7659.5 22916040 25881
❧Bibliotheca Eliotae. ❧ Eliotis Librarie. ❧LONDINI❧ ANNO VERBI IN∣CARNATI. M.D.XLII. Leaf
❧TO THE MOST ROYAL AND PVIS∣SANT PRINCE, AND HIS MOST REDOVBTED SOVE∣rayne lord kyng HENRY the eyght, kyng of England, Fraunce, and Irelande, defender of the fayth, and of the Churche of Englande and also of Irelande in erthe the supreme heade, his humble seruant Thomas Glyot knyght, desyreth perpetuall felicitie. THE HONOVRABLE PHILOSO∣pher Plutarchus, mooste worthye mayster to Traiane the emperour, dothe define in a similitude moste apte and pro∣per, what is signified by the dignitie and name of a kynge, saying: That which god is in heauen, and the sonne in the fyrmament the same in erthe is a kynge to those, whom he gouerneth. In almyghty god nothynge is greatter than Iustyce, wherby he rewardeth good men, aboue theyr merytes, and punysheth yll men vn∣der theyr deseruynges. The power of the Sunne is declared whan he sur∣mountynge the rygorous stormes of sturdy wynter, and being in his most dilectable progresse of lusty sprynge tyme, sheweth to the worlde his cele∣stiall vysage dyscouered: than herbes, graynes, and fruites, both holsom and dylectable, be founde in abundance, the pleasant verdure of trees doth delyte the beholders: the byrdes in theyr harmony do declare, howe moche they reioyce at the benigne aspecte of that noble planete. Lykewyse that kynge, whiche gouerneth for the weale of his countreye, beholdynge be∣nygnely them that be studyouse, or occupyed aboute thynges that be ver∣tuouse, he not onely doth animate or gyue lyfe to theyr courages, but also rendreth to theyr wytt more sharpnesse, with a prompt dexteritie armed with hardines. It is ther  meruayle, that great kinges haue in their counsayles moste wytty person, seinge that the makyng of great wyttes is in theyr puissaunce, although vertue procedeth immedyately from god, and sapience lykewyse. And yet Sapience is oftentymes hydde in those persones, whome eyther malyctouse wyttes hateth, or enuye pursueth, or fortune contemneth. Of the sayd power annexed (as it were) vnto a kyn∣ges maiestie, most noble prynce, mooste gracious soueraygne lorde, I a∣monge dyuerse other haue had good experience. For where aboute two ye∣res passed, farre aboue myn expectation, I receyued by wordes procedyng from the mouthe of your hyghnesse, comfort incredible to the settyng forth of my Dictionary, whyche at that tyme I had lately begun, and that very sengly, and with lyttell study. I all inflāmed with the sayde comfort, dyd afterwarde procede therin moche more exactly, and dyd ampliate the warke aboue that that I purposed: so that your maiestie (as I was infourmed) and dyuerse other commended my diligence. Not withstandyng, the sayd comfortable wordes of your hyghnes, contynually resortyng vnto my re∣membrance, cessed not to prouoke me to reade ouer eftsones, and reuolue
my sayd warke, fearyng (as god shall iudge me) lest by my neglygence, ey∣ther some wordes lackyng, or som interpretation being mysconceyued, my labors shuld be not only vnprofitable vnto the reders, but also vnworthy the most benygne and fauourable report of your excellent maiesty. I ther∣fore moste feruently styrred by your gracis comforte, in pervsyng my sayd Dictionary, haue proceded to the correction and amplifycation therof, in suche fourme, as hereafter foloweth. Fyrst sequestrynge my selfe from all other busynesse (that onely except, wherein I was bounden to serue your hyghnesse) I assembled all suche authours as I thought shulde be neces∣sary, for the achieuynge of that whiche I toke in enterpryse, whose names do immedyately folowe this proheme: and layenge them before me, I not onely dyd seriousely and dilygently trye and examyne euery worde, which eyther in sygnification or fourme of speakynge, called a phrase, moughte make any doubt to them that shulde reade it, and by the same authors dyd as truely correct it, as my lernynge wolde serue me: but also with a newe spirite of hardynesse, receyued by the often remembrance of your gracious sayde comforte. I folowynge the exaumple of Suidas the greke, aduen∣tured to make a generall collection by the order of letters of all notable countrays, cities, mountaynes, and ryuers, with theyr true descriptions, boundes and commodities, the names and natures of sundry beastes, fou∣les, serpentes, and fysshes: the declaration of a great number of herbes, trees, fruites, gummes, precyouse stones, and metalles, whiche before me were neuer of any man (that I can here of) declared and sette forthe in en∣glyshe: The true definitions of all syckenesses and kyndes of maladyes, whyche commonly do happen to men, with the cause, wherof they procede: Fynally the names of moste notable personages, who from the fyrst man Adam vntyll thre hundred yeres after the incarnation of CHRISTE, dyd any thynge worthy a speciall remembrance, expedient and necessary to the moderation of our actes and procedynges, with the hystoryes or lyues of the sayd persones compendyousely gathered. I haue not omytted fables and inuentions of paynymes, for the more easy vnderstandyng of poetes. I also thought it necessary to enterlace the detestable heretykes, with theyr sundry heresyes, concernynge the substance of our catholyke faythe iustly condemned by the hole consent of all true chrysten men, to the intente that those heresyes beinge in this wyse diuulgate, may be the sooner espyed and abhorred in suche bokes, where they be craftily enterlaced with holsom do∣ctrine. Ne the knowlege of them as heresyes may indamage any man in his conscyence (as some men haue supposed) more than the cōmune know∣lege and ofte recitation of treasons, fornication, or felonies contriued or practysed in sundry facions, for as moche as these thynges do requyre lesse study, than the maynteynynge of erronious and dyuellysshe opynyons, wherfore the knowlege thereof is moche more daungerouse: And yet the knowlege bothe of the one and the other is ryght expedient, sens in euery thynge it is as necessary to aforesee, what shall brynge damage vnto vs,
as contrary wyse what mought be founden good and cōmodiouse. As well in this parte as in the hystories and fables, I haue sette out the computa∣tion of tyme callid Chronography, wherin it appereth how longe the per∣sons were eyther before the incarnation of CHRISTE, or howe longe af∣ter. Also I haue declared the auncient coynes, weyghtes, and measures, conferryng them with those whiche be currant and vsuall amonge vs. I haue planted in prouerbes, callyd Adagia, such as be founden in latyn au∣thours, with theyr expositions. Also the proper termes belongyng to phi∣syke and surgery, and other dyuers and sundry artes and scyences. More ouer I haue declared dyuers greke wordes, whyche be vsurped of latyne authors. In this fourme haue I fynyshed this warke, to the glorye of al∣myghty god, and the no lyttell porfyte (I truste) of all englyshemen, whi∣che are and shall be desyrous of doctrine, whyche I shulde neuer haue en∣terprised, nor haue brought to conclusyon, had I not ben inflamed by the comforte receyued of your royall maiesty. By this it appereth, that the be∣nygnitie of pryncipall gouernours, extended to them whiche be of honest exercyse, dothe stere vp in them a more greatter spiryte, wherby theyr wyt∣tes and courages do appere more abundant. Witnesses therof be the great numbres of wonderfull lerned men, and moste valyant and polytyke ca∣pytaynes, which were in the tymes of great Alexander, Octauian, Titus. Traiane, Hadriane, bothe Antonines, and Alexander Seuerus, moste no∣ble emperours, of whom dyuerse by them were aduanced to dignities, ma∣ny enryched, none vnrewarded. And truly in this your gracis realme there is a great numbre studyousely inclyned to lernynge, prouoked as well by your gracis moste noble example, whych haue shewed your selfe not only studyouse in holye scripture, but also to be notably lerned, and to haue an excellent iudgement in all kyndes of doctrine, as also your bysshops and chapleynes of honour, men famouse in lernynge. And by suche wordes as your hyghnesse hath openly spoken in comfortyng and also commandyng yonge gentylmen, to enbrace good letters, and to be occupied in readinge good authors, there be not a fewe yonge men of the state of the temporal∣tie, by an honest emulation, do endeuour them to be founden in lernynge worthy to receyue lyke fruites of your gracis benygnitie, as the state of the clergie hath done hytherto, wherof dyuers haue bene ryght worthy to haue it. But whan bothe your temporaltie and clergy do flourysshe in do∣ctrine, as (your hyghnesse procedynge to the settynge vp of good lectures with lyberal salaries) it is likely to happen right shortly: than this realme of Englande, lyke as it maye compare with any realme christened in tem∣perate ayre, and abundance of all thynges, whiche the necessitie of mans nature requyreth: so in all partes of honour and suretie shall it surmount all other countrays, your maiestie gouernynge, whom almighty god hath abundantly endowed with the principall gyftes of grace, nature, and for∣tune. Fynally may it lyke your most royal maiesty to receyue this my sym∣ple labour and study, which I haue eftsones dedicate vnto your hyghnes,
with lyke benignitie as you receyued my fyrste edition, whyche neyther in dilygence, nor syncere exposition, nor in copy of wordes, nor in abundaunce of matter and sentence, is in any wyse to be hereto compared. And if I may perceyue your hyghenesse to be pleased with this fourme of exercyse, god gyuynge me helthe, and by your gracis assistence and fauoure, lyuynge in quietnesse and out of necessitie. I intende to imploy the reste of my tyme in suche study, as your maiesty shall haue cause to take no lesse thankful∣ly, than yf I serued your hyghnesse in other affaires, wherin shuld be mo∣che more trauayle of body: Suche truste and assured iudgement I haue in your gracis moste excellent wysedome, whiche is the onely botreaux of my welthe and comforte, lyke as it is to all Englande the princypall bul∣warke. I hartily beseche god to augmente your hyghnesse in all partes of felycitie. A QVIBVS phrases colliguntur. MARCVS Tullius. C. Iul. Caesar. Terentius. Titus Liuius. Salustius. Cornelius Celsus. Iunius Columella. Platus. Vergilius. Cornelius Tacitus. Fab. Quintilianus. HISTORICI. Graeci, HErodotus. Thucydides. Plutarchus. Herodianus. Dionysius Halycarnasseus. Laertius. Latini, Appianus. Helianus. Arrianus. Polybius Titus Liuius Cornelius Nepos. Suetonius. Valerius Maximus Quintus Curtius. Iulius Capitolinus. Lampridius. Ammianus. Aemilius Probus. Iustinus. Eurropius. COSMOGRAPHI. STrabo. Pomponius Mela. Ptholomeus. Americus Vesputius. Petrus Martyr. Antonius Sabellicus. Raphael Volaterranus. Re∣centes Chronographi. PHILOSOPHI. PLato. Aristoteles. Xenophon. Theophrastus. Plotinus. Porphyrius, Proclus. Philo. Alexander Aphrodiscus. Xenocrates. Seneca Censorinus. Boetius. Iulius Firmicus. Hyginius. AVTHORES sacri. MOses. Agiographi. Eusebius. Tertullianus. Hieronymus. Epiphanius. Augustinus. Gennadius. AVTHORES am∣bigui tituli. graeci VArro. Plinius. Solinus. Aulus Gellius. Macrobius. Vitruuius. Vibius Sequester. Frontinus. Vegetius. Ludouicus Coelius. Hermolaus Barbarus. Iouianus Pontanus. Erasmus Rotherodamus. Gulielmus Budeus, Lazarus Baphus. Georgius Agricola. Robertus Senalis, de ponde∣ribus & mensuris. MEDICI. HIppocrates. Galenus Dioscorides. Paulus Aegineta Alexander Trallianus Constantinus Affricanus Serapio Mesuh Io. Ruellius Io. Manardus. Antonius Musa Brasceuola Io. Agricola Georgius Agricola.
LEGVM interpretes. PAndectarum Authores Andreas Alciatus Vldericus Zasius Claudius Cantiuncula. Fabularum scri∣ptores. HOmerus Hesiodus Ouidius Diodorus Siculus Pausanias. GRAMMATICI. SVidas. Iul. Pollux Eustathius Homeri interpres Aristophanis interpres Priscianus Seruius Donatus Porphyrio Acron Pompeius Festus Pedianus Angelus Politianus Pomponius Laetus Beroaldus Bononiensis. M. Antonius Sabellicus. Vitellius. Baptista Pius. Baptista Egnatius. A recentioribus Ro. Steph∣no ac Steph. Doleto gallis ali∣quid traduxi in linguā nostrā, neutrum tamen us{que} adeo imi∣tatus, quin diuersitatis utrius{que} linguae rationem habuerim. ❧ BONIS AEQVE AC DOCTIS VIRIS CONSTANTISS. AMICIS ELIOTA. IACTA EST ALEA, PRODIT IN MEDIVM OPVS, NON TAM RECENS, {quam} uarium ac multiplex, at{que} ob id criticorum stylis ac morsibus uehementer obnoxium. Nimirū à uo∣bis nihil est quod metuam, nempe qui in alieno sta∣dio cum plumbeis pedibus aequis passibus incedere solebatis, non ignauorum hominum more hinc inde saltuatim procur∣rentes, uerba uellicantes quae litera uel accentu perperam inuertan∣tur. Igitur tabula prius à uobis perlecta, in quam errores ac uitia, quae crebro soleant inter imprimendum contingere, bona fide collegimus: in lectionis cursu mox ad eandem tabulā uitia corrigetis, authoris{que} no∣men ac dignitatem (quandoquidē incredibili studio subueniendae Rei∣pub. id opus occeperit) aduersum illiusmodi fucos▪ & crabrones forti∣titer defendetis. Caeterum pro mutua beneuolentia inter nos, studiorū ac uoluntatum similitudine comparata, si quid uobis interlegendum oc¦currerit, quod uestris eruditis oculis minus satisfecerit, aliquantisper sti∣lum continebitis, quous{que} collecta obfirmata{que} memoria, scribentis uo¦luntatem ac diligentiam cum illis authoribus, à quibus aut uerbum ali∣quod, uel sententiā, seu cuius{quam} rei descriptionem coepisse uideatur, ma∣ture contuleritis. In traductione uerborum ac sententiarum eloquentiā ullam non expectabitis in illa, quicquid mihi nimium festinanti interci∣derit, concinnabitis, tum legibus amicitiae tantum tribuetis, ut amicum dormitantem, seu uerius oneri succumbentem, ab inuidorum dentibus, obiecto quopiam honesto elogio uindicetis: & si non alio, saltem isto,
Eliota uir equestris ne in ullo malo otio, perniciosouè negotio uitam infirmaret, ut{que} aliqua ex parte de Repub. bene meritus esse uideretur, aliis rebus omnibus neglectis, quae tum opes maximas, tum summas di∣gnitates polliceri soleant, id oneris assumpsit, quo tū literas latinas scire cupientes facilius instrueret, tum iisdem literis mediocriter imbutos, uaria uerborum suppellectili, multip lici{que} rerum cognitione, locorum at{que} hominum spectaculo magis illustrium, ad studium capescendum acrius incitaret. quod cum effecerit, se uoto liberabit. In tam arduo ne∣gotio si ab eo quic{quam} imprudenter exciderit, quod solidae doctrinae frau∣di non fuerit, uel puritatem linguae latinae minus infecerit, ne dum pro∣bitati morum offecerit, nec sanitati corporis quic{quam} nocuerit, essent me∣dius fidius nimium ingrati, ne dicam improbi, qui labenti non potius manum porrigerent, {quam} insultando gratiam imminuerent. Id genus elo∣gii uobis amici non minus honorificum, {quam} mihi iure amicitiae debitum: quippe quod non solum humanitatis laudem, sed & uerae sapientiae a∣pud homines opinionem sit uobis allaturum, humanum quidem est labi, errare, decipi at labantem non sustinere, aut errantem in uiam nō reducere, aut deceptū consilio aut opera nō iuuare si possis, amicum prae∣sertim, non modo inhumanum existimatur, uerum etiam bonis omni∣bus execrandum. In moribus nihil habere commune cum beluis, bo∣nis{que} fauere prorsus sapientis est, at{que} ab omnibus amplectendum, mo∣dicum officium est, quod à uobis peto at{que} parua res, quam nec inimico ne dum aduersario ipse pernegarem. tam chara semper mihi fuit Res∣pub. ut quem in eam nouerim insigne quoduis beneficium molientem, hunc non potuerim honorificis uerbis non prosequi, laudare, extollere, quamuis mihi caetera uita, ac moribus minus probaretur. In hoc opere ut ab omnibus bene audiam equidem non laboro, cū id ne{que} Platoni, ne{que} Ciceroni, ne{que} Deo illi Maeonio contingere quidem potuerit. Gaude∣bo sanè, si mea beneuolentia in Rempub. in Nobilitatem amor, charitas in plebem, tum à rege doctiss. tū à uobis uestrum{que} simillimisita com∣probentur, ut me haud indignum existimetis, quem uestro patrocinio aduersus calumniatorum impetum defendere uolueritis. Hoc tandem uos nescire nollem, tam uerbalia nomina, {quam} etiam participia à me plae∣ra{que} praetermissa, quod uerbis primigeniis ex literarū ordine facile com∣pertis, leuiore negotio, quae ab eis deriuentur inuenire poteritis. At ne uobis ineptire uidear longis logis, hoc tandem breuiter capiatis. Si meū in hoc labore qualemcun{que} conatū à uobis liberaliter acceptum defen∣sum{que} cognouero, à me longe maiora molimina opera{que} iis multo prae∣stantiora breuiter expectabitis. SALVETI.
ERRATA. OBSECRO TE AMICE LECTOR, ne quic{quam} ex hac bybliotheca in tuum usum capias, prius{quam} errata typographi nimium festinantis, ex hac tabella castigaueris, ne author de sua patria bene meritus, immerito gratiam illi debitam amittat, ac tu itidē spem ac fortassis laborem imprudenter perdideris. FOr Aijt reade Abijt. Abiudicauit, put out Adiudicauit. Auita, put out Aulta. In Acer, for wyche, reade maple, and put out the resydue. In Acus, aci, for hornebeke, reade hornkeke. In Adhaese, put out not. In Agnascentia, for were, reade where. In Albion, the .xli. lyne for noo whyter, reade any whyter. In Alia, for Molimerus, reade Molmitius. In Amphimacrus, for the myddel sillable long reade the myddell syllable short. In Anagallida aquatica, for Alysaundis, reade Alysaunder. In Antaeci, put out zone or gyrdell, and put in contrarye. In Anthyllis, for herbe Iuye, reade herbe Iue. In Apsis, for name, reade naue. In Arcadia, the .vi. lyne, for bagpyde, reade bagpype. Argemata, put out ta. In Arnion, for Arnoglosso, rede Arnoglossa. In Artamitae, for Ceclaminus, reade Cycla∣minus. After Aruum, for Ars, reade Arx. Atrengere senectam, reade Attingere. Aurea aetheria, reade Aura. In Basilius for quadriuales, rede Quadriuiales. Bedegnar, reade Bedeguar. After Bellona, for Bollouaci, reade Bellouaci. After Bipennis, for Biponella, rede Bipenella. In Brachylogia, for spethe, reade speche. In Bubonium, for Inguinali, reade Inguinalis. Bulapatham, reade Bulapathum. Buphonum, reade Buphonium. In Calecut, the tenthe lyne, yet is his necke, put out is. Calirrohe, reade Calirhoe. Cauere testamenta, reade Testamento. Caute, wyse, reade wysely. Celebare ludos, rede Celebrare ludos. On Celtogallia, for hloe, rede hole. In Cibele, the .xvi. verse for Pessinuus, reade Pessimus. In Complodo. put out psi, and write plosi. In Concilium Lugdunense, the last worde for dignitie reade diuinitie. In Corus, put out a southewest wynde. Custodio, reade Custodia. Custodia, reade Custodio. De caltaria in carbonariam, rede De calcaria. Decidus, reade Deciduus, in the .vii. lyne for cernis, reade ceruis. In Decies the .xxiiii. lyne, for Deciës, reade Deciens. In Dedisco, dicere, reade dediscere. In Delphmus, the .ix. lyne rede, There hathe ben of them knowen to loue chyldren, and re∣ceyue▪ them. Depuneo, nere, rede nire. Descistere, reade desistere. In Dirigeo, for strynke, reade shrynke. Disiecta milites, reade Disiecti milites. In Domi nobiles, for honorably, rede honou∣rable. Dorsum, the .iii. lyne for shelpe rede shelfe. In Dracones, the .iii. lyne for Pyretum, reade Pyretrum. Eblandiri solitudidines, reade solitudines. Eblanditus, gotten by slattery, rede by flattery. In Ebur, Dioscorides calleth it Thamaeacte, put it out in that place, and set before in Ebu lus at the ende of the seconde lyne. Dioscori∣des calleth it Chamaeacte. Edere luci, for lyghe, reade lyght. In Efferre pedem, the .iii. lyne, for efferrat, reade efferat. In Esaias, in the laste lyne at the ende for .96. yeres, reade. 800. yeres. Ethopela, reade Ethopeïa. Exinantio, reade Exinanio. Facere conuitiam, reade Conuitium. Floreo, rui, rure, reade rere. In Folliculus, for eares of weate, reade eares of wheate. In Frumentum, for weate or rye, reade wheat or rye. In Heraclia, Nemiphar, reade Nenuphar. In Hipposelinon, for the herbe callache or smal∣lache, or marche, rede the herbe callyd smal∣lache or marche. Hucertus, reade hubertus. Hyaccynthinus, reade Hyacynthinus. In clausulam disputationi imponere, for an ende, reade an ende. Infici, reade Inficio. In Intentio, but forthe, reade but the. In Ioannes, the thyrd lyne, annes Baptista, rede Ioannes, the .liiii. lyne, Iolysabeth rede Ely∣sabeth. the .liiii. lyne, reade .vi. monethes. In Ioppe, the. iiii lyne, for the hauen callid whe¦che Port Iaffe, reade, the hauen whyche is called Port Iaffe. Iubilium, reade Iubilum. Lixinium, reade Lixiuium. In lunaticus, for made, rede madde. In Lycoctones, for Asconitum, rede Aconit̄.
Male precare, rede precari. Manibus pedibus{que} ire in sententiam, the .iiii. lyne, reade, Where the greater part. Marconiani, reade Marcomani. Mateaeotechina, reade Mataeotechnia. Mater matrina, reade hath a mother lyuynge. Matrinuis, reade Matrimus. Mediouratrices, reade Mediomatrices. Melamirus, reade Melanurus. Melisphillon, reade Melissophillon. Morosi, reade Morose. Moscatulae, peacis, reade peares. Moscena, reade Moscua. Mullus, for Sestertia, reade Sesterrios, and in the space after, put in .iii.li .xiiii.s .iiii. d. Naeuia, reade Nenia. Narbonensis prouincia, the .ii. lyne, reade the mountaynes callyd Alpes. Nascitus uentus, reade Nascitur uentus. Nonae, put out the myddes. Nouantum Chersonesum, reade a place in the west part of Scotlande. Nugigerulus, reade a bearer aboute of fables. Numa, the .viii. lyne, he brought, put out he. Numerato, the .xi lyne, that notwithstandyng put out that. Nummus argenteus, the seconde lyne, was al∣so that, put out also. Occurrit peruionibus, reade pernionibus. Oculi eruditi, reade, whan one knoweth whe∣ther a thynge be well done or no. Oculos tollere, put out, thing be weldone or no O dipodioniua, reade Oedipodionius. Oenophorus, a cupbearer. Oratoriae, rede oratorie, without a diphthōg. Orthopnoea, whan a man ran not, rede can not. Ozinum, reade Ozimum. Paciscor, the fyfthe lyne, I agreed, reade, he agreed. Palangari, reade Palangarij. Pannonia, the .iiii. lyne, for free, rede ferre. Parthenium, the .vi. lyne, for helcine, reade helxine. Paratus, reade Parasitus. Patiiactiuras, reade pati iacturas. Patrimis, reade Patrimus. Pendo, the thyrde lyne, expen -rede expendo. Per silentium adesse aeque animo, reade aequo animo. Perinde, the seconde lyne, uen, reade euen. Pernicissimus, reade Perniciosissimus. Petulenter, reade Petulanter. Peuxedanum, reade Peucedanum. Pharmacentice, reade Pharmaceutice. Pisarurus, reade Pisaurus. Padaris, reade Podaris. Pono, the .xxviii. lyne, whe, rede where. Possum, the seconde lyne, reade sermone. Posterior, the seconde lyne, betwene feram, and subauditur, put a poynt. Praesagiū, the .vi. lyne, cū exire, rede exirem. Praetereo, the .xiii. lyne, Nos nobilitate, reade Hos nobilitate. &c. Praetexo, the .iii. lyne, retexta, rede Praetexta. Praeuerto, the .vi. lyne, pulbamentum, rede pul∣pamentum. Puppes, the foreparte, reade the hynder parte or docke of the shyppe. Quadi, the seconde lyne, wuifes, reade wulfes. Quadragies, the .xvii. lhne, committed, reade omytted. Quia, the second lyne, beatae uixisse, rede beate. Quo non, the ii. lyne, ad locum, rede ad lacū. Rhodus, Caparthium, rede Carpathium. Sacamento teneri, reade Sacramento. Saliares coena, reade Saliaris. Salinacis, the .ii. lyne, Helmophroditus, reade Hermophroditus. Scordion, the .iiii. lyne, ransoms, rede ramsons. Scessus, rede Secessus. Seorsum, the fourth lyne, namely thē Demea, rede the. Sesquimodus, reade Sesquimodius. Silphion, the .ii. lyne, Beuicyne, rede Beuioyn. Somnorinum, rede Somnium. Spina Aegyptia, the thyrde lyne, Bedegnar, rede Bedeguar. After Stenoboea, for Sentor, reade Stentor. Super coenam, at supper, reade after supper. Syntaxis, the .v. lyne, {quod} recte, rede {quam} recte. Syrtes, shelpes, rede shelfes. Tabulata, the thyrde lyne, not not, put out the one not. Taminea uua, the .iiii. lyne, Stauis agria, reade Staphis agria. Taraxacon, for Soufystell, reade Southistell. Thessalia, the .x. lyne, Polybras, rede Polybius. Tollere cristas, the .ii. lyne, or them, rede to thē. TRbales, reade Trabales. Tracto, haec arte, reade hac arte. Tragum, weate, reade wheate. Trama, vn vnder, reade an vnder garment. Transalpina gallia, on his side, rede on this side. Trasimênus, the .iii. lyne, Roman, rede Romans Trcôlon, reade Tricôlon. Turricula, a lyttell towne, reade a lyttel towre. Veritanus ager, a selde, reade a fielde. Veromanditi, rede Veromandui. Vertere. In fugam uertere, plyght, rede flyght. Vitisator, he that selleth vynes, reade he that setteth. Vrua, reade Vrna. Vsucapia, reade Vsucapio.
A ANTE B. A SIGNIFIETH of, or from. Ab, and abs, be of the same sygnifycation, only A, goeth before a word, which be∣gynneth with a cō∣sonant: Ab and abs, goth before a word, that doth begin with a vowel. It was also a∣monge the olde Romaines the note or marke of acquital of transgressours, and therfore of Cicero A, is called litera salutaris, the let∣ter of saulfgarde. Aaron was sonne of Amram, and brother to Moses. The worde signifyeth, the moun∣taigne of fortitude, or a stronge hyll. This man was of the tribe of Leui, the fourthe from hym in lineall discent. He was in his proper tongue very eloquent, and was electe of god to be the fyrst byshoppe of the iewes, and lyued .Lxxiii. yeres, and dyed before all the people on the mount of Oreb, whan he had ben byshop .xxxvi. yeres, afore the incar∣nation of Christe .M.CCCC.lxxi. yeres. Ab accidentibus, an officer, vnto whom it be∣longeth to wryte such thynges as do chaūce. Abaci, the tables inbowed, wheron pyllars do stande. Abacti, officers deposed, or suche as be con∣strayned to resigne theyr authoritie. Abactor, a stealer of cattell. Abactores, theues that steale cattell. Abactus, tus, theft of cattell. Abactus magistratus, depriued of his office. Abacuk,Epipha∣mus. a prophet whiche was of the trybe of Simeon, who prophesied and lamented the takynge of Hierusalem, by Nabuchodo∣nosor, Afterwarde as he caryed meate and drynke to his heruest men, an aungell toke hym vp by an heare of his head, and caryed hym into Babylon, and broughte hym in to the dongeon, where Daniel the prophet was amonge lions, who beinge fed and relieued by hym, he was oftesones caryed home the same day. And dyed .ii. yeres before that the Iewes retourned from Babylon, before the incarnation of Christe .D C. yeres. Abaculi, counters, whiche auditours do vse. Abaculus, of Pliny is taken for accompte. Abacus, a countynge table, or cupbourd. Abagio,Varro de lingua la∣tina. gere, to fetche a compasse in speking, and not to consist or abyde in one oration or sentence. Abalienatio, alienation. Abalienator, he that doth alyene or put away a thynge, or altereth the possession therof, an alienour called of lawyars. Abalienatus, he whom a man putteth frō him. Abalienatus iure ciuium, outlawed out of the liberties of the citie. Abalienata morbis membra, Members mor∣tified by syckenesse. Abalieno, aui, are, to put or turne awaye, or to make straunge. Abambulo, aui, are, to ascende, or mount vp. Abamita, my great graundfathers syster. Abanec, a gyrdell, whiche priestes did weare, wrought with colours of scarlet and purple, in suche wyse, that there seemed to be in it floures and precious stones set in order. Abania, is interpreted the father, vnto god ac∣ceptable, or gratifienge vnto god. Abaphus, vndyed or vncolored. Abarceo, cui, cere, to prohibite, or put of frō a thynge. Abarimon,Plinius. a countrey in Tartary, where men haue fete tourned backewarde, and be won∣derfull swyft and wylde. Abas, the twelfe kynge of Argiues, and was graundfather to Perseus. An other was a Troian, companion to Aeneas, and maketh in the geniti case Abantis. Abaster, one of the horses of Pluto kīg of hel. Abathon, an yle in Egypt by the citie of Mē∣phis, where syris, whom the Egyptians named theyr god, was buryed by his wyfe Isis. Abatis, two wordes made of the preposition, a and the ablatiue case plural of batus, which in englyshe is a measure, signifieth an officer, that hath the orderynge of measures,Esdra. as a clerke of the market. Abauia, my great grandames mother. Abauus, my great grandfathers father. Abauuculus, my great grandfathers brother Abax, abacis, a cupbourd or dressar, also an astronomers table. Abba, a worde of the language of Syria, and signifieth father. Abbreuio, are, to abbreuiate, or make shorte. Abdêra, a citie in Thracia, whiche was first buylded by Hercules, in remembraunce of his minion called Abderitus, whiche was there eaten with the horses of Diomedes. In this citie were borne Democritus the great philosopher, and Prothagoras the famous rhetorician. This citie was afterwarde cal∣led Clazomene. In Spayne there is an other of that name, called nowe Almeria. Abderita, a citezen of Abdêra. Abdere se ex cōspectu heri, to kepe him away that his maister se hym not. Abdere se literis, to lyue vnknowen in conti∣nuall study. Abdias, one of the .xii. prophetes, and is in∣terpreted the seruaunt of our lorde. Abdicatio, an acte of the father, when he ex∣cludeth
his sonne and heyre from the inheri∣taunce of his possessions. Abdico, aui, are, to expel or put out of fauour, or resigne an office, or to refuse his sonne or kynseman. Abdicauit filium, he refused hym for his sonne. Abdicauit se magistratu, he hath resigned his office or dignitie. Abdico, ixi, cere, to deny or forsake. Abdite, secretly. Abditum, a secrete place. Abditus, ta, tum, hyd secretely. Abdo, di, dere, to hyde. Abdomen, minis, that whiche is vnder the mouth of the stomake, where it appereth out¦warde vnder the grystell of the breste bone. whiche is also called Hypocondria. It is sometyme taken for the fatte aboute the kyd∣neys. Also for the pappes of a sowe with her mylke, cut of from her bely the day after that the hath farowed. Abduco, xi, cere, to leade awaye, or leade out, or pul away, or take with. Abduce,Plautus. for abduc, leade or haue away. Abduxi clauem, I toke out the kay. Abecedarius, he that setteth any thynge in or∣der by letter. Abededos, a citie in Egypt, wherein was the palaice of Memnon, and the temple of O∣spris. Abedo, dere, to consume. Abel, the seconde sone of Adam, and is inter∣preted, brethe, vapour, or vanitie. He was borne together with his sustar Delbora .xv. yeres after Cain. he is reputed to be the first martyr, beinge slayne by his sayde brother, of enuy, for as moche as almyghtye god ac∣cepted his offrynge, and reiected the offering of Cain, whan the sayde Abel was one hun∣dred yeres olde. And was from his chyldhod of great vertue and fayth. He was slayne be∣fore the Incarnation of Chryste. 1900. yeres. Abellinae, fylberdes of Abellino, a Citye in Naples. Abemo, emi, ere, to take or putte of a gar∣mente. Abemito uestem, put of thy cote. Ab eo gratiam inibo, I wyll get his fauour. Ab epistolis, in suche offyce as nowe be clar∣ites of the signet, or inferiour secretaries. Abeo, iui, uel ij, ire, to departe, or goo a∣waye. Aberceo, to forbyd. Eam abercet domo, he forbyddeth her his house. Aberro, aui, are, to erre or wander very moch, to departe far of, or a sunder. Aberun casso, sere, to turne vp. Aberuncare iram deorum, to withdraw the vengeaunce of god with prayers. Aberunco, aui, are, to weede oute, or plucke out. Abessa, the name of a iudge in Israell. Abesse, to be absent. Abeston, a stone of the coulour of yron, found in Arabia, whiche hath growynge aboute it a thynge lyke vnto wulle, and that is called the doune of Salamandre. this stone beinge ones made hote, can neuer be cooled. Abfore, to be awaye. Abgrego, aui, are, to seuer or take out of the floche, or to drawe shepe. Abhinc, before this tyme. Abhorreo, ruï, horrêre, to abhorte, to hate, to dispyse, to flee froo, to be vnlyke, or to discorde. Abhorresco, to feare to beholde. Abhorreo ab urbe relinguenda,Cicero. I haue no mynde to forsake the citie. Abhorret ab illo mea sententia, myne opinion is contrarye to his, or repugneth against it. Abhorret à suspitione,Cicero de amic. it is contrarye to my supposall. Abhorret a charitate uulgi,Plaut. in Cistel. he tendreth not, or passeth nothynge on the poore people. Abhorret hilaritudo, thy myrthe is turned in∣to sadnesse. Abhortatio, a contrary aduyse. Abhortor, tari, to gyue contrarye aduyse, to disswade. Abiecto, aui, are, to caste often away. Abiectus, a vyle person. Abiectus, ta, tum, naught set by, vexed with aduersitie. Abies, a tree called a fyrre. Abietarius, a carpenter. Abiegnus,Varro. a, um, of fyrre tree. Abigeatus, tus, felony in stealynge cattell. Abigena bos, was amonge the diuinours cal∣led Augures, the oxe, whiche was to be sa∣crified, about whom the other beastes were set in an order. Abigêus, a stealer of cattell. Abigere ex aedibus, to dryue out of the house. Abigo, egi, gere, to dryue awaye any thyng, that is euell,Plaut. in Asin. or oyous, also to dryue awaye cattel by theft or deceyte. Abi, a great ryuer in Englande called Hum∣ber. Adijcio, ieci, ijcere, to caste away, to renoūce, to despyse, to poure out, sometyme to gyue awaye. Abijcior, ci, to be out of reputation. Abijt hora,Teren. in Eunu. the tyme passed. Abijt sol,Plautus. the sonne is gon downe. Abijt oppidum in uillas, the towne is turned into fermes: as manye be in Englande. I
praye god amende it. Abijt in uulnus praeceps, he fell downe soden∣lye, and laye on the syde, wherin he was wounded, Aijt è medio, he vanysshed away, he was ne∣uer more seene. Abijt incepto, he lefte his enterprise. Abijt in salem, it was tourned into saulte. Abit à sensibus, he is out of his wytte. Abibitur, I or he wyll departe or go awaye. Abi in malam rem,Plaut. in Mercat. go hense with a mischiefe. Abi tu sane superior, syt thou hygher, goo vp∣per. Abire pessum, to run hedlynge, to come to a myschiefe. Abire à iure, to do wronge. Abire, to cesse, to vanyshe, or to be appeased, to slyp awaye. Mirabar hoc si sic abiret, I meruayled if it shulde so passe away. Quid ad istas ineptias abis? what medleste thou with these fantasies. Ab illo tibi soluam, I wyll cause hym to paye you. Ab labore, after labour. A bonorum causa stare, to fauour the part of good men. Abintegro, yet agayne, eftesones. Abintestato, intestat, or without testament. Ab incunabulis, from his infancy. Ab ineunti aetate, from his chyldhode. Abitio, a departure, or goinge away, old wry∣tars toke it for deathe, as we maye calle it the decesse of one. Abitus, a departynge. Abiudico, aui, are, to take away by iudgement from oone, and gyue to an other by the same sentence.Cicero cō¦tra Rull. Id ab eo contra ius aequitatem{que} ad iudicauit, He toke that awaye from hym by iudgement agaynste al lawe and reason. Abiudicare à ulta, to put to deathe. Abiudicabit nun{que} ab suo triobolum, He wyl neuer be of the mynde to gyue thre halfpens of his owne. Abiudicatum, adiudged, gyuen by iudgement from one to an other. Abiugo, aui, are, to vnyoke, discharge or put a sonder. Abiungo, xi, ere, to seuer, or sunder. Abiurati, sworne brotherne, or confederates. Abiuratio, a forswearynge, an abiuration. Abiuro, aui, are, to deny by an oth, or to kepe a thynge wrongfully. Ablacto, aui, are, to weane. Ablaqueo, aui, are, to ryd the erth from trees or vynes, and cutte awaye the vpper rootes, that they may beare no more fruite. Ablectae aedes, houses well garnyshed to stere men to bye them. Ablego, aui, are, to sende awaye. Abligurio, iui, ire, to consume goodes in ban∣kettynge, or farynge delycately. Abloco, aui, are, to set or lette to an other. to take frome one and let to an other. Abludo, lusi, dere, to speake of a thynge co∣uertly, that other shal not espy what the mat ter doth meane. Abluo, uï, ere, to washe of. Ablutio, a wasshynge. Abluuium, a vniuersal floud wherwith a cun∣trey is drouned. A media nocte, after midnight. Abneco, are, to strangle. Abnego, aui, are, to deny vtterly. Abnepos, otis, a son in the fourth degre in li∣niall discent. Abneptis, a daughter in the fourth discent. Abnormis, out of rule. Abnuo, nui, ere, to deny or refuse with coun∣tenaunce or becke, to becke awaye. Abnuto, signifieth to becke away often times. Ab octaua, after eyght of the clocke. Aboleo, êui, uel ui, êre, to put oute, or rase out, to anull, or vndo for euer. Abolesco, to brynge to naught. Abolitus, ta,Festus. tum, rased out, putte out of re∣membraunce. Abolla, a senatours habite, or a sould youres cloke. Aboloes, olde wrytars vsed for ab illis. Abominalis, le, abhominable. Abominor, atus sum, nari, to take for yllucke or haue in detestation. Aborigines, people, whiche fyrste helde the countrey about Rome, and lyued abrode, ha∣uynge noo houses. They maye also be taken for any other people, whose beginnyng is not knowen. Aborior, abortus sum, aboriri, to be borne a∣fore naturall tyme. Aborsus, an vntimely byrth, nyghe to the con¦ception, whiche maye be called aborsion. Aborsio, onis, & Abortiuus, the byrthe dy∣stroyed with some hurte, or other mysaduen∣ture, or medicine. Abortio, tiui, tire, to brynge forth a chylde or it be perfecte. Abortium idem quod abortus. Abortiuus, a, um, that thynge whiche procu∣reth the sayde vntymely byrth. Abortor, & aborto, idem quod abortio. Abortus, an vntymely byrthe, nygh to the lust tyme of delyueraunce, wherby the chylde dyeth. Abpatruus, my fathers great vncle. A prima luce, after the sprynge of the day. A primo cogitauit, he thaught at the fyrst. Abrado, si, dere, to pare, to scrape away.
Abradere be bonis, to poll, or spoyl a man of his goodes. Abtaham, an holy Patriarke, was the sonne of Thare, borne in Caldey, and is interpre∣ted, the father of many nations, or of peo∣ple seinge. this man as well in vertue, and perfecte fayth, as in sondrye and mistical do∣ctrines, was moste excellente, he taught the Egyptians astronomy and geometry. He di∣ed before the incarnation of Chryste.Iosephus. 1838. yeres. Ab re, out of the matter, or out of the purpose vnsemely, vnconuenient. Ab re orare, to praye or desyre in vayn. Ab re tua, agaynst thy profyte. Non ab re, not without a cause. Abrenuntio, aui, are, to renounce or forsake. Abripio, pui, ere, to take fro, or take by force. Abripuit repentè sese, he went away sodenly. Abrogo, aui, are, to take awaye. Abrogare fidem, to brynge out of credence. Abrogare legi, to dissolue or repell a lawe. Fidem homini abrogare, to beleue a man no more. to haue one out of credence. Vires benefiens abrogare, to esteme the be∣nefyte of no value. Abrogati, they whiche beinge at lybertie, sub∣myt them selues to an other mannes rule, by theyr consent. Abrogatio, the dyssoluynge or repellynge of a lawe. Abrotanum, an herbe called southernwood. Abrumpo, rupi, rumpere, to breake of, plucke vp, or cut of. Abrupta loca, rockes and hylles, here and ther broken or dygged, so that oone maye vnneth go or crepe vp to them. Abrupte, out of frame, not agreyng with the begynnynge. Abruptum, that whiche hath suche a falle, or stepenesse downe, that no man maye passe by it, but onely fall downe. Abruptus, broken here and there, as rockes and great hylles. Abruptus sermo, a tale that hangeth not to¦gether. Abs, of, or fro. Absarus, a ryuer of Armeny, that incloseth the lesse Armeny. Abscedo, cessi, dere, to go away. Abscessus, & abscessio, a departynge. Abscessus, is of phisitions taken for an impo∣stume or botche, or for a course of euell hu∣mours to some parte of the bodye, wherby matter putrified is ingendred. Abscido, di, scindere, to cut of. Abscindo, signifieth the same. Abscio, iui, ire, to go out of remembraunce. Abscissior iustia, sharp iustice. Abscissus, a, um, broken, sharpe. Abscondo, di, dere, to hyde. Absconsus, a, um, hyd. Absens, tis, absent, or awaye. Absentaneus, a, um, that whiche in absence is done. Absentia, absence. Absento, tire, to thynke contrary. Absento, aui, are, to be absent. Absimilis, moche vnlyke. Absis, uel Apsis, idos, the strake of a carte whele, wherin the spokes be set. Absisto, tere, to departe frome a place. some∣tyme it sygnifyeth to absteyne or leaue of. Absoleo, êre, to be out of vse. Absoletus locus, a place vnoccupied, or ne∣glected. Absoluo, ui, re, to lose that which was boū∣den, also to performe or accomplyshe. Also to spare or forgyue, to pardon, to spede, to as∣soyle. Absoluere,Plaut. in Capt. in Amphit. to depeche of busynesse. Absoluere creditorem, to paye that he oweth. Absoluere pensum, to worke oute his taske. Absoluerè suspitione, to discharge or putte of all suspition. Absoluere vno uerbo, to tell at a worde, to make an ende shortely. Absolutè, perfectly. Absolutio, a dyscharge, or depeche. Absolutus, ta, tum, discharged, depeched. Absono, aui, are, to dyscorde, or sowne euyll. Absonus, na num, that whiche sowneth not well, or dyscordeth, or scantelye maye be harde. Absonum fidei, not credyble. Absonus voce, he that hath an vntunable voyce. Absorbeo, bui, uel psi, êre, to swalowe or sup of all, to deuoure or consume. Abs{que}, without. Abs quiuis homine,Terent. in Adelp. of euery man what soo euer he be. Abs re stat,Plaut. in Ruden. it standeth vpon the, or it lyeth in the. Abstemius, he that drynketh no wyne. Abstentus, accursed out of the churche. Abstergeo, si, gere, to wype, to wype awaye. Abstergere dolorem, to put awaye sorrowe. Absterreo, uï, re, to prohibite or lette, or put fro. Absterrêre, to feate awaye, or dryue awaye with feare. Abstinentia, abstinence, a vertue in forbea∣rynge to take an other mannes goodes. Abstinenter, with abstinence. Abstineo, ui, ere, to absteyne, or forbeare, or tempre.
Abstinere alieno, not to meddle with other mens goodes. Abstinere in commoditate,,Plaut. in Mil. to behaue hym honestly. Abstinere manum,Plaut in Rud. to holde his hande. Abstinere manus, to refrayne from bribery. Abstinere uerbis,Plinius in epist. to take hede what he spe∣keth. Abstineas à me manum, Take heede that thou stryke me not.Sueton. in Clau. Abstinuit diu publico, it was longe or he came abrode. Abstinens alieni, he that medeleth not with other mennes goodes. Abstro, stiti, stâre, to stande far of. Abstorqueo, torsi, quêre, to gette by force or tourmentes. Abstraho, xi, re, to take by force or by crafte. Abstraxi me illinc, I gat me from thense. Abstractum, taken by force. Abstrudo, si, dre, to hyde. Abstrûdere colaphos, to buffet or gyue blowes. Abstrusus, a, um, hyd, or shut vp. Abstulit, of aufero, he hath byrefte, taken a∣waye, or borne awaye. Absum, fui, abesse, to be away, or far of, or to fayle, or to be distant, or absent. Abest mihi animus, I haue no courage. Absente nobis, while I was away. Absit uerbo inuidia, a forme of speakynge, whan oone wolde not be suspected of arro∣gance in some thynge that he wyll speake. Absûmo, psi, re, to spende or consume. Absumedo, dinis, dispence, waste of moneye, or other lyke thynge. Absumptio, a wastynge, waste. Absumti sumus, we are vndone. Absurdè, without pourpose or reason, to noo purpose. Absurdus, da, dum, inconueniente, foolyshe, discordynge, dyshoneste, abhorrynge, or o∣dious. Absynthites, wyne, wherin wormwood hath ben infused or sodden. Absynthium, is commonly called wormwood. Howe be it there be therof thre kyndes: Se∣riphium, whiche semeth to be oure worme∣wood. Santonicum, wherof commeth worm seede: Ponticum, or Romanum, whiche hath a lesse leafe than our wormwood, and hath a sweter odour. Absyrtides, be ylandes in the Venetian sea. Absyrtus, the brother of Medea, whome she dydde cut in to pieces, and threwe in to the sea, whan she fledde frome her father with Iason. Abuerto, tere, to tourne from a place. Abundans, a ryche man. Abundanter, abundantly. Abundantia, abundaunce, more than suffyci∣ent, ryches. Abunde, abundauntly, plentuousely, inough, and more than inoughe. Abunde est, it is inough. Abundo, aui, are, to habounde, to haue out of measure, more than inoughe. also to be ryche. Abundare ingenio, to haue a great wytte. Abuolo, aui, are, to flee away. Abusiue, improperly, agaynste nature, or custome. Abus{que} manè ad uesperam, from morninge to nyghte. Abusum, worne out. Abusus, us, & abusio, abuse, yll vse. Abutor, abusus sum, abuti, to abuse, to vse a thynge dyshonestely, vncomely, contrarye to that, that it serueth for, oute of order, or in vayne. also to were out. Aburitur operam, he loste his labour. Abydena, trifles, thinges of small estimation, wanton toyes, thynges vnsemely for menne to use. Abydeni, a people in Asia, whiche hauynge theyr citie distressed with a longe siege, felle into a fury, or madnesse, and slewe all theyr wyues, theyr chyldren, and afterward them selfes. Abydeus, a man borne in the yle of Abydos. Abdus, was a Cytie in Grecia, vppon the sea syde, called Propontis, whiche dyuy∣deth Europam frome Asia, where the pas∣sage ouer excedeth not moche thyrtye fur∣longe, called Stadia, contrarye vnto that, standeth an other towne called Sestus. Abyla, a hylle in the Occean sea, agaynste Spayne, whiche is called oone of Hercules pyllars. Abyssus,Augustin. is a depenes without bottome.Ambrosi. A ante C. AC, sygnifyeth sometyme, and, as Do∣ctus ac iustus es, thou arte hunnynge and iuste. Sometyme it is taken for than, as: Haud secus ac iussi faciunt. They do none other wyse than they be commaun∣ded. Sometyme it signifyeth as, as, Super∣bis perinde, ac si rex esses. Thou arte as proude, as if thou were a kynge. Acadaemia, a vniuersytie, whiche toke that name of a place nyghe to Athenes, where Plato the great philosopher taughte phy∣losophy. Academici, were a secte of phylosophers,
whiche folowed and taughte the opinions of Plato. Acamas, an elbowe of lande in the yle of Cy∣pres, towarde the east. Acanthide, the olde name of the yle of Cypres. Acanthis, idis, a byrde that fedeth on thystles, and maketh her neste with claye, and is cal∣led in englysshe, as I suppose, a lynnet. It was also a boye, whiche as the poetes doo fayne, was transformed into a floure of his name. It is also a bushe, lyke a whyte thorn, with lasse leaues, mosy, and pryckynge. Di∣oscorides sayth, that it is an herbe, that gro∣weth in stony and moyste grounde, and hath leaues broder and lōger than lettise, in forme lyke to rocket, somwhat blacke, and in broi∣synge softe ad fatty, hauynge a stalke of .ii. cubytes hyghe, of thyckenesse of a mannes fynger, garnished vnder the top with lyttell longe leaues, and pryckynge, whervnto gro∣weth a whyte floure. It is supposed to be that herbe, which is commonly called Bran∣ca ursina, It is also called Acanthus and A∣cantha, in englyshe beare fote, as some doo suppose. Acapis, a ryuer in Asia. Acapna, drye wood that smoketh not. Acar & Acarus, a lyttell worme that bredeth in waxe. Acara, a towne in the myddel of Hungary. Acarnania, a parte of a royalme in Grece, na∣med Epirus. It is also a littell countreye in Egypt. and it is a citie by Syracusis, in the royalme of Sicile. Acarnanes, the people of that countrey. Acarpia, lacke of fruite. Acarpos, vnfruitfull. Acasta, a nymphe or mayden of the fayry. Acatalectos, a verse wherin one syllable iac∣keth. Acatium, the greatest sayle in the shyp. also a bote. Accalaurentia, the name of her, that nourys∣shed Romulus and Remus, the fyrste buyl∣ders of Rome. Acatia, the iuyce of a fruyte in Egypte, but in stede therof, men nowe do take the iuyce of sides which lyke to the other do refrygerate, bind, and stryke heate backewarde. Accedo, cessi, dere, to goo to, or approche. sometyme it sygnifieth to gyue an eare or har¦ken, to take hede, and to make moche of. Accede adiutare, come helpe me. Accedere ad amicitiam alicuius,Plaut. in trucul. to alye him selfe with one. Accedere alicui, to graunt to another, or to be of an other mannes opinion. Accedere illi, to be of his opinion. Accedere obuiam, to mete with one. Accedere periculum,Plaut. in Epidi. to take on hym the daungier. Accedit huc, more ouer than that. Accedit pretio, the pryce increseth. Huc accedit summus timor, more ouet the feare was wonderfull great. Accessit, he went. Illi aetas accessit, he is become olde. Robur accessit, strength in increased. Accessit ea res in cumulum, and that thyng moreouer is thervnto added. Accelero, aui, are, to make hast or spede. Accelerare gradum to go apace. Acceleratio, haste or spede. Accendo, di, dere, to kendle, inflame, prouoke, or gyue boldnes. Accensi, were souldiours appoynted to be a∣bout great offycers for defence of theyr per∣sons. Festus sayth, that it were they, which after the deathe of souldyours were put in their places. Varro affirmeth, that they were ministers redy at the commaundementes of principal officers. Accento, tare, to synge often. Accentus, an accent, or tunc, wherby a sylla∣ble is pronounced. Accepso, in stede of acceperim, I haue taken. Acceptabula, all vessayle or other thynge, that maye receyue and kepe what so euer shall be put in to it. Acceptilatio, an acceptaunce, a worde of the lawe, whiche happeneth in this wyse. One saythe to an other: art thou contented with that that I haue promised the? or that by my bargayne I owe to the? the other sayth: yea, I am contented. This is acceptilatio. Also wherin so euer I haue bounden my selfe by receyuynge of any thynge, it maye be called acceptilatio. Acceptum, thankefull, pleasaunt, alowable. Acceptam facere pecuniam, to make a qui∣taunce for money receyued. Acceptum fero, to knowledge my selfe to haue receyued, that is not yet payde, also to take thankefully, Acceptum referre, to make a reckenynge of that whiche is receyued. Acceptus, receyued, entertayned. Acceptus, ta, tum, accepted, acceptable. Accepti & expensi ratio, accompte of recey∣tes and expences. Accersio, sire, to sende or call for one. Accersi iube filiam, commaunde thy daugh∣ter to be sent for, or called for. Accersitus, called for. Accerso, siui, sire, to call forth, or sende for. Accerso, fere, tertiae coniugat. to go to cal, or fetche. Accersere orationi splendorē, to make the o∣cation
lyght to vnderstande. Accessio, an augmentation, also a goinge or commynge. Accessio febris, the course of the feuer. Accessio morbi, the begynnyng of a sicknes. Accessus maris, the flowynge of the sea. Accidens, is an accident which may be or not be, withoute corruption of that, wherein it may be. Accidere, to happen. Accidit, there hapned, it is chaunced. Accido, cîdere, to extenuate, or make feeble, to destroy. Accido, di, dre, to falle downe in doinge re∣uerence. Accinere, to synge to an instrument, or to syng a parte, as a treble to a tenor, or a descante to a playne songe. Accingo, xi, gere, to gyrd, to prepare, to make redy, to do some thynge. Accinctus, gyrt, redy, quicke in his businesse. Accio, iui, ire, to cal to, to send for one, to come. Accepto ferre, to acquyte one of his promyse. Acceptrîca, she that vseth to receiue any thing Accipio, coepi, cipre, to take, to here, to sup∣pose, to knowe, to vnderstande, to receyue, to intreate, or entertayne. Accipere auribus, to here. Accipere ad verbū, to take as he speketh it. Accipere aliorsum, to take it other wyse thā it was spoken. Accipere causam, to holde excused. Accipere cladem, to lose the battayle. Accipere conditionem, to take the offre. Accipere corde, to perceyue well. Pol haud satis meo corde accepi quaerelas tuas, In good fayth I do not well perceyue the cause of thy griefe. Accipere aequis auribus, to here indifferētly Accipere durius, to take it displesauntly. Accipere dictis, to take with one gentylly. Accipere dolorem, to take thought, to be heuy. Accipere fidutiam, to be infeoffed. Accipere grauiter, to take it heuyly. Accipere in ciuitatem, to make one a cyte∣zen. Also to open the towne gates agaynste hym that besiegeth it, to yelde it vp. Accipere moderate, to take it patiently. Accipere mandata, to take charge by com∣mission. Accipere nomen, to take account. Accipere oculis, & animo, to se and re∣membre. Accipere potestatem, to haue leaue. Accipere uerberibus, to beate one. Accipere uulnus, to be wounded. Accipe ad omnia, take this answere for all. Ego à maioribus memoria sic accepi. I re∣member that I harde myne elders so report. Accipiter, a hawke. Accipiter humipeta, a sparhauke. Accipiter hierax, an hauke called a sakre. Accipiter pecuniarum, a poller of people. Accipitrarius, a faulconer. Acclamo, are, to crye with reioysynge. Acclamatio, a showte. Acclino, aui, are, to enclyne, or bende to. Accliue, stepe wyse, bendynge wyse. Accliuis siue accliuus, rysynge vpwarde to a small top. Accliuis arbori, leauynge to a tree. Accliuitas, a raysynge vp of a hyll. Accludo, to shut to. Accola, the next inhabitant called a borderar. Also he that commeth out of one countreye, and dwelleth in an other countrey or towne. Accola campi, he that dwelleth nexte to the fielde. Accolo, to dwell by or nyghe, specially hylles or waters. Accommodo, aui, are, to accommodate, ap∣proper, to apply, make apt, set in order, giue or inclyne. Accōmodare ensem lateri, to gyrde a sword about one. Accommodare curam auribus, to here dy∣lygently. Accommodus, da, dum, apte, mete, con∣uenient. Accommodate, to the pourpose, handsomly. Accommodatus, ta, tum, applyed to a thing, besemynge, couenable. Accommodatus ad flagitia, disposed to mis∣chiefe. Accerdo, didi, dere, to gyue credence, to assent. Accreduo, uis, ûere, idem quod accredo. Accresco, creui, crescere, to growe to. Accretio & Acrementum, increace. Accubatio, a syttynge at the table, also the li∣inge in of a woman with chyld. somtyme the syttynge on broode of byrdes and foules. Accubitores, they that syt at the table. Accubitum, a bed or couche to lye on by daye tyme, as it was the maner of the olde Ro∣maynes, to eate lyenge on theyr beddes. Accubitus, the lyinge in the sayde maner. Accubo, bare, to lye by, or to syt, or to lye downe to eate. Accûdo, ere, to beate a thynge on an anuile. Accumbo, cubui, accumbere, to lye downe, to lye by, to ly or syt downe at feastes and ban∣kettes. Accumbere mensam, to syt at one table. Accumbere alicui, to syt by one at the table. Accumulo, aui, are, to accumulate, or gather in heapes, to increase.
Accuro, aui, are, to take good hede. Also to do a thynge diligently. Accurare prandiū, to make redy the dyner. AccuratèPlaut. in Trucul. diligently curiously, exactly. Accuratio, diligence. Accuratus, ta, tum, wherin is moch diligence, curiouse, exact. Accurata malitia, malice prepensed. Accuratum habere, to prepense, or forecaste a thynge curiously. Accurro, ri, rere, to run to, to spede thither. Accusabilis, le, worthy to be blamed. Accusatio, an accusement. Accusator, an accuser, a rebuker. Accusatorius, a, um, whiche conteyneth an accusation. Accusatorius liber, a byl of complaynt. Accusatrix, a woman rebuker. Accuso, aui, are, to accuse, to blame. Acedaria, salettes, or meates lightly prepared. Acédia, slouth, pensifnes, heuynes of harte, werynes. Acèdior, diatus sum, to be werye or waxe slouthfull. Acentra, & acentreta, thynges wherof the poynte in the middes is not knowen. Aceo, acui, ácere, to be sowre or sharpe. Acéphali, were heretikes which denyed to be two natures in Christe, affyrmynge the na∣ture diuine to be in hym onely. This heresy was condemned in the counsayle of Chalce∣donense. Acéphalus, la, lum, without a head. Acer & áceris, a tree, the woode wherof is most gentyll to worke in, it semeth by the di∣scription therof, to be that whiche is called wiche, also bowes be made therof. Acer, aceris, chaffe of mylseede. Acer, cra, crum, & Acer, acris, acre, sowre as vyneger. somtyme it betokeneth stronge, sore, also diligent. Acer amator, a feruent louer. Amor acer, ardent loue. Acer animus, a great or lusty courage. Acer equus, a couragious or swyft horse. Acer morbus, a greuouse sickenes. Acersè comes, he that neuer cutteth his heare. Acerrima vxor, a very shrewd wyfe. Acerrime, excedynge sharpely or stifly, eygre∣ly or rigorously. Acerrimi inimici, mortall ennemies. Acerrimi testes, wytnesses whiche do styfly abyde by the matter. Aceratum, morter, or claye, myxt with hey or strawe, wherwith walles are daubed. Acerbè, bitterly, vnripely, cruelly, vehemently. Acerbitas, bytternes of tast, sharpnes of time, crueltie of man, heuines, griefe, peyne. Acerbo, baui, bare, to trouble, to make bitter, or abhominable. Acerbus, ba, bum, vnrype, bytter, displesant, difficult, or peynfull, as, Robustorum iuue∣num acerba mors, The death of yong men is peynefull, as who sayth, they dye with great difficultie. Acere, a citie by Naples. Acernus, na, num, of the tree called Acer. Acero, rare, to myxt with chaffe. Acerosum frumentum, vnclene whete, whete not well wynowed or fanned. Acerosus panis, browne bread not ranged. Acerra, a shyppe, wherin frankensense is put. some do name it an auitare, whiche was set before a dead corps, wheron incense was bur¦ned. some call it a cuppe, wherin they dyd sa∣crifice wyne. Aceruatim, in heapes, without order, in a mengley. Aceruo, aui, are, to gather into heapes. Aceruus, a heape or gatherynge together spe∣cially of grayne. Acesco, sci, scere, to waxe sowre or tart, spe∣cially in licour. Acesinus, a great ryuer in Persia, which run∣neth into the ryuer of Indus, wherin doo growe canes of suche greatnes, that they do make therof betwene euery knotte or ioynt, botes to rowe in. Acesis, an herbe whiche is yelowe in colour. Acestis, a great ryuer in India. Acerabulum, a measure conteyninge in it of wyne two ounces and a halfe. It is also a li∣tell vessell, as a saucer, or other like. it is al∣so a boxe or goblette wherwith iuglars doo make theyr conueyance. It is also a partiti∣on in the leg of a fyshe called Polipus, whi∣che is lyke vnto a littel cup or goblet. Acetare, to moue or styrre. Acertarium, a salate of herbes, it is also a gar∣den, where salate herbes do growe. Acetositas, cygrenes or sowrenesse. Acetosus, a, um, eygre, sowre. Acetum, vyneger. Acetum in pectore). Nunc experiar, sit ne acetum tibi, cor acre in pectore, Now wyll I proue, if thou haste any thynge that dothe pricke the in the stomacke. Aceum, a citie in Colchis, on the banke of the ryuer called Phasis. Achaei, people in Grecia. somtyme they be ta∣ken for Grekes generally. Achaemenes, was fyrst kynge of Persians or Parthians, of whom diuerse kinges of Per¦sia, were called Achaemenes, and the peo∣ple Achaemenii. Achaeron, rontis, is of Poetes taken for a ri∣uer of Hell. In dede it is a ryuer in a parte
of Italy, wherof the people be called Brutii. Achaia, a parte of Grecia conteynynge these countreys, Attica, Boeotia, Megaris, Ac∣tholia, and Phocis. It hath on the west E∣pyrum, on the easte, the sea called Aegeum, on the north Macedonia, on the south the sea called Creticum. There is an other Achaia in the parte of Grecia, called Peloponesus, nowe called Morea, where was the citie of Patras, in the whiche saynt Androwe the apostle was martryd. Achantia, a fyshe, whiche some men doo sup∣pose to be thornebacke. Achar, a citie in Siria, nowe called Nisibis. Achateon, the mayne sayle of a shyppe. Achates, a precious stone, wherin are repre∣sented dyuers figures, for some haue had in them the ymage of the .ix. muses, some of Ve¦nus, some haue the colour of Corall, some ar bryght as Cristali. It was one of the .xii. sto∣nes, that god commaunded to be put on the vestementes of Aaron. It was supposed that magitiens by burnynge of that stone,Plinius. and the smoke therof cummynge,Solin. dyd put away tem¦pestes and stormes. Also of that name is a ry¦uer in Sicil. It was also the name of the cō∣panion of Aeneas the Troyan. Achei, or Achiui, be not onelye the people of Achaia, but also amonge the poetes, be of∣ten taken for the general name of Grekes. Achelous, a famous ryuer in Grecia, whiche rounneth out of Pindus.Solin. wherein is founde the stone Galactides, whiche is blacke, but beynge broken, it yeldeth licour as whyte as mylke, and is of the tast therof. Acheloeus, of that ryuer, sometyme it is put for aqueus. Achemenia, a countrey in Persia. Acherontinus, & Acherontius, of the ryuer of Acheron. Acherusia, a fen in the royalme of Naples. Acherusius, an hole or caue, whiche the poe∣tes dyd suppose was a way into Hell, out of the whiche Hercules brought Cerberum the dogge of Hell. And the painims beleued that all soules wente by that waye to the fenne or meere called Stygiae paludes, where Charon receyued them into his bote. Achtae, greshoppers, which chyrpe loude and pleasauntly. Achillèa, an herbe called yarrowe. Achilleias, a kynd of barly, peraduenture that whiche is called beere corne. Achilleon, some do suppose to be mylfoyle. Achilleum, a sponge, which is very soft, and hath small holes. Achilles, one of the most valyante capitaynes of the Grekes agaynst Troy, he was sonne of Peleus, in his chyldehode he was instru∣cted of Chiron in deedes of armes and sur∣gerye. after he slewe the noble Hector, and Troilus his brother, the one sodenly, the o∣ther cruelly. Wherfore afterwarde he by the slyght of queene Hecuba mother to Hector, was brought into the loue of Polyxena her fayre daughter, and vnder the colour of ma∣ryage was slayne by Paris, brother to Hec∣tor. He was in heyghte as Lycophron wry∣teth .vii. cubites. Achras, a wylde peare. Achylus, without lyppes. Aciaeris, a hatchet of brasse, whiche amonge the paynimes was vsed in sacrifice. Aciale, harde yron. Acicula, a pyn. Acidalia, the name of Venus, of a fountayn in a citie of Bocotia, called Orchomenae. Acidula, peares that be sowre. Also an herbe called sorrell de boys. Acidus, da, dum, sowre or sharpe. Acidylus, a knot in the gyrdell of Venus. Acies, betokeneth the edge of a knyfe, or other weapon or toole. Also the front of an host, at the ioyning of battayle. Moreouer that part of the eye whiche is called the syght. Acies animi uel ingenii, the sharpnes or ca∣pacitie of the wyt, which some cal the spirit. Aciem trahere, to set in edge. Acinaceus, a, um, full of kernels. Acinacis, a croked sworde that the Persians vsed. Acini, be lyttell kernels, which be in grapes, raisons, pomegranates, and other beryes. Acinosus, full of kernels. Acinus, small basyll. Acipenser, or Aquipenser, a kynde of fysshe, whiche hath the scales turned towarde the head. Aciritani, were a people in Spayne. Acis, a ryuer in Sycil, whiche commeth from the mountayne of Aethna. Acitia, an ylonde, called also Melos in the sea by Candy. Aclanes, he that neuer cryeth. Aclassis, a garment vnsowed frō the shulders. Aclytes, a weapon vsed in the olde tyme. Acon, onis, a fyshe, whiche after the descrip∣tion of Paulus Iouius, I suppose to be that whiche at London is called a shad. Aconitum, an herbe excedynge venemous, it hath leaues lyke a cucumber, but sumwhat lesse and roughe, the stalke one hande brode hyghe, the rote lyke the tayle of a scorpion, and is whyte as alablaster. There is also an other kynde therof, whiche hath leaues lyke a plane tree, but the diuysions are thycker, the leafe lenger and more blacke, and hath a stalke like a ferne, one cubite in heyghte the
seede beynge in a longe codde, the rootes are blacke, and be lyke to the heares or hornes of a shrympe. Acontiae, certayne impressyons in the fyrma∣ment, lyke to fyry dartes, whiche do seme to flye in the ayre. Acopa, medicins to remedy weryNes or labor. Acopis, a precious stoone lyke a glasse, with small golden oroppes, wherewith if oyle be heate, and the body therwith annoynted, it dissolueth all wearynesse. Acopus, an herbe called also Anagyris, full of braunches, and hath flowres lyke to cole∣wortes, and hath an yl sauour, the sede ther∣of is in longe coddes, harde and lyke in faci∣on to kydneys. Acor, ris, a tartenesse, lyke vnto rype wyne or pomegranates, eygRenes. Acorus, an herbe with longe leaues, lyke the blade of a sworde. Leonicenus and Antonius Musa do suppose it to be galyngale, and not that whiche is callyd Gladiolus, in englysshe Gladen. This roote is hotte and drye in the thyrde degree. Acquiesco, eui, escere, to leane, as to leane my head or arme vpon any thynge. Also it signy∣fyeth to assent to other mens sayenges. also to recreate. Acquiro, fiui, re, to atteyne a thynge that is sought for. Acratismus & acratisma, a breakefast. Acron, pure wyne, without alay, or vnmixt. Acre, swyfte, sowre, cruell, valiant, vehement, diligent, circumspect. Acre ingenium, a quycke wytte. Acres oculi, clere eyes. Acredo, acritudo, acritas, sharpnes, or sowre∣nesse that is in fruites that be not rype. Acredula, the wood larke. Acrimonia, tartnes, whiche byteth the tonge, and perceth the heed, as in the tast of garlike oynions and other like thingis. It signifieth sometyme sharpenes in speakynge or mynde, somtyme lyuelynes and quycknes of wytte. Acris, a ryuer of Italy. Acrisius, kynge of Argiues, the father of Da∣naes, on whom Iupiter begat Perseus. Acritas, sowrenes, crueltie, diligence. Acriter, sharply, sowrely, styffely, swyftly, cruel∣ly, vehemently, diligently. Acriter animum intendere, to set al his en∣tent or studye. Acriter iudicare, to iudge with a great deli∣beration, and as nighe the truthe as he can. Acrius, more sharpely or styffely. Acroama, a subtyl sentence or lesson, requiring moche studye and serche. It is also taken for al thynges to be recited or done, to delyte the audience. Acroamata, were certayn lectures of Aristotle whiche he radde to his scholers, wherin was the mooste subtyll and counnynge parte of philosophye. Acrocaeraunia, mountaynes of wonderfulle heyght, betwene Armenia and Hiberia. Acrochordones, a kynde of wartes, so smalle at the rootes, that they doo seme to hange by a synewe. Acrocomus, one hauynge longe heare. Acrocorinthus, an hygh mountayne in Mo∣rea, betwene the two seas Aegeū & Ionium. Acrodria, be all fruites, whiche haue an hard rynde or shale, as pomegranodes, nuttes, the styns, pystaces, and other lyke. Acropolis, a castell sette on a hylle. Acta, water bankes, or whiche men doo calle strondes, wheron the water floweth. Also it is that which we call actes concerning mens lyues, or priuate busynes put in wryting, also suche dedes as haue hapned out of iugement. Actitata, be those, whiche haue happened in iudgement, properly they whiche be in doing. Acta aetas, age whan youth is past. Acta agere, to do that whiche is all redy done. Acta circunducere, to cancell a sentence ones determyned. Acte, an elder tree. Actaeon, the name of a man, whome Diana, bicause he dyd see her naked, tourned into an harte, and so was he torne and slayne of his owne houndes. Actaeus, of Athens. Actia, orum, playes made ones in fyue yeres. Actio, onis, betokeneth sometyme pronuncia∣tion, somtyme an oration written, sometyme an action in the lawe, sometyme an history, somtyme a defence, otherwhile a recompence in wordes for a benefit receyued, as Gratiarū actio for thankes. Generally it is taken for act or dede in euery thynge. Action, the beary of an elder. Actiosus, busye. Actitatio, a debating of a case in law, a pleding Actitatus, determined by iugement. Actito, taui, tare, to practyse speciallye in cy∣uile causes. Actius, a noble poet that wrate tragedies. Actiuus, actiue. Actor, whiche dothe the dede. Also in the law the playntife, complaynant, or demandaunt. Also a player of enterludes. also a mans fa∣ctour or baylyffe that hath the charge of his busynesse. Actualia nomina, names whiche doo procede of acte, as Rex à regendo, of gouernynge. Dux à ducendo, of leadynge. Actualis scientia, a science that declareth thin¦ges by theyr operation, of the which are thre
partes, morall, dispensatiue, and ciuyle. Actuarius, a substantiue, signifieth a notarye or scribe, or any other that wryteth spedily. Actuarius, a, um, actiue. Actuaria nauis, a rowe barge, or other lyght shyppe whiche is rowed. Actum de me est, I am vndone. Actuose, braggyngly. Actuosus, full of actes, alway in busynes. Actuosus ignis, fyre which alway bourneth. Actus, ta, tum, performed, also arryued, thrust in, brought to, or feared. Actus, tus, a dede, the partes of a commedye or playe, a dayes warke in tyllage, whiche was accompted at .Cxx. feete square. Alsoo the measure of grounde contayninge .Cxx. fete square. Actutum, anon, without taryenge. Aculeatus,Seneca. a, um, any thyng that pricketh. Aculeus, a prycke or stynge. Acumen, the sharpnes of euery thing. it signi∣fieth also clerenesse of wytte, also the sharpe bylle of a byrde. Acumino, aui, are, to sharpen. Acuncula, a smalle nedle. Acuo, acui, acuere, to make sharpe. by transla∣tion, it signils;ieth to prycke forthe or styre one to do a thyng, to pouoke. Ingenium acuere to quycken the wytte. Linguam acuere, to make the tongue to pronounce perfectly. Stilum acuere, to write sharpely or cursedly. Acupedius, he that hath a quycke or apt foote to runne with. Acupictores, imbrowderers. Acus, aceris, chaffe. Acus, acus, a nedell, also chaffe of corne, also an order in battayle. Acus,Frāciscus Massari{us} in .9. li. Pl. ci, a fyshe of the sea, long, small, & smoth, and on the back hath a colour betwene grene and blewe, and hath a longe beake & a sharp. It is callyd in some countreys here, an horne beake. In the tyme of spaunyng, the bealy of this fyshe openeth, and so the spaune issueth, afterwarde the wounde is closed. This fyshe is harde of digestion, but it is moyst, and of good iuyce in a hole bodye. Acustici, they whiche doo here all, and speake nothynge them selfe. Acute, quyckely, subtylly. Acutulus, he that hath a prety wytte. Acutus, a, um, sharpe, but in voyce: it betoke∣neth hygh and small as a treble. Acuti oculi, clere eyes. Acuti cibi, sharpe meates. Acutum ingenium, a subtylle or quycke wytte. Acylon, an holy bearye. Acyphantes, a citie in Thessalye, whyche is also callyd Pindus. A, ANTE D. AD, by hym selfe, or ioyned to an nother worde, signifieth to or at, as Vado ad oppidum, I goo to the towne. Erat ad ripam fluminis arbor, There was at the ryuers syde a great tree. Sometyme it signi∣fieth agaynst, as Ad illum mihi pugna est, Agaynst hym is my warre. somtyme it betoke¦neth in comparyson, somtyme cause, as, Ad quid hoc fecisti? For what cause, or wherto dyddest thou this? sometyme aboute, as Ad duo millia hominum occisa sunt, There be slayne about two thousande men. Also after, as, Ad haec, After this. Ad is also sometime taken for Quantum ad.Cicero in Ver. Vidi simul cum populo Romano forum, co mitium{que} adornatū, ad speciem, magnifico ornatu, ad sensum, cogitationem{que}, acerbo & lugubri: I with the people of Rome be∣helde the places of iudgement and cōmon as∣semblies, as to the pleasure of the eye, sump∣tuousely garnyshed, but as to respect of wyt and imaginatiō, lamentably & heuily decked. Ad annum, duryng a hole yere. Ad assem,Plaut. in Ruden. to the vttermost peny. Ad annos sedecim,Plin. in Pa¦negy. .xvi. yeres after. Ad breuissimū, tempus, for a very short time. Ad cyathos stare, to awayte on the cuppe. Ad decem annos,Sueton. in Caesare. tenne yeres after. Nescio quid intersit, utrum illuc nunc ueniam, an ad decem annos,Cicero ad Attic. I wote not what diuersi∣tie, whether I comme nowe, or tenne yeres hereafter. Ad decimum sextum calendas, aboute the xvi. calendes. Ad dextram, ad sinistram, on the right hand on the lefte hande. Ad diem, at the day appoynted. Ad desyderium, for the desyre that they had Inde cum actae boues quaedam ad desyde∣rium,Tit. Liuius lib. 1. (ut fit) relictarum mugissent. Than whan somme of the nete whiche were dryuen away, for the desyre whiche they had of the other that remayned (as they vse to do) dyd lowe or bellowe. Ad ducentos,Cicero. about two hundred. Ad extremum, Ad postremum,Plau. in au Iular. at the last, fynally, in conclusion. Ad exemplum,Plinius. to the example or lykenesse. Ad hoc exemplum,Plaut. in Mercat. nun{quam} amaui, I neuer lo¦ued of that facion, or in that maner. Ad haec mala hoc mihi accidit,Teren. in And. besydes these dyspleasures, this chaunced vnto me. Ad horam nonam in anchoris expectauit,Caesar. he lay at ankor vntyll nyne of the clocke. Ad hunc modum, this way, or in this maner. Ad id tempus,Plaut. in Merc. at that tyme. Ad illam faciem, ita ut illa est, ut emerē sibi
mandauit mihi, He cōmanded me to bye for hym one, whyche had suche an nother face as she hathe. Ad iudices dicere, to pleade before iudges. Ad iudicem,Cice. pro Ros. before a iudge. Eius testis ad iu∣dicem fidem informabit, His wytnes before a iudge, shall proue the truthe. Ad limina, a portat. Ad lucem, vntyll the day lyght. Ad manum seruus,Cic. de o∣rato. 2. he that is a clerke to one, or wryteth for hym. Ad manus uenire, to come to hande strokes, to cope togyther. Ad me,Ci. Attic. lib. 9. with me. Commodum ad te dederā literas, cū ad me bene mane Dionysius fuit. I had scarsely sent my letters vnto the, whan Dionyse was with me erly in the mornyng. Ad meridiem, vntyll none. Ad meridiem spectat, aut uergit, it lyeth to∣warde the southe. Ad me domum, at home with me. Ad multam noctem,Terenti{us}. late in the nyght, Ad nummum conuenit, it is the trew summe. Ad pedem,❀ a prouerbe whyche signyfieth agreable, as it were my shoe is mecte for my foote. Accordynge to this prouerbe is the sen¦tence of Paulus Acmilius, who herynge his wyfe Papyriam commended for her beaultie and dyuers other good qualities, he helde vp his foote to them that praysed her, and asked howe they lyked his shoe. They sayd it was a good shoe. Than sayd Aemilius, ye se that it is a newe shoe, and a well made shoe, but yet none of you do know where he wryngeth me. but yet I do fele it. Ad pedes, a lakay. Ad pedes desilio, I lyght on my feete. Ad pileum uocare,Eras. chil. 2. centu. 1. to styre men to sedition, v∣pon trust of libertie, or other commodities. Ad quindecim talenta, about .xv. talentes. Ad rauim poscere,Teren. in Heauton. Plautus. to aske vntyll one be hoorse Ad rem facit, it maketh for the mattier, or is conuenient, or it serueth for the purpose. Ad rem pertinet, it belongeth to the purpose. Ad rem suam sapere,Plaut. in Trucul. to be wyse for his owne profytte. Ad restem res redijt, the thynge is in dis∣payre.❀ Eras. chil. 1. cent. 5. Whiche prouerbe came of them, whi∣che dyd hange them selues. bycause they had not so good fortune, as they loked for, or that thynges happened not accordynge vnto theyr expectation. Ad summum, at the moste. Ad sapientiam huius, nimius nugator fuit, In regarde of his wysdom, he was but a fole. Ad tempus, in season, somtyme according to the tyme. also for a tyme. Ad tria millia, about thre thousande. Ad uerbum, worde by worde. Ad uiuum resecare, Cic. de  mic. & de finib. to towche it to the quycke. I prouerbe taken of paryng of nay∣les, vntyll the bloud dothe appere, which sy∣gnifyeth to touche a thynge nerer than nede requyreth.Plaut. in Bacch. Ad unguem,Cicer. de amicitia. perfitely. Ad unum, not one left, at ones, vnto the last. Ad unū idē sentiūt, they be al of one opinion. Ad Calendas graecas,Plinius. sygnifieth neuer, for the olde grekes had no kalendes. Ad horam, at tyme appoynted. Adad, in the Syrian tongue, is the sonne, also it sygnifieth onely. Adactio, compulsyon. Adactus, ta, tum, compelled, put forth. Adaeque, semblably, so moche, as moche. Adaeque miser, so moche a wretche. Adaequo, are, to make or be equall. Adaggero, rare, to gather or lay togither. Adagia, an olde wyfe, which late had a chylde. Adagum, a prouerbe, or as I mought say, an olde sayd sawe. Adam, the fyrst man that was created, & dothe sygnify man, or redde erthe, or a dweller, ly∣ued .ix.C.xxx. yeres. In the byble is mention made but of thre sonnes that he had, and one doughter, Cayne, Abel, Seth, and Delbora, whiche of Philo is callyd Noaba. And the same Philo reherseth .xii. sonnes, and .viii. doughters, borne after Seth. Adamas, adamantis, a dyamonde, wherof be dyuers kyndes, one is founde in Inde, and is lyttell, bryght, heuy, and so hard, that nothing may breake it, except the bloud of a gote. An other is found in Arabia, whiche is lesse than the other, and paler of colour. Som be found in Macedonia, and they haue more the color of yron, made bryght. Other be founde in Ae∣thiopia, and they be mooste darke in colour. And some be found in Cypres, and theyr color draweth towarde the colour of ayre, but they ar soft. The vertues of this stone ar these, to resyst agaynst poyson and witchecraft, it put∣teth away feare, it causeth hym that weareth it, to vanquysh in contention, it helpeth them that be lunatike or phrenetike. I haue proued that a dyamonde layde by a nedelle, the lode stone myght not drawe hym vp to hym. Adamanteus, & adamantinus, of a dyamond or as harde as a dyamonde. Adamaster, a gyant, whiche was of incredy∣ble greatnesse. Adamitae, were heretykes, whyche toke these begynaynge of a Pycard, who came into the lande of Boheme, and sayde that he was the sonne of god, and named hym self Adam. And he cōmanded al men and women to go naked. And who so desyred to company carnally with any woman, he shulde take her by the hande,
and brynge her to hym, and saye, that he fer∣uentely desyred her company, and than wolde Adam say, Go togither, and increace and mul¦tiply. This heresy was begun the yere of our lorde .M.CCCC.xii. Sigismunde being em∣perour. And men suppose, that yet it endureth not only in Boheme, but also in other places. Adamo, aui, are, to loue verye welle, to desyre feruently. Adamussim, by rule, streyght as a lyne. Ad Apollinis, ad monetae, ad Saturni, ad Iu∣nonis, at Apollos temple. &c. Adaperio, rire, to open a thynge. Adapertilis, le, for apertum, open. Adapto, aui, are, to ioyne to. Adaquatio, watrynge of cattell. Adaquo, aui, are, to water horse or cattell. Adarca, a salt fome, whiche cometh of the rin∣des of canes or redes growyng in fennes. Adasia, an olde eawe, whiche hath late eaned, or had a lambe. Adasso, olde wryters vsed for Adigo, to cōpel. Adaucto, are, to augment or increace. Adauctus,Non. Mar cellus. ta, tum, augmented. Adaugeo, êre, idem. Adaxint, for adegerint, let theym compelle or constrayne. Addebat hoc,Teren. in Eunu. he sayd moreouer. Addere animum, to gyue courage. Addere gradum, to make hym go faster. Addico, xi, cre, to say, to iudge, to appoynte, or depute. Addicere animū, to gyue or apply his minde. Addictus, he that is iudged, appoynted, or de∣puted, or bounden. Addictus, ta, tum, openly solde. Also Addicere was, whan the iudge in the olde tyme delyue red the dettour to his credytours, to doo with hym what they lysted. Addisco, didici, discere, to lerne welle, or adde to in lernynge. Additamentū, a thing added to, an augmētatiō Additus, ta, tum, added or put to. Additus,Vergilius also for an enmy. Nec Teucris addita Iuno, us{quam} aberit, Neyther Iuno ennemye to the Troyans shall lacke or be away. Addo, are, to gyue to one. Addo, didi, dere, to adde, ioyne, or put to. Addoceo, cui, cére, to lerne. Addormio, miui, ire, to sleape. Addormisco, scere, idem. Addubito, tare, to doubte. Adduco, xi, cere, to brynge to, or brynge forth, sometyme to drawe or plucke togyther. also to meue or perswade. Adduci, to be meued or perswaded. Adducta frons, a frownyng forheade, somme tyme adducere, is to extende or thrust out. Adduplico, are, to double any thynge. Adedo, edi, ere, to deuoure. Adelphi, bretherne, it is also the name of a co∣medy in Terence. Ademptio ciuitatis, banyshement. Adeo, so moch, moreouer, surely, without dout. sometyme it signifieth euen, as, Tute iam a∣deo eius audies uerba, Thou thy selfe euen nowe shalt hers his wordes. Sometyme it si∣gnifieth, and that more is, as, Intra moenia at{que} adeo in Senatu uidetis,Cicero in Catil. ye see hym in the citie, and that more is in the senate. It hath dyuers significations harde to be perceyued, but by the examples. Adeo mihi uisus est le∣pidus, He semed to me so pleasant a felowe. Adolescens tuus at{que} adeo noster te salutrat, your chylde & myn cōmendeth hym vnto you. Aliquid at{que} adeo multa addunt de suo, som what they adde to, and that very moche of theyr owne. Id adeo ex me cognoscite, Thus moch take ye of me. Id adeo (si placet) consyderate, Hytherto (if it please you) consyder. Haec Cicero.Terent. Nihil herclè, aut si adeo, bidui, aut tridui est haec solicitudo, In fayth nothyng, or at the most, this sorow or care wyl not last passynge two or thre dayes. Adeo res redijt, the mattier is come to that poynte. Adeo, iui, ire, to goo to, to demaunde, to at∣tempte, to make assaulte. Adij te heri de filia, I came yesterday to talk with the for thy doughter. Adire discrimen, to put hym selfe in peryll. Adire haereditatē, to entre īto his inheritāce. Adire inimicitias, to enter into displeasure. Adire ad pactionem, to comme to a poynte concernynge the bargayne. Adire periculum, to take a dangerous thing on hande. Adeor, the passyue of adeo. Adeous{que}, vntyll that. Adeps, adipis, the fatte of all thynge. Adeptus, opteyned, gotten, or founden. Ader, a place by Bethlem, where aungels dyd synge at the byrthe of Christ, and Iacob kept there his shepe. Adesdum,Teren. in And. come hyther. Adesse, signifieth sometyme presence, somtime ayde, otherwhyle fauour. Adesse animo, to haue his mynde at lyber∣tye, to take a good harte to hym, to be of good courage. Adesse praesens, to be presente. Adesse coram, idem. Adesse coram praesentem. Corā aderit prae¦sens tibi, He shall come before the. Adesse alicui, to defende or helpe one. Adesse ad iudicium, to appere. Adesse iudici, to be associate in commission.
Adest, he is at hande. Adest ei animus, he hath a good courage. Adesto istic, tary here. Adesus, a, um, consumed. Ad exitam aetatem,Festus. for ad ultimam aetatem, at the vttermooste age. Adfabrum, wel wrought. Adnabito, aui, are, to dwelle by. Ad haec, moreouer. Adhaereo, to cleane fast, to set sure, to ioyne to, to holde or to take to any thynge. Adhaeresco, scere, idem quod adhaeteo. Adhaese.Gell. Ne{que} adhaese locutus est, nor he dydde not mumble, but spake out. Adhaesio, a cleauynge togyther. Adhaesus, a, um, cleaued to. Adhalo, aui, are, to blowe, or to breathe on a thynge. Adhamo, aui, are, to bynd to, or tye, or grappel. Adhibeo, ui, re, to put to, to haue by me. Adhibere animū, to take hede what is spokē Adhibere aures, to harken, to gyue an eare. Adhibere in consilium aliquem, to aske coū fsayle of one. Adhibere modum, to vse moderacyon or temperaunce. Adhibere parsimoniam, to spare. Adhibere sermonē, to deuise or talk togider. Adhibere testes, to bryng forthe wytnes. Adhibere uim, to doo a thynge by violence, to inforce. Celeritatem adhibere, to make haaste, or to vse dilygence. Coenae aliquem adhibere, whan one biddeth an other to supper, which is inferior to hym. Delectum adhibere, to put a difference, to di¦scerne betwene thinges, whiche is the better. Religionem adhibere, to make conscyence of a thynge. Adhinnio, to ney as a horse doth after a mare. Cicero by a metaphor maketh it to sygnyfye to reioyce.Cicero in Pison. Adhoc, furthermore. Adhortator, toris, he that exhorteth or coun∣sayleth. Adhortatio, an exhortation. Adhortor, tari, to exhorte or counsayle to the doynge of a thynge. Adhuc, yet, hytherto. Adhuc locorum,Plaut. in capt. for adhuc. Adiabene, a countrey beyonde Armenia. Adiaceo, cui, cre, to lye by. Adiantum, an herbe growynge aboute spryn∣ges of water, hauyng smal leaues lyke to Co∣riāder, some do nowe take it for Maydenheare. Adiaphoron, indyfferent. Adides, short battes of a cubite longe and an halfe, hauyng pykes of yron in them, & were tyed to a lyne, that whan they were throwen, he that dyd cast them, mought plucke theym ageyne to hym, hurlebattes. Adigo, egi, igere, to procure or styre, to bynde by othe or promyse, to brynge or dryue to, to fasten or ioyne to, sommetyme to compelle or dryue one to do a thynge. Adijcio, ieci, ijcere, to caste to, to adde or put to, or increase. Adijcere album calculū, to approue a thing.Plinius in epist. Adijcere animū, to set his mīd or loue on one Adijcere oculū haereditati, Planè uidebant adiectum esse oculū haereditati.Cicero in Ver. They sawe playnly, that the other went about to get the inherytaunce. Adimo, emi, imere, to take away, or diminishe Animam alicui adimere, to slee one. Adimereius, to prohibyte. Adimere suum alteri, to take an other man∣nes goodes from hym. Adimere uestem, to pull of his garment. Ciuitatem adimere, to banyshe one. Adindo, didi, dere, to putte in. Adineo, iui, ire, idem quod adindo. Adinstar, lyke to. Adinuenio, to inuent a thynge. Adinuentum, an inuention. Adipales, festis that pristes were wōt to make Adipatus, ta, tum, larded, basted. Adipiscor, adeptus sum, to get optayn, ioy∣ned with a person, it signifieth to ouertake. Adipisci senectutem,Cicer. de senect. to come to age. Adiposus, ryche. Adipson, a swete roote callyd lkorys. Adipsos, a certayne date tree growynge in E∣gypte, the frute wherof hath no stone. Plini∣us calleth it Myrobalanum. Aditiculus, a lyttell entrie. Aditio, onis, an accesse, or repayre. Adito, aui, are, to goo to. Aditus, accesse, commyng to, or entry. Adiudico, aui, are, to adiudge. Adiugo, aui, are, to yoke or ioyne to. Adiumentum, helpe. Adiungo, xi, ere, to ioyne to, to applye, to wyn or optayne.Teren. in andria. Errat longe mea quidē sentētia, qui imperium credat grauius esse aut stabili∣us, ui quod fit, quam id quod amicitia adiun¦gitur, He is foule deceiued in myn opinion, that thynketh, that rule to be more firme and stable, whiche is gotten by violence, than that whiche is opteyned by frendshyp. Adiurati, confederate or alyed togither by oth. Adiuratio, a coniurynge. Adiurgium, debate. Adiurgo, are, to rebuke. Adiuro, aui, are, to deny with an oth, to cōiure. Adiuto, aui, are to helpe often. Adiutor, an helper. Adiutrix. Adiutorium, helpe.
Adiuuamen, helpe. Adiuuo, aui, are, to helpe. Adlino, nere, to anoynt, or rubbe a thing with any thynge, liquyde. Ad liquidum, clerely, euidently, playnly. Adlubesco, scere, to please or content one. Admando, aui, are, to sende to, to delyuer any thynge to one to bryng to another. Ad manus, at hande, redy. ❀ Admeti naenia, a prouerbe which signifieth an heuy or sorowfull songe,Eras. chil. 2. cent. 6. or a lamentable complaynte. Admetus, was kynge of a people callyd Phe∣rei, vnto whome Apollo (beynge exiled oute of heauen by Iupyter) came for reliefe, and kepte his cattelle, and by his crafce, caused euerye cowe to brynge forthe two calues, whyche thynge Adinetus thankefullys ta∣kinge, entertayned hym honourably. That beynge welle consydered of Apollo, he optei∣ned of the destenies callyd Parcae, that whan the day of the deathe of Admetus shulde be wounde vpon theyr spyndels, he shuld escape death vpon this condytion, that yf he coulde fynde any other, that wolde wyllyngely dye for hym, he hym selfe shoulde escape deathe at that tyme. Whan the day was come that Admentus shulde fynysshe his lyfe, all men and women (yea the father and mother of Adme∣tus) refused to dy, only Alceste his wife prefer¦red the lyfe of her husband before her owne, who beyng dead, there was in the palayce of Admetus contynual waylyng and heuynesse, vntyll Proserpina meued with compassyon, sente Alceste agayne out of Helle vntylle her husbande. Of this fable came the sayde pro∣uerbe Admeti naenia. Adminiculo, are, & adminiculor, aris, to ayde to succour. Adminicula uitae, all thinges necessarye to the lyfe of man. Adminiculum, ayde, supportation. Administer, a stewarde of householde. Administratio, exploytynge, or dooynge of a thynge, seruyce. Administro, are, to doo seruyce, to exployte, to fournyshe. Admirabilis. wonderfull. Admirabundus, he that dothe wonder or mer∣uayle at a thynge.Ci. off. 1. de nat. de∣orum. Admirabilitas, tatis, idem quod Admiratio. wondryng or meruaylynge. Admirabiliter,Ci. Attic. honourably. Nos Asia accepit admirabiliter, The countrey of Asia recey∣uyd vs honourably. Admiratio, a wonderynge. Admiror, aris, atus sum, ari, to wonder. Admisceo, scui, scêre, to myngle or myxte one thynge with an other. Admissarius, a stalyon horse. Admissio, nyghnes about a prynce, as admyt∣ted to be of his priuy counsayle, or priuy chā∣ber. It also signifieth the act of puttinge the male to the female, or contrary wyse. Admissionales, vshers of the chaumber. Admissum, beinge a substantyue, sygnifieth a thynge committed or done. Admissura, the acte or tyme whan beastes do theyr kynd in generation, sesonyng of a mare. Admiste, an aduerbe, sygnifyenge one myxte with an other. Admistio, onis, a mynglynge or myxture. Admistura, idem quod admistio. Admistus, ta tum, put vnto a thynge and min∣gled with it. Admitto, misi, mittere, to admytte, to put to, to brynge in, to suffer, to susteyne, or take, to lette into a place.Plaut. in Men. Also to offende. Quid tan∣dem admisi in te? What haue I offeded the? Admittere diem,Plinius in epist. 21. to open the wyndowe that the lyght may come in. Admittere equum, to go to horsback, or take his horse.Cicer. de finibus. Cū se deuouêret, & equo admis∣so in mediam aciem Latinorum irrubat, Whan he had made his vowe, and had takē his horse, he thraste hym selfe into the myddle of the hoste of the latynes.Caesar de bel. gall▪ 1. Considius equo admisso ad eum accurrit, Considius toke his hors, and ranne agaynst hym. Admittere marem foeminae, to put the male to the female. Admittere noxam, to do an offence.Plaut. in pen Admittere sumptum, to do great coste. Admittere uitam,Teren. in And. to retayne lyfe, to lyue. Salutatum ueniebant, admissus est nemo, They came to salute him,Salust but none was let in Cum tu nocte socia per tegulas admittere,Cicero in philip. Whan thou the night folowynge were. let in at the roufe of the house.Ibid. Admodum, very moche, somwhat, resonably. Ad modum, as it were. Admolior, îris, îtus sum iri, to put or adde to. Admoneo, uï, ere, to warne, to exhort. Admordeo, momordi, dêre, to byte sore. Admoueo, ui, uêre, to moue to, or put to. Admurmurare, is proprely, where men at that thynge, whiche is doone or spoken, do mur∣mure, blamynge or reprouynge the thynge. sometyme it sygnifyeth in a good parte to cō∣mende secretely. Adnato, tare, to swymme to a place. Adnecto, tere, to knyt to a thynge. Adnexio, a knittyng or fastnyng to a thynge. Adnicto, nixi, nictere, to wynke on one.Festus. Adnitor, niteris, niti, to lean to a thing, to beare or susteyne it. Adnixus, uel adnisus, a, um, cleauynge or ioy∣nynge fast to a thynge.
Adnotatio, a tytlynge, or short notynge of that whiche we do rede or heare. Adnumero, are, to adde to. Adolabilis, without griefe or sorowe. Adoleo, leui, lui, lêre, adultum, to begynne to growe, to do sacrifice with incense, or other fumes, to burne swete thynges. Adolescens, tis, a yonge man, whyche is yet growynge vnto .xxi. yeres. Adolescentia, is the age betwene chyldhoode, and mans age, which is betwene .xiiii. & .xxi. Adolescentior, aris, atus sum, to be wanton, or full of youthe. Adolescentulus, a ladde. Adolescenturio, iui, ire, to play the boy. Adolesco, leui, lescere, to growe. Adonai, the name of god amonge the Iewes, whiche signifieth the lord of all creatures. Adonia, festyuall dayes, whiche were kepte in the honor of Adonis the derlyng of Venus. Adonis, the name of a chylde, whyche was son of Cynare, kynge of Cypres, whome Venus had for her derlynge, whiche was slayn with a bore, whom the poetes fayned, that Venus tourned into a purple flowre, somme say into a rose. Adonidis horti, gardeyns for a lyttel tyme pie¦saunt, whiche shortly decayen. Adoperio, rire, to couer or hyde. Adoptatiuus, he whome a man ordeyneth to be his heyre, and taketh vnto hym in steede of his sonne. Adoptio, an electiō of an heyr out of the cous of inherytance as by wyll or gyfte. Adoptitius, he that is adopted or taken in the stede of a sonne. Adoptiuus, the sonne of hym that is adopted. Adopto, aui, are, to elect or appoynt an heyre. Also to aske helpe.Cic. fa. 5. Ego quem potius adop∣tem aut inuocem, {quam}illum, quo defendente, uincere didici? Whom shulde I rather aske helpe of, or call for, than him, who defending, I lerned to vanquyshe? Ador, & Adoreum, a kynde of wheate, callid also Far, whiche by the descriptione semeth to be the wheate, whiche we call ducke byll. Adoratio, is an expresse motion or act of reue∣rence done with the body inclyned. Adorea, & adoreola, a prayse that is gyuen to them that haue victorye. Also a cake of fyne wheate, which they vsed in sacrifice. Adordior, iris, adorsus sum, riri, to speake to, to begynne. Adorior,Cic. de o∣ratore. riri, to go about to do a thynge. Ne conuellere adoriamur ea, quae non possunt commoueri: Let vs not go about to take a∣way those thynges, which may not be meued or put away. Also it signifieth to set vpon one in battayl, or in any forme of hostilite. A ter∣go hostes adoriri iubet:Caesar. de bel. gal. 7. He bad them to set on theyr enemies at theyr backes. Adorno, aui, are, to apparayle, to prepare, to prayse, to aduaunce to honour. Adoro, aui, are, to honour with inclination of the body, to beseche. Ad pedes desilire, to alyght from his horse. Ad plenum, perfectly, fully. Ad primus, chiefe of all. Adpulsus, Adpulsio, the dryfte of shepe to the water. Adquiro, siui, ire, to gette, to conquer. Adquo, for quous{que}, vntyll. Adramelech, an ydoll of Syria, whome alsoo the Samaritans honoured. Adrastia, a countrey not farre from Troy, also the name of a citie there. It was also callid a goddesse, whiche toke from manne both me∣mory and wytte. Adrastus, was king of Argiues, whose dough∣ter Argia was wedded to Polynices the se∣conde sonne of Oedipus, & his other dough∣ter callid Deiphyles was wedded to Tideus the kinges sonne of Aetholia. This Adrastus raysed all the Greekes agaynste the citie of Thebes, for to restore his sonne in lawe Po∣lynices to the kyngdom. But after that Po∣lynices and Aetheocles beinge bretherne, had slayne one the other, after many conflyctes, the Thebans slewe down ryght the Argiues and dyd put to flyght Adrastus, and slew his people, and after that, the Argiues had neuer vyctory in any batayle. wherof cam this pro∣uerbe,Eras. A drastia nemesis, thll lucke of A∣drastus, whiche may be vsed there prowde men are beaten. Adrepo, psi, pere, to reache at thynge, to take it with violence, to crepe to. Adriaus, a noble emperour of Rome, aboute the yere of our lorde .Cxix. he was Traianus systers sonne, e man of excellent wytte, and dyuers in maners, meruailous in lerning, spe¦cially in Mathematicalles, also in musyk, in karuyng and grauynge. In dedes of armes cunnyng and valyant. A great fauorer of wel lernid men, and liberal toward them. He was so great a trauaylour, that there were sewe countrayes, but that he went through them. He lyued .lxii. yeres, and reygned .xx. and died in torment of the bowels. Adriaticum mare, the sea that dyuideth Italy from Dalmatia, wherein standeth the noble citie of Venetia, some doo call it the gulfe of Venyce. Adrumo, aui, are, to grudge or make rumour. Adruo, ui, ere, to turne the erthe in tyllage. Adscisco, scere, to ioyne, or take to, as whanne one ioyneth an other with hym in auctoritie, or taketh one to ayde hym in his offyce.
Adscire, to ioyne or put to. Adscriptitij, were men of warte, whiche were taken into an armye to supply the places of them, that were slayne, or otherwyse lacked. Adscriptiui, idem quod Adscriptitij. Adsum, Fui, esse, I am here, or present, or at hād. Adsitis domi facite, See that ye be bothe at home. Ad summam, in conclusion, finally. Ad tempus, for a tyme. Ad uesperam, vntyll the some went downe. Aduallas, a mountayne, frome the whiche the greafryuer callyd the Rene, runneth northe∣warde. Aduatici, people of a countrey in Fraunce cal∣lyd Bosleduc. Adubanus, the famous ryuer callyd also Da∣nubius and Hister. Aduectio, a caryage ouer to a place. Adueho, xi, here, to bryng to, or cary to. Aduena, a straunger. Aduelitatio, a mutuall reprochynge, or conten∣tion in wordes. Aduenio, ni, nîre, to come to. Aduētitius, he that cometh to a place by chāce. Aduentitia bona, goodes whyche doo come vnloked for. Aduentitius morbus, syckenes that cometh without our defaute, and of some men is cal∣lyd an vncome. Aduentito, aui, are, to come often. Aduento, aui, are, to come nygh. Aduentores,Plaut. in Mustel. commune resorters or haunters to a place. Aduentus, tus, a comynge. Aduerbialiter, lyke an aduerbe. Aduersaria, a teckenynge booke of expenses, wrytē afore that the boke of accompt be made. Aduersarius, an aduersary. Aduersaus, a, um, agaynst or contrary. Aduersus, a, um, that wherof only the forepart is sene, as auersus, wherof onely the hynder-part is sene. Aduersus, cōtrary, or agaynst. also face to face. Aduersa aeruma,Teren. in Phorm. aduersitie, damage. Aduersa ualetudo, syckenes. Aduerso flumine, agaynst the streame. Aduersis nulneribus,Plinius de uiris illust. Cice. fam. ep. 8. with woundes in the forepart, ouerthwart the brest and face. Aduersarium intendere, to be agaynst one in his procedynges. Aduersus gratiae homo, a rude frowarde felowe. Aduersum cliuum, strayte vp. Aduerso animo, agaynst my wyll, thy wyll, or his wyll, agaynst his hart. Aduersitor, a seruāt that seketh for his master. Aduersitores, seruauntes which doo fetche home theyr maysters after dyner or supper. Aduersor, satus sum, sari, to repugne or be con∣trary, or to refuse. Aduersum, agaynste. Quis est hic, qui aduer∣sum mihi fit? Who is he that cometh against me, or marcheth towarde me? Aduersum is taken also for erga. Aduertebatur, one perceyued. Aduerto, ti, tere, to perceyue, to tourne to. Aduertere animum, to take hede, or harken. Aduertere oculos,Plin. in Pa¦negy. to perceyue, to see, to be∣holde. Aduesperascit, the euenyng or euentyde is co∣men, or it waxeth late, or it is nyght. Aduigilo, are, to watche or take good hede. Aduiuo, uixi, uiuere, to lyue yet. Adulas, the hyll callyd saynt Gothard, entryng into Lumbardy. Adulatio, flattery. Adulor, arus sum, ari, to flatter. Adulator, oris, a flatterer. Adulatrix, a woman that flattereth. Adulter, adultera, a man or woman auoutrer. Adulterinus, na, num, counterfayt or forged. Adulterinae claues, counterfayt keyes. Adulterium, auoutrye. Adultero, aui, are, to counterfait or forge. Adulteror, ari, idem quod adultero. Adultus, a, um, full growen. Adumbratio, loke in Adumbro. Adumbro, aui, are, to make or gyue shadowe, to represent or expresse, as peynters doo, that do shadowe ymages in playn tables, to make them shewe imboced or round. Some do sup∣pose that it signifieth, to trycke a thynge, or drawe it grossely, as paynters doo at the be∣gynnyng. It signifieth alsoo to feyne or dis∣semble a thynge. Adumbrata opinio, a false opinion. Adunco, aui, are, to make croked. Aduncus, crooked or hooked. Aduno, aui, are, to gather togyther. Adunum, eueryche one. Aduocatio, pleadyng, also assistance. Aduocatus, an aduocate, he that defendeth an other mans cause. Aduocito, tare, to calle for one often. Aduoco, aui, are, to calle to, or call to helpe. Aduolo, aui, are, to flye to or nygh a place, to go or come quyckely. Aduoluo, uere, to wrappe rounde togyther. Aduolutus genibus, fallen-downe atte his knees. Adoursem, olde wryters vsed for Aduersa∣rium. Aduorsor, for aduersor. Aduoum, after myne, thyne, or his appetite, as I wolde haue it. Aduro, ussi, urere, to roste, to bourne. Adustio, rostynge or burnynge.
Adustus, ta, tum, rosted or burned. Adus{que}, vntyll. Adyticulum, a dyminutiue of Adytum. Adytum, the chauncell or other secrete place of the temple, where none came but priestes. or persones sanctified. ¶A ANTE E. AEACVS was the sonne of Iupiter and Europa, whome Paynyms dyd suppose, to be of suche iustyce, that he was appoynted by Pluto, callyd god of Hellè, to be one of the iudges there, with Mi¦noes and Radamanthus, to discusse the tran¦sgressions of menne beinge deade, and to as∣sygne to theym punysshement accordynge to theyr merytes. Aeantion, a towne in the promontory or hylle of Troy, callyd Sigeum. Aeas, aeantos, a ryuer of a countrey callyd E∣pyrus, whiche rounneth out of Macedonia, and fallyth into the see callyd Ionium. Aedepol, an othe among Gentiles, signifieng by Pollux house. Aedes, a howse, and if there be ioyned ther∣vnto the name of god, or of a saynt, it signi∣fyeth a churche or a temple. Aedes saluato∣ris, saynt Sauiours church. it is also a chā∣ber. sometyme a sepulchre. Aedicula, an oratory, or place, where ymages were kepte. Aedificatio, buyldynge. Aedificator, a buylder. Aedificium, all the hole buyldyng of the hous. Aedifico, caui, care, to buylde. Aediles, offycers, whose charge was to see to the kepynge vp and maynteynynge of the temples and pryuate howses, and to make prouysyon for solemyne playes. Of theym som were callyd Aediles curules, of a chayre with croked feete, wherein they dyd sytte. Aedilitas, & aedilitium, the office of the Ediles ❀ Aedilitatem gerit sine populi suffragio, Aprouerbe,Palut. in Stich. Eras. chil. 3. centu. 1. whyche maye be sayd vnto hym that meddleth in other mennes mattiers, or commaundeth in an nother mannes howse or offyce. Aedilitius, he that had bene ones in that au∣ctoritie. Aedilitius, a, um, pertaynyng to Ediles. Aeditimus idem qui Aedituus. Aedititius, a iudge or arbitratour chosen of the one parte. Aedituror, ari, to rule ouer the temple or house. Aeditus, ta, tum, hygh and stronge. Aedituus, the prelate of the Temple or chur∣che, and maye be nowe callyd the persone or paryshe prieste. Aedo, aedidi, to sette forth or publysshe. also it signifyeth to brynge forth by generation. Aedere scriptum, to shewe forthe wrytynge. Aedere spiritum, to yelde vp the ghoste. Aedere facinus,Ci. Attic. to do an yll dede. Aedere stragem, to make a slaughter of mē. Aedere nomina, to telle the names to be wrytten. Aedere praelium, to make battayle. Aedon,Vergil. a nyghtyngale. Aegae, a citie in Cilicia, also an yle in the sea callyd Aegêum. Aegaea, a cite in Macedonia, an other in Mau¦ritania. Aegealus, was a countrey callyed also Achaia in Grece. Aeger, gra, grum, sycke or sorowfull. Aegeria, a Nymphe or goddesse, with whom Numa Pompilius, the seconde kynge of Romaynes, faynyd to haue famylyar com∣panye and communycation, concernynge re∣lygion and worshyppynge of Goddis, to the intent that he mough therby withdrawe the people from the appetite of warres, wherto they were inflamed. Aegêum mare, the sea whyche is frome the mouthe of the greke sea, vp in Syria and A∣rabia, wherin be many yles, besydes Creta, nowe callyd Candy, Rhodes, and Cypres. ❀ Aegeum nauigat, he sayleth the Egyptian sea, A prouerbe applyed to theym, that re∣fuse noo perylle for moche lucre or profytte, for as moche as the sayde sea is full of dan∣gers. Aegeus, the father of Theseus. Aegides, of Aegeus, patronymicum. Aegylops, wylde ootes. Aegimuros, an yle callyd also Capraria, be∣yonde the yle callyd Corsica, or Corse. Aegina, a cytie ioynynge of Peloponeso or Morea, agaynst the countrey of Athens. also an yle from Pyreum .xii. myles. Aeginenses, the people of Egina the citie. Aeginîtae, people of the yle of Egina. Aegineticus, a, um, of Egina. Aegiochus, a name of Iupiter. Aegipanes, beastes lyke to men, hauyng feete lyke to gotes. Aegis, gidis, an haubergeon, whiche onely the goddis were paynted with. Aegium, a towne in Peloponeso, nowe callyd Morea, where they fained that Iupiter was nouryshed with a goote. Aegle, a Nymphe. Aegloga, a communycation of shepeherdes togyther. Aegocephalus, a byrde, whyche is withoute a splene. Aegocerus, idem quod Capricornus.
Aegonomus, a goteherde or keper of gotes. Aegos, a ryuer in Thracia. Aegrè, with greatte peyne or difficultie, gre∣uousely, heuyly. Aegrefero, tuli, ferre, to be sorye. Aegresco, sci, scere, to be sycke. Aegrimonia, syckenesse, great heuynesse. Aegrio, I am sycke. Aegritudo, inis, griefe of mynde, or sorowe. Aegritudinem leuare, to ease or helpe the syckenes or heuynesse. Aegrius, more sorowfully, more dyspleasantly. Aegrorario, syckenes of body. Aegroto, aui, are, to be sycke, to faylle or be feeble of courage. Aegrotus, sycke, feble of courage. Aegrum, idem quod aegritudo, sorowe, di∣spleasure. Aegula, a kynd of brymstone, wherwith in som places they do perfume wol to make it white. Aegylops, a fystula in the corner of the eye, by the nose of a manne, oute of the whyche runneth matter. Aegyptij, people of Egyypte, not those vaca∣bounde Magitians, whyche nowe rounne into all countreys, callynge theym selues E∣gyptians, where they be of an yle remoued from Egypte. Reade the commentaryes of Volaterranus. Aegyptini, people of Ethiope, marchynge on Egypte. Aegyptius, & Aegyptiacus, a, um, of Egypte. Aegyptus, a countrey callyd Egypte: on the weste it is bounded with Lybia, and the coū∣trey called Cyrenaica: on the northe with the sea callyd Mediterraneum, and parte of Iu∣dea: on the easte with Arabia, and the Ara∣bian sea: on the south with Aethiopia. This countrey although it rayne there but seldome or neuer, yet by the ouerflowyng of the ryuer of Nilus, it is made so fertyle, that it hathe abundance of all thynges sauyng vynes, and bryngeth forthe strange beastis. Of the great cities, & other meruailous thinges in it, shalbe remēbred, where theyr names shalbe rehersed. Aegystus, he that slewe Agamemnon, and made hym cuckolde. Aelius, the proper name of a Romayne. Aelurus,Festus. a catte. Aemathia, a countreye in Grecia, after callyd Macedonia, the people wherof were first cal∣lyd Pelasgi. Rede more herof in Macedonia. Aemidum, swollen. Aemilia, a countrey in Italy callyd also Flami∣nia & Romandiola. Aemilius, the propre name of a Romayne. Aemonia, a countrey callyd also Thessalia. Aemulatio, enuy or imitation. Aemulor, atus sum, ari, to enuye without ma∣lyce, or to folowe, or study to be lyke an other. Aemulus, he that foloweth or enuieth an other onely for desyre of glory. Aenatores, blowers in trumpettes. Aenëas, a noble man of Troy, whyche with Anthenor betrayed the citie of Troy. Aenus, a, um, brason. Aenigma, tis, a darke question, hard to be vn∣derstande or assoyled. Aenigmatistes, he that purposith hard questiōs Aenobarbus, the name of a Romayn, so callid bycause he had a berde as redde as brasse. Aenum, a cawdron. Aeolia, is a region of the Grekes in Asia, be∣twene Ioniā and Troadē. It is also a region conteinyng .vii. yles, betwene Italy & Sicile. Aeolium mare, the sea ioyngng of Asia. Aeolus, callyd the kyng of wyndes. Aequabilis, equall. Aequabilitas uitae, wherein is noo varietie or trouble. Aequabiliter, equally, in euen partes. Aequaeuus, of one age. Aequalis, equall, playne, of lyke age. ❀Aequales calculi, euen iudgementes, A prouerbe applied vnto theym, whiche lacked but lytel that they were not condemned. For asmoche as in olde tyme the iudges gaue not sentence openly, but being in diuers opiniōs, they dyd put into a pot lytell stones of sundry colours, and of the which were most in num∣bre, that sentence preuayled, and if they were equall in numbre, he that was accused was acquyted. Whyche stode with good reason, as Aristotle sheweth in his problemes. Aequalitas, equalytie. Aequaliter, lykewyse. Aeqnamentum, indyfferency. Aequanimis, he that is neyther extollyd with prosperitie, nor discomforted in aduersitie. Aequanimitas, takyng in good parte. Aequanimiter, moderatly, paciently, coldly. Aequatio, the equall diuysyon of a thynge, or where one thyng is made equal to an other. Aequare solo, to beate downe to the ground. Aequator, tôris, the lyne which diuideth heuen in the myddel callid also the equinoctiall lyne, into the whiche whan the sonne commeth, the dayes and nyghtes ben of one length. Aequè, iustely, as well, euen as well, sometime wyllyngly. Aeque ambo pares, all of one greatnesse. Aeque pauci, euen as fewe. Aeque utrius{que} necessarius, as moche frende to the one as to the other. Aequi boni{que} facio, I take in good part, I recke not or care not. Aequidiale, the tyme whan the dayes and the nyghtes be of one length.
Aequidium,Varro. idem quod aequinoctium. Aequilanium, seu aequilaneum, the half deale of the holle. Aequilatio, of euen largenesse. Aequilibris, bre, of the same weyght. Aequilibrium, of euen weyght or poyse. Aequimanus, he that vseth the oone hande as well as the other. Aequimentum, hyre of a horse or other beast. Aequinoctiale, the adiectiue of aequinoctiū. Aequinoctium, the tyme of the yere, whan the day is as longe as the nyghte, whyche is twyse in the yere. In sprynge tyme about the viii. calendes of Aprille, and in Autumne a∣bout the viii. Calendes of October. Aequiparatio, a comparyson. Aequiparo, aui, are, to compare, or make equal Aequipollētia, equalite in estymation or value Aequipolleo, ui, ere, to haue lyke power, or be of lyke estimation. Aequipondium, of equall or lyke weight. Aequitas, equitie, iustyce, or euennes, lykenes of fascyon. Aequiter, iustely. Aequiualentia, equall value. Aequiualeo, ui, ére, to be equyualente, or of lyke valour. Aequiuocatio, makyng dyuers sygnifications to one worde. Aequiuocè, dyuersely sygnifienge in one word or terme. Aequiuocum, one worde hauynge dyuers sy∣gnyfycations. Aequo, aui, are, to make euen or playne. Aequor, the sea, sommetyme other waters, sometyme lande. Aequore aperto, in playne fielde. Aequor maris; the ouermost or euen part of the sea. Aequoreus, a, um, of the sea. Aequus, euen or playne, equall, iust. Aequus animus, quietnes of mynde. Aequo animo ferre, to take it in worthe, or pacyentely. Ex aequo loco dicere, oone companyon to talke with an other. Aequum est, it is but reason. Aequum esse alicui, to be content with one. Aequum & bonum, is a discretion or mode∣ration of ryght without rygour or extremitie of the lawe. Aequum certamen, where one hath no more aduantage than the other. Ar, the aire: somtime wind, blast, breth or soūd Aera, rae, money nūbred, somtime images of me tall. also dernel, whiche groweth in corne. Aeramentū, any thing made of copper or bras. Aerarium, a treasorye, where a common trea∣sure of a citie or countrey is kept. Aerarij milites, souldiours waged. Aerarij praefectus, high Treasourer. Aerarij Tribuni, were treasourers whyche payde to the Souldiours theyr wages. Aerarius, he that was put from his fredome, of a citesyn, and payde tribute as a stranger. Aeratus, mixt with copper, indetted. Aereolum uel Chalcus, the .xxxvi. parte of Dragma, by estimation the weyght of two barley cornes. Aerificium,Brut{us} Ci.fa. ep. 11. the crafte to make any thynge of copper or brasse. Aeripes, whiche is as swyfte as the wynde. Arius, of the ayre, or lyke to the ayre. Aero, are, to dresse with copper or brasse. Aeromantia, dyuination or coniecture of thin∣ges tocome by the ayre. Aerosus, a, um, that wherin brasse or copper is, or wherof it is made. Arugo, ginis, ruste or canker in mettall, specy∣ally in copper or siluer. It is taken in Horace and Iuuenall for money. Aeruginosus, rusty or cankred. Aerumna, labour peynfull, care of mynd with heuynesse, infelicitie. Aerumnalis, le, wherin is great peyn or labor. Aerumnatus, brought to myserye. Aerumnosus, a, um, myserable, full of peyne, or trauayle. Aerumnulae, lyttell croked staues, wherewith men do cary fardels & trusses on their backes Aeruscare, to get money by falsehode or vayn promyses. Aes, aeris, is proprely copper or brasse. It is of∣ten tymes taken for money, sommetyme for trumpettes. Aeratus homo, a man indetted. Aere alieno exire, to come out of dette. Aere alieno obruere, to ouercharge oone with dettes. Aere alieno obstringere,Plautus. to cause an nother man to be bounde or indetted for hym. Aere alieno premi, to be greuously indettid Aere diruti milites, souldiours, whyche for some defaut, were put out of wages. Aere meo. Multi. n. anni sunt, cum ille in ae∣re meo est. It is longe tyme passed, that I accompted hym in the numbre of my frendes, or for one of myne.6. Agri∣cola .Ci. ad A. In aere meo est, he is in my dette or danger. Aes caldarium, copper. Aes coronarium, lattyn mettall. Aes circumforaneum, moneye borowed of them, whiche are named bankers, and doo lende money by exchaunge. Aes conflare, to cast mettall. Aes ducere, to melt mettall. Aes alienum, money that is borowed. also det Aes ductile, mettall that wol be sone molten.
Aes alienum afferre,Ci. fa. ep. Salust. in catil. to be indetted. Aes alienum habere, idem. Aes alienum cogere, conflare, contrahere, to be indetted. Aes alienum dissoluere, exire, to pay dettes and be quytte. Aes alienum exonerare, to discharge the det. Aes alienum facere,Ci. Attic. to borowe money. Aes nostrum, money that other menne doo owe vnto vs. Aes suum, money that other men do ow vn∣to hym, whome we speake of. Aesculus, a tree not moche vnlyke an oke, but that he is smother, and the leaues are bro∣der and thycker: He bryngeth fruite in Au∣tumne, wherewith people were fedde, be∣fore they vsyd to eate flesshe. I wote not what it shulde be in englyshe, except it be the seruyce tree. Aesculapius, the sonne of Apollo and Coro∣nides, and was callyd God of Physyke, and honoured in the fourme of a serpent. Aeson, was the father of the valyant Iason. Aesopus, an auncient wryter of fables. Alsoo the name of a famous player in tragedies. Aestas, sommer. Aestimabile, that whyche may be valued. Aestimare litem, to taxe the damages and costes that a manne hathe susteyned by wronge. Aestimatio, a peyne sette, a valuation. Aestimator, he that valueth or setteth the price of a thynge, a preyser. Aestimo, aui, are, to esteeme, to valewe, to preyse. Aestiua, places to be in for shadow in the som¦mer tyme, wherevnto as well men as beastis do withdrawe them for heate. Aestiuo, aui, are, to dwell or be in a place du∣rynge the sommer tyme. Aestuaria, places wherevnto the sea floweth and ebbethe, or meeres fyllyd with salte water. Aestuo, aui, are, to waxe hotte, to bourne, to flowe lyke the sea, to be in anguyshe or trou∣ble of mynde. Aestuosus, hotte or feruent. Aestus, tus, tui, heate of the wether, or bour∣nynge of the sonne. Also the vyolence or trou¦blous motion of the sea,Plinius in epist. sommetyme doubt∣fulnesse or flyttyng of the mynde, a scrupule. Ata, a hylle in Thessalye. Aetabula, chyldehoode. Aetalia, an yle in the sea by Geane. Aetas,Cicero. age. Aetas acta est mihi, my tyme is passed. Aetas bona, the floure of youthe. Aetas grandis, auncientye. Aetas decrepita, age wherein a man loseth the vse of his membres. Aetas ingrauescens, age increasyng. Aetas matura, perfecte age. Aetas prima, youthe. Aetate adulta, of full age. Aetate affecta, of olde age. Aetate confectus, very aged, in extreme age. Aetate exacta, idem. Aetate integra, in the floure of youthe. Aetate prouecta, aged or of great age. Aetate anteire, to be elder. Aetatem meam me uiduam esse mauelim,Plautus. quam istaec flagitia tua pati, quae tu facis, I had leauer be a wydowe all my lyfe, than to indure this trouble that I haue with the. Aetatem uelim seruire,Plautus. Litanum modo ut conueniam, I wolde do seruice all the days of my lyfe, on the condition that I moughte mete with Litanus. Aetatis progressus, the course of age. Aetatis satis habere, to be olde ynough. Aetatem,Cice. pro Rabi. an aduerbe, signifyeng long time. Iam dudum aetatē lites sunt inter eos, There hath bene variance betwene them long tyme. Aetatula, chyldehoode. Aeternè, euerlastyngly. Aeterno, are, to make perpetuall. Aeternus, euerlastynge. Aether, the fyrmament. Aethera, rae, the ayre. Aethra, signifieth the same. Aethereus, a, um, of the fyrmamente. Anaxas goras putteth it for the element of fyre. Aethiopia, a great countrey in Affrike, contei∣nyng many regions, callyd Aethiope, wherin be founde people, beastes, and serpentes of meruaylous forine. It hath on the weste, the mountayns callid Athlantes, on the east it ex∣tendeth to the marches of Egipt, on the south it hath the sea occian, on the north part, it is enclosed with the ryuer callyd Nilus. Aethiopem lauas, thou washest a Moren, or Moore, A prouerbe applied to hym that prai¦seth ❀a thyng that is nought, or teacheth a na∣turall foole wysedom. This prouerb grew of one that bought a Mooren, and thynkynge that the blackenesse of his saynne happened by the neglygence of his fyrste mayster, he ceassed not to wasshe the Mooren contynu∣ally with suche thinges, as he thought wold make hym whyte, by the whiche labour and washynge he so vexed the poore slaue, that he brought him into a great sycknes, his skynne remainynge styll as blacke as it was before. Aethiopicus, a, um, of Egypt. Aethiopissa, a woman of Egipt. Aethon, one of the horses of Phebus. Aethrusci, the olde inhabyitantes of the coun∣trey in Italy, callyd noweli. Tuscana.
Aetiologia, a rehersynge of the cause. Aerites,Dios. li. 5. a precyous stone founden in an egles nest, whiche hath within it an other stone, as it were with yonge, whych maketh a sound if the stone be shaken. If the bealy of a womā with chylde do falle downe lowe, this stone be¦inge hanged aboute the lefte arme, it retay∣neth the child, but if the womās time be com, and that she dothe trauayle, than beinge ta∣ken away, and bounde to her thygh, she shall be forthewith delyuered without any peyne. Also yf a piece of this stone be put into bread or a pouddynge, and gyuen vnto oone yf he be a thefe, it shall neuer passe or go throughe hym. Lykewyse the brothe, wherin it is sod∣den, yf a thiefe, or they, whiche be of coun∣sayle with hym, do take it, he nor they may not swalowe it. Prepared with waxe and oyle of Cypres, it helpeth agaynste the fal∣lynge sycknesse. Hermolaus Barbarus saith in Corolario, that excepte this stoone be ta∣ken out of the egles neste, it hath no vertue in medicyne. Aetius, was the name of oone of Alexandria, whyche was bothe a great oratour and a no∣ble physytion. Alsoo of an heretycke, why∣che affyrmed, that noo synne, howe greatte soo euer  were, shoulde be reputed to hym that hae faythe. He succeded immediately after Artius, the yere after the Incarnation of Christe. 358. Aetna,Strab. li. 6. is a meruayllous hylle in Sycyle, at the foote whereof,Solinus. is a lyttelle towne of the same name, and there is alsoo woddes and trees of dyuerse kyndes planted. On the toppe thereof is a barayne grounde, myxte with asshes, and in the wynter tyme coue∣ryd with snowe, whyche conteyneth in cyr∣cuyte twenty furlonges, whyche fylde is en∣uyronned with a bank of ashes, of the height of a walle. In the myddell is also a rounde hylle of the same coloure and mattier, that the resydewe is. Wherein be two greatte hooles fasshyoned lyke vnto cuppes, and they be callyd Crateres. Oute of the why∣che ryseth sommetyme sundrye greatte fla∣mes of fyre, sommetyme horryble smooke, sommetyme are blowen oute bournynge sto∣nes in infynyte numbers. More ouer, before that the sayde fyre appereth, there is harde within the grounde terryble noyse and ro∣rynge in dyuers horryble sowndes. And al∣so, whyche is more meruayle, whanne the smoke and fyre is most abundāt and feruent, yet rounde about the toppe of the sayd hyll, are alway sene snowe and hore frostes. Pli∣nius writeth, that the fyre appereth alwaye et nyghte. lib. 2. cap. 109. This hylle is nowe callyd Gibello monte. Aetolia, a region in Grece betwene Acarnani∣am and Phocida. Aetolus, a man of Aetolia. Aeuitas, eternitie. Aeuum, longe or euerlastynge tyme. ¶A ANTE F. AFer, or Apher, a man borne in Affryke. Affabilis, a manne easye to be spoken vnto. Affabilitas, gentylnesse in hearynge, courtesy. Affabre, counnyngly, craftily workemanly. Affabrum, counnyngly or craftily wrought. Affaniae, tryfles, thynges of small estimation. Affatim, abundauntly. Affatus, spoken vnto. Affecta,Suet. in Vesp. almoste fynyshed, or nygh at a poynt. Affecta fides, credence almoste loste. Affectata oratio, a curyouse fourme of spea∣kynge. Affectate, curyousely, with to moch diligence. Affectatio, curiositie. Affectio,Cicero. affection, somtyme trouble of mynde. Affecto, aui, are, to seke effectually, to trouble, whan it is put with damno, or other lyke. Affecta aestas, sommer well nygh passed. Affector,Varro. aris, idem quod Affecto. Affectum bellum,Cicero. warres nygh at a poynt. Affectus, a, um, troubled or vexed. Affectus, ctus, ui, & affectio, affection or na∣turall motion, as gladnesse, desyre, and su∣che lyke. Affectus morbo,Plautus. vexed with syckenes. Affectus uirgis, beaten with roddes. Affero, fers, attuli, afferre, to brynge to. Affero ad te salutem, I come to salute you. Afferre auxilium, to helpe, to ayde. Afferre dentes,Varro de re rust. to byte. Afferre manus, to set vyolent handes on one. Afferre molestiam, to do dyspleasure to one. Afferre morbum, to make sycke. Afferre pedem,Catullus. to come. Abite, unde malum, pedem attulistis, Go hens from whense with a myschiefe ye came. Afferre uim alicui, to make assault on one. Afficio, eci, ere, to moue affection or dysposy∣tion eyther to good or to yll. Afficere bonis nuncijs,Plautus. to brynge good ty∣dynges. Vti bonis uos, uestros{que} omnes, nū∣cijs me afficere uultis, As ye will that I bring to you and yours good tydynges. Afficere cura, to brynge in care. Afficere lucro, to make oone to wynne or gayne. Afficere stipendio,Plautus. to pay to him his wages. Affecit eum laetali uulnere, he gaue to hym his deathes wounde. Affecit praeda at{que} agro populares suos,Cicero. He
his countreye menne ryche bothe of landes and goodes. Afficit me dolore, it maketh me sorye. Afficit me gaudio, it maketh me gladde. Affici, to be moued with affection. Affigo, gere, to nayle to, or fasten. Affigere literas pueris, to make chylderne kunne by harte. Affingere aliquid alicui, to lye or make a lye on one. Affines, in fyeldes betokeneth adioynynge: in men it betokeneth alyaunce by maryage. Affinis negotijs publicis, he that meddleth with the affayres of a commynaltie. Affinis rei capitalis, gyltie of a great offence, which deserueth deathe. Affinis sceleris, guyltie of the trespas. Affinitas, atis, affinitie, alyaunce. Affinitate attingere, to be of alyaunce to one. Affirmatio, affyrmaunce. Affirmatiue, with an affirmance. Affirmo, aui, are, to affirme. Afflare, to blowe wynde. Afflari sydere, to be blasted, as corne and flowres of trees sometyme ben. Afflatus, tus, a blaste. Affleo,Plautus. fleui, flere, to wepe in the remembrāce of a thynge. Afflictare, to tourment hym selfe contynually. Afflictatio, punishmēt of the body with siknes Afflictus,Salust. stryken downe to the grounde. Affligo, flixi, gere, to throwe or beate downe to the grounde. also to punyshe. Affligam te ad terram scelus,Plautus. si me uno di∣gito attigeris, I wyll beate the downe to the grounde wretche, yf thou towchest me but with one fynger. Affluens, tis, aboundaunte. Affluenter, aboundantly. Affluentia, aboundaunce. Affluo, xi, ere, to ouerflowe or abounde. Affodere, to dygge and laye more grounde to that we haue. Affor, fari, to speake to one. Affore, to be here or presēt. Hanc affore biduo. that she be here within these two dayes. Afformido, are, to before aferde. Affrica, the thyrde parte of the worlde, wher∣in is Carthage, Numidia, and all the coun∣treys now callid Barbary, and also the great countrey called Aethiopia. Affricanus, a man of Affrike. Also the most no∣ble capitayne Scipio was callyd Affricanus bycause he subdewed that countreye to the Romaynes. Affrico, aui, uel ixi, are, to rub against a thing. Affrictus, ta, tum, rubbed agaynst a thyng. Affricus, a, um, of Affryke. Affricus uentus, the south wynde. Affrio, aui, are, to grate or breake smalle one thynge with an other. Affulgeo,Liuius. si, gere, to shyne agaynste a thynge. also to happen with gladnesse. Sardiniae re∣cipiendae repentina spes affulsit, A sodayne hope ioyousely hapned, that Sardinia shuld be recouered. Affundo, fudi, fundere, to shedde lycoure on a thynge. ❀ A fronte & a tergo, before and behynde. Sommetyme it is taken for a prouerbe, ap∣plyed to theym, whiche doo beholde thinges passed, with those thynges whiche may hap∣pen. Alsoo the tyme passed, with the tyme commynge. ¶A ANTE G. AGabus, an Hebrewe name, which signi∣fieth in latyne locusta, a flye that dy∣stroyeth corne. also Festiuitas patris, the myrthe of the father.Act. 11. &. 21. Of this name was a prophet in the tyme of the apostles, which prophecied of an vnyuersall famyn to come, and that saynt Poule shulde be bounden, and put in gyues. Agag, is a worde of Hebrewe, which may be interpreted a solar in the vppermost parte or the house.Reg. 1. cap. 15. Of that name was a kynge of A∣malech, the fattest of all men, whom Saule kynge of Iewes toke in battayle, and slewe hym not, as god had commanded, and ther∣fore was God greuouselye dyspleased with Saule, as he declared by the prophete Sa∣muel, whyche shewed vnto Saul, that God more requyred the obedience of his commā∣dementes, than sacrifyce. And than Samuel dyd there cutte in pieces the sayd fatte Aga in the presence of God in Galgalis. Agallochum, mencyoned by Dyoscorides, se∣meth by the description therof to be the soote wood, callyd nowe Lignum aloes. Agamemnon, was sonne of Atreus, and kyng of Mycenae, who in the preparation of the Grekes agaynst the Troyans, for his wyse∣dome and magnanymytie, was by the con∣sente of all the Greekes, chosen of theym to be theyr generall capytayne. And accor∣dynge to theyr expectations, he mooste no∣bly gouernyd hym selfe, and that mooste pu∣yssaunt armye, durynge the siege of Troye by the space of tenne yeres. But beynge re∣tourned to his owne royalme, and hauynge with hym Cassandra, daughter of Prya∣mus kynge of Troye, his wyfe Clytemne∣stra conspyryng with Aegistus, with whom she hadde lyued in aduoultrye, causyd her sayde noble husbande to putte on a garment, whyche hadde noo yssue out for his heade,
than Aegistus prepared for that pourpose, whyles he was strugglyng therewith, strake hym through with his sworde, and soo slewe hym. And thus that noble prince, after that he had escaped the moste dangerous warres, the valiāt hādes of Hector and his brethern, the manyfolde stormes and peryls of the sea, wherein he had trauayled by the space of one yere, finally in his owne proper royalme, by treason of them whom he most trusted, was shamefully murdred. Suche is the vnsuretye of this wretched worlde. He was afore the Incarnation of our lorde about .1194. yeres. Agamnestor, was a kyng of Athenes. Aganae, was a noble woman, the daughter of Cadmus, who slew her owne sonne Penthea kynge of Thebes, fynding hym in the mooste lascyuious and abhominable ceremonies of Bacchus, callyd Bacchanalia. A notable ex∣aumple of a paynym ladye, who onely by the honestye of her nature, withoute knowledge of the lawes of god, beynge meued soo vehe∣mentely agaynst dyshonest wantonnes, to pu∣nyshe her owne sonne, excluded frome her all motherly pitie, rather wyllynge to haue her sonne deade, than to lyue abhomynably. Aganippe, pes, a fountayne in a countreye of Grece, callyd Aonia, whyche was dedycate vnto the Muses, whereof they be callyd A∣ganippides. Agapis, is a stone of the colour of saffron, the vertue whereof is to cure the styngynge of scorpyons and serpentes, yf it be layde to the wounde. Agar, the mayden of Sara, on whome Abra∣ham begatte Ismael. Agareni,Paral. 1. cap. 5. a people which were al dystroyed by Saul kynge of Iewes. Agaso, onis, a horsekeper or mulettout. Agatho, the name of one of the sonnes of Pri∣amus. also a boy whom Plato loued. Agathocles, a kynge of Sicyle, whyche was the sonne of a potter, and by subtylle wytte and boldenesse of courage, grewe by sun∣drye dygnyties at laste to be kynge. And than becamme suche a tyraunt, that he slewe all the noble menne, the counsayllours and ler∣ned menne of Sycyle, and despoyled all the ryche menne. Fynallye, he beynge attached in all the partes of his bodye, with incre∣dyble tourmentes, and a pestylencyalle hu∣mour, frettynge all his synewes, he conty∣nuyng longe tyme in suche peines, at the laste dyed. Agathyrsus, was one of the sonnes of Hercu∣les, whiche dwellid in a part of Scithia, and callid the people after his name, Agathyrsi, whiche in suche wise paynted theym selues, that the colour moughte not by any meanes be washed or putte away, and therfore they were callyd Picti Agathyrsi. And some men do suppose, that the auncient inhabytauntes of the south parte of Scotlande, ioynyng to the marches of Englande, whiche were cal∣lyd Picti, were of the sayde people callyd A∣thyrsi. Agdistis,Leonicus. li. 1. ca. 37. the Grekes feined to be a dyuel come of the sede of Iupiter, whiche felle from hym whan he slepte. Who had bothe membres of a man and woman, of whom other dyuels be∣ynge aferde, they dyd cut of the mans instru∣ment, and threw it away, wherof dyd spring an almond tree, and brought forth almondes whan tyme serued. Age, goo to, take hede. Age, age, well well. Age, age ut luber, Well, goo to, do what ye yst. Age dicat, lette hym speake on, lette hym speake hardyly. Age, & agite, go forth, forth on, or tell on. Agedum, go to yet. Agea, a way in a shyppe. Agelastus, he that dothe neuer laugh. Agellus, a lyttell fielde. Agenor, a kyng of Phoenicia, sonne of Balus, and father of Europa, whom Iupiter raui∣shed, and of Cadmus, who buylded the cytie of Thebes. Agendicum, a countrey in France callyd now Prouynce or Prouance. Ager, agri, a fielde. somtyme it signifieth a ter¦ritory belongyng to a towne, wherin is inclu¦ded fieldes, medowes, woddes, and waters. Somtime a manour with the demeanes, som¦tyme the arable fielde onely. Agere,Plautus. to here, to perceyue. Vos agite specta∣tores, ye that behold, here, or take hede. Hoc∣cine agis, an non? Perceyuest thou this mat¦ter or no?Terenti{us}. also to conclude. Herus me relictis rebus, iussit Pamphilum hodie obseruare ut quid ageret de nuptiis, scirem, My maister hath commanded me, that layeng al thynges aparte, I shulde awayte vpon Pamphilus, to the intent I myght knowe, what he wolde conclude touchyng the maryage.Terent. Also to goo. Quo hinc te agis? Whyther goest thou from hense? Somtyme it signifyeth to come. Vnde agis te nunc Dorpale? From whense comest thou nowe Dorpalus? Agere aetatem, to lyue. Agere ad praescriptum, to doo that, that he was appoynted. Agere ambages, to go about the bushe, or to tell a lengar tale than nedeth. Agere aliquem,Plin. in Pa¦negy. to pursue one. Agere amicum, to do lyke a frende, or play the parte of a frende. Agere apologum, to tell hym a fable.
Aliud agere, to thynke on an other thynge. Animam agere, to be in the poynt of deathe. Agere causam, to pleade. Agere caudam,Plautus. to wag his tayle. Agere conuentus, to holde a parlyament. Agere cuniculos, to vndermine. Agere cum aliquo, to treat with one, or to speake.Cicero. Cum mecum saepe ageres, ut de a∣micitia scriberē, where often times thou did∣dest intreate, that I shulde wryte of frende∣shyp.Plautus. Illo praesente, mecum agito, si quid uoles. If thou wylte any thynge with me, speke it in the presence of that man. Agere diris malis, to curse. Agere de pace, to treat of peace. Agere delectum, to chose men, as in mow∣sters for the warre. Agere equum, to spur his horse. Agere ex insidijs, to do a thynge by treason, or martiall polycy. Agere ex sponso, uel ex sponsu, to brynge an action of couenaunt. Agere ex syngrapha, to brynge an action of det vpon an obligation. Agere fabulam, to playe in a comedye, tra∣gedy, or enterlude. Agere frondem, to put oute leaues, spoken of a tree. Agere furti, to appeale one of felony. Agere gemmas, to bourgen. Agere inter-homines, to lyue. Agere iniuriarum, to sue oone for trespas or wronges done. Agere lege, to sue, to procede by the order of the lawe. Agere mensuras fideliter, to measure thyn∣ges iustely. Agere morem, to vse for a custome. Agere nugas,Cicero. to mocke, to trifle. Agere orationem, to pronounce an oration. Agere poenam ab aliquo, to punyshe one. Agere primas partes, to be the chiefe per∣sonage. Agere radicem, to take rote. Agere reum, to sue one in the lawe. Agere summo iure, to procede with rigour. Agere suo iure, to execute his auctoritie. Agere uineas, to laye ordinaunce to a thing. Agit uigesimum annum, he is .xx. yeres old. Pectus mihi agit nunc cubito,Plautus. She hytteth me on the harte with her elbowe. Quo hinc te agis? whither wylte thou? Agunt adolescentiam, they occupie youthe. Agesilaus, was kynge of Lacedemonia, which from his chyldhod was of excellent vertues, as in trouth, iustice, temperance, noble cou∣rage, liberalitie, and contine. Wherfore he was so moche honored, and prospered soo wel, that he subdued to the Lacedemonians, innumerable cities and cuntreys in Asia and Grece. whan one demaunded a thing of him, whiche was vniuste, sayinge, that he hadde promysed it, he aunswered: If it were iuste, I promised it, but if it were vniust, I spake it, but I promised it not. Whan the Lacede∣monians had gyuen to hym the tresour of A∣gis, whiche was kynge before hym, as sone as he had receyued it, he incontinent dyd di∣stribute it to them, whom he perceyued and knewe to be poorest. whan it was demanded of hym, why he laye no more rychelye than a priuate personne, he answered: that a prynce ought to excell other men, not in delycacy, but in temperaunce and moderate lyuynge. He spake with no woman, excepte his wyfe, but eyther in the temple, or afore al men, thinking those two places to be voyde of suspition, the one for holynesse, the other for multitude of wytnesses. vndoubtedly the lyfe of this man was wonderfull. Agesis, go to hardely, go to on goddis name. Agger, eris, a hepe of stones or tourfse. also a bulwarke, or a countremure to a fortresse or campe in battayle. sometyme it sygnifieth a caulsey. Aggero, aui are, to heape vp. Aggero, ssi, gerere, to lay on a heape. also to brynge to one.Plautus. Nam{que} ecastor, amor & mel∣le & felle est foecundissimus, gustu dat dul∣ce, amarum us{que} ad sacietatem aggerit: For in good fayth, loue hath abundance bothe of hony and galle, in taste it is pleasant, but it bryngeth with it bytternesse, so moch that it becommeth lothesome. Aggeus, a worde of Hebrewe, in englysshe me∣ry, solemne, or compacyng. It was the name of a prophete, one of the .xii. whiche prophe∣syed in the tyme of Zorobabel kynge of the Iewes, about a. 550. yeres afore the incar∣nation of Chryste. Agglomero, are, to make vp on a heape, by addynge to. Agglutino, aui, are, to ioyne together. Aggrauatio, a griefe, a burdon. Aggrauesco, scere, to waxe more greuous. Aggrauo,aui, are, to be burdenous or charge∣able. also to aggrauate or make a thyng more greuous. Aggredior, gredi, to go to, or come to, to in∣uade, to assayle, to begyn, to attempt. Aggrego, aui, are, to gather together. Aggressio, loke in Aggredior. Aggretus, idem quod Aggressus. Agilis, nymble, or lyghte. Agilitas, nymblenes, derteritie. Agiliter, lyghtly, nymbly, quickely, quiuerly. Agilla, an olde towne in Thuscane. Agina, wherin the beame of a payre of ba∣launce
is hanged. Aginator, he that is meued with a littel gayn. Aginor,Cicero. nari, to marchandise vyle thynges, or of small value. Aginnū, the cuntrey of Angolesme in Fraunce. Agiographa, bokes of holy scrypture. Agis rem actam, thou lesest thy labour. the thynge is done to thy hande. Agit rem suam, he gothe aboute his owne busines. Agit hic perpetuum diem sol,Plautus▪ the sonne shy∣neth here all the day longe. Agito, are, to intreate well, to go, to do often, to prycke, to compel, to trouble, to persecute, to vexe, to consyder, to reuolue, to solicite. Iam calcari quadrupedē agitabo aduersum cliuum,Plautus. Nowe wyll I with a spur make my horse runne vp the hyll. Agitare conuiuium, to bankette and make good chiere.Plautus. Age ergo, hoc agitemus con∣uiuium, uino, & sermone suaui: Therfore go to, let vs banket, drynke, talke, and make good chere. Agitare custodiam,Plautus. to take good hede in ke∣pynge of one. Agitare cum animo,Salust. to reuolue in the mind. Agitare diem,Plautus. to passe forth the daye. Agitare feras, to course wylde beastes. Agitare imperium, to gouerne. In pace ue∣ro, beneficijs magis quam metu imperium agitabant. In the tyme of peace, they gouer∣ned more by gentylnes than by feare. Agitare iustitiam,Plinius in epist. to exercyse iustyce. Agitare letitiam, to make ioye. Agitare mente, to conceyue in the mynde, to thynke. Agitare praesidium,Salust. to be in garrison. Agitare uigilias,Salust. to kepe watche. Agitare uitam, to lyue. Agitatio, a meyng or styrryng: also exercise. Agitator, a dryuer of a carte, or of beastes. Agitur de capite, aut de fama, he is in dan∣gier of his lyfe, or of his credence. Bene mecum agitur,Val. Max. de militia Terent. I am wel at ease, I am well content, or I am in good condition. Agitur res capitis, the question or matter in debate, concerneth lyfe. Aglaia, one of the thre Gracis, whiche is in∣terpreted bryghtnes, clerenes, beaultie, plea∣sure, or maiestie. Aglauros, was a mayden, which was daugh∣ter to Eritheus, kynge of Athenes: whome Ouidius fayneth to be turned by Mercuri∣us vnto a stone. Agmen, an host of men. somtyme a violence, a course of water. Agminalis, perteyninge to an hoste. Agnascentia membra, members whiche are superfluous, as were one hath thre legges, or syxe fyngers on one hande, and other lyke. Agnati, kynsmen of the fathers syde. Ad agnatos, & gentiles deduci, to be com∣mytted to his kynsfolke, as madde men were by the lawe ciuile: wherof was made a pro∣uerbe, applyed to them, whiche do all thyn∣ges madly and without circumspection. Ad agnatos & gentiles deducantur.❀ Agnatū, that which is in byrthe more than the cōmon course of nature vseth to bryng forth. Agnellus, a yonge lambe. Agnitio, knowledge. Agnomen, the surname that I haue by my father. Agnosco, noui, noscere, to knowe, to recog∣nise, or knowledge. Agnos, is a tree, which is a kynde of wyllow, and is commonly called Agnus castus, in en¦glysshe parke leaues, it hath leaues lyke to wyllowe, but that they be alwaye grene, and hath not so swete a smell, and floures fyrste purple, and after whyte, and a sede lyke pep∣per. There is an other kynde therof, whiche hath more braunches, the leaues whiter, and somewhat mosy, and the floure purple. Both of them do growe about ryuars. It is called Agnos, whiche is in englyshe chast, for it is sayde, that if a man or woman haue it about them, or vnder theyr beddes, it shall kepe them chaste. Agnus, a lambe. Ago, egi, agere, to do, to leade, to dryue, to la∣bour, to here, to speke, to pronounce, to fain, to go. Nudi agunt, they go naked. to extend or sprede, Radices agunt,Pom. M they sprede theyr rootes. to treate of a thynge, to gyue. Ago gratias, I giue thankes to bring forth. also to expell, Venena membris agit, It ex∣pelleth poyson out of the members. Agolum, a staffe to dryue cattell with. Agon, onis, a contention in furme of battaile, or a wrastlynge: also the place where it was exercised. Agonalia, certayne festiuall dayes kept amōg the Romaynes. Agonensis porta, a gate of Rome, called▪ also Colina. Agônes, were sometyme called hylles. Agônia, feare and heuynes, or vexation of mynde. Also sacrifice done on hylles. Agonisma, the rewarde of vyctory. Agonista, a champion. Agonius, was named a god, whiche had pre∣emynence ouer thynges to be done. Agonizo, aui, are, to contende, or fyghte va∣lyantely. Agonotheta,  that makith a common game, and payeth the rewarde to theym that doo wynne it.
Agoraeus, a market mā, a haunter of markets Agoreus, was an ymage of Mercurius, whi∣che was in Pharis a citie of Achaia, set in the myddell of the market place, out of the whiche ydoll, the dyuell gaue aunsweres in fourme folowynge.Leonicus de uaria hi¦storia. li. 1. cap. 36. Before the feete of the y∣doll was an aultar of stone, whervnto were bounden with leade, certayn lampes of bras, He that cam for an answere, burned franken sence on the aultar, and made his prayers, and after poured oyle into the lampes, & dyd put in to the ydolles hande a piece of money of that countrey, whiche was of brasse, and than secretly whispered in the ymages eare what so euer he wolde demaunde, and forth∣with stoppynge his owne eares with bothe his handes, went out of the markette place, and than opened is eares, and what voyce he harde fyrste, he toke it for a sure counsayl in all thynges that he wolde do. Agoranomus, he that setteth the pryce of vit∣tayle, a tasker. Agraria lex, a lawe made for the common dis∣position of landes, as be our statutes of in∣closures and decayenge of husbandry: but a∣monge the Romaynes they were such lawes as dyd appoynt, howe moche lande a sena∣tour shulde haue, and not excede, and howe moche shulde be deuyded amonge the people. Agrarius, a landed man, Also he that fauou∣reth the lawes that be made for the orderyng of possessions. Agrarius, a, um, perteyninge to landes or pos∣sessions. Agrestis, e, wyld, growen without culture. Al∣so he that is rude and beastely without gen∣tyll maners. Agricola, a husbande man Agricolator, the same. Agricolatio, tyllage, or husbandry. Agricultor, an husband man. Agricultura, husbandry. Agrigentinus, a, um, of the towne of Agri∣gentum. Agrigentum, a citie in Sicil, which the Gre∣kes do call Acragaritem, and the countreye Acragen. The people there buylded sump∣tuously, and fed delycatly. And therfore Pla¦to sayde of them in bourde: The Agrygen∣tines dyd buyld as they shulde lyue euer, and dyd eate as they shulde alway dye. Of this citie and countrey was prynce Phaleris the moste cruell tyrant, of whom shall be spoken in the letter P. Agrimonia, an herbe called commonly in en∣glyshe Egrymoyn, is the ryght Eupatorium, as it appereth as well by the description of Dioscorides, as by the affyrmaunce of May nardus, Antonius Musa, and other mooste excellent phisitions of this tyme. The dec∣ction of this herbe, or the poulder therof dry∣ed, is an excellent remedy agaynste oppyla∣tions of the lyuer by reason of fleume. It is hot in the fyrste degree, and drye in the secōd. Agripetae, they that doo aske theyr portion in diuision of landes. Agrippa,Iosephus antiq. was the name of sundry kynges, of whom one was moste excellent, the sonne of Aristobolus kynge of Iewes, which was by Tiberius the emperour cast in prison, where he liued miserably the space of .vi. monthes, And afterwarde Tiberius beinge deade, the emperour Caius Caligula toke hym sodenly out of pryson, and made him kynge of iewes, settynge a crowne of golde on his heade, and for the chayne of yron, wherwith he was boū¦den, he gaue to hym a chayne of golde of like weyght. So from extreme misery, he sodain∣ly came to hyghe prosperitie. and beinge re∣tourned in to his countrey, at the fyrste liued honorably, and dyd many good dedes, and dyd amplyate and adorne the citie of Hieru∣salem with buyldynges moste magnifikelye. But at the laste, beinge eleuate in pryde, and sufferynge hym selfe to be honored and won∣dred at as god, syttynge in a hyghe trone in the citie of Cacsaria, apparailed in glystring golde, sodeynlye he was stryken with an an∣gel in the presence of an infynite number of people, wherwith his body swelled, and wor∣mes issued out therof with intollerable pey∣nes, and horrible stenche. In the whiche tor∣mentes he loked on his flatterynge counsay∣lours and seruantes, and sayde: Lo I whom ye called a god, am nowe in the peynes of deathe. And in this wyse he dyed, whan he was of the age of .lvii. yeres. A very notable and perpetuall myrrour to all them, whiche flowe in prosperitie, forgettynge them selfes to be mortall, reioysynge in the commendati∣on of flatterers. Agrippae, they which be borne with theyr fete forwarde. Agrippina, the mother of Nero the emperour, whoo was daughter of the noble Germani∣cus, and suster to Caius Caligula, emperour after Tiberius, was fyrste maryed to a no∣ble man called Gneus Domitius, by whom she had Nero, who after was emperor. After the deth of Domitius, her brother Caligula abused her as his cōcubine: & after his deth, Claudius beinge emperour, whan he hadde caused his wyfe Messalina to be slayne, for her moste abhominable avoutrics, he toke this Agrippina to wyfe, for her excellente beaultie, who afterwarde by her crafty and shrewde wytte caused her husbande Claudi∣us to mary his daughter called Octauia, to
her son Nero, and also to make hym compa∣niō in the succession of the Empire with his son called Britannicus. And lest Britannicus in the lyfe of his father shoulde growe to the state of a man, and be able to receyue the em∣pyre incontinent er his decesse, and expell her sonne Nero: He fyrste poysoned her hus∣bande Claudius, and afterwarde his sonne Britannicus: But her falsehoode, abhomy∣nation, and crueltie was not left vnpunished. for soone after, her owne sonne Nero, not∣withstandynge that he ioyned her with hym in equall autoritie, and as some men suppo∣sed, abused her carnally, hauyng her in most mortal hate, caused her to be put into a barge vpon the ryuer of Tyber vnder the colour of solace, ouer the whiche barge was hanged great poyses, whiche sodeynlye shoulde haue ben letten fall to haue kylled her: and also in the barge were certayne holes closed for the tyme, whiche beinge open, the vessell shulde haue sunken. But fortune at that tyme other wyse prouyded for her, for the poyses fel not on her, but on other and slewe them, and the barge beinge sunke, she swam to lande, and for that tyme escaped. wherof Nero heryng, sent a capitayne with an hundred men to slee her, who entrynge in to the house, where she was reposynge her selfe, withoute any war∣nynge strake her on the head, but she holding forth her bealy, cryed, stryke here, strike here the place, whiche bare the monster of the worlde. By this story it maye appere, that of an yll mother cam an vngratious sonne, and that the ende of falsehoode and crueltie, was vengeance agaynst nature and al humanitie. Agrippina, mother of the said Agrippina, was doughter of M. Agrippa, and wyfe to Ger∣manicus, whom Tiberius by the command∣ment of Octauiā had declared to be his heire apparant to the Empire, and not withstan∣dynge was afterwarde poysoned by consent of Tiberius: for whose deathe the sayde A∣grippina toke suche heuinesse, that she deter∣myned to dye. wherfore she absteyned frome all meates and drynkes, and notwithstan∣dynge that the Emperour Tiberius caused meate to be put in to her throte, she wold not receyue it, but in that voluntary abstynence fynally dyed. Agrippina Colonia, the citie of Coleyne in Germany. Agyeus, a surname of Apollo. Ah, a voyce of lamentynge or sorowynge. Ahenum, a pot to heate in drynke. Ahenus, a vessell of whyte brasse or copper, whiche is bryght bothe within and without. A ANTE I AIAX, the sonne of Thelamon by He∣sione, daughter of Laomedon kynge of Troy, was the strongest man of al the Greekes nexte to Achilles. But after that Achilles was slayne, whan Aiax contended with Vlisses for the armoure of Achilles, and that Vlysses by force of his eloquence optey∣ned sentence on his parte of the iudges: Ai∣ax becam mad, and in his fury slewe manye beastes, supposynge that they had ben Vlys∣ses and his company. There was also an o∣ther prynce called Aiax, sonne of Oileus, and kynge of the Locrensis in Grece, who was wonderfull swyfte and expert in handiynge a speare: This man whan Troy was sacked, dydde violate the noble virgin Cassandra in the Temple of Pallas. wherfore as he retur¦ned homewarde, on the sea, he and his ship∣pes were burned with lightnynge. he was be¦fore the incarnation. 1190. yeres. Ailoth,3. Reg.  was a citie in Iudea buylded by Ozias kynge of Iewes. Ain,Terent. for aisne, is it as thou sayest? Ain uero, idem. Aio, ais, ait, I saye, thou sayeth, he sayeth. Aiunt, they saye. Aioth, was the second iudge of the Hebrews, a man of great strength and valyant of cou∣rage, and had equal strength and aptnesse in bothe handes. This man slewe Eglon kinge of Moabites, by this meanes. Whan Eg∣lon had longe tyme warred on the iewes, and taken from theym dyuerse cities, and kepte them in moche myserye, this Aioth came to hym to Hierico, bryngynge vnto hym certain presentes, whiche lyked hym well, and desy∣red to speake with hym priuely, whiche was graunted vnto hym. And all other being cō∣maunded to auoyde, Aioth sodeynlye strake Eglon vnto the harte twyse, the laste tyme with suche puissaunce, that the knyfe with the hyltes remayned in the wounde, and Ai∣oth so leauynge hym dead, departed without suspition, and came to his people, and decla∣red what he had done. who being gladde, ar∣med theym, and fell on the Moabites, and slewe of them ten thousand, and draue al the resydue out of theyr countrey. And so the Ie∣wes beinge delyuered by the wysedome and vertue of Aioth, they made hym theyr iudge or prynce, who gouerned them peasablye. 80 yeres, and dyed a very olde man in moch ho∣nour, before the incarnation of Christ about a. 1399. yeres. Aiutamini,Non  for adiuuate, Aizoon, an herbe called also Semper uiuum, barba Iouis, & Sedum, in englyshe singrene
or houseleeke. There be therof thre kyndes, the more fascioned lyke to a rounde tounge, growynge thycke to gether, the leaues thick and full of iuyce, and groweth on houses or walles. An other is called the lesse, and hath lyttell rounde leaues, and thycke, and is cal∣led in english pricke ma ame. An other there is, which is called Portulaca syluestris, wild purselane. Eueryche of them be colde in the thyrde degree. A ANTE L. ALA, lae, a wynge of a byrde, and a wynge of a battayle, whiche is pro∣perly of horsemen. somtyme a sayle of a shyp. It is also the parte of the eare that is open. Moreouer Alae, be the nose thrylles. Ala is also the piniō of the shulder of a beast Alabandae, a citie in Grece, in the countrey of Ionia. Alabandicus, a, um, of that citie. Alabandina, a stone redde, myxt with blue, it prouoketh bledynge. Alabarches, he that hath the rule ouer salte: & amonge the Egyptians it was an honoura∣ble name. Alabastrum, Alabrestites, alabaster. Alacer, cris, cre, quicke of spirite or of wytte, lusty of courage, mery, and he that lyueth in hope: properly he that is in a meane betwen glad and sory. sometyme it betokeneth a man redy and wyllynge, therof commeth Alacri∣tas, redynesse or promptnes of wyll, also fer∣uentnesse of mynde. Alacrè, promptly, couragiousely, gladly. Alacritas, chierfulnes, courage. Alacriter, idem quod Alacre. Alania, a region of Scithia in Europa which stretcheth vnto the great fennes of Meotis. Alani, people of Scithia, nyghe to the ryuer called Ister or Danubius. Alapa, a blowe or stroke with the hande. Alaricus, kynge of Gothes, besyeged Rome, and dydde put it to the sacke, and burned it, the yere of our lorde. 408. in the which siege there was in the citie suche famyne, that the mothers for hungar were constrained to eate theyr owne chyldren. There was also an o∣ther Alaricus, whiche was vanguisshed by Clodoucus kyng of Fraunce, the yere of our lorde. 238. in whose tyme the part of Fraūce called Gallia Narbonensis, and all Spayne were in the possession of the Gothes. Alarij equites, horsemenne, whiche are in the wynges of a battayle. Alata Castra, a citie in Scotlande called Eden burgh, or the castell of maydens. Alatus, a, um, wynged. Alauda, dae, a larke. It was also the name of one of the legions of the Romaynes. Alauorsi, people in the vttermost parte of the Northe. Alba, a citie nyghe to Rome, which was buil∣ded by Ascanius son of Aeneas. There was an other citie called Alba in Lumbardy. Albanenses, were certayne heretykes in the yere of our lorde. 1120. This secte helde son∣dry heresies: One was that the soule of man after his deathe was put in to an other bo∣dy. An other heresye, that baptisme was of no efficacy. The thyrde, that there were two goddes, oone good an other yll, of the good god proceded good thynges, of the yll god, yll thynges. The .iiii. that in hell were none other peynes than be in this worlde. The .v. that the generall iudgemente is passed, and that there is none to come. The .vi. that it is prohibited to al christen men to swere, and that it is not lefull for any manne to swere. The .vii. that man hath no free wyll, called in latine liberum arbitrium. The .viii. that the matter wherof the world was made, was not made of god, but is coeternal with god. The .ix. that there is no originall synne, and that chyldren be not borne in originall synne. Also that synne commeth not of free wyl, but of the dyuel. The.x. they denied that the bo∣dyes of men shulde eftsones aryse at the daye of iudgemente. The .xi. they abiecte all the olde testamente, as a vayne thynge, and of nonc autoritie. Albani, people of Alba in Italy. Albania, is a countrey in Asia, hauyng on the easte the sea called Caspium, on the weste I∣beria, on the northe the hylles of Caucasus. The people there were fyrste poore, and ly∣ued as shepeherdes, and were symple not knowyng money, nor any number aboue one hundred, but lyuyng by exchange, not know∣ynge weyght, measure, nor husbandrye; but notwithstandynge redy in warres. And ho∣noured for goddes the sonne and the moone, hauynge amonge them as Strabo wryteth .xxvi. languages. Of these people are suppo∣sed to come the Albanoises, whiche do nowe dwell in Morea, somtyme called Pelopone∣sus, whiche be nowe vnder the Turkes. Albanus, a ryuer not farre frome the citie of Rome. Also the name of two cities, one in Macedonia, the other in Armenia. Albanus, a, um, of Alban in Italy. Albani patres, the senatours of Albe. Albarium, the parget of a wall. Alba spina, Serapio supposeth it to be that whiche the Arabians call Bedeguar, some thynketh the contrary, and that it is a brem∣ble growynge in hedges and dyches, hauinge
floures whyte and of good sauour. some sup∣pose it to be a kynde of thystel square and ful of pryckes.Anto. Mu¦sa. Ruell. Albedo, Albetudo, Albor, whytenesse. Albegmina, parte of the inwarde of beastes, whiche was offred to Dis, called god of Hel. Albenses, people of Alba in Lumbardy. Albeo, bui, bere, to be whyte. Albesco, scere, to be whyte. Albeus, & Albeolus, a chesse bourde. Albi calculi, whyte stones, with whiche the people of Creta dyd note or marke the days, wherin they had good fortune: lyke as they marked yll dayes with blacke stones, called nigri calculi. Albia, a ryuer, whiche passeth through the re∣alme of Boemia. Albicera, a kynde of olyue tree. Albiceratae ficus, brode figges with a smalle stalke. Albico, aui, are, to be whyte. Albidus, a, um, somwhat whyte. Albigenses, were heretikes, whiche began by Tolouse in Fraunce, the yere of our lorde. 120. which held the heresyes of the Albanen∣ses, towchynge the soule, baptisme, god, and the generall resurrection. Moreouer that it was not leful for chrysten men to eate fleshe. Albinga, a towne in Liguria. Albinus, the name of an emperour. Albion, was the moste aunciente name of this yle, which conteyneth Englande and Scot∣lande: of the beginninge of the whiche name haue benne sundrye opynions. One late fay∣ned by hym whiche fyrste prynted the En∣glysh chronicle, wherin is neyther similitude of trouth, reason, nor honestie: I meane the fable of the fyfty daughters of one Diocleci an kynge of Siria, where neuer any other historie made mencion of a kynge of Siria beinge so named. and also that name is greke and no part of the language of Siria. More ouer the commynge of them from Siria in a shyp or bote without any marinours thrugh the sea called Mediterraneum, into the occe∣an, and so fynally to fynde this yle, and to inhabite it, and haue generation by deuelles, is bothe impossible, and moche reproche for this noble royalme to ascrybe her fyste name and habitation, to such inuentours. An other opinion there is, whiche hath a more hone ste similitude, which is, that it was named Al∣bion, ab albis rupibus, of whyte rockes, by∣cause that vnto theym, whiche doo comme by sea frome the easte or southe, the bankes and rockes of this yle doo appere whyte. of this opinion haue I moste meruaile, bycause it is wrytten of great lerned men. fyrst for as moche as Albion is no latten word, nor hath the analogye, that is to saye, the proportion or simslitude of latine. For who hath founde this syllable, on, at the ende of a latine worde. And if it shulde haue ben so called for the whyte co∣lour of the rockes, men wolde haue called it, Alba, or Albus, or Album. And yet in Italye were townes called Alba, and in Asia a coun∣trey called Albania, and neither the one nor the other toke theyr begynnynge of whyte rockes or walles, as ye maye rede in the bokes of Ge∣ography. nor the water of the ryuer called Al∣bis, semeth noo whyter than any other water. But where aunciente remembraunce of the be∣gynnyng of thynges lacketh, if it may be lefull to men to vse theyr coniectures, my coniecture may be aswel accepted, as the coniecture of Pli¦nie, althoughe he incomparably excelled me in wisedome and doctrine, specially if it may ap∣pere that my coniecture shall approche more nere to the symilitude of trouth. Wherfore I wyll also set forthe myne opinion, onely to the intente to exclude fables, lackynge eyther hone¦stie or reasonable similitudes. Whan the Gre∣kes began fyrste to prospere, and that theyr cy∣ties became populouse and waxed puissaunte, they whiche marcned on the sees, and also the yles whiche were in the sees, called Hellespon¦tus, Aegeum, and Creticum, after that they coulde practise perfytely the course of saylinge, and had founden therby profyte, they lyttel and lyttell attempted to serche and fynde oute the commodities of outwarde countreys, and lyke as Spanyardes and Portyngales haue late done, they experienced to seeke out countreyes before vnknowen, and at the laste passed the Straytes of Marocke, & entred into the great occean sea, where the wynd so fauouring them they founde dyuerse and many yles. Among the whiche they perceyuynge this yle to be not on∣ly the greattest in circuite, but also moste plen∣tuouse of euerye thynge necessarye to man: the ayre most holsome and temperate, the erthe apt to brynge forthe all thynge that may susteyne a temperate ayre, the fleshe of veoffes and mut∣tons, moste swete and delycate, the wull moste fyne, not lackyng any kynde of mettal, hauing aboundaunce of wodde and tymber to buylde with: also great and fayre ryuers, with great lakes or mecres of freshe water, and as well in them, as in the sea, wherwith the countreye is enuironed, was great plenty of fishes of diuers sortes, most apt to be eaten. they wonderyng  reioysyng, at theyr good & fortunate ariuayle, named this yle in greke Olbion, whiche in en∣glysh signifieth Happy, in latin Foelix, lyke as∣part of Arabia whiche is most fertile, is called Arabia felix. But in processe of time, by the re∣sort of sundry peple, hauyng dyuerse langages. no meruaile if one letter were changed, and the
fyrste letter O, tourned in to A, and soo for Olbion it was at the last called Albion, whi¦che word hath no mauer of signification. the whiche chaungynge of letters is not vnlyke∣ly, sens at this present time the Northern mē of this realm do vse A, in wordes where sou∣thern mē do vse O, as a bane, a stane, a bare, a bande, for a bone, a stone, a bore, a bonde. And amonge the grekes were lyke alterati∣ons of letters. And it maye be more easely su∣steyned, that one vowell may be chaunged in a worde, and specially A, into O, whiche in some mannes mouthe, souneth often tymes lyke, than a syllable impertinente to the pro∣portion of latine, shulde be vnaptly added to. Not withstandynge Pomponius Mela ma∣keth mention of a gyant called Albion, whō Hercules slewe in Gallia, whiche was sonne of Neptunus. who moughte with more rea∣son be named the fyrste gyuer of his name to this yle, than that the other surmyses shulde be likely. If any man can fynde matter more certayne, of the originall begynnynge of this yle, I wyll not be offended but congratulate with him his good fortune and diligence. Albis, a riuer in Boemia, whiche commeth to the citie of Prage. Albitudo, whitenesse. Albo, aui, are, to make whyte. Albogalerus, a hat, whiche the great priestes of Iupyter, called Flamines Dialis, dydde weare. Albor, the whyte of an egge. Albosia, shyldes or targates. Albucus, some doo suppose it to be the herbe, whiche is called Asphodelus. some do write, that it is onely the stalke of asphodelus, and that the hole herbe is called hastula regia. loke after in Asphodelus. Albugo, inis, a whyte spot in the eyen. also the white of an egge. Albula, the olde name of the ryuer of Tiber. also a water in the fielde callid Tiburtinus, whiche was medicinable for sore eyen. Album, a table openly sette vp, wherin eyther the names of officers, or some publike decre is wrytten. Album plumbum, tynne. Albumen, inis, the whyte of an egge. Albunia, a woode and fountayne by the ryuer called Aniene in Italy. Alburnum, the fat that is in some tree. Alburnus, a mountayne in Lucania. Albus, ba, bum, whyte. Albus fluuius, the ryuer called Humber in the northe parte of Englande. Alcaea, a lion. Alcaeus, was a famous poet of them which ar called Lirici, which made songes to the harp, the yere afore the intarnation of Christ. 646 Alcanna, is that whiche is commonlye called Cyprus. Alce, a wylde beaste in the woodes of Germa∣ny, in fascion and skynne lyke to a gote, but greatter, which haue no ioyntes in theyr leg∣ges, and therfore they do neuer lye, but one∣ly do leane to trees, whan they do rest them, whiche the hunters knowynge, do fawe the trees that they leane to, halfe a sunder, wher by they fall downe, and be taken. Alcea, is one of the malowes, but the hath lea∣ues diuided lyke veruin,Diosco. and a floure lyke a rose, longe rotes .v. or .vi, whyte and brode. Also Io. Agricola saythe, that it is called of the apothecaries herba Simeonis. Alcedines, & Alcyones, are byrdes of the sea, which do hatche theyr yonge chickens on the lande, and do lay theyr egges on the sandes, in the myddes of wynter, and whan the sea is moste troublous, if they do laye, it becom∣meth sodeynelye calme, and the stormes and wyndes do ceasse, vntyll these byrdes haue al hatched, and brought vp theyr chickens, and made them redy to flye, which is in the space of .xiiii. days. This byrde is lyttel more than a sparowe, his fethers be purple of colour, myxt with whyte, and hath a long necke and a small, his byll somwhat greene, longe and sclender, and this byrde is sene very seldome. Alces, a beaste in Fraunce lyke a mule, but he hath his ouer lyp so longe, that whan he fe∣deth, he goeth backewarde, or elles he canne not byte of the grasse and herbes, whiche he shulde eate. The horsckynde of theym haue hornes on theyr ouer browes. Suche a beast was late brought in to Englande, and scene in the kynges parke at Westmister. Alceste, seu Alcestis, loke before in Admetus. Alchabitius, is the name of a boke, whiche is an introduction in the indyciall parte of A∣stronomy. Alchech, in the Araby tongue, is the beaste, whiche is called Linx, whiche is begotten be∣twene a lion and a lybarde. Alcibiadion, is that herbe which Dioscorides calleth Echion. Ericius Cordus a famous phisition of this tyme, supposeth it to be a kynde of our borage, the floures being som∣what lyke, but that they be deper in, and do not sprede so brode, and be of a more pueple colour. the sede therof is lyke the head of an adder, in soo moche as there doo seeme to be eyen therin. Some do suppose it to be wylde Borage. Alcida, was a terrible monster, whiche was slayne by Pallas. Alcidamus, an auncient oratour of the Grekes Alcides, idem quod Hercules.
Alcinous,Homerus Odiss. the name of a kynge of a people cal∣led Phaeaces, excellent in iustice, which had a fayre and magnifie palayce, with orchar∣des whiche bare moste plentuousely fruytes twyse in the yere. Alcman, a famouse poete. Alcmenes, a cunnynge grauer. Alcmeon, a philosopher, scholer to Pythago∣ras, whiche fyrste wrate of the Nature of thynges Alcon, was a good archer of Creta, which be∣holdinge a dragon redy to deuoure his sonne, dyd shote so craftily, that as the dragon was imbracynge of the chylde, the arrowe passed vnto his hart, and hurt not his sonne, so that the dragon immediately dyed. Alcoranum, the boke of Mahumet, wherein are myxte moste shamefull lyes and abhomi∣nations, with some part of scripture and ne∣cessary lawes, thoughe these be feweste. For he gyueth libertie to men to haue great num∣bers of wyues, and concubines without nū∣ber. he imagineth angelles to be in loue, and commyt aduoultry with mortall women. he auaunteth, that he hym selfe went vp to god to receyue lawes, and that he was borne thi∣ther by an asse that Iesus lent hym, that he founde god beatynge an aungell, betwene whose browes was the space of a iourney of many hundred of yeres: and suche lies a gret number be there fayned. Not withstandyng in the same boke he doth prohibit aduaultry, and commaundeth straitely kepynge of pro∣myse, and other thinges not to be dispraysed. Alcybiades, was the name of a noble man of Athenes, comen of the bloude of Aaiax The∣lamonius. This man in beaultie, goodly per∣sonage, artiuitie, prowesse, eloquence, and sharpnesse of wit, excessed al men of his time. In so moche that into what countrey so euer he came, he so adapted hym selfe, to the ma∣ners therof, that he was euerye where won∣derfully beloued and honored, specially of the wyse man Socrates, who moste entirely lo∣ued hym. But with those moste excellent qua¦lyties, were ioyned sundry vices, that is to saye, vntemperate, and dissolute lyuinge in lethery and ryote, deceyte and vnconstancye. In so moche as all men meruayled, that in one man moughte be suche dyuerse natures. He acheued many great enterpryses as well for his countrey, as agaynste it. finallye be∣inge exiled by the meane of Lisander kyng of Lacedemonia, he being in Phrigia, the hous wherin he laye, was of pourpose set on fyre, whiche he escaped, and beinge halfe naked, and valiauntly defendynge hym selfe against his ennemyes, at the laste was slayne, and his head brought to Pharnabazus, capitain of the Persians. This man flouryshed afore the incarnation of Christe. 428. yeres. Alcionae, the name of two ladies, wherof the one was wyfe to Ceisis, who seinge the bo∣dy of her husbande caste on lande, threwe her selfe into the sea, whom the poetes fayned to be tourned into a byrde of that name. The other was daughter of Euene called also Marpesia. Alcyonium, is the spume or fome of the sea in∣durate. Alduasdubis,Caesar. a countrey in Fraunce, called Ledoux. Alea, a dye, playenge at dice. Somtyme it si∣gnifieth chaunce. Alea fortunae, the chaunce of fortune. som∣tyme perill. Aleator, a dysar. Aleatorium, a dice playing, or a dysyng hous. Suetonius calleth it Aleatorium forum. Aleatorius, a, um, belongynge to dice. Alebria, thynges whiche do nourishe well. Alec, is a sauce made of the liuers of fishes. also a fishe called a hearynge. Alecto, one of the furies of Hell. Alectoria, a stone founde in a cockes gysar or mawe, of the greatnes of a beane, of the co∣lour of christall. Alecula, a sprote. Alemani, people of Germany, called Almains. Aleo, onis, a disar, or diseplayer. Alephanginae species, is a barbarous worde vsed of the Moores, wherby they do signify the poulder of sote spices, as gynger, peper, cloues, maces, nutmigges, cynamome, and other lyke. Alere bellum, to mayntayne warres. Ales, alitis, a byrde. Sometyme it signyfiet swyfte in fleinge or runnynge, as, Alite plan ta, swyfte of fote. Alesco, scere, to growe fatte. Aletudo, fatnes of the body. Alexander, was the name of many noble prin∣ces, but amonge other one was moste excel∣lente, whiche was the sonne of Philip kynge of Macedonia, whoo in his chyldehoode was brought vppe by Aristotle in lernynge, wherin he profyted wonderfully, and was of suche courage, that after the deathe of Phi∣lip his father, beinge but .xx. yeres olde, he toke on hym the enterprise to conquere al the worlde, and fyrste gatte Illiria, nowe called Slauonia, and after subuerted the Citie of Thebes, and brought in subiection al Grece, and entred into Asia, and vanquished in sun∣dry iourneys the great and puissaunte kynge Darius kynge of Persia, and had his mo∣ther, his wyfe, and daughter prisoners, and neuer wolde company with any of them, not
withstandyng that they were most excellently fayre. Finallye he conquered. India, and all the easte parte of the worlde. And al this dyd he in lyttell more than .xii. yeres. But whan he had pacified the world from al rebellions, he fel into suche crueltie and pryde, sleing his moste trustye counsaylours in his furye, and commaundynge hym selfe to be callyd a god, he became so odious to his owne people, that they desyryng his destruction, at the last be∣ynge in his moste glory at the citie of Baby∣lon, where he abode the ambassadours from al realmes, at souper with one of his phisiti∣ons, was poysoned by drynkyng out of a cup, whiche was supposed to be made of a horses house. Whiche was thought to be doone by the deuyse of Aristotle sometyme his may∣ster, and Antipater his lieutenant in Mace∣donia, whom a lyttell before he had greuous∣ly thretened. Thus Alexander aboundynge bothe in excellent vertues, and notable vices, after moste happy fortune by his outragious pryde and crueltie shortened his lyfe, beinge at his deathe lyttell aboue .xxxiii. yeres olde. Which was afore the Incarnation of Christ 322. yeres. Alexander seuerus, was emperour of Rome, the yere of our lorde. 224. This man frome his chyldehode was of wonderfull grauitie and prudence, in so moche as where the citie of Rome was before brought by his cousyne the monstrous emperour Heliogabalus in∣to all abhomination of lyuynge, and dyssolu∣tion of maners, this man by his vertue, pru∣dence, and contynual iustyce, reduced it vn∣to a perfecte publyke weale, reformed the or∣der of his army, stablysshed lawes, restored honestye, expellyd vicious persones and bry∣bours, aduanced men of vertue and lernyng to great offyces and dignities, renewed the senate, prepared also a great and a noble coū¦sayle about his person, and so hated corrup∣ted iudges, that he dyd not onely put theym to tourmentes, but whan any came in his presence, he was redy with his two fyngers to put out theyr eyes. And yet this noble and gentyll prynce, by the false treson of one Ma∣ximus, whom of a mulettour, he had made a great capytayne, he was in a sodayne com∣mocyon slayne of his owne people at Mo∣guntia in Germany, with his mother Mam∣mea a wyse ladye and vertuouse. Somme supposed, that it was bycause by her coun∣sayle he was becomme auaritious, and was not so lyberall as he and other emperors had bene before. Alexandria, the name of dyuers cyties, of the whyche one was in Egypte, buylded by the greatte kynge Alexander. 320. yeres afore the Incarnation of Chryste, in the space of seuentene days, althowgh it conteyned with∣in the walles, the space of syx miles in length yt was made in the fourme of a mantell, and was dyuided with two broode wayes, oone crossyng ouer the other for easy conueyeng of caryage, euery way beyng in bredth a hūdred feete. Whyche wayes lay in suche wyse that the holsome wyndes dyd blow abundantly in to the citie, and refresshed the ayre. This cite was set betwene the fennes of Nilus and the sea, and had nyghe vnto it the noble hauen of Pharus, in the whych citie euery kyng of E∣gypt after Alexander, buylded a royal palaice wherby it shewed soo beautyfull and magni∣fyke, that the lyke therevnto was not in the worlde. Moreouer manye excellente lerned men were borne or brought vp in that cytie, as Philo the Iewe, callyd the seconde Pla∣to, Origenes, Clemens, Antonius, Dydi∣mus, Maximus, Theophilus, and Athana∣sius was there byshoppe. Also saynte Mar∣cus the Euangelyste preached there, and was ordeined bisshop by the apostles. It was destroyed by the Romaynes, and reedyfyed by Traianus the Emperoure. Afterwarde the yere of our lorde. 1230. Peter, brother vn¦to the kynge of Cyprus, with certayne fren∣che men and Catalones, eftsoones distroyed and robbyd it, soo that vnto this day it was neuer reducyd vnto the fyrste estate: nowe is it in subiection of the Turkes. There is an nother cytie callyd Alexandria in Lum∣bardye. Alexandrinus,Caesar. a, um, of Alexandria. Alexa, a countrey in Fraunce, nowe callydde Laussoys in Burgoyne. Allsoo the Towne callydde Arras in the Countye of Ar∣toyse. Alexicacon, a remedy to put away myschefe, or any ylle thynge. Alexipharmacon, is properly a medycyne a∣gaynste poyson. It is alsoo taken for suche thynges as be vsed to hange aboute men∣nes neckes, or theyr armes, or in howses for a defence agaynste poyson, ylle spyrites, or greuous diseases, and soo doothe Theo∣phrastus vse it in his nynthe boke, where he treateth of Tripolium. Alexius, a mannes name, of the whyche were two emperours of Constātinople. Also there was one Alexius the sonne of Ephimianus, a noble Senatour of Rome, who hauynge a wyfe of excellente beaultie, for the loue of god lefte her, and secretely departed in son∣dry pylgrimages in the habite of a pore man. And after moche pacyence, and longe po∣uertie, retourned to his fathers howse, be∣ynge there vnknowen, vntyl after his death,
that he was dysclosed by a letter, which was founde in his hande. At his buryenge God shewed many wonderfull myracles, than be∣ynge present Honorius and Arcadius empe∣rours of Rome, the yere of our lorde. 410. Alga, reytes or wedes of the sea. Algenses, fyshes callyd also Purpurae. Algeo, si, gêre, to be in peyn, properly for cold, to chylle for colde. Algidense, a kynde of radyshe, long and clere through. Algidus, a mountayne .xii. myles from Rome. Algida sylua, a wodde at the foote of that mountayne. Algo, idem quod algeo. Algor, griefe. sometyme it signifieth colde. Alguasen, an herbe lyke to a lyly. Algus,Plautus. uel algu, colde. Alia, uel Allia, a ryuer not farre from Rome, where the hoste of the Romayns was vtter∣ly distroied by Brennus, whom we say was a Bryton, son to Molimer{us} king of this realme Aliâs, an aduerbe, signifieth or els, els where, an other tyme, sometyme. Aliâs res agis, Thou thinkest on other mat∣ters. Vnde annulum istum nactus? dic mihi. Ille alias res agere se simulare, Telle me, where gatteū thou this rynge? He made sem∣blaunce as if he thought on an other matter. Alibi, els where. Alica,Ruellius. is a thyng made of wheat in this wise. They take wheate and stepe it in water, and afterwarde do beate it, than they drye it in the sonne, and breake it grosse, so that euery corne be broken in foure or fyue pieces. some do put into it chalke, some creame of mylke sodden to make it seme very whyte. Alicarjae, common harlottes. Alicarii, they that do sell alicam. Alicastrum, a dyminutiue of alica. Alicubi, somewhere. Alicundè, from some place. Alienatio, an alienation or alteration. Alienator, he that altereth a thynge. Alienatus, a, um, put away, altered, estrāged. Alienigena, a straunger borne. Alienigenus, a, um, that which commeth oute of an other countrey. Alieno, aui, are, to alienate, to put away, or put of, to alyene or alter possession. Aliena consilii,Salust. vnmete for the counsell. Alienior aetate,Terent. of nōage, not of cōpetent age. Alieno more mihi uiuendum est, I muste lyue after an other mans facyon. Alieno animo esse, to be displesed with one. Alienos agimus, we becomme straungers vnto theym. Alienissimum reipub. tempus, the warst tyme that may be for a weale publyke. Alienum suis rationibus, vnprofytable for his purpose. Alienus animus. Iam primum illum alie∣no animo à nobis esse, res ipsa indicat. The thyng selfe declareth, that euen nowe he hath no fauour towarde vs. Alienus, a, um, dyuers, vnlyke, not agreable, out of acquayntance or fauour. Aliger, any thynge that hath wynges. Alimentarius, a, um, pertaynynge to lyuyng or sustynaunce. Alimentum, sustynance, foode, or lyuyng. Alimodi, idem quod aliusmodi, of an nother facyon or maner. Alimonia, idem quod alimentum. Aliò, to an nother place. Alioqui, or els, excepte that. Aliorsum, to some other place. Aliouersum, towarde an other place. Alipedes, swyfte runnynge horses. Aliptes, he that anoynteth a man, and a sur∣geon that healeth woundes. Aliqua, by some place. Aliquando, sometyme. Aliquandiu, any whyle. Aliquantisper, a lyttell whyle. Aliquanto, idem. Aliquantulum, somewhat. Aliquantum, idem. Aliquatenus, in some part, by some reason. Aliquid, some thynge. Aliquis, aliquae, aliquod, some. Aliquis est, he is a mā of no smal reputatiō. Aliquò, to some place. Aliquorsum, towarde some place. Aliquot, some, nor many, nor fewe. Aliquoties, at some tymes. Alirei, Plautus vseth for aliae rei. Alisma, an herbe callyd alsoo Barba syluana, water plantayne. Aliter, or els, countrary wyse. Aliter ac, aliter at{que}, aliter quam, otherwyse thanne. Alites, great byrdes whyche are fedde. Aliubi, elles where. Aliubi, for alicubi, somme where. Alsunde, from an other place. Alius, alia, aliud, other, or another. Aliusmodi, in an other maner, of an other faciū Aliura, olde wryters vsed for aliter. Alkakengi, is an herbe callyd alsoo Halicaca∣bus, and Vesicaria, and in greke Physalides. out of the whyche groweth a stalke, hauynge on the toppe thereof, a rounde thynge lyke to a bladder, of colour betweene redde and yelowe, wherein is a redde beary, lesse than a cherye, whyche in dyuerse wayes is won∣derfulle medycynable, agaynste the strangu∣rye or stoppynge of vryne, besydes other
good vertues. Alla bor, labi, to flowe by, sayle by, or rowe by. Allatus, brought. Allecto, aui, are, to allure or drawe to by fayrenesse. Allectus, allured. Allego, aui, are, to sende, to alledge, or brynge forthe, to depute or gyue auctoritie. Allego, lexi, ere, to ascribe, to chese, to assigne Allegoria, a fygure or inuersyon of wordes, where it is one in wordes, and an nother in sentence or menynge. Alleluya, prayse ye our lorde. Alleuo, aui, are, to lyft vp. Allex, & allux, the greate toe, whan he lyeth ouer the nexte toe. Alliatum, a sawce made with garlyke. Allicefacio, ci, re, to allure, to drawe to. Allicio, exi, licere, to allure. Allido, si, ere, to squat, or throwe any thynge agaynst the grounde or walles. Alligator, he that byndeth. Alligatura, a bonde. Alligare aliquem furto, to appeache oone of felonye. Alligare se furti, to charge hym self of felony Allino, leui, linêre, to annoynte. Allium, garlyke. Allobroges, people of Sauoye and Pe∣mountaygne. Allcutio, a speakynge to one. Allocutum ire, to commune with one. Allophylos, a straunger. Alloquium, communication, speche. Alloquor, to speake to. Allubesco, to do it gladly, to obey, to fauour, to consent. Allucinatio, a blyndnes of mynde. Allucinor, to be deceyued in opynyon. Alludo, si, lûdere, to doo a thynge in iape, to speake meryly, or consent, sometyme it sygni∣fyeth to speake some thynge, whyche secrete∣ly hath some vnderstandynge. Alludere ad hystoriam, to speake or doo some thynge agreable with some hystorye be∣fore wrytten. Alludor, idem quod alludo. Alluo, lui, ere, to flowe nyghe to, to wasshe as the water dothe the grounde. Alluuies, is whan aboundance of water mixte with clay couereth the grounde. Alluuio, onis, idem. Alluuium, a floud causyd by rayne, or by ry∣uers whan they ryse. Alma, a mayden hyd or secrete. Almities, quietnesse, secretenesse. Almopia, parte of Macedonia. Almus, a, um, all thynge that nouryssheth  proprely the erth is so callid Alma tellus, by¦cause we haue therof our sustynāce. somtyme it sygnyfyeth quiet. Almus dies, a quiet day. Alnus, an alder tree. sommetyme it sygnifieth a shyppe or bote. Alo, alui, alere, to nourysshe or feede. Aloe,Vergil. aloes, is a iuyce of an herbe congelyd lyke a gumme, wherof be two sortes, one is namyd Succotrina, whyche is lyke a lyuer, redde, bryghte, and brokle. the other is cal∣lyd Caballina, and is sandy and grosse. The fyrste clenseth and confyrmeth the stomacke of a man, and therfore is myxte with pour∣gatyue medycynes, bycause they shall not a∣noy or hurte the stomacke, the laste is occu∣pyed about horses and other beastes. Aloe lignum, or lignum aloes, is a swete & pre¦ciouse wod, whych being receyued inmedicin comforteth the stomake, and all the inferior partes of a man, and maketh swete breathe. Aloeus, was the name of a gyaunt, sonne of Titan, on whose wyfe Neptunus begat two sonnes at one burdeyne, Oetus and E∣phialtes, whyche were callyd alsoo Aloidae, and were great gyauntes, of whome Ver∣gilius and Claudianus do make mention. Alogia, vnreasonable or beastly fedyng, and in gurgitation of meate and drynke. Alogiani, were heritykes, whyche denyed, that the sonne of god was Logos, whyche some doo interprete in to latyne Verbum, somme Sermo, and therfore they reiecte the gospelle of saynt Iohn, and his Apocalypsis, sayinge, that they were not his warkes. Alongè, farre of. Alopecia, is a chaungyng of the colour of the heed into more whitenes, whan the olde hea∣res do fall of by the rootes. Alopecidae,Gal. in de¦finition. dogges gotten betweene a wolfe and a bytche. Alopecurus, an herbe lyke a foxes tayle. Alopecus, he that hath a pylde heade, that is to say, the heares fallynge with scurfe. Alpes, the mountaynes, whyche do nowe de∣parte Italy and Fraunce. Alphabetarii, they whyche doo lerne fyrste the order of letters. Alphabetum, the order of letters, as A, B, C. Alpheus, a ryuer in Achaia, by the citie of Pi∣sa. Also the name of a mount. Alphiton, meale of phisitions. it is also taken for barlye meale fryed. Alphos, a morphy or staynyng of the skynne. Alpinus, a, um, of the mountayns of Alpes. Alpus, pale, carefull, or studyous. Alsine, an herbe, wherof some do suppose to be two kyndes: wherof one is that whyche is callyd in latyn Matrissylua, in englyshe wod bynde. The other is callyd Alsine minor, the seconde mouse eare.
Alsiosus, a, um, colde of nature. also that thyng whiche is soone hurte or anoyed with colde. Altanus, a wynde whiche is on the deepe seas. Altare, an aultare. Alte, on hygh. Altellus, the surname of Romulus of founder of Rome. Alter, rius, teri, an nother, the other, one of the two. Alius, an other, the other. Alter, the other, the seconde. Sometyme it sygnifyeth bothe. Vnus aut alter, one or bothe. Vnus & alter, the one and the other. Alter & uicesimus, one and twenty. Alter qui{quam}, any other. Alter, teris, siue alteres, teris, poyses of leade, made to lyft vp in bothe handes, to exercyse men, which may not otherwyse labour, wher of there be many nowe in Englande, specyal∣ly in the chambers of studentes. Alteras, olde wryters vsed for alias. Altercatio, a contention in wordes, where one man purposeth, an other replyeth. Altercor, aris, to contende with wordes oone with an other on sundry partes. Altercum, siue alter cagenum, an herbe callyd also Faba porcina. Alternatim, by tourne, one at one tyme, an o∣ther at an other tyme. Alterne, idem. Alternare, to do thynges by tourne, nowe one, and than an other. Alternatio, succession by tourne. Alternis, nowe one, nowe an other. Alternis diebus, sundry dayes, where oone day is betwene. Alterplex, icis, olde wryters vsyd for duplex, dowble. Altero, aui, are, to alter or chaunge. Alterta, idem quod alterutra. Alteruter, bothe the one and the other. also or the tone or the tother. Althaea, the great malowes or holy hocke. Alti lis, in plurali altilia, all thyng that is fran∣ked to make fat, be it beast, fyshe, or fowle. Alti lis gallina, a henne franked or fedde. Altimetor, an instrument, wherewith hyghe thynges are mette. Altinates, people of Altinum. Altinum, an olde cite by the ryuage of Venice. Altior, altius, hygher. Altiîsonus, he that maketh noyse from aboue. Altitonans, he that thondreth, which name the Paynyms gaue to theyr god Iupiter. Altitudo, heyght, or depenes. Altiuolans, all thynge that flyeth hygh. Altor, & altrix, he and she, whyche nourysheth and bryngeth vp one. Altrinsecus,Apuleius to the tone or the tother, to the tone parte, betwene the one and the other, in the hygher parte. Altrouersum,Plautus. on the other parte, or on the o∣ther syde. Altus,Vergil. a, um, hygh, depe, properly in the sea. it sygnifieth also excellent, glorious, auncient. Altum otium, longe rest, great leysure. Aluearium, & alueare, a place where hyues be sette. also a stocke of hyues. Alueolum & alueolus, a baskette or maunde. also a culuer hole, a chessebourde, or tables to playe on. Alueus, & aluus, a hyue for bees, a vesselle to wasshe in, the bealy of any thing that lacketh lyfe, sometyme it signifieth a shyppe. Aluini, they whyche haue frettynges in theyr bealyes with contynuall fluxe. Alumen, alume whereof be three sortes, one is callyd Scissilae or Plumae, whyche naturally groweth lyke a stoone, and not withstandyng maye be dyuyded with long strakes, which be sene in it. An other sort is boyled in a caul∣dron, and therfore is callyd Alumen Cati∣nae, and is made more pure by an herbe lyke to herbe Iuc bourned into asshes, and lye made therwith. An other sorte is callid Alu∣men Zucharinum, whyche is made with a∣lume relented, rosewater, and the whytes of egges, into the facyon of a sugar lofe, why∣che harlottes do vse to paint theyr visages to deceyue men, although they deceyue not god, who for theyr abhomynable curiositie, shall commytte them to the fyry flouddes of Hell, there to bayne them perpetually. Alumnari, to nourse or bryng vp. Alumnatus, nouryshed. Alumnus, a sonne or scholar that is broughte vp of a man, as of his owne father, eyther with sustynaunce, maners, or lernynge. Aluta, lether proprely tawed. somtyme it is put for a bagge or a purse. Alutamen, any thynge made of lether. Alutarius, a tawyer. Aluus, a bealy, also a hyue. Aluum bonam facere, to make soluble. Aluum ciere, uel elicere, to make the bealye louse or soluble. Aluum deijcere, to pourge the bealy. Aluum sistere, to stoppe or bynde. Alyba, a countreye not farre frome Misia, where, as Homerus dothe wryte, were my∣nes of syluer. Alypos, in Dioscorides is of somme suppo∣syd to be that, whyche is commonlye cal∣lyd Sena, wherewith Melancholye is pourgyd. Alysina, an herbe callyd water plantayne. Alysius, the name of Bacchus.
¶A ANTE M. AMabile, thankefull. Amabilis, le, amyable, worthye to be loued. Amabo, of felowshyp, a good felowshyp, a fa∣miliar worde vsyd amonge frendes. Amabundus, he that is a greatte louer, or a∣morouse. Amalec, a word of hebru, which may be inter∣preted a people lyckyng or strykyng.Exod. 17. It was the name of a kyng in Siria, whych resysted the people of Israel, whan they came out of Egypt, and slewe many of them. Wherfore he was afterwarde slayne by the commande∣ment of god.Deu. 25. it is somtyme taken for the coū∣trey wherof Amalec was kyng. Amalecitae, the people of Amalec,Reg. 1. 15. whome god commaunded Saul to destroy vtterly. And bycause he dydde not, he was reiect of god. Amalthea, a woman, whyche with her syster callid Melissa, nourisshed Iupiter with the milk of a gote. also the name of a prophetesse. Aman,Hester. a name of hebrue, whyche sygnifieth troublynge or murmurynge. Of that name was one whiche came of the howse of Agag, whome Assuerus kynge of Persia and Me∣dia exalted aboue all his lordes and counsai∣lours, and wylled all thynges to be doone as he wolde commaunde it. Wherefore Aman extollynge hym selfe in outragious pryde, by∣cause Mardocheus a Iewe, vncle to queene Hester, wyfe to Assuerus, dydde not humbie reuerence to hym, whan he passed by, he cau∣syd commyssyons in the kynges name to be sente vnto all countreyes, beynge vnder the domynyon of kynge Assuerus, that all the Iewes in euerye countrey shoulde be slayne. But almyghty God, beholdynge the malyce and crueltie of Aman, gaue grace vnto the vertuouse queene Hester, to preuente his vengeable appetyte. Wherfore after she had boden the kynge and Aman to dyner, she with suche a spyryte declared to the kynge the cruelle vengeaunce, that Aman hadde preparyd to be doone on her countreye men, and kynsfolke, that she soo styrred the kyn∣ges indignation agaynst Aman, that he com∣maunded incontynent, that Aman shulde be hanged on a gybet, whyche a lyttell before he caused to be raysed to hang theron Mardo∣cheus, whyche gybet was fyfty cubytes hye, And his howse and all his possessyons and goodes were gyuen vnto queene Hester. And moreouer, letters were sente by pooste into all countreyes, that the Iewes shoulde lyue, and alsoo that they shoulde slea all theyr en∣nemyes, whyche was doone, and moreouer tenne sonnes of Aman were hangyd. The noumber of theym, whyche were slayne by the Iewes, were thre score and fyue tenne thowsande. This is a noble storye, wor∣thye to be contynually remembred of theym, whyche be in hyghe auctorytie vnder pryn∣cis, that they maye feare God, abhorre cru∣eltie, and alwaye dreade the mutation of worldly thynges, and to consyder that kyn∣ges be not goddis. Amando, aui, are, to countremaunde. Amans, antis, he or she whyche loueth truely and contynually. Amanter, louyngly. Amanthes,Solinus. people in Aphrica in the further∣mooste parte of Ethiopia, who haue suche plenty of precyous stones and salt, that ther∣of they make greate houses. Amonge them is founden the carbuncle stone. Amantior, more louynge. Amantissime, moste louyngely. Amantissimus, moste louynge. Amanuensis, a clerke, or secretary alwaye at∣tendynge. Amanus, a mountayne callyd also Taurus. Amaracinum, an olyle made of maioram. Amaracus, an herbe callyd soote maioram, or maioram gentyl it is also callyd Sampsuch{us} Amaramis,Iosephus. the father of Moyses. Amaranthi, be people of the countrey of Col∣chos, wherein was the sheepe that bare the golden fleese. Amaranthos, & Heliocrysos, is al one herbe, and is supposed to be that whyche is com∣monlye callyd Stoecas or Sticados citrina, there is therof two kyndes. The flowre of the one is yelowe, and hath a soote sauoure, the other hath a purple flowre, whyche hath noo sauoure. The yelowe is layde amonge clothes to kepe them from mothes, and ther∣fore of somme it is callyd Tinearia. The o∣ther is callid Flos amoris, the floure of loue. Somme suppose it to be gylofer gentylle, or floure gentylle. Amarantus, an herbe, whyche groweth a fote in heyghte, and hathe leaues lyke basyll, and hathe a flowre fasshyoned lyke an eare of wheate, of crymosyn colour, whyche neuer dyeth, in frenche it is callyd Passeuelute. Some there be, whiche doo suppose it to be callyd in englyshe Baldare. Amare, bytterly. Amaresco,sci, scere, to waxe bytter, or to be bytter. Amarico, are, to make bytter, to make angry. Amarillis, the name of a shepeherde in the bu∣colicis of Vergyle. Amariscus, an herb callid Mathis, or dogfenel. Amaritudo, dinis, bytternesse. Amaror, idem quod amaritudo.
Amarulentus, vexed with malyce. Amarus, a, um, bytter, very angry. Amara mulier, a cursed queane. Amasa, a name of hebrewe, whiche signifieth the people that spareth, or lyftinge vppe the people. It was the name of a noble manne, sonne of Abigail syster of Dauid. Alsoo of a Capytayne, whome Ioab slewe in kyssynge and salutynge of hym, vnder the coloure of frendshyppe. Amasias, a name of hebru, signifieth the strēgth of the lorde. Of that name was one kynge of Iudea, sonne of Ioas. 853. yeres before the incarnation of Christ, and reygned .xxix. ye∣res. A man very eloquent, and at the begyn∣ning of his reigne was of moch humanite to∣warde all men, and obserued competently the commandementes of god, but yet he dyd not vtterly take away ydolatrye. He was longe tyme fortunate and waxed ryche, but at the laste he forgat god, and became prowde, and not being content with his astate, he wrate vnto Ioas kyng of Israelites, commandyng hym and his people to be vnder his subiecti∣on. But Ioas wrate vnto hym letters of de∣fyance. Wherfore he gathered an army, and went agaynst the kyng of Israel. But whan the battayle was ioyned, suche feare sodayn∣ly came amonge his men, that all tremblyng they fledde, or euer they came vnto strokes. And as Amasias wolde haue fledde, he was taken and broughte vnto kynge Ioas, who thretenyd to kylle hym, except he causyd the gates of Ierusalem to be openyd agaynste hym, whiche was done. Not withstandynge Ioas causyd .CCCC. cubites of the walle to be beaten downe, and he entered into the cy∣tie that waye in a charyotte, leadynge Ama∣sias with hym as a prysoner, and toke al the treasure of the Temple and of the kynges howse, and causyd it to be brought into Sa∣maria. Afterwarde beynge delyuered, his owne people conspyred against hym, and slew hym in the citie of Lachis. Amasenus, a ryuer in Italy. Amasis, was a noble kynge of Egypt, whiche made a lawe, that euery yere, eche man shuld make a reckenynge to the heade offycers of his realme, of his lyfe, and shewe whereby he lyued, or by what occupation he was su∣steyned, and he that dydde not make suche ac∣compte, shulde be put to deathe. Amasius, & Amasia, he or she that loueth, or is louyd. Amasso, idem quod amauero. Amastris, uel Amastrum, the pryncypall citie of Paphlagonia. Amath,Iosephus. the sonne of Chanaan. Amathus, untis, a citie in Cyprus, dedycate to Venus. also the name of an yle in the sea callyd Egeum, whyche was dedycate also to Venus, in the whyche was plentye of all ma∣ner of metalles. Amathuntius, a, um, of the sayd citie. Amathusa, the yle of Cyprus. Amatio, a louynge. Amator, a louer, or he that is amorous. Amatorculus, a small or symple louer. Amatorie, lyke a louer. Amatorium, a drynke charmed, to make a man a louer. Amatorius, a, um, that whyche pertaynethe to loue. Amaurosis, the dymnesse of the eyen. Amazones, women of Scithia, whyche wan a great part of Asia, who slewe all the men chyldren, and kepte the women chyldren, of whome they burned the ryght pappe, bicause it shulde not let them to throw theyr iauelyns or to shoote. Amazonicus, a, um, pertaynynge to the Ama∣zones. Amazonicus, ci, a countrey callyd afterward Cesaria. Amazonius, a, um, idem quod Amazoni∣cus, a, um. Ambactus,Caesar. a seruaunt. Ambages, a cyrcuyte of wordes, or a tale dra∣wen in lengthe. Ambagiosus, a, um, that aboundeth in suche fourme of speakyng. Ambarri, people of a countrey in France, now callyd Semar, & Monthar. Ambarualis hostia, was a sacrifyce made for the fieldes with a sowe great with farrowe. Ambedo, ere, to cate or gnawe about a thing. Ambegni, were an oxe and a ramme, on euerye syde of them, lambes were brought toke sa∣cryfyced. Ambest, idem quod circum est. Ambesus, a, um, eaten rounde. Ambiani, seu Ambianenses, people in France about Languedoke, callyd Amboise. Somme suppose it to be Amies. Ambidentes, shepe of two teethe, of some cal∣lyd hogges, of some theaues. Ambidexter, he that vsethe bothe handes lyke well. Ambigo, to compasse, also to doubte. Ambigue, doubtfully. Ambiguitas, doubtfulnesse. Ambiguum, a doubte. Ambilates, people in lyttelle Brytayne callyd Darenchis. Ambio, iui, ire, to compasse, to seke for promo∣tion, to desyre, to pray, or intreate. Ambitio, onis, inordynate desyre of honoure or auctorytie.
Ambitiosus, he that ymmoderately desyrethe honour. Ambitiosae preces, affectuall desyres. Ambitus, tus, a cyrcuite, inclosure. also the of∣fence of ambition made by the lawes. Ambitus, a, um, enuyronned or compassed. Ambo, bothe. Ambra, a very swete thynge, whiche is founde on the sea by a countrey callyd Zingi, in the caste parte of the worlde, whyche for the graye colour, is commonly callyd of apothe∣caryes Ambra grisia, whereof is made ve∣rye precyous and cordyall medycynes. it is hotte in the seconde degree, and drye in the fyrst degre. Ambratia, a cytie in Epiro, in a countraye, wherof the people be callyd Thesproti. This cytie was fyrst callyd Eponia & Paralia. Of this citie beareth the name a goulfe or bosom callyd Sinus Ambratiensis, whyche is made as welle by arte, as by nature wonderfulle stronge, hauynge a double walle, and inclo∣syd on bothe sydes with fennes, hauyng none entry, but by one narowe way. Ambratienses, people of Ambratia. Ambrices, tyles, whyche be layde ouerthwart betwene other tyles. Ambrones, people in Fraunce. Ambrosia, was callyd of the Paynymes the meate of goddis. Somme doo saye, that it is an herbe of the kynde of mugwort. it is pro∣prely tansye, whiche is vsed to be fryed with egges at Easter. This name of Ambrosia wandred as Plynye saythe in dyuers thyn∣ges. For were hit meate or drynke or herbes, whiche for the delycatenes thereof was offe∣red to the goddis in sacrifice, they callyd it by that name. Ambrosius, the name of a man, of the whiche one mooste excellent was bysshoppe of Myl∣layne, the yere of our lorde. 373. who was a Romayne, borne of a noble and auncyente howse, and hadde bene Consule there. This man beynge sent by Valentinianus the Em∣perour to Myllayn, to pacify a sedition, whi∣che at that tyme was amonge the people, af∣ter the deathe of Auxentius late bishop there of the secte of Arrianes, whan he in the chur∣che hauynge the people before hym, perswa∣dyd theym vnto concorde, sodainly the voyce of an infant was herde of all men, whyche cryed, Ambrosius is worthy to be bysshop. By the whiche voyce the people were so fer∣uently styred, that they all togyther consen∣ced, that he shulde be theyr byshop, although he was not yet baptysed, but newely instru∣cted in the faythe. And so he instantely refu∣synge, they compellyd hym to take it vppon hym. And forthewith as soone as he was by∣shoppe, all the people of Lumbardye agreed in one opinyon of true faythe, he was of su∣che holynesse, suche gentylnesse, suche excel∣lent wysedome and lernynge, that not oonely in his lyfe, but also after his deathe, he was had through oute the worlde in honour and reuerence. A rare fourme of election, and as rare a thynge is it to fynde a byshop or priest of Ambrose qualities, although he were half a paynym and a temporal man, whan he was chosen byshoppe, wherat they may be assha∣med, that be christened in theyr infancye, and twenty yeres or more priestes, er they be bys∣shoppes, and yet some not worthye to occupy that holy and reuerende offyce. Ambuariti, people of a part of Brabande. Ambubeia, the commune cykory with the long leafe, and the blewe flowre, whiche wylle be closed at the goynge downe of the sonne, and opened at the rysynge. Ambubeiae, drunken drabbes, whiche wander about the stretes. Ambulacrum, a pryuate place to walke in, an aley in a gardeyne. Ambulatio, walkynge, and a walkyng place. Ambulatiuncula, a lyttell walke. Ambulator, a walker or styrer. Ambulo, aui, are, to walke or styre about. Ambulare in ius, to come before a iudge. Amburo, bussi, rere, to bourne all aboute. Ambustus, a, um, bourned vp. Amecus, & ameca, olde wryters vsed for ami∣cus & amica.Galenus. Amemelides, a kynde of medlars, wherein be .v. stones. Amen, a worde of Hebrewe, whyche after the interpretation of Aquila, sygnifyeth fi∣deliter, after the .lxx. interpretours, it signy∣fyeth fiat, be it. Amens, madde. Amentia, foly. Amentior, tius, madder. Amentissimus, a, um, maddest. Amentum, a thonge, or that whyche is boun∣den to the myddes of a darte or iauelyn, wherwith it is throwen the farther. Ameria, an olde cytie in Italy. America, a countrey late founde in the weste parte of the worlde, by Americus Vesputi∣us the yere of our lorde a thousand foure hū∣dred .lxxvii. Amerinum, a citie in Italy. Ames, itis, a perche for a hauke. Amethystus, callyd also Anterites, is a precy∣ons stone callyd an ametyst, whyche is of a purple colour, but the more it is myxte with rose colour the better it is. Amethystinus, a, um, of an ametyst. Ametor, he that lacketh his mother.
Amia, a fish like to a Kuny, but he hath no sca∣les, but a playne skynne, whiche shineth lyke to syluer myxte with blue, and his tayle is in facyon lyke a newe moone. Amianthon, is of Eritius Cordus supposed to be a stone, wherof be made matches lyke to thredes, whiche beinge ones on fyre, ar ne∣uer extincte or put out. Amica, a woman that is loued. also a cōcubine. Amicabilis, le, frendly. Amice, idem. Amicibor, for amiciam, I wylle clothe or put on a garment. Amicinum, a canue or potte, whereout they powre wyne. Amicio, cui, cire, to cloth, to put on a garment. Amicior, ciri, to be cladde. Amicissime, moste frendely. Amicissimus, a, um, idem. Amiciter, frendly. Amicitia, amitie or frendshyppe. Amicius, more frendly. Amictorium, a lynnen rayle that women doo weare. Amictus, a, um, cladde. Amictus, ctus, a garment or apparayle. Amicula, a diminutiue of amica. Amiculatus, he that weareth a short cloke. Amiculum, a shorte cloke. Amicus, & amica, a frende, a louer. Amicus, a, um, ioyned to a thyng lackyng lyfe, sygnifieth profytable or holsome. Amineae uites, vynes growynge in a countreye by Salerne, in the royalme of Naples. Amissio, the losse of a thynge. Amissus, a, um, loste. Amita, my fathers syster, myn aunte. Amiternum, a town in Campania, where Sa¦lust was borne nowe callyd Aquilae. Amites, perches wheron haukes be sette. Amitini, cousyns germains by brother & syster. Amitto, si, tere, to suffre, to departe, to lose, to send, to let passe, to take fro. Amitere iusiurandum,Plautus. to breake an oth, to lose credence. Quod si non dederit, at{que} hic dies praeterierit, ego argentum, ille iusiu∣randum amiserit, If he doo not paye it, and this day doo passe, I shall lose my money, but he shall lose his credence. Amittere libidinem, Iam non possum amisi omnem libidinem: I may do no more, I am past all pleasure. Ammi, Ammios, uel Ammium, a lyttel sede and whyte, and hathe the tast of Origanum, and is hotte and drye in the thyrde degree. It groweth mooste commonlye in Ethiopia. The Apothecaryes (saythe Ioan. Agrico∣la) hathe not the very trewe Ammi, but in stede therof, they do selle the sede of cheruile. Ammon, an hebrewe name, whyche sygnyfy∣eth the sonne of my people. By the whyche name was callyd the sonne of Lot,Gen. 19. whyche he gatte on his yonge daughter, whan he was dronke. Of this Ammon came the people in Syria callyd Ammonitae. Iosephus dothe calle theym Ammanitae. By this name was Iupiter also worshypped in Egypt. Ammoniacum, callyd also gutta Ammonia∣ca, is a soote gumme, whyche the Apotheca∣ries doo calle Beniewyne. it yssueth out of a caane, whyche groweth specyally in Lybia, where the temple of Iupiter Hammon stode. Ammonitrum, a bunche of whyte glasse. Amnestia, forgetfulnes of thinges passed. Amnicus, a, um, of the brooke. Amnis, a ryuer or brooke. Amo, aui, are, to loue hartyly. Amodo, from henseforthe. Amoeno, aui, are, to make merye or glad. Amoen, meryly, pleasauntly. Amoenitas, atis, plesure, delectablenes or mirth. Amoenus, a, um, pleasaunt or dylectable. Amoenum ingenium, a pleasant wytte. Locus amoenus, a delectable place. Amolior, I remoue with great peyne. Amomum, is a lyttell busshe wrappyd rounde togyther, lyke a cluster of grapes, and hath a lyttell flowre lyke a whyte vyolette, the lea∣ues be lyke to the leaues of Withwynde or whyte vyne. The beste commeth out of Ar∣menia, whyche is yelowe as golde, the wood somewhat redde, and verye soote in sauour. They be deceyued (as saythe Ruellius and Agricola) which do take it for the rose of Ie∣rusalem, callyd also our ladyes rose. Amor, loue. Amores, idem. Sometyme wanton pastimes, or pleasures, wherin we delite. Amorgis, suche a kynde of lyne, wherof is made Raynes or Cipres. Amorrhaei, a worde of Hebrewe, whiche sy∣gnifieth cruell rebelles, or great bablars. Of that name was a people, whiche were neigh¦bours vnto the Iewes, and oftentymes sub∣dued by them,Reg. 3. and at the laste kynge Sala∣mon made them tributories vnto hym. Amos, was father of the prophete Isai, and than it signifieth stronge or puissaunt. There was an other Amos, whiche was one of the xii. prophetes, and that name signified bur∣deyned or charged, the fyrste hath in the be∣gynnynge the letter called Aleph, the other hath the letter called Aijn. This man was borne in a towne called Thime, and was a shepeherde, and sente by god in to Sama∣ria to prophesye, and whan he hadde there prophesied agaynst .x. tribus, and somwhat spake of the other two, Amasias caused hym
often tymes to be beaten, but whan he could not resist the holye goste, Ochozias, sonne of kynge Amasias, caused hym to be thrast into the temples with a greate nayle, and beynge halfe deade, he was caryed in to his owne countrey, where he sone after dyed. Amosio,Festus. for annuo. Amoueo, ui, uere, to remoue, to put frome a place, or a thynge. Amouere crapulam,Plautus. to parbreake whan one is dronke. Amouere segnitiem, to caste awaye slouth. Ampendices, old wrytars vsed for appēdices. Ampelos agria, a wylde vyne. Ampelusia, an yle called now Tinge. Amphesibene, a serpent, hauyng two heades, wherof the one is before, the other behynde, where his tayle shulde be. Amphiaraus, was sonne of Oileus, an Argiue borne, and was a southsayer, whome Adra∣stus kynge of Argiues wold haue taken with hym, whan he made war agaynste the The∣bans, but he knowynge that he shuld not re∣tourne, hyd hym selfe. At the laste was dys∣couered by his wyfe, and compelled to goo with the kynge. And the fyrste daye that he came to Thebes, the erthe opened and swa∣lowed hym. Amphibea, beastes or byrdes, whiche do lyue as well on the water, as on the lande. Amphibolum, a doubtfull sentence. Amphibrachus, a fote of meter, beinge of thre syllables, the fyrste and laste shorte, the mid∣del syllable longe, as Cupido. Amphictiones, was a noble coūsayle in Grece whiche assembled at a place, called Termo∣polae. In this counsayle were these .xii. sun∣drye people of Greece. Iones, Dores, Per∣rhebi, Boetii, Magnetes, Achaei, Phthio∣tae, Melienses, Dolopes, Aenianes, Delphi, and Phocenses: of this counsayle do make mention Suidas, Strabo. li. 9. Dionisius. lib. 14. Amphicyrtos, is the state of the moone, as wel whan he is somwhat increased aboue the di∣ameter or iuste middell, and groweth toward a roundnes, as also whan he is in the wane, passed the myddell, and waxeth holowe, and the endes sharpe. Amphilochus, a philosopher. Amphibologia, a forme in speakynge, where a sentence maye be taken two sundrye or con∣trary wayes. Amphimacrus, a foote in meter, hauynge the fyrste syllable and the laste longe, the myddel syllable longe. Amphimalla, clothe or garmentes frysed on bothe sydes. Amphimerinon, a feuer cotidian, whiche cō∣meth of fleume. Amphion, a man, whiche with naturall elo∣quence, brought rude and wylde people to a ciuile forme of lyuynge, and as some do sup∣pose, founde fyrste harmony. Amphipolis, a citie nyghe to Macedonia. Amphiroe, a nymph or mayden of the ryuers. Amphisa, a ryuer in Phocide, a countreye in Greece. Amphitana, a preciouse stone, the brymme or edge wherof shyneth lyke to golde. Amphitapetes, garmentes on bothe sydes roughe. Amphithearrum, a rounde place made with seates or scaffoldes, where men beheld plays. Amphitreatrales ludi, plays exercised in those places. Amphitrio, onis, the husebande of Alemena, mother of Hercules. Amphitrionides, he that commeth of the line of Amphitrio. Amphitryte, was the daughter of Nereus,  wyfe to Neptunus god of the sea, and some∣tyme it is taken for the sea. Amphora, called also Quadrantal, an old me∣sure of Rome, whiche is a fote square euery waye, and hath in it .xlviii. of the olde mea∣sures, called Sextarij, of oure englyshe mea∣sure .v. gallons. In weyght it conteyneth .lxxxli. of wyne .lxxii.li. of oyle, of hony .Cxx.li. Amphorarius, he that bearethe the potte, a tankarde bearar. Amphrysus, a riuer in Thessalsa, by the whi∣che Apollo kept the shepe of Admetus. Amphitapa, idem quod Amphimalla. Ampiruo, are is proprely where in daunsyng lyke meuynge or countenaunce that one ma∣kyth, he vnto whome it is made, shall do the semblable. It was fyrste vsed of the priestes callyd Salij. Amplant, olde wryters vsed for amplificant, they enlarge. Ample, amply, largely. Amplector, ti, to imbrace, to loue hartily. Amplexa,Non. Mar cellus. for Amplexare, imbrace or take to you. Amplexari, for amplecti. Amplexor,Cic. in fa. epi. & ad Q. fra. ari, to imbrace or loue well. Amplexus, imbracynges. Ampliatio, a deferryng of indgement concer∣nynge mans lyfe. Ampliatus, a man repried, whose iudgemente is deferred vppon somme dyfficultie or con∣syderation. Amplificatio, an augmentation. Amplifico, are, to augmente, to make better. somtyme to extolle. Amplio, aui, are, to make more, to drawe to, to defer or delay a thyng in iugement, to repry.
Amplior, larger, greatter. Amplissimus, a, um, greattest, largest, Amplissimus ordo, was vsed for the senate of Rome. Amplissimus magistratus, the highest office Ampliter, largely, abundantly, magnifikely. Ampliter occupatus,Plautus. let with moch busines. Ampliter testis, witnes of al the hole matter. Amplitudo, greatnes of power or maiestye. somtyme it signifieth largenesse. Terrae āplitudo, the largenes of the coūtrey. Ampliuagus, moche wandrynge. Amplius, more ouer, more largely. Amplius horas quatuor fortissime pugna∣uerunt:Caesar. They foughte myghtely more than foure houres. Coeperunt amplius tria mil∣lia hominum: They toke prisoners .iii. thou sande men and aboue. Amplus, a, um, large, wyde, gret, abundant. Amplustra, Amplustria, uel Aplustra, the tack¦lynge of the shyp. Ampron, a corde or chayne fastened to the yo∣kes, wherby beastes do drawe a wayne. Ampulla, an oyle pot. also a bottell or flagon. somtyme it signifieth a thyng that is blowen or puffed.Sueton. in Domitian Suetonius vseth that worde for a drinkynge glasse. it maye be called a vyole. Ampullarius, a bottell maker. Ampullor, I swell for pryde. Amputo, aui, are, to cut of. Amula, a water pot, and it maye be vsed for a holy water pot. Amuleus, the gret vncle of Romulus & Rem{us}. Amuletum, any thing that is ordeined against poysonynge. It is also taken for euery thing whiche is hanged about ones necke or arme, to preserue hym frome any inconuenience or sickenes. Amurca, the mother or ome of all oyles. Amussis, the masons or carpenters rule. Amussitatus, a, um, made by lyne, wel propor∣tioned. Amusus, he that knoweth no lernyng. Amyclae, a citie in Lacedemonia, where Ca∣stor and Pollux were borne. also an other ci∣tie in Italy. Amyclaeus, a, um, of that citie. Amygdalus, an almonde tree. Amigdalum, an almonde. Amylū, is a thyng made of wheate thre mon∣thes, olde, whiche is layde in water vntyll it waxe softe, the water beinge chaunged .v. tymes in the daye, and as often in the night, and whā it waxeth tender, the water is pou∣red out faire and softly. After whan it is as soft as may be, than the water beinge softly poured out, it is trodden with mennes feete, eftsones the water is poured out, and troden agayne, finally the bran, whiche swymmeth on the water, is taken away with a syue and that whiche remayneth, beinge strayned, is layd on newe tiles, and set in the hot son, vn∣tyl it be through dryed. This is very medici∣nable against distillations into the eies & pim¦ples of the eyes,Ruell. agaynst spyttyng of bloude, and myxt with milke, it causeth one to be fat. Amyson, a famouse Citie in the realme of Pontus. Amynthas, was the .xv. kyng of Macedonia. A ANTE N. AN, whiter, or if. Ana, a riuer of Spayne, whiche diuy∣deth the realme of Granato, from the realme of Portugall, and it spryngeth in a countrey in the hithermoste part of Spayne called Amitanus ager, and sometyme sprea∣dynge hym selfe into great pondes or meeres somtyme scante apperynge in lyttell brookes, or elles hydden vnder the ground, at the last, it falleth in to the great spaynishe sea. Anabaptistae, is a sect of heretikes, which be∣gan about the yere of our lorde. 1524. in Ger¦many: wherof the firste author was one Bal∣thazar, which taught that baptisme dyd no∣thynge profyt vnto chyldren, but that they ought eftsones to be baptised whā they come to yeres of discretion. wherefore they which were of that sect of heretikes be called Ana∣baptistae, whiche do signify rebaptisours. Anabasius, he that rydeth by post horses. Hie∣ronimus contra Rufinum. Anabathrum,Iuuenal. a pulpit or other lyke plae, whi¦che standeth on hyghe, wherunto a man must go vp by a ladder or grifes. Anabula,Plinius. a beast in Aethiope, hauynge a head like a camell, a necke like a horse, legges like an oxe, and is of colour a bryght red, full of whyte spottes. Anacardus, uel Anacardū, a tree vnknowen to the old Greekes, it groweth in India, also in Sicilia in the mountaynes, out of the which commeth fyre. The fruite therof is lyke the harte of a littell byrde, and hath a red iuyce, lyke to bloudde.Ruell. & Io. . The vulgare people of Si∣cile and Naples do cal it Pediculū elephanti an Elephantes louse. There is conteyned in the fruite, hony, whiche doth exulcerat, and burneth the bloud and other humours, roteth vp wertes, and is holsome for the synewes whiche be hurt with could. By it selfe taken it is venym, but there is therof a confection made by Rasis agaynst al colde diseases. Anacephaleosis, a shorte recapitulation or re∣pitition of thynges before rehersed. Anacharsis, a philosopher of a meruaylouse wisdome, albeit that he was borne in the bar¦barous
coūtrey of Scithia whom Plini sup¦poseth to haue fyrst found the potters whele. And beinge in the tyme that Solon made la∣wes to the Athenienses, he sayd: That lawes were like to copwebs, which tyed fast lyttel flies, and the gret flies brake them, and went cleane through them: In lyke wise the poore and meane men are faste wounden in the pe∣nalties and daungiers of lawes, but lordes and men in great auctoritie dayly breake la∣wes, and are not corrected. Anachorita, an hermite, the interpretation therof is, he that lyueth a parte, and out of company. Anaclinterium,Spartian. a mattresse. Anacreon, an olde poete, whiche songe to the harpe, he was borne in a towne of Ionia cal¦led Teum. This man being aged, was strā∣gled with the kernel of a grape, and so died. Anadendromache,Gal. li. 14. Meth. a playster made of the lea¦ues of holy hocke. Anadiplosis, is a doublynge of a worde, as the laste worde of the fyrste verse, is the first worde of the seconde verse, as, Certent & si∣gnis ululae, sic Tytirus Orpheus, Orpheus in syluis inter delphinas Arion. Anagallida aquatica, called also Sion & La∣uer, an herbe whiche groweth in water, with a strayght vprighte stalke, whiche is fattye, and hath brode leaues lyke alysaundis, but they be lesse, and haue a good sauour. Sur∣gions do vse it to heale woundes. Anagallis, an herbe called vulgarlye morsus gallinae, in englyshe (as I suppose) Chicke∣weede. Anaglypha, & Anaglypta, vessell or plate of golde or syluer chaced, as cuppes or bolles beaten with the hammer, and not ingraued. Anaglyptes, he that worketh suche vessell. Anaglyptice, the craft to chace or imboce plate Anagnostes, he that redeth to other men, as bible clerkes, or any other clerke, whiche re∣deth while an other wryteth. Anagoge, the hyghe and subtylle vnderstan∣dynge of the scripture. Analecta, fragmentes of meate, whiche fall vnder the table, and be afterwarde swepte awaye. Analectes, he that gadereth vp brokelettes. Analeptice,Gal. Met. li. 7. a forme of diet to nouryshe hym, whiche is late recouered from sickenes. Analesia, is a sickenesse of the heade, whiche taketh awaye sensiblenes from the hole par∣tes of the heade, and cummeth of the weke∣nesse of the stomake, or of to moche meate, or of to moche lechery, or drinkynge moche cold water, or to moche study, or of indigestion. Analogia, conueniency or proportion, whose propertie is to confer that whiche is doubt∣full, with that whiche is lyke to it, which is more certayne, to make it more playne. Analogos, proportionable. Ananias, the cloude of the lorde, or diuination of the lorde. It was the name of one of the thre Hebrewe chylderne,2. Para. 26 whiche by the com∣mandemente of Nabugodonosor were put in a fournaise of fyre, and came forthe without damage. Also it was the name of one of the captaynes of kyng Ozias. Also of one of the disciples of the apostelles, which with Sap∣phira his wyfe solde his lande, and broughte a portion therof to the apostelles, and kepte backe the residue. Wherfore beinge rebuked of saynte Peter, they bothe fel downe deade, for that they wolde haue deceyued the holye goste. Of that name was also an other dys∣ciple of Chryst, which baptised saynct Paul. Moreouer a byshop, who commaunded that sayncte Paul shuld be striken on the mouth, whan he preached. Anapestus, a fote in meter of .iii. syllables, ha∣uyng the two fyrst feete short, the last longe. Anapis, a riuer in Sicile, tenne, furlonge from the citie of Siracusis. Anarchos, without a prynce, or without a be∣gynnynge. Anas, anatis, a ducke. Anastrophe, a tournyng out of a commune or∣der, as Italiam contra, for contra Italiam. Anaticula, a lyttell ducke. Anatarius, a, um, of a ducke. Anatinus, a, um, lyke a ducke. Anathema, in holy scripture betokeneth sepa∣ration, els where it signifieth a thing offered or set vp in a temple or churche, as thynges offred and hanged vp. Anathematizo, aui, are, to curse or gyue to the dyuell. Anatiborum, Prouaunce in Fraunce. Anatocismus, receyuynge of vsery. Anatolius, was bshop of Laodicea, the yere of our lord. 278. a very holy man and of gret lernynge. Anatomia, or Anatomice, anotomye or cut∣tynge of men by phisitions, to consyder the inward partes and membres. Anatorius, a keper of duckes. Anauros, a riuer in Thessalia. Anaxagoras, a famous philosopher, noble of bloudde, but more noble in vertue and wyse∣dome, whiche abandonynge all his possessi∣ons, gaue hym all holye to the study of natu∣rall philosophy, and whan one sayde to hym: Haste thou no care for thy countrey, he aun∣swered: yes verylye, I haue excedynge care for my cuntrey, poyntyng vp to heauen with his fynger. Also whan he had ben longe out of his countrey, and was eftsones returned,
and beheld his possessions distroyed and wa∣sted, he sayde: I hadde not ben saulfe except these thynges had ben loste. Anazarba, a towne in Cilicia, where Diosco∣rides the noble phisition was borne. Anaxarcus, a philosopher, whiche fallynge in the indignation of a tyraunt called Nicocre∣on kynge of Cyprus, was by hym apprehen∣ded, and put in to a greatte morter of stone, where he was beaten or pounde with yron pe¦stelles: whiche tourmente he toke soo paci∣entlye, that he doubled these wordes worthy of remembraunce: Beate on, beate on Anax∣archus wynde bagge, for Anaxarchus thou beatest not. By the whiche wordes he accoū∣ted his body but a bagge full of wynde. Anaximander, a philosopher, whiche fyrste founde the description of the compasse of the sea and lande, and made fyrst the sphere. Anaximenes, a philosopher, disciple of Anax∣imander: who sayde, that the begynnyng of all thinges was the ayre, And that the sters es dydde moue infinitely, not ouer the erthe but about it. Ancaesa, grauen vessell. Anceps, itis, doubtfull. sometyme it signifieth double: also cuttynge on bothe sydes. Anchialea, a citie in Cilicia, which was buil∣ded by Sardanapalus, where also was his sepulture. Anchilops,Gal. in de¦finition. is superfluous fleshe in the greater corner of the eye, wherevnto humours be ga∣thered. Anchises, the father of Aeneas. Anchora, An anchore. Anchorarius, a, um, pertcyning to an anchore. Anchyle, is an incision or cuttynge of the cor∣des of the necke or ioyntes, wherby the vse of the member is let. Ancile, a shielde without corners, suche one in the tyme of Numa kyng of Rome, was sene fall out of the skye. Ancilla, a mayden seruaunt, it was properlye taken for a bonde woman. Ancillor, to serue humblye and diligently. Ancillula, a lyttel or poore wenche seruaunt. Anclabra, vyssels, whiche priestes vsed. Anclare, seu antlare, to empty a vessell. Ancona, a noble citie and hauen in Italye, in the countrey called Picenum, whiche stan∣deth vpon the sea called mare hadriaticum, and was soo called bycause that the sea ban∣kes there do bende in fourme lyke to an arme with the elbowe. It was fyrste buylded by people of Siracusis a citie in Sicilia, afore the incarnatiō of Christ. 179. yeres & the ha∣uen was augmented by the noble Traianu emperor of Rome. After was it destroyed by sarasins, and eftesones buylded and inhabi∣ted, and is nowe a famous citie. Ancones, the coynes or corners of a wall. Anculi, & Anculae, goddes and goddesses of seruynge women. Anchusa, an herbe, of whose roote commeth a red iuyce, wherwith sanguine colour is dyed. Ancus, he that hath a croked elbowe. Ancus Martius, was the fourth king of Rome and was son to the daughter of Numa Pō∣pilius, and succeded Tullus Hostilius, afore the incarnation of Christe. 642. yeres. This prynce as well in martiall prowes, as in cy∣uile policie was equall to any that were be∣fore hym. Also he enlarged the citie, & made a brydge ouer the ryuer of Tiberis: also a prison in the middes of the citie, to the terror of offendours, whiche than dayly increased. Ancyra, the name of .ii. cites, the one in Phri∣gia, the other in Galatia. Andabatae, certayne menne that foughte with swordes winkynge. Andegauia, a countreye in Fraunce called Angewe. Andes, the people of Aniewe in Fraunce. it was also a village by Mātua in Italy wher Vergil the poete was borne. wherfore he is somtyme called Andinus uates. Andianum uinum, wyne of Aniewe. Andrachni, in greeke, is in latine Portulaca, in englyshe purslane. Andrago, a woman hauynge a mans harte. Andreas, was one of the .xii. apostelles. bro∣ther to Peter, who preachynge at a citie cal∣led Patrias in the countray of Achaia, was imprisoned and beaten, and at the last han∣ged on a crosse, wheron he preached .ii. days, and than died. Andricus, an hyll in Cilicia. Androdamanta, seu Androdamas, a pretious stone, harde and ponderous, & is as it were of the colour and bryghtnes of syluer, and in fourme is of diuers lyttel squares. It is foūd in the sande of the red sea. it putteth awaye the fury of yre and the rage of lechery. Androgeus, the son of Minos kyng of Crete, whiche by enuy was slayne of the Athenien∣ses. For the which many yeres after the son∣nes of the Athenienses were sente to Crete, to be delyuered to the monster called Mino∣taurus, whiche was afterward destroyed by Theseus. It was also the name of a noble Briton, whan Iulius Caesar came hyther in to this realme of Brytain. Androgynae, people in Asia, beinge of bothe kyndes in one person, man and woman. Androgynos, a man hauynge bothe members of a man, and also of a woman. Andromache, the wyfe of the valiant Hector. Andromede, the wyfe of Perses, whome he
saued from a monster of the sea. Andron, a chaumber, wherinto men onely do come, and not women. Also a space betwene two houses, wherinto rayne falleth. Andronitis, idem. Andronae, feastes, whervnto onely men doo come. Andros, an yle betwene Greece and Asia, di∣rectly agaynste the citie of Ephesum. Androsace, Cordus and some other do suppose it to be that, whiche is also called Cuscuta, in englyshe withwinde, whiche wyndeth a∣bout lyn and hempe. Musa and Maynardus do thynke the contrary: beleue whom ye lyst, Dyoscorydes descrybeth hym in this wyse: Androsaces is a bytter herbe, spreadynge abrode smalle stalkes lyke rushes, withoute leaues, hauynge lyttell coddes on the toppe, wherin be seedes. It groweth on the sea co∣stes of Siria. Androsaemon, an herbe called sayncte Ihon̄s worte. Andruare, olde wryters vsed for recurrere, to run agayne. Anellus, a lyttell rynge. Anemonae, wylde popy, with red floures, gro¦wynge in corne fieldes. Anethum, an herbe called dyll. Aneurisma, the cuttyng a sonder of the sinew, whiche conteyneth the receptory of bloudde, or takynge away the matter, wherin the spi∣rites be conteyned. Anfractus, wyndynges and tournynges, speci∣ally in the grounde. Angaria, a constraynt or compulsion. Angariae, arum, some do expounde it a pro∣uision of postes in sundry places for spedines of messages. Angarij, postes or currours whiche go in mes∣sages. Angario, aui, are, to constrayne one to doo a thynge. Angelica, called also Smyrnium, is taken of Mainardus for that which is called Alexan∣der. Io. Tanstetterus, a well lerned man at this tyme, supposeth that whiche Dioscori∣des calleth Morrida, to be our Angelica. Angelus, an angell, In greeke it properlye si∣gnifieth a messager. Anger, a certayne serpente, after whose styn∣gynge hapneth intollerable peynes. Angerona, was called the goddesse of plea∣sure, called also Volupia. Angilae, people in Affryke, of whome the wo∣men, the fyrst night that they be wedded, do accompany with all men, whiche come to the weddynge, but euer after they be chaste. Angina, of the Greekes called synanche, is an inflammation of the muscule of the inner gargil. Of this dysease be thre kyndes: the fyrste is Synanche, wherin appereth neyther swellynge nor rednes, but the bodye waxeth leane, the members are leused, and the breth is stopped. The seconde is called Vtisynan∣che, there apereth rednes and swellyng, and let of speche with yexinge. The thyrde is cal∣led Parasynanche, wherein onely the chekes doo swell, the other tokens do not folowe. Angiologia, is a poynte of surgery in the vai∣nes of the temples hyd, being deuided from temple to temple in depenes. Angiportus, a great hole in the erthe with ma¦ny tournynges, or that whiche hath none is∣sue out, or a lane in a towne, whiche leadeth the nexte waye to a strete, or that whiche ly∣eth on an hauen, wherby marchandise is ca∣ryed from the water, or recaried. Angleria, is nowe a castell in Lombardy, whi∣che sometyme was a citie forty myles frome Myllane, set on a very hyghe mountayne. Anglia, the royalme of Englande, part of the yle called Britannia, the people are called Angli, of a people of Saxony, whiche were at that tyme moste of reputation, and ther∣fore theyr name lengest continued, as well in the people as in the countraye. Reade more hereof in Britannia. Ango, anxi, angere, to tourment or vexe. Angon, the inner parte of the elbowe. Angor, anguyshe of body or mynde. Anguilla, a fyshe called an ecle, whiche as the best autors do affirme, commeth without ge∣neration or spawne: neyther there is of that kynde eyther male or female, but they be in∣gendred of that whiche is called the bowels of the erthe, whiche is of claye myxte with moyste erthe. And that apereth by standynge pooles, where after that the erthe hath ben throwen out cleane, after dyuerse shoures of rayne, eeles haue ben founde in them. for in drye wether they do not increase, thoughe it be in a ryuer. And they whiche fyndynge lit∣tell thynges lyke heares or easis ioyned with them, say that they be yonge eeles, are decei∣ued. In the ryuer of Ganges in India, haue ben founde eeles .xxx. feete in length. Anguimanus, an olyphant. Anguinus, a, um, of a serpente, or wyndinge and crepynge lyke a serpent. Anguis, a snake. Angularis, re, cornerde. Angulatim, corner wyse. Angulosus, full of corners. Angulus, a corner. Anguste, an aduerbe, signifienge strayghtlye, naroly, peynfully, Angustia, straytnes, or perplexity of mynde. Angustitas, a strayte, or strayt place.
Angustus, a, um, strayt. In angustum uenire, to be in some necessitie: to haue great lacke of helpe. Anhelator, he that fetcheth his wynde often, or bloweth moche, called a pursy man. Anhelitus, brethe or wynde of a man. Anhelo, aui, are, to fetche wynde, or drawe breathe. Anhelus, he that draweth his breth peynfully. Ania, a Romayne woman, whiche being faire and yonge, after that her huscbande was deade, was counsayled to take an other, but she wolde not consent therto. for if (sayd she) I shall hap to haue as good as I haue had, I wyll not be in feare to lose hym: if I shall haue an yll husbande, what shall I nede, af∣ter a good manne, to suffer a shrewe. Anicetum, idem quod Anethum, dyll. Anicula, a lyttel olde woman. Aniliter, lyke an olde foole. Anima,August. li. Definito. is a substaunce created, inuisible, most lyke vnto the immortall god, hauynge none ymage or figure, but onely of his creatoure.It is called in englyshe the soule. somtyme it is taken for lyfe. also it sygnifieth the breth. otherwhile the wynde. somtyme the water. Animā adimere, uel extinguere, to kyll. Animam debet, he oweth more thanne he is worthe. he oweth so moche, that he hath not his lyfe but in lone. Dic amabo, an foetet anima uxoris tuae? Tel me of good feloweshyppe, dothe thy wyues brethe stynke? Animam comprime,Plautus. holde thy brethe. Si situlam iamiam caepero, nun{quam} aedipol tu mihi diuino quid credas post hunc diem, ni ego illi puteo, si occepso, animam omnem intertraxero: If I take the bucket, neuer be¦leue me for a prophete after this daye, if I drawe not cleane out (if I ones begynne) all the water of the well. Animaduerto, tere, to consider, to take hede, to perceyue, to set mynde on a thynge, to be∣holde, and to thynke. Experrecta nutrix animaduertit dormien∣tem,Plautus. circumplicatum serpentis amplexu. The nourice awaked, & perceyued the chylde beinge on slepe, wrapped all aboute in the wyndynge of the serpent. Date operam,Terenti{us}. & cum silento, animaduer∣tite? Take you heede, and with sylence per∣ceyue what I wyll saye to you.Cicero. Ea sunt ani∣maduertenda peccata maxime, quae difficilli me praecauentur. Those offences ought to be moste sharply corrected, whiche moste hard∣ly are eschewed.Caesar Hac re animaduersa, Caesar iubet signa conuerti: After that the offence was punyshed, Caesar commaunded to ad∣uaunce the standarde. Animaduertere in Aliquem, to punishe one. Animaduersi, they whiche are punysshed or corrected. Animaduersio, consideration, punysshmente. sometyme study. Animaduersor, he that punisheth. Animaequius, a, um, pacient, or sufferinge. Animal, all thyng that hath lyfe, and is sensi∣ble, commonly it is taken for a beaste. Animalis, le, that wherin is lyfe. Animans, idem quod Animal, sauinge that it is more larger. for it maye signifie all thynge that hath spirite of lyfe. Animatus, a, um, that hath sowle or lyfe. Also hauynge a fantasy or fauour to a thynge, or to be dysposed.Plau. Ita animatus fui, at{que} nunc sum, ut ea te patera donem. I hadde such a fantasye, and yet haue, that I wolde gyue the cup to you. Amabo si quid animatus est facere, faciam ut sciam. If he be disposed to do any thynge, let me knowe it. Animitus, from the very sowle or lyfe. Animo, aui, are, to gyue courage or boldenes, to quicken. Animos addere, to make one bolde, or to prycke hym forwarde to do a thynge. Animos comprimere, to abate ones cou∣rage. Animos retardare, idem. Animos efferre, to loke highe, or be proude. Animos lactare, to drawe mennes hartes with fayre promyses, to make fooles fayne, to bryng men in fooles paradise. Animi pendere, to be in doubte what to do. Animi causa, for pleasure. Cur eam emit? T. Animi causa.Plau. wherfore dyd he by her? T. for his pleasure. Animo male est, it greueth hym at the very harte. Animo praesenti, with a bolde spirite or courage. Animo bono esse, to be of good chere. Animo iniquo pati, to suffer vnpatiently. Animo obsequi, to take pleasure, to folowe appetite or wyll. Animo morem gerere, idem. Animum adijcere ad uirginem, to sette his loue on the mayden. Animum adiungere, to applye or set mynde to a thynge. Animum aduertere, to take hede. Animum appellere, to dispose or apply him to do a thynge. Animum ecere, to put awaye affection or fantasy. Animum recipere, to take harte or courage Also to fetche brethe. Animum sumere, to take a good harte.
Animus impotens, an vnpaciente courage. a proude or dogged harte. Animus tibi pendet, thou standest in doubte what thou mayste do. Anime mi, my dere harte. Animule, idem. Animose, couragiousely, Iustily. Animositas, boldnesse. Animosus, bolde. Animus, the mynde, the wyll. sometyme it is put for the soule. sometyme for affection or de∣lectation. sometyme for wynde or blaste, som tyme for wrathe. somtyme for a sowne. Anio, enis, a ryuer in Italy in the fielde cal∣led Tiburtinum. Anisum, an herbe called anyse, whereof com∣meth anyse sede, whiche is hotte and drye in the thyrde degree. Anna, a name of Hebrewe, whiche signifieth gratious, pitifull, restinge, or gyuinge. Of this name haue ben many noble women. One was a iewe, wyfe to Elcans, whiche beinge a longe tyme barrayne, by continuall prayer at the last obteyned of god to be fruiteful, & broughte forthe by her husbande, the good and holy prophet Samuel, who afterwarde was the chiefe prieste and bushop in Israell. Ano ther was an olde widowe and a prophe∣tesse in Hierusalem, at the tyme whan Christ was presented in the temple: whiche woman serued god daye and nyght, in prayer and fa∣stynge, and beholdynge Christe, declared all that was prophesied of hym, to them that a∣bode the redemption of Israel. Another An¦na was daughter of Isachar of the tribe of Leui, or as Damascenus saythe, of the tribe of Iuda, and was maryed to Ioachim of the same tribe, whiche beinge longe barrayne, at the laste brought forthe the blessed vyrgin Mary, mother of Iesu, god and man: and after the death of Ioachim she was maried to Cleophas, and after his death to Salome Annales, histories of actes, yerely done. Annalis, le, that whiche is done yerely. Annaria lex, was a lawe in the .xii. table of the Romaynes,ex. Pōp. ext. Cae lius. whereby was appoynted at what age and duringe what tyme, great of∣fices in the publyke weale shoulde be taken and kept. Annarius, a, um, aged, or that whiche is done yerelye. Annas, was bushop amonge the iewes, whan Christe began to preache. Annascor, to growe, or to be borne by a plate or man. Anniculus, a, um, that whiche is of one yeres olde. Annilis, le, aged. Annilis fabula, an olde wyues tale, or a tale without fruite. Annitor, to resyste, or to helpe, to sette to my mynde. Anniuersalis, the compasse of the yere. Anniuersarius, a, um, that euery yere retour∣neth at one tyme. Annona, vyttayles, sustinaunce, or lyuynge. Somtyme it betokeneth fyndynge in meate, drynke, and apparayle. Annonarius, & Annotinus, a, um, pertey∣nynge to vyttayle. Annonariae expensae, expenses in vitayle. Annosus, a, um, aged Annotatio, a notynge or markynge of thinges for speciall remembraunce. Annoto, aui, are, to nots, to intitle. Annotinae naues, shyppts that cary corne. Annuatim, yerely. Annularis, re, perteynynge to a rynge. Annuntiare, to declare a message. Annuo, ere, to consent or graunt. Annus, is commonlye called a yere, not with∣standynge Annus is diuided in .ii. significa∣tions, one is called Annus uertens, whiche the Egyptians made but of .ii. monethes, the Romaynes in the tyme of Romulus .x. mo∣nethes: After Numa Pompilius, which rei∣gned nexte after Romulus, added to .ii. mo∣nethes, and made it .xii. monethes, whiche Iulius Caesar accompted to contayne. 365. dayes, and the fourth part of a natural day. Annus magnus after the sayinge of Aristote les, is the space, where in all the spheris ster∣res and planettes be retourned into the same state and poynte, as they were at the tyme, from whense we do accompte, whiche some do suppose to be in. 2484. yeres, called uer∣tentes, some saye. 5552. some ten thousande and eyghte hundred yeres. Iosephus calleth a thousande yeres Annum magnum. Annuum, a pention, or annuitie. Annuus, a▪ um, that dureth one yere. Anodina, thynges, whiche do put away peine or griefe. Anomalum, vnequall, diuers, roughe. Anonium, an herbe called deade nettle, or ar∣chaungell. Anonymum, without a name. Anophytus, sprōgen or growen vpon a thing. Anquina, the cord wherwith the saile is bound to the maste. Anquiro. to seke. Ansa, the care or handell of a pot, or cup. And sometyme it signifieth occasion. somtyme a buckle. Ansanctus, on euery parte holy. Ansatus, a, um, hauynge an handell. Anser, seris, a goose. They treade to ingender in the water, they syt on theyr egges in colde
countrayes .xxx. dayes, in warme countreys or wether .xxv. dayes, as Columella saythe. They were moch made of by the Romayns, for as moche as when the frenche men besie∣ged the capitole of Rome, they whiche were within beinge on slepe, the capitole had ben betrayed and wonne, if that a certayne num∣ber of geese, perceyuynge the ennemies, had not cryed, wherwith the Romaynes beinge wakened, by the valiant prowes of M. Mā∣lius, they slewe and draue oute the frenche∣men, and saued the capitol. wherefore geese were had in great reputation, and prouision was made that they shuld neuer lacke meate. Anserinus, a, um, lyke a gose, or perteyninge to a gose. Ansula, the diminutiue of ansa. Antacei, as Strabo wryteth, be fysshes in the ryuer called Borysthenes, lyke to Dolphins without fynnes, and be verye delycate and pleasaunt to eate. Antae, iambes, also postes on euery syde of the doore. Antaeci, people whiche dwell in the countrary Zon or gyrdell, to Anticthones. Antandros, a citie in Phrigia. Antapocha, the counterpane of a deede in wrytynge. Antarcticus, the fifthe cercle in heauen, called the south pole. Antarium bellum, battayle before a Citie or towne. Antea, Ante, before. Ante alios, aboue other, before other, more than other, or besyde other. Anteambulo, lonis, a lackey, or other seruaut that goeth afore his maister. Antecapio, coepi, capere, to preuent. Antecedo, cessi, dere, to go before, to excell. Antecello, lui, lere, to excel or haue preeminēce Antecessum, payde before hande. Antecoenium, a colation or drynkyng betwene dyer and supper. Ante eo, iui, ire, to precede or excel, or go before. Antefero, to put before, or set more by. Antefixa, thynges caste in mouldes, and set o∣uer doores. Ante hac, before this tyme, or before that time. Antelapides, stones sette at bothe the sydes of a doore for strength. Anteloquium, the fyrste tourne in speakynge. Antelucanus, a, um, that which is before day lyghte. Antelucani uenti, wyndes that doo blowe from the water, or from some creke. Anteluco, an aduerbe, before daye. Anteluco, aui, are, to wake before daye. Anteluculo, before daye lyghte, or an howre afore son. Antenna, the crossepiece, wherto the sayle is fastened. Antenor, was of alyaunce to Priamus kynge of Troye, and after the destruction of Troy, remayned there with the Troyanes, whiche were lefte on lyue, and afterwarde beinge dryuen thense by the sonnes of Hector, he fled with .ii. thousande Troyans, and entred in∣to the countreye called Venetia, and there buylded the noble citie of Patauium, called commonly Padua, and there reigned during his lyfe. Ante oculos, before his eyes, but it signifieth further of than Coram oculis. Antepagmentum, a portall. Antepono, sui, nere, to preferre. Ante{quam}, before, ere. Ante{quam} de repub. dicam, ete I speake of the weale publike. Anterius, longe before. Antermini, the inhabitauntes of the marches or frontiers of a countrey. Anterotae, loue mutually sette betwene two persones. Anterotes, the warste kynde of Amatistes, whiche hath a white purple colour, towarde a christall. Antes, outwarde pyllars or postes, wherby the house or frame is susteyned. Antesignani, they whiche be nexte the stan∣derd, appoynted for to defende it. Antesto, to excell, or stande before. Antestor, to assigne a iudge. Antesum, antefui, ante esse, to excell an other in any thynge. Anteuenio, ueni, nire, to preuent. Anteuerto, to preuente, to ouer tyde one. som∣tyme to do one thynge before an other: to do a thynge fyrste, and before an other man. Anteurbanus, a, um, nygh to the citie, as An∣teurbanum praedium, a manour nygh to the citie. Antexpectatus, a, um, come before that he was loked for. Anthedon, a kynde of medlars, whiche hath leaues lyke an almonde tree, the fruite lasse than the common medlar, but moch pleasan∣ter, and wyll be lengar kepte. Anthemis, an herbe called chamomyl. Anthenodorus, a philosopher of the secte of them, whiche were called Stoici, flouryshed xv. yeres before the incarnation of Chryste. Of whom this wyse sentēce proceded: Thou mayste thynke that thou arte free frome all couaytise, whan thou art come to that point that thou wylte desyre nothynge of god, but that thou mayste openly craue. Antherae, a certayne salue, whiche hath a flo∣ryshynge and orient coloure, rede Cornelium
Celsum. All be it Ioan. Manardus saythe in the fourthe boke of his Epistoles, that phy∣sytions doo calle Antheras, compounde me∣dycines for dyseases of the mouthe, wherin Roses be myngled. But he that readeth Ga∣lenum de compositione medicamentorum, shall fynde Antheras withoute the flowres of Roses. Anthericon, idem quod Asphodelus, Daf∣fadylles. Antheus, was a man in Mauritania of mer∣uayllous strengthe, before the Incarnation of Chryste .1588. yeres, with whome Her∣cules wrastlyd, who perceyuyng that as of∣ten as he threwe hym to the erthe, soo often he eftesoones recouered his strengthe: He at the laste toke hym in his armes, and dydde lyfte hym aboue grounde, and so helde hym vntylle the sowle wente out of his body, and there dyed. Antonius Sabellicus wrytetth, that Sertorius founde the Sepoulchre of Antheus, in a citie callyd Tigena, in Bar∣barye, whiche was in length .xl. cubytes. Anthias, a fyshe, a greate deuourer of man∣nes flesshe, hauynge teethe lyke to a combe, yet not withstandynge in the partes where this fysshe breadeth, there is no monster of the sea, and therefore he is callyd Sacer pi∣scis, the holy fysshe. He is alsoo callyd Cal∣lionymus. Anthirrhinos, an herbe lyke to lynne, hauyng no roote. It hathe a purple flowre, and gro∣weth commonly amonge corne. The seede is lyke to a calues heade with the nosethryl∣les open. Anthos, is commonly taken for the flowres of Rosemary. All be it, it is the generall name of euery flowre. Anthraceus, a colyar. Anthracia, a bournynge cole. Anthracides, a stone, in the whiche there see∣meth to be sparkes, as it were of fyre. Anthracinus, a, um, blacke as a cole. Anthropophagi, people whiche doo deuoure men in eatynge of theym. Anthyllis, is the herbe commonlye callyd herbe Iuye. Antiae, the heare of a woman, that is layde ouer her forhead, gentylwomen dyd late call them their rolles. Antibacchius, a fote in meter, hauyng the first syllable and the laste shorte, and the myddell syllable longe. Antica, all that is before vs. Anticipo, aui, are, to preuent. Anticlus, was one of the Grekes, which was inclosyd in the brasen horse, wherby the cytie of Troy was betrayed. And whan the fayre Helene, mystrustyng that engyn, cam vnto it, and feining the voices of the ladies of Grece,Homerus spake as if euery of them had spoken to theyr husbandes, and none of them, which were in the brason horse, regarded her: onely Anti∣clus thynkyng that he herde the voyce of his wyfe named Laodomia, wold haue answerd had not Vlysses with his hande stopped his mouthe, vntyll Helene commaunded by Pal∣las, was departed, by the occasyon whereof Anticlus was strangled. Anticthones, people dwellynge in the vtter∣moste part of the worlde, directly ageynst vs. Anticyra, an Ile in Asia, where the herbe cal∣lyd Elleborus groweth, whyche pourgeth melancholy, and there it may be taken with∣out any daunger. Whereof grewe this pro∣uerbe spoken to men in theyr melancholy: Nauiga ad Anticyras, Go sayle to Anticyra. as who saythe, Pourge your melancoly. Antidicomaritae, a secte of heretyques, whi∣che affirmed, that the blessed vyrgyn Mary, after that she had brought forth Christ, was carnally knowen of Ioseph, and had by hym other chylderne. The authour of the why∣che heresy was Heluidius, about the yere of our lorde . 406. Antidora, gyfte for gyft, one for an other. Antidotarius, a boke of medicines. Antidotum, a medicine to expelle poyson. Antigerio, olde writers vsyd for very shortly, forthewith, or the thynge were done. Antigraphareus, a controller. Antigrapeus, idem. Antigraphum, an example. Antila, a poumpe to drawe water. Antilena, a peutrell. Antimetabole, a fygure in speche, where wor∣des are repeted to a contrarye sentence, as, Non ut edam uiuo, sed ut uiuam edo, I lyue not to eate, but I eate to lyue. Antiochia, a noble citie in Syria, callyd fyrste Epiphane or Beblata, and afterward was augmented by Seleuchus, sonne of Antio∣chus, one of the noble companyons of great kynge Alexander .330. yeres afore the com∣mynge of Chryste, who callyd it by the name of his father Antiochia. Thoroughe this Cytie rounneth the ryuer callyd Orontes. Of this cytie sayncte Peter the apostle was bysshoppe seuen yeres, and after hym saynt Lucas the Euangelyste other seuen yeres. There was the fyrste Synodus or Counsell celebrate, where the name of Chrysten men fyrste beganne. This Citie was in the han∣des of Chrystyan menne oone thowsande yeares, and there hathe beene in successy∣on. Cliii .byshoppes, and had within it .366. Churches. Antiochus, was the name of the kyn∣ges
of Siria, of the whiche the fourthe of that name, and syxte kynge of Siria, was callyd the greate Antiochus, whyche was a∣fore the commynge of Chryste .212. yeres. He was also callyd Hierax, whyche sygnyfy∣eth a fawlkon, for the rauenye that he vsyd in takynge frome euerye manne theyr posses∣syons and goodes. To this kynge camme Hannyball duke of Carthage, after that the Cytie of Carthage was delyuered by ap∣poyntemente, to whome Antiochus shewed his armye gatheryd agaynste the Romay∣nes, whyche was wonderfully rychely ar∣myd with golde and syluer, and he reioy∣synge therein, demaunded of Hannyball, yf he thoughte not that that was ynoughe for the Romaynes, meanynge the puyssaunce of his armye. Hannyball lyttell esteemynge the rychesse, aunsweryd in skorne: yes al∣thowghe the Romaynes of all other were mooste couetouse. Fynallye, the Romay∣nes vanquyshed bothe Antiochum, and Han∣nyball, who fledde to Prusias, kynge of Bithynia. And Antiochus was constrayned to desyre peace, and to relynquysshe to the Romaynes all his interest in Europa and Asia, and to leaue his sonne Antiochum in hostage, and he hym selfe to departe to the hyle of Taurus, and to be contente with the countreye there aboute. At the laste be∣ynge eftesoones styrred with a couetouse mynde, desyrynge to haue a greate treasure, whyche was supposed to be in Perside, the chiefe cytie of Persia, in the Temple Na∣nea or Fortuna, was deceyued by the prie∣stes of that Temple, and cutte in smalle pyeces, and caste oute to be deuowred of byrdes. And this was the ende of a raue∣nouse and couaytouse prynce, after that he had moste gloryousely reygned syxe and thyr∣ty yeres. Antiochus illustris, the noble Antiochus, was sonne to great Antiochus, whyche was left hostage in Rome by his father. This man gaue his syster in maryage to Ptolomeus kynge of Egypte, that by pretence of fa∣mylyarytie, he mought take the royalme of Egypte frome hym, whyche he dydde, for commynge vnto hym vnder the colour of a∣lyaunce, he slewe Ptolome syttynge at sup∣per. He also subdewed the Iewes in Hieru∣salem, and robbed the Temple and Cytie, and dydde sette vp Idolles, and with sun∣drye tourmentes, compellyd the Iewes to breake the lawes of god, and commytte ido∣latrye. But he escaped not vnpunysshed, for whan he had reygned .xi. yeres, he felle into an horryble syckenesse and tourment, so that wourmes yssewed aboundauntly out of his body, whyche so corrupted his flesshe, that it dydde stynke soo greuouselye, that his ar∣mye, nor noo manne aboute hym mought su∣steyne the sauour. At the laste he retourning to the knowledge of God, with greate con∣trition dyed, oppressyd with tourmentes. Dyuerse other haue bene of that name, some kynges, some phylosophers, whyche I passe ouer for as moche as I fynde not of theym any thynge notable. Antipagmenta, garnysshynge of porches in stone or tymber wrought. Antipater, was the name of dyuers kynges, as well of Macedonia, as of Iudea. Also of a noble Capytayne, whome the great kynge Alexander made his lyutenaunte of Ma∣cedonia, whyles he was in his Conqueste, who dyd many valyaunt actes in the absence of Alexander, and kepte the royalmes and domynyons of his mayster in good state with his wysedome and prowesse. But beynge at dyscention with queene Olympias, mother to great Alexander, who wrate many great complayntes to her sonne agaynste hym. fy∣nally, dreadynge the crueltie as welle of A∣laxander, as of his mother, it is supposed, that he consented to the poysonynge of his maister. Antipater, was a phylosopher borne in the cy∣tie of Tirus, of the secte of Stoici, whyche from the tyme of his byrthe, vntyl his death, had alwaye a feuer, and not withstandynge he liued tyll he was olide. Antipater, is alsoo an herbe, whiche hathe an harde stemme, and leaues lyke Rosemarye, but they are broder, and not soo longe. The propretie therof is, that the flowres, whiche growe laste, do sprynge vp hyghest, therefore Pandecta calleth it Filius ante patrem, the sonne afore the father. Antipathia, a repougnauncie, or naturall con∣traryetie. Antipelargesis, one good tourne for an other. Antiperistasis, is that thynge, wherby, where heate commethe, colde is expellyd, where colde is, heate is expelled. By this well wa∣ter in the wynter tyme is warme, forasmoche as the hygh partes of the ayre beynge colde, the heate withdraweth hym to the loweste partes. Lykewise in the bodye of man, the spirite is kepte in more feruente by the out∣warde colde, by the ioynt consent and tolle∣ration of all partes of the body. Antiphonae, e interpreted Antemnes, whi∣che be songen after Psalmes. These were fyrste ordeyned to be songen in the Churche by Saynte Ignatius, the dyscyple of saynt Iohan the Euangelyste, Archebysshoppe of Antiochia, the yeare of oure Lorde, a∣bout
.109. Antiphrasis, a worde or sentence, hauynge a contrary meanyng: as Parcae, the mynisters of deathe be soo callyd, bycause they spare to man. Antipodes, people whyche doo inhabyte the parte of the worlde, in respecte of the round∣nesse therof, vndernethe vs, that it seemeth that theyr feete be agaynste our feete. Antiquarius, he that sercheth for antiquities, or redeth olde warkes, or vseth to speake or wryte wordes of ancient tyme, whyche haue bene longe out of custome. Antiquatio, an abolytion of a lawe. Antiquitas, atis, auncientye. Antiquitus, of auncient or olde tyme. Antiquo, aui, are, to make voyde, to reduce to the fyrste state, to repell. Antiquare legem, to abolyshe a lawe. Antiquus, a, um, auncyent or olde. sometyme it sygnifieth noble or worshypfull. Also it sig∣nifieth moche set by. Nihil antiquius, nothing more sette by or fauoured. Antiqua ratio, the maner of tyme passed. Antiqua terra, a noble countrey. Terra antiqua, potens armis, & uberae gle∣bae,Vergil. A noble countray puyssaunt in warres, and of a fertyle soyle. Antiqui homines, menne of the olde fas∣shyon. Antiquum obtinere, to keepe the olde fas∣shyon. Antiquus hospes, myne host of longe tyme. Antispasis, a pluckynge the contrary way. Antistes, itis, a prelate. Antisthenes, was a famouse Philosopher in Athenes, thre hundred syxty and syx yeres a∣fore the commynge of Christe, who to here Socrates, wente euerye daye on his feete frome Pyreus to Athenes, whyche was fyue myles out, and fyue myles home. He fyrste beganne the secte, callyd Cinici, but he dyd suppose the chiefe goodnesse to be in Vertue. Antistita, on abbesse or prioresse. Antistitium, prelacy or preeminence. Antistitor, he that hathe ouer other preemy∣nence, or that standeth before them that do worke,Galen. and controllyth them, a controller or ouerseer of workemen.Meth. Antitasis, a pluckynge backe. Antithesis, a fygue, where one letter is sette for an other, as olli for illi. Antitheton, a fygure, wherby one contrary is ioyned with an other.Ouidi{us} in Metamor Frigida pugnabant calidis, humentia siccis. Mollia cum duris, sine pondere habentia pondus: Colde thynges contended with theym that were hotte, moyste thynges with dry: Harde thynges with softe, lyght thynges with h∣uy, kepte not one note. Antium, a citie in the parte of Italye, callyd Latium, by the sea syde. Antlantes, ymages of antyque,Martial. set ouer doo∣res in the corners of the haunce. Antlia, a poumpe, or lyke thynge to drawe vp water. Antonius, a name, by the whyche was cal∣lyd dyuerse Emperoures of Rome. And a∣monge other, oone was callyd Antonius Pius, whyche succeded Hadryane, the yere of oure Lorde. 141. and reygned two and twentye yeres and three monethes with Au∣relius and Lucius. His progenytours were Spanyardes, as Capytolinus saythe. He was a meruayllous good manne, for after that he was Emperoure, he gouernyd with suche moderation and gentylnesse, that he was therefore callyd Pius, and father of the countraye, he was neuer cruelle for any pryuate or commune cause: he vsyd often this sayenge: He hadde leauer saue oone subiecte, thanne dystroye a thowsande en∣nemyes. For his deuoute lyuynge, sweete∣nesse of maners, mercye, Iustyce, and tem∣peraunce, he was compared to Numa. Wherefore manye kynges and pryncis of dyuerse nacyons, layenge warre aparte by his commaundemente, commytted all theyr contencyons vnto his Iudgemente, and helde theym therewith contented. For bothe loue and feare of hym, causyd theym to ex∣chewe warres, honourynge hym for his vertue as a god. Yet was not he soo desy∣rous of glory or rychesse, that he wold attayn thervnto by other mens damage. He dyed at the age of .70. yeres. Antonius Musa, was physition to Octauyane the Emperoure, whome he delyuered of a daungerouse syckenesse, and therefore the Emperoure causyd an Image to be made of brasse, and to be sette vp by the Image of Esculapius. There is nowe lyuynge a physytion of that name in ferrare, who is ryghte lykely to sette forthe a wonderfulle knowledge in physycke, as welle in specu∣lation as also in practyse, yf ambition or aua∣rice lette hym not, as it dothe other menne of greate lernynge. Antrax, acis, quycke syluer erthe. Antropomorphitae, a secte of heretyques, whyche affyrmed, that God had a body and members as a man had. This secte beganne in Egypte about the yere of our lorde. 380. Antrum, a denne vnder the erthe. Antuacutum,Pthol. the towne of Andwarp in Bra∣bande.
Anubis, was a god of the Egyptians, whiche they honoured for Mercurius in fygure of a dogge. Annuicallia, & Annuifera, bene herbes why∣che are drye, but hauynge rootes, whyche yerely do sprynge into newe braunches, as hyssope, penyroyall, sorell, fenelle, and dy∣uerse other, whose stalkes in wynter are dry, and seeme to be deade, but towarde sommer there sprynge grene leaues and stalkes out of the rootes. Anularius, a ieweller that sellyth rynges. Anulus, a rynge. Anus, nus, an olde wyfe. Anus, ni, an arse. Anxie, curiousely, with great peyne. Anxietas, care, heuynesse, anguysshe or so∣rowe. Anxietudo, idem. Anxifer, he that causeth sorowe. Anxius, a, um, carefull or heuy. Anxia oratio, an oration made with to mo∣che dilygence. Anxur, a citie callyd also Tarrasina. Anygrus, a ryuer in Thessalia. ¶A ANTE O. AOnia, a parte of the countreye callyd Boetia. Aonius, a, um, of that countrey. Aornos, a place whervnto no byrd may come. ¶A ANTE P. APage,Plautus. fy, fy. Apage, haud nos deceat fugitiuos imitari, Fye fye, it wyll not beseme vs to playe the mychers. al∣soo remoue, putte awaye, or dryue awaye. Also it hathe a sygnifycation of a more ve∣hemencye, as, Apage hanc caniculam, A∣waye with this bytche, or, hense away with this bytche. Apage à me, haue away from me. Apage te, gette the hense. Apage sis, lette be, gette the hense. Apagina,Galen. in definitio. is a cuttynge of the bone of, in the ouerpart apperynge, descendynge downe in the partes ioynynge to the rupture. Or it is whan the ende of a bone, where he is ioyned with an other bone,Galenus Meth. 6. is broken. Apalaestris, he that can neyther wrastle, nor do any other maystry. Apamia, was a cytie in the lesse Asia, through the myddell wherof ranne the ryuer callyd Marsia. It was the name also of an nother citie in Parthia. Aparme, an herbe, whiche somme menne sup∣pose to be burres, somme that herbe whiche is callyd Rubea tinctorum, in englysshe madder. Apathes, were philosophers, whiche of a fro∣warde and stubbourne nature, helde opiny∣on, that a wyse manne had none affections or passyons. Apedes, a byrde, whose fete be so lyttell, that they seeme to haue none, I suppose they be martlettes. Apelles, was a name, whereby the Iewes were callyd in derysion, as it were Sine pel∣le, bycause the skynne of theyr instrumente was cutte of, whanne they were circum∣cysed. Apelles, was also an herelyke in Grece, the yere of oure lorde .174. whose heresye was, that he knewe not the god, whiche he wor∣shypped. And that Christe was not god in verye dede, but a fantasye apperynge to men as a man. Apelles, an excellent paynter in the tyme of great Alexander, borne in the yle of Cos, of whome onely Alexander wolde be paynted. Whan he dyed, he lefte an ymage of Venus vnperfourmyd, whome neuer manne after∣warde durste enterprise to fynyshe, for the in∣comparable beauitie therof. Apello, lere, pulsum, to amoue or put of from a thynge. Apeptia .i. cruditas, cruditie or lacke of good dygestion. Aper, apri, a bore. It is also a fysshe, whiche hath a voyce. Aperio, ui, ire, to open, to dysclose, to ex∣pounde. Aperte, openly, playnly, euidently, withoute dissimulation or colour. Apertus, a, um, open, playn, euident, discoue∣ted, without colour or cloke. Apes, uel apis, a bee. Apesus, untis, a mountayne in Grece. Apex, icis, the crowne of the heade; the toppe of euerye thynge, It sommetyme signifieth a mytar. Apexabo, a puddyng, called a bluddyng. Aphaeresis, a figure, whereby a letter or silla∣ble is taken from a worde, as Pone metum, for Depone metum, Mi for Mihi, Tun for Tune. Aphiae, a kynde of litle fysshes in brokes lyke vnto gougins, whiche are supposed to haue none other begynnyng but of abundaunce of rayn: for they be found all tymes of the yere, and the more that the water is troubled, the better they are. Plinius calleth this fyshe A∣pua. Theodorus nameth hym Aplua. I sup∣pose they be dacis. Aphilos, he that hath no frend. Aphracta, a litle barke or brygantine.
Aphractum, a kynde of shyppes, whyche the Rhodians vsyd. Aphrica maior, the thyrde part of the worlde, whyche is seuered frome Europa on the east by the ryuer of Nylus: on the weaste by the pyllars of Hercules. The hyther parte is nowe callyd Barbarye, and the people Mores. The inner parte is callyd Lybia and Aethiopia. Aphrica minor, is in this wyse bounded. On the weaste it hathe Numidiam, on the easte Cyrenaicam, on the northe the sea callyd Mediterraneum. In this countrey was the noble citie of Carthage. Aphricanus, was a nase gyuen to two no∣ble Romaynes callyd Scipiones, bycause the one vanquysihed Hanniball, and subdewed Carthage: The other afterwarde Carthage rebellyng, subuerted and distroyed it vtterly. Aphricus uentus, a southwynde. Aphrodisia, dayes dedycate to Venus, or Ve∣neryall pastymes. Aphronitrum, the fome of salte peter, callyd of the Arabiens Baurach. Aphtha, is an exulceration or breakyng out in the mouthes of chyldren, whiche do soue. Apianus, a, um, that wherin bees doo delyte. Apiarium, the place where as hyues be sette. Apiarius, he that nouryssheth bees. Apiastra, a byrde whiche dothe deuour bees. Apiastrum, an herbe calllyd bawlme, also melyssa. Apiceones, sheepe hauynge small bodyes, and lyttell woulle. Apicius, was a Romayne, whyche delyted in delycate meates, soo moche that he professed cookery, and infected Rome with gluttonye, whyche before was the myrro of tempe∣raunce. And whanne he hadde consumed in gourmandyse Millies sestertium, whyche do amounte after the computacyon of Sena∣lis, to two myllyons and fyue hundred thou∣sande crownes, whyche is after oure rate, fyue hunderde foure score and three thow∣sande fyftye and fowre poundes. Whanne he grewe in dette, and made his reckenyng, that there was lefte but Centies sesterti∣um,Seneca. whyche amounteth to this rate in our money, fyftye and nyne thousande fyue hun∣derde and fyue poundes, and eyghte shyl∣lynges, fearynge that in that substaunce he shoulde lyue in penurye, he wyllyngly drank poyson and dyed. Apicula, a yonge bee. Apiculus, the dyminutiue of apex. Apidanus, a ryuer in Thessalia. Apina, a trysle. Apinae, nuttes without shales. Apinus, a tree wherof commeth pytche. Apionia mala, rounde appulles, whyche I take to be they, that are callyd Pome∣royall. Apios, wylde radyshe. Apium,Io. Agric. properly our common persely. Apiria, infynytenesse, where there is none ende. Apis, callyd also Serapis & Osyris, whome the Egyptianes honouryd for theyr chyefe God. Aplanes, the parte of heauen, whyche ne∣uer moueth. Apluda, wheaten branne. Aplustre, & aplustria, orum, the tackelynge of a shyppe. Apnoea, the vyce of a shorte wynde or breathe. Apocalypsis, sios, a reuelation. Apocle, counsayllours of the pryuye coun∣sayle. Apocope, a fygure, by the whyche a letter or syllable is taken awaye, as peculi, fo peculij. Apocopi, men beinge gelded. Apocroti, men that be harde and myserable in lyuynge. Apocryphi libri, bokes, the authors whereof be vnknowen. Apocryphus, a, um, hydde, not knowen. Apocynon, a lyttell bone in the lefte syde of a frogge, wherewith it is supposed, thyn∣ges may be done, whiche were not expedient to be openly knowen. Apodixis, an euidence, a demonstration. Apodyterium, the place by a bayne, where they whyche be bayned, doo putte of theyr clothes. Apogaei, wyndes that doo aryse oute of the grounde. Apogeum, an habytacyon vnder the ground. Apolactizo, are, to stryke with the heeles. al∣so to despyse or sette at nought. Apollinares ludi, playes made in the honour of Apollo. Apollinaris, an herbe callid Henbane. Apollinaris, a name of a manne, whereby was callydde oone whyche was bysshoppe of Hierapolis, a cytie in the yere of our lorde .145. who was a greatte ler∣nyd manne, and wrate a greatte booke of the faythe of Chryste, an nother warke a∣gaynste the Gentyles, dedycate vnto Mar∣cus Antonius the Emperour. Alsoo agaynste the heretyques callyd Cataphrigae. An no∣ther of the same name was bysshoppe of Laodicea, whyche alsoo was a noble ler∣nyd manne, and wrate thyrtye bookes for oure faythe agaynste Porphyrium▪
Not withstandynge he felle into heresye, say∣inge: that Christe receyued not flesshe of the vyrgyn Mary, but that in the acte of his in∣carnation some parte of the worde was con∣uertyd into flesshe. He sayde that Christis sowle was not of that parte, whiche was ra-tionall, but onely of that parte, whyche kept the body lyuynge, and therfore in his Incar∣nation he toke oonely the bodye and not the sowle. Apollinea, a citie in Lumbardy, nowe callyd Vercellae. Apollo, inis, whome the Gentyles honouryd for God, referrynge to hym the inuention of Musyke, of poetry, and of physyke it is som¦tyme taken for the sonne. Apollonia, a blessyd vyrgyn borne in Alexan∣dria, who for confessyng the fayth of Christ, the yere of our lorde .265. had all her teethe pullyd out of her heade, and after, whanne the tyraunt menacid her, that except she wold blaspheme Christe, she shulde be bourned in a great fyre, whyche was therfore preparyd, After that she had aduysed her self, she brake from the mynisters, and wyllyngly lepte in∣to the fyre, whyche was greatte and horry∣ble. Her body is buried at Derdona in Lum∣bardye. Apolloniatae, people of Apollonia. Apollonia, is also the name of a citie in Epi∣ro, nowe callyd Valonia, an other in Creta, an other in Siria, also an yle by Thracia. Apollonius, a phylosopher borne in Grecia, aboute the yere of our lorde .90. This man from his infancye soo profytted in lernynge, that beynge but a chylde, was a great phy∣losopher, and folowed the seete of Pytha∣goras, gooynge alwaye in lynnen, and ne∣uer eatynge any thynge, whyche hadde lyfe. And not withstandynge that he was excellentely lernyd in the mystycalle know∣ledge of phylosophye and naturall magyke, yet to haue more knowledge, he went into E∣gypt, Persia, Ethiope, and Inde, and lernyd of the Bragmanes, and Gymnosophistae, and retourned into Grece and Rome, where he was hadde in greatte admyration for the meruaylles, whyche he shewed, and at the last beynge aboue the aege of eyghtye yeres, he beynge in a greatte assemblye of people, sodeynely was conueyed awaye, no manne knoweth howe or whyther, as Phi∣lostratus saythe, who wryteth his lyfe. Alsoo sayncte Hierome makyth mencyon of hym in his prologue to the olde Testament more haboundauntlye. There were of this name three greatte physytions, oone the dy∣scyple of Erasistratus, whoo fyrste of any physytion wrate of the partes of mannes bodye, he was callyd Apollonius Memphi∣tes. The other two were of Antioche, the father and the sonne. Apologia, a defence or aunswere to a re∣buke. Apologo, aui, are, to requyre or aske. Apologus, a fable wherin beastes or trees do speake. Apomel, uel apomeli, a drynke made with honye combes sodden in honye, vntylle the waxe be cleane skymmed awaye, and than koolyd, be putte in a fayre erthen potte. Apophasis, a denyenge of a thynge, also an in∣uentorye. Apophlegmatismus, a medycine, whyche cau∣syth one to vomyte vp fleume. Apophoretum, a presente.Gal. in itroduct. Apoplexia, uel Apoplecticus morbus, is a syckenesse ingendryd of haboundaunce of grosse humoures, whyche doo fylle those Receptoryes or vesselles of the heade, from whense commeth feelynge and mouynge of the bodye. And therefore they whyche haue this dysease, be depryued of felynge, speche, and mouynge. Apoplecticus, he whyche hathe the sayde syckenesse. Apophthegma, atis, a shorte and quycke sen∣tence. Aporeta, caskettes or coffers, wherein were putte secrete thynges, or mooste precyouse iewelles. Aporia, doubte, necessitie. Aposiopesis, where somwhat is lefte out, spe∣cyally in speakyng, and left to the coniecture of them that be herers. Apostasia, rebellyon or forsakynge of a mans profession or aliegiaunce. Apostata, a rebelle or runnagate. It is nowe vsyd for theym, whyche do forsake the rely∣gyon of Chryste. Apostema, an impostume, wherein corrupted humours haue recourse in any parte of the bodye. Aposteparnismos, is a cittynge awaye of the bone with the wounde. Apostolus, an apostle. it proprely sygnifieth a messanger. Apostrophe, a conuersyon in speakynge from one to an nother. Apotelesma, a pronostication or declaration of the sygnifications of sterres at a mannes natiuitie, or the begynnynge of any thynge, what therof shall happen. Apotheca, a wyne sellar or shoppe, wherein thynges be sette to sale, a store howse. Apotheosis, a dedycation or consecration pro∣prely of men into goddis. Apoximenos, he whyche wypeth away fylthe
from ones bodye. Apozema, a decoction of water with herbes or barley, whiche the grekes vsed in stede of our syrupes. Apparatus, tus, apparaylynge or deckynge. Apparatus belli, preparation for warres, artyllery. Appare, rui, rere, to appiere. Apparere quaestioni, to serue processe, as ser∣geantes and baylyffes done. Apparitores, offycers of Iustyce, attendynge on the great ministers, to sommon or attache whom they wyll commaunde. Apparitura, the offyce of a sergeaunt or bay∣lyffe. Apparo, aui, are, to apparayle or trymme, to be redy to do a thyng, to prepare or ordeyne. Appellatio, a namynge or appealynge to a hygher iudge. Appello, aui, are, to name or calle familyarlye to me. Also Vipian the greatte lawyer wylle haue it to sygnify to wowe a mayden to haue her virginitie. sommetyme it sygnifieth to arryue, sommetyme to appeale to a hygher Iudge. Appellare blande, to talke pleasauntelye with oone. Appellare Caesarem, to appeale to the Em∣perour. Appellare literas, to pronounce letters. Appello, puli, pulsum, to arryue. sometyme to applye or sette the mynde, to dyrecte. also to approche. Appellere animum ad aliquid, to sette the mynde to somewhat. Appendeo, dis, dere, to hange by or nygh. Appendicula, a diminutiue of Appendix. Appendix, that whyche hangeth at an nother thynge. Appendeo, dis, dere, to hange vp, to way in a balaunce or beame. Appenninus, the parte of the mountaynes of Alpes, whyche begynne by Geane, and diui∣deth Italye, and extendeth vnto the sea be∣twene Naples and Sicile. Appetens, desyrous of a thynge. Appetentia, inordynate appetite. Appetitio, idem. Appetitus, appetite. Appeto, tij, tere, to desyre moche, to goo to, sommetyme it sygnifieth at hande. Dies ap∣petebat, The daye was comme, or at hande. sommetyme to wounde or stryke at, as Le∣uans se alis, os oculos{que} hostis rostro & un∣guibus appetit, Rysynge vp with his wyn∣ges, his talons and beake, he wounded the face and eyes of hym that faughte on the o∣ther parte. Sommetyme to assaye to doo a thynge. Appiades, were amonge the paynymes these goddesses, Venus, Pallas, Pax, Concordia, Vesta. Of these doo make mention Ouidius de arte amandi .2. & de remedio amoris. & Tullius .3. epist. fam. Appia uia, the name of a hygh way at Rome. Appiana poma, a kynde of appulles as greate as quynces, and hauynge as greate a fauour as they. Appianus, a noble hystorian borne in Alexādry, who wrate most excellēt warkes of the ciuile warres of the Romayns, which bokes I wil counsell all them that be studious in Tullies warkes to rede diligently, whereby they shall vnderstand many thingis, that without them shall not be well vnderstande. Appion, a famous grammaryan borne in E∣gypte, agaynst whome Iosephus wrate his warke De antiquitate Iudaeorum. Applaudere, to moue handes or feete for ioye, or to beat any thing to the grounde. Applico, aui, are, uel applicui applicere, to ioyne to, to lay or sette to, or to applye. Applicatus, ioyned to, sommetime occupied a∣boute a thinge. Applicat primum ad Chrysidis patrem se, He first made repaire to Chrisis father. Applodo, plosi, dere, supra applaudere. Appono, sui, nere, to putte or adde to, or sette to, to appoint. Apporto, aui, are, to brynge to. Apposco, scere, to aske more. Apposite, aptely, conueniently. Appositus, a, um, put to, or set to. sommetyme it signifieth conuenient, or to the purpose. Appotus, well weatte with drinke. Appraehendo, dere, to take, to attache, to laye hande on a thynge. Appraehendere palmam, to gette the victory. Apprime, chiefly, principally. Approbo, aui, are, to approue or allowe. Approbus, very honeste. Appropero, aui, are, to make haste to come. Appropinquatio, an approchynge or dra∣wynge to. Appropinquo, are, to aproch, to draw nigh to. Appulsus, us, comyng of beastes to watrynge. Apricari, to sytte or goo abrode in the ayre, or in the sonne. Apricus, a place set agaynst the sonne. Apricus dies, a sunny daye. Aprilis, the moneth of Apryll. Aprinus, bores flesshe. Apronia, an herbe callyd alsoo Vitis nigra, a blacke vyne, whyche rounneth vppe, and wyndeth about trees and stalkes of herbes, and hathe a leafe lyke an yuye, but great∣ter, and bearyth bearyes in clusters, whyche at the begynnynge are greene, and blacke
whan they be rype: alsoo the roote is blacke without, and within is yelowe lyke boxe. Aprono in genua,Plinius li. 24. ca. 17. I knele on my knees. Aproxis, an herbe, the roote wherof kyndleth fyre farre of. Aprugna, the venyson of a wylde boore. Aprunum uel Aprugnum callum, the brawne of a bore. Aprurius, & aprugnus, a, um, of a bore. Aprutium, a part of Italy, the people wherof were sometyme callyd Samnites, agaynste whome the auncient Romaynes hadde longe tyme warres. In it be these cities, Aquileia, Adria, Sulmo, Ortona, Arpinū, Aquinum. Apsis, the name of a cart whele. Apsorus, an yle in the Venetian sea. Aptera, a cytie in the countrey of Licia, and a towne in Crete. Aptitudo, aptenesse. Apto, aui, are, to ioyne, to agree two thynges togyther. Aprus, a, um, apte, agreable, mete, necessary. Apud, at, whan it is ioyned with a person, it sygnifieth with. Apud eum est primus, he is his princypell mynyon.Teren. Apud me priores partes habet, he maye do moste with me.Teren. Facio te apud illum deum, I wyll make hym to take the for a god. Per eam te obsecramus ambae,Terent. si ius, si fas est, uti aduersa eius per te tecta, tacita{que} apud om∣nes sint, We bothe desyre you, on her behalf, yf it may be by any meanes possible, that by your policie, her mysfortune may be keuered, and from all men kepte secrete. Apud aliquem mentiri, to make a lye to one. Apud nos imperium tuum est, we remem∣ber your commaundement. Apud animum meum statuo, I determyne in my mynde.Salust. Apud forum, in the market. Apud aedes, in the howse. Apud horcum, in helle. Apud quem, in whose presence. Apud maiores nostros,Ci. in off. in the tyme of our forefathers. Apud se non est, he is out of his wyt, or he is not in his ryght mynde. Vix sum apud me, ita animus cōmotus est metu, spe, gaudio, mirando hoc tanto, tam repentino bono, I am well nygh out of my wy, my mynde is so vexed with feare, hope, and ioye, with this good chaunce, whiche is soo wonderfull, soo great, and so sodaynly hapnyd. Apud te sis, thynke what thou haste to doo, remember thy selfe. Apud ignem,Salust. by the fyre. Apud aquam, by the water. Apud quem, by whome. Apud cum, by hym. Apud te exemplum experiendi habes,Plautus. non eges foris, Ye haue the experyence at home, ye nede not to seke for it abrode. Apuleius, a phylosopher borne in Aphrica, not withstanding he florished in Athenes, & after wrate in latin diuers stiles, as De uita & mo¦ribus Platonis, & de Deo Socratis, in a ryght eloquent and temperate style. In his bokes callyd Floridorum, & De asino au∣reo. he wrate so affectately and flouryshing∣ly, that he is therfore more to be mocked than praysed. He made also a ryght commendable boke of the names and vertues of herbes, he was about the yere of our lorde .300. Apulia, is a countrey whyche is a part of Ita∣lye, bordyng on the sea callyd Mare Adria∣icum. This countrey is populous, and hath in it many townes and castelles, and is a∣boundaunt of corne, wyne, and oyle, and good coursers for the warre. The chiefe cy∣tie or see therof is Brundusium, there is alsoo the mount of saynt Michael callyd Garga∣rum. This countreye is callyd also by other names, as Iapegia, Messapia, Calabria, and Salentina, and the people are callyd Apuli. Apus, odis, a byrde lyke a swalowe, but he hath larger wynges, and is moste commonly about the sea costes, where alwaye he eyther flyeth or houereth in the ayre, and bredeth in a rocke. Apyrena, swete pomegranates. Apyrotus, a stone that no fyre may dammage, or deface. ¶A ANTE Q. AQua, water. Aquae Augustae, a towne in Gascoyns callyd Baiona. Aquae Calidae, a citie in England callid Bath. Aquaelicium, rayne water vsyd in medicine. Aquae Sextiae, a towne in Prouance now cal∣lyd Aquensis. Aquagium, a cundyte. Aquaintercus, water whiche runneth betwene the skynne and the fleshe, the dropsye. Aqualiculus, a lyttell trough. Aqualicus, the panche. Aquaricola, a place wherin water is caste. Aquarioli, boyes whiche do attende vppon co∣mon harlottes. Aquariolum, a washynge place. Aquarium, idem. Aquarius, one of the .xii. sygnes. Aquarius, a, um, pertaynynge to water, a aquarius sulcus, a forowe, by the which wa∣ter is drayned. Aquaicus, that whiche haunteth the water, or lyueth therin.
Aquatilis, the same. Aquatio, a watringe. Aquatus, a, um, that wherinto water is put. Vinum aquarum, alayed wyne. Aqueus, a, um, watry. Aquifolia, a wyld medlar, or a tree lyke a wild medlar. Aquila, an egle. It is also a fyshe of the kind of them, whiche haue gristelles. Aquila, was also a name of a man borne in the countrey of Pontus, of a gentile be commen a iewe, whiche translated the olde testament the seconde tyme out of Hebrew into Greke. Aquilegium, a gourde of water, whiche com∣meth of rayne. Aquileia, uel Aquilegia, an aunciente citie in the part of Italy called Forum Iulij, the whi¦che citie was sometyme of suche estimation, that therin was kept the great marte of all Europa. And the great emperour Octauian delyted principally to repayre thyther often. Afterward it was dystroyed by the Gothes, and the inhabitantes fled thense, and were the fyrste, whiche beganne to buylde the citie of Venice. But nowe it is soo symple, that none dwell there but fyshers and a fewe shep¦herdes. Aquilex, he that sercheth for water, or con∣uayeth it. Aquilifer, the standard bearer of the Romains Aquilo, the northeast wynde. Aquilus color, russet. Aquiminaria, all water pottes. Aquitania, a countrey, whiche is accounted to be the thyrde parte of Fraunce. It hathe on the west the occean sea, on the northe the ry∣uer of Loyre, or as Caesar wryteth, the riuer of Gerond, on the easte the parte of Fraūce called Lugdunensis, on the southe the moun∣taynes called Pyrenei, which diuide Fraūce from Spayne. Albeit a portion therof, con∣teyninge Cascoigne, Foix, Bigor, & a fewe countreyes mo, is called Aquitania, in En∣glyshe Guyen. Aquo, aui, are, to fetche or beare water. Aquor, quari, to fetche or prouyde water. Aquosus, a, um, full of water. Aquula, a lyttell water. A, ANTE R. ARA, an aulter. Arabarches, a lorde of Arabia. Arabes, in the syngular noumber A∣rabs, the people of Arabia: all be it in Ara∣bia, are sundry sortes of people, whiche haue dyuerse names, as, Sabaei, Charaeni, Ata∣ceni, Gebbanitae, Edumaei, Atramitae, Acho¦meni, Troglodytae, Saraceni, uel Syraceni. Arabia, in Hebrew named Saba, is a countrey in Asia, whiche is diuided in to thre regions, Petream, desertam, & felicem. Petrea whi∣che signifyeth stonye, marcheth on Aegypt and Iudeam, and of Plinius is called Na∣bathea, the chiefe city wherof is Petra, whi∣che nowe is called Arach, in holy scripture it is called Petra deserti. By this countrey pas∣sed the chylderne of Israell whan they went out of Egypt. It is (as Strabo wryteth) playne, enuyroned with rockes of a greate heyghte, in the whiche be many springes of freshe water, without that circute towarde Iudea, the more parte of the countrey is de∣serte and without water. There is the grete mount or hyll of Sina, called of Ptolomeus Melanes, where the olde lawe was gyuen to Moyses. and also where the body of the ho∣ly vyrgin sayncte Catharine is buryed. also an other mounte called Casius, where the great Pompius is buryed. Arabia deserta, whiche Strabo calleth Saenetis, hath on the south the mountaygnes of Arabia foelix, on the north Mesopotamia, on the west Petrea, the people of this countrey haue no certayne habitation, and do dwell in tentes, hauynge no houses. Arabia foelix, on the south, lyeth betwene the two seas Arabicum & Persicū, whiche is so plentyful, that it bryngeth forth corne and fruites twyse in the yere, hauynge plenty of all fruite and cattell, excepte horses mules, and swyne: all foules, excepte geese, cockes, and hennes. Also there groweth all kyndes of spice and swete gummes, as fran∣kensence, and myrre. The townes are vn∣walled, bycause the people doo alwaye lyue in peace. Arabrica, a towne in Portugall. Arachne, the name of a woman, whiche fyrste inuented spynnynge of lynnen, and makynge of nettes. It is also taken for lynnen yarne, or the woufe of clothe. Arachneus, a lyttell beaste, whiche goeth a softe pace. Arachnion, fyne threde. Arachosia, a countraye in Asia. Arachthus, a great ryuer in the vttermost bor∣ders of Epirus. Araciae ficus, fygges brode and whyte, whiche do growe on a lyttell stalke. Aracynthus, a mountain in Boeotia in Grece, where Minerua was specially honoured. Aradus, a citie in the yle of Tripolis towarde Siria, where (as Possidonius writeth) was sene a serpent lye deade, that was in lengthe one hundred and .xxv. pacis, and of suche greatnesse, that he moughte deuoure a man on horsebacke, and euery seale of his skynne was greater than any shylde.
Aram, was brother to Abraham. Aranea, a copweb. somtyme a spyder. Araneolus, a yonge or lyttell spyder. Araneus, a spyder. It is also a fysshe of the greatnesse of a gougeon, in coloure dyuerse, hauynge on his backe nyghe to his head .iii. prickes. Arar, a countrey in Fraunce called Sone. Araris, a ryuer in Fraunce, called nowe Sa∣gona, whiche commeth in to the ryuer of Rone, not farre from Lyons. This ryuer is so quiete, that vnneth it maye be perceyued whiche way it runneth. Ouer this ryuer Iu∣lius Cesar made a brydge, with his souldy∣ars in one day. Ararus, a ryuer in Scithia, whiche runneth throughe the realme of Armeny. Arath, a Countreye in Armeny wonderfull fertyle. Arator, a ploughe man. Sometyme a plough oxe. Aratro, aui, are, to ploughe eftsones land that is sowen, to make the grounde fat. Aratrum, a ploughe. Aratus, a poete of Asia, in the yere before the incarnation .246. amonge dyuers other war¦kes, wrate certayne verses of heuen, and the sterres, whiche warke was translated by Tulli, and also by Germanicus, the son ad∣optyue of Tiberius the emperour. Araxes, a ryuer in Armenia, ouer the whiche the great kynge Alexander made a brydge, and lyke wyse dyd Augustus the Emperour. Arbea, a citie in Iudea, where Adam and o∣ther three patriarhes were buryed. Arbela, a countrey in Persia, where the great Alexander vaynquished kynge Darius kinge of Persia. Arbiter, tri, an arbitratoure. Arbitrarium, arbitrabic. Arbitratus, tus, arbiterment or iudgement. Arbitratu meo, in my iudgement, sometyme it signifieth at my pleasure. Arbitri, they whiche are presente. Sometyme wytnesses. Arbitris remotis mecum loquebatur: They whiche were present, beinge commaunded a∣waye, he talked with me. Arbitrium, idem quod Arbitratus. Arbitror, to trowe, to iudge, or awarde. Arbor, & Arbos, a tree. Arborator, a lopper of trees. Arborescere, to waxe to a tree. Arboreus, a, um, of a tree. Arboses, olde wryters vsed for Arbos. Arbusto, aui, are, to set a fielde with trees. Arbustum, a place where trees be set, proper∣lye elmes, wythy, or salowe. It maye be ta∣ken for an orcharde, or a hopyarde, or a vine yarde, where vynes do growe vp by trees. It is also a vyne that runneth vp in heyghte or by a pole. Arbutum, an appull called a wyldynge. Arbutus, a wyldynge tree. Arca, a coffer. Arca Noe, was a greatte vessell, whiche god commanded Noe to make, to the intent that he, his wyfe, his thre sonnes, and theyr wy∣ues mought be preserued from the vniuersal floudde,Philo. an∣tiq. li. 1. the yere of the age of the worlde. 1652. and before the incarnatian 2310. yeres. This vessell conteyned in lengthe. 300. cu∣bites of geometry, whiche after the exposi∣tion of sayncte Augustine, were thre hundred perche, euerye cubite of geometrye, beynge syxe common cubites: in breade it was .50. perches, and in depenesse frome the hatches to the bottome thyrty perches, from the hat∣ches vpwarde one perche. Noe at the tyme of the fynyshinge of this arc, was of the age of syxe hundred yeres. Berosus writeth, that after the floudde, this arke remayned on a mountayn in Armenia called Cordiei, where he in his tyme sawe parte therof. Arca testamenti, was a coffer or cheste made by Moyses in the deserte, wherein were put the table of the olde lawe, the rodde of Moy¦ses, wherwith he shewed meruayles, and parte of Manna, whiche god rayned in the deserte. This art was made of stronge wod and soote, and was keuered as well within as without with fyne golde, and on the top were two ymages of aungelles Cherubim: whiche ark was in lengthe fyue cubites, and in brede thre cubytes. This was also called Arca foederis. Archades, be people of the countraye of Ar∣cadia, whiche be also called Prosilini, as Ly∣cophron saythe, signyfienge that they were afore the mone, for as moche as at the tyme of the floudde of Deucaleon, they saued theym selfe on the mountaynes, and therfore were acompted the moste auncient people. Arcadia, a countrey in Greece, set in the myd∣dell of Peloponesus or Morea, soo called of Arcas the sonne of Iupiter, whoo reigned there. It was also called Pelasgia, & Par∣rhasia, & Lycaonia: there was fyrste inuen∣ted the bagpyde. Also there is the greatte fenne callyd Lernea, where the monster Hy∣dra was slayne of Hercules, and the greate ryuer called Erymanthus, and a mountayne of the same name. There is also founde the stone called Abeston, whiche beinge ones het maye neuer be quenched, and is of the co∣lour of yron. Arcadicus, a, um, of Arcadia.
Arcanè, secretely. Arcanum, a thinge secrete, or of fewe knowē. Archas, the sonne of Iupiter and Calisthona, doughter of Lycaon, was the fyrste kynge of Archadia, before the incarnation. 1470. ye∣res. This man herynge that his mother (be∣inge a virgin consecrate) was defloured by Iupiter, whan he was begotten, and therfore expelled of the other vingines, wolde haue slayne his mother, who being aferde of him, fled in to the wildernesse, & did hyde her selfe, tyll at the laste she and her sonne were recon∣ciled by Iupiter. Afterwarde they bothe be∣inge deade, the Paynims fayned that they were translated amonge the sterres, and set nigh to the Pole artike, and the mother was called Vrsa minor, and the son Vrsa maior. Arcâtus, a, um, bent lyke a bowe. Arceo, cui, cêre, to strayne, to put of, to dryue awaye. Arcera, a horse lytter. Arcesilas, a philosopher of the secte of Acade∣mici, who was the scholer of Crantor. There was also of that name a kunnynge keruer of ymages, specially the ymage of Diana. Arcesso, to accuse, to call for. Arcessere, to purchase or get a thinge. Causam sibi mortis arcessere: To be the cause of his deathe. Archarius, a treasorer, or cofferer. Archelaus, a mannes name, of the which were dyuerse famous menne. One was a philoso∣pher, disciple to Anaxagoras, borne at Mi∣letum, and mayster to Socrates, and was the fyrste that broughte naturall philosophy out of Ionia, to Athenis. Of this name were dyuerse kinges of Cappadocia, also one was kynge of Macedonia, whom Plato calleth a tyrant, and was slayne by one Cratena his minion. Of this man these thynges be remē∣bred, that whan he hyred the famouse payn∣tour Zeuzis to paynt his palayce: Socrates sayde meryly: that he dyd it to prouoke men to resorte vnto hym, althoughe they wolde not come for his sake, at the least waye they shuld gladly come to beholde his fayre house. Also whan he had with hym at soupper dy∣uerse lerned menne, a poete there desyred of hym a summe of moneye, he caused it to be brought to hym, and forthwith gaue it to Eu¦ripides, who dyd not aske it, sayinge: Thou arte worthye to take it, and he to desyre it. Archemorus, sonne of Lycurgus kyng of Ne∣mêa, slayne by an adder as his noryce layde hym in the gras by the ryuers syde. for whose sake were made playes called Nemêi. He was also called Opheltes. Archeptholomeus, was charyot man to He∣ctor of Troy. Archesilaus, a philosopher of the countreye of Acolide, who fyrste inuented and vsed the fourme of disputation by opposynge and an∣swerynge, as it is nowe vsed, he brought in the secte called Media academica. And al∣thoughe he were a wyse man, yet dyed he by immoderate drynkynge of wyne. Archerypus, the fyrst example or paterne. Archias, called also A. Licimus, was a poete of Antioche, moche fauoured and honoured of the noble men of Rome, speciallye of Lucul∣lus and Tully, who defended hym in a no∣ble oration, where he speketh moche to the commendation of poetry. Archiater, tri, a chiefe phisition. Archidâmus, a noble man of Sparta, who be∣inge demaunded, howe moche money wolde serue to the warre of Peloponesus, aunswe∣red, sayinge: that warre foughte for noo certayntie. Archigenes, the name of a famouse phisition. It is also he that wolde be taken for the wy∣sest of his kynne. Archigrammatêus, a chauncellour or chiefe se¦cretary. Archilochus, a poete of Lacedemonia, whiche wrate in the kynde of verses called Iambici, wherin he was so vehement, that where Li∣cambes his wiues father, toke from hym his wyfe, and maryed her to an other manne, he so rated hym with versis, that he compelled hym for sorow and indignation to hange him selfe. He was afore the incarnation of Christ 650. yeres. Archimagirus, chiefe cooke. Archimedes, a famouse geometricien of Si∣racusis in Sicile, who by his arte resysted a longe tyme Marcellus captaygne of the Ro∣maynes, who besieged the Citie of Siracu∣sis: But fynally the citie beinge wonne, and he sente for by Marcellus, was founde dra∣wynge fygures of geometry in the grounde, wherto he was soo attentife, that whan he was boden to come to Marcellus, he aun∣swered: that whan he hadde finished the fy∣gure, whiche he was in makynge, he wolde come: at the whiche aunswere the messager disdaynynge, slewe Archimedes, for the whi∣che Marcellus was excedyngly sory. Some do suppose, that he fyrste inuented the ma∣kynge of materiall spheris, and the globe. He also made a doue of wood, whiche had in it suche equall poyse, that it wold hange in the ayre by a longe space. Also he made an horo∣loge, wherin mought be sene, the true course of the heauens and spheris. He was afore the incarnation about .192. yeres. Archimimus, the mayster or chiefe of the players.
Architas Tarentinus, a noble philosopher of the discipline of Pythagoras, and captayne of the armye of the Tarentines inuyncible. He was master of Plato in geometry, whom he also delyuered from Dionisius the tirant of Sicile. He was afore the incarnation of Christe about .370. yeres. Architectonice, ces, idē quod Architectura. Architectonicus, a, um, perteynynge to diuy∣synge of buildynge. Architector, & Architectus, a diuiser of buil∣dynge, or a maister of the warkes. Architector, aris, ari, to make craftelye, or to deuyse buyldynge. Architectura, the counnynge of diuysynge of buildynge. Architriclinus, mayster of the feaste. Archiuum, the treasory of minumentes and e∣uidences belongynge to a kynge or a citie. Archon, was the chiefe dignitie in Athenes. Archiontici, certayne heretikes, whiche affyr∣med, that the vnyuersall states of thynges was not made by god, but by prynces, and they also denyed the resurrecton of the body. Arcirna, a lyttell carte, a whele barowe. Arconicum, a minorall called Arsenyke. Arctium,Io. Agric. the great burre. Arcto, aui, are, to strayne often tymes. Arctophylax, a certayne figure of sterres, fo∣lowynge Charles wayne, called also Bootes. Arctos, a fygure of sterres called Charles wayne. also Vrsa maior. Arctous, & arcticus, a, um, of the Northe. Arctus, a, um, streyght. Arcturus, a sterre, whiche is at the tayle of that, which is called Arctos, or ursa maior. Arcuatim, bent lyke a bowe. Arcuatus, fascioned lyke a bowe. Arcubalista, a crossebowe. Arcula, a lyttell coffer or casket. Arculus, a roll that women do weare on their heades, to beare water or mylke easelye. Arcuor, ari, to be made bente lyke a bowe, or to be vaulted. Arcus, a bowe, the vault of a roufe. Ardea, a byrde called an heron. It is also the name of a citie in Latio, beinge from Rome about .xxii. miles, wherein was the palayce of Turnus, whom Aeneas vaynquished, and the people there were called Rutuli. Ardeates, people of the citie of Ardea. Ardelio, a busy man medlyng with many thin¦ges, and can skyll of nothynge. Ardens, tis, hastye in doynge, quycke wytted burnynge, ardent. Ardenter, feruently, Ardeo, arsi, dêre, to burne, to loue ardentely or excedyngely, to make hast, to be consumed, to desyre: also to shine. Tyrio{que} ardebat mu∣rice laena. His mantell dyd shyne of fine pur∣ple of Tyre. Ardêre cupiditate, to couet ardently. Ardêre iracūdia, to be inflamed with anger. Ardêre maxime flagitio,Plautus: to haue done, or be infamed of a myscheuous deede. Ardeola, an hernsewe. It is also a byrd, wher∣of there be .iii. kyndes: One is called Pella, whiche ingendreth with moche dyffycultie, and lyke wyse sytteth: in the tyme of trea∣dynge the bloud yssueth out of his eyes The other is called Alba, or in a greke name leu∣ce, whiche amounteth to as moche. The .iii. is called Stellaris or piger. Ardesco, to be hasty. Arduenna, a great wod in Gallia belgica, whi∣che taketh in space .500. myles, comming frō the ryuer of the Rhene throughe the lande of Luke vnto the citie of Tournay. Ardum, olde wryters vsed for arduum. Arduus, hygh and difficult, harde to come to. Area, a large place in a citie kept euer cleane. where marchauntes do assemble, as I haue sene in diuerse cities in Almayne. Also it is e∣uery place marked out to buylde or to set an house in. Also a floore where corne is thras∣shed. It is more ouer a quarter of a garden, wherin herbes be sowen or set. Areator, a threshar. Arefacio, to make drye. Arelate, a citie in Fraunce called Orleaunce. Arena, sande. Arenaceus, a, um, sandy. Arenarius, a, um, perteynynge to a fyghtinge place. Arenarium, a pyt where sande is dygged. Arenatus, a, um, pergetted with lyme & sande. Arenosus, sandy. Arenula, fyne sande. Areo, rui, rere, to be made drye. Areola, a bedde in a garden. Areopagitae, were iudges, whiche satte in a place by Athenes, and iudged causes of mur¦der, and weyghty thynges concernynge the common weale. Areopâgus, the village of Mars, where the sayde iudges dyd syt in iudgement. Areopôlis, a citie in Araby, called also Aloab Areopolitae, the inhabitantes of Areopôlis. Aresco, scere, to waxe dry, or to be made drye. Aretalogus, a bragger or a vaūter of his own vertues. Somtyme a forger of lyes, to make men mery. Arête, in latine uirtus, in englyshe vertue. It was also the name of the wyfe of Alcinous kyng of Phaeacis, of whom Homer wryteth in Odyssea. Arethusa, the companion of Diana. It is also the name of a fountayne in Sicile, and of an
other in Metia. Arethyssa, & Arethusa, a ryuer in the greate Armeny. Aretium, a Citie in Tuscana, fyfty myles frō Peruse. Aretinus, a, um, of that citie. Arferis, wyne or water offered to the infernall goddes, or rather dyuelles. Arganthonius, an hyll nyghe to Bithinia, by the citie of Prusias, nygh thervnto is a wel, where Hilas the companiō of Hercules was taken sodeynly away by the nymphes, whan he was at that well to fetche water. Argatilis, a kynde of foule, whiche bredeth in water bankes, makynge her neste with lyn∣nen threde in fourme of a ball, soo close that the entrynge in to it maye not be founde. Argemata,Galen in Isagog. a sore in the eyes, whiche being in the blacke of the eye, is white, in the whyte of the eye, is redde. Argémone,Diosco. an herbe, whiche hath leaues like wylde poppy, ragged, also a pourple floure, the top in a cod, lenger than the heade of po∣py, and brode aboue, a rounde rote: the iuice of it is of the coloure of saffron, and tarte. Argentaria, a banke of exchaunge. Argentariam facit, he maketh or occupieth a banke for exchaunge. Argentaria cura,Plautus. care for money. Argentaria inopia, lacke of money. Argentariae illecebrae, thynges gettynge money. Argentarius commeatus, prouision of mo∣ney. Argentarius, a banker, with whom men doo make theyr exchaunge of money. Argenteus, a, um, of syluer. Argentina, a fayre Citie in Germany, on the west side of the riuer of Reine, called Straus¦burgh. it was also called Argentoracum. Argentum, syluer. somtyme it signifieth plate. Argentum uiuum, quicke syluer. Argestes, the wynde whiche bloweth oute of the southe weste. Argeus, a, um, of the citie of Argos. Argia, a countrey in Peloponeso or Morea. Argiae plurali, a citie in Laconia. Argiletum, the sepulchre of Argus. It is also a place, where potters claye is dygged. It is also a strete in Rome, where the boke sel∣lars dwelled. Argiletanae, bokesellars dwellyng in the said strete called Argiletum. Argilla, potters claye. Argimissae,Stra. li. 13. thre lyttell yles in Asia, by the yles of Mitele and Lesous. Argis, at the citie of Argos. Argo, the shyppe wherin Iason and his com∣panye sayled in to Colchos, to wynne the the fliese of golde. Argonautae, were the companions of Iason, whiche sayled with hym vnto Colchos, as, Castor, Pollux, Hercules, Thelamon, Or∣pheus, Zetus, Calais, and manye other no∣ble men, as well of bloudde, as in prowesse. This voyage was afore the incarnation of Christe. 1254. yeres. Argos, a countrey & citie in Thessalia, where raigned Inachus. In this countreye be the famous mountaygnes of Olympus and Os∣sa. Also Argos was a citie not far from Athe¦nes, an other in Achaia. Argumentatio, the declaration of an argumēt Argumentor, aris, ari, to argue or reason. Argumentosus, a, um, that whiche is doone with great reason. Argumentum, is a reason makynge a profe, wherby one thynge is gathered by an other, and the whiche confirmeth that, whiche is doubtefull. sometyme it signifieth a mater, somtyme coniecture, sometyme a shorte expo∣sition of that whiche foloweth, othewhyle sentence. Also a sygne or token. Sine argu∣mento, without coloure. Argumentū picture, the deuise of the thing portrayed. Argumentum scripturae, the matter whiche is wrytten of. Arguo, gui, ere, to reproue, to impute to ac∣cuse, to shewe. Arguere aliquem pecuniae interuersae, to accuse one for stealynge of money.Plautus. Argus, the son of Aristor, the .v. kynge of Ar∣giues, after that Osiris wente into Egypte, whiche made the shyp, wherin Iason and o∣ther sayled to Colchos, the poetes fayned, that he had an hundrede eyes, signyfyenge thereby his wysedome and circumspection. Moreouer that Iuno appointed him to kepe Io, whom she had transformed in to a cowe. But Mercurius being sent by Iupiter, with his swete armony broughte Argus on slepe, and than slewe hym, and toke Io from him, and broughte her in to Egypt. Than Iuno toke the eyes of Argus, and set them in the fethers of a pecockes tayle, wherfore the pe∣cocke is called Auis Iunonia, Iunos byrde. Argutatio, reasonynge, debatynge. Argute, an aduerb, signifieng wittyle, subtyly. Argutiae, sharpe wordes or shreude. Argutiosa, a prety taunte, or quippy. Argutor, aris, ari, to speke sharpelye, shrewd∣ly or pertly. Argutulus, somewhat perte, quicke in aunswe¦rynge. Argutum, selender or small. Argutum, caput, a sharp or piked head lyke a sugar lofe.
Argutus, a, um, reproued, sometyme it signi∣fieth shrewde, and he that can in speakynge sharply inserche a mannes wytte. Also shyrle of voyce, somtyme leane. Arguta diuisio, a subtyl diuision. Arguti homines, they that speake moche in fewe wordes. Arguti oculi, rollyng eies, or alway moving. Argyranche, the syluer syckenesse. Argyraspidae, men bearynge shyldes of syluer. These were souldiours of the great kinge A∣lexander, whiche after his deathe were re∣tayned with sundrye prynces, as the launce knyghtes be with vs. Argyrini, a certayne people in Epiro. Argyritis, the spume or some of syluer. Ariadne, a lady, the wyfe of Theseus, whom he forsoke, notwithstandynge that she had sa∣ued his lyfe. Aricia, a citie in Italy. Aricinum noemus, a wood by the sayde Citie, where Numa kynge of Romayns fayned to speake with Aegeria the fayry. Aricinus lacus,Plautus: a brooke by Aricia. Ariditas, drynesse. Aridus, drye. Arida uita, a straight lyfe. Aridus uictus,Plinius. harde fare. Aridus homo, a drye felowe, of whome no∣thynge maye be gotten. some do call hym, a pelt, or a pynchebeke. Aries, etis, a ram. Also a piece of ordyuaunce or ingine, made lyke a rammes heed, to beat downe a wall. It is also oone of the .xii. sig∣nes that the sum passeth by. It is also a fishe hauynge hornes lyke to a ramme, whiche he sometyme holdeth with his heade out of the water, and if he espy any man swymmynge, he goeth vnto hym, and pulleth hym vnder the water, and deuoureth hym. Arietinus, of a ramme. Arieto, aui, are, to hit or throwe downe. Arimaspi, people in Sithia, whiche haue but one eye, and that is in theyr foreheade, whi∣che do fyghte continuallye with griphons or gripes. Herodotus sayth, that they haue .ii. eyes, but they vse to wynk with the one, that they may haue the other more stedfast whan they do shote. Ariminum, an olde citie in Flaminea, a coun∣trey of Italy by the ryuer of Rubicon. Arimpaei, people vnder the domynyon of the prynce of Moscouites, whiche lyue alwaye in woodes, and be gentyl in maners and iust, whiche eate nothinge but bearies and maste.Herodo. Arinca,Gellius. called rye. Arion,Plinius. a famous harper, whom the mariners wold haue throwen in to the sea, for to haue his moneye: but he desyryng them to let him playe a songe on his harpe or he dyed, after∣warde lepte into the water, but a dolphin re∣ceyuynge hym on his backe, brought hym to lande a lyue. Arista, the berde of corne. Sometyme it is put for wheate. Aristathea, the malowe with the great leafe. Aristarchus, a grāmarien of Alexandria, whi∣che taught the son of kynge Ptolomeus cal∣led Philometor: he was of such iudgement, that it was thoughte, not to be the verse of Homere, whiche he dyd not approue. He dy∣ed by abstinence, bycause he wold not sustein the peyne of the dropsy, whan he was of the age of .72. yeres. He was before the incarna∣tion of Christe .127. yeres. Aristheus, the sonne of Apollo and Ceres, cal∣led of Hsiodus Apollo pastoralis, whiche was slayne with dogges: the gentiles pain∣ted hym, a yong lad berdlesse, standyng be∣twene the .ii. tops of the mountayn of Par∣nasus, out of the whiche ranne the fountain of Castalius, hauynge far from hym the ser∣pent Pithon, whom he strake through with his arrowe. They did also dedicate vnto him the grype and the rauen. Aristides, was a noble manne of Athenes, in wysedome, iustice, and temperaunce excellēt: For where in the gouernaunce of the commō weale of Athenes, he was ioyned with The∣mistocles, a man of great prowesse and ry∣chesse, who sayinge in the counsayle, that he knewe a thynge, whiche was expedyente to the common weale, but it was not necessary, that it shulde be openly knowen, and desired to haue one appoynted, vnto whom he shuld disclose it. The counsayle assigned to hym A∣ristides, to whom he shewed, that the nauye of the Lacedemonians mought be shortly set on fyre, and soo shulde theyr puissaunce be a∣bated, whiche Aristides herynge, he retour∣ned vnto the counsayle, and sayde, that the aduyse of Themistocles was profitable, but it was not honest. The Athenienses herynge that it was not honest, iuged that it mought not be profytable, and wolde not let it than to be disclosed, suche credence had they in A∣ristides. Also not withstandynge that the A∣theniences had exiled him without any cause but onely bycause he excelled in Iustice, yet at his departynge, he prayed to god, that what so euer they desyred, it moughte come to good effect and conclusion. And whan he was called agayne out of exyle, he neuer re∣membred any olde displeasure, in soo moche that he alway honoured Themistocles, with whom he euer contended in the weale pub∣lyke. Of his temperaunce this was a greate token, that not withstanding that he had ben
in the gretest dignitie and offices in the com∣mon weale of Athenes: yet dyed he so poore, that he left not sufficiently to bury hym wor∣shypfully. And his doughters were maryed at the charge of the citie. And to his son Ly∣simachus was gyuen by the people one hun∣dred Minae, whiche amounteth of our money to .CC.xxxix. li. xi. s. viii. d. O howe maye christen men be ashamed, whā they rede this story, beholdynge in his temperaunce Iustice and charitie, a more resemblance of Christis doctrine, than is in them, whiche wyl do no∣thynge vnhyred, measure iustice by theyr af∣fections. Of this name were .iiii. other, whi∣che deserued not so good a remembrance. He was afore the incarnation. 474. yeres. Aristides, a christian philosopher in Athenes, the yere of our lorde. 132. made an eloquente defence for Christes religion, and delyuered it to Hadriane the emperoure, wherwith he was so perswaded, that he gaue commande∣ment to the proconsull of Asia, that he shulde put no christen man to death, except he were conuicte of some crime notable. Aristippus, was disciple to Socrates, notwith¦standynge he dyd put the chyefe goodnes in volupte or pleasure, wherfore Diogenes cal∣led hym the royall dogge, bycause he alwaye folowed them that were ryche, and taughte for money. On a tyme he beinge on the sea, whan a storme came, that the shyppe was in peryll, he was sore aferde. After that the pe∣ryll was paste, men asked of hym why he fea¦red so moche sens he was a philosopher. The peryl (said he) in losse of an ignorant knaue, and of a noble philosopher, is not of lyke esti∣mation. The folowers of hym were called Cirenaici. Saynct Augustine saythe of hym: It is not requisite to aunswere Aristippum, who in euery part lyued so, as betwene hym and a beaste was no diuersitie. His secte by other disciples of Socrates and noble phy∣losophers, was vtterly exterminate. He had a doughter called Arête, excellentely lerned. He was afore Chryste. 366. yeres. Aristobolus, was son of Hircanus, captayne and chiefe bushop of the Iewes. 92. yeres a∣fore the commynge of Chryste. This man at∣tempted to translate the dignitie of a byshop vnto the dignitie of a kynge, and was the fyrste, whiche after the returnynge from the captiuitie of Babylon, toke on hym to weare a crowne. He subdued the people called Iturei, in Siria, and compelled them to be circum∣cided: but afterwarde by the yll counsayl of his brother Antigonus, he put his mother and yonger brethern in pryson, & after slewe his sayd brother Antygonus in famyshynge hym, for the whiche crueltie god soo strake him with vengeance, that hsi bowelles were rente in his bely, and he vometed vp all the bloude in his body, and so dyed. Aristocratia, the fourme of gouernaunce of a weale publyke, where they do rule, whiche are of moste vertue. Aristolochia, an herbe, wherof be thre kyndes One is called rounde, whiche hath leaues in fascion lyke iuy, but somwhat rounder, wher in is a sharpe and delycate odour, the floure white lyke a lyttell bonet vppon a red knop, the rootes are rounde and manye. An other called longe Aristolochia hathe lengar lea∣ues, small braunches, and a pourple floure, whiche stynketh: and whan it spryngeth, it is of the facion of a peare: the rote therof is longe, and of the greatnesse of a mannes fin∣gar, bothe of them do beare bearyes lyke to capers, within of boxe colour, which ar bit∣ter and stynkynge. The thyrde is longe and hath smal braunches, ful of leaues somwhat rounde, lyke to the lesse syngreene, and hath floures lyke vnto rewe, the rootes longe and smal with a thicke rynde, and sote in sauour. Aristomenes, a man of Messene, whiche was called Iustissimus, moste iuste. This manne whan he was dead, was foundē to haue his harte all hearye. Aristophanes, a poete mooste eloquent in the tunge of Athenes, althoughe he was borne at the Rhodes: he wrate .liiii. commedyes, wherin he spared not them, whiche than ly∣ued. he was in displeasure with Socrates, and therfore he reprehendeth hym in his com¦medy called the Cloudes. Aristopherum, a dyshe wherin meate is borne to dyner. Aristoteles, sonne of Nicomachus the phisiti∣on, borne in Stagera in Greece, consumed his youthe ryottousely, afterwarde he was scholer to the noble Plato .xx. yeres continu∣ally. he excelled all men in sharpnes of wytte, and knowledge in dyuerse sciences, wherfore kynge Philipe of Macedoni sente his sonne Alexander to hym to be taughte, sayinge: that he thanked god, that he had a son borne in his tyme. This man began a secte, the fo∣lowers wherof were called Peripatetici, and taught after the deathe of Plato .xxiii. yeres He was banyshed out of Athenes, bycause it was supposed, that he demid not wel of their goddes. It is written, that he dyed by this occasion: As he wente by the sea syde, he per∣ceyued fysher menne syttynge and doinge of somwhat. And whan he asked what they did they tolde hym a ryddell, whiche whan by longe stydye he coulde not assoyle, for shame and sorowe he dyed. Of hym Quintilian wri¦teth in this wyse: what say you by Aristotle,
whom I wote not, whether I maye iudge more excellent in knowlege of thynges, or in abundaunce of wrytynge, or in swetenes of eloquence, or in sharpnesse of wyt, or elles in diuersitie of workes. Not withstandynge he was lyttell of personage, crooke backed, yll shapen, and stuttyng. He was. 345. yeres be∣fore Christes incarnation. Arithmetica, the Scyence of numbrynge, of whom it was fyrste founden, it is vncertain. Albeit Abraham fyrste taught it vnto the E∣gyptians. Longe tyme after Pythagoras de¦clared it vnto the Greekes. Plato wylleth that before all other thynges, the numbers be taught vnto chyldren, whithout the whi∣che nothynge eyther priuate or commone can be well ordered. This science is diuided in∣to. viii. partes, that is to saye, Numbryng, Addition or puttynge to, Subtraction or ta∣kynge away, Mediation or partynge in the myddes, Duplication or doublynge, Multi∣plication or augmentynge one number by an¦other, Diuision or diuidynge one number by an other. Progression, as one, two, thre, ma¦keth syxe. More ouer in this science Digitus is the single numbers vnto ten, as 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. Articulus is any of the hole num∣bers, as. 10. 20. 30. 40. and so forthe. Num∣ber compounde is of digitus and articulus, as. 12. 23. 34. 46. &c. This science is of such excellency, that as well diuines as phyloso∣phers do therby declare the moste diffuse mi∣steris of theyr ymagination. And Pythago∣ras supposed, that the world, and al thynges were fyrste created of numbers. And Aristo∣tle affirmeth, that the beste profe of a natu∣rall foole is, that he can not number truelye. Aritudo, drythe, or drynesse. Arma, orum, harnayes and weapon. also the instrumentes of al maner of craftes. also stan¦dardes and baners. somtyme battaylles. Ad arma uocare, to commaunder men to be in harneys redy. Armamenta, tooles, instrumentes, al store for warres or shyppes, armour, tacklynge. Armamentarium, an armory or storehouse for shyppes or ordinaunce. Armarium, where bookes are layde, or other stuffe of householde. Armati, armed men. Armator, an armorer. Armatura, armure. Armenia, of that name be, ii. regions, the one is called Armenia minor, the other Arme∣nia maior. Minor hath on the northe & weste parte Cappadociam, on the Easte the noble ryuer of Euphrates and Armeniam maio∣rem, on the south the mountayn of Taurus. Armenia maior hath on the Northe Colchi∣dem, Iberiam, and Albaniam, on the weste parte Cappadocia, on the easte parte the sea called Hircanum, on the southe Mesopota∣miam, and the mountaygne Taurum. Armeni, people of Armenia, whiche were chri∣stened of late yeres, but nowe they are sub∣iectes vnto the Turkes. They in some thing erred frome the churche of the Latines and Greekes, they haue one great byshop, whom they call Catholicum, they celebrate moche lyke vnto our fascion, but they doo not kepe holy neyther the natiuitie of Christe, nor his baptisine, saying that he neded not to be pur¦ged or clensed of synne. Also they take frome all sacramentes the vertue to conferre grace. also they eftesones baptise them, which come from the churche of latines to them, sayinge that we be not of the Catholike faythe but they. Also they saye that no man may be chri¦stened, excepte he receyue the sacramente of the aultare. Also that infantes nede not to be baptised, affyrmynge that in them is no ory∣ginall synne. Also that the holy ghoste proce∣deth of the father and not of the sonne. Also that the sacrament of the aultar maye not be cōsecrate of bread cleane without leuen. also in the consecration they put no water to the wyne. Moreouer they say, that the receyuing of the sacrament profyteth onely to the body, and not to the sowle. Also they say, that whā Christe descended into hell, he led with hym all the soules that were there. also that ma∣trimony is no sacrament, and that it may be dissolued at the wyl of the man or the womā. also that Christe dyd ryse the saterdaye after Parasceue or good fryday. All these heresies and other whiche I passe ouer for briefnesse, are condemned by sondry generall counsailes and the consente of all Christendom. Armeniacum malum, is a fruyte accompted among the kynde of Peaches: the Italianes do call them Armelini, the frenche men sez abricotes. I knowe not that there be any of them in Englande. Armeniaca malus, the tre which beareth that fruite. Armentarius, the keper of an armery. sometime Esquiar de Esquiry. Armentum, store of horse or nete. sometyme it signifieth cattell. Armiger, geri, properly an esquire for the bo∣dy, or he whiche alwaye attendynge aboute a knyght, beareth his head piece, his spere, and his shylde. Armillae, rynges that gentyll women vsed to weare aboute theyr armes, as at this daye some men and womē do vse, called bracelets. Armille neut. gen. an instrumente of falshode or craft.
Armillum, a vessell, wherin they vsed in these sacrifice to put wyne. Armilustrum, was a festyuall day, in the why∣che the Romaynes dyd sacrifyce armed, and trumpettes dyd blowe bluddy soundes. Also the place, wherin suche sacrifice was made. Armipotens, puissant in armes. Armo, aui, are, to arme. Armocea, a wylde radyshe. Armoracia,Io. Agric. Ruellius. idem. Armon, a ryuer that cometh from the hylles of Arabye, and diuideth Moabitide, frome A∣monitide. Armorica, the auncient name of Brytayne in Fraunce. Armus, the shoulder of a beaste, or the pynion of a fowle. Arnentis,Oppian{us} f. Massari{us} a fysshe whiche Plinye calleth Hip∣puris. Theodorus callyth hym Equiselis, whiche is lyke to a horses tayle. She spau∣neth in sprynge tyme, and of a verye lyttell fyshe shortly groweth to be greate, and vseth to repayre of shippes that be wrecked. Arnion, uel Arnoglosso, an herbe callyd plan tayne, whiche is colde and drye in the second degree, the iuyce wherof in curyng of feuers certiane, and in stoppynge of bloud, is of so∣uerayne vertue, lyke as the sede and the wa∣ter therof is against the stone if it be drunke. Arnobius, a noble rhetorician of Affrike, mai∣ster to Lactantius, who wrate agaynste the gentiles, the yere of our lorde. 305. whose ex∣position we haue vpon the psalter. Arnus, a swyft ryuer in Italy, which runneth by the citie of Florence. Aro, aui, are, to eare or plowe lande. Aroma, atis, pleasant sauour, also spice. Aromaticus, a, um, swete of sauor, odoriferous. Aromatites, a precious stone, which hath the sauour of myrre. Aromatorius, & Aromatopola, he that sellith thinges hauyng swete sauour. Aros, an herbe callyd wake Robyn. it is callid of some Serpentaria minor, bycause it hath leaues lyke to Dragons, but broder, and ha∣uyng black spottes, it groweth about hedges. Arpinas, a man or woman of Arpinum. Arpinum, an aunciente towne in Italye, fa∣mouse and noble by the byrthe of Plautus, Tulli, and Marius. Arquatus morbus, the syckenesse callyd the Iaundise. Arquites, olde wryters vsed for an archer. Arquus, qui, the raynbowe. Arrectarij parietes, walles made with tymber and parget, to diuide chambers. Arreptitius, he that is obsessed with an ylle spyrite. Arrha, & arrhabo, ernest money. Arrideo,Plautus. risi, dêre, to smyle at a thynge, some∣tyme to lyke or content. Aedes mihi arride∣bant, The house lyked me well. Arrexit animos, it aduanced theyr courage. Arrige aures,Salust. lay to thyne eares, or gyue an eare to that whiche is spoken.Terent. Arrigo, rigi, ere, to water grounde. Arriminensis synodus, was a generall coun∣sell kepte at Arriminum in Italye, the yere of our lord. 360. the .xxii. yere of the raigne of the emperour Constantius, where the grekes assayd by their subtyl wyttes to cōdemne the noble counsayle of Nicene, but by the wyse∣dome of the Latines, that dyspution was de∣feeryd, and at a generall counsayle at Rome, the opinions of the Arrians were condemned. Arripio, pui, ere, to take. Arripere conditionem,Sueto. de claris grā. to take the offer. Arripere maledictum, to take heede of an ylle reporte.Cicero. Quare cum ista sis authoritate, non debes Marce arripere maledictum ex triuio, aut ex scurrarum aliquo conuitio, Wherfore in as moche as ye are in this auc∣toritie, or of this estymation, ye oughte not Marke to take hede of an ylle worde spoken abrode, or of the rebuke of a raylyng knaue. Arripere sermonē,Plautus. to take hym at his worde. Arripere se foras, to gette hym oute of the doores. Arrius, an heeretycke, beynge a prieste in the Churche of Alexandria, the yere of our lord, CCC. & twenty, Constantinus magnus be∣ynge emperour, this Arrius was a fayre per¦sonage, and hauynge a verye sharpe wytte, he was hadde in moche estimation. But fal∣lynge at the last into pryde and ambition of honour, he purposed and helde this heresye. That the sonne in deitie was not equall vn∣to the father, nor of the same substaunce, but was a meere creature. Vnto this errour he inducyd not onely a great parte of the worlde than christened, but also a greate number of noble clerkes. for the whyche was callid the great counsel of Nicene, where themperour, was present with. 318. bishops. Where after sundry and many assemblees & longe disputa∣tion, it was at the laste determined, that the son was equal & of one substance with the fa¦ther, as touching the diuinite. Which decree was ap{pro}ued by thēperor, & Arrius with .vi. byshops, which obstinatly perseuered in their heresy, were banyshed. Afterward Arri{us}, who with his foul heresy had corrupted the world finyshed his lyfe with an horrible deathe. for as he was disputyng, beinge prouoked to the stole, in exoneratynge nature, he poured oute all his bowelles, and so dyed. Arrius, an hystorian borne in Nicomedia, a∣monge other warkes, wrate in greke the lyfe
of great Alexander. This man for his lerning and vertue optayned greate honors at Rome of the emperours Hadrian and Antonine, in so moche that he was one consull. Arrogo, aui, are, to gyue to moche, to presume. Arrogans, arrogant, or presumptuous. Arroganter, presumptuousely, proudely. Arrogantia, arrogancy, presumption. Arrogare filium, to make one his heyre by adoption. Arrogare pretium, to inhaunce or sette vp the pryce. Arrugia, a myne of golde, a coney. Ars, artis, a crafte, subtyltie. Ars parasitica, the feate of flattery. Arsaces, was the generall name of the kynges of Parthia. Arsenothelea; a beaste whiche is bothe male and female, as some doo saye that a hare is, one yere male, an other yere female. Artaba, a measure of the Egyptians, contey∣nynge. lxxii. Roman measures callid Sextarij. Artamitae, an herbe callyd alsoo Cecla minus, & Vmbelicus terrae. Artaxata, a citie in Armeny the greate, at the ryuer of Arexis. Artaxerxes, a name, whereby many kynges of Persia were callid, of whom one is callyd in the Byble, Assuerus, an other whiche was his sonne by Hester, callyd also Ochus. An other was callyd Longimanus, bycause that his armes and handes were soo longe, that standynge vpryght, he moughte touche his knees with his handes. He loued peace, and was of moche gentylnesse, wherfore he was well beloued of all his people. He was before the incarnation of Christe. 485. yeres, who had to surname Memnon. Artemis, is a name of Diana. Artemisia, was the name of a noble princesse, who was wyfe to Mausolus, kynge of Ca∣ria, and was of a notable chastytie, and in loue towarde her husbande soo excellyd, that whan he was deade, she causyd his harte to be dryed in a vessell of golde into pouder, and by lyttell and lyttell dranke it vp, sayinge: That theyr two hartes shulde neuer departe asunder, and that she thoughte, that there mought be made no worthy sepulchre for it, but her owne bodye. Not withstandynge she made for his body suche a sepulchre, that for the excellent workemanshyp that was in it, also the beaultie and costlynes, it was taken for one of the meruayles of the worlde, and for the notable fame thereof, all sumptuouse and great sepulchres were afterwarde callyd Mausolea. She founde also an herbe called Artemisia, mugwort or motherworte in en∣glyshe, of great vertue in womens diseases. Artemisius, the moneth of Maye amonge the Macedonians. also an hyll in Arcadia. Artemius, a mountayn of Achaia in Argo. Artemon, onis, a troukle, whereby ropes doo runne. It maye also be taken for any instru∣ment that hath troucles. Artemon, was an heretyke, whyche affirmed, that Christe was pure man, takynge his be∣gynnynge in our ladye. This heresye beynge ones condempned, was eftsoones reuyued by Paulus Samosatenus. Arteria, a synew lyke to a vayn, wherin the spi∣ryte of lyfe dothe walke, myxte with bloude. Arthetica passio, callyd alsoo Morbus articu∣laris, the ioynte syckenesse, is thus dyuyded into Coxendix,Galen. callyd Sciatica, whyche is in the huckle bone:Plautus Podagra, the goute of the legges and feete: and Chiragra, the goute of the fyngers. Arthuntis, idem. Arthurus, a kyng of Englande, whan it was callyd Britannia, a man of excellent prowesse, who had .xv. great batayles agaynst the Sa∣xons, and vanquished them, and finally draue the more parte of them out of this royaulme. And also subdewed Scotland and Ireland at that time being wel inhabited and in culture. And after kepte a great and moste honoura∣ble Courte of valyant and noble personages, wherin was suche magnificence, that it gaue occasion to frenchemen and Spanyardes to exercise theyr wyttes in the aduaunsynge of Arthurs maiestie with incredible fables. whi¦che is noo more to be meruayled at, than the semblable inuentions & fantasies of the gre∣kes. Al be it this Arthur was a very noble & famous prince, yet of them, which wrate hy∣stories about his time, he was vnremembred. He floryshed about the yere of our lorde. 510. Arthritica, some do suppose it to be that herbe and flowre, whiche is callyd Prymerose. Articularius, he that hath the goute. Articulate, articulately, as whan one doth ex∣presse euery syllable. Articulatim, from ioynt to ioynt. Articulo, aui, are, to ioyn one ioynt to an other. Articulus, a ioynt. also a moment or parcell of tyme. also a colour of rhetoryke. Artifex, a craftes man. Artificium, the practise of a crafte. Artitus, well instructed insciences. Arto, aui, are, to strayne, to thraste togyther, to wrynge. Artocopus, a baker. Artocrea, may be callyd a pastye or pye, with fleshe or fyshe baken. Artolaganum,Plautus. fyne cakebreade. Artomici, people of a countrey in France, cal∣lyd Arminake.
Artopta, a bakynge panne, wherin they bake tartes, or other thynges made of fyne paaste, sommetyme a brake, wherewith breadde is wrought in dowe. Artoptesii, tartes or cakes baken in a panne. Artoptitius panis, browne breade, or breadde of course wheate. Artotyritae, people, whyche dydde offer vnto god breade and cheese. Artuo, aui, are, to cut asunder. Artus, membres. Aruales fratres, were supposed to be the foster bretherne of Romulus, to whom he gaue the dignitie of priestehode, to make sacrifice for growynge and increace of corne, and preser∣uation of the corne fieldes. Aruina, talowe. Aruisium, an hyll on the sea coste of the yle cal∣lyd Chium, where groweth the wynes callid Aruisia uina. Arunca, a towne in Italy. Aruncus, the berde of a gote. Arundinetum, a place where redes do growe. Arundo, a rede or cane. Aruspex, he that telleth of thinges to come, by lokynge in beastes bowelles. Aruum, a falowe fielde. Ars, arcis, a fortresse or castell, specially stan∣dynge hygh. ¶A ANTE S. AS, assis, a pounde weyghte. In the olde tyme in the partition of lande, or o∣ther lyke thynge inheritable, they cal∣lyd the hole As, & the partes diuyded, oūces. Asa, a worde of the language of Siria, and sygnifieth a phisytion, or a healer of sycknes∣ses. Of that name was the .v. kyng of Iuda, the sonne of Abia,3. Reg. 15. who reigned .xli. yeres, and was a good kynge, honored god, and distroy∣ed ydolles, and was fortunate in battayle, so that he is comparyd to kynge Dauid in his personage and vertuouse qualyties. He slew the kyng of Aethiopia with an infynite num¦ber of people. Fynally he dyed well and gra∣cyousely in a dysase of his feete. He was a∣fore the incarnation. 973. yeres. After whom succeded his sonne Iosaphat. Asaph, an hebrue worde, sygnifyenge gathe∣rynge or fynyshinge. Of this name was one, whyche was a syngynge man in the house of god, to whome kynge Dauyd assygned cer∣tayne titles of his psalmes. Asarótum, pauynge tyle with pyctures ene∣lyd, whyche maye not be swepte with a be∣some, but the douste and other thynge muste beswepte with a wynge, and gatheryd vp. Asarum, an herbe, whose leaues are lyke vn∣to yue, but they be lesse and tounder, and hath a good sauour, the floure is purple, lyke to the flowre of Henbane, but it sauoureth swetely, and groweth betwene the leaues by the roote, the stalke is edged, and somewhat roughe, the rootes are small, croked, and like to grasse, fulle of knottes. It is commonlye callyd Asarabaccha, somme calle it wylde Spykenarde. Asarus, a ryuer in Macedonia, whiche passeth by the citie of Heraclea. Ascalon, an hebrewe worde, sygnifieth a poy∣synge, or a balance, or fyre of infamy. Of that name was a citie in the higher Idumea, whi¦che was from Hierusalem. 90. myles, as Ege sippus saythe. The people of this cytie were callyd Ascalonitae. Ascaloniae, a kynde of onyons callyd scalyons. Ascania, one of the yles callyd Cyclades. Ascanius, the sonne of Eneas the Troyan and of Creusa his wyfe, doughter of Priamus kynge of Troy, who commynge into Italye with his father, susteyned sundye labours, and finally after his father, reigned ouer the Latynes, with his brother in lawe Syluius Posthumus, and buylded the cytie of Alba longa, he was also called Iulus, he began to reygne the fyrste yere of Sampson, and reig∣ned. xviii. yeres. Ascarides, lyttell rounde wourmes, whych do brede in the longe gutte of a man, but speci∣ally of chyldren. Ascendo, di, dere, to clym, to ascende, to go vp. Ascia, a chyppe axe. Ascio, aui, to chyp or cut with an axe. Ascio, is, to knowe surely. Ascisco, sciui, scire, to presume, to take vpon me a thynge. Ascisco, ascisci, asciscere, to admit, to take to me Ascitae, Arabians. Asclepades, the name of a famous phisitian, also of a philosopher, whiche beinge blynde, was demanded in scorne, what his blyndnes dydde profytte hym, and he aunswered, that he had the more companye by one boye that dyd leade hym. Asclepas, some men thinke to be the herb, whi¦che is commonly callid grounde yuy. Asconius Paedianus, the most excellent expositor of the orations of Tulli, whan he was. 73. ye¦res old becam blind, and liued afterward .xii. yeres in great estimation and honour. He flo∣rished about the tyme of Nero themperour. Ascopera, a bagge of lether. Ascra, a towne in Boeotia in Grece, by the moū¦tayn callid Helicon, where the Muses dwel∣lyd. In this towne was borne Hesiodus the famous poete, and therfore he is callyd som tyme Ascraeus.
Ascribo, psi, bere, to adde to, to attribute, to impute. Ascripti, were they that were appoynted to in∣habyte townes or cities made by the Roma∣nes callyd Coloniae. Ascripti milites, souldiours, whose names are regystred or entred with other. Ascriptitius, he that is added to the number of other, whose name is registred or inrollyd. Ascriptiuus, idem quod ascriptitius, he that is registred with other. Ascriptor, oris, he that foloweth the exaumple of an other, or he that writeth many copies of others examples. Ascriptus, a, um, inrollyd. Ascyes, one of the kyndes of dropsye, whiche is causyd by lacke of good digestyon, wher∣by is ingendred in al the membres a salte and yelowe humour, at the laste falleth into the bealy, and is turnid into water, and therin is meued, as it were in a gret vessel, whan the bo¦dy meueth, the bely beyng swollen and great. Asdrubal, was a name of dyuers noble men of Carthage, amonge whome one had maryed the syster of Hanniball, and after the deathe of Amilehar father of Hanniballe, he rulyd the cytie of Carthage, and sente Hanniball into Spayne, and there exercised him in con∣tynuall labours. At the laste in the myddell of his frendes and seruauntes, he was slayn by a Morayne slaue, whose mayster he hadde slayne a lyttell before. Whyche slaue so lytle feared deathe, that whan he was putte vnto moste horryble tourmentes, he being in them, shewed alwaye a laughynge countenaunce. Of this name were dyuerse other, whome I passe ouer, as men of no great meryte. Asella, the arme hole. Asellus, is a fysshe, whyche the Greekes doo call Onon & oniscon, and hath the coloure dunne lyke an asse, and hath in his head two stones facyoned lyke mylstones. In the cany∣cular dayes he can not be founde, as Athe∣naeus wryteth. Oppianus sayth, that he hath his name of slownes. Many doo suppose, that it is the fysshe, whyche we call an had∣docke, other do thynke that it is the codde fysshe. Of the dyuerse kyndes of them shall be written in their places. Asia, is the thyrde parte of the worlde, dyuy∣ded from Europa, by the sea callyd Bospho∣rus Thracius, and the gret ryuer of Tanais, and frome Affrica, by the famouse ryuer of Nilus, and is in quantitie supposyd to be as great as bothe Europa and Affrica. Asia minor, is a parte of the other Asia, whi¦che nowe is callyd Turkay, and contayneth in it these royalmes, Pontus, Bythinia, Phri∣gia, Caria, Lycia, Lydia, & Lycaonia. Asianus, a, um, of Asia. Asiaicus, a surname gyuen to one of the Sci∣pions, bycause that he subdued the lesse Asia. Asilus, a greatte flye, whyche byteth beastes, and is callyd a horse flye. It is also a worme that is founde in fysshes. Asinarius, an asseherde. Asine, a towne of Achaia in Grece. Asinius Pollio, a noble Senatour and oratour Romayne, whome the Emperour Octauian specially fauoured: He was verye eloquent, but he was noted of to moche diligence, whi¦che toke awaye the grace of his Orations. He was in his Iudgement verye exquisyte, and vsyd to reproue other, whyche were mo∣che better lernyd than hym selfe, as Tullye, Cesar, Saluste, and Liuie. He made the first commune lybrarye, wherein he sette the I∣mage of Varro, and had vyctorye ouer the people of Dalmatia. To the honour of hym the poete Vergille made one of his eglogas. He lyued to the age of .80. yeres. Asinius Gallus, was sonne to Pollio, a man of great lernynge, who wrate a boke compa∣rynge his father with Tullye, and also pre∣ferrynge hym, whyche boke was afterward answered by Claudius the emperour, he was commanded to be slayn by Tiberius the em∣perour, for what cause it dothe not appere. Asinus, an asse. ❀Asinus ad liram, an asse at an harpe. A prouerbe applyed vnto theym, whyche haue no iudgement in wysedome or lernyng. ❀Asinus auriculas mouet, The asse wag∣geth his eares. A prouerbe applyed to theym whyche althowghe they lacke lernynge, yet wyll they babble and make countenaunce, as if they knewe somewhat. ❀Asinus inter simias, an asse amonge apes. A prouerbe where a good sely body commeth amonge shewde wytted felowes, and being scornyd of them, dothe not perceyue it. Asion, an owle, whyche hath fethers on euery syde of her heade, lyke vnto eares. Asiortum, a kynde of spyders, with white stra∣kes, of whom if one be stunge, his knees shal howe and waxe faynt. Asmodus, the name of a dyuelle, and sygny∣fyeth a dystroyer, or aboundaunce of synne, or measurynge fyre. Asomatos, vnpalpable, or that can not be felt. Asopus, a ryuer in Achaia. Asotia, ryotte. Asotus, riotous, prodygal, wanton, incōtynent. Aspalathus, a thorne growyng in the east par∣tes of the worlde, the rynde wherof is some∣what redde, and within, the wodde is of a sadde purple, and smelleth very sweete, and therfore is vsyd in parfumes.
Asparagus, an herbe callyd of common apote∣caries Sparagus, in englyshe Sperage. Aspasia, a woman of Miletum in Grece, of no table lerning in rhetorike, and taught the elo¦quent Pericles duke of Athenes, and loued hym. Wherfore not withstandynge that she was a captiue, he toke her to his wyfe. It is writen, that she was one of the concubines of Cyrus kynge of Persia, after whose deathe Pericles toke her, and afterward by her pro∣curement, for displeasure that she bare to the Peloponesians, he was the cause that the A∣thenienses made warre against them. Wher∣in is to be noted, that in a fayre woman elo∣quence is of suche puissaunce, that if she wyll abuse it vnto ylle affections, she may peruert the wysedome of men, and be occasion of mo∣che vnhappynesse. Aspecto, aui, are to beholde stedfastly. Aspectus, syght, beholdyng. Aspello, aspuli, aspellere, to driue awey  one Asper,Plautus. vnpleasant, as wel in sight and hering, as in taste, also harde or greuous. Asperum uinum, a rough wyne. Asper nummus, money new coyned. Aspersus infamia, stayned with dishonour. Aspergillus, an holy water stycke. Aspergo, ginis, a springyng of lycour. Aspergines parietum, sweatynge of stoone walles. ❀Aspergo, spersi, gere, to sprynge or cast water. Aspergere comitatem seueritate,Cicero. to myxt fa¦myliaritie and grauitie togither. Aspergere aliquid in epistolis, to touche a thynge quyckely in a letter. Aspergere maculis uitam alicuius, to make yll reporte of a man. Aspergere aquam, to sprynge water, A pro∣uerbe, which signifieth to put one out of fere. Aspergit hoc mihi molestiae haec epistola, This letter hath brought me īto this trouble. Asperitas, sharpenes, rudenes of maners. Aspernabilis, he that is worthy to be dispised, or refused. Aspernor, aris, ari, to despise, to refuse, to ab∣horre. Aspero, aui, are, to make sharper or harde. Aspersus, a, um, sproungen or wette with any lyquour. Asphaltum, a water in Siria, wheerin noo∣thyng that hath lyfe may be drowned. It is callyd Mare mortuum, the deade sea: it is supposed, that in that place stoode the cyties of Sodoma. it is also a certayne lyme myxte with brymstone, which beinge ones het, may neuer be extincte. Asphodelus, an herbe callyd Daadyll. Aspicio, spexi, spicere, to beholde, to see. Aspidisca, a lyttell tergat or shielde. Aspilates, a stone lyke to syluer. Aspiratio terrae, vapour of the erthe. Aspiratio stellae, the influence of a sterre. Aspiro, aui, are, to aspire, to loke to come to a thinge, to blowe, to fauour, to gyue ayde, to gyue all my study and wyt tooptayn a thyng, to touche, to goo to. Aspis, is a lytel serpent, which bredeth in Affri∣ca, whose styng is so venomous, that nothing may cure it, except onely a stone taken of the sepulchre of an auncient kynge, whyche be∣ynge washed, the water drunken with wine, the inhabitauntes doo affyrme, that it onely cureth the sayde stroke. Plinius saythe, that the male and female gothe alwaye togyther, and if one of them be slayne, the other conti∣nually foloweth the sleer, and wyl neuer leue hym, vntyll he haue stryken hym, althoughe he be in a great assembly of people, except he passe ouer a ryuer. Not withstandynge this name Aspis, is soo generall, that it contey∣neth dyuers other kyndes, of the whiche shal be written hereafter. Asplenium,Io. Agric. an herbe called also Scolopendra, hath many leaues growyng out of one rote, lyke to the wourme, whiche is callyd a pal∣mer, that hath many feete, and is somewhat lyke vnto ferne, and hathe neyther flowres nor sede, and is callyd of the cōmon apothe∣carie Citrac, some calle it stone ferne. Asplenos,Ruell. is an herbe growynge on stone wal∣les,Diosc. or amonge flyntes in the shadowe, ha∣uynge leaues with many dyuisyons lyke to Polypodium, many growynge out of oone roote, whyche nygh to the grounde are taw∣ny coloured, aboue grene, and hath neyther stalke nor flowre, it is alsoo callyd Scolo∣pendra. Asporto, aui, are, to cary away. Assae, dry stoones. Assaracus, the sonne of Trois kynge of Tro∣yanes. Assatura, rosted meate. Asscla, a page, and he that foloweth in all thyng the wyll of an other man. Assectator, a companyon. Assector, aris, ari, to kepe company. Assentatio, flattery. Assentatiuncula, a flatterynge tale. Assentio, si, tire, & assentior, to consent, or as∣sent. Also to perceyue.Plautus. Sed assentio aperiri foras, quae absorbent, quicquid uenit infra pessulos, But I perceyue the doores are o∣penyd, whyche deuouren all that commethe within the boltes. Assentor, aris, to flatter in commendyng an o∣ther mans actes that be yll. Assequor, eris, qui, to folowe, to gette, to op∣tayne, sometyme to render as moche to one
as he hath deserued. Nullam partem uidear tuorum meritorum assecutus,Cicero. It maye not be founde in me, that I haue rendred to you any thynge after your merites, or haue done so moche for you, as ye haue deserued. Assequi nomen, to gette renoume. Asser, eris, a pole. Asserculi, & assiculi, lyttell bourdes or lathes. Asseres, bourdes. Assero, ris, to sow or plant by. also to claym, to affirme or approue, to manumise or make fre. Asserere aliquem manu, to set one at liber∣tie, or to manumyse a bondman. Asserere in seruitutem,Plautus. to bryng in bondage or seruytude. Asserere ab iniuria, to defende from wronge or daungier. Asserere se studijs, to leaue all other busynes to applye studye. Assertio, an affiyrmance. Assertor, oris, he that setteth one at lybertie, or defendeth hym from bondage. Assessor, oris, assocyate to a man in offyce or auctoritie. Asseruo, to kepe diligently, to take hede of one. Asseuero, as, are, to affyrme. Assidela, a byshops seate or chayre, wherin he sytteth whan he ministreth. Assideo, I syt with or by an other, or I am as∣socyate, to be continually at a thynge. Assido, is, dere, to reste me, to sytte downe, to sytte by. Assidere lieris, to be alway ī study of letters Assidue, & assiduo, aduerbes, whiche doo sy∣gnifie continually,Cicero. often. Assiduitas, continuance in a thynge. Assidui fideiussores, sufficient sureties. Assiduus, contynuall, or suffyciente, ryche or well at ease. Assiduus scriptor, an author ap{pro}ued, whose sentence is holden for certayn and trewe. Assigno, aui, are, to assygne or appoynt. Assignare famae, to apply hym selfe to gette renoume. Assilio, ui, ire, to leape forth. also assilire, is to leape, as a horse leapeth a mare. Assimilis, le, lyke, or semblable. Assimiliter, all semblable. Assimilo, are, to do a thynge lyke to an nother man, to imitate or folowe one. Assimulatio,Plautus. a dyssembled countenaunce. Assimulo, are, to fayn to do a thing, and not to do it. also to compare, to countefayte. Assipondium, a pounde weyght. Assis, is, a sawen bourde. Assisia, one of the nmis of Pallas or Minerua. Assisto, stiti, stere, to be here, to defende a man∣nes cause. Asso, aui, are, to lay bourdes: to oste. Assoleo, ere, to be wont or accustomed. Assolet, it is vsed. Assono, are, to sowne or make a sowne. Assauoce cantare, to synge without an in∣strument. Assuefacio, wont. Assuefactio,Vano. a bryngyng of one in custome. Assuesco,scere,Cato. to vse of a custome. Assuetudo, wont, or custome. Assuetus, accustomed. Assuerus, sygnifyeth prynce or heade, he was kynge of Persians, who is alsoo callyd Ar∣taxerxes & Memnon. Assula, a chyppe. Assulatim, & assulose, in fascion of shyngle or slates. also piece meale, in chippes. Assumo, sumpsi, sumere, to take, properly it si∣gnifieth to take to moche on me. Assumptio, a takynge. Assuo, ui, ere, to sowe to, or piece. Assur, a cite in Iudea, builded by king Salomō Assurgo, rexi, gere, to ryse to an nother better than my self, to giue place, to grow vpward. Assus, a, um, tosted or rosted. Assyria, a regyon in Asia, callyd nowe Syria, in englyshe Surry, whyche marcheth on the easte vpon Inde, on the west on the noble ri∣uer of Tigris, on the southe it hath the coū∣trey callyd Media, on the northe it hathe the hylle callyd Caucasus. Ast, but, also therfore, as well, more ouer. Asta, depart not, stande styll. Astacus, a lopsta of the sea, whiche in some thinges dothe vary from the crauayse callyd Locusta, for his eight hinder legges be grea∣ter and broder: he hathe two tethe as a cra∣uayse, but the hornes, whiche be aboue them, be shorter and smaller, He hath also fsoure o∣ther hornes, lyke the other two, but they be shorter and lesse, ouer them be his eyen, whi∣che are very lyttell, the forhead ouer the eies sharpe and rough, the breast broder than of a craueyse: Al the bodye within hauynge more substance and shorter, his .viii. feete foure of them are forked, and foure be close. This I suppose sufficient to knowe the fyshe, he that wyll knowe more, let hym reade the comment of Marius, on the .ix. boke of Plinius. Astaphis, raisons in confection. Astare, to stande by, or to be present. Astare aduocatus, to assyst or speake for one. Astare in genua, to knele. Astaroth, a name of hebru, which signifieth ri∣ches or flockis. also makīg serch, or the mouth of the law. it was the name of an ydol, which the iewes honored. Iud. 2. & lykewyse Salo∣mon. 4. Re. 25. Also it was the name of a citie in Siria, whiche was gyuen to the chyldren of Gersom of the kinred of Manasses. . Par. 6.
Also of a countray, wherof mention is made Genes. 14. Aster, a sterre. Aster atticus, is also callyd Bubouium, of Pli∣nius Inguinaria, hath a stycky stalke, on the toppe a flowre purple or yelowe, diuided lke to flowres of wylde camomyll, the leaues be∣ynge longe and rough, compasseth the stalke lyke a sterre. Asterias, a kynde of hearons, I suppose that it is an Egret. Astericum, an herbe callyd Pellitory. Asterie, was doughter of Caeus, syster to Latona. Asteriscus, a lyttelle marke in wrytynge lyke a sterre. Asterte, a goddesse of the Sirians, to whō Sa¦lomon, to plese his concubine, raised an altar. Asthma, atis, a syckenes, where one maye not fetche his wynde, but with moche difficultie, with weasynge of the breast: which hapneth by staytnes of the pipes stopped with tough flewme, or of somme impostume growen in the pypes. Asthmaticus, he that draweth his wynd short. Astipulator, he that is of one accorde or con∣sent with an other. Astipulor, to leane to, to fauour. Asto, astiti, to stande by, to be present. Astomi, people of Indie, hauyng no mouthes, whyche lyuen by ayre, and smelle of sweete thynges. Astraea, signifieth iustyce. Astragalizo, to play at dyce or tables. Astragalus, the play at tables. Astragalus, callid of cōmon apothecaries Ci∣cer montanum, an herbe with an hard stalke beinge in the leafe and braunches lyke to Ci∣cer, and hath a lyttell purple flowre, and a roote lyke to radyshe, hauynge certayn thin∣ges growyng to it, hard lyke to hornes woūd togither. It commonly is found in stony pla∣ces, where cometh abundance of wyndes. Astrea, was doughter to Iupiter and Themis, who for her equitie was callyd iustyce. Astricte, close. Astricta frons, a frownyng countenance. Astringo, to ioyne or bynde togyther, to bynde by couenaunt or promyse. Astringere fidem, to promyse. Astringere se furti, to confesse to haue done felony. Astroites, a stone lyke to a fyshes eye. Astrolabium, an astrolabe, or instrumente of astronomye. Astrologia, the speculation and reasonyng con¦cerning the celestiall or heuenly motions. Astrologus, an astorologyen, he that studyeth the speculation of astronomy. Astronomia, the parte of astronomy that con∣cerneth iudicialles and practyse. Astronomus, an astronomer. Astrum, a celestiall bodye compacte of many sterres, as a sygne. Astruo, to buylde, to ioyne one house to an no∣ther, to fortify, to affirme. Astruere dignitati alterius,Plinius in epist. to augmente an other mans dignitie or honour. Astruitur his, is putte for more ouer, or fur∣thermore. Astur, uris, a nowne possessiue, and signifieth of Asturia, as Astur homo, a mā of Asturia. Astur equus, a spanyshe horse, callid a genet. Asturcones, idem. Astura, a towne and ryuer in Italy. Asturco, conis, a geldyng or genet of Spayne. Asturia, a countray in Spayne betwene Gali∣tia and Portugall, whiche sommetyme was famouse for myes of golde, and aumblynge hackeneys callyd Asturcones. Astu, craftily or subtylly. Astus, crafte, or subtiltie. Astute, craftyly. Astutia, crafte. Astutiae, subtilties. Astutus, a, um, subtyll or craftye. Astyages, was the laste kyng of Medes, who was father to Mandane, mother to the no∣ble kynge Cyrus, who was .597. yeres be∣fore the incarnation, and reygned .38. yeres, & at the last was deposed of his royalmes by Cirus. Rede more therof in the story of Cir{us}. Astyanax, actos, was sonne of Hector, whom after th winnyng of Troy, the Grekes cru∣elly dyd throwe downe from a towre, so that his braynes cleaued on the walles. Astypalea, an yle in the sea callyd Aegeum, It is also a mountayne in Creta, an nother by Athenes. Asuestinum, lynnen threde, whyche maye not be boued. Asylum, a saynctuarie. Asylus, an ymage, whervnto men were wonte to runne for succour, as to a sanctuary. Asymbolus, he that commeth to a bankette, without appoyntment, an vnboden gest. also he that gothe scot free, and payeth nothinge. ¶A▪ ANTE T. AT, a voyce, whyche dothe sygnifye in the wordes that do folowe, wrathe or indygnation. Sometyme it signifieth yet, or at the least waye. Si non propinquita∣tis, at aetatis suae, si non hominis, at huma∣nitatis rationem haberet: All thowghe he hadde not consyderacyon of kynredde, yet shulde he haue hadde regarde to his age: and
though he caryd not for the persone, yet shuld he haue had respect vnto good humanite. som¦tyme it signifieth sed. also at, sometyme it is put for saltem. Si non eodem die, at postri∣die, If not the same day, at the leste way, the nexte day folowynge. At at, tusshe, or fye. At contra, contrary wyse. Atabulus, a feruent wynde, whyche whan it bloweth in the realme of Naples, pestylence immedyately insueth. Ataceni, people in Arabia. Atalanta, was a mayden, daughter of Iasius a prynce in Arcadia, who with dyuers noble men of Greece came into Aetolia to slea the great boore, whiche distroyed that countray, whych she with her owne handes fyrst strake and wounded. But after he was slayne by Meleager, sonne of the kynge of Aetolia, who loued Atalantam, and toke her to his wyfe, and had by her a sonne callyd Partho∣nopaeus, whiche was slayne at the battaylle of Thebes. An other Atalanta was dough∣ter of Caeneus, kyng of the ile called Scyrus, who contended in runnyng with them which came to wowe her. And whan she hadde van∣quyshed many, and put theym to deathe (for that was the wager, or els to haue her, who so coulde ouer rounne her.) At the laste a no∣ble yonge man named Hippomanes, by this meanes ouercame her. Whyles they were rounnynge, he hauynge thre fayre appulles of golde, threwe at sundrye tymes the three appuls from hym, whyche she in takynge vp was therby taryed, and by that meanes Hip∣pomanes ouerranne her. At the last (as Oui∣dius wryteth) as they two medlyd togyther in the temple of Cybeles, that goddesse ha∣uinge therat indignation, transformed them bothe into lyons. Atauus, a great graund father. Atechna, thynges vnkunnyngly handlyd. Ategia, a bouthe, or place made vp with trees and boughes. Ater, tra, trum, blacke or darke. Ater panis, browne breade. Athacus, a byrde with foure legges, hauynge the longest behynde. Athalia, was doughter of the cursed quene Ie∣zabel, and mother to kyng Acab, kyng of Ie∣wes. This woman beinge also mischeuous, whan that she herd that her sonne Ochozias was slayn, and Ioram with all his housholde to be distroyd, she being inflamed with desire to reigne, laying apart all womanly pitie, de∣termined to distroye vtterly all the posteritie of Dauid, but through the goodnes of god, Ioas the sonne of Ochozias an infant, was vnwares to her conuayed away by Iosabeth his aunte, and hyd in the house of Ioaides the bishop, and there kept .vi. yeres. And af∣ter that this cursed woman Athalia had rey∣gned ouer Hierusalem .vii. yeres, Ioas, whi∣che was supposed to be slayn, was by Ioaide made kynge.4. Reg. 11. Wherof she being aduertysed, and cryeng to the people to sle Ioas,2. Par. 22. she was taken of the men of warre,Ioseph. 9. cap. 7. & shamefully dra∣wen to the gate of the citie callid Mularia, & there was slayne. She was afore the incar∣nation of Christ .900. yeres. Athanasius, was bisshoppe of Alexandria, the yere of our lorde .348. A man in holines of lyfe and great lerning very excellent, who su∣steyned greate and many persecutions of the Arrianes, for whan in the counsell holden at Laodicea, he had confounded the Arrianes with most puissant argumentes, he stired al∣most all the world against him. Wherfore he fled, and .vi. yeres continuall he aboode hyd in a dry cestern, where he neuer saw the sonne shyne. But than was he discouered by a mai∣den, and fled eftsones by the helpe of god, and wandred about the world, not withstanding that princis, the people, and their hostes, did continually persecute hym, so that he mought not fynd any place to abyde in. Also bringing against him a cōmon harlot, which affirmed, that he had accompanyed with her. But he alway sustayning all thinges with a wonder∣full pacience, at the laste dyed, the yere of our lorde .379. Valentinianus and Valens being emperours, and is accompted in the number of sayntes. Athanatos, immortall. Athenae, arum, the citie of Athenes. Athenaeum, a place at Rome, where all scien∣ces were radde. Athenodorus, a philosopher, whiche left with Octauian the emperour this lesson, whan he toke his leue of him: Noble prince, whā thou art attached with wrath, neither saynor do a¦ny thynge vntyll thou hast pervsed the .xxiiii. greke letters, and remembred the order of the places where they stande, to the intente that the passion of pre, by withdrawyng the mynd to an other thing, mought languishe and va∣nyshe away. Atheos, he that dothe not beleue that god is. Atheromata, littell pousshes in the necke, and vnder the armes. Athesis, a ryuer in the coūtray of Venetia, rū∣nyng by the cite of Trent, & through Verona & so passeth into the sea callid Adriaticum. Athleta, a great wrastlar, or a great runner at common games. Athletheta, the iudge in games of wrastlynge or runnynge. Athletica, the crafte of wrastlyng or runnyng.
Athos, a hyll in Macedonia of a wonderfull heyght, Athraciars, art magike. Athrax, a citie in Thessalia. Atinia, a kynde of elme tree. Atlanticae insulae, the yles called nowe Fortu∣natae, where fruites and herbes doo growe without labour. Atlantides, the doughters of Atlas. alsoo cer∣taine sterres. Atlas, antis, was brother of Prometheus, whō as the Grees do suppose, dyd fyrst fynde out the course of the sterres, by an excellent yma∣gination. And therfore the poetes fayned, that he sustayned the firmamente with his shulders. It is supposed, that he was about 1599. yeres, afore the incarnation. It is al∣so the name of a hyll in Barbaria, highe and small, whiche perseth the cloudes. Atlantes, Moores dwellynge about that hyll. Atocia, medicines, wherby the tyme of byrthe of chyldren is preuented. Atocius, a certayne spyder, whiche is heary. Atomus, a thynge so small, that it maye not be deuided or made smaller. also atomi, be motes of the sun. Atnepos, potis, the fyfthe of lyneall dyscente from me, or my neuewes neuewe. At{que}, and so, as it were, euen as. Locus est at{que} optabam. The place is euen as I wysshed. also than.autu. in ed. Illi sunt alio ingenio at{que} tu: They be of an other maner of wyt than thou arte. Non Appolinis magis uerū,erent. in dri. at{que} hoc respō¦sum est: Appollos answere was neuer trewer than this is. At{que} adeo,aut. in asina. and that more is. Esurio hercle, at{que} adeo nunc haud parum sitio: I am hun∣gry, and that more is, I am a thyrste not a lyttell. At{que} eccum, but lo were he is. At{que} audin? but herest thou? At{que} uides? doest thou not se Aliter at{que}, other wyse than. Atqui, surely albeit, but yet. Atraba, in a measure of the greekes, and con∣tayneth .v. modios romanos, of englysshe measure, a busshell, a pottell, a pynte, and 4 ounces of measure. Atrabaticae, blacke garmentes. Atrabilis, melancoly. Atractilis, an herbe hauynge a longe ste and roughe, with longe leaues growynge by the top, the residue without leaues, the top full of prickes, and a yelowe floure, women were wont to make spyndels of the stalkes therof. Atractilis, an herbe called of apothecaries Car¦tamus, in greeke Cnicos, of some men wyld safron. it is hot in the seconde degree. Pau∣lus Aegineta putteth it in the thyrde degree. the late experiencers do fynde, that the iuyce and the seede purgeth aduste humours, and increaseth mannes sede. Atramentarium, an ynke horne. Atramentum, ynke, blache that showemakers do occupy. Atratus, a mourner that goeth in blacke. Atrebates, a contrey in Fraūce called Artoys. Atreus, was the sonne of Euristheus kyng of Mycenae, and founde fyrste the eclips of the son. Moreouer for as moche as his brother Thyestes had lyen with his wyfe, he slewe his sayde brothers chyldren, and causynge theym to be rosted, made his brother to eate them. Who knowynge it, and askynge ther∣fore vengeance, he had answere made of the god Apollo, that if he dydde carnally knowe his owne daughter Pelopia, he shuld on her get a sonne, whiche shulde reuenge hym. So begat he Aegistum, whoo afterwarde slewe his vncle Atreus, and in lyke wyse Agamm∣non his eldest sonne, after that he returned frome the battayle of Troye. This was be∣fore the incarnation of Christe .1258. yeres. Readynge this tragedye marke well the suc∣cesse of abhominable lyuynge and crueltri. Atricapilla, a byrde with blacke fethers on the crowne of his heade. Atricus, a porter that kepeth a gate. Atri dies, dismal dayes. Atriensis, an huisher of the hall. Atrifer, a rushe that beareth a blacke seede. Atriolum, a lyttel inner court. Atriplex, an herbe called orache or arage. Atritas, blacknes. Atrium, an inner courte. Atrocitas, cruelty, fiersenesse. Atrociter, cruelly. Atrophia, an affecte or discrasye, wherein the body can not be nourished with any thynge, but consumeth with leannesse. Atrophus, he that hath that affecte. Atropos, one of the fatall Ladyes, whiche is fayned to breake the chrede of lyfe: It is som¦tyme put for necessitie of deathe. Atrox, ocis, cruell, terrible, or soure in coun∣tenaunce. Atta, is he that goeth so on the soles of his fete that he swepeth the grounde, rather than walketh. Attagen, & Attagena, a byrde which is foūd in Ionia, and is verye delycate, and hath fethers of sondry colours, and being at large is alwaye syngynge or chatterynge: whan he is taken, he maketh no noyse, nor semeth to haue any voyce. They are deceiued that take hym for a woodcocke. Attalus, a kynge in the lasse Asia, of meruay∣louse rychesse, of whome all magnifyke and
stately thynges, are called Attalica. Attalica uestis, a garment of cloche of golde. Attmen, but yet. Attamino, aui, are, to foule or defyle. Attegiae, arum, shepeherdes cotages. Atteae, a citie in Campania, not far from Na¦ples, whiche nowe is called Auersa. Attelanae fabulae, were commedies or enterlu∣des, whiche onelye were in iestes and merye scoffes or bourdynges. Attendo, di, dere, to take hede, to consyder, to intende. Attente, intentifly, with a fyxed mynde. Attentio, a mynde set or fyxed. Attento, to attempte. Attentus, he that hereth diligently, attentiue. Attentus adrem, carefull to get goodes. Attenuate, sclenderly, subtilly, fynely. Attenuo, to appayre, to make weaker. Attero, triui, terere to rub against a thynge. Atterere famam.Salust. Post ubi eorum famam at{que} pudorem attriuerat, maiora alia impe∣rabat: After that he had made them consume theyr good name and honestie, he set them in hande with other greatter attemptates. Attestari, to call to wytnesse. Atthis, was doughter of Crancus, who (some do suppose) gaue the fyrste name to the coū∣trey called Attica. Attica, a countray in Greece, wherin stode the famous citie of Athenes, the nouryce of all sciences. Attice, an aduerbe, signifienge in the eloquēce of speche of Athenes. Atucismus, the fourme of that speche. Atticisso, to speke lyke a man of Athenes. Atticus, a, um, of Athenes. Attigo, idem quod attingo. Attiguus, by or nyghe ioynynge to. Attila, was capitayne of the people called Hū∣ni, and wan Hungary from the Romaynes, & gaue that name to it, where before it was called Pannonia. This man called hym selfe the scourge of god, and raigned aboute the yere of our lorde. 400. Attilius Regulus, was a noble consul of Rome who in the fyrste warres of Carthage, vain∣quished often tymes the Carthaginensis. At the laste was taken by a sleyght, and beinge bounden was sent vnto Rome, to the intente that for hym they moughte exchaunge with the Romaynes for a great number of pryso∣ners of theyr people. But at his commynge Attilius exhorted the Romaynes, that they sholde not make suche exchange, considering his age and debilitie. And soo he with a glad wyll retourned to his ennemyes, knowynge that he shuld be cruelly put to death, so moch he loued his countrey. wherfore at his com∣mynge, the Carthagynensis caused his eye lyddes to be cutte of, that he moughte neuer slepe, and hym to be put in a holowe tree, be∣ynge stycked fulle of nayles, the poyntes in∣warde, where he continued vntylle he dyed, whose valyaunt courage is notably commen¦ded by Tully in his boke of offices. Attineo, ui, êre, to perteyne. Attinet, it besemeth, it is conuenient. Attingo, tigi, tingere, to touche almoste. Attingit me sanguine,Plin he is nygh of my blud Attengere senectam, to come to great age. Attingere partes naturae,Ver to come to the knowlege of naturall causes.Geo Attingere studia, to sauour of letters. Attingitur, it is nyghe. Attollo, to auaunce, to lyfte vp, to brynge to, to take awaye. Attollere signa, to dysplaye standerdes and banners in the fielde. Attollere partum, to nourysshe or brynge a chylde from his byrthe. Attondeo, dre, to clyp or sheare a thyng nigh. Attondere arbores,Pla to shred trees. Attondere auro, to ryd one of his money, to take all away from hym. Attonite, bashefully. Attonitus, a, um, amased or abashed. Attonsus, a, um, shorne or clypped. Attrahere ad se aliquem, to make one come to hym. Attrecto, aui, are, to fele. Attrectare uxorem alterius, to meddel with an other mannes wyfe. Attribuo, bui, bere, to attribute, to put vpon one by blamynge or accusynge, to assigne, to commyt. Attributus, a, um, attributed. Attributa pecunia, moneye delyuered to be gyuen to an other man. Attritus, tus, rubbynge or wearynge. Attritus calciamentorum, the wearynge of shoes with moche goinge. Attropatia, parte of the countraye of Media. Attyla of some called Athyla, a valiant prince. which came out of the countray of Scithia, and after that he hadde subdued Pannonia, he entred in to Italy, and destroyed the citie called Aquileia, and came towarde Rome, wherof Valentinianus the emperour beinge a ferde, sente vnto hym Leo that tyme being byshop of Rome, with the consules and cer∣tayne senatours, who submytted them selfes vnto hym. And whan his host supposed that he wolde haue had them in contempte, and haue continued his iornay to distroy Rome, contrary to theyr expectation, he pardoned them, and departed. wherat all men meruai∣lynge, and demaundynge of hym, why he so
dyd, he aunswered: that whiles the bysshop and senatour spake vnto hym, he beheld stan¦dynge on euery hand of him, a man of armes of excellent personage, euery of them holding a naked sworde ouer hym, menacynge to slee hym, if he spake any vnsyttyng worde, or did make any farther attemptate. Wherfore he discharged the Romaynes with gentyll lan∣guage, and perswaded his host to hold them contente. Afterwarde he entred into Germa∣ny, and wasted the countreye, and in retour∣ninge towarde Hungry, he maryed a wyfe. In the whiche mariage he so excessisly fylled hym selfe with meates and wynes, that ther∣by he fell into a great bledyng. He was after the incanation of Chryste .401. yeres. And at the begynnyng called hym selfe, the scurge of god. A ANTE V. AVARE couetously, nighly, nigardly. Auarus, a, um, coueytouse of moneye. Auarus, a nygarde, a sparar, a coue∣touse man. Auaricum, Vieron in Berry in the royalme of Fraunce. Ptholomeus calleth it Varicum. Auceps, a fouler or byrder. Auctio, onis, an increase, or an open sale of pryuate goodes. Auctio hastae, porte sale of the godes of mē attainted for treason or felony: but more pro∣perly of menne and goodes taken in warres and solde by the chiefe capitayne. Auctionarius, the salesman. Auctionor, to sell by porte sale. Auctior, tius, greatter. Aucto, aui, are, to gayne, to wynne, to aug∣ment or multiply. Auctuarium, uel auctarium, ouer measure or weyghte, surplusage in number. Auctus, a, um, increased, aduaunced. Auctus, tus, increase. Auctus filiolo, he is rycher than he was, for he hath a son borne. Auctus damno, he hath yet more harme. Auctus honoribus, aduaunced to honour. Auctus praeda, he is made ryche with rob∣bynge and pyllynge. Auctus re fortunis{que}, he is very ryche. Aucupatorij, lyme twygges. Aucupium, & Aucupatio, byrdyng or fouling. Ancupor, to go a byrdynge, or a fowlynge, or hewkyng. Also it signifieth to serche by craf∣ty meanes. Aucupare sermonem alicuius, to harken or take hede what one sayth. Aucupari famam, to get renoume. Aucupari tempus, to espye the tyme. Audatia, hardines, courage, trust. Audacter, & Audaciter, boldly, aduenturusly. Audaculus, hardy, spoken in derision, or con∣tempte. Audax, acis, bolde or hardy, or trustynge well in hym selfe. Audens, hardy. Audentia, hardynesse. Audeo, si, dere, to dare, to presume. Audio, diui, dire, to here, to consyder, to per∣ceyue, to graunte that whiche is asked, to do the thynge that is commaunded. Audin tu? herest thou not? Audire bene, to be well reported of, to haue a good name. Audire male, to be yll reported of, to haue an yll name. Audire Platonem, to be Platos disciple. Audias pro audire poteris, thou mayst here. Audiens dicto, redy to do that he is comman∣ded, at commaundement, obedient. Audienciam facere, to commaunde or make silence, as they do whiche are cryers in pla∣ces of Iustice. Audiri, to be beleued. Auditio, herynge or audience. Auditorium, a place where men do here lessons or propositions. Audirus, tus, herynge, one of the fiue wyttes. Aue, be thou gladde or ioyfull, as the vulgare people sayth, Rest you mery. Auere te iubet, he greteth you well. Auelio, here, to cary frō one place to an other. Auellana, a sylberde nut. Auello, uulsi, uellere, to plucke awaye by vi∣olence. Auellere se à meretrice, to withdrawe hym, or go awaye by force from an harlot. Auena, otes. somtyme it is put for an ote straw or a whete strawe, or reede. Auenaceus, a, um, made of otes. Auenaria, a kynde of grashoppes, whiche ap∣pere not, vntyll the corne be rype. Auenarius, beynge amonge otes. Auentinus, a hyll at Rome. Auenuiorum colonia, Auynion, a Cytie in Prouaunce. Aueo, uere, to couayt. Auerni,Caesar. people of a countray in Fraunce called Auegn. Auernus, a lake in Campania, which was de¦dicate vnto Pluto kynge of Hell, where men supposed, that there was an entry or passage to Hell. Auerrois, a great philosopher and phisiiyon, ennemy to Auicen, and also to Chryste, and for his great commentes wrytten on Aristo∣tle, he is named Commentator. He was a∣bout the yere of our lorde .1145.
Auerrunco, aui, are, to turne awaye, to put a∣waye, or scrape of. Auerruncare deûm iram, to pacyfy goddes wrathe. Auersor, aris, to abhorre, to refuse. Auersus. straunge, vnacquaynted: sometyme backeward, or on the backe halfe. also angry Aduersus, & auersus, forwarde and backe∣warde. Auersa pars, the backesyde of a thynge. Auersa pecunia publica, the cōmon treasure to a particuler aduauntage. Auersis post crura planus, the feete tourned backewarde. Auerta, thes peutrell of an horse. Auerto,Vergil. ti, tere, to tourne awaye. Auertere ab aliquo loco, to let or prohibit one to enter. Auertere se ab aliquo, to leue hym there. Auertere hostes, to dryue awaye ennemies. Auertere se a sermone, to turne away from the tale. Auertere culpā in alterum, to lay the blame or fault in an other. Auertere haereditatem, to put one from his inherytaunce. Auertere flumen, to tourne the ryuer out of his course. Quod omen dij auertant, god kepe vs from that lucke or chaunce. Auertor, teris, ti, to disdayne. sometyme it sy∣gnifieth to tourne awaye, to tourne fro. Auerruncus, god which putteth away all euyl. Aufero, abstuli, auferre, to take awaye. Auferre caput alicui, to stryke of ones head. Auferre formam, to disfigure. Auferre nomen alicui, to take from one his good name. Aufer te hinc,Terent. get the hense. Aufer te domum, get the home. Auferas iurgium,Plautus. leaue thy chyding. Auferent quindecim dies hi ludi. those plais wyll let vs these .xv. dayes. Aufer nugas, leaue these tryfelynges, leaue your mockes. Auferre litem, to get by action or proces of the lawe.Plaut. in Rud. Maiore mulcta mulctat, quam li∣tem auferunt. He maketh theym to spende more, than they maye wyn by theyr suite. Auferre petitionem, to haue the thynge that he asketh.Plaut. in Cur. Tuo arbitratu, dum auferam abs te id quod peto: Euen as ye wyll, so that I may haue the thyng that I aske or demande. Auferre pignora, to take a distresse or gage. Auferre tacita, to make one to cōfesse a thīg secrete.Plaut. in Asinar. Suspendas potius me, quam tacita haec auferas: Thou mayste rather hange me, than make me confesse that secrete. Auferre inultum, to goo quyte without pu∣nyshment. Ergo pretium ob stultitiam fero,Terent. i Andria. sed inultum id nun{quam} auferet: I am well re∣warded for my folyshnes, but yet he shall not go quyte. Auferri sibi,Cic.  quest. 3. to be vexed in mynde, or frome hym selfe. Aufugio, gi, ere, to flee hense. Augeo, xi, gere, to increase. Augere auxilia, to make a newe hoste after a discomfite. Augesco, sci, scere, to waxe greate, or be gret, to be growen. Augifico, for augeo. Augmento, aui, are, to increase, or make more. Augur, guris, he that telleth by byrdes voyces or by theyr flying or sitting, what shal happē Auguralis, le, perteynynge to diuynation. loke Augurium. Auguratus, the dignitie of them, whiche were Augures, of whom was a college in Rome, as there be nowe of pryestes in cathedralle churches. Augurium, dyuynation or tellynge before of thynges whiche shal happen, specially by the flyght or voyces of byrdes. Auguro, as, are, to tell by suche crafte what shall happen. Auguror, ari, Idem quod Auguro. Auguror opinione,Cic. pro L. Mue▪ I suppose in myne opinyon. Augusta Cesaria, a citie in Spayne, vpon the ryuer of Iberus. Augusta Emerita, a citie in Portugall. Augusta Taurinorum, Turine. Augusta Triuerorum, the citie of Trier. Augusta Rauricum, a citie in Almayne called Basyle or Basilaea. Augusta Vindelicorum, a goodly and beauti∣ful citie in Germany, called Ausbourgh. Augusta Vessonum, Soisson in Champaign. Augustalis, le, the Emperours palayce or pa∣uyllion. Augustae, nobly, with a maiestie. Augustinus, the noble and mooste famous do∣ctour of Christis churche, was borne in Af∣fryca, in a towne named Gathensis, whoo was of suche an excellente wytte, that in his chyldhode he lerned all the .vii. liberall scien∣ces, without an instructour, and in al partes of philosophy was wonderfully lerned, spe∣ciallye in the doctrine of Plato, whereby he was the rather induced to imbrace the chri∣sten faythe. Notwithstandynge he fauoured the errours of them, whiche were called Ma∣nichaei: But by the continuall prayer of his good mother, called Monica, and the persua∣sion of holy sayncte Ambrose, he at the laste was conuerted vnto the trewe faythe, they bothe replenyshed with the holye goste, dyd
synge to gether the psalm Te deum, answe∣ryghe mutually one to the other. Afterwarde in prayer: wrytynge and preachynge he soo moche profyted, that he was had in great re∣uerence of all men, and wrate mo bokes than euer dyd any in the churche of Latines. Final¦ly beinge of the age of .76. yeres, whan he had ben byshop .40. yeres, he dyed in the yere of our lorde .437. Augustonemetum, Neuers in Fraunce. Augustus, noble or full of maiestie. wherefore the emperours of Rome were and yet be cal∣led Augusti. Augustus, is also the moneth next after Iuly. Auia, a grandame. Auiarium, a thycke wood without way. Also a place where byrdes be kept and nouryshed. somtyme busshes set for byrdes to haunt and syt in. Auiarius, & Auiaria, he and she that hath the charge of the kepyng of pultry or wildfoule. It maye also be vsed for a pultar, which sel∣leth pultry. Auicenna, or Abicena, a famouse physytion, whom some men do suppose to be of a cyte in Spaine called Hispalis or Siuile. some name hym prynce of Abalim, some do saye that he was kynge of Bithinia. Fynally he was ex∣cellentlye lerned, and wrate in the Arabike tongue many noble warkes of philosophy na¦turall and metaphisike. Also he comprehen∣ded phisike in .v. volumes, wherin he calleth hym selfe the interpretour of Galene: albeit men exactely lerned in the greke tongue, doo wryte, that he fayled in his interpretatiō, not truely declarynge Galens sentence in manye places. Notwithstandyng sense his tyme, vn∣tyll within these .xi. yeres or lyttel more, men partely for lacke of vnderstandyng the greke tunge, partly bycause the warkes of Galene were yll translated into latine, also not sustei¦nynge the flowynge copye of Galene, & thyn∣king this man more compendious in writing they haue studied his warkes rather thanne Galenes. wherby the cure of sicknes hath bē founde very vncertayne. Not withstandyng there is in his warkes moch notable know∣lege, not conuenient to be omytted of theym, whiche wolde aspire to the perfection of phi¦sike. He was about the yere of our lord .1151. and as some men do suppose, was poysoned by Auerois, whome not withstandynge he slewe before that he dyed. Auicula, a lyttell byrde. Auide, affectuously, couetously, ardently, with great desyre. Auiditas, desyre of a thynge, couetise, ardente affection. Auidus, a, um, couetise, desyrou. Auidus cibi,Terent. hungry. Auidis moribus, of an excedynge couatous appetite. Auilla, a lambe lately yaned. Auis, a byrde. Auirus, a, um, that which is left by ancestars. Auitus ager, olde inheritaunce. Auius, a, um,Plautus. wherby there is no passage or waye.Vergil. Auia uirgulta,Salust. busshes so thycke that no man maye passe. Auius, he that goeth out of the waye. Aula, a haule. sometyme the palaice or courte of a prynce. It was also of olde wryters vsed for olla, a pot. Aulae, shaumles or waytes. Aulea, tapesrye, hangynges of noble mennes houses. Aulerci,Caesar. people of a cytie of Normandy called Roane. Aulercij, people of Orliance in Fraunce. Auletes, a pypar. Auletris, tridos, a woman pypar. Auleticus, he that playeth beste on a shalme or wayte. Auli, a kynde of shel fyshe lyke vnto muskelles. Aulicotia, boyled meate. Aulicus,Sueton. in Nerone a courtiar. Aulicus, a, um, of the courte, as Aulicus ap∣paratus, courtly apparayle, but mooste pro∣perly of prynces. Aulis, idis, a lyttell countrey or shyre in Boeo∣tia in Greece. It was also a great Citie and hauen, where the princes of Grece assembled & conspired togither the distruction of Troy. Auloedus, a mynstrell. Aulon, the name of a mountayne and Citie in Calabria, where groweth excellente good wynes. Also of two other Cities, the one in Macedonia, the other in Cilicia. Aulula, a lyttell pot, wherof commeth Aulula∣ria, a commedy of Plautus, wherin is decla∣red the couetous mynde of on, which hyd his money in a pot, thynkyng that no man knew it but hym selfe, and yet was he deceyued of it. Auocamentum, passetyme, recreation, that withdraweth the mynde from heuynes or me¦lancholy. Auocatio, loke Auoco. Auoco, aui, are, to call away. Auocare animum, to withdrawe the mynde from a thynge. Auolo, aui, are, to flye awaye. Aura, Sometyme betokeneth a softe wynde. sometyme bryghtnes, somtyme fauour of the people. Aurea aetherea uesci, to lyue. Auras uitales carpere, to lyue.
Auram captare, to haue good hope. Aurae popularis homo, a man that seketh fa∣uour of the people. Auramentum, gyltynge. Auraria, a golde myne. Aurarn, gylters. somtyme it signifyeth main∣teynours. Auratus, a, um, gylte. Aurata, a fyshe of the sea, whiche I suppose to be a gylte heade, for he hath in his forehead a thynge congelat, whiche in the water shy∣neth lyke golde, and also hath a sette of tethe lyke check tethe, wherwith he hath ben hard of fyshers in the nyghte to crushe cockelles, and suche other lyttell shell fyshes, wheron he feedeth. Aureae, the hedstall of a horse. Aureus, a piece of golde in money. Aureus, a, um, of golde. Aurichalcum, latten metall. Auricomus, he that hath heare as bryghte as golde. Auricula, the eare lap. Auricularius, a secretary or pryuy councellour. Auricularius, a, um, perteyninge to the eares. Auricularis confessio, confession made secret¦ly, as priestis do here it. Auricularis, re, Idem. Auris, an eare. Aurem uellere, to put in remenbraunce. Aurem in utramuis dormire, to slepe surely to take no though or care for any thynge. Aures sitientes, eares desyrous to here. Aures arrigere,Terent. in Andria. to lyft vp the eares, to here attentiuely. Aures calent illius criminibus,Cicero in Salust. myne eares glowe or bourne to here of his mischeuouse actes. Aures hebêtes habet,Cic. pro G. Planco he is dull in herynge, or he lysteth not to here. Auricula infima mollior, a softe man, with whom a man may do what he lysteth. Auribus accipere,Plaut. in Trinum. to haue herde. Auribus capere spolia, to harken, and beare awaye our secresies,Plaut. in Milit. or secrete counsayle. Auribus dare, to flatter, to speke that whi∣che shall content a mannes eare.Treboni. Auribus aequissimis alicuius uti,Cicero. to be fauou¦rably harde of one.Volsi. Auribus prouehi,Apuleius to be caryed by the eares. It is properly vsed, where we wyll declare, that being in iourney with one, we delyte so moch in his communication, that we fele no labour or peyne by goynge or rydynge. Soo may we say Auribus prouehimur, in hering of hym, our peynes are relieued, or in hering hym talke, our iourney semeth shorte, or is abbreuiate. ❀Auribus lupum tenêre, to holde the wulfe by the eates: whiche is a prouerbe, and doth signifie to be in two sondry daungiers, and knowe not what is best to be done. Auriferum, that beareth golde. Aurifex, ficis, a goldsmyth. Aurificina, a goldsmithes shop. Aurifur, a theefe that stealeth golde. Auriga, a cartar, or a dryuer of a carte. Aurigo, a syckenesse called the yelowe iaūdise. Aurigor, aris, to dryue a carte, or some thyng lyke. Also to gouerne. Aurilegus, he that hath stolen golde. Auripigmentum, Auriscalpium, an eare pyker. Auritus, great eared, or he that harkeneth di∣lygentely. Auro, aui, are, to gylt. Aurora, the morynge or son rysynge. Aurum, golde. Aurum obrizum, fyned golde. Aurum coronarium, was gold gathered of the people, to make crownes, to sende to em∣perours, after theyr victories. Aurum captare, to hope. ❀Aurum Tolosanum habere,Eras a prouerbe, whiche signifieth to peryshe myserably: whi¦che prouerb had this beginning: whan Quin¦tus Cepio toke by assaulte the Citie of To∣losa in Italy, there was found in the temples there, great plenty of golde, which being ta∣ken awaye, all they whiche had therof any parte, dyed afterwarde myserablye. wherof happened this prouerbe, that whan any man fynished his lyfe in myserye, men wolde say, that he had golde of Tolosa. Ausculto, aui, are, to here diligentely, or gyue good care. also to obeye. Auscultabitur,Pla i Merc he wyll do as ye byd hym. Auscultare alicui, to obeye one, or be at his commandement. Auscultare inter sese, to whyster one in an o∣thers eare. Ausim, sis, sit, is put for audeam, as, at. Ausitis, the countreye called Hus, where Iob dwelled. Ausonium, Italy. Ausones, were the auney∣ente kynges of Italy. Auspex, spicis, idem quod augur. Also it sy∣gnifieth the person that maketh the mariage on the mannes parte. also the chiefe captain in warres. Auspicalis, a lyttell fyshe called also Remora, whiche cleauynge faste to the kele of a shyp, holdeth it styll agaynst the puissaunce as wel of wyndes as of ores. This fyshe is also cal∣led Echineis, rede Plinium .li. 32. Auspicatò, happyly, with good lucke. Auspicatus, a, um, honourably enterprysed. Auspicium, the signe or token shewed by birdes
of thynges that shall folowe. Also it betoke∣neth fortune, conduct, or disposition of a ca∣pitayne. also it is a token or signification of thynges to come. Somtyme it signifieth au∣thoritie.Vergil. Communem ergo hunc populum, paribus{que} regamus Auspicijs. Therfore let vs gouerne this people mixt now together, with equall or lyke authoritie. Auspicia optima, tokens of good lucke. Auspicia malo, with yll lucke, or in an yll tyme.Plaut. in Aulul. Nae ego aedepol uenihuc auspicio ma¦lo: I cam hither in an yl tyme, or, an vnhap∣py or vnlucky fortune brought me hyther. Auspicium liquidum,Plaut. in Persa. a manyfeste sygne or token. Auspico, aui, are, to seke for a thynge by diui∣nation. Auspicor, aris, ari, to take likelyhood. also to begyn or enter into a busynesse. Auster, stri, the southe wynde. Austeritas, sharpnes, cruelty. Austerus, soure or sharpe. also sore or without pitie. Austerus color, a sad colour. Australis, le, southerne, or of southe part. Austria, is a great countray on the vttermoste caste parte of Germany, and was sometyme called Pannonia superior. It boundethe on the easte vpon the royalme of Hungarye, on the west vpon the countraye called Noricum & Taurisium in duche, on the south vpon I∣taly, on the north it is inclosed with the gret riuer of Danubius or Hister, in duch Donow In it is the noble citie of Vienna, set vppon the sayde ryuer: there is also a famous vny∣uersitie, where specially is taught the mathe maticall sciences moste exactly and perfectly. Austrinus, a, um, from the southe parte. Austro, aui, are, to make moyste. Austrum, the spoke of a whele. Aut,Cicero in Bru. or, eyther. Aut certe, or at the leaste. Quo enim uince∣bamur a uicta Graecia, id aut illi ereptū est, aut certe nobis communicatum: That one thynge, wherin we gaue place to Grece, whi¦che is vainquished by vs, eyther it is taken cleane awaye from them, or at the leaste we be therin equall vnto them. Autem, a coniunction discretiue, whiche is ne¦uer put in the fyrste place, but in the seconde. It signifieth but.Terent. Ah quid faciam? quid meaautem? quid faciet mihi? Oh what shall I do? but what haue I herewith to do? what wyll he do to me? It signifyeth etiam. Abi∣te, tu domum, tu autem domum. Go your waye, get the home, and also goo thou thy waye home. Porro autem, more ouer Tum autem, afterwarde. Autem is somtyme vsed in the repetition of a question, as, Non fecis∣sent? fecissent autem: wolde they not haue done it? yes in saythe wolde they haue done it. It somtyme signifieth nothynge, but fyl∣leth vp the number in the sentence. Autenticus, a, um, of authoritie. Author,Tit. Liui. the fyrst inuētour or maker of a thing also a reporter of newes.Paul. iure consultus also a ruler or tutor also he that dothe sell or delyuer a thynge on warrantise.Cicero in Ver. also he whom a man foloweth in doynge of any thynge. Author tibi non sum te profugere,Plaut. in Cur. I wyll not counsayle the to run thy way. Author id tibi sum, I wyll thus aduise the. Authore te, by thy counsayle. Authorem dabit rem, the dede shall proue. Authores classici, authors receyued, and of all men allowed. Authoramentum, an indenture or obligation, wherby a man is bounden to do seruice. also ernest money, wages, or hyre. Authoratus, he that is bounde to serue special¦ly in warres. Authoratus, a, um, bounden by couenaunte. Authoritas,Terent. in prol. An. authoritie, credence, puyssaunce, iugement, the inioyeng of possession. Authoritatem defungi,Plaut. in Paenul. to deny to haue don any thynge, or to haue ben the cause that it was done. Authoritatem defugere,Terent. in Eunu. to refuse to do that he is commanded. Authoritatem interponere, to commande a thynge to be done. Authoritatis iure, by ryght of prescription. Vsus & authoritas, properly in a thynge by prescription. Authoro, are, to binde one by couenaunt to do seruice. Autocthones, people whiche beganne in the countrey that they do inhabit, whiche name was gyuen to them of Athenes. Autodidactus, he that lerneth withoute a mayster. Autographum, his owne hande wrytynge. Autolycus, a mayster thefe. Automata, thynges without lyfe, whiche seme to moue by them selfes, as it maye appere in olde horologes and ymages, whiche by vy∣ces do moue. It is also taken generally for al thynges which happen without any notable cause. Autopyron, browne bread. Autumnalis, le, belongynge to Autumne: Autumnus, the tyme of the yere betwene som∣mer and wynter, whiche begynneth the .vi. day of Auguste, and endeth the .vi. daye of Nouembre. Autumo, to suppose, to affyrme. Auulsio, a pluckynge of, or pullynge awaye. Auunculus, the vncle of the mothers syde.
Auus, the grandefather. Auxiliaris, re, wherin is ayde or succour. Auxiliares copiae, succours from a stranger. Auxiliarius, he that succureth, or commeth in ayde of an other. Auxilior, aris, ari, to ayde or helpe. Auxilium, ayde or helpe, succour. Auxilio esse, to helpe. Auxumae, the yonge fyshe whiche commeth of the spawn of Tunyes. A ANTE X. AXAMENTA, verses made by the pryestes of Mars, called Salij, in quicke tauntynge of all men. Axare, olde wryters vsed for nominare, to name or aske. Axes, bourdes sawen. Axilla, the arme hole. Axioma, a sentence spoken and proued: as If Plato walkethe, Plato mouche. If it be daye, the sunne is aboue the erthe. It is put by Tully for that whiche sophisters doo call a proposition, whiche is a sentence true or false. Axis,Iuuenal. an extree of a carte, sometyme the hole carte. somtyme it is shyngle, wherwith hou∣ses are couered in the stede of tyle. Axis mūdi, is a lyne ymagyned to go streight from the northe to the southe, diuidynge the worlde as it were in two partes: at the en∣des are supposed to be two pointes in heauē, whiche are called the Northe pole and the South pole. Axona,Caesar. a countrey in Fraunce called Desne. Axungia, swynes grease, or barows grease be∣inge olde. A ANTE Z. AZAN, an Hyll in Arcadia, where Cibele, called the mother of the god∣des was honoured. Azanium, was a wel, the water wherof being drunke, caused menne to hate the sauour and taste of wyne. Azotus, a citie in Siria. Azymus panis, vnleuened breade. B ante A. BAAL, IN THE tongue of Siria, signyfy∣eth Lorde, and is attribut to Iupiter. After some in∣terpretation it signifyeth hauinge dominion, subie∣ction, or possession. Babae, an interiection of wondrynge. Babel, signifieth confusion or myxture. It was the name of a toure buylded by Nemroth, be fore the incarnation of Christe. 2174. yeres. At the buyldynge wherof was the fyrste dy∣uysion of tunges: this was done in the land of Sennaar, in the countray of Caldea. Babylon, a great citie in Caldey, and sygnify∣eth confusion or translation: where was a towre edifyed by Nemroth, whiche was in heyght fyue myles,Philo. and a hundred threscore and ten paces.Ioseph▪ Afterwarde beynge enlarged by Semiramis,Diodo. the wyfe of Ninus kynge of Assiria, it was so great, that it conteyned in compasse three score myles, and the walles were in heyght. 300. feete, and in thyckenes or bredth. 75. fete, and had a hundred gates of brasse, and there ran through the myddell therof the noble and most famous ryuer Eu∣phrates, whiche is one of the ryuers, wher∣of the sprynge or head is in Paradyse. Babylonia, the countray where the citie of Ba¦bylon stode. Babylonicus, a, um, and Babylonius, a, um, of Babylon. Babylonica, are clothes wouen with sondrye colours. Bacca, a bery, as a baye bery, an hawe berye, an eglantine bery. Baccae, margarites, or perles. Baccalia, a kynde of bay trees or laurell, but it hath larger leaues, and greate plenty of be∣ryes. It is also called Augusta. Baccar, aris, & Baccharis, is an herbe hauyng a leafe in facion and greatnesse betwene vio¦let leaues, and the herbe which is called mo∣lein or long worte, the stalke square and som∣what roughe, whiche is in heyght a fote and a halfe, hauynge a floure lyke purple myxte with white, the roote blacke, but that it sa∣uoureth lyke vnto Cinamome: some do call it Asdrabacca, some our ladyes gloues. it is also a wyne potte. Baccaricum, a swete oyntmente, made of the rote of Asdrabacca. Baccatus, a, um, garnyshed with perle. Bacchanal, lis, the place where the solemnytie of Bacchus was kepte. Bacchanalia, feastes of the paynyms, whiche they dyd celebrate with al abhominations of lecherye.
Bacchatim,Coelius. lyke a madde man. Bacchius, a, um, of Bacchus. Bacchor, aris, ari, to celebrate the feast of Bac∣chus, to do a thynge lyke a madde manne, or vexed with spirites, to be woode. Bacchus, chi, callyd alsoo Liber & Dionysius, was the sonne of Iupiter by Semeles dough¦ter of Cadmus. The poetes fayned, that af∣ter that Iupiter hadde gotten Semeles with chylde, she desyred hym to company with her, lyke as he dyd with Iuno his wyfe in his di∣uine maiestie, wherfore he bryngynge with hym his thunder and lyghtning came to her: but she not able to sustayne his presence, felle in trauayle, and beinge delyuered longe be∣fore her naturall tyme, than dyed. Iupyter toke the chylde, and delyuered hym to Mer∣curius, who by his commaundement caried it vnto the caue of Nisa, whiche was be∣twene Pheniciam and Nilum, where it was nouryshed and brought vp by the Nymphes. Lyke foolyshely other imagyned, that Iupi∣ter made a hole in his thygh, and dyd put in the chylde, where it remayned vntyll the full tyme of his byrthe was come. What so euer his begynnynge was, this man amonge the Grekes, was the fyrst that dyd set vines, and made wyne. also he fyrst yoked oxen in the plough, and gatheryng to hym a great num∣ber of men and women, went a greate parte of the worlde, distroyinge tyrantes and mon∣sters, and conquered the countrey of India: but his people delytynge in wyne, and dryn∣kynge superfluousely of it, felle to fyghtynge amonge them selues. Wherfore he prouided, that whan they dranke, they shoulde haue in theyr hādes nothing but canes, or other light stickes. He that wyl knowmore of Bacchus, let hym rede. th .v. boke of Diodorus Sicu∣lus, where he shall fynde of hym a fable more pleasant than trewe. Baccifer, a tree bearynge bearyes. Baccula, a lyttell bearye. Bacenis sylua, a wodde in Fraunce callyd fo∣rest Neigre. Bacillum, a lyttell staffe. Bacrio, onis, a vessell of an olde facion. Baculus, a staffe. Bactra, a countrey in the furthest part of Per∣sia, the people wherof are callyd Bactri & Bactriani, in whome is suche inhumanytie, that whanne theyr parentes be very sycke or olde, they throwe theym vnto fyerce dog∣ges, whiche do rent them in pieces, and de∣uour them. Bactriani, people of that countrey. Bactrianum, a countrey wherein were a thou∣sande cities. Badius color, bay colour. Badizare,Plaut. in Asin. to go. Baetica, is a countraye in Spayne, whiche ta∣keth his name of a ryuer callyd Baetis, whi∣che doth runne through it, and was also cal∣lyd Turdetania, and is the southe parte of Spayn, where nowe be the cities of Cybile and Corduba, and the royalme of Granado, and extendeth to the pyllers of Hercules. Baeticatus, he that weareth a blacke or browne garment. Baeticus, a, um, blacke or browne. Baetis, a ryuer in Spayne by Grando callyd nowe Gadalqueni. Baeuis, a ryuer in Portugall. Baganum, the citie of Tourney. Bagôus, in the Persian tunge signifieth a gel∣dynge, or a man geldyd. Bagrada, a ryuer in Affrike by the citie callyd Vrica, where Attilius Regulus and the host of the Romaines slewe a serpent, which was in length. 120. fete. Bahal, the ydoll of Tyre. Baiae, arum, a towne in Campania, on the sea syde, betwene Puteolos, and Misenum, for the temperatenes of ayre & fayrenes of buyl∣dynge, moche haunted of the aunicent Ro∣mayns, where also ben hotte waters natural, whiche are bothe pleasaunt and holsome, and therfore it hath bene supposed, that all other hotte bathes naturall, were callyd Baiae. Baiulo, aui, are, to beare. Baiulus, a porter or caryer of burdeyns. Balaam, signifieth the age of the people, the de∣uourynge or destruction of them. It was the name of a southsayer,Nu. 22. & 23. who by Balac the king of Moabites, beinge desyred to curse the Is∣raelites, by the waye was let by an aungelle, whome the asse, wheron he rode, dyd behold, and the asse spake, and asked why he dydde beate hym: also if euer he dydde soo before. And than he hym selfe perceyued the aungell, who had hym that he shuld go to Balat, and that he shuld nothynge speake but that he cō∣manded him. And so finally he blessed the Is∣raelites, cōtrary to the expectation of Balac. Balaena, a gret fish of the see which hath an hole in his heed, wherby he takith ayre, & spouteth out great abūdance of water. Some do sup∣pose, that it is a thirlepoole, she hath pappes lyke a beast. Plinius writeth in hi .18 boke, that there hath ben sounde of them, whyche haue ben in length .240. fete. Balanites, a stone, which is a lyghte grene, and hath a veyn in the middel like a flame of fire. Balanitis, a kind of roūd chestēs, or chest nuttis Balanus, a kynde of acornes: it is alsoo a sup∣pository to helpe theym that be costife. also a swete oyntment made of Myrabolanes. Balatus, bleatynge of shepe.
Balaustium, the flowres of wylde pomegra∣nades. Balbucinor, aris, to maffle in the mouthe. Balbus, he that can not prouounce wel his wor¦des, whan he speaketh. Balburio, iui, ire, to stammer or stutte. Baleares insulae, two yles by Spayne, in the sea callyd Mare mediterraneum. The one is nowe callyd Maiorca, the other Minorca. Balinêum, a bayne or bathe. Balius, a, um, bay colour. Balius, a horse of bay colour. Ballista, a crosbowe, or a brake. It may be vsyd for a gunne. Ballistarium, the place where a great brake or slynge is layde. Balito, are, to bleate often. Balnea plural. a commune bayne. Balnearia, all thynges belongyng to a bayn. Balnearius, of a bayne. Balneatorius, idem. Balneator, the keper of a bayne, or he that ser∣ueth in a bayne. Balneolum, a lyttell bayne or bathe. Balneum, a priuate bayne. Balo, aui, are, to bleate lyke a shepe. Balsamum, baulme. Balsaminus, a, um, of baulme. Baltheus, & Baltheū, a belt, a sworde girdell. Bambalio, onis, he that stammereth or stutteth for feare. Bambatium, cotton. Bambia, a kynde of olyue tree. Banausus,Coelius. an artificer, which worketh by fire. Banchus, an haddacke. Baphia, a dyehouse. Baphicus, a, um, pertaynynge to dyenge. Baptes, a stone grene of the colour of a frogge Baptae,Angel. were certayne comedies, wherein were reproued thingis dishonest and abhominable Baptismus,Politian. & baptismum,Miscell. cap. 10. & Baptisma, atis, baptisme. Baptisterium, a bathe or vessell to washe in the body, a dyenge vate, a fonte. Baptizo, aui, are, to baptise, to deepe. Barathrum, an vnmeasurable depenes. Baratro, an vnthrist, that in lechery and glut∣tony deuoureth his substance. Barba, a bearde. Barba tenus, in or touchinge the bearde. Barba Iouis, an herbe callyd Syngrene, and groweth on tyles. Barba saenis, is an herbe whyche groweth a∣monge stones, the leaues wherof be lyke vn∣to longe heares. It is also callyd Barba pe∣trae, it hathe a yelowe floure, and the roote therof is bytter. Barbare, barbarouselye, rudelye, withoute e∣loquence. Barbari, in the olde tyme were all people, ex∣cepte Grekes, properly it be they, whiche do speake grossely, without obseruynge of con∣gruitie, or pronounce not perfectely, special∣ly greeke or latyne. Also they that abhorte all clegancy. Moreouer it sygnifieth them, whi∣che he without letters, fiers or cruell of ma∣ners or countenaunce. Barbaria, the countrey where dwelleth people rude or beastely. Barbaricarii, weauere of clothe of baudkyn. Barbaricus, barbarous. Barbaries, rudenes, lacke of ciuilitie. Barbarismus, the corrupte fourme of speakyng or pronouncynge. Barbatulus, he that hath a yonge berde. Barbatus, a, um, bearded. Barbesola, a towne in Spayne callyd Bar∣besull. Barbitium, the bearde. Barbitos, an instrument of musyke, whiche I suppose is that, that men calle doulsymers, some thynke it to be a double harpe, callyd a roote. Barbula, a lyttell bearde. Barbus, & barbo, a fysshe called a barbyll. Barce, a citie in Lybia, also an other citie callid Ptolomais. Bardana, the herbe callyd the great burte. Bardesanes, was an excellent astronomer. Bardi, were certayne wytches or prophetes in Gallia. Bardiacus, a certayne garment. Bardocucullum, a thrummed hatte, or a shepe∣herdes cloke. Bardus, a foole. Sometyme a mynstrell that syngeth iestes or fables. Bariona, Iohnonson, or the sonne of Iohn̄, as Barptholomeus, Ptholomeus sonne. Wher by it seemeth, that Bar in the tongue of Si∣ria or hebrewe sygnified sonne. Baris, idos, uel baridis, a bote in Egypt, wher∣in they caryed deade bodyes to buryenge. Barnacida, a garment that chyldren dyd wear. Barrire, to bray lyke an olyphant. Barritus, the brayenge of an olyphant. Barrus, an olyphant. It also signifieth a tothe.Martial. Quid tibi uis mulier, nigris dignissima bar∣ris? What woldest thou haue woman, that arte worthy blacke tethe? Barsinon, a towne in Spayne callyd Bar∣selona. Basan, a countreye beyonde the ryuer of Ior∣dane in Iudea, whyche was dyuided to two of the Tribes, whyche maye be interpreted moste fertyle and fatte. Bascanda, a certayne vesselle,Martial. whyche camme oute of Englande, whanne it was callyd Brytayne.
Bascania,Coelius. lyte tryfles, whyche smythes were wont to haue hanging before theyr shop win∣dowes to exclude enuy. Bascauda, a certayne kynde of vessell. Basia, honeste kysses, swete kysses. Basiatio, a kyssynge. Basiator, a kysser. Basium, a kysse. Basilaea, a citie in Germany. Basilia, an yle in the north occean sea. Basilica, a place where people doo assemble for suites in the lawe, and ciuile iugementes be exercysed, and counsayles holden. Also it may be taken for a hall, or other large place, where suiters do attende, or men doo wayte on ru∣lers, or great feastes be kepte. It also signifi∣eth a cathedrall churche. Basilica nux, a wall nutte. Basilicanus,laut. in ersa. he that keepeth the place callyd Basilica. Basilice,Plaut. in Epid. royally. Basilice agere, to do a thynge royally. Basilicon,Plaut. in urcu. a kynges robe. Basilicus, a certayn chaunce at dyee. Basilicus, a, um,Plaut. in Trinum. royall. Basilica facinora, actes or gestes of kynges. Basilicae edictiones,Plaut. in Capt. the kynges ordynances or commaundementes. Basilides, was the name of an heretyke, whych affirmed, that Christe was not crucified, but Simon Cyreneus, who (as the euangelistes do write) was constrained to beare the crosse whan our sauyour waxed faynte by effusion of bloude by his scourgynge. This man sayd also, that it was none offence to deny Christe in the tyme of persecution. He also denied the laste resurrection. He also affyrmed, that vir∣ginitie was of no greatter meryte than ma∣riage, but equall with it. He was soone after the tyme of the apostles, about the yere of our lorde. 110. Basilidiani, the folowers of Basilides. Basiliscus, callyd also Regulus, in englysshe a cocatrice, whiche is a serpent in the desertes of Affrica, with a white circle about his hed, hauynge a sharpe heade, redde eyen, and is somewhat blacke of colour, and is soo veno∣mous, that he sleeth men and beastes with his breath, and with the syght of his eyen. Basilius, a proper name of a man, of the whych one was byshoppe of Cesaria, a man in his tyme of incomparable vertue and lernynge. he was borne in the countrey callyd Cappa∣dotia, of a noble house, and as Gregorius Nazianzenus wrytethe, his parentes were christians and catholycke, his fathers name was Basilius magnus, by the which name he was also called, he was taught of his father, as welle grammer as other lernynges callyd Quadriuales. After he went to Cesaria, and from thense to Constantinople, where he ler∣ned rhetorike and logyke more perfectly, and also philosophy. from thens he came to Athe∣nes, where dyuerse greate lernyd men dispu∣ted with hym, and fynally were by him van∣quished. but whiles he exactly studied in phi∣losophy, Gregory callyd Nazianzens, beynge than hollye dedycate to the studye of Scryp∣ture, and seruynge God, louynge Basile en∣tierly, came in to the schoole, where he radde in a chayre, and takynge hym by the hande, brought hym to a monasterye, where he lay∣enge aparte all bokes of philosophy, onely in∣tended to the redynge of holy scripture. And at the laste the spirite of god leadyng theym, they diuided them selfes, Basyl goyng about the countrey callid Pontus, taught the peo∣ple the true fayth. After he was byshoppe of Cesaria, and than was exiled by Valens the emperour, whiche fauoured the Arrian here∣sy. he was of suche a reuerent grauitie with humblenes, that the people loued hym, them∣perour and men in authoritie fearyd hym, in so moche as whan he was eftsoones reuoked from exile, whan other of the true faith were put out of the countray, Basile only for feare was reserued. He was about the yere of our lorde. 367. Basis, the foote of a pyller, or that whiche su∣stayneth any thyng. Also it signifieth the foū∣dation or grounde of a matter. Bassaris, idis, a priest of Bacchus. Basterna, a certayne sorte of charyottes. Basternae, people on the northesyde of Thracia about the ryuer of Isther of Danubius. Bat, a worde spoken reprochefullye or scorne∣fully, as russhe, or tut. Sometyme it is vsyd for a worde of sylence, as peace, or huysht. Batauia, a countray in lowe Germany, callyd Hollande. Batauus, an Hollander, or man of Hollande. Batalus, an effeminate person.Eras. chil. Batilus, a fyre panne. Batiochus, a lyttell potte, oute of the whyche wyne is poured at the table. Batis, or batos, is the fyshe callyd raye or skeat. Batrachion, or Batrachium, an herbe, whyche I do suppose is that whych is commonly cal∣lyd goldknappe or yelow cray. It is also cal∣lyd of Democritus Chrisanthemon, for it hath a floure as yelow as golde, and the leafe is somewhat lyke vnto percily, but that it is moche greatter. Batris, a vessell with a longe handell. Battiola, a wyne potte or flagon. Battologia, a longe patteryng or superfluous speakynge. Batuo, i, ere, to beate with a rodde.
Batus & Ephil, hebrewe measures, the oone of drye thynges, the other of lycour, by the com¦putation of Senalis, contayneth .vi. galons one pottell, and one quarte. Bauaria, callid also Baioaria in duch Berne, in french Bauiere, a contray in high Germany, lyeng in the east, on the south it boundeth on the mountaynes of Alpes, whyche dyuideth Germany from Italy, on the weste lyeth the countrey callyd Sueuia, in douche Swane, on the east Austria, callid in douch Owstryk, on the northe the royalme of Boheme. Bauari, uel Baioarn, people of Bauier. Baubare, to barke lyke a dogge. Baxiae, slyppers, properlye of phylosophers, or suche other. ¶B ANTE D & E. BDelium, is a tree growynge in Arabia and Scithia, also a gumme commynge of the same tree, lyke to waxe, but clere as gumme, within vnctuous or fatte, verye swete of sauor, whan it is rubbed or burnid, and bytter in taste. Beatè, happily, fortunately. Beatitudo, & beatitas, is a heape of good thin∣ges gatheryd togyther, of it selfe suffycient without lacke, and a verye perfection accor∣dynge to vertue. Beatus, is he whiche hath aboundaunce of all thynge that is good, and is perfect in al thyn¦ges that be worthy prayse, or ought to be de∣syred of a good man. somtyme it is taken for fortunate or noble. Bebritium, seu bebriacum, a towne in Italye betwene Cremona and Verona. Bebrytia, a countray callyd the great Phrigia. Bebrytius, a, um, & bebryx, icis, of the coun∣trey of great Phrigia. Bedegnar, a worde vsyd of the barbarous phi¦sytions, is after the sayenge of Serapio, the white brier, whiche, as Dioscorides writeth, hath a whyte flowre and sweete. Manardus supposeth it to be a certayn kynde of thistels with sharpe pryckes and a square stalke, and nowe some do tak it for the thystell, which is callyd Carduus benedictus. Beelphegor, a gapyng ydoll. Beelsebub, an ydoll callyd god of flyes. Beelsephon, lorde of the northe, an ydoll set vp in the places of espyall. Beemoth, the dyuell, and sygnifieth a beaste. Belbus, a beaste callyd also Hiena. Belerium, or Bolerium promontorium, is a place in Cornewall callid saynt Burien. Belgae, were the people whiche do inhabyte in the countreys and townes inclosed with the Occean sea, and the ryuers of Rhene, Marn, and Seyne, wherein be the cities of Trire, Colaigne, Magunce, and Reynes. Also the countrayes of Flaunders, Hollande, Gel∣der, Iuliers, Cleuis, Hennaw, part of Frise∣lande, Pycardy, the greatest parte of Cham∣paigne, and all the forest of Arderne. And all this countraye was sommetyme callyd Gal∣lia belgica. Belgium, the towne of Beauuoysyne. Belial, the deuyll, whiche is interpreted Apo∣stata, without yoke. Bellaria, bankettynge dyshes, as tartes, march paynes, and other lyke. Bellarius, a, um, apt for the warre. Bellator, a warryour. Bellator equus, e horse of warre. Bellatrix, a woman warriour. Bellatulus, bellatula, a wanton worde, whiche is as moche to say,Plauns as ioly, proper, lyttel fayre one, well fauoured chylde, lyttel swete harte, prety mayden, prety boy. Bellax, acis, vsed or haunted in warres. Belle, well. Belle se habet, he dothe or fareth well. Bellerophontes, seu Bellerophon, the sonne of Glaucus kynge of Ephyra, who beynge a man of moche bealtie and prowesse, was ar∣dentelye belouyd of Stenobea, the wyfe of Pretus kynge of Ephyra, nexte after Glau∣cus, and whan she desyred hym to commytte adultrye with her, he fearyng the vengeance of Iupiter god of hospitalitie, and remem∣brynge the frendeshyp shewed to bym by her husbande, refusyd her, and dydde put her a∣way from hym, whyche she dysdaynyng, and beinge in a wodde rage, accusyd hym to her husbande, that he had rauysshed her, but he lyke a sober man, wolde not slea hym in his owne house, but delyuerynge hym letters to his wyues father, sent hym into Lycia, who perceyuynge therby the mynde of Pretus, en∣couraged Bellerophon to distroye the two monsters callid Solymos and Chymaera, and sente hym therto, that he moughte be slayne vnder the coloure of a valyaunt enterpryse, but he acheuynge it noblye, retournyd with honour. Belliatus,Plaut. is Ruden. a, um, beautified. Bellica, was a pyllour in the temple of Bello∣na, callyd goddesse of battayle, wherat they vsed, whan warres were proclaymed, to cast a iauelyn. Bellicosè, valyantly. Bellicosus, valiant in armes, fiers or warlshe. Bellicrepa, a certayne fourme of daunsynge in harneyse. Bellicus, a, um, pertaynyng to warre. Belliger, a warryour. Belligero, are, to make warre.
Bellipotens, puissaunt in armes or battayle. Bellis, seu Bellium, the whyte daysy, callyd of some the Margarite, in the northe it is callid Banwort. It is also a fysh with a long beake lyke a crane, whyche is callyd of somme a hornebeake. Bello, & bellor, aris, ari, to make warre. Bellocassii,Caesar. a countreye in Fraunce nowe cal∣lyd Bayenx. Bellona, callyd goddesse of battayle. Bollouaci,Caesar. a countreye in Fraunce, nowe na∣myd Beauuoys. Bellua, a great cruell beast, or a monster. Bellum, sygnifieth all the tyme that the war∣res do contynue, also a battayle or warre. Bellum ciuile, warre betwene menne of one countraye. Bellum intestinum, warre in one countrey a∣monge the inhabitantes. Bellum nauale, warre on the sea. Bellum instruere, to prepare for warre. Bellicum canere, to blowe to the fielde. It is also vsyd in this signification, to animate or incourage. Bello premere, to trouble one with warres. Bellum componere, to make a conclusion of warres, to make peace betwene two whiche are at warre. Bellum conflare, to stere vp warres. Bellum indicere, to declare warre. Bellum moliri, to prepare warre. Bellum ponere, to set asyde warre. Bellum profligare, to fyght out a battayle. Bellum merum loquitur,Cic. Atti. he speaketh onely of warre. Belluatus, a, um, paynted or kerued with great beastes. Belluata taperia, tapestry, wherin is wrought or paynted the figures of beastes. Baelon, a towne in Spayn callyd Tariffa. Belūinus, a, um, beastly. Belūina rabies, a beastly fury. Beluosus, a, um, full of monsters of the sea. Bellulus, a, um, somwhat fayre, minyon, tricke galaunt. Bellus, a, um, fayre, pleasant, good. Bellus homo, an honest man. Belus, was an auncient kynge of Assyria, to whom the fyrste image or ydoll to be honou∣red,Cael. anti lect. was made. It sygnyfyeth after somme mens opinion the compas of the fyrmament: of some the aire that incloseth al thynge. it si∣gnifieth also a pauement, also the first entrye in at a doore. also the feruent heat of the hea∣uen. It is also put for the ayre, whiche is vn∣der the firmament. it is also a ryuer in Siria whiche hathe sande of the nature of glasse, also it tourneth all other mettall that cometh into it, into glasse. Belzahard, is a barbarous worde, but for the efficacy of the thyng, it is necessary to knowe the signification therof. It is a speciall and soueraygne medicine agaynst poyson beinge drunke.Abēzoar. Auenzoar wryteth, that agaynst poi∣son, whyche is excedyngly hot, he made it in this fourme, thre graines of barley, with fiue ounces of the water of a gourde. But some men thynke, that the mooste excellent Belza∣harde is this whiche foloweth:Plin. li. 8. cap. 32. li. 28. cap. 9. The proper∣tie of the harte is (as Plinius doth write) to be at contynuall debate with the serpente, in so moche as he pursueth hym, and seketh for hym at the hoole, where he lyeth, and with the breath of his nosethrylles compelleth him to come forthe. Now after that the hart hath fought with the serpent and caten hym, he be¦commeth thyrsty, and runneth vnto some wa∣ter, and leapeth into it, but he than doth not drynk. For if he shuld take neuer so lytel wa∣ter, he shulde dye incontinent: than do yssue out of his eyes dropes, whiche by lyttell and lyttell do congeale, and waxe as greate as a chesten nutte. After that the harte is comme out of the water, men do awayt where those dropes do fall, and taketh them, and layeth them amonge treasure, as a thynge most pre∣cious, and agaynst all maner of poyson most certayne remedye. This haue I taken oute of the boke of Ioan. Agricola de recentiori∣bus medicamentis. Bembina, a towne by the forreste callyd Ne∣maeus. Bembinatus, of that towne or wodde. Benacus lacus, a lake in Italy callyd Gardae. Bene, well, honestly, or prosperousely. Bene accipere aliquem, to intreate one well, or intertayne hym. Bene acceptus, well intertayned. Bene agitur,Plautus. the thynge is well done. Bene ambulato, god be with the. Bene audire,Plinius. to be well spoken of. Bene cogitare de aliquo, to haue a good o∣pinion of one. Bene conuenire inter eos, they agreed well togyther. Bene curare aetatem, to lyue pleasantly. Bene de te mereo, I intreate the well, thou art beholden vnto me. Bene ferre gratiam,Plaut in Rud. to do pleasure to one. Bene habere, to behaue me or hym well. Bene hercle denuncias,Plaut. in Trinum. thou tellest me good tydynges. Bene hoc habet,Plaut. in Epid. this mattier commeth well to passe. Bene longus sermo, a very longe tale. Bene magnus, very great. Bene mane, very tymely. Bene mereri, to do pleasure to one.
Bene multi, very many. Bene nummatusm marsupium, a purse welle storyd with money. Bene nummatus homo, a well monied man. Bene successit, it came well to passe. Bene uale, farewell, adewe. Bene ualere, to be in good helth. Bene uertere, to turne to good. Precor deum ut haec res bene uertat tibi, I praye god this thynge may tourne the to good, or may be for thy profyte. Bene uiuere, to make good chere. Bene uolo tibi, I wolde the good. Benedicè, an aduerbe, signifyeng in praysinge or sayeng well.Plautus. Cum illiciebas me ad re blan∣de & benedice, Whan thou dyddest trayne me vnto the with pleasant wordes and pray∣synge of me. Benedico, dixi, dicere, to prayse, to saye welle of a man. Benedicus, a man wel tunged, or fayre spoken. Benefacio, cere, to do well. Benefacta, benefites, pleasures. Benefactum, it is well done. Beneficentia, is not onely liberalitie in gyuing of money, or possessiōs, or other like thinges, but also in helpyng a man with counsell, solli∣citation, or other labour. Beneficiarij, were they whyche in the warres were not charged with watche or other la∣bours pertaynyng to the field or hoste. Beneficiari{us}, he that receiueth a benefit or good tourne of an other. Beneficiarius fundus,Alciat. in cōmen. de uerb. sign. lande gyuen in fee sym¦ple or fee tayle to be holden of the donour by some seruice. Beneficium, a benefyt, a plesure, or good turne. Beneficus, he that is beneficiall or lyberall. Beneuolens, beneuolente, he that loueth welle an other. Beneuolentia, fauour, or good wyll, an intent to doo well. Beneuolus, fauourable. Benignè, an aduerbe, whyche sygnifieth cur∣teysly, graciousely, bounteousely. Benignitas, bounteousnes, curtesye, lyberaly∣tie, gentylnesse Benignus, a, um, gentyll, benygne, and boun∣teouse, or lyberall. Benigna terra, a grounde that is fertyle. Beo, aui, are, to comfort, to make happy. Berecynthia, called the mother of goddis. Bercynthus, a mountayn and towne in Phri∣gia, where Cybele was worshypped, wherof she was namyd Berecynthia. Berengarius, was the name of an heretycke, whyche affyrmed, that in the sacramente of the aultare was not the very body of Christe in the substaunce of fleshe and bloudde, but onely in a sygne and figure. He was a french man borne, and of lytell lernyng, sauyng that he was a subtyll logician. Afterwarde he dyd recant. And in the counsayle of Lateranens his errour was condempned, the yere of our lorde 1082. Berilus, is a precious stone in facion as it were syxe square, in colour like oyle or water in the sea. His properties are to make theym that do weare hym mery, it conserueth and incre∣seth the loue betwene man and wyfe. If it be hanged aboute ones necke, it putteth awaye dreames, it cureth diseases of the throte and chekes, and all those whyche come of moyst∣nes of the head. It helpeth women, whiche do trauayle with chylde. Bersabë, a citie in Iudea, callid also Puteus iu∣ramenti, the pytte of the othe, where Abra∣ham dwellyd, whiche is the confynes of the lande of beheste. Bes, bessis, a weight of .viii. ounces. Bestia, a beaste. Bestiarij, men which in olde tyme fought with beastes in the syght of the people. Beta, an herbe callyd betis. therof commeth a verbe betisare, whiche signifieth to be vnsa∣uery in communication or writing. Eras. chil. And men vnsauery or vnwitty were in scorn callyd Betae. Laert. de Diogene. Bethania, a towne two miles from Hierusalem on the syde of the mount Olyuete. Bethasij, people dwellyng aboute the towne of Mastreyghte, within the diocesse of Luke in Germany. Bethel, a citie in Samaria, where the people dwellyd, whyche were callyd Iebusaei. Bethleem, the cite of Dauid the prophet, wher he was borne and dyed, where also our saui∣our Christe Iesu was borne, there also dyed Rachel the wyfe of Iacob the patriarche: it was assigned to the tribe of Iuda, and was dystant from Hierusalem .vi. myles, and was fyrst callyd Euphrata, and signifyeth in the hebrue tounge, The house of breade. Bethsaida, or Bethesda, was a greate ponde in Hierusalem, wherin the priestes wasshed the shepe, whiche shulde be sacrificed, and maye be interpreted, The house of cattelle. it was also the name of a towne, where Peter and Philyp the apostles were borne. Bethsamis, a cytie in Galile, where Christ dyd many myracles. Bethsamitae, people of Bethsamis. Bethsura, & Bethsurae, a strong fortresse of the Iewes. Beto, to walke forthe. Betonica, an herbe callyd Betayne, whiche is hote and dry in the fyrste degree, and hath in∣numerable vertues.
Betonica altilis, siue coronaria, I suppose it to be gylofers. Betphage, a towne in Iudea, and maye be in∣terpreted the house of a mouth or a iawe. Bettere, a towne callyd Besics in Guyen. Betula, a tree callyd byrche. ¶B ANTE I. BIAEON, wheate, whyche is harde to be beaten out of the huskes. Bias Priencus, was one of the seuen wise men of Grece, who beholdynge his countreye gotten with enemies, fledde. And other men, carieng with theym suche of their goodes as they mought bere, he toke with him nothing. And whan it was demanded of hym, why he dyd so, he answered: Truly I cary al my goo∣des with me, meaning vertue and doctrine, re¦putyng the goodes of fortuue not to be his. Bibaculus, he that drinketh often. Bibax, acis, bibosus, a great drynker. Bibisia, bybbynge. Biblia, the wyfe of Duilius the Romayn, whi∣che was of so great chastitie, that she was at that tyme an example, whan it was a thynge monstrous to here of vnchastitie. Biblio, blere, to make a sowne as a pot dothe, whan drynke is drawen into it. Bibliographus, a wryter of bokes. Bibliopola, a stacioner, or a bokeseller. Bibliotheca, a lybrary. Bibo, bibi, bere, to drynke. Bibitur.Ci. in. Ver ct. 3. Mature uemunt, discumbitur, fit ser∣mo inter eos, & inuitatio, ut graeco more bi¦beretur: They come at the tyme appoynted, and there was amonge theym talkynge and quaftyng, that euery man mought drynke af∣ter the Grekes facion. Bibractae, people of a countraye callid Beuray Dautume. Bibrax, a towne in Fraunce in the countye of Rochel callyd Bray. Bibulus, a, um, that sucketh vp shortly. Biceps, cipitis, that whiche hath two heddes. Biclinium, a chamber with two beddes. Bicornium, that whiche hath two hornes. Bicorpus, that whiche hath two bodies. Bicurgium, a citie in Almayn callyd Herfford. Bidental, a place where they vsed to sacrifyce shepe, whanne any house was bournyd with lyghtnynge. Bidentes, sheepe with .ii. teeth, callyd in some place hogrelles, or hogattes. Biducenses, people, of Normandy. Biduum, the space of .ii. dayes. Biennis, ne, any thynge of .ii. yeres olde. Biennium, the space of two yeres. Bifariam, in .ii. partes, or .ii. maner of ways. Bifarie, the same. Bifera arbor, that beareth twyse in a yere. Bifidus, clefte. Bifores, that hath two doores. Bifrons, that hath two forheades. Bifur, a double thiefe, or he that hathe stollen twyse. Bifurcatus, a, um, double forked. Biga, a carte drawen with two horses. Bigamus, he that hath had two wyues. Bigenera, beastes comen of two sundry kindes, as betwene a dogge and a wolfe, or betwene an asse and a mare, and suche lyke. Biiugi, cattell or beastes, yoked two togither. Bilanx, ancis, a beame with two balances. Bilbilis, a towne in Spayne. Bilibris, bre, wayeng two poundes. Bilinguis, dooble tongued. Biliosus, he that is cholerike. Bilis, without any addition, mooste commonly signifieth choler. Bilis atra, melancoly. Bilis flaua, choler mixt with fleume. Bilis rubea, choler mixte with bloudde, or redde choler. Bimaritus, he that hath had two wyues. Bimembris, of .ii. partes, hauing .ii. membres. Bimestris, two monthes olde, or two yere, ac∣compted of the moone. Bimulus, of two yeres age. Bimus, of two yeres. Binus, a, um, two, idem quod duo. Binae litterae, two letters. Bini tabellarij, two messangers. Bina iuga boum, two yoke of oxen. Binarius numerus, the number of two. Binominus, & binominis, he that hathe two names. Bion, the name of a philosopher. Biothanatus, he that is violently slayne. Bipalium, a mattocke with two bittes. Bipara, she that hath had .ii. byrthes. Bipatens, open on bothe sydes. Bipennis, hauyng two wynges, also a twybyll wherwith carpēters do make their mortaisis. Biponnella, an herbe callid Pympernell. Bipertior, iris, iri, to diuide in two partes. Bipedalis, & bipedaneus, two foote longe or brodde. Bipes, pedis, hauyng two fete. Biremes, shyppes whyche haue two raunges of oores. Bis, twyse, Bis ter{que}, ones or twyse. Bis deni, twenty. Bis tanto, twyse as moche. Bisaltae, a people in Scithia. Bisellium, a seate or fourme, wheron two men only may sytte. Bisextus, one day added to, in foure yeres.
Bisextilis annus, the leape yere. Bison, tis, a beaste hauynge one horne, and a very longe mane. Bistonia, the countray called Thracia. Bistonis, a citie, and also a great mere or pole in the countrey of Thrace. Bisulcus, a, um, clouen foted. Bithymum, hony gathered by the bees of two sortes of tyme. Bithynia, a royalme in Asia, whiche nowe the Turke hath, on the Northe it hath the sea called Ponticum, on the Southe Misia and Phrigia. Bithynium, a citie in Bithynia. Bitumen, a kynde of naturall lyme, whereof the olde walles of the citie of Babylon were made. Bituminatus, a, um, of the lyme or claye called Bitumen. Biturges, Bourges in Fraunce. Biuium, awaye hauynge two pathes. Biuius, a, um, done two sundry wayes. Bizen, a Citie of Thracia, of Pliny called Bizian. B ANTE L. BLANDA, a towne in Spayn called Blanes, they be also delectable thinges in readynge. Blande, an aduerbe signifienge, with fayre or pleasaunt wordes, graciousely, amorousely, flatteryngely. Blandimentū, thynge plesantly done or spoken Blanditia, flatterye, pleasaunt motion, intise∣ment by wordes. Blandicus, he that flattereth. Blandidicus,Plaut. in Trinum. a fayre speaker or flatterer. Blandi loquentulus, a pleasaunt speaker. Blandior, iris, iri, to flatter, to speke fayre for aduauntage. Blanditiae, flatterynge, fayre speche. Blandus, a, um, flatterynge, or fayre spoken, pleasaunte. Blapsigonia, losse of generation, properlye in bees. Blasphemia, cursynge, reprochynge, common∣ly blasphemy. whiche is nowe onely referred to the despite of god. Blasphemo, aui, are, to curse, to reproche, to speke in the derogatiō or despyte of an other. Blatero, onis, a bablar, he that talketh to no purpose. Blatero, aui, are, to bable in vayne, and from the purpose. Blatio, iui, ire, to speake or talke lyke a foole, or without any purpose or reason, to bable. Blatta, is properly the longe flye, that fleeth in the leame of a candell, and is of the kynde of mothes. It is also a sylke worme. Blattaria, an herbe callyd Moleyn. Blatteus, a, um, purple. Vestis blattea, a purple garment. Blax, softe, delycate, wanton, that can not de∣caerne thynges, and he whyche vaynely bo∣steth hym selfe. Blemmiae, monstruous people in India, which haue none head, but theyr eyes and mouthe be in their breastes. Blepharo, onis, he that hath great browes. Bleptae, a people in Aphrike, which haue their vysages in theyr breastes. Blaesus, he that stammereth, omyttynge some letters in speakynge. Blitteus, a, um, vnsauery. Blittea meretrix, an vnsauery queane. Blittus, an herbe beinge of the kynde of bietes, hauynge no sent. Blitum, an herbe callyd spynache. ¶B ANTE O. BOA, a serpent in Italy, so great & large that on a tyme whanne one was kylde, there was a chyld all hole founde in his bealy,Plinl cap.  as Pliny writeth. Boa is also a syeke∣nes, wherin the body is ful of redde blysters. Boalia, playes made for the healthe of oxen and kyen. Boaria, an herbe callyd a clote or burre. Boarium forum, the market place where oxen be solde. Boca, uel Bocas, a fyshe whiche hath his back as it were paynted with sundry colours. Io∣uius sayth and affyrmeth, that he is taken in all costes in great sculles, not withstandyng I do not yet fynde his name in englyshe. Boces, callyd of Theodorus Bocae, is a fysshe, that onely hath a voyce, whiche mought seme to be dogfyshe, whiche is sayde dothe make a noyse lyke the barkynge of a dogge, after he is taken. Bocchyris, a mans name. Bodellium, a kynd of swete smellyng gumme. Boebis, a lake in Thessaly. Boēmia, is a royalme callyd Beame, inclosyd with the boundes of Germany, hauynge on the easte Hungary, on the southe Bauier, on the weste, the countreye callyd Noricum, on the northeaste Polonia or Poole. It is equall in length and in bredthe, eche of them beyng about thre dayes iourney. And is enuyroned with the famous foreste callyd Sylua Hercy∣nia, and through the myddell therof passethe the greate ryuer callyd Albis, and an nother ryuer namyd Multania, vppon the ryuage whereof is sette the pryncipall cytie namyd Braga or Praga. The language there is not
duche, but the slauoin tungue: not withstan∣dynge in the churches  people art taughte in the duche tunge, in the church yardes they are taughte in the beame tunge. They varye from the catholyke faythe, in sundry opiny∣ons, and do skorne all ceremonies. In some places there they pryuyly obserue the secte of the Adamites and Waldenses in the acte of lecherye. whereof is wrytten in the wordes Adamitae & Vualdenses. Boeodurum, a Citie in Almayne, nowe called Patauia or Passaw. Boeotia, a countrey in Greece, wherin was the citie of Thebes: nowe it is called Vandalia. Bogud, a towne in Affryke: also the name of a kynge. Boiae, gyues or fetters. Boij, people of Burbon in Fraunce, and Ba∣uiar in Almayne. Boletus, a mushrom. Bolis, idis, a darte with wyld fyre. also a plū∣met and lyne wherwith shypmen doo sounde in the sea, to fynde lande. Bolus, a masse or lumpe of mettal or other like thynge. also a throwe or caste at dyse. also a draughte with a net in waters. It is also a morsell. Bombax,Plautus. an aduerbe spoken of hym, that set∣teth naught by that whiche is spoken, as one wolde saye, whan he is rebuked of a faulte. And what than? or tushe, I care not for that. Bombitatio, the noyes that bees make. Bombus, a great sowne or noyse, as it were of a trumpe, or gunne, a bounce. Bombix, icis, a sylke worme. Bombycinus, a, um, of sylke. Bombycina uestis, a garment of sylke. Bomolochus, a common scoffar, or he that su∣steyneth all villany for to get money. It was also taken for a boye, that stode at the altars ende, to stele away the candels. Bona dea, was she that some called Farua, or fauna, of whom: Varro wryteth, that in her lyfe neuer man dyd se her, nor harde her na∣med, but onely her husbande. Bona caduca, the goodes of them that be dam¦ned, goodes escheted. Bona praedia, the goodes whiche be lyable to euery action. Bonaria, caulmnes of the sea. Bonasus, is a beaste in fourme lyke a bull, but broder and shorter, and hath a mane lyke an horse downe to the shulders, but the heare is softer, and commeth downe to his eyes: the heare of his body is lyke a bryght sorrell, his mane is darker couloured. The fleshe of him is pleasaunte in eatinge, and therfore he is hunted, but he runneth continually vntill he be wery, and in his runnynge flyngeth, and shoteth forthe his sharde and dunge thre fur∣longe from hym, as Plinius writeth. Bonitas, goodnes, honestie, and iustyce. Bonum, good, whiche is contrary to ylle. Bonus, a good man. also beneuolent, peasyble, lyberal, playne, easy to speake to, worshypful, treatable, mercyfull. Bona dicere, to report well. Bona fide dicere,Terent. in Andria. to say truely and playnely. Bona pars, the more part. Bona uenia, By your lycence, Noo displea∣sure to you. Bona uerba quaeso, say well I pray you. Bonae aedes, a substancyall house. Bonae fidei possessor, a feoffee of trust. Boni consulas, take it in good parte. Boni frugi, honest, of good conditions. Bona ualetudo, good helthe. Bonae notae uinum, wyne of a good sorte. Bonae fidei emptor, he that meaneth good faythe, in byenge, intendynge no deceyte. Bonus horas male collocare, to loose tyme, whyche mought haue ben better spent. Bonis auibus, of good lucke. Bono animo esse, to be of good chere. Bono animo dicere aut facere, to speake or do a thynge for a good intent. Bono ingenio esse, to be debonayre. Bono publico facere, to doo it for the com∣mune weale. Boo, as, are, to belowe lyke a cowe. Boōtes, a sterre, which folowith Charles wain Borbetomagus, or Vormatia, a towne callyd Wormes in Almayne. Boreae, Iasper stones. Boreas, the northesterne wynde. Boreus polus, the northesterre callyd the lode sterre. Borith, an herbe that fullers vse. Borsyrites, a kynde of olyue hauynge manye boughes, white and spotted with sanguyne. Borysthenes, a greatte ryuer in the countreye of Scithia. Bos, bouis, a rother beest, be it bul, oxe, or cow. ❀Bos in lingua, A prouerbe touchyng them whiche dare not speake the truthe, or wyl not for bicause they haue receiued money to hold theyr peace. Bosphorus, the name of a part of the sea, whi∣che lyeth in two sundry costes, one by Constā¦tinople, the other more northe. Bosra, a citie of Idumea. Bostar, an oxe house. Bostrychites, a preciouse stone lyke to women∣nes heare. Botrys, or botrus, a cluster of grapes. Botrytes, a precious stone, like to a black grape Botuli, they whiche haue moche bloud. Botulus, or botellus, a puddynge made of the
inwarde of a rother beaste. Botytillus, a lyttell cluster of grapes. Bouatim, lyke an oxe. Bouicida, a slauter man. Bouile, an oxe stall. Bouillae, arum, a towne not far from Rome. Bouillus, a, um, belonginge to neate. Bouinator, he that with greatte noyse cryeth out on an other man. Bouinor, aris, to belowe out lyke a cowe. B ANTE R. BRABEVTA, & Brabeutes, he that is ordeyned iudge in any game of wra∣stelinge, runninge, or leapynge. Bracca, that kynde of mantell, whiche nowe commeth out of Ireland, or a longe garmēt made of roughe frise. Braccharij, the makers of suche clothe. Brachiale, the wrestbone of the hande. Brachialia, bracelettes, whiche some gentyll men and gentylwomen doo vse aboute theyr armes. Brachiatus, that whiche lyke an arme, holdeth any thinge vp, a prop, or shore. Brachicatalecton, where one syllable lacketh at the ende of a verse. Brachicatalecticum carmen, a verse lacking one syllable or mo. Brachium, an arme. Brachylogia, shortnesse of speche. Bracmanae, philosophers of Inde. Bractea, thyn plates of metal, horne, or wood. Bractearius, a worker of plates. Bracteator, the same. Bracteola, lyttell plates or aglettes. Bracara Augusta, a towne called Briga in Spayne. Bragada, a ryuer nere to Vtica in Affrica. Branchiae, the gilles of a fishe. Branchos, the reume or catarre, which falleth downe by the chekes. Brannouites, people of a countrey in Fraunce, called Le vafe de Moriane. Brassica, colewurtes. Brauium, or Brabium, the rewarde for wrast∣linge, runninge, or leaping, commonly called the chiefe game. Brauum, the citie of Burgus in Spayne. Breno, a capitayne or leader of the frenchmen called Galli, whiche builded Verona, a citie of Venice. Brephotrophia, an hospitall, where chyldren be kepte and nourished. Breue, shortely. Breuia, places in the water where oone maye wade. Breuiculus, a lyttell shorte man. Breuiloquium, a shorte fourme of speakynge. Breuiloquentia, the same. Breuiloquus, he that speaketh his mynde in fewe wordes. Breuiarium, a bridgment. Breuitas, shortnesse. Breuis, breue, shorte. Breui postea, sone after. Breuiori summa emere, to bye at a lesse pryce. Breuissima terra, a lyttell grounde. Breuiter, shortly. Breue. idem. quickely. Briarêus, a gyant, whiche was of an exceding greatnesse. Brigantes, were auncient people in the northe parte of Englande. Brigantium, a Citie in Galitia called Com∣postella. Britanica, an herbe lyke great sorrell, but blac∣ker, thycker, and therewith mosy, the roote blacke and lyttell, and in tastynge strayneth the tunge. Britania, is the moste noble yle of the worlde, wherin be conteyned both countreis Englād and Scotlande: It lyeth frome Germania west, from Fraunce and Spayne, weste and northewest.Plin. li. 4. The fourme therof is lyke a tri∣angle, and as some haue wrytten, lyke the blade of a gleyue. the lengthe is extended in∣to the Northe, to the furthermoste parte of Scotlande called Calidonia, whiche Plini∣us, Solinus, and Martianus doo agree, to be eight hundred myles. also in breade, after Martianus,Mart. li. 6. thre hundred myles: accompting them Italion myles, whiche be not so moche as our Englysshe myles. The dystaunce be∣twene this yle and Calays sandes, called of Plinius Gessoriacum, in Gallia, where the narroweste passage is betwene bothe coun∣treys, is. 50. Italion myles, after the same Pliny, it is nowe gessed to be lyttell aboue xxx. englyshe myles. Of the fyrste occasion of the name of this yle there is not yet found a∣ny certayne determination, for as moche as there remaineth not any autentique, and an∣cient history, makynge therof remembrance, the olde bookes of the Britonnes (suche as were) beinge all destroyed by the Saxons, who indeuored them selfe to extincte vtterlye the honourable renoume, with the name of Britons: Lyke as the Gothes delt with the Romaynes. Also the parte of Titus Liuius, where the conquest of Britain is remembred with the histories of Iulius Rusticus, & dy∣uerse other noble wrytars, who wrate speci∣ally of this countray, are vtterlye perysshed. They whiche do remayne, as the Commen∣taries of Iulius Caesar, Cornelius Tacitus, Diodorus Siculus, and they whiche wrate of cosmography, haue omytted the origynall
begynninge of the name. The hystorye of Gil∣das the Briton, canne not be founde, who not withstanding was after that the Saxons had inuaded this realm: and therfore mought lack suche bokes as mought best instructe him. And as for Beda, a vertuouse and ryght well lerned man, semeth to haue seene nothynge wrytten of that matter. For where he saythe, that this yle toke the name of Britania, of the inhabytaun∣tes of Britania in Fraunce, it is nothynge lyke to be true: for that countrey not verye longe a∣fore the tyme of Beda was named Armorica & Armoricus tractus: at whiche tyme, & long before, this yle was called of the most aunciēt wrytars Britania: and as Solinus wryteth, se¦med to be an other worlde, for as moche as the west cost of Gallia was thoughte to be the vt∣termoste boundes of this worlde. Also Iulius Cesar wryteth,Caes. li 5. that the places of this yle were vnknowen to frenche men, sauynge to a fewe marchauntes, and yet they noo farther knewe than the sea cooste towarde Fraunce. Moreo∣uer the same Britons inhabitantes of this yle dyd affirme, that it was lefte amonge them in remembraunce, that the innermooste parte of the countray was inhabited of theym, whiche had theyr fyrste begynnynge in the same yle. This well consydered, with the aucthoritye of the wrytar, who was bothe an excellent prince and also a great lerned man, and beinge hym selfe in this yle, it is not to be douted, but that he moste diligently serched for the true knowe∣lege of the auncienty therof. And if he mought haue founden, that the inhabitantes had come of the stocke of Aeneas, of the whiche progeny he hym selfe came, he wolde haue reioyced not a lyttell therat, for the prowesse and valyaunte courage, whiche he hym selfe commended in them. Moreouer, that the name began of Bru∣tus, whome our wrytars haue of theyr owne heades ymagined to haue discended from Ae∣neas the Troyane, it is no more lykelye, than that this yle was called Albion of Diocleciās daughter, or of whyte rockes, whereof I haue before writen, & that for dyuerse causes. Firste all the olde latine historiens do agree, that the son of Syluius, whiche was the seconde in suc∣cession from Aeneas, and of theym named the sonne of Ascanius, was Aeneas called also Syl¦uius. whervnto the Greekes doo also accorde, but that they name Syluius to be brother to Ascanius, and borne after the deathe of Aene∣as: and therfore was called Postumus. but neyther the Romayns, nor the Grekes do writ of any man called Brutus, eyther sonne of As∣canius, or any other afore Iunius Brutus, whi¦che expelled kynge Tarquinus oute of Rome: whiche name was also gyuen to hym in derysi∣on by the sonnes of Tarquine, bycause he see∣med to theym folyshe and dull wytted. Moreo∣uer there is so moche diuersitie betwene Brita¦nia and Brutus, that it semeth vnlykelye and agaynste reason, that the one shulde procede of the other. For if Brutus had ben the gyuer of the fyrste name to this yle, he wold haue called it Brutia, or Brutica, rather than Britania, whi∣che hath noo maner of proportion or analogie with Brutus. But now, as I haue done in the worde Albion, so wyll I here declare a reaso∣nable cause of coniecture, why this yle was na∣med Britania. About .xxx. yeres passed, it hap∣ned in wildshere at a place called Yuy churche, distant about .ii. myles from the Citie of Sa∣risbury, as men were digginge to make a fun∣dation, they founde an holowe stone fast keue∣red with a nother stone, whiche beinge broken there was in it a booke hauynge lyttell aboue xx. leues (as they sayd) of very thyck velome, wherin was some thyng wrytten: but whan it was shewed to pryestes and chanons, whiche were there at that tyme, they coulde not reade it: wherfore after that they had tossed it from one to another (by the meane whereof it was torne) they dyd neglect it, and dyd cast it a side. Long tyme after a piece therof hapned to come to my handes, not with standinge that it was also rent and defaced, which I shewed and de∣lyuered to maister Richarde Pace, than chiefe secretary to the kynges moste royall maiestye, wherof he excedyngly reioyced. but bycause it was partly rente, partely defaced, and bloryd with weate, whiche had fallen on it, he coulde not fynde any one sentence perfyte. Not with∣standynge after longe beholdynge of it, he she∣wed me, that it seemed, that the sayde boke cō∣teyned some auncient monumente of this yle, & that he perceiued, that the word Prytania was there put for Britaniae: but at that time he said no more to me. Afterwarde I gyuynge moche study and diligence to the reading of hystories, consyderynge wherof the worde Britania firste came, fyndinge that all the yles in this part of the Oceane were callid Britaniae, after my first coniecture of Albion, the sayde olde wrytynge was reuiued in my remembrance, and by chāce fynding in Suidas (whom I than vnderstod) that Prytania in greke, with a circūflexid aspi∣ration dothe signifie mettalles, fayres or mar∣tes, also reuenues belongynge to the commune treasour, I than conceyued this opinion, That whan the Greekes flourished in wisedome and prowesse, and were mooste experte in saylynge, and being ones entred into our Ocean sea, had founden in the yles there great plenty of tyme, leade, yron, brasse, and in dyuerse places golde & syluer in great quantitie, wherof there came vnto the comune treasores of theyr cities yere∣ly great reuenues, they called all those yles by
this generall name Prytania,. signifienge the place, by that whiche came out of it, as one wolde saye, that he wente to the mart, whan he goeth to And warp or Barowe: or to the fayre, whan he goeth to Sturbrige, or to his reuenues, whan he goeth to any place, oute of the which his reuenues do come. And yet bicause this yle excelled all the other in euery condition, it was of some priuatelye called Olbion, that is to say, more happy or richer, as I haue before wrytten, This is myne one¦ly coniecture, whiche doth nerer approche to a true similitude, than the other inuentions, excepte there be any aunciente hystorye, I mean before the tyme of Geffraye of Mone∣mouthe or Beda, whiche can more probably confute that whiche I haue declared: and to suche wyll I gladdely gyue place. Fynally I haue alwaye thought and yet doo, that it is more honourable vnto this countrey, to haue receyued his fyrst name by suche occasion as I haue rehersed, and the generation of the in¦habitauntes therof, to be eyther equall with the moste aunciente, or myxte with the moste wyse and valyaunte people of Greece, vain∣quisshours and subduars of Troyanes: than to take the name and fyrste generation, ey∣ther of a vayne fable, or of a man (if any su∣che were) whiche after he had slayne his fa∣ther, wandred about the worlde, vncertayne where to dwell. Also to aduaunte vs to come of the Troianes, causours of the destruction of theyr owne countreye, by fauourynge the uoutry of Paris and Helene, of whom ne∣uer proceded any other notable monumente, but that they were also breakers of theyr oth and promyse. And yet this foly is founde all∣moste in all people, that euery of them do con¦tende, to haue theyr progenitours come first out of Troy, the whiche fantasy among wise men, maye be well laughed at. The fayth of Chryste was fyrste receyued in this yle after the incarnation of Christ. 156. yeres. Britannus, & Brito, a man of that countrey. Brixia, Bressa, a citie in Italy. Bromus, one of the names of Bacchus. Bronchoscele,Galen. in diffin. a swellynge by the cheeke. Bronchus, is he that hath the nether iawe far∣ther out, than the ouer iawe. Brochus. idem. Bronteus, the surname of Iupiter. Bruchus, a flye, whiche eatethe corne as it groweth. Bruma, wynter. Brumalis, le, belongynge to wynter. Brunci, they whiche haue tut mouthes. Brundusium, a citie in the realme of Naples. Brupeo, ere, olde wryters vsed for stupeo, pé∣re, to be abashed. Bruscum, a bunche or knur in a tree, specially in boxe. Bruseum, an herbour or hedge made with thor¦nes and briers wounde together. Brutij, people in the royalme of Naples, ioy∣nynge to Sicile. Brutus, dul and grosse wytted lyke to a beaste. Bryon thalassion, or marinum, a thinge gro∣wyng on the rockes, wheron the salte water beateth, somwhat lyke to mosse, and is cal∣led of the northern men, slawke. Bryonia, a wylde vyne, which groweth in hed∣ges, and hath red beryes, the iuyce wherof touchinge the skyn, wyll cause it to blyster. some do call it Bryony. Brysso, aui, are, to bruise out. B ANTE V. BVA, the worde of yong chyldren, whā they aske for drynke: with vs they vse to saye bumme. Bubalus, a beaste called a bugill. Bubastis, a citie in Egypte. Bubinda, Slane in Irelande. Bubile, an oxe house. Bubo, a shriche oule. also a botche. Bubonium,Dios. an herb, some call it Aster atticus, some Inguinali,Plini. whiche hath a lyttell stalke harde, a purple or yelowe floure, on the top lyke to chamomyle, and hath a knap with lit tell leaues, in fourme of a sterre. aboute the stalke are some leaues, somwhat long: it gro∣weth amonge stones in a roughe grounde. Bubonocele, where the bowell is braste by the share of a man, towarde his priuy members Bubsequa, a cowe herde. Bubula, beofe. Bubulcito, as, to playe the herde man. Bubulcus, a herde man. Bubulus, a, um, that whiche longeth to an oxe or cowe, as Lac bubulum, cowe mylke. Bucardia, a stone lyke to a bugles harte. Bucca, the holowenesse of the cheke. Buccea, a morsell. Buccella, the same. Buccellatum, breade called bisket. Buccina, a trumpet. Buccinator, a blower in a trumpet, a spreader of fame. Buccino, aui, are, to blowe a trumpet, or sette forthe a mannes prayse or dispraise. Buccinum, the sowne of a trumpet. it is also a shell suche as be made at sayncte Cornelys, wherin one maye blowe as in a trumpet, Buccones, they whiche haue great chekes. Bucculenti, idem, Buccula, a lyttell cheke also that part of a hel∣met, wherby wind is taken. also a hekfare.
Bucculus, a steere, or bullocke. Bucea, a thyn huske in a bean within the hull. Bucentaurus, a great shyp or carrike. Bucentes, stinginge gnattes. Bucentrum, a pricke of a gode. Bucephalus, was an horse, whiche wolde nat suffer any other person to come on his backe, but only the great kyng Alexander: on whom he syttinge, dyd meruaylous battaylles, and escaped wonderfull dangers. And fynaly be∣inge. xxx. yeres olde, not by woundes, but onely by extreme labours and sondry bruises, at the last died. Ouer whom Alexander buil∣ded a citie, and called it Bucephala, by the horses name, in India, where Alexāder vain∣quished Porum. Bucephalus signifieth also an oxe head. Bucera armenta, herdes of neate. Bucerum paecus, an herde of rother beastes. Buceras, fenugraecum, fengreke. Bucheides, an herbe hauynge leaues and flou∣res lyke to Satyrion, but it hath two rootes lyke vnto two handes, and in the leaues are blacke spottes. Bucolica, herdes of nete. Bucolicus, a, um, perteyninge to the kepynge of bullockes. Bucolicum carmen, a poeme made of herde men. Bucolus, an herde man that kepeth bullockes. Budoris, a citie in Almayn called Heydelbergh, belonging to the Palsgraue or coūt palatine. Bufo, onis, a tode. Buglossa, or Buglossos, an herbe called borage which although in frenche it signifieth lan∣gue du buef, & so do we cal a common herbe: yet by the description of olde wryters it se∣meth not to be that herbe, but rather that whiche is called Borage. Bugones, bees. Bulapatham, an herbe called pacience. Bubine, nes, scalions. Bulbito, aui, are, to caste durte on one: proper¦ly it is of chyldren, which nourisses do name cackynge. Bulbosus, a, um, hauynge lyttel round heades in the rootes. Bulbus, is taken generally for euery roote that is rounde, as an onyon or turnepe. ❀Bulbos quaerit, he looketh for onyons. & prouerb applyed to them, whiche behold the ground as they go. Bulenta, one of the consaylours of a citie. Bulga, a male of lether, wherein clothes be caried. Buli,Cael. lect. ant. bowelles. Bulimia, great famine or hunger. It also sig∣nyfieth the hungrye syckenes called Apperi∣tus caninus. Bulis, a name of a citie. Bulla, a tablet or other thynge hanged aboute ones necke, properly whan it is holow. A bu¦ble of water. sōtime the head of a naile other whyles studdes in gyrdels or other thynges. Bullatus, he that is garnished with tablettis or studdes. Bullatae nugae,Eras. chil. auauntinges or bostinges, or elles a vayne clatteryng, wherin is no sub∣stantiall sentence. Bullare, to buble, as water whan it boyleth. Bullio, iui, ire, to boyle or seeth. Bullula, a lyttell water bell, or boble. Bumastos, a great teate. Bumelia, a kynde of ashe. Buphonum, an herbe, whereof if cattell eate, they do dye of a griefe in theyr throte. Buphthalmon, an herbe, called also Cotula fe tida, and is lyke to comomyl, but it groweth more vpright, maywede. Bupina, great thyrste. Bupodes, great fete. Buprestis, a fly lyke to a blacke bytell, but he hath lengar legges, whiche if a beaste dothe eate, he swelleth, and therwith dyeth. Bura, or Buris, the hynder parte of a ploughe whiche is croked. Burbarus, a fyshe, which by the description of Paulus Iouius, semeth to be a carpe. Burcana, an yle in the Occean of Germanye. Burdigala, Burdeaux in Gascoigne. Burdo, onis, a mulet. Burgundia, Burgoyne. Burrum, a depe red colour. Busicon, a great fyg. Bustiarij, sworde players, which fought at the burnynge or buryeng of one. Bustum, a place where deade bodyes haue ben brente. Busyris, a tyrant, which was kynge of Aegypt who fed his horses with mennes fleshe, and was slayne at the last by Hercules. Buteo, a kynde of haukes whiche hath three stones, a bussarde. Buthysia, was called a great sacrifice, such as Hecatumbe is. Buttubata, a trifle of no value. Butyrum, butter. Buxentum, a towne that the Greekes calle Pyxunta. Buxeta, a place where boxe trees growe. Buxeus, a, um, of boxe. Boxus, or Bussus, a boxe tree. B ANTE Y. BYRSA, a hyde of a beast. Byrseus, a tanner or cordyner. Byssinus, a, um, of fyne lynen.
Byssina uerba, wordes, wherin is a magni∣ficent eloquence, expressyng an authoritye. Parysates mother to the kinges, Cyrus and Antaxerxes vsed to saye:Plutarch. that he that wolde speake to a kynge boldely,Apopth. must haue wordes lyke to fyne threde. In latine more properlye Verba byssina. Byssus, a maner of fyne flaxe or lynnen. Byzantium, a Citie of Thrace, nowe called Constantinople, whiche was somtyme buil∣ded by a kyng of Spartane, called Pausania, wherof the people and inhabitauntes were called Byzantii, Afterwarde it was augmen¦ted by Constantine the Emperour, and was the chyefe and head of al the empire oriental. Byzari, fantasticall men, and of straunge in∣uentions. C ANTE A. C BY HYM SELFE signifieth Caius, the pro∣per name of a manne, and therfore is ioined with an other name, as C. Iul. Cae∣sar, Caius Iulius Caesar. Cl. signifieth Claudius. Cabala, a tradition of the sewes, lefte amonge them by Moyses with∣out wrytyng, but from the father to his son, and so continually in theyr generation, wher¦in is included the vnderstandynge as well of the secretes of nature, as the misticall sence, included in the wordes of holy scripture. Cabaesi,Cael. measures that can not be fylled. Caballi, people of Asia. Caballinus, a, um, perteyninge to an horse. Caballinus fons, the riuer called also Helicon, about the whiche ryuer was the moste com∣mune haunt of the .ix. muses. Caballus, a horse. yet in some partes of Englād they do call an horse a cable. Cabus, a measure of the Hebrewes, conteyning two sextarios and a halfe .vi. ounces, and. 3. drammes of Athenes measure, which amun∣teth to foure pounde, thre ounces, and three drammes. Cabyle, a citie in Thracia. Cabyria, a citie of the lower Asia, althoughe Cabyrii be people in India. Cacabus, a pot or cauldron, wherin meate is sodden. Cacabo, as, are, to call lyke a partriche. Cacadêmon, an yll spirite. A dyuell which stir¦reth a man to do euyll. sometyme it is taken for yll fortune. Cacalia, an herbe called wylde carwayes. Cacaturio, to desyre to go to the stole. Cachexia, a spice of a consumption, which pro¦cedeth of an yll disposition of the bodye, and the body and vysage is therwith very leane, and yll coloured. Cachinnatio, a great laughter. Cachinnor, aris, ari, to laughe immoderately, and with a loude voyce. Cachinnus, a scorne, or a loude laughter in de∣rision. Cachinnos commouere, to make menne to laughe. Cachinnum sustollere, to laughe oute of measure. Cachrys, a rounde thyng growyng on an oke, whiche I suppose to be that which is called an oke appull. Cacia, viciosity, or that whiche we commonly do call, a faute in a thynge. Caco, aui, are, to shyte. Cacoblepa, a lyttel best in Egypt in the ban∣kes of the ryuer of Nylus, whiche hath such venenositie in his eyen, that who that behol∣deth hym, dyeth incontinent. Cacochexia, an yll habite or deformitie of the body, caused by syckenesse. Cacochymia, yll digestion, or rather yll iuyce gathered in the condutes of the bodye, for lacke of perfyt digestion. Cacoêthe, a vyce or sore ingendred in one from his infancy, harde to be recouered or cured. Cacologia, yll speche. Cacologus, an yll speaker. Cacophaton, is an yll fourme of spenkyng, or where the wordes do not sowne wel and con∣ueniently. Cacosyntheton, an yl or defourmed cōpositiō. Cacozelus, an yll folower or imitatour. Cacula, a page. Cacumen, the top of an hyll. Cacummatus, a, um, with a sharpe top. Cacus, a gyant whom Hercules slewe in Italy Cadauer, eris, a deade body, or carrayne. Cadere, to happen. Cadere causa, to be nonsuite in an action Cadere formula, idem. Cadmaea uictoria. A prouerbe applyed to that victory, wherof ensueth more harme thā good, or that it were better to lese thanne to get. Rede hereof in Chil. Erasmi. Cadiscus, a vessell, whereinto are gathered sce¦dules, bylles, or lottes, where thynges are done by a consene of many counsaylours, or of the people. Cadiuus, a, um, that whiche falleth by it selfe. Cadiua folia, leaues fallen down by thē self. Cadiua poma, appuls whiche do fall dowe without violence. Cadmites, a stone which hath lyttel blue spar∣kes about it.
Cadmia, the owre of brasse. Cadmus, the name of a pryuce, sonne of Age∣nor, and brother to Europa, who buylded Thebes, and brought out of Phoenicia in to Greece sixtene letters, and founde out the fu∣synge and castynge of mettalles. There was an other Cadmus, whiche was the first that euer wrate in prose. Cado,Plaut. in Amphit. cecidi, dere, to fall, to dye, to the slayn. Cadit illi animus, his harte or courage fay∣leth, or is abated. Cadere in deliberationem, to come to com∣munication. Cadit solutio in diem calende, the payment was the fyrste daye of the moneth. Caduarij, men hauynge the fallynge euyll. Caduca, thynges that wyll shortely peryshe or decay, olde writers vsed them for significati∣ons of that whiche shulde happen. Caduceator, an ambassatour or herault at ar∣mes, sente to demaunde peace, or to take a truse. Caduceus, & Caduceum, a rodde whiche po∣etes supposed, that Mercury bare in his hād in token of peace, as messanger of Iupiter. Caduci,Vergil. 7. they whiche are decessed. Caducor, ceris, duci, to be ouerthrowen. Caducus, a, um, fallynge, decayenge. Caduca haereditas,Cic. in Phil. an inheritaunce whiche is fallen in excheate, for lacke of heyres. Caducae literae,Plinius. letters whiche wyll be short¦ly put out, blynde letters. Caduci tituli,Plini. in pan. honours and dignities, which endure but a lyttell whyle. Caducus labor, lobor lost. Caducus morbus, the fallynge euyll. Cadulae guttae, drypinge of rost meate. Cadurcenses, Cahors in Fraunce. Cadurcum, a keuerlede of lynnen, moost pro∣perly a quylt. Cadus, a wyne vessell, it maye be taken for a pype. It also contayneth the same measure that Amphora dothe. Caea, an yle in the sea called Aegeum. It is al∣so called Coa, where silke wurmes were fyrst founde. The countreye of Hyppocrates the prynce of phisitions. Caebus, an ape with a tayle, we maye take it to be a munkay. Caeca dies, oculata dies, the day whā the mo∣ney is payed, and the daye whanne it is not payd.Plautus in Pseud. Eme die caeca hercle oleum, id uendi∣to oculata die. Bye not that day that the mo¦ney is payde and layde out, but promising it at a day, sell it agayne whan the moneye is brought forthe. Eras. Chil. Also the ciuile la∣wiars do call those days and wytnesses, whi¦che only be certified by them that are absent, Caecas dies, & Caeca testimonia. Caecias, the easte northest wynde. Caecigeni, they whiche are borne blynde. Caecilia, a slowe worme that is blynde. Caecitas,Lucre. 2. blindnes, not onely of the bodely eies, but also of the mynde, Caeculto, aui, are, to haue a dym syght. Caeco, aui, are, to make blynde. Caecus, a, um, blynde, also darke. Caeca uestigia, where one maye not se his way that he rydeth or goeth. Caeci haemorroides, emeraudes or pyles, whiche are within the fundemente, and doo not appere. Caeci morbi, sycknesses which be not appa∣rant, the causes where of be hid frō phisitions Caecum intestinum, is a bowell, which com∣meth from the ryghte syde, at the poynte of the huckle bone, and goeth to the lefte syde in length, and is also called Monoculus. Caecum uallum, a trenche, whiche in tyme of warre is pight priuily with sharpe stakes whiche are hyd with brakes or bushes. ❀Caecus caeco dux, one blynde man leadeth an other. A prouerbe signifienge, one igno∣rant person to teache an other vnlerned. One fole to gyue an other foole counsayle. Caecutio, iui, ire, to see but lyttell, to be halfe blynde. Caedes, deathe, slaughter or murder. Caedem facere, to kyll, to make a slaughter. Caedo, dis, caecidi, caedere, to beate or whyp, to cut,Vergil. to stryke, to kyl, to breake. Somtyme to sacrifice. Caedunt binas de more biden∣tes: Accordynge to the custome they sacrify∣ced two hoggrelles. Caedere calcibus, to kycke. Caedere ianuam saxis, to breake the doore with stones. Caeditur testibus,Cic. ad Q fratrem. he is conuict by wytnes. Caedua sylua, wodes vsed to be cut, Copeyses. Caelebs, he or she that is vnmaryed. Caelibatus, the state vnmaryed. Caelebs uita, idem. Caementarij, daubers, pargetters, rough ma∣sons, whiche do make onely walles. Caementitius, a, um, of morter. Caementum, morter, or any other grosse mat∣ter, wherwith walles be made. Caene, a citie. Caeneus, the surname of Iupiter. Caepe, an oynion. Caepi, the preterperfette tense of Capio, I haue taken. Caepula, a chybboll. Caera, waxe. Caeratum, a seared clothe. Caeratura, the waxinge. Caere, were writing tables couered with wax. Caerefolium, an herbe called cheruyll.
Caereolus, a syze candell. Caeremoniae, ceremonies. Caerete, an auncient citie in Tuscana. Caereus, a taper, or waxe candell. Caereus, a, um, of waxe. Also fat or tydy. Caerinthe, thre leued grasse, whiche bryngethe forth white hony suckels, called cliuer grasse. Caeris, a sor lyke an hony combe. Caero, aui, are, to laye waxe on any thynge. Caeroferarij, they whiche do beare candels in the churche before the crosse in procession, or do any lyke seruice in the churche. Caeroferarium, a candell stycke, where vpon tapers are set. Caeroma, & Caeromatum, an oyntment made with oyle and netes dunge, wherewith men that wrastled, vsed to anoynte theyr bodyes, to make them the more delyuer and stronge. Also it signifieth the place where wrastlers were annoynted. Caerosus, a, um, that whiche is myxte with waxe. Caerulus, a, um, & Caeruleus, a, um, blewe of colour. Caesa, a weapon, somtyme vsed in Fraunce. It is also a parte of an oration, not concludinge a sentense, as it were a piece of a sentence. ❀Inter caesa & porrecta,Eras. chil. betwen the cutting and the gyuynge. A prouerbe signifienge ta∣rienge and doutyng what to do, & as it were the space betwene leauing of from the thinge whiche is begun, and the begynnyng of that whiche is newely enterprised. Caesar, the emperour: it was the surname of a noble house of the Romaynes, of whome came Iulius Caesar, the fyrste Emperour of Rome. Caesarea, a citie of the countrey of Palestina. Caesar Augusta, a citie in the realme of Arro∣gon, called Sarragosa. Caesareus, a, um, perteynyng to the emperour Caesaries, heare, or a bushe of heare. Caesenna, a citie in Italy. Caesim, edglynge, or with the edge. Caesim dicere, to speake nowe one word and than an other. Caesio, a strype. Caesitium, a shete, a cleane napkyn or hande∣kerchefe. Caesius, graye of colour or blunkette. Also he whiche hath grey cyen. Caesones, they whiche be cutte out of the mo∣thers or dammes bealyes. Caespes, Caespitis, a turfe. Caespitius, a, um, made of turfes. Caespito, aui, are, to stumble. Caestrum, a lyttell towre. Caestrum, is also an instrument, wherwith I∣uory was bored. Also a weapō like a dagger. Caestus, tus, a weapon hauynge greate plum∣mets hangynge at it. Caestus, sti, a gyrdell or corse, whiche the hus∣bande dyd put about his wife, whan he was maryed, and at nyght dyd plucke it of. Caesuliae, they whiche haue blewe eyes. Caesura, a cut, a garse, an incision. also intay∣lynge, or caruynge in stone, or tymber. Also a piece as it were cut of from the remenaunte, properly of a verse. Caesuratim, briefely, succinetly. Caesus, slayne. Caeter, caeera, rum, the remenaunt or residu. Caetera doctus,Cic. de ∣tura de∣rum. lerned in other thinges. Caeteróquin, or elles. Caeterum, & Caetera, be aduerbes signifyeng somtyme moreouer, somtime from hensforth: somtyme Caeterum is a coniunction, and si∣gnifieth sed, but. Caeus, uel Cous, a, um, of the yle called Caea¦uel Coa. Caffrani, althoughe it be neyther greke nor la∣tine, nor haue not bene knowen but of late yeres: yet for as moch as in the chartes and histories of the newe found countreyes, that worde is frequente, I wyll therfore declare what it signifieth. Caffrani, be that sorte of Idolatres dwellynge in Inde the more, whi∣che do wurshyp dyuelles in moste terryble fy∣gure, beleuynge that they are permytted of god to punishe or spare men at theyr plesure. wherfore vnto theym they do sacryfice theyr chyldren, and sometyme theyr selfes: They haue many wyues, but they companye not with them, vntyll that they be defloured by other, hyred to that purpose. Also they lette theyr priestes to knowe carnally theyr wiues with them, whan they be absente. They haue bulles and kyne in great reuerence, all be it they neuer eate fleshe, but theyr sustinance is ryce, sugar, dyuerse swete rootes, and doo drynke the lycour whiche commeth of rype dates. Reade more hereof in Calecute and India. Caiani, were heretykes, whiche worshypped Cain, sayinge: that he was made of the one vertue or power, that is to saye of the dyuel, and Abell of the other, and that the vertue of Cain preuayled so, that he slewe Abel. They also do saye, that Iudas was a godly man, and that his act was a benefyt to mankind: for he perceyuynge howe moche the passion of Christe shoulde auayle, delyuered hym to the Iewes, that by his deathe, man mought be redemed. They also affirmed, that the old lawe was naughte, and denyed the generall resurrection. Cain,Philo. was the fyrste son of Adam, who had to wyfe his owne suster, whiche of Philo is na∣med
Themech, and was the firste that buyl∣ded cities. And for enuy that he hadde to his brother Abell and malyce, he slew hym. wher¦fore being in desperation he continually wan¦dred, and his body trembled. fynally he was slayne by Lamech, whan he was of the age of. 730. yeres, after Philo. Caius, a proper name of a man. Caycus, the name of a ryuer in Phrigia. Cala, a byllette. Calabra, a conuocation place, where matters concernyng deuotion were treated. Calaber, bra, brum, of Calaber. Calabria, a coūtrey ioining to Naples, callid be¦fore Messapia, & afterwarde magna Graecia. Caladrius, a byrde. Calae, arum, a citie in India. Calagurium, a towne in Biskay. Calamarium, a pennar. Calamintha, an herbe, of the which ar .iii. kyn∣des, the one hath leues like to great basyl, but that they be hore, & hath square stalkes, with many knottes or iointes, and that now is cal∣lyd cōmonly calamynte. The other is lyke to penyroial or puliole roial, but that the leaues ar greatter,Diosc. and that is cōmonly callyd wyld peny royal.Constant. The thirde groweth hygher than any of the other, & hath a larger leafe lyke to wyld mint, & hath a yelow floure, & is cōmon¦ly callid nep or cat mynte, bicause that cartes do delyte to rubbe them selues against it, and eate of the braunches. All the thre kyndes be hotte and dry in the thirde degree. Calamitae, lyttell grene frogges. Calamitas, generall distruction, or mysery. Calamitose, myserably. Calamitosus, myserable, or full of aduersitie. Calamistrum, a pin of wod or yuory, wherwith men & women do set or trym vp theyr heare. Calamus, a rede, or wheat straw▪ also a pen▪ it is also takē for a pipe or whistel▪ also a fishing rodde, and a twyg, wheron byrd lyme is put. Also smal branches of trees, also it is a pole to mete with, conteining six cubites and a span, a mete pole. it is also a mesure, which the Ie∣wes vsed, as we do a pole, but there was of it two sortes, one was callid Calamus san∣ctuarij, whiche conteyned .x. fete, and a halfe, the other was callyd Calamus uulgaris, or the common pole or perche, whiche conteyned ix. fete, of our measure thre yardes. Calamus aromaticus, uel odoratus, is a cane or rede growyng in Arabia, Syria, & India, which hath many knots or ioyntes, & is of a pale red colour▪ whan it is broken, it fallith in to longe pieces as it were cut, & hath within it lyke vnto copwebbes.Dioscori. It sendeth forth of it a meruaylous swete sauour far of,Constaut. & being ta¦sted,fer. it cleaueth to the tunge, and strayneth it. It is hote and dry in the seconde degree. Calantica, a tyre or burlet for a woman. Calanus, a philosopher of Inde, whiche in the presence of the great Alexander, being of the age of .73. yeres, felyng hym selfe sycke, made a bonefyre, and went into the toppe thereof, and burnyd hym felfe. Calaris, a citie in Sardinia. Calaster, tri, he that hath a shyll & loude voice. Calastri pueri, were children, whiche hadde sharp voyces and loude,Vitruuius. & were moch sought for of great princis. Calathis, the name of a citie. Calathus, a basket or hamper. Calatores, seruauntes, whyche were alwaye callyd for. Calcaneus, & calcaneum, the heele. Calcar, a spurre. Calcar addere, to spurre. It is vsed for a prouerbe, signifienge to pricke one forwarde, whiche is of hym self wel disposed to a thing. Calcaria fornax, a lyme pyt, or kylle. Calcarius, a lyme bourner. Calcata, a house whiche is pargeted. Calcatus, a, um, pargetted or white lymed. Calceamen, & calciamentum, a showe, pyn∣son, or socke. Calcearium, a showmakers shop, also a show. Calceatus, tus, idem. Calceatus, a, um, shodde. Calceo, aui, are, to putte on shoen, to showe an horse or mule. Calceolarius, a showemaker. Calceus, a showe. Calceus lunatus, a showe fasshyoned before lyke a moone, whiche only the Senatours of Rome dyd weare. Calcitro, aui, are, to kyche or wynse. Calcitro, onis, a horse that doth flyng or kycke Calcitrosus, a, um, that oftentymes flyngeth or kycketh. Calco, aui, are, to treade or presse downe. Calculo, aui, are, to cast accompt. Calculos{que}, he that is moch disesed with the ston Calculosus, a, um, grauelly or stony. Calculosus locus, a stony place. Calculus, a peble stone. also the stone in the bo∣dy. also a chesse man, also accompt. also the lest weyghte or poyse that maye be. Moreouer a knyfe made of a stone. Calculum album deijcere, to approue or al∣lowe a thynge. Calculum ponere, to yelde accompt. Calculū permittere uel porrigere, to put it to ones libertie, to gyue a sentence, or to gyue his voyce in election as he lysteth. Calculū reducere, to reuoke a sentence, wher of one repenteth, or to tourne that purpose, whiche was not well or cōmodiously diuised.
❀ Calculo mordere,Eras. chil. A prouerbe signifienge to hurt one in giuing a sentence, or in election ❀ Calculum albū addere, to approue a thing. which prouerbe hapned of this occasion. In the old tyme in iugementes, litell stones were put into a potte, some white and som blacke, whiche the iudges dyd take out of the potte, & if the more parte of the stones were white, he that was accused, shoulde be acquited by iugement. If the more part were blacke, the partie shuld be condemned. If the white and the blacke were equall in number, than shuld he be acquited. Caldariae, hotte bathes. Caldariae cellae,Budeus. places ioynynge to an hotte house or drye bayn, whiche be made warm by the heate that procedeth from the said bayns. Caldarium, a cauldron wherin water is hette. Caldor, idem quod calor. Calecut, is a famous citie in Indie the more, ioyning vnto the Indian sea, where as is the greatest mart & recours of marchantes that is in all Inde, from the countrayes not onely adioyning, but also out of Arabia, Syria, E∣gypt, Lybia, and Ethiopia, for to sell and by all maner of spices & swete gummes, muske, and ambregrise, and myrobalanes. The kyng of that countrey is inestimable ryche, and al∣thoughe he doo weare no garmentes, yet  his neck, armes, and legges be adorned with precious stones of wonderfull greatenes and beautie, as with diamādes, saphires, rubies, emerauldes, and balaises. The king and peo∣ple be idolaters, callid Caffrani. Also they vse those maners and detestable customes, which I haue before spoken of, where I haue wryt∣ten of Caffrani. Calefacio, to make hotte. Calefio, I am made hotte. Caleua, a town in Englād, callid Oxford, wher in is the first & chiefe vniuersitie of christen∣dom, flourishing in all kyndes of lernyng. Calendae, the fyrste day of euery moneth. Calendarium, a calender, declaryng the dayes of the monthes. it is also among the ciuilyan lawyers, as Budeus saith, a denial or refusel to lende money. Not withstanding by the exā∣ples which he bryngeth, it seemeth to me (ex∣cept I be deceyued) that it shuld rather signi¦fy suche a boke as marchauntes vse to haue, wherin is writen the names of their dettors, with the det, & day whan it was due. The ex∣amples be these.Vlpianus. Calendarij quo{que} curatio & quaestura in aliqua ciuitate, inter honores nō habetur, The hauynge of the custody & order of the boke, wherin dettes are writen, and the treasorership in any cite, is not reputed amōg honorable offices.Africanus Ita{que} ipsae pecuniae si adhuc calendario, id est nominibus faciendis desti∣natae essent, fidei cōmisso cedere solēt. More ouer the goodes yf they were assygned vnto the calender, that is to say, to be lent out for a¦gayn, ar wōt to be left vnto them that ar put in trust for the performaunce of a wylle. This haue I not written in contempt of Budeus, whom I know to be excellētly lernid in greke & latin, but only to declare myn opiniō, which I wyl be cōtent to chāge whā I here a better. Calendula, an herb callid ruddes or marygoldes▪ Calaenum, a citie in the coūtrey of Naples. Calent iuditia, the iudges haue moch to do. Caleo, ui, êre, to be hotte or warme. Cales, a towne in Fraunce. Calesco, to waxe hotte. Calete, the towne of Calyce. Calidi pedes, lyght feete. Calidus, da, dum, hotte. Caliga, a hose, or legge harnayse. Caliga Maximini, A prouerbe applied to men of great stature and personage, and ha∣uyng yl conditions or properties, or be had in contempt or hatred. Which prouerb grew of themperor Maximinus, who being in height viii. fete and an half, his greaues were lōger than any other mans more than one fote, not withstāding he was of maners barbarous & beastly, and extremely hated of all men. Caligatio, a dymmynge of the syght. Caligatus, hosed. Caliginosus, darke. Caligo, ginis, darkenes. Caligo, aui, are, to make darke, or be darke. Caligare in sole, to be deceiuid in a plain matter▪ Calligante animo, with a blynde imagination. Caligula, the surname of an emperor, callyd al∣so Caius, who succeded Tiberius themperor and was son of the noble Germanicus, & had the name of Caligula gyuen to him by the mē of war, which were with his father, forasmo∣che as to allure the loue of the people toward hym, his mother somtyme wold shewe him to the army, with greaues on his legges, like to the facion of warre, which greaues were na∣med in latin caliga, and bicause they were li∣tel, they were by a diminutiue callid caligula whiche the souldiors in disport & reioycinge, applied to his surname. This man at the be∣gynnynge of his reigne was of maners right cōmendable, but sone after he became of con∣ditiōs detestable, as wel in lechery as in beast¦ly crueltie. Wherof happened this prouerbe. There was neuer a better prince than Cali∣gula at the begynning, nor a wars tyrāt than he at his later ending. Wherby (not withstā∣ding that at the beginning he was most dere∣ly beloued of the Senate and people) after∣warde he was so deadly hated, that they slew him, whan he hadde reygned but four yeres,
beinge than .xxviii. yeres olde, after the incar¦nation of Chryste .xl. yeres. Calim, olde wryters vsyd for clam, priuily. Caliphus, was the name of dignitie of the kin∣ges of Egipt, from the yere of our lord .704. vntyl the yere. 1050. At the which time Alme∣ricus being kyng of Hierusalem, and making warre on Egipt, the Calyf sent vnto the soul∣dan of Babylon for succou. 3, whiche sent an army with one Sarraco, who firste expellyd the Christen men, and afterward dyd cast the Calyf in prison, and takynge on hym the rule of Egipte, caused hym selfe to be callyd soul∣dan of Egypt. Caliphus, is also the dignitie of him, whiche is the chief byshoppe of Ma∣hometes lawe. Calirrohé, the name of .ii. fountaynes, one by Ierusalem, the water wherof is medicinable and healeth diuers syknesses: An other is by Athenes, whiche fountayn hath .ix. heades. Calisthenes, was a noble philosopher, disciple of Aristotle, whome the greate Alexander for his excellent lerning and wysedom toke with him whan he went in his conquest, & had him in great honour. But afterwarde Alexander imbracyng the pride of the Persians, and cō∣mandyng the Macedons to honour him pro∣strate, after the fourme of the Persians, and wold be callid the sonne of Iupiter, Calisthe¦nes rebuked and dissuaded hym from that fo¦ly. Wherfore Alexander commaunded that his armes and legges shuld be cut of, and like wise his eares, nose, and lippes, & to be thro∣wen into a dungeon. Whose greuous peynes and deformitie, one Lisymachus a noble man pitieng, gaue to hym poyson, wherof he died. Calistho, the mother of Archas, whiche gaue the name to the countrey of Archadia, whom poetes fayned to be transformed into a beare. Calix, a cuppe. also a pot wherin potage is sod∣den. it is also the lyttell grene leaues on the toppe of the stalke, out of the whiche cometh the floure,Ruellius. and after the seedes. it is also the skynne of an apple or other fruite. Callaria, a cole whitynge, meane betwene an haddocke and a whitynge. Callens, wyse, or perfite in a thynge. Calleo, ui, ere, to be harde as brawne. also to perceyue, to know perfectly by long experiēce Callesco, scere, to become harde. Calliblephara, medycynes to make heares to growe in the chekes or browes. Calliblepharon, a medicine for the eyes, speci∣ally whan the eye lyddes do cleaue togyther. Callide, wyttyly, prudently. Calliditas, slyenesse. Callidum mendatium, a crafty lye. Callidus, slye or crafty, sometyme wyse. Calligonō, an herb cōmonly callid Sāguinaria. Callimachus, the name of a poete. Calliope, one of the virgins whiche be named Musae. Callipaeda, an olde man playeng the boy, being wanton and busy. Callipolis, a citie in Thracia. Callis, a way moche vsyd. Calliscere, to waxe harde, proprely in the skyn and fleshe. Callitrichon, an herbe callyd maydenheare. Callosus, thycke skynned. Callosa ulcera, soores hauynge the flesshe a∣bout them harde. Callus, brawne, or hardenes of the feete made with goynge. Callum obducere, to harden, to make to in∣dure labours or peynes. ❀Callum ducere, A prouerbe signifienge to be longe exercised or vsed in any thyng. Calones, showes of wodde. also scullyons and boyes, whiche do folow an hoste to cary bag∣gage, wodde, coles, or other lyke thynges. Calophanta, a mocker. Calopodium, a paten, or slypper. Calopus, a beaste in Syria, whiche with his hornes throweth downe great trees. Calor, & caliditas, heate. Caldor, idem. Calorificus, a, um, that whiche heateth or ma∣keth a thyng hote or warme. Calous, a, um, hotte. Calotechnus, a good workeman. Calpar, a runne. Calpae, one of the mountaynes which be callid Hercules pyllers, by the whiche is the pas∣sage out of the Spanyshe sea, into the sea cal∣lyd Mediterraneum. Also the name of a citie within the realme of Granado. Calta, an herbe growynge amonge corne, ha∣uyng a yelowe flowre. Calthae, is a yelowe flowre lyke to a violet, ha∣uynge many leaues, and a greatte sauour, it flouryssheth at the latter ende of sommer. Ruellius supposeth  be marygouldes, by¦cause it spreadeth in Autumne, wherof I mer¦uayle, sens they be founde here in the begyn∣nynge of sommer, or soone after. Neuer the lesse I suppose it to be a kynde of yelowe vio∣lettes, which ar callyd hartes ease, som think it to be a stocke gylofer, some a wall rose. Calthula, a garmēt of the colour of hartes ease. Calua, the sculle. Caluaria, the hole head of a man or beast, whā the flesshe is awaye. It was also a common place of buriall. Some men do suppose, that it was the place where Adam the fyrste man was buried. Caluaster, a man somwhat balde. Calueo, I am balde.
Caluesco, to waxe balde. Calueta, downes or playnes, wheron do grow neyther corne nor trees. They be also callyd of Columella, Glabreta. Caluire,Alciat. in cōmen. de uerb. sign. amonge the olde Romaynes sygnified to deceyue or disapoynt. Calumarius porcus, a swyne fedde with grai∣nes, and suche other vyle thynges. Caluisius Sabinus, was a very ryche manne in Rome, who had so smal a remembrance, that sometyme he forgat the name of Vlysses, som¦tyme of Achilles, sometyme of Priamus, whi∣che before he knewe as perfectely as chyldren do theyr tutours. Not withstanding he wold be sene to be lernyd, wherfore he founde this redy waye, he broughte dyuers slaues, of the which one had the warkis of Homer by hart, an other had likewise Hesiodum. Likewise to euery of the .ix. poetes callid Lyrici, he appoin¦ted one seruāt to kan them by hart. And whā he had gotten this companye, at supper they shulde sytte under the bourde at his fete. Of whom he receyuing verses, wold oppose them whiche sat with him. Yet somtyme he forgat the myddell of the verse. Not withstandyng he thoughte that he knewe as moche as any man in his house. A mery felowe callyd Sa∣tellius perceyuynge his folye, exhortyd hym to wrastelle, he beinge leane, sycke, and pale. Than sayd Caluisius,Seneca. Howe may I wrastle, sens vneth I maye lyue for feblenes? O saye not so, quod Satellius I pray you, do not you behold what a sort of tal men ye haue to your seruantes? This historye haue I wrytten as well for the mery concept therof, as also that therby men, whiche wolde seme wyse or well lerned, if they haue aboute them seruauntes well lerned or wyse, they them selfes lackyng wysedome and lernynge, may by this tale be warned, that they not withstanding  espied and mocked for theyr vayne arrogance. Caluities, & caluitium, baldnesse. Calumnia, a false or crafty accusation. Calumniator, he that accuseth or sueth a man vniustely. Calumnior, aris, ari, to accuse or sewe a manne vniustely. Caluo, aui, are, to make balde. Caluo, ui, êre, to deceyue or disapoynt. Caluor, eris, eri, to be disapoynted. Caluus, he that is balde. ❀Caluum uellis, Thou pluckest of heare of a balde mannes head. A prouerbe, where one wold haue any thing of a mā that he lacketh. Caluus comaus, a bald man with a bush A prouerbe applyed to theym, whiche shewe them selues ryche with other mens goodes, or do set forthe warkes for theyr owne, whiche other men laboured or deuysed. Calx, calcis, masc. gender, the heele. Calx, feminine gend, lyme made of stones ue∣ned. it is takē somtime for the end of a thing. Calydon, a citie in Greec. Calydonia sylua, was a great foreste in Scot∣lande, wherein were whyte bulles and kyen, whiche had manes lyke to lyons. Calypso, the daughter of Atlas, a nymphe or woman of the sea. Calypsos, the name of an yle. also of a woman whiche receyued Vlysses, whan he escaped drownynge. Calyptra, a womans cappe or bonet. Camarina, a stynkynge herbe, the ayre wherof prouoketh one to vomyte. Cambalu, is a great citie in the countreye of Cathay, whiche is in circuite .xl. miles, which is strongely wallyd, and hath .xii. gates, In the myddell therof is the palaice of the great Cham or Cane of Cathay, whyche is there called the palaice of Iustyce, whiche palaice in circuite contayneth .iiii. myles, and in it be foure great pyllers of fyne golde. Cambio, iui, ire, to chaunge. In the olde tyme it signified to fyght, to begyn a iourney, or to tourne in a iourney. Camboduum, a citie in Westphalia, callyd Monachum and Munchen, whiche late was distroyed, bicause that the people maynteined the heresy of the Anabaptistes. Cambyses, a kyng of Persia,  father of Cyrus. It is also the name of a ryuer in the countrey of Hircania. Camelerij, they whiche do ryde on camelles. Camelelasia, a dryuer of camelles. Camelinus, a, um, of a camell. Camelus, a beast callyd a camell, whiche hath a long necke and a lytel head, and som haue on theyr backes two būches like to hillockes, some haue but one. They of the countrey of Bactria be hygher thanne horses, and more swyfte,Col. in so moche as some wyl runne aboue one hundred myles in one day. Camelus bactriana, is a prouerbe, ap∣plyed where one bryngeth forthe a thynge to be meruayled at or feared, whiche in deede is to be contemned and laughed at. Some take it in the masculine gender for an ancre cable. Camera, the faulse roufe of a house, sollar, or chamber, or vault. Camerare, to make a sauce roufe of a howse, or to make a sollar, or to sylde, or make a vaulte. Camerarius, a, um, what so euer groweth han¦ging ouer perches, or on the roufes of houses Camerata uehicula, chariottes or lytters co∣ueryd with bourdes. Camerium, a towne of Italy, in the countrey of Picenum.
❀ Camerinam mouere, is a prouerbe spoken to one, signifyeng that he hurteth him self, by that thīg that he stirith or goth about to haue done. And it proceded of a fen so callyd, which beinge dryed vp there hapnyd a great pesty∣lence, whereof the people adioynynge asked of Apollo, yf they shuld make it dry for euer. Who aunsweryd, Ne moueas camerinam, as he shoulde say, styre not myschief to thy self. Camertes, the inhabitantes of Camerinae, a towne in Sicile. Camillus, & camilla, was in olde tyme a boye or wenche that seruyd the byshoppe, whan he dyd sacrifice. Camillus, was also the surname of a noble Ro¦mayn, whiche was dictatour fiue tymes, and triumphed foure tymes: who was of so gen∣tyll a courage towarde his countrey, that not withstandyng that the people of Rome had expellyd hym, & that he was in exile, yet whā the Galles had taken the citie of Rome with an assaulte, and compellyd the Romaynes to redeme theyr heades with golde, he perswa∣ding the people callid Ardeates, with whom he lyued in exyle, to succour the cytie, entred with them or any was ware of his commyng and slewe the Galles, and discomfyted them, and saued or rather restored the citie frome bondage. He was before the incarnation of Christe. 350. yeres. Caminatus, a, um, made lyke a sournays or chymney. Caminus, a chymney or fournays. Cammarus, or gammarus, a fyshe callid a cre∣uyse, specially of the fresshe water, a crenyse deau doulx. Camoenae, the Musis. Camomilla, & camoemêlum, an herbe callyd Camomyll. Campana, a belle. Campania, a countray in the royalme of Na∣ples, callyd also nowe Terra laboris. Camparius, the keper of the fieldes. Campe, a worme which eateth herbes, and is rough with may fete, and is callid a palmer Campester, tris, tre, of the playne countrey. Campestria loca, playne countrays. Campigeni milites, those men of warre, whi∣che be alway about the standerd, and by their prowesse and actiuitie do kepe the host in ex∣ercyse of armes. Campso, aui, are, to tourne an other way. Campsores, exchaungeours of money, or they whiche delyuer money by vsury. Campus, a playn fielde great and large. Campus Martius, a field nigh Rome, and ioy∣nyng to the riuer of Tiber, where the Roma∣nes not only exercised them selfes in running, leapyng, wrastlyng, and swymmyng, but also had there assemblies for the election of great offycers in the commune weale. Camuri boues, oxen or kien with croked horns Camus, a byt or snaffle. also a rayne or corde, wherwith men being condemned, were boūd. Canaan, the sonne of Cain, sonne of Noe, of whom commeth Cananaeus. Canabatius, & canabinus, a, um, of hempe. Canabis, hempe. Canabus, a wyne sellar. Canales, pypes, wherby water dothe runne in∣to a cundyte. Canaliculus, or canalicula, a lyttell pype. Canaliculatus, fashioned lyke a pype. Canaliculata folia,Plinius leaues whiche be holowe & turned round lyke cundite pipes or wafers Canalitium aurum, golde digged in pittes. Canan, the countrey callyd Arabye. Cananaea,Ioseph. in antiquit. a part of Siria nowe callid Iudea. Cananîtis regis, idem. Canariae insulae, are yles in the greate occeane 400. myles from Spayne, whiche some sup∣pose to be those that of the olde wryters are callyd Insulae fortunatae. The newe names of theym be these, Lanzelota, Fortis uentura, Magna canaria, Tenerife, Gomera, Palma, & Ferrea. In these yles of late yeres grewe great numbre of canes, wherein was sugar, but cither by distemperance of wette wether, or by conyes, whiche some men suppose were brought thyther, that commoditie is almost distroyed. Canarius, a, um, pertaynyng to dogges. Canatim, an aduerbe, signifieng lyke a dogge. Cancellarius, in the olde tyme was taken for a scribe or notary, now it is callyd a chancellor. Cancellatim, lattise wise. Cancelli, lattyses, or any thynge mude lattyse wyse. Also secrete places to looke out. Alsoo wyndowes made with barres of wodde or yron with dyuersehooles. Also lytell crabbes of the sea. Cancello, aui, are, to rase or put out, to cutte or teare any thynge that is written. Cancer, cri, a kynd of fyshe callyd a crabbe al∣so a sygne in heauen. Cancer, eris, a disease callyd a canker. Cancri, is the same that cancelli be. Cancris, a pyll in medicine. Candax, acis, a queene of Egypt. Candefacio, cere, to make white. Candela, a candell. Candelabrum, a candelstycke. Candeo, ui, dêre, to glowe lyke a burning cole. also to be white. Candico, aui, are, to be whyte, or to make whyte. Candide uestitus, trymmely apparayled. Candosoccus, a sea gulle, or a Camose.
Candidati, were amonge the Romaynes they, whiche laboured for some of the great offices in the publike weale, and they were so named bycause they dyd weare in the tyme of theyr election white apparayl. It may be taken by translation at this tyme for them that in vni¦uersities be callyd inceptours or regent mai∣sters. Also for them that be lately christenyd, or newly entred into some honorable or wor∣shypfull state. Vegetius saythe, that Candi∣dati were men of warre, whiche had a priui∣lege before other. Candidati Caesaris, were such as sued for great offices, and were recōmended of the emperor to them which had election. Who presuming alway that themperors recōmendation shuld take place, dyd solicite but negligētly, Wher∣of hapned this prouerbe, Sic petis tan{quam} Cae∣saris candidatus,❀ Whan any man asked any thing in such form as he thinketh that no māwyl deny hym. As who sayth, ye aske it as if themperor had spoken for you. They were al∣so callid Candidati principis,Budeus. where that fa∣cion is vsed may neuer be publik weie perfit. Candide, gentylly, or easyly. Candido, aui, are, to make whyte. Candidus, a, um, whyte, more than Albus, ori∣ent white. It is sometymes taken for fortu∣nate, gentyll, or easy. Candidus iudex, a gentyll or easy iudge. Candidus lector, a gentyl reder, which doth not openly reproue that which he readeth. Candifacio, to make white, to bleache, to make to glowe lyke a burnyng cole. Candifico, aui, are, to make white. Candor, oris, brightnes or whitenes. Canentae, were of the old Romayns named the apparayle pertayning to the head. Caneo, & canesco, scere, to be hoore, or graye heared. Canephora, a mayden, which bare on her heed a basket or coffer, wherein were iewels or y∣mages of the goddis. Cangrena, a soore callyd a canker. Cani, be taken for white heares for age. Canicae, branne, of wheate. Caniceps, a beast, whiche hath onely the face of a dogge. Canicula, a lyttell dogge or bytche. also a sterre wherof canycular or dogge dayes be named Dies caniculares. Caniculus, a whelpe. Caninus, doggyshe, or of a dogge. Canis, a dogge, a kynd of fyshe, callid dogfish, a play at tables, a sygne in heauen, whereof there be two sterres, one called Canis maior, the other Canis minor. ❀Canis festinans caecos aedit catulos, The hasty bytche bryngeth forth blynde whelpes. A prouerbe applied to theym, whiche beynge hasty in settyng forth theyr warkes do make them vnperfecte. ❀Canis reuersus ad uomitum,Salom in pro The dogge turneth agayn to eate that he vomited. A pro¦uerbe referred to hym,Petrus epistola. whiche beinge recon∣ciled vnto god, returneth eftsones to his olde conditions and vices. ❀Canina facundia, dogge eloquence. A pro∣uerbe applyed to suche as doo neuer exercise theyr tunge or penne, but in reprouing or bla∣mynge other men. ❀Caninū prandiū, a doggis diner. A prouerb vsed where there is no wyne at dyner or sup∣per, for dogges of theyr nature do abhor wine. Caninus appetitus, is a sycknes with an vnsa∣tiable appetite to eate.Galen. It procedeth of fyue causes, of abundance of melancholy flowing from the splene to the mouth of the stomack, or of a cold distemperance of the stomack, or of the lousnes of the body, the poores beinge to open, or of to moche labour resoluynge, or of the consumyng of naturall moysture, wher with the body is nourished. Canistrum, a basket. Canities, hoorenesse, or whitenes of heares. it is sometyme taken for grauitie. Canna, a poete, whyche was in the tyme of Martialis. Canna, a cane or rede: also a canne or oyle pot. Also a village in the countrey of Galilee. Cannabis, hempe. Cannabinus, a, um, made of hempe. Cannae, arum, a towne in the countrey of Apu∣lia, where a great hooste of Romaynes was slayne by Hanniball. Cannetum, a place where canes or reedes doo growe. Cannitiae, thatched houses. Cano, cecini, canere, to synge, to playe on the shalme or other instrument. Also to prayse, to prophesye. Canere classicum, uel bellicum, to blowe to the fielde, or to the assault. Canere eandem cantilenam, to tell one tale twyse, or to recite often tymes one thyng. Canere fidibus, to play on a harpe, or other instrument hauynge strynges. Canere receptui, to blowe the retraicte in battayle. Canere sibi,Cicer. de lege agra∣ria. to speake for his owne profyt. Canere sibi & musis, to syng or write for his owne pleasure, and for them that doo fauour hym, nothyng caryng for any other. Canere signa, to blowe whyles men do sight in battayle. Canere surdis auris, to gyue counsaylle in vayne, to lose labour in speakynge. Canon, a rule, also the inner parte of a tergate,
whiche keuereth the hande also the reuenues in customs and fee fermes of townshyps. Canonarij, gatherers of taskes and tallages. Canonia, the transomes in a shyppe, whereon the hatches are made. Canonici, be those sort of musitians, which do trye musyke by raison, as the Pythagorians dyd: lyke as Harmonici, iudged by the dile∣ctation of the eares, accordynge to the folo∣wers. of Aristoxenus. Canonium, a place assigned to deuout persons,Coelius antiq. 3. whiche lyued vnder a certayn rule. Canopicon, is an herbe, whiche is one of the kyndes of spurge. Rede more in Pityusa. Canópus, a sterre of a meruaylous bryghtnes. It was also the name of hym, which was ma¦ster of Menelaus shyppes, which beyng dead in an yle at the entrye of the ryuer of Nilus, was the cause that the yle was called by his name. And he was there honoured for a god, of whom this prety hystory is remembred of Suidas, where it hapned, that the people of dyuers countreys contended for the preemy∣nence of theyr goddis, whiche they honored. it was at the laste agreed, that those ydolles, whiche were vanquysshed by any notable ex∣perience, shulde giue place to the vanquisher. That perceiuyng an Egyptian priest of Ca∣nópus, a wytty felowe, he gat a water potte full of smalle holes, suche as in that countrey seruyd to make water to runne pure, and stop pynge the holes, and fyllyng it full of water, he paynted it, and made it in the forme of an ydoll, and craftily dyd set it in the old image, knowyng that the Caldeys honoryng the fire for God, did cary it about into all countreys, and therwith consumyd all other ydols, made of mettalle or other mattier. But whan they came to Canópus, and dyd set the fyre about hym, the wax wherwith the holes were stop∣ped, dyd melt quyckely, and the water distil∣lyng into the fyre, quenchyd it. Wherfore Ca¦nópus was demed vanquysher and chiefe of the goddis. Canor, ôris, melody, loude. Canorosus, a, um, full of melody. Canôrus, a, um, loude or shylle. Canta, olde writers vsed for cantata. Cantabri, people of a countrey in Spayne cal∣lyd nowe Biskay. Cantatio, a syngynge. Cantator, a syngar. Canterij, be the pieces, whiche do lye vnder a piece of tymber whan it is sawen, which som do call strynges. Cantherius, a gelding of an hors only. it is also the rail of a vine born vp with forkis or postes Cantharia, a stone whiche hath the prynte of a blacke flye callyd a byttell. Cantharis, idis, uel cantharida, ridae, a greene wourme shynynge with a glosse lyke golde, bred in the toppe of ashes, whiche layde to a mans bodye, maketh it to blyster. Some doo say that it is a flye keueryd with a skale lyke a byttell, but that he is greene. Cantharus, a pot or a iugge. Also a beast, wher of there is founde no female. also a kynde of fyshe. also the blacke flye callyd the byttell. Cantherij, gootes. Cantheriate uineae, vynes raysed vppon fra∣mes or perches. Cautherium, a maner of a chariot or wagan. also a perche or a rayle. Canthes, organ pipes. Canthus, is the corner of the eye, as well that whiche is by the nose, as that whiche is next to the temples. It is also the yron, wherwith the extremitie of whecles be bounden, the strake of a carte. Canticum, a pleasant or mery songe. Cantilena, is taken of Cicero for a spceche or tale commonly or to often vsed, and is of a smale effecte. Cantio, a songe. Cantiuncula, a songe of lyght matters. Cantito, aui, are, to synge often. Canto, aui, are, to synge or to charme. somtyme to monyshe or exhort. Haec dies, noctes{que} ti∣bi canto,Plaut. in Trinum. ut caueas: This I exhorte the daye and nyght, that thou mayst beware. Cantus, a songe. Canus, an olde man. Canus, a, um, gray or hoore. Cana fides, the faythfulnes of olde tyme. Cana ueritas, idem. Canusium, a towne in the countrey of Apulia. Capacitas, aptues to take. Capax, acis, that taketh or conteyneth anye thynge, able to receyue. Capax amicitiae, he that consydereth what belongeth to frendshyp. Capêdo, the greatnes of a vessell, or lyke thing that conteyneth. Capella, a yonge gote. Capêna, a towne by Rome. Caper, a geldyd gote. somtyme it is taken for the bucke gote. It alsoo was the name of an olde grammarian. Capero, qui, to frowne or lowre. Capesso, si, fere, to take, or to go about to take, to receyue,Plautus. sometyme it signifieth to bring in. Capêtus, the name of a kynge. Caphareus, a mountayne in Grece. Capharnaum, the chiefe citie in Galilee. Capidulum, a hoode. Capillamentum, the heare of a mans headde. sometyme the toppes of herbes, where the se∣des do growe.
Capillatia uela, be clothes of heare. Capillatus, a, um, that hath heare. Capillitium, the heare of the head. Capillo, are, to make heare. Capillotenus, iuste to the heare. Capillus, the heare. Capillus Veneris, an herbe callid maydenhear Capio, coepi, capere, to take wyllingely or vn∣wyllyngly. sometyme it signifieth to delite, to mitigate, to deceyue. Capti dolis, deceyued with cautels. somtime to conteyne. Dij boni, quid turbae? aedes nostri, uix capiunt, Good lorde, what a company? vneth our house wyll conteyne them. also to make. Capere rationem, to fynde the meane. Rationem coepi, ut & amāti obsequerer, & patrem non offenderem, I found the mean to please my louer, and not withstandynge I dyspleased not my father. Also to knowe the cause why.Terent. in Heauton. Scio tibi esse hoc grauius multo, ac durius cui fit: uerū ego haud minus aegrè patior id qui nescio, nec rationem capio, nisi quod tibi bene ex animo uolo. I knowe wel that to you, whom the thynge toucheth, it is moche more displeasant and greuous, but yet it greueth me no lesse, I can not tell why, but onely bycause I loue you. Capere conditionem, to accept the offre. Capere fugam, to runne away. Mente capere, to haue in mynde. Miseriam capere, to be in miserye. Misericordiam capere, to haue pitie. Coepit eum satietas, he was wery of it. Capere somnum, to sleape. Capere rationem oculis,Plaut. in Pseud. to iudge by syght. Hi loci sunt at{que} hae regiones, quae mihi ab hero sunt meo demonstratae, ut ego oculis rationem capio: These are the places and stretes that my mayster shewed me, as farre as myne eyes can iudge, or as farre as I can perceyue. Capere uoluptatem, to delyte. Capere uersoriā, to chāge a purpose, to turne sayle, to do the contrary to that he intended. Capere usuram corporis uxoris alterius, to cōmyt adultery with an other mans wyfe.Plaut. in Amphit. Capis, dis, a cuppe. Capistro, are, to halter or put on a rope or cord. Capistrum, an haltar. Capitatio, head syluer, or subsidye gatheryd of euery man after the rate of his substance. Capitale, & capital, an offence punished by deth Capitale est, it is death, or deserueth deth. Capitalem fraudem admittere, to do a thynge worthy punyshement by deathe. Capitales Triumuiri, iuges in causes of deth. Capitalis noxa, an offence worthy death. Capitalis aduersarius, a mortall ennemy. Capitalis dies, a day appoynted to done to re∣ceyue iugement of deathe. Capitalis homo, a man that deserueth deathe. also that is proe or redy to murder. Capitalis ira, mortall wrathe. Capitalis locus, the place of execution. Capitaliter, mortally. Capitatus, a, um, that groweth greate in the heade. Capitati caules, cabages. Capite censi, were amonge the Romaynes the poore sorte of the people, whiche were dys∣charged of al exactions, and remayned in the citie onely for generation. Capitellum, a lyttell heade or top of a thynge. Also the hyghest parte of a pyllar. Capitium, any thinge that couereth the heade, commonly they do call it a hood. Capito, onis, he that hath a great heade. also heady or obstinat in opinion. It is also a fish which by his description, semeth to be a cod. Capitolinus, was the surname of hym that founde the heade, whan the capitol shulde be buylded. Capitolium, the palayce of the citie of Rome. Capitosus, he that hath a great head or a dull head. Capitulatum, any thynge that is growen to a heade. Capitulo, are, to diuide by chapiters. Capitulum, a lyttell heade, also a chapiter. Capnion, an herbe called fumitory.Plinius li. 26. It is also called Capnios. Capo, a fyshe called a Gurnarde. Cappa, the name of a greeke letter, for which the latines vse C. Cappadocia, a countrey in Asia, & hath on the south the mountayn called Taurus, & the coū¦trey callid Ciliciā: on the east the countrey of Armeny, & diuers other nations: on the north the sea called Euxinum: on the weste Paph∣lagoniam. and is diuided from Armeny the more with the famous ryuer of Euphrates. In that countreye are bred plentye of excel∣lent good horses. It was somtyme called Al∣ba Siria, for as moche as the people be why∣ther than they of the other Siria. The people therof are called Cappadoces, whiche were reputed to be of so yl conditions, that among the commune people, if one had ben sene to be of yll facion, they wolde saye that he was of Cappadocia. yet not with standynge in that countrey was borne the blessed martyre and valiant christen knyghte sainte George, whose noble vertues and constante faythe is wrytten in the boke of lyfe, and also remay∣neth an immortall example amonge vs. Also Basilius magnus, and Gregorius Nazian∣zenus, holye byshoppes and moste excellente doctours.
Cappadox, ocis, a man of the countreye of Cappadocia. Cpparis, a fruite called Capers, wherewith we do make salates and sauce for mutton, whiche eaten afore meales, be very good for the stomake, & agaynst diseases of the splene. Capra, a gote. Capraria, an yle in the sea called Ligusticum. Caprarius, a goteherde. Caprea, a beaste whiche dothe se wonderfull quickelye. It is also a kynde of vines so na∣med. Moreouer an yle by Naples. Capreolus, a kyd. also a beaste called a too. It is also the tendrell of a vyne, which windeth dyuerse wayes, called also Pampinus. Also a forke to set vp a vyne. Capreus, a, um, that whiche is of a gote. Capricornus, a sygne in heauen, conteynynge xx. stertes. Caprificacio, the parynge awaye of the barke of a tree. Caprificiales dies, the dayes called canicular dayes, whiche were dedicate vnto Vulcan{us}. Caprificus,Plinius. a wylde fyg tree, whiche runneth vp by walles. Caprigenus, a, um, that which is of the kind of a gote. Caprîle, a stable or pen where gotes be kepte. Caprilis, le, of a gote. Caprillus, a, um, idem. Caprimulgi, byrdes lyke to gulles, whiche ap∣pere not by daye, but in the nyght they come into gote pennes, and do sucke the gootes, wherby the vdders of them be mortifyed. Caprinus, a, um, of a gote. Caprisans pulsus, is whan the pulse semethe to ryse,Galen. in definit and sodeynly is chaunged in to an other fourme of meuynge. Caproneae, the top or lytel mane, that is in the forhede of a horse. Caprótina, a surname of Iuno. Caprunculum, a great vessell Capsa, a coffer or cheste. Capsaces, a vessell wherin oyle is kepte. Capsarius, he that kepeth chestes or apparell. Capsis, for cape siuis, take it and thou wylte. Capsus, a couered carte. Captatio, a purchase, the acte or crafte to get fauour. also deceypte or subtyltie. Captator, oris, he that vseth that crafte. Captio, onis, the acte of takyng or deceyuing, or that whereby any thyng is taken. Captiosus, captious, or deceytful. Captiuncula, the diminutiue of Captio. Captiuitas, captiuitie or bondage. Captiuus, a prysoner taken in warres, or a slaue. Capto, aui, are, to get the fauour of one with fayre wordes, pleasaunt dedes or rewardes, also to deceyue or take quyckely. Captare coenam,Martialis. to get a supper of fre cost. Captare impudicitiae, to ly in awayt, to take one in the acte of lechery. Captare sermonem, to harken pryuily what men talke. Captura, the apprehendyng or gettynge. Captus, a, um, taken. Capti oculis, blynde. also greatte iouers be callyd Capti. Captus mente, out of his wytte, or madde. Captus, tus, chaunce, also deceyte, perceyuyng of a thynge, or capacitie. Captus hominum, mens capacitie. sometyme dilectation. Non possum adduci, & suscipere è pecunia cap∣tum, I may not be brought therto, and take dilectation of the money. Capua, a citie in the royalme of Naples. Capula, a cuppe with an handell. Capularis senex, an olde mn redy to be layde in his biere. Capulum, a rydyng knotte. Capulus, & capulum, what so euer may receiue any thyng into it: properly it is a beere, wher in deade corpsis are borne. also the hyltes or handell of a sworde. Capus, a capon. Caput, a head. Also the begynnynge of euerye thynge. also a chapter of a boke. also an au∣thor or begynner of a thyng. somtyme chiefe, otherwhiles peryll. somtyme estimation. Ad capita rerum peruenias, com to the point of the matter. Capita frumenti & uectigalium, the articles concernynge grayne and reuenues. Capita rerum expedite, goo quyckely to the principall mattier. Capite damnatus, condemned to dye. Capite decernere.Cicero. Vtinâ meo solum capite decernerem, I wolde god I mought trye it at myn owne peryll. Siue capite manere res, whan one knoweth not wherof the bruite is spronge. Capitis anquirere, to procede in iugement a∣gaynst one for treason or felony. Capitis arcessere, to appeache one of treason or felonye. Capitis diminutio, a condemnation, wherby a man looseth eyther libertie of his persone, and is made bonde, or is banyshed his coun∣trey, or put out of the kynges protection, or renouncyng his owne family, is adopted or taken into another, whiche is not nowe vsed, Capitis iuditium, processe crimynall. Caput facere, to gather a soore to a head. Capys, a mans name that buylded Capua. Carabus, seu caramus, a fyshe callyd a lopster, lyke to a creuyse, but that he is greatter, and is redde whan he is alyue.
Caraxus, was the brother of Sapphus. Carba, a wynde that bloweth from the southe Carbasus, in plural. Carbasa, a kynd of lynnen cypres: also the sayle clothe of a shyp. It is sumtyme taken for lynnen clothe. Carbaseus, & Carbasinus, a, ū, of fyne threde. Carbo, a cole. It was also the name of a Ro∣mayne. ❀Carbone notare, to marke with a cole. It is also a prouerbe signifienge to condemne a thyng. somtyme to take a thyng for yl lucke. Carbonarius, a colyar. Carbonarius, a, um, perteynynge to coles. Carbunculatio, a red wynde, whiche burneth trees. Carbunculatio in uitibus, is a faute in vines whan the clusters of grapes ar not sufficient¦ly couered with leaues, by the which occasi∣on they be withered and dryed. Carbunculo, are, to be burned lyke a cole. Carbunculus, a botche whiche commeth of in∣flammation. It is also a kynde of pretious stones, whiche do shyne lyke a burnyng cole. Moreouer a defaulte in a vyne, and other trees, wherby they are burned, whiche hap∣neth about the canicular dayes. Also it signi∣fieth erthe, wherin is founde blacke slat sto∣nes. Also erthe whiche with the heate of the son is so hot, that it burneth all thynges that be sowen or set in it. Carcer, eris, a prison. Carceres, plural. the place where horses stand whan they runne for prices, and from thense do take theyr course. wherof commeth a pro∣uerbe. A carceribus ad calcem, from the be∣ginnynge to the ende of an enterprise.❀ Carcerarius, a, um, of a prison. Carchedonius, a kynde of carbuncle stones, whiche in the house seme of purple colour, a∣brode in the ayre they are fyrye, agaynste the sonne they sende out sparkes, and if waxe be touched with them, it melteth. Carchesium, a standynge cup with handelles. Carchoquios, a kynde of frogges, hauynge on theyr belies yelowe spottes. Carcina, a citie. Carcinodes, the cancre in the nose. Carcinoma, atis, the eatynge anker in the o∣uer partes of the body. Carcinus, a crab. Cardamine, an herbe called water cressis. Cardamomum, is a spyce, which is lyke a sede somewhat longe, the beste of it is harde to be broken, and sone perseth the nose in smellyng in taste quicke and somwhat bytter. In stede of this spyce, whiche commethe out of Ara∣bia or Indie, they nowe do commonly vse a spice, whiche the apothecaries do call grana Paradisi, in englyshe graynes. Cardiacus morbus,Galen uel Cardiaca passio, is a sickenesse procedyng of an humour in the cel∣les of the harte.Cels if the humour be of bloud or choler,Confr there is with the tremblynge of the harte an heate also, with moche thyrste, and a depe fetchynge of wynde. if it be of grosse bloude and melancholy, than is there feare, sorowe, and dulnes, without thyrste. Some tyme it hapneth by dymynution of thynges necessary to the comfortynge of the harte, as good and substantiall bloud and clere, com∣mynge frome the lyuer. sometyme humours sharpe and prychynge do gather to gether in the stomake, and causeth that sickenesse. O∣therwhiles it hapneth in a feuer, wherin the pacient sweateth moche: Also of the feblenes of the stomake, specially where the vaynes are lyttel, the pulse feble, sweate oute of due measure and tyme, about the ouermost parte of the body, the necke and heade, the legges and fete beinge than colde and drye. Cardinalis, le, chiefe or principal. Cardineus, the same. Cardinum, an herbe, whiche some do suppose, is cressis. Cardo, dinis, the poste wheron the dore han∣geth, and is moued. Also a mere or boundes, whiche passeth through the fielde, frome the southe to the north. It is also the tenon, whi∣che is put into the mortayse. Cardines temporum,Plinius. the foure tymes of the yere: Sprynge tyme, Somer, Autumne and Wynter. Cardo causae, the yssue of the matter. Cardo rei, the effect of the matter or thyng: the chiefe poynte of the matter. Cardopos, an huche or coffar, wherin breade is layden I the northe countreye it is called an arke. Carduelis, a byrde called a lyuet. Carduus, a thystell. Care, derely, at a great pryce. Carex, icis, sedge that groweth in fen groun∣des or watry. Carectum, the place where sedge doth grow. Careo, ui, ere, to lacke, properlye those good thynges, whiche ones were had. Somtyme it signifieth to be without a thyng: as Ca∣reo culpa, I am without faulte. Careo febre, I am without feuer. Cares, the name of a keruer, the scholer of Lysippus. Caria, a region in Asia, hauynge on the northe sydhe great ryuer of Meander, on the west the great sea called Icarius, on the east Licia, and dyuerse other countreyes, towarde the southe the mountayne of Taurus. The peo∣ple therof were called Cares, whiche were good men of warre, and therfore they were
euery where reteyned for soudiours, as Suy¦zars or Suychynars be nowe. Carica, cae, a drye fyg, such as is eaten in lent. Carica, lyttell houses set on hyghe places, whi∣che be stronge by the naturall munition of the place. Caricus, a, um, of the countray of Caria. Carides, a fyshe called a prane, lyke to a shrīp. Caries, a lyttell worme that eateth wood. It is also putrifaction or fylthe growen by age or continuaunce. Cariem trahere, to waxe rotten, or to be pu∣trified or vinnewed. Carina, the kele or bottome of the shyp. Carinae, arum, a strete in Rome, wherin Pō∣pey dwelled. Carinatus, a, um, made in fourme of the kele of a shyp or bote. Carino, aui, are, to make any thynge lyke to the keele of a shyp. Carinthia, a countrey by Oustrike, ioynynge on the southe to the mountaynes called Al∣pes, and Italy, on the Easte and Northe to Stiria. The fourme of election of the newe prince or gouernour there, declared by Pius in his cosmographye, is very straunge, and right pleasaunte to knowe. In the town cal∣led Sancti Viti, is a great valey, where, in a medowe is set a stone of marble, of a good height, whervpō ascendeth an husband man, vnto whom by inheritaunce that office belō∣geth: On his right hande standeth a blacke cowe, on the lefte hand an yl fauoured mare, about him standeth a great multitude of car∣les. On the other syde of the medowe cometh the duke, accompanyed with his noble men in theyr robes of astate, before him goeth the erle of Goritia, the gret maister of his hous, betwene .xii. banners, bearynge the princes standarde. The other noble men doo folowe with the prynce clad lyke an husbande man, with a shepe croke in his hande, lyke as he were a shepeherd. whom as sone as the earle, whiche standeth on the marble stone, doth se commynge, he asketh with a loude voyce in the slauon tungue: who is this that cometh with so proude a gate? They whiche stande about him, don answere, that it is the prince of that countrey. Than answereth eftsones the earle: Is he a rightuouse iudge, sekinge for the weale of the countreye, a free manne borne, and worthy to haue honour? Is he a trewe christen man, and defendour of Chri∣stis fayth? They all answere: yea, he is and shall be. Than sayth the earle, by what right maye be put me from this place? Than aun∣swereth the erle of Goritia: Thou shalt haue for thy place .lx. grotes, these two beastes ar thyne (shewyng to hym the cowe & the mare) the prynces aparayle whiche he dyd late put of, thou shalt also haue, thy famyly or kynne shall be free from all maner of tribute. Than the carle gyuyng to the prynce a lyttel blowe on his checke, byddeth hym be a good iuge, and commynge downe frome the stone, gy∣ueth hym place, and soo departeth, takynge with hym the cowe and the mare. Than the prynce goeth vp on the stone, and holdynge a naked sworde in his hande, and brandishing it, tourneth to euery parte of the stone, pro∣mysyng equall iugement vnto all the people. Than is there brought to hym cold water in a husbande mannes cappe, whiche the prince drynketh, signifienge that he condempneth drynkynge of wyne. Thanne goeth he to a church of our lady there by, where after that he hath harde masse, he putteth of the rusti∣call apparayle, and putteth on other appa∣rayle of honour, and dynynge with his nobi∣litie sumptuouselye, he commeth eftsones to the medowe, where he hereth matters, and mynystreth Iustice. This hystorye I haue thought necessary to be knowen amonge vs. wherfore I haue not spared my labour to de¦lyte other. The duke of this countreye is as it were chiefe maister of the game, vnto the imperiall maiestie. Cariophillon, a spice called cloues. Cariosus, a, um, as erth is after that it is wel dunged & stered. it is also putrified or rotten. Cariota, a date. Cariotis, idis, idem. Caritas, tatis, scarcitie, derth properly of that whiche serueth for the sustinaunce of manne. Caritas, annonae, derthe of vitayle. Carius, the name of Iupiters sonne. Carmania, a countrey in India, whiche after Ptholomeus is diuided in two partes, oone parte is very fertile, an other is very barain. The peple in the stede of garmētes do weare the saynnes of fyshes, and do eate only fishe, and theyr bodyes be all roughe and keuered with heare, excepte theyr vysages, and they haue no townes nor other certayne habyta∣tion,Strabo. but are alwayes wandrynge. Of this countrey I fynde one thynge worthye of re∣membraunce. Who so euer wyll mary there, muste brynge fyrste to the kinge of that coun∣trey, the head of an ennemy, which the king setteth vppe in his palaice, and taketh fyrste out the tungue, and causeth it to be cutte in pieces, and mengled with breade, and giueth parte therof to him which brought the head. And if there be many heades, he deuideth the tunges amonge his gentylmen, as moste de∣lycate meate. Carmelus, the name of two sundrye hylles in Iudea.
Carmen, minis, a verse or meire. Also the hole warke whiche is made in versis. somtyme it signifieth a charme. Carmentis, the name of a lady, whiche hadde the sprite of prophesy, and gaue aunswere in versis. She was also called Nicostratis, and was mother of Euander. Carminare, to carde wull, or other like thing. Carminarij, they that do picke or make cleane wull, or carde. Carmites, people of a countrey in Fraunce cal¦led Chartres. Carmon, a place in Messenia, and the temple of Apollo in Laconia. Carna,Macrob. was supposed to be the goddesse of mā∣nes lyfe, of her they desyred the harte and ly∣uer to be preserued. Carnarium, a larder, wherein hangethe salte fleshe. Sometyme it sygnifieth a bouchers shambles. Carnarius, a boucher. Carnarius, a, um, that perteyneth to fleshe. Carneus, a, um, that whiche is of fleshe. Carni, the people of a countrey in Almayn cal∣led Carinthia, belongynge to the duke of Au∣strike. It is also the name of an other people in Italy, in the countrey called Marca Tar∣uisina. Carnifex, ficis, an executioner or hange man, that cutteth men in pieces. sometime a mur∣derer. Carnificina, the place where suche execution is done. Also the office or acte of a hange man▪ also great murder, cruelty. Carnificium, the same acte. Carnificinus, a, um, perteynynge to the act of murderynge or sleinge. Carnificor, aris, ari, to playe the hangemans parte. Carniuorns, a, um, any thynge that deuou∣reth fleshe. Carnositas, abundaunce of fleshe. Carnosus, fleshye. Carnosium folium, & Carnosa radix, a thicke leafe or a thycke roote. Carnotum, the myddell region of al Fraunce. Carnuntum, a town in the border of Germany Carnus, a, um, fat. Caro,Donatus. carnis, fleshe, properly of that whiche is deade. Caros, excesse of meate and drynke. Also an herbe and seede called carwayes, It is also an herbe called caret, the rote wherof is like a persenepe, but some are yelowe, and some red, and be in eatyng more plesant than pers∣nepes, and wyl be soner digested. Carorae,Cel. ant. lect. uel Carotici, be the greatte ynewes, whiche do holde vp the necke, called also Te∣nondes, which in Cornelius Celsus in some prynte be called Cerotes, which wolde be a∣mended and written Carotas. Caroticae,Aristo▪ aal; be the great vaynes on euery syde of the necke. Carpâthium mare, the sea ioynyng to Egypt, wherin be the yles called Sporades. Carpathos, an yle agaynste Egypt, the myd∣des betwene Rhodes and Candy. Carpâtinae, ploughmens bootes, made of vn∣tanned lether, they maye be called okers. Carpentarius, a cartwright, or carpenter. Carpentarius equus, a carte horse, or chari∣ot horse. Carpentum, a chariot, or waggen. Carphos, an herbe called Sengrene. Carpinus, a tre, called among the frenche men carpi, or carme. Carpineus, a, um, of carme. Carpio, a fyshe called a carpe. Carpo, psi, pere, to gether or plucke. Also to these out, to reproue, or taunt, to vse .i. fiuor, to passe ouer quickely. Carpere agmen, to assayle an host on euery syde. Carpere cibum, to eate. Carpere iter, to take a iourney. Carpere lanam, to tose wull, or carde wull. Carpere maledico dente, to reproue ma∣lyciousely. Carpere uiam, to walke. Carpere, uires, to debilitate or infeble. Carpere uitales auras, to lyue. Vnum quicquid quod quidem erit belissi∣mum carpam.Te One, whiche so euer shall be the fayrest, I wyll chese. Genio carpamus dulcia, lette vs make good chere. Carpere exercitum in multas partes, to dy∣uyde an hoste or army. Carpet citius aliquis, {quam} imitabitur: One shal soner fynde faulte, than do lyke it. Carpocrates, an heretike, whiche denied that Christe was god, affyrmynge that he was pure man, of whom the sect was called Car∣pocratitae, or Carpocratiani. They also af∣fyrmed, that the worlde was made by aun∣gelles, and not by god. they reiecte the olde testament, and do deny the generall resurecti¦on. They also denyed that Christe was born of the virgin Mary, saying, that he was got ten of the sede of Ioseph. Also that his body suffered, and that onely his soule was recey∣ued in to heauen. This Carpocrates lyued about the yere of our lorde .142. Carpophyllon, a tree, whiche hath leues lyke to laurell. Carptim, pykinge out here and there. Carptim breuiter{que} perstringere aliquid, to touche a thynge summarily & in few wordes.
Carptim dicere, to touche thynges here and there quickely. Carptura, a gatherynge to gether of soundrye thynges. Carra, rae, a citie in Arabia. Carrodunum, the chiefe citie of Polonia cal∣led Cracouia, or Cracaw. Carruca, a carte. Carrucarius, a, um, perteynynge to a carte, Carrus, a chariot. Carteia, a towne in Spayne. Carthaginenses, people of Carthage. Carthaginensis, perteyninge to Carthage. Carthago, was a famous citie in Affrike cal∣led Cartage, almoste enuironed with the sea whiche citie was in compace about the wal∣les .360. furlunges, whiche are .45. Italy∣on myles whereof .vii. myles and an halfe ran in length on the rydge of an hyl, which went from sea to sea, where as were set the stables of olyphantes, which was a very large place. Almoste in the myddell of the citie was a ca∣stell or towre called Byrsa, hauynge an hy! on the top, whervpon stode the temple of Aes∣culapius, called god of medicine: vnderneth were hauens or kayes of the castell, and a lit∣tell yle called Cothon, whiche was rounde, standynge as it were in a great ponde, about the whiche were set the houses, that serued for the nauy of Carthage. This citie conty∣nuwed warres with the Romayns .xl. yeres, and had many excellente menne of warre, of whom Hannibal was the most noble and fa∣mouse. That citie had in subiection not one∣ly a great parte of Affrike, but also Sicile, the more part of Spayne, and the yles of the myddell sea, which now the emperour Char∣les enioyeth. It was at the last destroyed by Scipio, and the Romayns, before the incar∣nation of Christe .144. yeres. The countrey where it stode, is nowe called Tunyse. Carthallum, a basket. Carthumandua, a queene in this Britayne, of the people called Brigantes. Cartilâgo, ginis, a gristell. Cartilaginosus, a, um, full of gristelles, or of a gristell. Caruncula, a lyttell piece of fleshe. Carus, a, um, deere. Carya, the name of a citie in Grece. Caryatides, the images of womenne holdyng garlandes, or other lyke thyng, set vp to gar∣nyshe houses. Caryca, reade in Carica. Caryon Indicū, uel nux indica, a great fruite lyke to a nut, whiche the Arabians do say ar the dates of Inde, out of them cometh a ly∣cour more swete than butter. This nut is hot in the second degre, and moyest in the fyrste. Caryon myristicō, uel Mosthocaryon, is that spice whiche is also called Nux muscata, in englyshe nutmygges, whiche is hot and drye in the seconde degree. Caryopos, the iuyce of a nut. Caryorae, reade in Cariotae. Carynus, a, um, of a nut, as Oleum carynū, the oyle of nuttes. Caryste, & Carystos, an yle in the sea called Euboicum, wherin is plentye of marbyll of dyuerse colours. Carystaeus, a, um, of that yle. Casa, a cottage. Casabundus, a, um, fallynge often. Casaria, the woman that kepeth the cotage. Cascus, a, um, olde. Caseale, a stable. Caseus, cheese. Caseus musteus, Rowen cheese. Casia, a spice whiche hath the vertue of Cina∣mome, and is wonderfull soote in sauour, it is called of the apothecaries Cassia lignea. Casito, aui, are, to fall or drop oftentimes. Casia fistularis, is that whiche is called com∣monly Cassia fistula. Casius, a hyll in the borders of Egypt. Casner, in the osk tungue, is an olde man. Caspiae portae, are places broken in the roc∣kes of the mountaynes of Caucasus toward Hyrcania and Persia, whiche are in length (as Plinius sayth.) vii. myles, as Solinus wryteth .viii. myles: in breade they are soo narrow, that a carte may hardly passe throw them. Martianus wryteth, that those gates were faste shyt with greate yron beames, to let that no man shulde passe. In the sprynge tyme and sommer all serpentes doo repaire thyther from all countreys aboute, wherfore the passage that way is peryllous. Caspij, a people nowe in Iartaria, ioyuynge to the sea called Caspium. In them is this in humanytie, as Strabo wryteth, that when theyr parentes do excede the age of .lxx. yeres, they put them into a close place, and doo fa∣myshe them, and than do they laye them in a deserte, and do beholde them farre of. And if byrdes do plucke them out of theyr couches, and deuoure them, they accompte them bles∣sed: if dogges or wylde beastes do it, they do not accompte it so happy. if bothe do it, they esteme those men vnhappy. Other do wryte, that they nouryshe dogges of purpose to de∣uoure them. Cassa dote virgo, a mayden hauynge nothyng towarde her maryage. Cassa nux, a pypped nutte. Casses, sis, nettes, whiche may be called haies. Also an helmet: But than it hath cassidis in the genitiue case.
Cassiculus, a lyttell hay. Cassinum, an olde market plate. Cassiopa, an hauen on the Southe parte of Sicile. Cassiope, called also Cassiopeia, a sygne in heauen that hath .xii. sterres, and is fygured lyke to a woman, syttynge in a chayre. Cassita, a larke. Cassiterides, be .x. Iles in the Spanysshe sea, wherin was digged moche tynne, and they be not far from the weste parte of Spayne. Cassiterus, tynne. Cassitias, the gumme that droppeth oute of a fyrre tre. Cassius, a propre name of a man. Casso, aui, are, to put out or make of none effecte. Cassus, a, um, voyde and of none effecte. Cassus lumine, deade. Cassutha,Ruellius. is that herbe whiche is commonlye called Cascuta, in englyshe withwinde. Castalius, a fountayne in the foote of the hyll of Pernassus, whiche was dedycate to the Muses. Casta mola, was a kynde of sacrifice, that the virgines vestales made. Castanêtum, a place set with chesten trees. Castaneum, a chesten or chest nut. Caste, chastly, honestly, vncorruptly. Castellani, the inhabytauntes of a lyttell wal∣led towne. Castellatim, one lyttell walled towne after an other. Castellum, a lyttell walled towne. It is also a cundyte, out of the whiche water runneth. it is also the name of a countrey called Iuliers or Gulike. Casterium, a house, wherein the tackelynge of shyppes is kepte. Castigatio, Correction. Castigabilis, le, that whiche may be corrected or amended. Castigo, aui, are, to chastise with wordes, also to correct or amende, to refourme, to punish. Castitas, atis, chastitie. Castimonia, idem. Castor, a beuer, whiche hath the tayle of a fyshe, in the residue is lyke to an ottar. Castor, & Pollux, were bretherne bothe born at oone byrthe, whiche were honoured for goddes. Castra, orum, an army of men of warre whan they lye or abyde in any place. Also the place where the host lodgeth. Also the pauyllions beinge pitched. Also they do signifie Statio∣nes, restinge places, where the hostre taryeth to refreshe theym, whiche amonge the olde Romaynes conteyned .ix. myles, as Senalis doth wryte. Castris exuere, to compel the ennemies to aise theyr campe.Ti. L bell. P Nec ante abscessum est, quam castris exuerunt hostem: Nor they departed not awaye, vntyll they had constrayned their ennemies to rayse theyr tampe. Castramêtor, to laye or lodge an army. Castrata respublica, a weake or feble common weale. Castrense peculium, that which a man of war¦hath gotten in the warres. Castrensis, se, that which perteyneth to an host or army, or warre. Castro, aui, are, to gelde. Sometyme to cut of generally. Castrum, a castell or fortresse. Castula, lynnen clothe, wherwith maydene did gyrde them selfe vnder their pappes. Castus, a, um, chaste, honest, and continente, or vncorrupted. Casu, by chaunce. Casura, a fall or decaye. Casurgis, a citie in Boeme, now called Praga. Casus, hap, ruine, misfortune, or mysery, also a case. Catabasis, the sun set. Catabathmus, a place in Affryke ioynynge io Egypt. Catachresis, a figure, wherby the property of a worde is abused: as, Facies simillima lau∣ro, where facies onely belongeth to a man, and not to a tree, althoughe it doth signyfye there a similitude or figure. Catachysmata, amonge the Atheniensis the v∣sage was whan newe seruauntes were fyrste come into an house, as they stode by the chim¦naye or herthe, there were poured on theyr heades, fygges, nuttes, dates, beanes, and peason, whiche were catched vp of the other seruauntes. And the lyke was doone on the newe bryde in token of good lucke. And this was called Catachysmata, for catachysis, in greke, is in englyshe a pourynge out. Cataclysmus, an vniuersall floudde. Cataclysta, a garment close all about. Catacrysis, a condemnation. Catadromus, the place where men do rum hor∣ses for prices or wagers. Catagrapha, ymages lokynge dyuerse wayes, and in dyuerse fourmes. Catalecticum metrum, a verse wherin one on∣ly syllable lacketh. Catalepsis, occupation, or deprehension. Catalexis, a finishynge of a thynge. Catalogus, speache or wrytynge, where thyn∣ges be recited in order and number. A reher∣sall or table of the number of thynges Catalyma, refection. also an ynne. Catamidio, are, to set one vp with a paper on his heade to be mocked or rebuked for some
offence, as they use to do with men periured, or with forgers of euydences. Cataphora,Galen. in agoge. a deade sleape, or dysposition to slepe or wake. Cataphractus, armed and fenced on al partes. Cataphracti equites, men of armes on barbed horses. Cataphractae naues, keuered shyppes, Cataphriges, were heretives, which toke that name of one Montanus of Phrigia, an arch heretike, who affirmed, that the holye goste was gyuen to them, and not to the apostles. They baptised not in the name of the tryny∣tie: they baptised also menue after that they were deade, and damned the seconde mary∣ages. This secte beganne the yere of our lorde .170. Cataplasma, a playster made with herbes and sewet. Catapotia, pyiles in medicine. Catapulta, an arrowe, or a quarell. Catapultarium pilum, a bolte. Cataputia maior, the greatter spurge. loke in Racinus. Cataputia minor, an herbe called the lesse spurge. loke more in Tithymalus, and also in Lathyris, whiche is the same herbe. Catarrhacta, a portculious. Also cloudes. som∣tyme caues in the erthe, also a web in the cie. Catarrhactae, great courses of water, fallinge downe frome hyghe places. Also the places from whense they do fall. Catarrhus, a rewme or stillinge downe of wa∣ter or fleume from the head. Catascopium, a shyp that watcheth or espieth for other, a brigandine. Catasta, a cage wherin men be set, whiche are to be solde. also wherin they were punysshed. Catastroma, parte of a shyp or pauement. Catastrophe, a subuersion, or a volume. Catatyposis, a figure, where one thynge is de∣scribed by an other. Catechesis, an instruction or teachynge proper¦ly by mouth and not by writyng. Catechiso, aui, are, to instructe, to infourme, or teache. Catechumenus, he that is newely instructed. Categoria, accusation. Catellus, Catella, a lyttell hounde, a brache. Catena, a chayne. Cateno, aui, are, to chayne to gether. Catenula, a lyttell chayne. Caterua, a company of men of warre. somtime a multitude of people. Cateruarij, they that do assemble in companis. Cateruatim, by companyes. Cathalanū, a towne in Fraunce called Chalon Catharctica, purgatiue medicines. Cathari, were heretikes, whiche affirmed, that it was not lefull to a christen man to sweare, for any cause, or at any tyme. They also de∣nied al the sacramentes of the churche. Catharmos, a certayne purgation with fyre. Cathay, is a great region in the easte parte of the worlde, extendynge vnto the east occean sea, and on the southe vnto the ouer India, and is also called Synarum regio. It is de∣uided into nyne royalmes, whiche be all vn∣der the great Cham. This countrey is won∣derfull ryche in golde and sylke, and aboun∣deth in grayne and wynes and al other thin∣ges necessary for mannes sustynaunce. The people for the more part doth honour Christ as god, but they are not baptysed, they are courtayse and reasonable, and very kunning artificers, Cathedra, a benche or stoole. Cathinea, a kynd of erthe, wherof latyn metall is made. Catholicus, vniuersall, now it is vsed for him that kepeth the faith, as the vniuersal chur∣che hath obserued it. Also the busshop of the Armenians was so called. Cathortoma, the right worke of vertue, a dede iustely done. Cathortosis, a right affection. Catillatio, a great reproche layd to gentylmen, whiche had robbed the countreys that were alyed to the Romaynes, and had riottouslye consumed the goodes. Catillo, are, to eate lyke a glutton. Catillones, lycke dyshes, gluttons. Catillus, the ouer stone of a myl, called the run¦ner. Also a potager. Câtina, a citie in Sicile. Câtinus, a dyshe. Cato, onis, was not fyrste a surname, but a name of merite, for the aunciente Romaines called hym Cato, that was wyse by moche experience. Of this name were dyuerse, of whom two were moste excellent persons: the one of them was called Marcus Cato Cen∣sorius, bycause that he alwaye vsed the gra∣uitie and rigour, whiche was wonte to be in the correctours of maners called Censores, and also he hym selfe beynge Censor was a∣boue all other moste sharp and rigorous. Va∣lerius Maximus wryteth, that he was al∣moste an olde man er he lerned latine letters, and than it semeth he was olde er he lerned greeke. And yet notwithstandinge by gathe∣rynge bridgmentes oute of Tucidides and Demosthenes warkes, he became the great∣teste oratour of his tyme, and was called the Romane Demosthenes. He being made con∣sul, wan moo cities in Spayne, than he had aboden dayes in that countrey, In the whi∣che iourney he nothyng retayned to him selfe
of all that was founde there, but meate and drinke onely: but made his souldiours riche, gyuynge to euery of them a pounde weyght of syluer, sayinge: That better it were that manye Romaynes retourned with syluer to Rome, than a fewe Romayns with gold. He taughte his owne sonne grammer, not with∣standyng that he had a seruaunt called Chy∣lo, whiche was an excellente grammarian, and taughte a great schoole, sayinge: that it was not conuenient, if his sonne were slowe in lernynge, that he shulde be rebuked or pul∣led by the cares of hym, whiche was of a ser¦uyle condition. He also taughte hym the cy∣uile lawes, and all maner of exercise, not on∣ly to handle al weapons and to ride well, but also to fyght with the sistes, and to susteyne bothe cold and heate, & also to leape into wa∣ters, and to swymme against swift running streames. Beinge Censor he spared none e∣state, whom he founde corrupted in maners, or superfluouse in liuing, wherby he brought into the citie a meruailouse image of vertue. His sentences rehersed by Plutarch be won∣derfull, of the whiche I wyll remember thre for the excellencie of them. Lyke as the diars (sayde he) do die most osten that colour, whi¦che they perceiuen moste men do delite in: so yonge men do moste studiouselye haunte and imbrace that, whiche they se olde menne and counsailours haue in most estimation. He al∣so blamed the people of Rome, for as moche as they commytted authorities and offyces, often tymes to one person, sayinge: They se∣med not to esteme rule and auhoritie, or elles that they supposed that there were but a few that were worthy promotion. The one was a signe of contempt, the other was discorage to good wittes, and rebuke to theyr coun∣trey. Also whanne there were thre ambassa∣dours chosen to be sente in to Bithynia, of whom one had the goute, an other had peine in his heade, the thyrde was timerous, Ca∣to laughinge, sayde in the senate: The peo∣ple of Rome, sendeth an ambassade, whiche hath neither feete, heade, nor yet harte. The lyfe of this man, & also of the other Cato, are worthy to be often tymes radde, specially of coūsaylours and men in authoritie. He was before the incarnation of Christe .182. yeres. Cato Vticensis, was so called bycause he slewe hym selfe in the town called Vtica in Affrike. His great graundfather was the other Ca∣to called Censorius. This man in childhood shewed a wonderfull constance and grauitie, seldome very mery, or sene to laughe, and if he dyd, it was a very lytel smyling, nor wold lyghtly be angrye, but if he were angrye, he was not shortely appesed. Also he was harde to lerne, but that whiche he lerned, he perfect∣ly reteyned, and was verye studious in all mo∣rall philosophye, practisynge in his actes and lyuinge that which he rad of vertue and hone∣sty, and also studied eloquence, onely to the en∣tente that in counsaylynge and raysonynge he mought adde vnto philosophy more force & or∣namente, and yet wolde he not shewe it, or pra¦ctise it openly. And whan one sayde to hym, mē dysprayse thyne obstinate silence, he answered: I force not, so that they disprayse not my liuing But I wyll breake out of this silence, whan I can speake that, which is not worthy to be vn∣spoken. Beinge Tribunus militum, that is to saye capitayne of a thousande men, or as Bu∣deus resembleth, marshall of an army, and be∣ynge sente in to Macedonia, He with his mer∣uaylouse grauitie, prudence, and peynefulnes, made all them, whiche were vnder hym, fierce and hardy agaynste theyr ennemies, gentyll to theyr felowes, fearefull to do iniury, prompte to get prayses: and hym selfe labourynge with them, and vsynge his apparayle, feedynge, and goinge, lyke vnto them, he contrary to mennes expectation (not withstandynge his seuerytie) wan the hartes of them, goinge on foote and talkynge with euery manne. And was of suche constance, and soo far from ambition and flat∣tery, that neyther by Pompeye nor Caesar in theyr chiefe pryde, whan all menne eyther for dread or for fauour inclyned to theyr desyres, he moughte be by no meanes perswaded, to a∣gree to theyr myndes, in cases where it semed to be agaynste the weale publyke, nor any ma∣ner of menacynge or dreadfull tokens, mought from that constaunce remoue hym. In so moch that whan he harde, that Iulius Cesar hadde vainquisshed Pompeye, and that his frendes wold haue sent to Caesar to desyre his fauour, Cato aunswered: They whiche are vainquy∣shed or haue any wise trespaced, ought to make suite, but sense he in al his lyfe was neuer vain¦quished, and in innocency he surmounted Cae∣sar, whiche in makynge war agaynst his owne countreye, hadde condemned hym selfe to haue done that thynge, whiche he had often denyed. Fynally not for malyce of Caesar, but bycause he wolde not beholde the weale publyke destroi¦ed, he slewe hym selfe at Vtica, hauynge with hym at souper, the euenynge before, the great∣test officers of that citie, and many of his fren∣des. Also this sentence beinge spoken amonge other: Onely a good man is a free man, all yll men are bonde▪ whan one hapned to reason a∣gaynste it, Cato beinge therwith chaufed, dis∣puted with the other so vehemently and longe, that all men suspected, that he wolde not longe lyue. He dyed afore the incarnation of Christe .44. yeres.
Catoblepas, a beast full of poyson, called a ba∣sylyske. Catularia, one of the gates of Rome. Catulinus, a, um, of a catte. Catulire, the desyre of female kynde, to compa∣ny with the male kynde, proprely to go assaut, to rudder, to horsyng, or to blyssonynge. Catulitio, the goyng assaut. &c. Catullus, the name of a poete. Catulus, a kytten or yonge catte. also it is put generally for the yonge kynde of all beastes. also for a dogge. Caturactonium, a cytie callyd Carlyle in En∣glande. Catus, a cat. somtyme wise or wyttye▪ also the name of a noble and wyse family in Rome. Caua, a hole, wherin byrdes do brede. Caucasus, an hyll, one of the highest in all Asia, and stretcheth of a meruailous length, and is named of some men Caspij montes, forasmo∣che as it stretcheth forth by the sea callid Ca∣spium. Not withstandynge in the chart, cal∣lyd Charta marina, the hylle of Caucasus is sette on the Northe parte of that sea, and Caspij montes, are on the southe parte, ha∣uynge on the northe Alania, and a parte of Media, and on the southe Assyria. Cauda, a tayle of a beaste. somtyme a mannes priuy member. Caudacus, gentyll and pleasaunt. Caudecae,Plaut. in rudente. lyttell coffers of wickers, or a iunket, wherin eles are taken in ryuers. Caudeus, a, um, of the stemme of a tree. Caudex, dicis, the lower part of a tree next the roote. also a table hauyng many leaues or ta∣bles. It also signifieth a dulle foole, suche as can neyther well speake nor do. Caudicalis, le, pertaynyng to the stem of a tree. Caudicariae naues, shyppes made of thyk plan∣kes, or a shyppe whiche carieth vitayles. Caudis, a towne of the Samnites. Cauea, a caue or darke place in the ground. al∣so a cage or coupe, wherin byrdes be kepte. Moreouer a place where a comedye or enter∣lude is playde. Cauaedium, is a place at large, hauynge manye porches, whiche serueth to a commune, lyke a markette place. It is also a lyttell court with in a house. Caueo, caui, cauêre, to beware, to eschewe. also to prouyde diligently, to take hede. and ioy∣ned with an accusatiue case, sygnyfyeth to bydde to beware. Caue tibi, take hede of thy selfe. Caue tibi illum puerum, beware of that chylde. Caue facias, take hede what thou doste. Caetera cauebuntur, the reaste I wylle pro∣uyde for. Cauêre alicui, to gyue counsaylle to oone in matters of lawe, or concernynge contractes, to instructe one what he shall do. Cauêre capite,Pli. li. 54. to put in sureties to appere in matter of lyfe and deathe. Cauere sibi ab aliquo, to take a quytance or other dyscharge for the payment of money, or delyuerance of any thynge. At uero, inquam tibi ego Brute non soluam,Cicer. in Bruto. nisi prius à te ca∣uero, amplius eo nomine neminem, cuius petitio sit, petiturum, Truely sayde I, Bru∣tus, I wyll not pay the, excepte I haue fyrste a quyttaunce of the, that thou shalt not efte∣sones demaunde it of hym, of whome thou moughtest aske it. Quid isti caueam? B. Vt reuehat domum,Plaut. in Bacch. What shall I prouyde for hym? B. one to brynge hym one. Cauêre testamenta, to gyue in charge by te∣stament a thynge to be done. Caueri, to be taken hede of. Caueares hostiae & cauae, were partes of the beastes next to the tayle, to be sacrifyced for the byshoppes. Cauerna, a caue or holow place in the ground, sometyme Cauernae, do sygnifie eares. Cauernosus, a, um, full of caues. Cauilla, uel cauillum, a mocke or a skoffe. Cauillatio, a cauillation, a subtil forged tale. Cauillator, a mocker, a bourder. Cauillo, aui, are, uel cauillor, ari, to ieste, to mocke, to bourde. Caula, a shepehouse, but propely a folde. Caulescere, to growe into a stalke. Caulias, liae, the iuyce whiche is pressed oute of the herbe callyd Laserpitium. Cauliculus, a tender stalke. Caulis, a stalke or stemme of an herbe or tree. It is sometyme taken for all pot herbes, the rumpe of a beast, and for a shafte or iauelyn, it is alsoo an herbe callyd colewortes. Rede Brassica. Caulon, a towne, whyche as Plynie saythe, is sytuate in the fyrste region of Italy. Cauma, atis, heate. Caunus, an yle in the occean sea. Cauo, aui, are, to make holowe. Caupo, onis, a howkster that sellethe meate and drynke. Caupona, a woman that sellyth wyne. also the tauernar. Cauponaria, tauerners crafte. Cauponius, a, um, pertayninge to the tauerne. Cauponor, to selle as houksters do. Cauros, was an yle, whyche afterwarde was callyd Andros, and after that Antandros. Caurus, a westerne wynde. Causia, an hatte or cappe after the fascion of Macedony.
Causima,Cael. anti. a drye wodde, that wyll burne quyckly. Causon, is an hote continuall feuer, ingendred of red choler and sharpe, in the vaynes nexte to the harte, and in the vaynes of the mouthe of the stomake, and in the holownes of the li∣uer or lunges. The signes of the which feuer is intollerable heat, with continual thyrst, hor¦rour, a swyft pulse, kepyng none order, shorte breathe, the vrine high coloured and thynne. Caussa, a cause or matter in suite. Caussam accipere, to take the mattier in hande, also to take an excuse. Caussam capere, to take an occasion. Causa cadere, to lose his action. Caussam agere. to pleade a matter. Caussam dicere,Plaut. in Capt. to answere vnto that, which is layde vnto his charge. Caussam dicere, to say cōtrary, to deny. Hoc si secus reperies, nullam caussam dico, quin mihi & parentum, & libertatis apud te deli∣quio fiet, If thou doste fynde it other wyse, I wyll not say contrarye, but that it is at thy pleasure, that I shall lose bothe, my parentes and libertie. Causam dicere ex uinculis, to aunswere in warde, or being a prisoner. Caussas nectere,Liuius. to fayne matters, to make excuses or delayes. Caussam orare, to pleade. Caussam quaerere,Ci. Attic. to seke an occasion. Caussam sustinere, to beare the blame. Caussam tenîre, to optayne in iudgement. Caussa mea,Terent. in Heauton. for my sake. Syro ignoscas uo∣lo, quae mea causa fecit: I wylle that ye for∣giue Syrus al that he hath done for my sake. Caussa inferior, the lasse right, or weker title. Caussa superior, the better right or title. In caussa haec sunt, the raison is this. Caussarij, they whiche be essoyned in our lawe, or excused for a speciall cause. Caussaria misio, a discharge of a souldiour for a reasonable cause. Caussarij milites, souldiors, which for causes reasonable, were discharged out of the army, for sycknes, as Politianus writeth. Caussario, an inwarde sycknes. Caussatiuus, a, um, that is cause that a thynge is doone. Caussidicus, a man of lawe. Caussificor, aris, to complayne me of a thynge that doth greue me. Causso, aui, are, to cause. Caussor, aris, to fynde the matter, or to brynge for excuse. Caustica medicamenta, medicines, whiche do bourne the skynne or the fleshe. Cautêres, & cautêria, is a markyng yron, or an instrument, wherwith soores are bourned. Cauteriatus, a, um, marked or bourned with that instrument, or marked with an yron. Cautes, a raggyd rocke, or hylle fulle of greatte stones. Cautè, wise, circumspectly, subtylly. Cautim, idem. Caute loquatior,Eras. in chil. more clatteryng than a rocke. ❀ A prouerbe applyed to great spekers, gathe∣ryd of the continual clackyng that the sea ma¦keth, whan it stryketh agaynst a rocke. Cautio, is a promyse or writing made diligent∣ly for the assurance of any thynge. Cautio, onis, prouision. Cautio est, it is nede to prouyde or beware. Cautum est praedibus ac praedijs, assurance ta¦ken by bondes and sureties. Mittere cautionem chirographi, to delyuer writynge signed with his owne hande for as∣surance. Cauto est opus procedere, it nedeth to be wysely handlyd. Cautor alieni periculi, he that warneth an o∣ther man of any daunger. Cautor formularum, he that can skyl of a kin∣des of actions to be sued. Cautum est, it is ordeyned or prouyded by an acte of parlyament or counsayle. Cautus, a man that is circumspecte. Caua uena, the vayne of the lyuer. Cauus, a, um, holowe. Cauus, an holowe place. Causter, a floudde of Lidie. Caystrus, foem. gen. citie of Cilicie. C ANTE E. CEcrops, opis, was an auncient kynge of Athenes, whose ymage was made ha∣uing two heades, as som men do sup∣pose, bicause he dyd first institute matrimony in Grece. Other do write that it was bycause he was borne in Egipt, and also dyd vse both languages, greke and egyptian. He was afore the incarnation of Christ. 1584. yeres. Cecropidae, men of Athenes. Cecropidis, a man or woman comyng of hym. Cecropius, a, um, of Cecrops. Cecriphalea, a rocke in the sea, or an yle. Cedar, a region of Araby. Cedo, cessi, dere, to giue place, to depart, to go awaye, to voyde, to withdrawe, to obeye, to graunt,Plaut. i capt. to gyue, to succede. Cedere authoritati, to be of lasse authoritie. Cedere ad factum,Sueto.  clar. gri. to come to effect. Cedere creditoribus, is proprely where one not beynge able to pay his dettes,Plaut. in Pseud. leaueth all his goodes or landes to his creditours. Cedere ex transuerso, to goo sydelynge lyke a crabbe. Cedere famae, to regarde more his honesty.
Cedere intercessioni, to procede no further, to admytte the contrary. Cedere iuri, to gyue ouer a right or title. Cedere pro, to be in the stede of an other thīg. Nam pro pulmentario cedit sicuti ficus, for it is in stede of the meate, lyke as figges be. Cedere uita, & cedere fato, to dye. Cede manum, gyue me thy hande. Cedere possessione, to leaue the possession. Cedere periculo, to flee from the daunger. Cedere precibus, to graunte to the requeste or prayer. Cedere tempori, to accommodate hym selfe to the tyme. Cedere remedijs, the sicknes is vanquished. Cedit dies,Ci. de Se. Pli. ep. so. among the lawyers is, The time is come, that the dette is due to be payde. Cedit huic quaestus ille, he hath that auātage by it. Cedit illi res, his matter cometh wel to passe. Quin tu mihi argentum cedo, But yet gyue thou me the money. Cedunt mihi ea bona, those goodes are come or happened vnto me. Cedo, in the imperatiue mode, telle thou, re∣herce, tell on. Cedo cuium puerum? telle or saye, whose chylde or seruant? Cedunt dies, the dayes passe away. Cessit, it happened. Cessit parum gratus, he hadde lyttell thanke for his labour. Cessit in prouerbium, it became, or was tur∣ned into a prouerbe. Cedentes cepilli, heares hanging down ryght. Cedrati libri, bokes whiche wyll neuer perishe, nor be eaten with wormes. Cedrelate, tes, a great cedre tree. Cedria, the rosyn that runneth out of the cedre. Cedrides, the fruite or bearies of cedrus. Cedrinus, a, um, of a cedre tree. Cedrium malum, & Cedromelum, was of old tyme taken for an orenge, as Atheneus and Dioscorides do write. Cedropolis, a towne in Caria. Cedros, an ylande in the costis of Germany. Cedrosis, a white vyneyarde. Cedrus, dri, is a tree hauing leues like to iuni∣per, bearies like myrtils, but they be yelowe, swete of sauor & plesant to eate, they beare all tymes of the yere new fruit & old, as the oren¦ges do, & the leaf neuer fallith. The tree swea∣teth out of him a lycour like to rosyn, meruai∣lous odoriferous. In the lande of cypers there haue ben sene of them growynge, which were in length .130. fete, and in cōpasse fiue fathom Of like greatnes or greater be in Siria. The wodde therof neuer rotteth, nor wormes may breede in it. Wherefore it is moche praysed in buyldynge. Cedris, dridis, the fruit of the cedre tre. Cedro digna, thynges worthye perpetualle memory. Celatura, grauyng in mettall. Celatus, a, um, hydde. Celeberrimus, a, um, most honourable, or most in reputation. Celebrare nuptias, to make a feast at a ma∣riage. Celebrare epulas, to make bankettes. Celebrare conuiuium, to make a great feast or bankette. Celebrare exequias, & funera, to bringe one solempnely to burienge. Celebare ludos, to make plays with greate assemblye of people. Celebrare suum natalem, to make a greate feaste at the day of his byrthe. Celebrare coetus hominum, to assemble a great numbre of people. Celebratio, solemnisation. Celebratus, a, um, moche spoken of, or haūted. Celebresco, I am in gret fame, or am renomed. Celebris, bre, famons, also swift, honourable. Celebris loc{us}, a place moche hanted & knowē. Celebritas, tatis, renoum. also a great assembly. Celebriter, honourably. Celebro, aui, are, to celebrate or brynge in re∣noume, to make good report. also to haunte, to honour or worshyp. Celer, eris, swyfte, quycke. Celeris copia.Plaut{us} in Mercat. Date dij quaeso conueniun∣di mihi eius celerem copiam, God graunte that I may very shortly mete with hym. Celeranter, for celeriter, hastily or quickly. Celeratim,Actius. idem. Celeres,Sisenna. olde writers vsed for Equites, horsmē. Celeritas, quyckenes, swyftenes. Celeritudo, idem. Celeripes, swyfte of foote. Celeriter, celerius, celerrimè, swyftely, swyft∣lyer, swyftlyest. Celero, aui, are, to doo a thynge quyckely, to make haste Celetes, runnynge horses. Celeusma, the shoute or crye that shyppemen or botemen doo make, whan the mayster dothe whystell or calle. Celeustes, he that calleth on the maryners in comfortynge them. Cella, a cellar, wherin any thinge is kept, also where we be priuily wasshed, alsoo a secrete place in the temple, a chauncell. Cella penuaria, a garnere, or storehouse. Cellaria, a wyne sellar. Cellarium, a stoorehouse. Cellarius, he that hath the charge of a cellar or storehouse. Cellulae columbarum, culuer hooles. Celatim, priuily.
Celo, aui, are, to hyde, or wyll not knowe. Celare aliquem.Ci. ep. fa. Balbus noster me de hoc libro celauit, Our frend Balbus told me no∣thynge of that boke. Celox, a swyft shyp, callid a Brigantine. Celsus, highe. it was also the name of a noble Romayn, whiche wrate in phisycke and hus∣bandry in moste eloquent latyne. Celtae, frenche men. Celtiberia, Biskay. Celtiberi, people of that part of Spayn, which is callyd Biskay. Celtis, a kind of swete trees growing in Affrik. Celtogallia, is that part of France, which con¦teyneth Aquitaniā, Lugdunensem, Belgicā, & Narbonensē, wherof the french king hath iii. partis hoc. Belgicā for the more part hath the emperour that nowe is, Charles the .v. Reade of eueryche of them in theyr letters. Celydrus, a womans apparayle. Cemellio, a towne in Liguria. Cemēta, pl. litle stones & rubbel, which ar layd betwene great stones in the making of a wal. Cementum, morter. Cenchris, a byrd lyke an hauke, which maketh a greatte sowne whan he crieth. Also it is the name of a towne or countrey in Grece. Cenina, a citie of Italy. Cenodoxia, vaynglory. Cenomani, people of Lumbardy. Cenotaphium, a monument of theym whyche are deade. Censio, sui, ere, to suppose, to shewe myne opi∣nion or sentence, to determine, to be discontēt, to number people, to thentent to take theym, whiche be apt for the warres, or to leuy a tax or a subsidy; to speake or tell. Ne uobis censeam,Varro. si ad me referretis, lest I wolde be angry,Plaut. in Sticho. yf ye tolde me. Quid grauare censeas? Telle me, what is that,Plinius. 8. that greueth the? Censeri, to be had in estimation, or to be set by, also to be meruayled at. Censio, onis, a chastisement, a pryce, aduyse, or opynyon. Censor, a iudge of mens maners. also suche as was appoynted to value mens goodes. Censitor, idem. Censorius, a, um, pertaynyng to them, whiche had ouersyghte of the maners of the people, whiche were callyd Censores. Censorius uir, he that hath ben a Censour, or is worthye for his grauitie to iudge and cor∣rect other mens maners. Censoria animaduersio, was a punishement of them, whiche were of yll maners. Censoria nota, the rebuke or checke of the ma∣ster of maners. Censualis, he that dothe assyste or accompanye the iudges of maners called Censors. Censura, the authoritie or iudgement of a cen∣sour. also correction of maners, lawe or decree, concernynge maners. Censuram uini facere, to taste wyne, to assay whether it be good or badde. Census, sus, yerely reuenues, also valuation of goodes, also a subsidi, the nūbrīg of the people Censui agri, were those fieldes, which by the lawe cyuile mought be bought and solde. Census equestris, was the estimation or va∣lue of them, whiche were in the order of gen∣tilmen, callid ordo equestris, which rate was 400. Setertia, and that some amounted after the rate of our money at this day, to .2635. li. 6. s. 8. d. wherby it appereth howe rych Rome was at that tyme, sens that was the general estimation of one order or state.Plutar Census senatorius, was the estymation of them which were senatours, and was double the rate of equestris, and in Augustus tyme it was treble so moche, which amounted of our money now currāt to .7900. & vi. li. not with stāding, that there were aboue .600. senators. Census, si, he that is assessed or taxed. Capite censi, taxed by the poll, or he that pai∣eth head syluer. Centauri, a people in the countrey of Thessaly, whom the poetes dyd fayn to be the one half lyke a man, the other halfe lyke a horse. alsoo they be certayn great shyppes. Centaurium, an herbe, whereof there be two kyndes, the great which apothecaries do call Reuponticum, and the lasse whiche is callid Centory, also Fel terrae, & Febrifugia. Centaur{us}, a riuer, which was first callid Euen{us} Centenariae coenae, were suppers, on the which by a lawe callid Licinia, was bestowed but one hundred of the brason coyne callyd Asses. Centesimus, a, um, the hundred, as Centesima pars, the hundred part. Centesimae ursurae, were gaynes of the hun∣dred one peny for euery moneth lone. Centimanus, hauyng an hundred handes. Centipeda, a worme callyd a palmer, which is heary, and hath many feete. Cento, a quilt, or a iacke, or other lyke thyng stuffed with lynnen, flox, or cotten, or a ushen made of pieces of cloth of diuers colous. Centies, a hundred tymes. Centralis, le, that which is set in the very d∣des of a thynge. Centrones, moūt Sineis going into Lūbat dy. Centrum, the poynt, which is in the very myd∣des of a thynge. Centum, a hundred. Centūuiri,Budacns. wher as the people of Rome were. ¦uided into .35. tribes, of euery tribe were thre men chosen to be iuges in commune matters,
which company was callid Centumuiratus, & they were callid Centumuiri, although that there were .v. mo thā a hūdred in that compa∣ny, & their iugement was named Centum ui∣rale iuditiū, and Centū uiralis hasta, forasmo∣che as those iudges, whiles they sate in iuge∣ment, had a speare pitched vp before them. Centunculus, a vyle garment. Centuplex, plicis, an hundred folde, an hun∣dred double. Centuria, a parte of an hooste, conteynyng an hundred men. also a portion of grounde in the field, contayning an hundred acres. Centuriata comitia, were generall congrega∣tions of people to traite of cōmune affayres,udeus. whiche assembly was not gathered by diuisiō of parishes or wardes, but by the rate of their substance, or by theyr age. Centuriatae leges, lawes whiche were inac∣ted by the people assembled after the rate of theyr substance or age. Centuriatim, by a hundred togither, also plen∣tuousely, or in a great numbre. Centuriatus, tus, the office of a centurio. Centurio, onis, a capitayne ouer one hundred of foote men. Centurio, aui, are, to diuide men into a compa∣ny, contayning an hundred persons, or fieldes into an hundred acres of lande. Centurupe, a fielde in Sicile, wherof is Cen∣turupinum crocum. Cētussis, a rate of money at Rome, which was of ten of their grotes callyd Denarij, whych amounteth in the rate of our money at this tyme to .v. s. vi. d. ob. halfe ferthyng, halfe an halfe farthynge. Cepa, pe, & cepe indeclinab. an oynion. ❀Cepas edere, to eate oynyons: was a pro∣uerbe spoken of them, which do seme to wepe or do wepe often. Cephale, or cephalis, signifieth the head. Cephalea, is a greuous and longe continuynge pein in the hed, of euery light cause sustening moch griefe, neither abidyng noyse nor light, nor swete sauors. The pacient feleth as if his head were broken in pieces with hammers. It hapnith somtime of cold, somtime of heat. Cephalenia, an yle beyond Corcyra in the myd∣del sea, which is also callid Vlysses yle. Cephalocrustes, a worme, which is in the lea∣ues of a peache tree. Cephalus, the name of a man, and of a fyshe. Cephenes, vnprofitable bees, whiche make no hony, but only with the multitude of theym, do kepe warm the yong bees. it was somtime the name of Persians, as Herodot{us} writeth. Cephéus, the name of a kyng of Ethiope. Cephisia, the region Attica. Cephisis, a lake nere to the sea Athlanticum. Cepina, an herbe callyd cyues. Cepites, a precious stone, hauing many whyte strekes. Cepius, a, um, of an oynion, or like to oyniō. Ceporus, a gardiner. Cera, waxe, also waxed tables. Cerabaroa, is a contrey late found by the Spa¦niardes in the west occean, where all the men do go naked, and haue their bodies paynted with diuers figures, wearyng onely garlādes made with sūdry floures, mixt with the cleys of lyons and tygres, in that countrey hathe bene founde plenty of golde. Ceramicus, a place in Athenes, where mē being slayne in battayle, were buried. also an other place, where cōmune women dwellyd. Ceramion, the same measure that Amphora is. Cerastes, a serpent whiche hath hornes lyke a ram, the body very lytel, wherby he deceiueth men, hidynge his body in the grasse. Cerasum, a chery. Cerasus, a chery tree. Cerates, a small weight or poyse, which is the fourth part of a scruple, the. 48. part of an vnce Ceratia, is an herbe whiche hath but one leafe, and a great rote full of knottes. Ceratinae, is of Quint. callid a kinde of argu∣ment, whiche can not be resoluyd. Ceratium, is the fruit, which is callid Siliqua, loke there, for the description. By the weight therof, the auncient phisitions made all their poyses, whiche tryers of golde do now call a cartacte, wherof Dragma conteyned .18. as Leonardus Portius writeth. Ceratum, siue Cerotum, a playster made with waxe, roseyn, or gummes. it is callid in greke Dropax. Ceratura, the dressynge of a thinge with waxe. Cerberus, the porter of hell. also a dogge with thre heades, whiche Hercules drewe oute of Hell, as paynyms supposed. Cercius, uide Circius. Cerea, a certayne drynke, whiche the Spany∣ardes vsed. Cereales, were .ii. of these offices callyd Aedi∣les in Rome, whiche had authoritie ouer the markette. Cercope,Coelius. a lyttell grassehoppe. Cercopithêcus, an ape with a tayl callid a mar¦moset. it may be also taken for a munkay. Cercurus, a certayn sorte of shyppes. Cerdo, nis, a cobblar. sometyme generally all craftes vsynge sowynge. Cerdon, dônis, an heretike, whiche affyrmed, that Christ was neuer borne of a woman, & that he had no fleshe, nor suffred any passion, but that he fayned to suffer. Also he taughte that the god, which was declarid by the law prophetes to be god, was not the fader of our
sauiour Christ, for he was knowen, the other was vnknowē, thone was iust, the other was good. also he said, that the old testament was naught. moreouer that som creatures of them self ar yl, and that they were not made of that god, that was the chief goodnes, but of an o∣ther the begynnyng of al yl, which he nameth the principal mischief. He was about the yere of our lord. 144. whose heresies ben al cōdem∣ned by the generall consent of al christendom. Cerrale, pertaynynge to Ceres the goddesse. Cerebrosus, a man beinge braynsycke, or wyld brayned, trustyng onely to his owne wyll. Cerebrum, the brayne. Ceres,Diodor{us} Siculus. callyd also Isis, was wyfe of Osyris, kyng of Egypt, who as the Grekes supposed dyd fyrst inuent the sowyng of wheate & bar∣ley, whiche before dyd growe wylde amonge other herbes. Also that she fyrst made lawes, wherby iustyce shuld be equally minystred to all men, violence and wronge beinge by feare of punyshment taken away. Herodotus wri∣teth, that the Egyptians do affirm, that Ce∣res & Bacchus do beare the chief rule in hell. Ceretani, a people in Spayne. Ceretum, a towne in Italy. Cereus substant. a taper, or other lyke candelle of waxe. Cereus,Horatius. a, um, softe, also fatte, also of waxe. Cerea pruna, wheaten plummes. Cerinthe, an herbe hauynge the taste of waxe and hony togither, a honysuckle. Cerinthus, the meate of bees, which is founde in hony combes, seperate from the hony, whi∣che is in taste bytter, and is also moyst. Cerinum,Actius. a garment of the colour of waxe. Cerits, madnesse or frensy. Cerium, a soore lyke a hony combe. Cero, aui, are, to dresse a thynge with waxe. Ceroma,Cic. in ca. an oyle wherewith wrastlers were annoynted. Cerostrotum, an ymage of waxe. Cerno,Ci. Dolo∣bellae, & ad Attic. Plin. 18. creui, cernere, to se or perceyue▪ also to consyder, somtyme to iudge, or determyn. som¦tyme to trye out. Also to syft or raunge floure of corne. Otherwhyle to deuyse togyther, or talke one with an other. Vere cundari neminem apud mēsam decet,Plautus in Trinum. nam ibi de diuinis at{que} humanis cernitur: No man ought to be abashed at the table, for there men do deuyse and talke of matters con¦cernynge as well god as man. Cernere falsam haereditatē alienae gloriae, To get praise to him self of an other mans actis. Cernere hereditatem, to entre into land fal∣len by inheritaunce. Cerno animo, I do foresee or consyder before Cernulus,Hier. con. he that is busye to fynde faute in an other man.Ruffi nū. Cernus, nus, a certayne showe. Cernuus, stoupynge or lokynge downewarde. Cerrus,Rue a great tree lyke to a poplar, hauyng a longe sem and a straight he beareth a kinde of mast, rough without lyke a chestin, but not apt to be etē, but only of swine, & yet is it not very good for them, there hangeth on the bo∣wes longe pendantes lyke drye russet mosse, whiche is swete in sauour. The tymber ther∣of is not conuenient for buyldyng. Certamen, a conflict or byckring, a contētion. Certamina sacra, were certayn great games in Grece, where men contended in featis of wit, strength, and agilitie. Of theym were foure: Nemaea, Pythia, Isthmia, & Olympia, the price of Olympia was a garlande of wyld o∣lyue, at Isthmus a garlande of pyne apple, in Nemea of percily, in Pythiis, of apples gro∣wynge by the temple of Apollo. Vitruuius re¦membreth, that the auncient grekes ordeyned that the people there assembled, stāding with palme in their handes, shuld singe their pray∣ses, whiche had victorye at those games, and also whan they retourned home to their hou∣ses, the citie or towne, where they dwellyd, shulde receyue them with moch honour, they riding in chariots, & during their lyues, they shuld haue pencions out of the comon tresure. Certatim, one contendyng or stryuyng with an other, who shall do most or best. Certe, truely, verily, assuredly. Certò, idem. Certatio, debate, stryfe, study, prouocation. Certisso, aui, are, to be certified or sure. Certitudo, dinis, certayntie or suretie. Certo, without doubte. Certo, aui, are, to striue, to contend, to fight, to sue one an nother.Cicera Certare damnis, to goo a∣bout to distroye one an other. Certare pignore, to lay in a paun in cōtentiō Certus, a, um, certayn, sure, without dout. some tyme it signifieth euen as we wold haue it. Certae opes, rychesse that is permanent. Certi homines, sure men and faithfull. Certi, certayn other. Certiorem facere, to aduertise, to lette me to wete or vnderstande. Certo certius, as sure as may be. Certum habere, to knowe surely. Cerua, an hynde. Ceruchus, a cabin in the highest part of a ship. Ceruicale, & ceruical, a bolstar. Ceruinus, a, um, of a harte. Ceruisia, ale or biere. Ceruix, icis, the hynder part of the necke. Ceruici imponere, to laye on his necke, to charge one with a thynge, wyll he or no. Ceruices dare alicui, to offre to one his heed. Cerunina, care waxe. Cerus, a kynde of oken trees.
Cerussa, ceruse or white leade, wherwith some women be paynted. Cerussatus, a, um, paynted white. Ceruus, a harte, or a forke, wherwith cotages were propped vp. Ceryx, cis, a pursyuaunt or bedell. It is alsoo a shell fyshe of the kynd of purples. Cespes, pitis, a tyrfe▪ som do call them soddes, grasse and erthe togither. Cessatio, slackenes in doing, ydelnesse. Cessator, he that is slowe in doing his dutie. Cessio, where one claymeth a thynge, whiche an other man hath, who denyeth it not, nor maketh contrary clayme. Cesim ferire, to stryke edgelyng. Cessim, in reculynge. Cesso, aui, are, to cesse, to leaue warke, to abide to do nothyng, or to be ydell. Cesticillus, a garland of cloutes, which womē do lay on their heedes whā they cary any thīg. Cestreus, a kind of codfish, which neuer eateth any other fyshe, wherof came this prouerbe, Cestreus ieiunat, the codde fasteth, spoken of good and iust men, which do no rauyn, nor ta¦keth any other mens goodes from them. Cestrum, an instrument wherwith yuory is made holowe. also a  or a wyme▪ also an herbe, whiche is  Betayne. Cestus, a gyrdell, wherwith the husbande dyd gird his wife, which was set full of studdes. Cetariae, places nigh to the sea syde, where Tu∣ny & other great fishes be taken and salted. Cetarius, a fyshmonger or taker of great fishes Cetra, a lyght tergate. Cetrati milites, souldiors with lyght tergats Cete & Cetus, a great fyshe callid a whale. Ceu,Ci ad At. as it were, euenas. Ceua, a lytle cowe that giueth moch mylke. C ANTE H. CHaam, callid also Gog Chaam, is the name of a dignite of the great emperor of Tartariās, callid also the gret Chan of Catay or Cambalu, whose dominion exten∣deth from the furthest part cast, vnto the coū¦trey of Russy northwest, & so northe vnto the septentriall or north sea, and on the southeast vnto the south or Indiā sea. on the southwest vnto Persia. so that by the chart it appereth that there is vnder hym as moche mayn land within lyttell, as is the resydue of all Asia, Europa, and Affrica. Chabrias, a noble capitayn of the Atheniensis, of whome this inuention in armes is lefte in remēbrance. Whan he came in the ayd of the Thebans agaynst the Lacedemonians, Age∣silaus king of the Lacedemoniās vāquyshing the aray of the souldiors retayned, & putting them to flyght, Chabrias restrayned the resi∣due, causyng them to set their tergats against their knee, & thrasting forth their speare, to a∣byde and receyue the brunt of their enemies, which Agesilaus beholdīg durst not go forth but caused the retreate to be blowen. This man in a batayle on the sea, against theym of Chius, was slayne, chosyng rather to dye ho∣norably, than forsakyng his shyp (as the resy∣due dyd) to throwe awaye his harneys, and swymme with his company. Chaere, the imperatiue mode of a verb of greke whiche in latin is salue, god spede, wel mette, and suche other salutations. Chaerephillon, an herbe callyd Cheruyle. Chalame, a citie of Persy, whiche now is cal∣lyd Aetisiphon. Chalasis, the knot, wherwith womens garmen¦tes were knyt about theyr neckes. Chalastra, a certayne apparayle. Chalastricum nitrum, salte peter, which is ve∣ry pure and lyke to salte. Chalaza, a gatherynge vnder the skynne lyke the disease callyd Bubo. Chalazia, a stone lyke to hayle, and so cold, that no fyre may heate it. Chalazium, a lytell round werte in the eye lyd∣des, whiche may be moued with ones fynger hyther and thither. Chalcantum, coprose, or vitriole. Chalcedonia, a cite in Asi against Cōstātinople Chalchis, a fish of the sec, of the kind of turbut. Chalcis, dis, the name of a citie in Grece. also of an yle, and of a byrde. Chalcites, a stoone of the colour of brasse, but more blacke, wherof brasse is tried. Chalcographus, a prynter. Chalcos, seu Aereola, the .xxxvi. part of a dram Chaldaea, a countrey, whiche as Strabo wry∣teth, doth ioyne to Arabia, & to the sea callyd Mare Persicū, Solinus and Plinius nameth that countrey Chaldaea, where the great city of Babylon stode. In the new chartes it is in this wyse set, on the west it ioyneth on Mesa∣potamia, on the north vpon Assiria, and Me∣dia, on the east vpon Persia, on the south vpō Arabia deserta, & so is it far frō Iudaea. They haue a proper language, somwhat lyke to he∣bru, but their letters ar vnlike to any otherlet¦ters. Strabo nameth the countrey, where the people callid Chalybes dwell, Chaldea li. 12. Chaldei, be taken for great astronomers of the countrey of Assiria. Chalestra, a citie of Thessaly on the sea cost. Chalybes, a people in the lasse Asia, in the coū∣trey callyd Pontus, whiche people do dygge great plentie of yron, they beinge naked. also it is the name of a fludde in Spayne. Chalybs, lybis, steele. Chalyx, a flynte stone, out of the whiche fyre is stryken.
Cham aecissos, an herbe callyd grounde yuy. Chamedaphne, an herbe, whyche groweth in lengthe, wyndyng togither in dyuers partes, and hath leaues lyke to laurell or bayes, and hath a floure lyke to a violet, and is callyd of some men perwyncle. Chamaedris, drios, an herbe callid Germander. Chamaeleo albus, is a maner of a thystel gro∣wyng by the ground without any stalke, put∣tynge vp prickes lyke an hedgehog, hauinge in the middle a knap ful of prickes on a short stalke, in the whiche doo appere purple flou∣res, whiche growe into plumes, and do fly a∣way with the wynd, lyke as of other thystels, and hath a white roote and swete, & groweth on olde landes and bare hylles. Chamaeleo niger, is the cōmun thistle, whiche hath a great stalke and longe, somwhat rud∣dy, hauyng on the toppe a rounde knap with sharpe floures chaungeable of colour. Chameleon, ontis, a lyttell beast, hauynge his skyn spotted lyke to a lybarde, which chaun∣geth into dyuers colours, accordynge to the thing that he seeth. They be ingendred in In∣dia, and is of the quantite and figure of a li∣sarde, but that his legges be lengar, and goth vpryght, and hath a snowte lyke a swyne, a longe tayle and small at the ende, his eyen be neuer closed, he dothe neuer eate or drynke, but is nouryshed onely by ayre. Chameleuce, ces, an herbe growing by ryuers hauing leues like a poplar, but moch greater. Chamaemelon, an herbe callyd caomyll. Chamelopardalis, a beaste whiche is as great as a camel, of skin and colors like a Panther, hauyng spottes of sundry color, and hath his forelegges and necke longe, and the heed lyke a camell, his fecte and legges lyke an oxe. Chamelus, a beast callyd a camelle, commonly knowen. Chamemirsynne, is a bushe or tree, which hath sharpe pryckes in the leaues, and redde bea∣ryes clustered. I suppose it to be a kynde of holy or holme. Chamaepyris, an herbe, wherof be .iii. kyndes, the one is commonly callyd herbe yuy, but it is not that whiche is described by Dioscori∣des, although it haue ben proued to haue lyke vertue. The seconde is the small cipres set in pottes. The .iii. is supposed to be that which is callyd saynt Iohn̄s worte. Chamaeterae, maydens, whyche were wonte to syt at theyr maystresses feete. Chamezeleon, an herbe callyd cinquefoyle. Chamitterae, & Chamitteridae, lyttell ymages made folowynge a greatter ymage. Chaniscus, the hyndermost part of a shyppe, by the whiche the anker hangeth. Chanona, a tarte or marchpayn, or other lyke delycate thynge. Chaones,Strabo. people of the countrey of Epirus in Grece. The countrey is callyd Chaonia. Chaonides, wolues that do slee hartes. Chaos, a confuse matter without for me, made fyrst of nothyng, wherof poetes supposed all other thynges to procede. Characatae umeae, vynes inclosed with canes or reede in the stede of pales. Characias, an herbe callyd spourge. Characote, a frame, about the whyche vynes be wounde and tourned. Character, a token, a note made with a penne, a figure, a style or fourme of speakynge. Characteres, letters. Charadrius, a great deuouring byrd of the sea. Charax, a fyshe callyd also Dentix, with teethe standyng out of his lyppes, & is a brode fysh, & somwhat red, with a chaungeable colour. Charaxes, the brother of Sapphus. Charchesia, a cup longe, and small in the myd∣dell, and full of handels. Chariophilon, a kynde of oote spice that gro∣weth in India, I suppose it to be cloues. Charisma, grace, a thankefull gyft. Charistia, plura, is as it were a Christmas feest or a wake, where kinrfolk do resort togither, bryngyng or sendyng presentes mutually. Charisius, the name of a grammarian. Charistium, a grene marble. Charitas, charitie or loue, proprely towarde a mans countrey or neighbours. Charites, the graces, whiche were supposed to be the doughters of Iupiter, thre in number, whose names were, Aglaia, Thalia, Euphro∣syne. And where in speakyng or wrytyng ap∣pered to be a meruailous dilectation or swete¦nes, it was sayde that therin was a grace, in latyne Charis. Charmesynum, a kynde of sylke, whiche dely∣teth the beholders. I thinke it to be crymsyn. Charon, tis, was named of the Paynyms, the boteman that caried soules ouer the thre ry∣uers of hell, Acheron, Stix, and Cocytus. Charopus, amyable, pleasaunt, or hauynge a good grace. Charta, paper, alsoo a leafe of paper, or other lyke thyng, wherin we do write. Moreouer a∣ny thynge contaynynge the description of a place in pycture. Also a mayden that had ne∣uer chylde. Chartaceus, of paper. Chartariae officinae, paper mylles. Chartilago, ginis, a grystell. Chartophylacium, a place where wrytnges or monumentes are kept, as the place callyd the rolles. And the maister of the rolles maye be callyd Chartophylax, or Magister scriniorū, which offyce had Vlpianus the great lawyer
with themperour Alexander callid Seuerus. Chartula, alyttell leafe of paper. Charundas, the name of a man, whiche gaue lawes to the Atheniens. Charus, well beloued. Charybdis, a gulfe of the sea by Sicile, wher∣in is daungerouse saylynge, by reason of stre∣mes flowynge contrary eche agaynste other, wherby shyppes be therin deuoured. Chasma, a gapynge or openynge of the firma∣ment, or of the erthe. Chelae, the klees of a crab, crauayse or scorpiō. Cheledonia, an herbe called selandine: also a western wynde. Chelenophagi, a people in Carmania, which lyue by eatynge torteyses. Chelonalopices, I suppose to be the byrdes whiche we do call barnacles. Chelonium, the shell of a torteyse. Chelydonij, lyttell stones founde in the mawe of a swalow. Chelydros, a sea snayle. Chelys, a torteyse: sometyme it is taken for an harpe or lute. Chema, is a measure of the grekes conteining two cochlearia, which receyueth of wyne in poyse or weyght .ii. drammes .i. scruple .iiii. graynes, and .iiii. fyue partes of a greyne. Chemiscus, a parte of the foreshyppe, wherby the anker dothe hange, sometyme it is taken for all the shyp. Chemites, a maner of tombe, lyke to yuory. Chennis, is an yland as Pomponius writeth. Chenoboscion, a place where grese be fed. Chenopus, a goose fote. Chenotrophia, a house or place where water-foule are kept. Cheospes, a kynge of Egypt, which made the great steple at Memphis, wheron were soo many men workynge, that the same kynge spente onely in persely, oynions, and garlike a thousande and thre score talents, whiche if it were the great talent, it amounted of our money, to CCI. thousande fyue hundred and fifty poundes. Cherinthus, an heretike, which affyrmed, that Chryst shulde come and raygne in the worlde the space of a thousande yeres, and durynge that tyme men shoulde lyue in all carnall de∣lytes, and afterwarde shulde come vp to he∣uē, where they shuld euer lyue in the plesures of gloteny and lecherye. Also he denyed that Christ was god, but pure man. Also that the world was made by god, but of principates. He also receyued onely the gospell of sayncte Mathew, and reiected the other euangely∣stes, and the actes of the apostels. He was a∣bout the yere of our lorde. 88. Cherronesus. the parte of Greece called nowe Morea. It is somtyme taken for the northe parte of the greate Asia. It is also called Chersonesus. Chersina, a kynde of londe snayles. Chersydrus, a kynde of serpentes in Calabria whych liue bothe on lande and water. Cherubin, one of the holy orders of angelles, wherin is the science diuine and misticall. Cherusci,Coelius. ant. a people of Germany. Chia, a serpentes den. Chibis, an herbe. Chiliarchus, a capitayne of a thousande men. It is the same office, whiche Tribunus mili∣tum was amonge the Romaynes. Chilias, adis, the numbre of a thousande. Chiliastae, were christen men, whiche had this opinion, that Christ shulde come personally, and raign as a kynge in this worlde a thou∣sande yeres. Chilon, one of the .vii. wyse men of Greece. Chilones, men hauynge great lyppes. Chilorus, a ryuer of Macedony. Chimaera, a gote. Also a mountayne in Licia. also a monster hauynge thre heades, one like a lyon, an other lyke a gote, the thyrde lyke a dragon. Chimerinos, a cercle of heauen, in to the whi∣che whan the son commeth, the dayes be at shortest. Chymus, the iuyce procedynge of meate dige∣sted, whiche by the vaynes commeth into the members, and restoreth that whiche is con∣sumed by heate. Chiragra, the goute in the fingers. Chiragricus, he that hath suche a disease. Chirographum, & Chirographus, an obly∣gation or lyke instrument, wherby a man is bounden, and hath put to his hande. Chirogylius,Leuit. 11. and hedghog. Chiromantes, he that telleth mennes fortune by palmestry. Chiromantia, palmestry. Chiron, nis, the name of a man, who fyrst did fynde the vertues of herbes, and taught Aes¦culapius phisicke, and Apollo to harpe, and astronomy to Hercules, and was mayster to Achilles, and excelled all other menne of his tyme in vertue and iustice. Chironia, is a foule sore harde to be cured, by lykelyhod it is that which comonly is called, Noli me tangere. It is also a wylde vyne. Chironium, an herbe called Centauria maior,Ruellius. in englyshe Centory the more. It is hot and dry in the seconde degree. Chironomia,Constan. a fascion of gesture with the hā∣des vsed in dansyng, or in keruyng of meate. Chironomus, he that daunseth with gesture of the handes. Chirotheca, a gloue.
Chirurgia, surgery. Chirurgus, a surgeon. Chius, an yle by Greece in the sea called Aege∣um, whiche as Strabo wryteth, is in com∣pace. 900. furlonge: whiche is a hundred I∣talion myles. In this yle do grow very good malmesyes and other hotte wynes. It is re∣membred amonge the authors in greke, that it mought neuer be remembred, that within that coūtrey was any aduoutry committed, or vnlaufull accompanienge with women a∣monge them selfes, whiche is a thynge wor∣thy to be put in remembraunce. Chlamis, idis, a cloke which properly is worn, by men of warre. Chlamidatus, cloked. Chlorion, a grene byrde as great as a turtyll, whiche is neuer sene but in sommer. Choa, a certayne measure, also vessell, wherin was put licoure, which was offred to ydols. Choaspes, a famous ryuer in Asia, which run¦neth into the great ryuer of Tigris. Chobar, signifieth all the great floudes, whi∣che be in the region of Caldee. Choemis, was a space of grounde amonge the Iewes, conteyninge, iiii, miles italyon. Choenix, nicis, a measure of the Greekes, whi∣che conteyneth after Rullius .ii. Sextarios, whiche amounteth to .xl. measure ounces, or ynche measures, so is it lasse than our quart. After Georgius Agricola it conteyneth three Cotylas, and than is the measure vncertain, for as moche as Galene sayeth, that there were dyuerse opinions of the measure of Co¦tyla. Rede more in Cotyla, notwithstanding this measure was soo commune amonge the auncient grekes, that therby they measured as moche meate as shoulde suffyse theyr ser∣uauntes for one day, as Suidas remembreth in expoundynge a place in Homer. Choenici ne insideas, was one of the coūsels of wyse Pythagoras, whiche saynct Hierom doth in this wyse expound: be notmoch care¦ful how thou shalt liue to morow. Plutarch{us} in this wyse: Leue some for to morow, for he saythe, that in the olde tyme it was not leful to take vp the table without any thyng left. whiche exposition is contrary to saynct Hie∣romes.Chil. 1. But Erasmus doth declare it in this wyse: men ought not by ydelnesse and slouth eate that whiche other men paye for, but by his owne labour or studye gette some what, wherby he may honestly lyue. Nowe ye haue all three expositions, euery manne take that whiche he lyketh best. Cholera, one of the foure principall humours called choler. It is also a sickenes of the sto∣make & bowels, wherin hapneth both vomit and flyx, with tourment in the bowelles, sen∣dinge forth choler vpward and downwarde, first watry, afterward lyke as fleshe had ben washed in it. That sickenes ingēdred with inordinate fedynge of longe tyme, speciallye of rawe fruites and mushroms, moche vse of cucumbers and pompones, and all fruytes very colde, whiche eaten after meales or the meate be digested, are corrupted in the sto∣make, and ingendreth a venomous iuyce, whiche nature may not susteyne, and therfore she expelleth it with violence. Cholericus, & Cholerica, he or she that is cholerike. Cholerica tormina, tourmentes or frettinges, whiche come of choler. Choliambi, a kynd of verses, made of the fote of meter called Iambus. Cholon, is the gut, wherin the ordure or dreg∣ges of the meate is fourmed, and commeth from the lefte hednay, & toucheth the splene, and ryseth vp to the right side of the stomak, and cometh by the lyuer, and receyueth a lit∣tle choler from the gal, by the sharpnes wher¦of the ordure is prouoked to discende, and made redy to passe. Chomata, water bankes to kepe in ryuers that they ouerflowe not. Chomer, idem quod Chodrus. Chonca, a shell fishe. Chondrilla, is an herbe of the kynde of cicho∣rye, by the description therof it is an herbe growynge in corne fieldes, hauynge leaues lyke vnto wyld cicory, but that they be more full of mylke, and the stalke is greatter, and more tender and holowe: oute of the whiche commeth moche mylke. Sauynge that whi∣che Diostorides doth wryte of, hath mastyr comminge out of the braunches, whiche may happen to be, where the contray is very hot, which althoughe it happen not here, yet may our herb be Chondrilla, & haue his vertues. Chondrus, rede more in Alica. Choragiū, stuffe, properly wherwith that place is adorned, where as shalbe enterludes or dis¦guisinges. Also the apparayle of the players. Choragus, he that kepeth suche stuffe or ap∣parayle. Chorannei, certayne men that lyue in woodes in Persia, which are so swyft, that they take hartes with runninge. Choraula, the craft to blowe trumpettes, or to playe on shaulmes, or other lyke pypes. Choraules, minstrels that do play for dansing. Chorda, a strynge of a harpe or lute, or other instrument. Chordapson, the siknesse called Illiaca passio. reade more in Illica passio. Chorea, a daunce. Chorebus, was one of Athenes, which first in∣uented
the makynge of erthen vessel. Choriambus, a fote in meter, whiche hath the fyrste syllable and the laste longe, and two in the myddel shorte. Chorius, a fote in meter, whiche by an other name is called Trochaeus, and is but of two syllables, the fyrste longe, the seconde shorte. Chorobates, a measure to meete ground with, or a masons rule. Chorocitharista, he that leadeth a daunce, and playeth hym selfe on an instrument. Chors, tis, a place inclosed, wherein cattell is kepte, a barton called in some place. Chorta∣les aues, pultry fedynge abrode in a barton or courte of husbandry. Chortos, haye or grasse mowen. Chorus, the company of players or dauncers, also a quyar. Chorus, siue Chomer, a measure of the He∣brues, whiche conteyneth ten tymes as mo∣che as Batus, or Ephi, and amounteth to .vii bushelles and a halfe of our measure. Chresis, is vse. & Catachresis, is abusion. Chreston, an herbe called cykory. Chrestus, the name of a noble author of A∣thenes. Chria, a notable sentence, spoken shortly, to ex∣horte to vertue, or dissuade from vice. Chrisis, vnction. Christus, annoynted, the surname of our re∣demar. Chromaticus, whose colour neuer chaungeth, but is alway one. Chronica, orū, an hystory of actes done, with the tymes expressed, Chronicles. Chronicus, a, um, temporall, or perteynynge to tyme. Chrysanthemum, is the herbe called crow fote which hath yelowe floures commonly called golde knappes. Chryse, an yle whiche Plinius and Solinus do set out of the mouthe of the famous riuer of Indus, where as Martianus writeth, is suche abundaunce of fyne golde, that therof the yle toke his name: for Chrysos is in en∣glyshe golde, Chrysendeta, a cup hauyng a border of golde, lyke as our masers and nuttes were wont to haue, and therfore they maye be so called. Chryses, the name of a prophette amonge the Gentiles. Also of a mayden gyuen by the gre∣kes to kynge Agamemnon at the battayle of Troy. Chrysia, a Citie in Phrigie, and an ylande in Indie. Chrysippus, a noble philosopher borne in Ci∣licia, in a towne called Soloe, as Solinus wryteth: but Laertius writeth, that he was borne in Tarsus, he was of the secte called Stoici. Christis, the skym, whiche is on golde beinge molten. Chrysoaspides, knyghtes that had shyeldes of golde. Chrysoberillus, a christal stone, wherin the co∣lour of golde shyneth. Chrysocolla, a stone, with the poulder, wher∣of paynters doo make a golden colour: also goldsmythes do vse it to sowder golde. Chrysocoma, golden heare. Chhrysocomus, he that hath golden heare. Chrysogonum, that bryngeth forthe gold. Crysolachanon,Ruellius. an herbe called orage, in la∣tine Atriplex. Chrysolampis, a stone of fyry colour by nyght. Chrysolitus, a pretious stone of the colour of golde. Chrysomela, yelowe quinces, of Vergilius they are named Aurea poma, as Ruellius supposeth. Chrysoprassus, a stone grene as a leke, hauing speckes of golde. Chrysostomus, the name of a bushop of Con∣stantinople, and also of an hystoryen, whiche were so called for theyr eloquence, for Chry∣sostomus is in englyshe, A golden mouthe. Chrysothemis, the doughter of Agamemnon and Clytemnestre. Chus, uel Choa, is a measure of the greekes of the whiche there is three sortes, one is cal∣led Attica or Medica, and conteyneth .vi. sex∣tarios atticos, whiche is of englyshe measure one pottle and halfe a pynte. An other is cal∣led Georgica, or of husbandry, and is of en∣glyshe measure .vi. pyntes a halfe and a quar¦ter, that is in poyse of oyle .xi.li. and .iii. oun¦ces: of wyne .xii.li. and di. of hony .xviii.li. and .ix. ounces. An other is Veterinaria, or of theym whiche cure cattell, whiche recey∣ueth of our measure a pottell and a quarte, and in weyghte of wyne .xi.li. one ounce .ii. drammes .ii. scriples: of oyle .viii .li. of ho∣ny .xvi.li.di. one ounce .di. and one dramme. Chymosis,Galen. in defini. is a moysture in the skynne, whi∣che incloseth the eye. Chytra, a pot with fete, or a triuet. Chytracus, a triuet or cradel, whereon pottes are set to boyle meate. C ANTE I. CIBALE perteyninge to meate. Cibarium, meate. Cibarius, a, um, vyle. Cibarius homo, a vyle person. Cibarius panis,Cice. tus. ques. 1. ranged breade, or cribble breade. Cibarium uinum,Varro. small or yll wyne. Cibatus, tus, vittayles.
Cibele, les, the doughter of Minois kynge of Creta, nowe Candy, she beinge caste out into a deserte, was nourished with beastes, and founden by a womanne that kepte shepe, she was by her nouryshed, after becam meruay∣louse fayre, and also wyse, and founde fyrste the pipe and rabour, and also the cymbales amonge the greekes. Moreouer the educati∣on of chyldren, she tenderly louynge them al, in so moche as for the deathe of a childe, cal∣led Ays, whom she moche loued, she became madde. Afterwarde she was honoured of the gentiles for a goddesse. She was also called Rhea, mother of the goddes, and Vesta. Her ymage beinge specially honoured in a citie of Phrigia called Pessinuus, was by the coun∣sayle of Sybilla, fetched thense by Scipio Nasica, and brought vnto Rome, and there had in great reuerence. Cibo, aui, are, to feede. Ciborium, a kynde of appuls of Alexandry. Cibus, meate. Cibi repositi,Quintili. meate set vp to be kepte. Cibum facere,Plautus in Trucul. to make redy meate. Mane a∣liquid fie cibi, There shall be some meate made redy betyme. Cibum sub ducere, to take meate away from one. Cicada, a grashopper. Cicatrico, are, to stryke one so that a marke al∣waye remayneth. Cicatricosus, he that hath manye tokens of woundes. Cicatrix, icis, a token or scar where a wounde had ben. Cicatrizo, idem quod Cicatrico, also to heale a wounde, soo that onely a seme or scar maye appere. Ciccum, the tender rynde of a pomegranade. Cicer, eris, a grayne lyke to peason, whereof some are red, some blacke, & some are white. Cicercula, is lesse than Cicer. Cicerculum. idem. Cicerbita, an herbe called southystell. Cicero, onis, the surname of Marcus Tullius whose diuine eloquence, abundant lernynge, sharpnesse of wyt, dexteritie in actes, & moste ardent loue to the comune weale of his coun∣tray, can not be sufficiently expressed by noo mortall mannes tunge or pen. He was linyal∣ly discended from the auncient kynges of the people called Volsci, all be it tyme and occa∣sion wearynge out dignities in bloudde, his name continued long in the state of worshyp: his auncestours were named Cicerones, by∣cause that Tullius Appius, a noble kynge of Volscis, one of them had on his nose a mark lyke a chiche pease called Cicer. In his child hood he so excelled in wyt all other childrene, that the fathers of them meued with his fame, went purposly to the schole to behold and here hym. He so profited in the eloquence of greeke and also of latyne, that not onely his compani∣ons were in a meruaylous admiration of hym, but also Apollonius, the moste excellent orator at that tyme, in herynge hym beinge sore aba∣shed, and not speakynge a great space, sayd at the laste: Truly Cicero I prayse the, and mer∣uayle at the, but I lament the fortune of gree∣kes, whan I consyder that by the, lernyng and eloquence, whiche onely was lefte vnto vs, is euen nowe translated vnto the Romayns. whi∣che sayenge of Apollonius, was founden after∣ward true. sor loke what subtiltie is in logike, what commoditie in morall philosophye, what secrete knowledge in philosophye naturall, he knewe it (as Tacitus writeth) and declared it in latine in moste perfecte eloquence. And whi∣che is to be wondred at, not withstanding that beinge a verye yonge man, he came to practyse in Rome, and had studied abundauntly the ci∣uile lawes, and was meruaylously occupied in greate and weyghtye causes, and after that he was senatour, was continually (as it semed) most busy about the weale publike: yet he that dothe exactly reade and study his warkes, shall thynke, that he neuer dyd any thynge but rede great authors and wryte bokes. for there was no secte of philosophers, none oratour, no poete afore his tyme, that eskaped hym, but that he rad his warkes, as in his bokes sufficientely it appereth. And yet howe many bokes mde he? sens we haue not the thyrde parte of them, yet suche as we haue of them, if any man now did wryte so moche and so well, we shoulde thynke hym to haue spente the more parte of his tyme in wrytynge. And yet noble Cicero, lorde god, howe many thynges dyd he exploit by his wis∣dome and diligence in moste weighty affayres, as well in warre as in peace? Howe dyd he by his dexteritie and prudence saue the Citie and people of Rome from the most pernicious con∣federacy and rebellion of Catiline, and manye other of the nobility, whiche went about to de∣stroye the weale publike, and robbe the citie? Howe preserued he the same citie and people, after the deathe of Caesar, that they were not oppressed by Marcus Antonius? for his incō∣parable actes the hole Senate and people gaue to hym firste before any the name of father of the countray. what trouble and misery sustey∣ned he, beinge exyled, by the procuremente of Clodius, onely for the puttynge of the sayd re∣belles to dethe? Suche is the reward of people vnstable. Like wyse for dryuinge Antonius out of Rome, and by his sharpe orations causynge hym to be proclaymed ennemy to the weale pub∣lyke, he made Antony so moch his enemy, that
in the treaty of peace betwene hym and O∣ctauius, he demaunded Cicero, to doo with hym at his pleasure. which beinge graunted of the vnkynd Octauius, whom Cicero had brought vp, and by his meanes caused hym to be made the chiefe gouernour of the Ro∣maynes: finally Antony sent one Herennius, whom Cicero had saued from deathe by his eloquence, who pursued hym as he fled: whi∣che Cicero perceyuynge, abode his comynge, lyinge in a horse lytter for waikenes, & with constant eyes prepared his throte to Heren∣nius, who, all other men therat abhorringe, strake of his head and his handes, & brought them to Antony, who reioycynge therat, cau¦sed the heade and the handes to be sette ouer the place of ciuile iugementes at Rome, whi¦che beholden of the senat and peple was dai∣ly lamented. This haue I purposely written, to the intente, that this moste noble counsai∣lour shulde not be hyd to suche as can not yet vnderstande his lyfe wrytten in greeke or la∣tine, and that all men shoulde be inflamed to reade and vnderstande his warkes, whiche afore all other gentiles, wold be chiefely red and folowed of Christen menne, fyndynge in them incomparable wisedom and eloquence. And truely I wyll affyrme Quintilianes sai∣inge: He may well thynke, that he hath mo∣che profyted, whom that Cicero specially ly∣keth, he flourished about .xl. yeres before the incarnation of Christe. Ciceronianus, he that coueyteth to folowe Ci∣cero in eloquence. Cichorea, & Cichoreum, an herbe called suc∣chory. Cicina, a nyght crowe. Cicindula, a fly whiche shyneth by night. Cicinia, a lyttell leane serpent in Italy. Ciclades, be yles in the see Ionium called Ci∣clades, bycause they lye rounde together, or∣els bycause in saylinge to them menne muste fetche a great compasse aboute, by reason of promontories: whiche are in number. 53 Cicones, a people of Thrace. Ciconia,risot. a byrde whiche some do suppose to be called a storke, and is of the fygure of an he∣ron,nius. but that he is greater, and is whyte, sa∣uynge that the toppes of his wynges are blacke, and his byll and legges are red. some thynke that they haue no tungues. they na∣turally be ennemies to serpentes, and do slea them. Of them it is wrytten, that whan they be olde, theyr byrdes do fede them, and pro∣uyde meate for them, for the which cause the ymage of them was the token of iustice. and the auncient kinges had it on the top of their septours, as they had in the lower parte the beaste called Hippopotamus, which contra∣rye wyse sleeth his father, and rydeth on his mother, wherby they were exorted to aduāce iustice and pitie, and to oppresse iniustice and crueltie.Eras. in chil. Of this byrde came a greke worde for a prouerbe, Antipelargein, which signi∣fieth (as I mought saye) to be lyke a storke. whiche prouerbe is to exhort men to be kind to theyr parentes, or to theyr maysters, whi∣che teacheth them or bringeth them vppe, re∣quitynge them the benefyte, whiche they re∣ceyued of them. Ciconius, the name of him that bylded Brixia. Cicorium, an herb that groweth euery where. Cicum, a thynne skynne, whiche is within a pomegranade. Cicur, euery beaste or byrde, whiche ones be∣ynge wylde, is made tame. Cicuro, aui, are, to make tame. Cicuta, a venemous herbe, which groweth .ii. cubites in heyght, with a grene stalke full of knottes, bushy in the toppe, hauynge leaues smaller than Coriander, and seedes greater than anyse seede, and is horrible in sauouor. some do nowe vse that name for hemlocke. Cidaris, a cap, whiche the kynges of Persia dyd vse, and also the bushops in the old law. Cieo,Festus. & Cio, ciui, to meue a thynge, to cal or name: also to trouble or make one angrye. Quid negotij est,Plautus. Pistoclerum Lydus quod herum tam ciet? What is the matter, that Lyous thus trubleth or angreth his master? Bellum ciebant, they did set forth in bataile. Ciere aluum, to prouoke one to the stoole. Ciere urinam, to make one to pysse. Cileo, ui, ere, to meue or styrre a thynge. Cilicia, is a countray in Asia beyond the moūt of Taurus, partly inclosed with the hyghest parte of the sayd mount, and hardest to passe by. Strabo deuideth Cilicia in to two par∣tes, one called Tracher, that is to say rough or rocky: The other Campestris, that is to saye playne. Iosephus writeth, that it was of olde tyme called Tarsus of Tarsis, oone of the sonnes of Iaphet, the yōgest son of Noe. Herodotus sayeth, that the people were cal∣led Cilices of Cilix, the son of Agenor kinge of Phoenitia, where before it was called Hy¦patus. Saynct Hierom doth interpret Cili∣cia, a congregation, a lamentation, an as∣sumtion, a lamentable callynge, or vomyte. The people were by nature inclyned to lien and stealynge, whereof grew this prouerbe: ❀Cilex non facile uerum dicit, The Cilici∣an not lyghtly sayeth trouth. A prouerbe ap∣plyed to a couetous man, which alway lyeth for his particular aduauntage, as nowe a dayes mooste parte of men doo, whiche lyue onely by sellynge. Cilicinus, a, um, made of hearen clothe.
Cilicium, any cloth or garment made of heare. Cilium, the ouer skynne wherwith the eye is closed. Cilix, icis, an inhabitaunt of Cilicia. Cillibe & Cilliba, a rounde table. Cilones, men hauyng great round foreheades. Cima, the tender part of the stalke of herbes. Cimaria, thynges that be foure square. Cimbalaris, an herbe whiche groweth in stone walles, whiche hath a lyttell leafe, somwhat in fascion lyke to an iuy, and hath a lyttell purple floure. It is supposed to be the herbe, whiche is called Vmbelicus Veneris. Cimbices,Plutarch. they whiche do make moch of a lit∣tle, or greately esteme a thynge whiche is of small value. Cimbri, were the people whiche dyd inhabite Denmarke and Norway, who hadde a mer∣uaylous custome, whiche Strabo wryteth: that with theyr wyues, who folowed theym in warres, were also women kunnynge in di¦uination, whose heare was whyte, and like∣wyse theyr gownes, vnder the whiche they hadde launde clothes made faste with pyn∣nes or taches, beynge gyrte with gyrdelles of brasse, and wente bare foted. They alwaye, as prisoners were taken, with naked swor∣des bete them to the grounde, & drewe them vnto a brasen cauldron, whiche conteyned fyfty Amphoras, of our measure .250. gal∣lons, and hauynge an haulte place made for the purpose, they went vp quickely, and lif∣tynge on hygh the men that were taken, they dyd cut theyr throtes ouer the cauldron, and by the droppynge of the bloudde, they decla∣red theyr prophesies. Some other openynge mens bealyes, serched theyr bowelles, and prophesied victory vnto the people. Cimeliarchon,Budeus. a iewell house. Cimeliarchus, maister of the iewell house. Cimex, a stinkynge worme bredynge in wood or paper. Cimmerij, are people inhabitynge in the fur∣thest parte of Europa, not fer from the great fennes called Paludes Meotidis, and about the sea called Bosphorus Cimmerius, north∣easte from Grecia. Plinius and some other do affirme, that by the farre distaunce of the son from it, that countraye is alwaye verye darke, wherof hapned this prouerbe: ❀Cimmerijs tenebris atrior, Blacker than the darke of Cimmeria. applyed to moche darkenesse, or dulnes of wytte, or lacke of wysedome. Cinabulum, a cradle. Cinaedus, of Nonius Marcelleus is expounde to be an exerciser of wonton daūces and mo∣tions of the body in dyuers fourmes. Perot¦tus in Corcopie declareth it to be a person exercisynge actes of lechery detestable, and agaynste natural fourme and order, whiche I wyll not expresse, and if he had omytted it also, he had nothyng offended, being a thing worthy to be out of remembraunce. Cinamomum, a kynd of spyse odoriferous and dilectable, called Cynamome, of some canell, It groweth in Ethiope, lyke a lowe bushe in dyuerse stemmes, whiche do not excede two cubites in heighte, hauynge leaues lyke to organum, the ryndes thereof is that whiche we haue in vse. It is hot and dry in the third degree. Cinara, an herbe, whiche some men do suppose to be an artochoke. Cincinnati, men that haue curied heares. Cincinni, heares that be curled. Cinclidae,Ca are bayes or parclosis made aboute the places of iudgement, where men not be∣inge sutars, maye stande, beholde, and here what is done and spoken amonge the iuges and pledours. Suche a lyke thing is at west∣mynster hall about the common place, and is called the bekens. Cinclidarius, ant. 3. was he whiche kepte the place, where monumentes or recordes were kepte, that euery manne shoulde not enter without leaue. As he which now kepeth the recordes in the towre, or the porter of the rolles maye be so called. Cincticulus, a shorte cote called a ierkyn. Cinctus, tus, a short garment, which the con∣sull dyd weare, whan he profered battayle. Cinediae, stones founde in a fyshes heade. Cineraceus, & Cinereus, a, um, of the colour of ashes. Cenericius, a, um, baken or rosted vnder ashes. Cingo, xi, gere, to gyrde or compasse about. Cingria, a shorte pype hauynge a smal sounde. Cingula, a gyrth for beastes. Cingulus, a gyrdell for men. Cinifactum, broughte into ashes, as thynges whiche are burned. Ciniflo, onis, he that maketh hote the instru∣mentes, wherwith men or women dyd trym theyr heare. Cinis, neris, ashes. Cinna, a citie of Thessaly. Also the name of a Romayne, whiche exceded in crueltie. Cinnabaris, a stone called a sanguinarye, it is also called in latine Sanguis draconis, dra∣gons bloud. It is put in to sondry medicines to staunche bloud. Cinnamolgus, called of Pliny, and Cinnamo¦mus of Aristotle, is a byrde whiche makethe her nest with cynamome. Cinniligium, a gyrdell, whiche a bride or new wedded wyfe weareth, a corse. Cinnus, a heare of a man or womans head, or
a medley of dyuerse thynges together. Ciperum, a soote plante or herbe, whiche is good to breake and expulse the stone. Cippus, a payre of stockes. Also a lyttell hyll, whiche men cal a barrowe. It is also a crosse or other marke, whiche sheweth the ryghte way to a place. Cio, ciui, cire, reade Cio. Circa, about, nighe. Circania, a byrde, which in his flyght fetcheth a compasse. Circe,odorus ul. li. 5. was doughter of Ceta, kynge of the yle of Colchos and Hecate the wyche, and was the sustar of Medea. This woman knew the meruaylous operations of sundry herbes, & howe to cure al maner of poysons. Not with standynge at the laste she slewe her husbande kyng of Scithes with poyson, and vexed the people with moch tyranny. wherfore she was expelled the countrey, and fled in to a deserte yle in the occean sea. Homerus nameth her the suster of Aeta, and sheweth howe Vlisses arryuynge in the yle, where Circe dwelled, dyuers of his companyons were by her trans¦formed in to swyne, and afterwarde by the intercession of Vlysses, she eftsones restored them vnto theyr pristinate fourme, and were more beautiful and yong in syght, than they were before. Circerus, a great shyp, whiche they of Asya vsed. Circino, aui, are, to compasse, to make a cerkle. Circinus, an instrument called a compasse. Circiter, about, and is referred sometyme to tyme. Circiter caledas Iunias, About the first day of Iune. Sometyme it is referred to the place. Circiter in media arce, Aboute the myddes of the castell. Somtyme to the thynge. Circiter duo millia hominum caesa sunt, There were nyghe two thousande men slayne. Circites, houpes of yron or brasse. Circitores, officers in cities, whiche do go a∣boute to se that good rule be kepte. Circius, a southern wynde, whiche is wonder∣full vehemente. Circuitio, a compasynge, goinge about, or en∣uironynge. Circuitus, a circute, a compace about. Circius, the name of an yle in Misia. Circuitores, the serchers of watches▪ also they whiche do go about the stretes to selle gar∣mentes or lynnen clothe. Circulatim, by cercles, or in the fourme of a cercle. Circulator, he that goeth about to shewe hym selfe what he can do, or to deceyue the peo∣ple with crafte or subtiltie. Circulatorius, a, um, perteynynge to suche a∣uanters or deceyuers. Circulatrix, she that goeth about to get money with daunsynge or tumblynge. Circulo, aui, are, to compasse or close with a dyche, or other lyke thyng, or to make a cer∣cle or compasse about a thynge. Circulus, a cercle or compasse. Circum, about. Circumago, egi, agere, to leade about, to tourne about. Circumcelliones, tauerne haunters, or ray∣lers about. Circumcidaneus, a, um, cut rounde about. Circumcido, cidi, cidere, to cut about a thing. Circumsisus, cut rounde about, circumcided. Circumcirca,Ser. Sul. ad Cice. all about. Circumcise agere, to make an oration by pe∣cis,Sueto. de claris rhe∣tor. without comynge to the purpose. Circumcidaneū mustum, wyne, whiche after that the grapes are pressed, is taken oute of the same grapes, being cut and newe pressed. Circumcludo, si, dere, to inclose rounde. Circumcolo, colui, colere, to dwell now here nowe there. Circumcolumnium, a place set aboute with pyllars. Circumcurso, are, to run hither and thither. Circundo, are, to enuyron or compasse about, as a rynge dothe about a mans fynger, or a dyche about a close. Circumduco,Paulus de re iudica∣ta. duxi, ducere, to leade one about. It is also to abolyshe or put a syde an acte. Quod si is qui edictum peremtorium impe trauit,Vlpia de iudicijs. absit die cognitionis, tunc circumdu∣cendum erit edictum peremptorium: And if that he that hath opteyned the perempto∣ry decree, be absent the day whan the matter shuld be determined, than the peremptory de¦cre is to be dissolued or abolyshed. It is som∣tyme to deceyue by cautelles. Circumducere aliquē argento,Plaut. in Pseud. to get ones money by falsehod. Circumductrio, deceyte. Circumductus, a, um, led about.Plaut. in cap. Circumeo, iui, ire, to go about any thynge. Circumfero, to carye or beare aboute. also to clense.Vergil. 6. Idem ter socios, pura circumtulit un∣da: Also he clensed his company three tymes with clene water. Circumferre se, to goo braggynge aboute the streetes. Circumecto,Vergilius tere, to tourne hyther & thither. Circumflexus, bowed. Circumfluo, to abounde. It is also to flowe or runne aboute, as water aboute a Citie or countrey. Circumfluus, a, um, that floweth aboute.
Circumforanei, malaperte guestes, and tellers of tydynges in markettes. Circumforaneus, a, um, that maye be, or is caryed about. Circumfundo, dere, to cast water or other li∣cour about. Circumfundere hostes, to slee ennemies on all partes. Circumfusus,Vergilius a, um, gathered about, as peple whan they desyre to se a thynge. Sometyme wrapped about lyke an adder or serpente. Circumiaceo, ieci, ijcere, to put about. Circumlino,Pli. de ui∣ris illustr. to annoynt about. Circumlinitio, onis, bournishynge, clensynge, or polyshynge. Circummissus, a, um, sente aboute. Circummitto, to sende about. Circūmunio, iui, ire, to inclose, wal in, or dich in. Also to enuiron strongely, to fortify with walles or men. Circumnascor, to growe about. Circumpedes,Cicero. lackayes awaytinge at theyr maysters styrop. also foote men of princis. Circumscriptus, ta, tum, put out, rased, abo∣lyshed. Circumscriptè dicere, to speake in a certayne numbre and measure. Circumscriptor, a deceyuour. Circumscriptus, deceyued or abused. Circumscripta oratio, a measurable oration. Circumscriptio, abusyng, or deceyuynge. Circumscriptio temporis, a certayne measure of tyme. Circumplector, to imbrace or close in. Circumscribo, psi, bere, to wryte, or drawe a∣bout with a lyne. Also to deceyue one in bar∣gaynynge with hym. Fratrem circumscripsit in diuisione haereditatis: He deceyued his brother in partition of the inherytance. Also to gather, cōprehende, or descryue throughly. Cuius scientiae summam breuiter circumscri¦bo: The effecte of whose lernynge I wyll comprehende or descriue shortely. Somtyme to put out that whiche is written. Circumsecus,Apuleius on bothe sydes. Circumsedeo, cessi, cedere, to besiege. Circūsido, sedi, fidere, to go about to besiege. Circumsisto, stiri, sistere, to stande aboute one to defende hym. Circumspectatrix, a woman that beholdeth a∣bout, or watcheth. Circumspecto,Plautus. are, to beholde about. Circumspectus, circumspecte. Circumspicientia, circumspection. Circumspicio, exi, cere, to loke about. Circumspicuus, a, um, that maye be beholden on all partes. Circumsto, steti, stare, to stande about. Circumtego,Plautus. texi, tegere, to couer all aboute. Circumuado, to inuade, or perse on all partes. Circumueho, uexi, uehere, to cary about of∣ten tymes. Circumuecto, tare, to cary about often. Circumuenio, to compasse a man, to deceyue hym, to close hym in, as in warres, to op∣presse. Circumuenire iuditio, where iudges doo con∣demne one by a confederacy, contracye to iu∣stice and reason. Fenore circumuentus, oppressed with vsury. Circumuerto, tere, to tourne about. Circumuolito, aui, are, to flee about. Circuo, iui, ire, to go about. Circus, was a place in Rome walled aboute, wherin was fightynge with the fistes, run∣nynge with horses. About it were sondry ga∣leries, where the senatours and gentylmen behelde the passetyme. Circenses Iudi, were those games, whiche were exercised in Circo, and were soo called as it were Circum enses, amonge swordes. for as moche as before there were any suche place made as Circus was, the homely anti∣quitie vsed to haue those games in the open fielde, enuirroned with ryuers, and swor∣des the poyntes vpwarde, that on euery part he that was a cowarde, shulde be in danger. Cirnea, a wyne potte. Cirratus, he that hath his heares brayded. Cirri, heares curled, or fethers that do growe on the top of a byrdes heade, as a larke or hearon. Also lyke thynges growinge on her∣bes, whiche maye be clypped of. also thinges lyke heares about oysters. Cirsion, an herbe, which is comonly called bu¦glosse, not that whiche is called languede∣buefe, but that whiche hath the great leafe, whose prickes are not so harde. Cirsocele,Gal defi is a lousyng or pullyng out of their place of those vesselles, whiche do nouryshe the stones of a man, and a gatherynge of yll humour in the bag. Cirtacus, a kynde of brawne. Cis, a worme amonge corne, whiche I suppose to be called weuyls. also it signifieth on this syde: as, Cis Rhenum, on this syde the ry∣uer of Rhine: Cis Alpes, on this syde the mountaynes called Alpes, Sometyme it si∣gnifieth lasse. Cis nature leges, lesse than the lawes of na∣ture maye suffer. Salust vseth it ones for be∣yonde: Cis Rhenum, at{que} intra mare no∣strum & oceanum: Beyonde the ryuer of Rhine, and within our sea and the occeanse. Cis paucos dies,Pla. within fewe dayes. Cis undi{que}, in all places about. Cisalpina Gallia, was somtyme that countrey, which is from the mountaynes called Alpes.
vnto the ryuer of Rubicon. Cisium, aut Cissium, a carte with two wheles. Cisiar ius, a carter. Cispello,aut. in mph. puli, pellere, to kepe one out that he come not into the house. Cispius, a mountayne in Rome. Cissanthemos, an herbe, whych the apotheca∣ries do calle Sigillum Mariae. Cisseus, a kynge of Thrace, father of Hecuba quene of Troy. Cissites, a precious ston like an yuy leaf, bright of colour. Cissos, in greke is yuy. Cissybium, a cuppe or boll made of yuy. Cista, a cheste, coffer, or basket. Cistella, a casket. Cisterna, a cesterne. Cistophorus, a certayne auncient coyne, wher∣in was a man hauynge a panyar on his head of the whych .vii.M. and. D. were in the ta∣lent, callyd Talentum Euboicum. This wold be set for Costrophinari, in the .xvi. boke of the digestes. tit. depositi .L. publia. Cistula, a casket. Cita aluus, a louse bealye. Aluo cita est, He hath a laske. Citatim, quyckely, swyftly. Citato gradu, with quycke spede. Citatus, callyd, summoned, or cited. Citerior, nerer. Citerior Gallia, Lumbardy. Cithaeron, onis, kynge of Plateae, in Grece, of whome this history is remembred: Iuno be∣inge on a tyme angrye with Iupiter her hus∣bande, departed from him into Boeotia. Iu∣piter desyrous to haue her agayne, wente to Plateas to Cithaeron, beynge than reputed a man of great wisedom and moch experience, to aske his aduise, who gaue to hym coūsayle in fourme folowyng, he caused an ymage to be made of wod, and to be cladde rychly, and in the apparayle of a bryde to be set in a cha∣ryot, and that it shulde be publyshed amonge the people, that Iupiter was determyned to mary Plateam the doughter of Asopus. But as this ymage was solempnely caryed, Iuno inflamyd with ielosy, met with the chariotte, and entryng therinto, fyrst dydde rent the clo∣thes and apparayl about the ymage, and thā fyndynge that therein was but an ymage of tree, and noo bryde, delyted at the inuention, wherwith she was begiled, and tournyng her anger into laughyng, she was forthewith re∣concyled to Iupiter. Cithara, a harpe. Citharista, whiche onely playeth on the harpe. It is also an angle of Fraunce by Marcile, lyenge out to the sea. Citharistria, a woman harper. Citharizo, aui, are, to harpe. Citharoedus, an harper, whyche syngeth to his harpe. Citimus, a, um, the last, the nexte vnto vs. Citius, sooner. Citius dicto, sooner than one may speake it. Citissime, as soone as is possible. Citò, soone, shortly. Cito, aui, are, to cite, to summon, or calle. Cita re testes, to bryng wytnesse, to recyteor name. Citorus, a mountayne where groweth plentye of boxe trees. Citra, on this syde, sometime without. Citra adulationem, without flattery. Citra pulueris tactum, without any duste. A prouerbe applyed vnto them, whiche com∣meth to a thynge without any labour. Citrago, ginis, the herbe whiche is commonly callyd baulme, of the apothecaries Melyssa. Citrea malus, an orenge tree. Citreum, an orenge. Citrum, a fruite callyd pome citron. Citrus, is another maner of tree, whereof in the olde yme were made fayre tables and co∣fers, as nowe ben of cypresse. Citta, a pye. Cittium, a towne of Cyprus. Citus, quycke, hasty, swyfte, sometyme diuy∣ded or parted. Ciuicus, a, um, is the same that ciuilis is. Ciuica corona, a garlande of oken leaues, v∣sed to be giuen to them that had saued a cite∣syn in battayle. Ciuilis, le, that pertayneth to a citesyn. Ciuilis homo, a man expert in those thynges that appertayn to the ministration of a com∣mon weale. Ciuilitas, tatis, curtesy, ciuilitie, good humanite Ciuiliter, lyke a citesyn, also curteysely or with good maner. Ciuis, a citesyn or denysen. alsoo Ciuis meus, my countrey man. Ciuitas, tatis, a citie, proprely it is the multi∣tude of citesyns gatheryd togyther, to lyue ac¦cordyng to lawe and ryght. Cius, a ryuer in Thrace. Cizicus, a citie in Asia, the lesse. C ANTE L. CLades, dis, a discomfiture in battayle, a destruction of men,Plaut. in Amph. losse. Clam, priuilye, vnwares. Is amare oc∣coepit Alcumenā clam uiro, He loued Alcu∣mena, vnware to her husband. also by stelthe. Clam alter alterum, the one knoweth not of the other. Clam me profectus est, vnwares to me, he went his wayes. Clam me,Plaut. in Aulul. clam te, I or thou not knowyng. Clam omnes, vnwares to euery mā, no man
knowyng or wyttynge. Clamito, tare, to crye often. Clamo, aui, are, to crye, to calle. Clamor, oris, a crye, a clamour, a noyse. Clamosus, a, um, clamorous or full of noyse. Clancularius poëta, a poete that wryteth, not shewynge his name. Clanculum, secretely. Clandêstino, priuily or secretely. Clandêstinus, a, um, priuy or secrete. Clango, xi, gere, to sowne a trumpet. Clangor, oris, the sown of a trumpet. somtyme the cry that gese or other lyke byrdes do make Clanius, a citie of Champaigne, nere to the ci∣tie Acertas. Clarè, clerely, apparantly. Clare audire, to here perfytely. Clareo, ui, ere, to appere, to be well knowen, to be clere, to be renoumed. Claresco, idem. Clarifico, aui, are, to make clere or apparant. Clarigatio,Alciatus ī cōmēt. de uerb. sig. a clerynge, a subsidy or taske gran∣ted by a commune consent. It is also authori∣tie gyuen to arrest one. Clarigo, aui, to demande a thyng with a loude voyce, it was properly a worde pertaynynge to the kynge of armes of the Romaynes, cal∣lyd Pater patratus,Plinius li. 22. whan he went to the bor∣ders or marches of them, which had done in∣iury vnto the Romayns, & there with a loude and clere voyce demanded of them amendes. Claritas, tatis, clerenes, sommetyme nobilytie or honour. Claritudo, idē quod claritas, also brute, renom. Clarium, a town in Grecia, where Apollo was honoured, in that towne was an hole in the grounde, out of the whiche ran a lytell broke, wherof if any man dyd drynke the water, he gaue meruaylous answeres, but he lyued not longe after. Of this towne was Apollo sur∣named Clarius. Claro, aui, are, to make noble or honorable. Claros, a citie in Grece. Clarus, a, um, clere, honorable, famous. Clara pugna, a battayle worthy memory. Clarus clamor, Clara uox, a lowde crye, a lowde or shyll voyce. Clara res, a playne matter. Clarus genere, of a noble or honorable hous. Clarus, a ryuer, whiche runneth from the high mountayns of Alpes into the ryuer callyd Da¦nubium. Classiarius, a man of warre on the sea. Classiarius,Vergilius dylygent. Classici, they which in a towne were most rych and substanciall. Classici authores, writers of most estimatiō. Classici testes, witnesses hauīg most substāce Classicum, a peale or noyse of trumpets or bel∣les, to call men togither, or to go to battayle. Classica bella, warre on the sea. Classicus, an offycer, whyche with a trumpet or tabore callyd people togither. sometyme a man beinge in reputation. Classicus, a, um, pertaynyng to nauyes. Classis, is, a nauy of shippes. it is also an order of fourmes or stoles set in a place, where men do sytte accordyng to theyr degrees, authori∣ties, promotions, in kunnynge or substance. The people of Rome were deuided by Serui∣us Tullius, the .vi. kynge of Romaynes into tyue bandes, whiche were callyd Classes, and they whiche were of the fyfth bande, were of no value. The three places of iudgement in Westm̄ hall, may be callyd Classes. Clatrum, & clatrus, a lattyse wyndowe, or any thyng made lyke a latrise, or with barres cal∣lyd a grate. some do write it Clathrum, with an aspiration. Clatro, aui, are, to shut a wyndowe, specially a lattyse wyndowe. Claua, a clubbe. Clauam extorquere Herculi, to take from Hercules his clubbe. A prouerbe applyed to hym, whiche gothe about to get a thing, that an other man hath, moch strōger thā him self Clauarius, an officer, appointed to deale them∣perours gyfte of money or corne amonge the souldyours. Clauator, he that vseth a clubbe. Clauatus, sette with nayles. Clauata uestis, was a garmente sette with spangles lyke to the heades of nayles, as we do nowe behold in some vestementes in chur∣ches wrought in braunches and flowres, and if the garment were wyde, it was callyd La∣tus clauus, whiche in Rome no man mought weare, except he were a senatour. Claudeo, to halte, somtyme to erre. Claudia, was a gentylle womanne of Rome, whiche for the curiositie that: she vsed in ap∣paraylynge her selfe, was infamyd to be vn∣chaste. But whan the image of Idēa, callyd mother of the goddis, was broughte out of Phrigia to Rome, being caried in a barge by the ryuer of Tyber, it hapned to styck so fast in a shalowe place, that it moughte not be re∣moued with no force. This mayden knelinge downe, desyred that goddesse, that the beinge a cleane virgine, and falsely sclaundered, the sayde ymage wolde wytsaulfe to folowe her to the cytie, and thanne she onely tyenge her gyrdelle to the barge, easylye drewe it to the lande, whyche all the youth of the citie were not able to do. Claudianus, a famouse poete. Claudico, caui, are, to halte. Claudicare in aliquo officio, to be neglygent in doinge a mans duetie.
Clauditas, haltynge, lamenes. Claudius, was the proper names of dyuers Ro¦maynes, and also a surname of a noble fami∣ly in Rome, whiche were euer repugnant to the actes of the commune people. Claudo, si, dere,Salust. to shytte, somtyme to compas, also to put of, also to halte. somtyme to turne about. Claudite nymphae Dictéae, nymphae nemorum, iam claudite saltus, Turnc about ye goddesses of Dictea, ladyes of the fore∣stes, tourne your daunce about. Claudus, a, um, lame. Clauena, the duchy of Cleues. Clauicula, a lyttell kay or clubbe. Clauicula, or clauiculus, diminutiues of clauis. Clauicularius, he that beareth the kayes. Clauiculus, the tendrell of a vyne. Clauiger, idem quod clauicularius. Clauis, a kaye. Clauola, a griefe. Claustrarius, a maker of kayes and lockes. Claustrinus, a keper of the cloyster, or of any other place, wherein any lyuynge thynge is inclosed. Claustrum, a cloyster, or other place where any lyuyng thyng is inclosed. Clausula, a lyttell sentence, or a parte of a sentence. Clausura, a shuttynge in. Clauulus, a diminutiue of clauus. Clauus, a nayle, also the sterne of a shyppe, al∣so a corne on a mans toe or fynger. Moreouer claui, be lyttell swellynges of harde flesshe in the corner of mens eyen. Also puffes growing in the stemmes of great trees. also in harneis, that whiche is callyd the ryuette. Moreouer clauus is a garmente pyrled or poudred with spangles, lyke nayles heades. Wherfore the proper garmente of a senatour, was callyd Latus clauus. Clauus aeneus, a brasyn nayle. Coelius wri¦teth it for a prouerbe, signifieng a sure reme∣die agaynst all mishappes, whiche prouerbe he saythe proceded hereof. In the olde tyme hunters whan they had ouerthrowen a wyld swyne or hart in places farre from habitati∣on, they draue into the beaste a brason nayle, beleuyng that therby the fleshe shuld be kept from putrifaction, and of this superstytion came the sayde prouerbe. Clauum clauo pellere,Eras. in chil. to dryue out oone nayle with an nother. A prouerbe, signifieng one yll to putte away an other, oone labour an other labour, oone griefe with an nother griefe, one deceypte with an other deceypte, extreme pleasure with extreme peyne. Clazomenae, a cite of Ionie, whiche Paralus buylded. Clazomenia, an ylande, whyche is callyd Ma∣rathusa. Cleantes, the name of a noble phylosopher, whiche succeded Zeno in his schole. Clearchus, the name of a phylosopher, There was a noble capytaine of the same name, of whom Xenophon writeth in the expedition of Cyrus the lesse. Clemens, tis, mercyfull. Clementia, mercy. somtyme pacience. Clementia aestatis,Plaut. in Sticho. the temperatenesse of sommer. Clementer, mercifully, gentilly, without anger Clementer tractare, to entreate gentylly or swetely. Clementer uolo, I am well content. Cleobulus, was done of the seuen sages of Greece, who had a doughter callyd Cleobu∣lina, whiche was an excellent poet, and made a boke of ryddelles contayned in three thou∣sande versis. Cleodamas, the name of a geometrician in the tyme of Plato. Clena, a cloke. Cleombrotus, the sonne of Pausanias, capy∣tayne of the Lacedemons. Cleopatra, the name of dyuers greate ladyes, specially quenes of Egypt, of whome one ex∣cellynge in pleasantnes and sharpenes of wyt fyrst allured vnto her Iulium Caesarem, af∣terward Marcum Antonium, companyon in thempire with Augustus, whom she brought into suche dotage, that in folowynge her ap∣petite, be aspired vnto the hole empire, wher∣fore he was afterwarde distroyed by Augu∣stus. This woman so moch exceded in sump∣tuous gluttony, that she puttyng an excellent perle into tarte vyneger, wherin being consu∣med she receyued it into her bodye, the perle beynge estemyd at. 100. Sestertia, whiche is of our money. This lady after the death of Antony, inclosed her self in a tumbe, being on lyue, and hauing two serpentes suc∣kynge at her pappes, so dyed. Clepo, psi, pere, to steale. Clepsydra, a dyall, whyche dyuided the hou∣res by the rounnyng of a certayne measure of water. It was also the name of a fountayne in Athenes. Cleronoma, herytage. Cleronomos, an heyre. Clerus, chosen by lotte. Also a worme whiche destroyeth and corrupteth hony combes. Clibananus, he that fyghteth in Iustyng her∣neysse. Clibanus, an ouen, or the mouthe of a four∣neyse. Cliduchus, he that beareth a mace. Cliens, tis, is he which belongeth or retaineth to som man in authoritie, to haue his defence
and assistence in causes honeste. it is also he which hath retayned a lawyer to sustayn his matter, callyd a clyent. Clientela, the noumber of clyentes or of ser∣uantes retayned, or duetie. sometyme safegard by reason of a great mans fauour. Clientulari um, an yerely fee, for counsayle or assistence. Clima, tis, is a portion of the worlde betwene southe & northe, wherin is variation of tyme in the length of the day, the space of halfe an houre, which is set out in the tables and char¦tes of cosmographye. Climactericus, a, um, signifieth the degrees of mans lyfe by seuen yeres, in the whiche he is in daunger of deathe or misfortune. Climactericum tempus, the sayde daunge∣rous tyme. Climacterum, idem. Climax, a ladder, & the figure callid gradation Clingo, gere, olde wryters vsyd for cingere, to gyrde. Clinicus, a phisition, that healeth with medy∣cines, also he that is so sycke, that he can not aryse out of his bedde. Clinopale, wrastlynge in the bedde. Clinopodium,Ruellius. the herbe whiche is callyd Pu∣lyole mountayne. Clio, the name of one of the Muses. Clisis, declination. Clitellae, a packe saddell. alsoo the name of a place in Rome. Clitellarij, packehorses or mules, that do serue for cariage. Cliterini,Coelius. the cullions or stones of a man. Clitomachus, the name of a philosopher. Clitorius, a fountayne in Grece. Clitumnus, a ryuer in Italy. Cliuia,Festus. all thynges harde to be brought to passe Cliuosus, a, um, pytching down or stiepe down Cliuus, seu cliuum, the pitche of an hylle. some tyme the syde of an hyl. somtyme a lyttel hyll, wheron is some thyng buylded. Cloaca, a synk or gutter wherby water passeth Cloacare, to defyle or pollute. Cloacarium, skot in a towne for clensynge of commune draughtes. Clodius, was a name of the Romaynes, wher∣of were two, whyche by theyr yll actes gatte specialle remembraunce. One was sonne to Aesopus the player in tragedyes, vnto whom the father lefte meruaylous greatte rychesse, whyche he shortly consumyd in bankettynge, wherin he was so sūptuous, that vnto theym whyche souped with hym, he wold gyue per∣les of great value, relented in vyneger to eat. An nother Clodius was of a noble howse of the Romaynes, who so moche hated Tully, for bearynge wytnesse agaynst hym, whan he was accused for commyttynge adultery with Pompeya, the wife of Iulius Cesar, that af∣terwarde beynge Tribune of the people, he neuer ceassed to styre the people against Tul∣ly, vntyll he compellyd hym to go into exyle. Cloris, a mayden or nymphe, whiche was ma∣ryed to Zephirus, vnto whom was assigned for her dower, to haue rule ouer flowres. Clostrum, olde writers vsyd for claustrum. Clotho, one of the fatall ladyes, hauynge po∣wer ouer mannes lyfe, in dyssoluynge therof. Cludo, si, dere, to shytte. Clumae, the huskes of barley. Clueo, ui, ere, to contende or fyght. Clunaculum, a bouchers choppynge knyfe. Clunes, the buttockes or haunches. Clupea, a citie of Affrike, nexte to Cartage. Clymene, the mother of Promotheus, dough∣ter of Oceanus. Clypeus, a shielde or tergat of footemen. Clysmus, a purgation or washynge. Clyster, eris, & clysterium, a tergate. Clytemnestra, the wyfe of Agamemnon. C ANTE N. CN, uel Cneus, the name of a man. Cnicus, an herbe callyd of the apotheca∣ries Carthamus, of the which be two kyndes, the one is of the gardeyne, the other is wylde. Of the fyrste is a notable confecti∣on made, callyd Diacarthami, which louseth the bealy, and pourgeth watrye fleume. It is of some callyd wylde saffron, and is hote and dry in the seconde degree. Cnipes, is a lyttell wourme, whiche is founde bred in an elme tree. C ANTE O. COaccedo, cedere, to be added to the prin¦cypall summe. Coaccesso, cessi, cessere, to waxe sowre or tarte. Coaceruo, aui, are, to heape vppe, or gather in∣to heapes. Coacta pecunia, moneye gatheryd for somme pourpose. Coactio, a particular receypte. Coactores, particular receyuours. Coactura, a great gatherynge togither. Coaduno,Bude are, to assemble. Coaequalis, equall. Coaequare, idem quod aequare. Coaequus, a, um, lyke, euen. Coaetaneus, of one age. Coagito, idem quod simul agito, rede Agito. Coagmento, aui, are, to ioyne togyther, or make lyke.
Coagulo, aui, are, to gather in to a courde or creame. Coagulum, courde or creame. Coalesco, ui, escere, to gather togider. to īcreas Coarcto, aui, are, to strayn, or presse togither. Coarctus in oppido, kept within the towne by force. Coarguere, to rebuke with other. Coasto, to planke or bourde, or to ioyne bour∣des togither. Coaxare, to make a noyse lyke a frog or tode. Cocalus, a kyng of Sicile, to whom Dedalus fled out of Creta, whā Minos king of Crtte pursued hym. Coccalus, a pyne appull. Coccentum, a meat made of hony & popy sede. Cocceus, a, um, & coccineus, a, um, of scar∣let colour. Coccina, a scarlet vesture. Coccinatus, he that weareth a scarlet gowne. Coccinus, & coccus, scarlet colour. Coccis, igis, a byrde callyd a cuckowe. Coccum, grayn wherwith cloth & sylk is grai∣ned. Coccos baphice, idem. Coccum cnidiū, is a beary like to myrtils, blak and hard without, & within white, the herbe wherof som to call Thymaelea, som Oliuella, some Leo terrae, some Linum syluestre. The bery is medicinable to purge choler, water, & fleme, som authors do call it Granū cnidium. Cochlear, a spone. It is also a measure, which conteyneth .iii. drammes, and one scriple, and is the fourthe part of Cyathus. Cochlearium medicum, seu atticū, conteyneth one dramme, half a scriple .ii. graynes .ii. fyue partes of a grayne in measure, and in weight of wyne as moche, of oyle one dramme, and two scriples. Cochlium, a wyndynge stayre. Coclea, a snayle hauing a shell. also a fyshe cal∣lyd a pyrwynke. Cocles, itis, he or she that hath but one eye. Coclides, wyndyng stayres. also a stone found in Araby, which being boiled seuen days and as many nyghtes in hony, and all the erth ta∣ken from it, it is made wonderful pleasant in syght, hauing being and spottes of sundry co∣lours, and is so great, that somtyme therof is made horseharneys for kynges. Coctie, a part of the mountaynes of Alpes. Coctilis, le, sodden or baken. Coctito, aui, are, to boyle. Coctinus, a, um, easy to be boyled. Coctona, quynces. Coctonum, cotton. Coctus, a, um, sodden ynough. Coculum, a pot to boyle in. sometyme Cocula do sygnify styckes, which wyll sone be on fire Cocus, a cooke. Cocynthum, a mountayne in Italy, that diuy∣deth two seas. Cocytia, sacrifyces, that were doone in honour of Proserpyne. Cocytus, a ryuer of Helle. Coda, a tayle. Codatremula, a byrde callyd a wag tayle. Codex, icis, the body of a tree, or a great boke or volume. Codicariae naues, shyppes or barges made of thycke plankes. Codicilli,Suetonius. epistles. sometyme it is taken for let∣ters patentes of a prynce. Codicillus, signifieth properly a letter missiue. Codiculus, a diminutiue of codex, whan it is put for a boke. Codonia, an yland that the Almayns kepe. Codrus, the propre name of a kynge of Athe∣nes, whiche to saue his countrey, wyllyngely loste his lyfe. Coea, of Politianus is vsyd for Coa, of the yle of Cos. Coelator, he that graueth. Coelatura, the grauynge. Coelatus, a, um, grauen. Coelebs, a syngle man or woman, also euerye chaste persone. Coelestis, coeleste, heauenly, or of heauen. Coelestis aqua, rayne water. Coeliaca,Alexāder Trallian{us}. is a peyne in the bealy, with a conty∣nuall flyt, dyuers in colour, with losse of ap∣petite, and coldnes in the extreme partis, whi¦che syknes hapneth of the feblenes of vertue digestiue in the stomake and bealy. Some do suppose it to be that, whyche is callyd Cho∣lica passio, I thinke it rather to be Lienteria uentriculi, reade in Lienteria. Coelibaris hasta, was the staffe of a sauelyn, whyche had ben in the body of one of theym, whyche were callyd Gladiatores, and was slayne, with the whyche staffe the head of a mayden newe maryed, was kempt and stry∣ken, signifieng that likewise as the staffe had stiked fast in the body of him that was slain, so shuld she styck fast, and be ioyned with him that maryed her. Coelibatus, a syngle lyfe without mariage. Coelicola, he that inhabiteth heauen. Coelicus, a, um, of heauen. Coelifer, was the surname of Atlas, whom po∣etes fayne to beare heauen on his shulders. Coelipotens, almyghty god. Coelistomia, the pronouncyng of the voyce low in the mouth, without perfect digestion. Coelites, heauenly creatures. Coelitus, heauenly. Coelo, aui, are, to graue in mettalle. Coeloma,Galen. in definit. tis, is a rounde and holowe soore a∣bout the cercle of the eye, nigh to the syght.
Coelum,Plinius. heauen or the firmament. also the pa∣lat or roufe of the mouthe, sometyme a gra∣uynge yron. Coelum digito attingere, to touche heauen with his fynger. A prouerbe applyed to them which suppose them selfes able to do thynges impossyble. In coelo esse, A prouerbe signifienge to be in felicitie, or to be most happy. Coelus, the father of Saturnus and Titan. Coemeterium, a churcheyarde. Coemptio, where two or moo persons doo bye togyther. Coena, a soupper. Coenacularia, the way or craft to ordeyn a sup∣per. Coenaculariam facere, to let a house in diuers partes to sundry persons, wherin are many parlers or drinkyng houses. Coenacularius,Vlp. de pi gnor. act. l. solutum he that dothe let suche houses to hyre. Coenaculum, a parler or other place, where men do soupe. Coenaticus, a, um, pertaynynge to soupers. Apparatus coenaticus, ordinance for supper. Sermo coenaticus, communication mete for suppers. Coenatio, a lower parlar to soupe in, a som∣mer parler. Coenatiuncula, a lyttell drynkynge house. Coenatorius, a, um, belongyng to soupers. Coenaturio, ij. ire, to labour or endeuour my selfe to soupe. Coenatus, he that hath souped. Coenipeta, a goer about to soupers vnboden. Coeno, aiu, are, to soupe. Coenare alienū,Plaut{us} in persa. to sup atan other mās coste. Coenabis hodie magnum malum, thou shalt haue thy souper soone in shrewde rest. Coenobium, a monastery or other place, where men lyue in commune. Coenosus, a, um, full of myre, dyrty. Coenula, a lyght souper. Coenum, myer, or dyrte. Coepio,Cato. piui, pire, to begyn. Coepra, torum, thinges or matters begun. Coepto, tare, to begyn. Coeptu, a, um, begunne. Coepulonus, a banketter or reuellar. Coetus, an assembly of people. Coëo, iui, ire, to come togyther, to assemble, to ioyn to, to draw togither, to gather togither, to do the act of generation, to ioyn togither in action by maintenance or champertie. Coire in foedera, to make alyance. Coire societatem,Plautus. to be familyar. Coeli, the part of Siria, that ioyneth to Araby. Coërceo, cui, cere, to resteayn, to bynde harde, or straight, to compelle or constrayne, to kepe within a compasse, also to comprehend or cō∣tayn, to correcte or punyshe. Coercere ignes, to stynte the fyre, whyche burneth a house, or other lyke thynge. Coërcitus, ta, tū, restrayned, compellyed, kept in. Cogitate, aduysedly. Cogitatim, idem. Cogitatio, onis, a thought. Cogitatus, tus, idē. Cogitatum, idem quod cogitate. Cogito,Plaut.  mili. aui, are, to thynke, to imagyne. Cogitat curas, he thynketh on his matters. Cognati, kynsemen. Cognatio, kynrede. Cognitio,Cicer. a knowledge, it sometyme signfieth iugement.Attis. Qua lex earum rerum, quas Cae∣sar statuisset, decreuisset, egisset, Consulibus cognitionem dedit. The whiche lawe gaue to the Consules iudgement of those thinges, whiche Cesar shoulde haue iudged, decreed, and executed. Cognitor, oris, an atturney or {per}ctor in the law Cognitus, ta, tum, knowen: Cognobilis, idem. Cognomen, a surname whiche a man hath of his ancesters. Cognomentum, idem. Cognomines, dyuers men of one surname. Cognomino, aui, are, to gyue a surname. Cognosco, noui, noscere, to know, to consider, to vnderstand, to ly with a woman, to iuge a matter, or here a matter to iuge it. Cogo, egi, gere, to constrain, to gather togither, to mylk a beast, to make licour thyck or hard, to presse, to set or bring in order. Cogere in ar¦ctū, to kepe one strait, or frō his liberte. Coge¦re in ordinē, to abate ones pride. Cogere o∣ues, to put vp the shepe into a stable or folde. Cohaereo, haesi, haerere, to be ioyned, to be fami∣liar togither, or to cleue to a thīg also to com to passe. Nuptiae non cohaerent. The mariage come not to passe. also to agree togither. Cohaeresco, scere, idem. Cohaeres, he that is ioyned with an other in in¦heritance it may be vsed for a ioynttenant. Cohibeo, ui, ere, to restrain, to kepe of, to let, to restraine, to kepe one shorte, also to retayne or kepe to him self.Plaut.  miline. Cohibere filium, to kepe vn∣der his son.Cicer.  Sen. Cohibere intra limen, kepe you within the doores. Cohibere se, to moderate himselfe, or to refrayne. Cohibitus, a, um, let, refrayned.Pla Mer Cohors, tis, was company of men of warre. There were in euery legion .x. Cohortes, but the fyrste excellyd the resydue, as well in pree∣minence as in multitude. Therein was the chiefe banner of the Romaynes, wherin was painted the egle. And the capitayn of that cō∣pany callyd Centurio, was of more reputa∣tion than any other Centurio, for as moche as in that companye required to be menne of good byrth, wel lerned, & of valiant courage, also the capitayn wise, valiant, stronge in ar∣mes, and plitike in leadyng. In that compa∣ny were .1105. footemen, and .142. men of ar∣mes,
and was callyd Cohors miliaria. The seconde Cohors had .555. fotemen, and 66. men of armes. The thyrde had as many fote∣men, and but .56. menne of armes, but therin were the strongest men, bycause it was set in the myddes of the battayle. The fourthe had lyke number of fotemen, and .lxvi. men of ar∣mes. The fyfth had as many fotemen & hors men, but therin were chosen mē, bicause that lykewise as the fyrst bende was on the righte wyng of the battayle, so the fifth was on the left wyng: for fiue Cohortes or bendes made the firste battayle. The other fiue had equall number euery of them with the sayd fourthe and fyfth bend, so that these ten bendes made vp a legion, contaynyng. 6100. fotemen, and 730. men of armes. Cohors, is also taken for the domestical company of seruantes and mi¦nisters, attendyng vpon a man of high digni∣tie or authoritie, and such was Cohors Prae¦toria, the companye whiche awayted on hym that was Praetor or gouernour of countreys. Cohortes conscribere, & cohortes contra∣here, haue one signification, to get togither or assemble bendes or companies of menne of warre.Caesar de el. ciuil. 1. Ex finitimis regionibus, quas potest, contrahit cohortes ex delectibus Pompeia∣nis: Out of the countreys adioynynge he gat bendes togither of theym that had be chosen of Pompey.Salust. in Catal. Ille cohortes ueteranas, quas tumultus causa conscripserat, in fronte, post eas caeterum exercitū in subsidijs locat, He dyd set in the front of the battayle the bendes of olde souldiours, which he had gatheryd to¦gither bycause of the sodayn commotion, be∣hynde them he set the resydue of the hoste for succours if nede were. Cohortes complere, to make vp bendes of men of warre,Salust. in Catalina. after the rate of the companye that is assemblyd. Catalina ex omni copia, quam & ipse adduxerat, & Manlius habue∣ra, duas legiones instituit, cohortes pro nu∣mero militum complet, Catalyne of all the men of warre, that as well he had broughte with him, as also Manlius had there alredy, he ordeyned two legions, and made vp bendes accordyng to the numbre of souldiours. Cohors, seu cors, tis, a barton or place inclosed wherin pultry & al other kind of pultry is kept. Chortalis gallina,Varro. & chortalis anser, an hen or goose that fedeth abrode. Cohortor, aris, ari, to exhorte. Cohum, a thonge or lyngell, wherwith the oxe bowe and the yoke are bounden togither. Coinquino, aui, are, to soyle or stayn. also to de∣fame a man or woman. Cois, a garmente of fyne sylke. Coirio, an assēbly, it is also a secret part or agre¦mēt amōg mē to do som act, which they wold not haue other mē know: it may be taken for co¦uine. Coitus, tus, the acte in generation. Coix, a basket. it is also a certayne kynde of o∣syars, hauyng a leafe lyke a rede, wherewith baskettes were made at Athenes. Cola, a straynour. Colaphizo, aui, are, to buffette. Colaphus, & colaphum, a buffette or blowe on the cheke. Colasis, a kind of punishmēt that is don for cha¦stysement. Colchi, people in Asia, wherof the coūtrey is of Strabo callid Colchis, by the sea callid Pon¦tus, where the top of the hil callid Caucasus, turneth to the moūtains callid Riphei, thone side bending to the sea callid Euxinū, & the fe callid Meotis, the other syde towarde the see callyd Caspium. In this countrey is the fa∣mous riuer callyd Phasis. And it was the con¦trey of Medea wyse to Iason. Coles, the yarde of a man. Colei, the stones. Coleus, the cod whiche contayn the stones. Colica, a passiō callid the colyli, bred in the gut named colon, the grief wherof in felt .iiii. fin∣gers brede aboue the nauyl on the right syde, extending like a girdel vntil the left side.Constaut. The occasion wherof {per}cedeth of one of these cau∣ses, either by a coletik heat drieng vp the moi¦sture of the ordure, whiche therfore may not passe out of the bealy, or that the meate eaten was dry & bīding, letting the said passage, or els that viscous & clāmy fleme is so augmen∣ted in that gut, that it stoppeth the issu therof or that a grosse & thik wind is there ingēdred either by coldnes of the natural cōplexion, or by weakenes of the stomake in digestion, or of the lyuer, or by meates fatte and windy, or it hapneth by an impostume in the saide gut, or by wourmes wrapped in the ordure, or for the insensiblenes of the gutte, wherby one fe∣leth not the annoyance of the ordure. Colicus, colica, he or she that hath the colyke. Coliculus, a tender stalke of an herbe. Colidos, an ylonde in the occean of Indie. Colina, for culina, a kytchen. Coliphium, a kynde of bread, which wrastlers dyd eate, to make them stronge. Colis, the lyttell tender stalke of colewortes or cabages, also the branche of a vyne. Colitia, a great furrow for water to run into, for sauynge of the corne. Colla, a kynde of glewe. Collabasco, scere, to be redy to falle. Collabefactari testula, to be banysshed out of the citie by lottes of shelles, as it was vsed in Athenes. Se after in Ostracismos. Collabello, aui, are, to ioyne lyppes togither, that is to say, to kysse on the lyppes.
Collacrimo, aui, are, to wepe with other. Collactaneus, he that souketh with me of one nourse, a foster brother. Collacteus, he that souketh of the same breast, and at the same tyme. Collare, a collar for a hounde. Collatia, a towne by Rome, whereof one of the gates of the citie was callyd Collatina. Collatina dea, was supposed to be the goddesse ouer small hylles. Collatina porta, the name of a gate in Rome. Collatinus, the name of a noble Romane, whi∣che was husbande to the chaste Lucrece. Collatinus uenter, a great panche or bealye, whiche worde Plautus vsyd. Collatio, a task or sise: also a cōferring togither Collatitius, a, um, that which is gatheryd and brought togyther. Collatis signis pugnare, to fight ī a field pight Collaudo, aui, are, to praise that whyche other do commende. Collectanea, thynges written gathered out of many warkes, Collectè & collectim, compendiousely. Collectio, a gatherynge. Collectitius, a, um, that whiche is gatheryd. Collega, a felowe or companyon in offyce. Collegium, a company of theym, whiche haue equall authoritie. also a company of men, whi¦che be of one mystery or crafte. Collibet & collubet, collibuit, collibitū est, col∣libêre,Plaut. in Amph. to lyke, to plese. Vtcun{que} animo collibi¦tū est meo, Euē as it pleseth me, or liketh me. Colliculus, an hyllocke. Collido, si, dere, to beat or knocke togither. Colligo, aui, are, to bynde togither. Colligo, egi, igere, to gather togither, to take away, to brīg togither. also to prepare. Se col¦ligit in arma,Vergilius Ci. tus. 4. he made him redy to fight. Seipsum colligere, to bryng home agayn the partes of the mynde that were dispersed. Colligo rationem, I make accompte. Colligere uestem, to tucke vp his garment. Collimare, to wynke with one eye, or to looke streight on the marke. Collina porta, a yate at Rome. Collineo, as, are, idem quod collimo. Collino, linis, lini, uel leni, linere, to rub or frot softly togither many thinges, as one maketh an oyntment of a thyng. Colliquiae, great gourdes of water, rounnynge through fieldes, after great rayne or snowe. Colliquo,Varro. qui, liquere, to molte. Colliquor,Vergilius liqueris, liqui, to be molten. Colliquesco, scere, idem. Collis, a hylle. also Colles, the backe. Colloco, are, to sette in a place. Collocare se in arborem,Plaut. in Amph. to clym vpon a tre. Collocare aliquē in soporē, to stryke one in suche wyse that he is amased, and lyeth as he were on sleape, or to speake it more shortly, to lay one a slepe with a stroke. Colloces te in otium, drawe the to ease. Collocare in lecto aliquem,Pla to brynge one to bedde,Me or to lay one in his bedde. Collocare filiam nuptui in dimidia parte a∣gri, to gyue halte his lande in mariage with his doughter. Collocare patrimonium in salutem populi, to employ his inheritaunce to the wealthe of the people. Collocare beneficium, to do pleasure. Dotem in fundo aliquo collocare, to assigne dowery to one in some lande. Male collocare horas, to bestow the time yl. Insidias collocare, to laye in wayte to do one harme or displeasure. Praesidium collocare, to sette a garrison in a place to defende it. Spem in aliquē collocare, to put trust in one Collocare se palā in meretricia uita, to gyue her selfe to lyue lyke a common harlot. Collocare se in otium, to dispose hym to liue quietly and without labour. Collocare nuptum, to bestowe a woman in maryage. In luce benefacta collocare, to cause benefi∣tes or good tournes to be openly knowen. Collocare aliquem in aliquo gradu, to exalt or aduaunce one to some degree or dignitie. Collocatus, a, um, put or set in some place. Collocupleto, tare, to enryche. Collocutio, a communication. Colloquium, idem. Colloquor, queris, qui, to talke with one, or to talke togyther. Colloqui alicui, to deuyse or talke with one. Colloqui aliquem, to speake to one. Collostrati, be chyldren whiche do souke of the fyrst mylke of theyr mothers as soone as they be borne. Collostratio, a siknes, whiche children haue by sucking curdy mylk of a womā new deliuered. Colluco, aui, are, to make a glade in a thik wod Colluceo, cere, to shyne. Colluctatio, a wrastlynge. Colludo, dere, to playe with one, or togither, also amonge ciuilians it sygnifieth to pleade togither by couyne, to the intente to deceyu some other man. Collum, a necke. Colluo, lui, luere, to washe or rynce. Collue poculum,Plant.  cap. rynce the cuppe. Collus, idem quod collum. Collusor,Pla he that dothe any thyng by collusyon or couyne. Collusor, oris, a play felowe. Collustrare, to beholde on all partes.
Collustrare lumine, to make very clere. Collutilo, aui, are, to dishonest or defyle. Colluuiarium, a synke or gutter. Colluuiaris porcus, an hog that walloweth in the myre, and there hath meate giuen him. Colluuies, whan the erthe is couered with wa¦ter by great flouddes. Collybia, fygge tartes, fartes of Portingall, or other lyke thynges. Collybistes, & Collybiste, he that delyuereth money by exchaunge, a banker. Collybus, money receyued by exchaunge, or in banke, as men do whiche goo in to straunge countreyes, delyueynge moneye of this re∣alme, to receyue as moche of an other coyne, where he commeth. Collyra, a lofe of bread, or a bunne. Collyrida, a cake. Collirium, a medicine for soore eyes. Colere questum suum, to seke his own profit. Colo, aui, are, to strayne out licour. Colo, ui, ere, to worshyp, to loue, or fauour, to haunt, to inhabite or dwell, to tyll or hus∣band grounde, to leade, to haue in estimatiō Hanc uitam colo, I leade this lyfe. Colere officiū, to do his duetie or indeuour. Colere pietatem, to haue his parentes in reuerence. Colere se, to apparayle hym selfe. Colere uitam,Plautus. to lyue. Colobium,Plaut. in Rude. a iacket or cote withoute sleues. Colocasia, a beane of Egypt. Colocynthis, a kynde of wylde gourdes, cal∣led of the apothecaries Coloquintida, whi∣che moste vehemently pourgeth fleume, af∣terwarde choler, finally bloude. Many men by this medicine haue finyshed theyr lyues, whan they haue thought therby to haue pur¦ged theyr bodies. Colon, a gut, whiche goeth from the left syde vnto the ryght, in the whiche the dunge ta∣keth his fourme, and there is the disease cal∣led Colica, the colyke. It is also a member or parte of a sentence. Colonai, rusticall people, tenauntes in vil∣lenage. Colonarium, was a certayne pention, whiche the Romaynes were compelled by the three prynces called Triumuiri,Aldatus  ōmēt. de erb. sig. to paye for theyr houses at Rome. Also a rent payed for thyn∣ges belongynge to husbandry.Coelius. It may be ta∣ken for suche tenour, whiche with vs was called villenage, where the tenant was boū∣den eyther to ploughe, or to hedge, or to repe the corne of the lorde. Colonia, people sent to dwell in a place, which is not inhabited, It is also a citie, the people wherof cam from an other citie buylded be∣fore. It is somtyme a graunge where husban¦dry is kepte. Colonias nouas deducere, to make a newe ci∣tie, and to brynge inhabitauntes of an other citie to dwell there. Colonicus, a, um, perteynynge to husbandry. Colonus, a husbande manne. Also Coloni be they, whiche are sent to inhabite a countrey or town. Also a high place in Athenes, where Neptune was worshipped. Colophon, nis, a cite of Ionia in Grece, where as was the temple of Apollo called Clarius, and Homerus the famouse poete was borne. Colophonem addere, to achyeue or brynge to conclusion the thynge that is enterprysed or taken in hande. Colophonia, is the herb called also Scammo∣nium, wherof is made the vehement purga∣tion of choler: oute of the roote distylleth a gumme, whiche in greeke is named Diacri∣dion, whiche signifieth a lyttell teare, which worde is nowe corrupted, and for Diacridi∣on, they call it Diagredium, which medicine beynge gyuen without discretion, killeth ma∣ny men. Color, ôris, colour. Colos. idem. Coloratus, a, um, coloured. Coloria euestes, garmentes made of wull vn∣dyed. Colorificus, he that maketh colour. Coloro, aui, are, to gyue or make a colour. Colos, the fundment. Colosseus, & Colossicus, a, um, in fourme of Colossi, or great ymages. Colossi, were ymages of horryble greatnesse lyke vnto toures, wherof there was oone of Apollo in the capitole at Rome, whiche was xxx. cubites hyghe. Also at Tarentum, was one made by Lysippus the famouse mason, whiche was .xi. cubites hyghe. But at the Rhodes was one of the Sun, excedyng al o∣ther, whiche was in heyghte .lxx. cubytes, made by Colassis, scholer to Lysippus: the thombe of that image few men might fathō. It was in makyng .xii. yeres, and the charge therof drewe to .300. talentes, whiche amoū∣teth to thre and fortye thousande, oone hun∣dred, and .xxv.ii. Strabo writeth, that the ymage was of Iupiter, & was made by Cha¦res Lyndius: Besydes this were a hundred lesse Colossi in the Rhodes, and at Rome were many made of mettall. Colostrum uel Colostra, as Palladius sayth, was called of shepeherdes the thycker parte of mylke, whiche I deme to be creame, other thynke it to be the kurdes. Colostrati infantes, chyldren whiche haue sou¦ked curdy mylke. Colôtes,Quit. li. 2. the name of a mā that was a painter.
Coluber, a serpente, whiche lyeth in the sha∣dowe of woodes. Colum, a straynour, a colander. Columbar, aris, a pyllory. Columbaris, re, of a doue. Columbarium, uel Columbaria, a douehouse or culuerhouse. Columbaria, an ylande in the Tuskan sea, Columbarius, he that taketh doues. Columbatim, in the maner of doues. Columbinus, a, um, of a culuer. Columbulus, a pygeon. Columbus, & Columba, a culuer or doue. Columella, the name of one that wrate of hus∣bandry moste eloquently. Columellares dentes, cheke tethe. Columen, luminis, the succour or staye, the wynde beame of a house. Columis, & hoc colume, hole. Columna, a pyller. Columnae Herculis, are two mountaynes, one at the vttermost parte of Spayne, the other in the vttermost west parte of Affrike, where as nowe are the strayghtes of Cyuil or Mar¦rocke. Some holde opinyon, that it is two yles in the sayde straightes: some (as Stra∣bo sayth) do affyrme, that it were in dede .ii. pyllars of brasse in the yle called Gades lon∣gynge to Spayne, set there in the temple of Hercules, in the honour of hym: where they whiche trauayled by the myddell sea, & were come to the vttermoste parte therof, and en∣trynge in to the occean sea, came and dyd sa∣crifyce to Hercules. which opinion Possido∣nius thought to be most trew. They that sup¦pose it to be two yles, do say, that the one of them is in Europe, the other in Affryke. Columnus, was in olde tyme, that whiche we call nowe culmus. Coluri, ar two great cercles in the sphere, whi∣che do declare the tymes called Aequinoctia & Solstitia, that is to saye, whan the daye and nyght is equall in lengthe. Also whan the day is lengest, and the nyght at most lengthe. Colurnus, a, um, of hasyll. Colus, a distaffe. Colûtea, the tree called Sene, wherof the lea∣ues and coddes are ministred in medicines, to purge melancholy. Colimbades, olyues, or oyle bearies condite in bryne or pickell. Colyrides, lyttel smal loues lyke maunchettes. Coma, all the heare together, called a bushe. it is also somtyme taken for the laues of trees Comagene, a parte of Siria. Comare, to haue moch heare, or a gret bushe. Comata, a shepeherdes name in Theocrite. Comata Gallia, all Fraunce, on this halfe the mountaynes. Comatulus, a boy with a fayre bushe of heate. Comatus, ta, he or she that hath a great bushe. By translation it is sayde of trees or herbes, that haue longe leaues or floures. Combe,Coe▪ a mayden that inuented the armure of Aeneas. Combino, aui, are, to combyne or confederate to gether. Comburo, bussi, burere, to burne or consume with fyre. Come, an herbe called gotes berde. Comedim, olde wryters vsed for comedam. Comedo, edi, edere, to eate. Comedo, onis, he that consumeth his owne goodes riottously. Comedere patrimonium, to consume his in∣heritaunce in riotte. Comedere beneficium, to forget a good Comes, mius, a companion or felowe. Also a name of dignitie, whiche we call an erle. Comessabundus,Q. C▪ vsynge to banket. also ouer charged with meate and drynke. Comessans, idem quod Comessor. Comessari, to banket. Comssatio, a banket after soupper, or a ryot∣tous bankettynge. Comessator, a riottour. Comesse, for comedere, to eate. Comest, for comedit, he eateth. Comêtes, & Comêta, a blasynge sterre. Comis, gentyll, full of good humanity. Comitatus, tus, a felowshyp. Comiter, gentylly, courtaysely. Comitialis dies, the daye whan people assem∣bled at Rome, for the election of officers. Comitialis, morbus, the fallynge syckenes. Comitia, a congregation or assembly of the pe∣ple for election of officers, or for prouulgati∣on of lawes, lyke to our parlyament. Comitia edicere, to calle or summon a par∣lyament. Comitium, the place where the assembly was. Comitor, ari, to accompany or go with one, or kepe felowshyp with other. Comma, a poynte endynge a sentence, where many sentenses be: as, Nihil tibi profuit no∣cturnum praesidium palacij, nihil urbis ui∣giliae, nihil timor populi, nihil concursus o∣mnium bonorum? There is comma foure tymes. Commata, trenches, wherby water is let out of a ponde or ryuer. Commanducare, to chew meate. Commanducatus cibus, chewed meate. Commeatus, tus, a saulfe conduct, or leaue to departe. somtyme vytayles for an armye or multitude of men. Sometyme for a passage of men.Plaut. in Milit. Commeminere, to remember.
Commemini, I remembred, or doo remembre well. Commemoro, aui, are, to remembre. Commendatitius a, um, that wherwith a man is remembred or recommended. Commendo, aui, are, to commende or prayse. somtyme to recommende. Commentaculum, a marshals or hushers rod. Commentariensis, was called a gaylour. Commentarium, uel Commentarius, a brige¦mente or other booke, conteyninge thynges briefely written. Also it signifieth a comment also a booke of remembraunce, or a register, or exposition. Commenticius, a, um, fayned or deuysed for the tyme. Commentor, ari, to thynke on, to make men∣tion, to dispute, to wryte commetaries or bo¦kes for remembraunce. also to deuyse. Commentum, a cōment or exposition, a mat∣ter fayned. Commeo, aui, are, to go hyther and thyther, or to go to, or with an other. Commereo, ui, êre, to deserue, to commytte. Si senserit te timidum pater,erent. in orm. arbitrabitur cō¦meruisse culpam: If thy father do perceyue the to be aferde, he woll suppose, that thou art gylty, or hast committed the offence. Commereri culpam, to do an offence. Commertium, an entercourse or lybertie to ca¦ry marchandise from one place to an other. Also a commutation or fourme of byeng and sellyng togither. Also a familiarite or custom. Commessari,Q. Cuti. to fede more than ynoughe. Commigro,aut. in ulul. are, to go with one to a place. al∣so to go from one place to dwelle in an other. Commilitium, felowshyp in warres. Commilitones, felowes together in warres. Cōminiscor, sceris, sci, to call to remembrāce. Comminuo, to cut in small pieces. Comminus, forthwith at hande, hand to hād. Commisceo, scui, scêre, to myxe to gether. Commiseresco,erent. in ecyra. scere, to haue compassion. Commissa, confiscations. Commissio, a conferrynge to gether by exer∣cise, as two lerned men together, or herynge the one after the other. Commissiones Praetorum,oelius. were the celebra∣tion or publysshynge of playes made by the great officers called Praetores. Commissura, a ioynt of any thynge that is clo∣sed and opened, as properly of tables which be ioyned. Commissus, a, um, commytted to the kepyng of one. Commissum bellum,i. Liuius erent. open warre. Commitigo, aui, are, to knocke. Tibi uti com∣mitigari uideā sandalio caput: That I may se the knocked on the head with his slypper. Committo, misi, mittere, to commytte, or in∣ioyne, to offende, to ioyne together. Also to do and begyn.Salustius. Quibus dictis mox praelium commisere: That spoken they began bat∣tayle. Also to delyuer, to compare, to brynge in contention, to put to gether, to confiscae or sease for a forfayture, to prouoke or steare.Cicer. in Ver. act. 3 Commodatarius, he that taketh a thynge of lone, he that boroweth. Commodata res, a thynge lende withoute aduauntage. Commodè, well, or to the purpose. Commode cadere, to happen or succede wel or to the purpose. Commodè uerba facere, to speake thynges to the purpose. Commoditas, tatis, a commoditie. Commoditas hominis,Terent. in Adelphis the facility or curte∣sy of one, the whiche agreeth to any request. Commodo, aui, are, to do for an other mans commodity. Also to lende. Commodare capillum,Plaut. in Mostel. to kembe his head, or decke his bushe. Commodare loquelam,Plaut. in Rude. to speake. Commodare operam, to helpe. Commodum, profyt, or cōmoditie Also good apte, or conueniente. Sometyme it is an ad∣uerbe, and than it signifieth the same tyme, in good tyme, leysure or oportunitie, scarse∣ly. Commodum discesseras heri, cum Tre∣batius uenit: Thou were scarcelye departed, whan Trebattus was come. Commodus, a, um, profytable or apt. Commodus capillus, a bushe well decked or kempt. Commodus homo,Plaut. in Pseud. a tractable or reasona∣ble man. Commoda & faceta mulier,Plaut. in Mostel. a pleasant and mery woman. Commoda statura homo,Plaut. in Asin. a man of good sta¦ture, nor to great nor to lyttell. Commodum id non est,Terent. in Eunucho it maye not be ease∣ly done. Commodum obsonare, to vse moderat fare Commoereo, rui, re, to be all heuy or sory. Commonefacio, feci, facere, to warne or ad∣uise one. Commonefieri, to be warned. Commoneo, ui, êre, idem. Commonere aliquem,Terent. in Andria. to remember one of a thynge. Commonere aliquem officium suum,Plaut. in Pseud. to ad uertise one what he ought to do. Commonstro, to shewe a thynge that is hyd. Commorior, ri, to dye with one. Commoror, rari, to abyde with one. alsoo to dwell in a place for a tyme: Also to tary one that is goynge.Plaut. in Amph. Male facis, properantē qui me commorare, sol abit: Thou dost nought
to tary me sense I go in haste, and the sunne is howe set. Commotari,Plaut. in Amph. to cause one to tarye. An te au∣spicium commoratum est? an tempestas cō¦tinet, qui non abisti ad legiones, ita ut du∣dum dixeras? Dyd the token shewed by the vyrdes cause the to tary? or elles the wether kepe the backe, that thou wenteste not vnto the armye, as thou saydest a whyle ago that thou woldest? Commossem, for commouissem. Commotria, a mayden that doeth araye or ap¦parayle her maystresse. Commotus,Donatus. a, um, meued, troubled, afrayde, angry: also quicke. Commoueo, ui, êre, to trouble, to tourne or chaunge a mannes mynde, to hurt. somtime to departe.Ci. Tyro. Tu & cura, ut valeas, & te istinc¦ne temere commoueas: Farewel, and take hede, that thou departe not hense to hastely. Communico, aui, are, to communicate or de∣parte some thynge with an other, whiche. I haue. Communio,Cic. de o∣ratore. 3. mutuall participation together. Communis, commune, common. Communes dies, were vnlucky dayes to go about any thynge, suche as we call dysmoll dayes, or crosse dayes. Communiter, in commune. Commutabilis, le, that whiche maye be chan∣ged easyly. Commutatio, an exchaunce, oone thynge for an other. Commutatus, a, um, chaunged. Commuto, aui, are, to chaunge oone thynge for an other. Commutare uerba, to chyde, or to gyue a shrewde worde for a good. Como, psi, ere, to apparayle gorgiousely, to trym, properly it belongeth to women. Comoedia, an enterlude, wherein the common vices of men and women are apparantly de∣clared in personages. Comoedice, gentylly, and pleasauntly. Comoedior, aris, to ieste or scoffe. Comoedus, a player in enterludes. Comicus, a maker of enterludes. Compactum, an agrement or appoyntmente. Compacto rem agere, to cōspire a matter, or to do a thynge by one accorde.Plaut. in cap. Compagino, aui, are, to put or ioyne together a thynge that is loused. Compago, ginis, a ioynynge to gether of thynges. Compar, aris, equall, or euen lyke. Comparatio, comparyson, preparation, or byenge. Comparatiuus, a, um, comparatite, wherein begynneth excesse in comparison. Comparatus, a, um, ordeyned or receyued in an vsage.Plaut.  Pho. Quam inique comparatum est, hi qui minus habent, ut semper aliquid addāt ditioribus? What an yl vse is this, that they whiche haue but a lyttell, shall gyue more to them that be ryche?Ci. de Quando quidem ita ra∣tio comparata est uitae naturae{que} nostrae, ut alia aetas oriatur ex alia: Sense the fourme of our lyfe is soo ordeyned by nature, that of one age cometh an other. Compareo, rui, rêre, to appere, or to be seene. Comparebunt quae imperas:Plaut. is Amph. you shall se al thynges done, that ye commaunde. Comparet ratio argenti:Plaut. Tri It doth apper how the money is spente.Cice. Comparo, aui, are, to compare or make equal or more, to ordeyne, to prepare, to ioyne to, or by, also to gette or purchase. to fynde the meane or deuise. Nunc hoc tibi curandum est Chrysale.Plaut. Bacc C. Quid uis curem? M. Vt ad se∣nem etiam alteram facias uiam, compara, fabricare, finge quod lubet: Nowe Chrysa∣lus thou muste take good hede .C. what wilt thou that I shulde do? M. Deuyse yet to go an other waye to warke, ymagine, contryue euen as thou thynkest best. Comparare conuiuium, to prepare a bāket. Comparare malum,Plaut. to purchase an yl turne or a myschiefe. Comparare se, to dyspose hym selfe to any thynge. Compasco, to fede or kepe cattell. Compascuus ager, a common fielde. Compedes, gyues or fetters. Compedio,Va diui, dire, to gyue or fetter one. Compeditus, a, um, fettred or gyued. Compello, aui, are, to speake to, to accuse. Compello, puli, pellere, to compel or constrain to ioyne or brynge together. Compelluceo, luxi, lucere, to shyne verye bryghte. Compellucidus, a, um, very bryght. Compendiarius, a, um, compendious or brief. Compendium facere, to make briefe, or be shorte in speakynge. Compendifacio, to make compedious. Compendiosus, a, um, very profitable. Compendium, a sauynge or sparynge, or ad∣uauntage, a compendiouse or shorte fourme in wrytynge or other acte. Compensatio, onis, a recompenss, or satys∣faction. Compenso, aui, are, to make recompense or amendes. Comperendinatio, a delaye, or prolongynge of tyme. Comperendinatus, a, um, adiourned. Comperendinaria dies, a daye ouer in mat∣ters of lawe.
Comperendinati rei, they whose iugemente is deferred vntyl an other tyme. Comperio, ij, ire, to knowe of an other man. Comperior, iris, to fynde, or ymagine in mine owne opinion. Compertus furti, founden gylty of felony. Compertum habeo, I knowe or perceyue. Compernis, he that hath his knees nyghe to∣gether, or longe feete. Compesco, scui, scere, to assuage, to mitigate Compesce in ilium iniuste dicere,ut. in cchi. leaue to saye yll of hym. Competitor, he that sueth for that, whiche an other man sueth for. Competit, it is mete or conueniente. Hocilli competit, that is mete or conueniēt for hym. Also it is sufficient. Competo, tij, tere, to aske or sue for an offyce or other lyke thynge agaynste an other that doth the semblable. Compilati, pollyd by extortion. Compilo, aui, are, to take by extortion or wrōg or as the vulgar speche is, to polle and shaue. Compingo, pegi, pingere, to thruste. Quid faciam nunc, si tres uiri, me in carcerem cō∣pegerint? Howe shall I do nowe, if the offy∣cers thruste me in to prison. Somtyme com∣pingere is to compacte or put together. Compingere axibus, to bourde or planke a floore or roufe. Compingere in oculos,aut. in en. to thruste it in his eyes. Compita, many pathes goinge in to one way, or places where many wayes doo meete, or where two stretes do crosse. Compitalia, feastes or drynkynges, made where as be many pathes or hyghe wayes in a place. Compitalicius, a, um, belongynge to the sayd feastes. Complaceo, cui, cere, to please or lyke well. Complacitum est,aut. in ph. it lyketh or contenteth. Complano, are, to make playne. Complector,. fam. . 14. eris, ti, to imbrace or holde strait also to loue well. also to entertayne: Quare uelim eum {quam} liberalissime complectare: wherfore I wolde that ye dydde entertayne him very lyberally.. Peto ut eum complecta∣re, diligas, in tuis habeas: I requyre you entertayne hym well, fauour hym, and take hym amonge your frendes. Nos inter nos es¦se complexos: One of vs to loue well an¦other. Complector te amore, I loue the hrtely. Complector cogitatione, I beare in mynde. Complector animo, I consyder. Compleo, eui, ere, to fulfyl, or fyll to the top, to fynishe or perfourme, to make vp or sup∣plye that lacketh. Complex, plicis, partner, companion in acte. Complexus, imbracynge or collynge. Also a∣grement in wordes or sentences. Complico, aui, are, to folde or wrap together, Complodo, psi, dere, to clappe to gether the handes for ioy. Complures,Plautus. complura, & compluria, many. Compluries, very often. Complusculi,Terent. scula, many. Compluuium, a gutter, wherin falleth rayne from many houses. Compluuius lacus, a dyche whereinto water falleth out of dyuers gutters. Compono, to put or ioyne together, to make, ordeyne, or dispose. Also to compare, to ad∣orne, to gather, to recreate, to appease, to conclude, to accorde or agree, to redeme, to dissemble or fayne. Componere lites, to agree men to gether. whiche are at variance. Compos, potis, he that hath his purpose or desyre. also euer contente. Compos animi, of sounde remembraunce, not madde. Compos culpae,Plaut. in Trucul. he that hath done an offence, gylty or culpable. Compos laudis, he that is praysed. Compos patriae, he that is come home into his countrey. Compos praedae, he that hath gotten the praye that he loked for. Compos uoti,Ti. Liuius he that hath his owne desyre or appetite. Vix prae gaudio cōpotes: for ioye they could not tell what they shulde do. Compositio, onis, a makynge, an ornament, a composition or agrement. Compositiones gladiatorum, were the brin¦gynge in of swordplayers in to the fightynge place. Compotatio, a banket. Compotio,Plaut. in Rude. tiui, tire, to getee oone the thynge that he desyred. Compoto, aui, are, t drynke with an other man. Compotrix, she that drynketh with an other. Compraedes, pledges or sureties together. Compraehendo,Cicero. dere, to take holde on a thing to comprehende or contayne. Also to fauour and defende. Comprecor, cari, to desyre or praye. Compressis manibus sedêre, To be ydell or vnoccupied. Compressus, a defloration, or rauishement. Comprime,Plaut. in Trucul. let be, pease. Epistolam comprimere, to close a letter. Comprime te, be stylle, leaue of. Vix comprimor, quin inuolē illi in oculos: I can vnneth forbeare to take hym by the face.
Comprime, Peace, gette the hence. Comprimo, pressi, primere, to presse or thrust together, to hold or refraine also to defloure a woman. Comprimere aliquem,Plaut. in rudente. to beate or tourment one. Comprimere animam, to holde in a mans breathe. Comprimere manus, to holde his handes that he stryke not. Comprimere se,Plaut in Casina. to ceasse or refrayne to doo a thynge. Comptum, a certayne offeryng of lycour, whi∣che was made with meale. Comptus, tus, freshe apparayle. Compulsus, a, um, compelled or hytte with a∣ny thynge. Compunctus, a, um, marked or spotted. Compungo, xi, gere, to punche, or pryck, or stryke. Computo, aui, are, to deme, to account, to de∣cerne, to impute. Comum, a Citye of Fraunce on this syde the mountaynes, the inhabitantes whereof are called Comenses. Conatus, endeuour, inforcement, power, might sometyme diligence. Concaleo, lui, ere, to be het, to be made warme. Concalfacio, feci, facere, to inflame, to be ste∣red or prouoked. Concalleo, lui, lere, to be made harde, as a mannes handes with moche workynge, or his feete with moche goinge. Concameratio, a warke made lyke to a vaulte with arches. Concastigo, gare, to chastise with an other. Concateno, aui, are, to bynde to gether with chaynes. Concauus, a, um, holowe. Concedo, cessi, dere, to graunte, to permyt, or suffer, to departe awaye, to go to a place, to consente. Concede hinc,Plautus. go hense a lyttell. Concedere fato, to dye. Concedamus huc, let vs be here. Concedere octauam partem, to abate or re∣myt the eyght parte. Concedere alicui, to gyue place to one. Concede ad dexteram, go on the ryght hande. Concede huc domum, go thy way home. Concessit in ras, he is angry. Concelebro, brare, to celebrate with other. Concelebrare platêam hymenaeo, to make ioye abrode with syngynge and daunsyng in the honour of mariage. Concelo, are, idem quod celare. Concento, tare, to agree in one tune. Concentus, tus, a consent, many voyces in one tune, or accorde in musike. Conceptaculum, or Conceptabulum, any thynge holowe or apte to receyue and holde,Fe as a vessell. Conceptiuae feriae,Co holye dayes kept at a tyme certayne yerely. Conceptus, a, um, conceyued, purposed, some¦tyme gathered. Ne cum à uerrice torrens im bribus conceptus affluxerit, fundamenta conuellat, Lest whan the streame gathered by the shoures of raine, shall runne vnto it, it shall pull vp the foundation of that whiche is buylded. Concepta uerba, wordes expressed and pro∣nounced. Conceptis uerbis iurare, to take an othe, re∣citynge the wordes of the othe. Conceptus, tus, & conceptio, the thynge that is conceyued. Concernere, to concerne. Concerpo, psi, pere, to pull in pieces. Concertatum, debated in reasonynge. Concerto, tare, to contende, to fyght. Concertatio, debate, disputation. Concesso, aui, are, to cease. Concessus, a, um, graunted, gyuen. Concessus, us, ui, permission, sufferaunce. Concha, properly a muskle. somtyme the shell of a muskle, oyster, or cockle. Also euery ves∣sell that is holowe and open aboue, properly a bolle, wherin linnen clothes be washed. som¦tyme a wyne vessell. Also a trumpet, as it se∣meth made of erthe, lyke to suche as thore men do vse, whiche haue the fallyng sicknes, and do come from the place in Duchelande, called sayncte Cornelius. Conchula, the diminutiue of Concha. Conchis, a meate made of beanes. Conchon, is called a vessell of the greekes, or the holownesse of the eyes. Conchus, a perle. Couchyle, & conchylium, a kynd of shelfish, out of the whiche a lycour is taken, where∣with sylke is dyed purple. It is somtyme ta∣ken for the purple colour.Cae Conchyliata uestis, a purple garment. Conchyta, he that seketh for the shell fyshes, out of the whiche commeth purple: we may take hym for a fysher of oysters and muskels. Concido, cidi, ere, cisum, to cut in pieces, to dye. Virgis concidere, to beate one vntyll▪ he blede. Concidit crimen, The action is abated or fallen. Concido, concidi, ere, concasum, to fal down all together. Et muri ciuitatum concident: And the walles of all Cities shall fall all to∣gether. Concidere nucleum dentibus, to knak a nut with ones teeth.
Concidere & delumbare sentētias, to make feble or confounde mennes argumentes. Concisae sententiae, briefe sentences. Consise, in pieces, sometyme briefely. Concidit animus, my hart is done, or my hart fayleth me. Animo, uel mente concidere, to lacke cou∣rage, or comforte. Concidere in optima causa, to be uanqui∣shed in a good quarell. Concidit fides, he hath lost his credence. Conciliabulum, a counsayll house. Conciliabundus, he that is redye to gyue coū∣sayle. Conciliatrix, a woman that endeuoureth her to make agrement betwene menne and theyr wyues. Concilio, aui, are, to accorde or make frendes together, to geate. Conciliare affinitatem, uel pacem, to make alyaunce, or peace. Conciliare beneuolentiam, to get fauour or loue. Conciliare odium, uel inimicitias, to get ha∣tred or displeasure. Conciliare pecuniam,Cicer. in er. act. 4 to gather moneye of the people. Concilium, counsayl, or the assembly of coun∣saylours. Concilium Antiochenum, a generall counsell kepte at Antiochia in Syria, in the yere of our lorde. 346. Concilium Ariminense, was a generall coun∣sayle holden at Ariminum in Italy, the yere of our lorde. 361. In the whiche, the articles of the counsayle of Nice, were confyrmed. Concilium Arelatense, a generall counsayle holden at Orleance, the yere of our lord. 814. Concilium Basiliense, a general counsayle hol∣den at Basil in Almayne, the yere of our lord 1345. Concilium Chalcidonense, ageneral counsail holden at Chalcedon in Bithinia, the yere of our lorde. 453: in the whiche counsayle the heresies of Nestorius & Eutiches were con∣demned, and all the bokes of the Maniches heresies were burned. Concilium Carthaginense, a general counsail holden at Carthago, in Affryke, the yere of our lorde. 419. Concilium Constantiae, a generall counsayle holden at Constaunce in Heluetia, the yere of our lorde 1414. and dured .iii. yeres and mo. Concilium Constantinopolitanum, a counsail holden at Constantinopole, the yere of oure lorde. 869. Concilium Ferrariense, a generall counsayle holden at the cite of Ferraria in Italy, wher the churches of Latines and grekes became one churche, the yere of our lorde. 1438. Concilium Lateranense, a generall counsayl holden at Rome in the palayce of the bysshop of Rome, called Lateranum, the yere of our lorde. 1215. Concilium Lugdunense, a generall counsayle holden at Lions in Fraunce, the yere of our lord. 1273 where the greekes accorded with the latines in procedynge of the holye goste from the father and the son in dignitie. Concilium Nicenum, the fyrste generall coun∣sayle, whiche was holden at Nicaea a cite in Bithinia, the yere of our lorde .327. Concinere, to agre in one songe, or one tune. Concinnatitius, a, um, compendiously and apt∣ly gathered together. Concinnatus, a, um, apparayled, trymmed. Concinnè, properly, honestly, trymly. Concinnitudo, aptenes, or propernes, a con∣ueniencie. Concinno,Plaut. in cap. aui, are, to make apt or proper, or fytte. also to make. Vt illi mastigiae cerebrū excutiam, qui me insanum uerbis concinnat suis: I wyll surely brayne this knaue, that with his wordes maketh me out of my wyt. Concinnare lutum, to make morter. Concinnare se leuem suis, to put his fren∣des to no coste.Plaut. in Trinum. Nun{que} erit alienis grauis, qui suis se concinnat leuem: He shall neuer be greuous to other, whiche wyll not be bour∣denous to his frendes. Concinnare struices patinarias, to make son dry bankettynge dyshes.Plaut. in Men. Concinnare uinum,Idem. to mengle spyces with wyne.Plaut. in Sticho. Concinnare uestem, to amende a garmente. Concinnare viam, to make rome that a man maye passe. Concinnare uxorē lachrymantem, to make his wyfe to wepe.Plaut. in Amph. Lachrymantem ex abitu concinnas tu tuam uxorem: By your depar¦tynge hense, ye make your wyfe to wepe. Concinnus, a, um, proper, well facioned, mynyon. Concinnitas, tatis, propernesse, featenesse, apt∣nesse. Concio, ciui, cire, to cal together a multitude. Concio, onis, a pulpet or stage, wherin he stan¦deth that exhorteth people. Also an assembly or congregation of people, called together to here the commaundement of the kynge, or o∣ther in auctoritie in the weale publyque. Also it is the oration or proposition made vnto them, called a concion. Concionem habere, to make an oration or sermon to the people. Concionalis, he that is wonte to make orati∣ons or propositions to the people. Concionatorius, a, um, perteining to a cōtion.
Concionator, oris, he that preacheth or pur∣poseth an oration. Concionor, aris, ari, to preache or purpose a matter to the people. Concipere curam, to take charge of a thinge. Concipere dedecus, to take dyshonour or shame. Concipere furorem, to become madde. Concipio, coepi, pere, to conceyue or appre∣hende, to deliberate, or determyne in minde. Concipere foedus, to make a leage. Concipere iusiurandum, to sweare in recy∣tynge the othe, as it is ministred. Concipere metum, to be aferde. Concipere oculis,Plaut. in penu to se or beholde. Concipere scelus, to ymagine to doo an ylle deede. Concire,Terent. in Heauton. to moue or steere. Disperij, scelestus, quantas turbas conciui insciens? I am vn∣doone wretche that I am, what a busynes haue I made vnwares. Concire lites, to moue debate. Concito, aui, are, to steere. Conclamare ad arma, whan al the world cri∣eth warre. Conclamata uasa, proclamatiō made truste, to gather bag and baggage, as is vsed in the raysynge of a siege, or remouynge of a camp in battayle. Conclamatum est, it is at a poynte, or paste remedy. Conclamito, tare, to make many cryes. Conclamo mare, to crye to one. Vbi abijt con∣clamo,Plaut▪ in milit. heus quid agis tu in tegulis? Whan he was gone, I cryed vnto hym, ho syrra, what doeste thou amonge the tyles? Also to make a cry or proclamation. Vis conclamari auctionem fore quidem? wylt thou haue it proclaymed,Plaut. in Men. that there shalbe port sale. Conclaue, a priuy or secret chamber. somtyme a bankettynge chamber. Conclauia,Fectus. many chaumbers or places vnder one kaye. Concitare equum, to threaste the spurres to an horse. Concitare equum in aliquem, to spurre his horse, and runne ageynste one. Concitare sui expectationem, to cause men to haue a trust or expectation in hym. Concitare inuidiam in aliquem, to brynge one in to an hatred. Concitare odium, idem. Concitare somnum, to cause one to sleape. Concitare vrinam, to make one pisse. Concitaus; ta, tū, stered, prouoked, meued. Concitatior cursus, a more vehement or quic∣ker course. Concitatio, a sterynge, a prouokynge. Conclauium, idem quod conclaue. Concludo, fi dere, to conclude, or make an ende, sometyme to hyde. Conclusa oratio, pro numerosa. Conclusio, onis, a conclusyon, or ende of a matter. Concolor, of the same colour. Concoctio, digestion in the stomake. Concoquo, coxi, coquere, to digest. Concoquere odia, to suffer dyspleasures or malyce. Concordare, to be at a concorde or agremente. Concordia, concorde, or agrement. Cocorditer, by assent or agrement. Concorporo, aui, are, to make one thynge of dyuers. Concors, dis, of one mynde or wyll, agreable of one assente. Concratitij parietes, walles made with lathes or bourdes vpright and ouerwhart. Concredo, didi, dere, to delyuer or commyt a thynge vpon trust. Concredere uites teneriores calido solo, to plant vynes in an hotte grounde. Concrepare, to make a great noyse, or to creke as a dore doeth in the openynge. Concresco, creui, crescere, to growe together. Concretio, a gatherynge to gether and wax∣ynge harde. Concretum, congeled or conglutinate. Concretus, a, um, ioyned or congeled toge∣ther, as a thynge that is liquide, to be made harde. Concreta labes, a spot which will neuer away. Concubinatus, hordome, fornication. Concubitor, oris, he that meddleth with a woman. Concubina, a woman vsed in the stede of ones wyfe. Concubium, the fyrste sleape in the nyghte, or the depest of the nighte. Concubia nox, idem. Conculco, care, to treade vnder the foote. Concumbo, bui, bere, & Concubo, aui, are, to lye to gether, to accompanye to gether, in the acte of generation. Concupiscentia, a feruente desyre, or appetite carnall. Concupitus, ta, tum, desyred feruently. Concupisco, piui, piscere, to coueyt, or desire feruently. Concupio, piui, pire, idem. Concuro, rare, to care for a thynge. Concurro,Plaut. in Bacchi. rere, to runne with an other. some tyme to accorde. Concursare, to run often together. Concursus, sus, a runninge of people together to one place. Concursio, idem. Concursatio, idem. Concutio, tij, tere, to shake.
Concussus, a, um, shaken. Condalium, a rynge. Condecenter, agreably. Condecentia, a besemynge. Condecet, it well becommeth. Condecoro, aui, are, to make klenly or honest, to polyshe. also to honour a thynge in making it more commendable. Condemno, aui, are, to condemne. Condensare, to make thycke. Condico,Ti. Liuius xi, cere, to appoynt, to ordeyn, to pro¦myse, to aske agayne, to denye, to assigne by mouth, to denounce or declare. Condictio, onis, an action in the lawe, or ap∣pointment to a day certayne. Condictum, a promyse. Condign, worthyly, honestly. Condignus, a, um, worthy and accordynge as it is estemyed. Condimentum, that wherwith thinges be pre∣seruid from corruption, or els made dilectable in taste, sauce, seasonynge. Condio, iui, uel dij, dire, to season meat, to pou¦der, or otherwyse order it, to preserue it from corruption. Condire tristitiam hilaritate, to temper wise∣ly sorowe with myrth, or to mitigate. Condiscipulus, a schoolefelowe. Condisco, scere, to lerne. Cōditaneus, a, ū, that which is to be preseruid. Conditio, onis, condition, fortune, estate, elec∣tion or choyse. Conditione uti, not to refuse the offer. Conditionem accepit, he toke the bargayne or promyse, or he agreed. Condititia cibaria, powdered meate or other∣wyse preseruyd. Conditinus, a, um, that whyche may be pow∣dered or kepte. Conditor, oris, a maker. Conditorium, a sepulchre, a place wherin ordi∣naunce for warre is kepte. Condere captiuos in custodiam, to put the prisoners in saufegarde. Conditura, sauce, or pickle made with spices. Condiuincum, Nauntes in Fraunce. Condo, didi, dere, to lay saulfe, or hyde, some∣tyme to make or buylde. Condocere, to teache. Condocefacio, feci, facere, to make to knowe. Condolet caput,Plautus. my head aketh. Condonatus, pardonyd. Condono, are, to gyue, to forgyue a dette or duetie, to pardon. Condormio, ire, to sleape with other. Condormisco, scere, to sleape a lyttell, to nap. Condrillon, wylde cykory. Condris, an herb callyd fals dittayne, bycause it is lyke dittayne, but it hath lesse leaues. Conducibile, profytable. Conducit, it is profitable. Conduco, xi, cere, to brynge with me, to hyre, to take a house or lande, also to gather, to con¦uerte. Conducere, is also to profite. Conduci non possum,Plaut. in Asin. I can not be made to beleue, no man can make me beleue. Conductitius, a, um, that whiche may be hired or taken, or is vsyd to be hyred. Conductor, he that hyreth a thynge. Conductus, a, um, to be set to hyre. Conduplicatio, doublynge. Conduplico, care, to pay the double of a thing. Condus, a stewarde of householde, or he that kepeth the store of householde. Condylóma, matis, a swellynge of the tuell or fundement, procedynge of an inflammation. Condylus, of Fest. Pom. is expowned a ryng, some other do declare it to be the roundnesse of the bones in the knee, the ancle, the elbow, the knuckles of the fyngers. Confarratio, a mariage betwene a man & a wo∣man, whiche was done with certayne solem∣nities in the presence of the byshop. Confecta, thingis voided or cōcluded by reason▪ Confectum, is declarid by Nonius, exanimate or kylled. Confercio, to stuffe or porre. Confero, tuli, ferre, to put togither, to set forth to prepare,Plautus. to deuise, to talke togither, to put in. Ne posterius in me culpā conferas, Put not at the laus the defaut in me. Consilia con ferunt, They kepe their coūsels togither. To lay to,Terentius or ioyn. Nouissima conferam primis, I wyll lay to, or ioyne the last to the first. also to profyte, to lay togither. Sit{que} utri{que} proxi mum horreum, quo conferatur rusticum in∣strumentum,Columel. To both, next there muste be a barne, wherin may be laid vp togither, instru¦mentis longyng to husbādry. also Confero, I gyue. Multa contuli in Catonē, I haue gyuē or attribute moch to Cato. I haue fauoured moch Cato. Cōtuli me domū, I went home. Contuli me ad Catonem, I wēt vnto Cato. Confero me in campum, uel ad campum, I go into the felde. Conferre amorem, to loue. Cōferre animū alio, to set his mind els wha Conferre capita, to assemble for counsaylle, to lay theyr heades togyther. Confer gradum,Plautus. come forthe. Conferre in pauca, to conclude shortely. Conferre manus, to assayle eche other. Conferre pedem, to come to the poynt, pro∣prely in contention, where the parties doo ioyne. Conferre se in pedes,Plaut. in Bacch. to runne awey, to take his legges. Conferre studium, to employ his study.
Conferre tempus in aleam,Plinius in pan. to spende the tyme in playenge at the dyce. Conferre uerba ad rem,Terent. in Eunucho to do as he sayth. Confert, it is profitable. Conferum, in a bushement. Confertus, a, um,Caesar in cōment. full. also in a flocke or multi∣tude, in abusshement. Vt nun{quam} conferti, sed rari magnis{que} interuallis praeliarentur, That they mought fight, not a multitude togither, but a few at ones, and a great distance on sun¦der.Ti. Liuius. Turba confertaiter clausit, The people gathered in a bushement, stopped the waye. Qua parte hostiū acies cōfertissima uisa est,Caesar. erupit, He brake out on that syde, where the hoste of the enemies femed to be most thycke of people. Confertissima turba, in the thyckest prease. Conferua, an herbe whiche groweth in fresshe waters lyke to a spounge. Confessio, a confession. Confessor, oris, a confessour. Confestim, eftsoones. Confibula, a clapse or tache. Conficientissimus literarum,Ci. pro L. Flacco. he that putteth all thynge in wrytyng. Conficio,Lactanti{us}. Cic. off. feci, ficere, to performe or fynyshe, to perysshe or be consumed, to distroye or slea, to explycate or declare. Honestaris pars confe∣cta est, quā tibi cupio esse notissimam. The part of honestie is declared, whyche I wolde shoulde be vnto the perfectly knowen. also to bryng to passe. Si me amas, confice, If thou louest me, bryng it to passe, also to gather mo∣ney. Permagnam dices ex illa re pecuniam confici poste, Thou wylt saye that a greate sūme of money myght be made of that thing. Conficere, to breake. Nucem dentibus con∣ficere,Plinius. To breke a nut with his teethe. also to consume or wate. Qui cum hic non uideant me,Terent. credant me conficere argentum suum, Who bicause they se me not here, they beleue I wast theyr money. also Confici to be made. Quomodo potest ex multorum deorum a∣ceruo, unus deus confici? By what meanes may there be of a heape of goddis one onely god made. Conficere pensum,Plaut{us} in Mercat. to spyn out her threde, it is translated into this sentence. To haue done or brought to an ende that thynge, whiche he was commanded or appoynted.Plaut. in persa. Conficere prandium, to haue dined. Pallium ad phrigionem fert confecto prandio,Plaut. in Men. when dyner was done, or whan he had dined, he ca∣ryed her mantyll to the brouderer. Conficere solicitudines alicui,Terent. in Andria. to brynge one into heuynes, or to make hym sorowfull. Confidens, tis, he that regardeth no lawes, nor feareth any thynge, sommetyme it sygnifieth constant, assured. Confidenter, constantely, assuredly. sometyme hardily, boldly, aduenturousely. Confidentia, trust, hope, certayn assurance. al∣so madde hardynes. Confidentiloquus, he that speakethe boldlye, without feare. Confido,Plautus. di, dere, to trust, to be sure, to dare. Cōfigo, fixi, figere, to styk or thrust into a thīg Confingo, finxi, fingere, to sayne a thynge to be trew. Confingere dolum, to fynd a mean to deceyue one. Confinis, ne, next to, or adioynyng. Confinium, a border or march of a countrey or lande. Confirmitas, assurednes. Confirmo, are, to confirme or assure a thinge, to be as it is spoken. Confirmare animum,Ci. Tym. to take courage. Confirmare se, to make hym self stronge af∣ter his syckenes. Confiscare, to sease for a forfayture. Confit, it is made togither. Confiteor, eris, to confesse. Conflages, places whereinto many wynde do blowe. Conflagro, are, to be on fyre, to be inflamyd. Conflare, to blowe togyther, to blowe lyke as one bloweth the fyre. Also Conflare, to ga∣ther. Cōflauit ex his omnibus populum, Of all those he gatheryd a great multitude. also to make.Vergilius. Et curuae rigidum falces conflan∣tur in ensem, And the crooked sythe into the harde sworde is made. Conflare inuidiam, nimicitias, odium, To styre or procure enuy, hostilitie, hate. Conflare mendatium, to imagin a lye. Conflata pecunia, money coyned. Conflauit aes alienum, he is runne in dette. Conflatile, that whiche is apt to be wroughte lyke mettall. Conflictatio,Donatus. is where as one thynge beateth agaynst an other. Conflicto, aui, are, to fyght often. Cōflictor, aris, to be vexid or troublid, to fight. Conflictatus graui morbo, to be tourmented with greuous syckenes. Confligo, fligi, gere, to fyghte as men doo in battayle. Confluens, where two riuers do mete togither. Confluere, to come or run togither, or flowe, to assemble togither out of dyuers countreys. Confluges, places, into the whyche many ry∣uers do flowe. Confluuium, & confluxus, a metyng togither of many streames. Confluus, a, um, that whiche floweth togither. Confodio, dere, to dygge. Confoedusti,Terent. in Andria. olde writers vsyd for them which were ioyned in leage, confederates. Confore, to be brought to passe.
Conformis, me, of a conformitie, or lyke in fa∣scion, conuenyent. Conformo, are, to bryng to a facion or figure, to make apte or lyke to a thynge. Conforto, aui, are, to comforte. Confragosus, a, um, rough, as a ground, whi∣che is not playne, yll to go in. also harde to be vnderstande, rude in language. Confringo, fregi, fringere, to breake or bruse. Cōfringere rē, to spend away al his substāce. Confringere tesseram, to be out of fauoure, or no more welcome to one.Plaut. in Castel. Confugio, fugi, gere, to flee with other. Con∣fugere ad aliquid, to resort for succour or excuse Confundo, fudi, dere, to confound, to medle to¦gider, to trouble al, also to myxe out of order. Confutatio,Liuius. 6. a disprouīg of that which is spokē Confuto, aui, are, to reproue or vanquysshe by wordes. also to styrre. Congedus, a ryuer in Spayne, nere to a town callyd Bilbilis. Congelatur, it is frosen or congelyd. Congelo, aui, are, to congele and wax thycke. Congeminatio, a doublynge. Congemino, nare, to double. Congeneres, they whyche haue wedded the doughters of one man. Congenulo, aui, are, to knele. Congeries, an heape. Congermino, nare, to growe ioyntly togither. Congero, gessi, gere, to gather togyther, or heape vp. Congerro,Plaut. in Mostel. onis, a mery companion, he that ke∣peth cōpany only in pastyme & mery deuising Congestitius, a, um, caste vp in a heape. Congestus, a, um, made in an heape. Congiarium, an almes, or other lyberall gyfte, gyuen by the prince vnto his people, be it in money corne or vytayles. Congius, a measure contayning .vi. Sextarios and receyueth in weight of oyle .ix. li. of wine x. li. of hony .xv. li. and is of our mesure a pot tell and one pynte. Conglacio, aui, are, to frese or let to frese. Con∣glaciat Tribunatus Curioni,Cicero. Curio lettethe the office of Tribune to frese, as who saythe, he dothe nothynge in the offyce worthy of re∣membraunce. Conglobare, to bryng or come round togither Conglobatim, in a rounde fourme, lyke to a bottome of threde. Conglutinatio, a ioynyng or glewyng togider. Conglutino, nare, to ioyne togither as it were glewed. Congraecor, cari, to eat and drynk excedyngly after the comon word, to make good chere. Congratulor, aris, ari, to reioice with an other man of his good fortune. Congredior, eris, gredi, to goo with an other to fyght or dispute. Congrego, aui, are, to gather togither. Congrestus, us, a battayle, also company with other. Congressio, idem. Congrex, of the same flocke. Congruens, accordyng, lyke. Congruo, grui, ere, to agree. Congruum, agreable. Congrus, & conger, a fyshe callyd a conger. Coniectarium, effectuall, or perfect. Coniecto, aui, are, to suppose, to iudge. Coniector, oris, an interpreter of dreames, a coniecter, that doth coniect what shal happē. Coniectura, a coniecture. Coniecturale, that whiche is coniected, or ga∣theryd by coniecture. Coniectus, us, a certayn direction of reson vn∣to the trouthe. Conifera arbor, a tree whiche beareth fruites being smaller at the one ende thā at the other lyke a pyne appull. Conijcio, ieci, ijcere, to caste, to coniecte. Coniecit se in fugam, he put him to flight. Coniecit se intro, he went his way in. Coniecit se in pedes, he toke hym to flyght. he toke hym to his legges. Conijcere pecuniam, to bestowe money. Conijcere in letitiam, to bring to a gladnes. Conijcere in saginam, to put to fattynge, to go where he may fyll his bealy. Conijcere in uincula, to cast into prison, or to lay a man in the stockes or gyues. Conijcere tela, to caste dartes, or to shoote. Conisco, care, to bousshe one at an other with theyr heade, as rāmes do, bulles, and dere. Coniugalis torus, the chamber where the hus¦bande and wyfe do lye. Coniugata, be those wordes, which being of one kind, be deriued one of an nother, as of Iusti∣tia, iustus, & iustū, wherof an argument may be made in this wise. If iustice is to be chief∣ly honored & louyd of men, a iust man is to be had in estimation & reuerence amonge men. Coniugatio, a ioynyng togyther. Coniugium, maryage. Coniugo, aui, are, to yoke togither, or mary. Coniugus, a, um, that whiche ioyneth. Coniunctim, togyther. Coniunctio, onis, a ioynyng togither, somtime affinytie,Cic. fam. epi. 5. sometyme familyaritie or acquayn∣tance. Vetustus est amor, consuetudo, studia paria, quod uinculum, quae res deest nostrae coniunctioni? There is olde loue, acquayn∣tance, studies like, what bond, or what thing lacketh, that we shulde not be familiar? Spe∣ro{que} & opto, nobis hanc coniunctionem uo¦luptati fore, I desire & also I trust, that this alyance shalbe ioyfull vnto vs. Coniunctura, idem.
Coniunctus, a frende, or verye famylyat and well trusted. Coniunctus, a, um, ioyned. Coniungo, xi, ere, to ioyne togither. Coniux, iugis, a wyfe. Coniuola,Pom. Fes. hydde, secrete. Coniuratio, a conspiracy. Coniuro, aui, are, to coniure or conspire with other for an yl purpose. somtyme to sweare. Coniza, of some is callyd herba pulicaris. Connatio, a swymmynge togither. Connato, tare, to swymme togither. Connecto, nexui, nectere, to bynde togither. Connexio,Quintil. a binding togither, also a conclusiō. Conniuentia a sufferance of a thyng, or a fay∣nyng not to see or espye. Conniueo, & conniuo, is, iui, uel xi, to wynke, and is vsed to be spoken, whan men woll let thynges passe that ought to be loked on. Connubium, matrimony, wedlocke. Connubo, bere, to mary togither. Conoides, the female of the cypresse tree. Conon, nis, the name of a kynge of Athenes. Conopoeum, a canapy, proprely suche one as hangeth ouer beddes, and is wrought lyke a a uet, to kepe out gnattes, whiche do stynge men in theyr beddes. Conor, aris, ari, to endeuour or inforce to bring a thynge to passe. Conari alicui obuiam, to make haste for to mete with one. Conquassatio, a bruysyng togyther. Conquassare, to breake to pieces. sometyme to vexe, to shake. Conquassatio, a shakynge, a vexation, or tra∣uaylynge. Conqueror, queri, to complayne. Conquiesco, eui, escere, to ceasse, to leaue of. Conquinisco, quexi, niscere, to ducke with the heade. Conquiro, quisiui, quirere, to seke all aboute, to serche for. Conquisitor, a sercher. also an officer, whyche is sent to attache a man for a great offence. Conregione,Fectus. olde writers vsyd for è regione, on the other syde, or agaynst a thyng. Consalutare, to salute one an other. Consalutatio, a salutyng togither. Consanescere, to become hole. Consanguineus, cousyne. Consanguinitas, tatis, kynrede. Conscelerate aures paternas, violate your fa∣thers eres with tellyng thinges abhominable Conscendo, di, dere, to clymbe. Conscientia,Ci. ad At. Ti. Liuius. conscience. Conscindo, scidi, scindere, to cut with other. also to scorne or rebuke one priuily. Cōscindere sibilis, to whistle one out of a place Conscio, sciui, scire, to know with other. Conscium facere aliquem, to make one pri∣uye to a matter. Conscisco, sci, scere, to consente, determyne, or grant to a matter willingly. also to draw to. Diligens pastor stabulū cotidie cōuerrit,Columel. nec patitur stercus humorē consciscere, A diligēt shepeherde euery day swepeth his stable, and letteth not the dunge draw moysture vnto it. Consciscere mortem, to kyll wylfully. Conscius, conscia, that knowith with an other. Conscius sceleris, partie or priuie to the of∣fence, accessary. Conscius mihi sum, I knowe certaynly. Conscribello, are, to write togither. Conscribo, psi, bere, to write thynges togither also to inrolle or register. Conscriptio, an enrollement. Conscripti, they whose names be writen or re∣gistred to supply a number, which do lacke, or such as be new chosen or added vnto thother.Tertullia∣nus. Consecranei, suche as be dedicate to one secte or opinyon. Consecro,Ci. ad At. aui, are, to dedicate or consecrate. al∣so to put in remembrance by writyng.Cicer. ad Consecrare memoriam nominis,Q. fratrē. to put his name in perpetuall remembrance. Consectanei, they whiche be of one secte. Consector, aris, to folowe all togither. Consenesco, senui, senescere, to be or wax old. Consensio, a consente or accorde of one mynde or purpose. Consensus, consent. Consentaneus, a, um, agreable. Consentio, in, tire, to consent. Consepio, piui, ire, to inclose with an hedge. Conseptum, an inclosure, or place inclosyd. Conseptus, a, um, inclosed. Consequentia, thingis which do folow or insu. Consequiae, sequeles. Consequor, to folow immediately, to optayne or get, to expresse. Verbis consequi nō possūt They may not be expressed in wordes. Consero, seui, serere,  sowe, or sette herbes togither. Conserere manus, to fyght hande to hande. Conseruo,Cic. off. are, to kepe, to preserue, to gather goodes. Conseruus, & conserua, a felowe or compani∣on in seruyce. Consessus, sus, men syttynge togither. it maye be taken for a sessions or sittyng of men, whi∣che be commyssioners. Consido, sidi, dere, to syt or abyde togyther. it may be vsed to sytte at a sessions. Consignatus,Cic. Aca. a, um, sygnified, testified. Consignifico, are, to shewe by tokens. Consigno,Cicero. are, to seale and close vp, as letters. also to signify or declare proprely by letters. Consiliarius, a counsellour.
Consilio, iui, uel lui, lire, to leape togither. Consilior, aris, to take counsayle. Consilium, a counsayle. It maye be taken for commissioners or iudges assigned. Consilium est ita facere, I haue pourposed soo to doo. Consimilis, le, in all thynges lyke. Consisto,Cice. pro Ros. stiti, fistere, to stande fast or sure, to a∣byde boldly by a thynge. Consistit aluus, the bealy is costyue. Consistit morbus, the syckenes is at the ex∣tremitie. Consistere mente, to be of sounde memory. Consistorium, a counsell howse, specially in a pryncis house. Consobrini, cosyns germayns of two brethern or two systers. Consoceri, they two, whose sonne and dough∣ter are maryed togyther. Consolabilis, he that may be comforted. Consolabundus, he that comforteth a man. Consolatio, comfort in aduersitie. Consolida, the name of an herbe, callyd con∣fery or camfry. Consolor, aris, ari, to gyue comforte, or take comforte. Consomnio, are, to dreame. Consono, nui, are, to make one sown togither. also to accorde or agree. Consors, tis, a felowe or companyon, somtyme it signifieth lyke. Consortio,Ci. off. 3. onis, felowshyp. Consortium, felowshyp or comapany. Conspectus, tus, a beholdyug or syght. Conspergo, spersi, spergere, to scatter or sper∣kle about abundantly. Conspicilia, spectakles. Conspicilium, a loupe to loke out of a howse, or walle. Conspicio, spexi, cere, to see or beholde. Conspico, spexi, ere, & conspicor, aris, ari, to beholde. Conspicuus, a, um, circumspect, witty, or of a sharpe and quycke wtte. also apparaunt or playne to perceyue. Conspirare, to wynde rounde like an adder. Conspiratio, nis, a conspiracye. Conspiro, aui, are, to conspyre or consent. alsoo to blowe togyther. Conspondio, di, dere, to promyse mutually. Consponsi, they whiche haue mutually promi¦sed one to the other. Consponsor, oris, he that byndeth him self by promyse, to hym that hath made lyke promise Conspuo, ere, to spyt on one. Conspurcare, to violate, defile, or make foule. Consputo, to spet often on one. Constabilio, liui, lire, to make sure. Constans, tis, constant, or stedfast. Constanter, constantly, stedfastly. Constantia, constance, or stedfastnes. Constantinopolis, a citie in Thracia, somtime callyd Byzantium, and afore that Lygos, It ioyneth to the sea callyd Pontus Euxinus, on the narowest part betwene Europam and A∣siam, whiche somtyme was the chief palaice of the most christen emperour Constantine, & is nowe the pompous den of the great Turk enemy to Christes fayth, by the vengeance of god, prouoked by the vnfaythefulnes, arro∣gance, and beastly lyuynge of the princis and people there inhabiting. It was taken of the Turkes the yere of our lorde. 1452. Mahu∣metes beynge great turke, and Constantine beyng emperour of Grece. Constantinus, was a name of diuers emperors of whom the fyrst was most excellent, & was sonne of Constantius (a noble and valyaunt prince, felow in the empire with Maximin{us}) and of Helene, a woman borne in England, than callyd Brytayn. This man after he had attayned the monarchy, hadde the faythe of Christe in suche reuerence, that he dayly most studiousely laboured for to augmente it, not withstandyng that in his tyme were dyuerse heresies, and horrible contentions among the byshops, whiche he eyther dissolued, or at the least wayes dyd reuerently moderate with a wonderful temperance. He raigned. 30 yeres and was buryed in Constantinople. He dyed in the yere of our lorde. 330. Constat, it costeth, it is solde for. Consternati, mē ouerthrowē. somtime abashed. Consternatio, onis, an abashement. Consternium, a place where men whan they were hayned, layde theyr garmentes. Consterno, aui, are, to strawe, to paue, to keuer the floore with any thynge. Cōsterno, straui, sternere, to make one abashid Constituo, stitui, stituere, to ordeyn, to gouerne, to prouide, to couenant, to fourme, to be adui¦sed or determined to do a thyng. Constituere in diem tertium, to determyn to do a thynge thre days next folowyng. Constituere disceptationē, to make his plea formall, or to foresee that which shall come in contention. Constituere iudicium,Ci. in par¦ti. ora. after our maner of spe¦kynge is to demurre in lawe, or dwell in law, to remytte a thynge to the better opinyon of the Iudges.Salust. Constituere maiestatê, to confirme or aduāce the reuerence dewe to the supreme auctoritie. Constituere quaestionem, to decree, that vpō straite examination, execution be done. Constituere statum causae, is whan the iuge doth determin, where it be a matter in law, or a matter in dede, which is in controuersy.
Constituere uadim onium, to put in pledgis. Constitutio corporis, the complexion. Constitutio causae, which our lawyers do cal the matter in debate. Constituere testem aliquem in aliū, to cause wytnesse to be brought forthe. Constituere pecuniā, to promise money to be payde, which was before due by an obligatiō Constitutū patrimonium, Cicero. Existim at patrimonium fore suum per te constitutum, He recogniseth, that the lādis which he hath, camme by your meanes, or that ye were the cause, that he came to his lyuelode. Constitutio, somtyme signifieth an ordinance, somtyme an inuention. Constitit nus{quam}, it is no where. Constitutus, a, um, ordeyned. Corpus bene constitutum,Cicero. a body well com∣plexioned. Consto, stiti, stare, to persyst or abide in a thing, to stande togyther, to be manifest or knowen, to agree, to pertayne. Constant sententiae, the opinions do agree. Constat animo, he is of stedfast mynde. Constat pedibus, he is sure of his feete, or hole in his legges or feete. Constat hoc mihi tecum, we he both agreed. Constat ratio, there is a reasonable cause. Constare sibi, to abyde in his opinyon. Constet modus, let there be a measure. Constitit nun{quam}Pli. in epi. he abode in no place. Constrepo, pui, ere, to make a noyse togyther. Constringo, strinxi, gere, to bind fast, to wring hard. Cōstringere supplicio, to cause him to dy Construo, struxi, struere, to buylde, to ordeyne. Construere pecuniam, to gather money. Constuprare, idem quod stuprare. Consuefacio, to accustome. Consuesco, sueui, suescere, to be wont. somtime to vse carnally. Cū eius consueuit matre clan culum,Terent. He had companye with his mother priuily. Also to vse for a custome, somtyme to lyue. Nec magis humo {quam} stagno cousueue∣runt,Columel. They liue aswel on lande, as on water. Consuetudo, dinis, custom or vsage, also com∣pany or conuersation, somtyme familyaritie. Consuetus, a, um, accustomed. Consul, lis, a chief offycer amonge the Roma∣nes, wherof were two, whiche had the chiefe rule in the citie for one yere. Consularis, he that had bene consule, or were mete to be consull. Consulatus, tus, the offyce of consull. Consulo, lui, sulere, with a datiue case, to gyue counsaile, with an accusatiue case, to ask coū∣sayle, also with a datiue case, it signifieth to prouyde, to help to. Grauiter de se consulere, to do some hurt to hym selfe. Consulto, taui, tare, to gyue or aske counsayle often, to delyberate or shewe myn aduise ofte. Consultò, delyberately or aduisedly. Consultor, oris, he that giueth counsayl, some∣tyme he that asketh counsayle. Consultus, ta, tum, wyse, or well aduysed. Consultus, tus, & consultum, the thyng that is consulted somtyme an acte of counsayle. Consummatus, a, um, perfect at a poyut. Consummo, aui, are, to summe vp in a recke∣nynge, to fynyshe or performe, or make vp, or make perfecte. Consumo,Terent. in Andria. sumpsi, sumere, to consume or dy∣stroy, somtime it signifieth to finishe or make vp, or to bryng to a poynt, also to spende. Consumere diem in apparando, to spend al the day in preparynge. Consumere fidem,Salust. to lose credence. Consumere operam,Terent. in Heauton. to employ labour. Consumere orationem, to telle a longe tale without a conclusyon.Sa. in lug. Consuo, ui, ere, to sowe togither, or ioyne. Consurgo, surrexi, gere, to aryse to gyther with other. Consyderate, with a consyderation. Consyderatus, he that doth a thynge with con¦syderation. Consydero, aui, are, to consyder. Contabesco,Plaut. in Mercat. scere, to wast away, or relent, like salt put in water. Contabulare, to bourde, or to lay bourdes on a roufe or floore. Contabulatio, a floore bourded. Contactus, ta, tum, touched. Contacti relligione dies,Plaut{us} in Pseud. dayes reputed of the paynyms to be infortunate to begyn any enterpryse. Contagium, & contagio, onis, & contages, an infectiue syckenes. also any infection. Contamino, aui, are, to violate or defyle, with myxtyng thynges togither, to dishonest. Contechnor,Plaut. in Pseud. ari, to inuent som thīg, to deceiue Contego, texi,Terent. in Hecyra. tegere, to hyde a faute, that it be not espied. Contemero, aui, are, to vyolate. Contemno, tempsi, temnere, to despise, or con∣tepmne, whiche is lasse than despysynge. Contemplatio, onis, a beholdynge, speciallye in the mynde, with deuotion to god. Contemplator, he that beholdeth with great affectyon. Contemplo, are, & contemplor, aris, ari, to be∣holde intentiuely with great affection. Contemporanei, they whyche be at one tyme. Contemptibilis, he that is to be despysed, or not regarded. Contemptim, dysdaynfully. Contemptor, aris, to sette lyttell by. Contemptus, tus, despite, contempt. Contemptus, a, um, contemned, not estemed.
Contendo, di, dere, to cōtend or tesyst, or striue to cast or shote a darte or arowe, to continue, to make hast, to inforce. Contendere aliquid ab aliquo, to requyre some thyng of one. Contendere sacramento, to wage the lawe. Contentio, onis, resystence, stryfe, or debate. also a sharpe oration apte to confirme or re∣preue, a continuance, an inforcement or set∣tynge forth with vehemence. Contentus, a, um, that whiche is contayned, also content, or satisfied. Contereo, rui, rere, to make aferde. Contero, triui, terere, to weare out with occu∣pienge, also to make warre. Conterere aetatem, to spende his lyfe. Conterere diē,Plaut. in Bacch. to spēd the day vnprofitably. Conterere operam, to lose labour or peyne. Conterere questū,Terent. in Hecyra. to spende all that he hath gotten or wonne. Conteris tu tua me oratione mulier,Plaut. in Castel. Thou makest me wery woman with thy talkyng. Conterraneus, countrey man. Contestari, to aske togither wytnesse. Contestari litem, to perpleade, where the one hath full purposed, the other hathe fully an∣sweryd. Contestatus, a, um, proued by wytnesse. Contexo, ere, to ioyne togither. Contexere dolos, to fynde crafty meanes. Contextus, tus, a ioynyng or sowyng togither. Contextu pennarum corpori tegmenta fa∣ciebat, He made hym garmentes with the fe∣thers of fowles sowen or glewed togyther. Contextu longiore loqui, to speake with a longe deliberation or tracte of tyme. Conticeo, ticui, cere, to holde my peace with other. Conticesco, scere, to kepe sylence with other. Conticinium, bedde tyme, or the fyrst parte of nyght, whan men prepare to take theyr rest, and all thynge is in sylence. Contignatio, onis, the roufe of an house. Contigno, aui, are, to raufter a house. Contignus, a, um, that whiche toucheth or is nexte to a thynge. Continens, tis, firme land, that is none yle, al∣so continuall, somtyme ioynyng. Continenti biduo, two dayes continuall. Continenter, continually, cōtinently, or firmly Continentia, continence, a vertu, refusyng thin¦ges that are pleasant. also resistence of yll. Contineo, nui, nere, to refrayn, to kepe backe, to contain, to kepe togither, to withhold, to let. Continebat me tempestas,Plaut. in Amph. the fowle we∣ther letted me. Continere se domi, to abyde at home. Contingo, tigi, tingere, to touche. Contigit, it hath happened. Continuè, continually. Continuo, aui, are, to contynue. Continuus, a, um, contynuall. Contollam gradum,Plaut. in Aulul. I wyll go forwarde. Contor, tari, to abyde, to inquire diligently. Contorqueo,Vergilius in georg. torsi, quêre, to pluck vp, & draw with hym. Contorquere telum,Vergilius Aenei. 2. to shoote an arrowe or darte, and therwith to hyt or perce a thynge. Contortae res, thynges wounden and twysted. also suche matter, as one parte can not agree with an nother. Contortuplico, are, to wray or wynd a thing, that with great peyne it may be vnwounde. Contortuplicata nomina,Plaut. in persa. names so diffuse, that they may vneth be pronounced. Contra, agaynst a place, a person, or a thynge, on the other part. Contracto, aui, are, to attayn, or comprehend. Contractio animi,Ci. tuscu. quaest. stonieng of the mynde. Contractio neruorū, shrinking of the sinues. Contractus, tus, contract, bargayn. Contractus, a, um, gotten. Bona contracta, goodes gotten by conquest. Contradico, dixi, dicere, to contrarye in wor∣des, to say contrary. Contraeo, to go contrary or agaynst a thynge. Contraho,Pli. in ep. traxi, trahere, to gather togither, to commmyt, to make a contract or bargayn, to drawe togither. also to shrynke. Nerui con∣trahuntur, the synewes be shrunken. Contrahere aes alienum, to be indetted. Contrahere animum,Cic. tus. q. to take thought. Contrahere bona,Ci. in off. to get goodes. Contrahere frontem,Ti. Liuius to lowre. Contrahere tempus,Quidi{us} in Metamo. to abridge the tyme. Contrahere ualitudinem, to get syckenes. Contractio, feare. Contractio frontis, frownyng or lowrynge. Contrarius, a, um, contrary. Contrasto, are, to be agaynst one, to repugne. Contrauenio, ire, to happen contrary or come contrarye. Contrecto, tare, to touche often. Contribuo, buere, to attribute. Contribuere in regna, to dyuide it into royaulmes. Contribuere se alicui, to become one of his, to be at his commandement. Contristo, tare, to make one sory. Controuersia, a controuersy or variance. Controuersor, aris, to contende or vary. Controuersus, litigious, or ful of controuersy. Controuersus, a, um, contrary, or in contrarye wyse. Res controuersa, mattier in contro∣uersye. Contrudere in naues. to brynge into the shyp∣pes. also to put or thruste in. Contrunco, care, to mynyshe.
Contubernalis, a felowe or compaynyon, or of one company. Contubernium, a felowshyp or a company. Contueor,Plaut. in Sticho. eri, to defende, to see, to regarde ve∣ry stedfastly. Contumacia, dysobedyence, a selfe wyll, or fro∣wardenes. Contumaciter,Ci. in clo. dysobediently. Contumax, macis, disobedient or frowarde in oppinyon, he that wylle not be perswaded. somtyme it signifieth constantly suffryng. Contumelia, a reproche, a thynge done or spo∣ken to a mans rebuke, an iniury. Contumeliosus, he that vseth to speake re∣bukefully. Contundo, tudi, tundere, to breake to pieces, or stryke downe. Contundere facta alicuius,Plaut. in Sticho. to put an other mans actes out of estimation or remēbrance. Contuor,Plaut. in Asin. eri, to see. Contuosi oculi, eyen lokyng narowe. Conturbo,Ci. as At. are, to trouble. also to spend in wast Conturbare fortunas, to spend al his goodes in waste. Conturbare rationes, to spende all that he shulde haue made reckenyng of. Contus, a long speare or moryspyke, also a lōge pole with yron at the end, wherwith shipmen do gauge the water. Conuador, dari, to cōpel one to fynde sureties. Conuallis, a valey hauing hilles on both sides. Conuaso, aui, are, to gather by stelth. Conuector,Cic. Atti. oris, a maryner that conueyeth o∣uer many. Conueho, uexi, uehere, to cary or brynge from many places vnto one place.Plinius. 11 Conuello,Plaut{us} in Amph. uulsi, uellere, to shake or pull out of his place. also to take from one by robbery. Conuellere gratiam, to bryng out of fauour or credence. Conuenae, people assemblyd of dyuers coun∣treys, dwellyng in one countrey or towne. Conueniens, conuenient. Conuenientia, a congruence. also a commynge togyther of people. Conuenire, to come togither, or to assemble in one place. Also to agree, to sewe at the lawe, or bryng in iudgement, also to determyne to speake with one, to accorde. Conuenit inter me at{que} hunc, It is agreed be¦twene him and me. De precio conuenit, We are agreed of the price. In manum conuenit, She is my wyfe. Conuenire in manum, to be affianced or be∣trouthed on the parte of the woman. Conuenit, I am contented. Also it is conueny∣ent, meete, or syttynge. Pax conuenit,Salust. in Catal. peace was accorded. Conuentae, couenantes of maryage. Conuenticulum,Cice. p Sexto. a congregation, a lyttell as∣sembly, moste commonly for an yll purpose. Conuentio, onis, & conuentum, a couenant. Conuentus, an assembly of people, warned by the chiefe officers commaundement. Conuentus maximus, maye be taken for a parlyament, Conuentus iuridici, maye be vsed for the foure termes. Minores conuentus,Salust. in Iugurt. sessions of the peace. Conuentus, a, um, accorded. Conuenta pax,Plaut. in rudente. peace accorded. Conuerro, rere, to swepe together in to oone place. also to rub. Conuersatio, conuersation, or familiaritie. Conuersè,Cato. klenly. Conuersor, aris, to be conuersant. Conuertere se in fugam, to runne awaye. Conuerto, uerti, tere, to conuerte or tourne. Conuersio, alteration or chaunge. Conuexitas, the imbosing or roundenes of the backsyde of that whiche is holowe. Conuexum, the outwarde parte and roundnes of a thynge that is holowe. Conuexus, a, um, imbosed rounde and holow within. Conuiciator, he that speketh to mens rebuke. Conuicinium, a neyghbourhod. Conuicior, aris, ari, to speake in reproche. Conuicium, a reproche or rebuke. Conuicium dicere, to speake to a mannes rebuke. Conuicium facere, to do a thyng to a mans rebuke. Conuinco, cere, idem quod uinco. Conuictor, oris, a dayly companyon at table, or a dayly guest. Conuictus, tus, a lyuynge to gether in house, or at one table. Conuiua, & Conuictor, a beden guest, he that is inuited or beden to dyner or supper. Conuiuam abducere, to brynge one to a dy∣ner on banket. Conuiualis, le, perteynynge to feastes. Conuiuator, oris, a feaster or banketter. Conuiuiones, companyons at drynkynge or bankettynge. Conuiuium, a feaste or banket. Conuiuo, uixi, uere, to lyue together with one. Conuiuor, aris, ari, to feaste or bankette, or to take meales with other men. Conuoco, are, to call to gether, or to assemble many together. Conuolo, are, to fly together. Conuoluo, ui, uere, to wrap or wynde aboute a thynge. Conuoluolus, a lyttel worme with many feete and heary, that eateth the leaues of vynes. Conuoluulus, or Cissampelos, is an herbe,
whiche hath a leafe lyke to yuye, but moche thynner, and a floure lyke a lylly, and wyn∣deth about lyke a vyne, some hath white flou¦res, some violet. I suppose it to be withwind Conuoti, sworne bretherne, or men makynge one auowe or promyse. Conifera arbor, a tree whiche beareth fruyte of the fourme of a pyne appull. Conus, properly the pyneaple tree, by transla∣tion it is a figure in fascion lyke to a pynea∣ple. Also the crest of an helmet or salet. Conoides, pineaple trees female. Conuulsio, is the same syckenesse whiche in greeke is called Spasmos,Hippocr. whiche is an af∣fecte of the synewes and muscules,Aph. li. 10 wherein some tyme all the bodye, sometyme parte of the body is drawen or stretched, wyl he or no that suffereth: If it be in parte of the bodye, it is called in englyshe the crampe: If it be in all the body, it hath yet no name in englyshe, bycause it hapneth seldom. The cause of this grife is of two contrary and dyuerse occasi∣ons, eyther of repletion, or of to moche empti¦nesse and lacke of nourishement. Coos, uel Cos, uel Co, uel Coum, the name of an yle nyghe to the Rhodes. Cous, a, um, of that yle. Copen, olde wryters vsed for Copiosum, plentuouse. Cophinus, a basket. Copia, plentye, eloquence, power, leaue or ly∣cence, multitude. Also ayde. Copiam dare,Terent. in Heauton. to gyue power, or lycence. also to gyue occasion. Copia est,Idem. Nam apud patrem tua amica te∣cū sine metu ut sit, copia est. For thou maist nowe brynge to passe, that thy wenche maye be with thy father without any dreade. Copia est, I maye or mought: Ego in eum incidi infelix locum,Terent. in Phorm. ut neque eius sit amit∣tendi, nec retinendi copia: I am vnhappily come to that point, that I may neither leaue her, nor kepe her. Copia uix fuit eum adeundi, with great dif∣ficultie or peyne mought I come vnto hym. Copia cuntandi non est tibi,Plaut. in Epidic. thou haste noo leysure to tary. Copia est tibi magis,Plaut. in cap. thou maist more easely Copia nulla est tibi in illo, he can nothynge helpe the.Plaut. in Epidi. Copiam efficere alicui, to fynde the meanes that one maye come in.Plaut. in milite. Copiam facere argenti, to lende one money. Copiam facere,Pli. in epi. to communicate any thynge with an other. Copiae cornu, was the horne of a gote, with whose mylke Iupiter was nourished in Cre∣ta nowe called Candy, of two maydens, one called Adrastea, the other Ida, doughters of Melisseus, the which horne Iupiter gaue to his sayd nouryces inreward, hauīg therwith this cōmoditie, that what so euer thyng they wyshed for, it shulde abundantly come out of that horne. Wherof it came afterwarde into a prouerbe, that whan men wolde declare to be plenty of any thyng, they signify it in these two wordes Copiae cornu. Copi, for copioso. Copio, are, to gather moche togither. Copiosa, some plenty. Copiosè, aboundauntly. Copiosus, a, um, plentuous. Copis, plentuouse. Copula,Plautus. a couplynge or ioynyng togither, cou∣ples or fetters. Copulatiuus, a, ū, that coupleth, or may couple. Copulo, aui, are, to couple togither, to bynd or ioyne togither. Coquina, a kytchyn. Coquinaria, cookery. Coquinarius, a, um, pertaynyng to cookery. Coquinor, aris, ari, to do the offyce of a coke. Coquito, tare, to boyle often. Coquo, coxi, coquere, to seeth or boyl, to make rype, to make redy, to digest. Coquus, a cooke. Cor, cordis, the harte, somtyme it is taken for the mynde. ❀Cor ne edito,Eras. in chil. do not tourment thy mynde with care and heuines, it was one of Pytha∣goras counsayles. Cora, a citie that Dardanus buylded, of why∣che the inhabitantes are callyd Corani. Coracinus, a, um, of a crowe. Coracesius, a part of the hyll Taurus. Coralium, a stone callyd corall, whiche beynge in the sea is a tree or bousshe, and out of the water it becometh a stone. Solinus wryteth, that it also changeth his colour, after that it is out of the water. It is founden in dyuers places, as Hermolaus writeth, that is to say in the red sea, in the Persian sea, & about Si¦cile, also in the north sea about the yles callid Orchades, not far from Scotlande. he saith also, that whiles it is in the water, it is grene of colour. Auicen affirmeth to be thre kyndes therof, white, red, & black. also that it is cold in the fyrst degree, and dry in the second. But Constantyne sayth, that it is also colde in the seconde degree. Corallobachates, a stone with golden rayes. Coram, before, openly, in presence. Corambla, an herb that maketh the eyes dusks and weake of syght. Coraxicus, a part of the hyll Taurus. Coraxis, a mountayn in Asia, also a floud. Corbis, a basket. Corbita, a great shyppe callyd a foyst.
Corbito,Plaut. in Casina. tare, to caste into a basket. Corbona, the treasure of the temple amonge the Iewes. Corbula, a lyttell basket. Corchorus, a vyle herbe called chickeweede. Corculum, swete harte. Also wyse men were so called amonge the Romanes. Corcyra, an yle in Greece. Cordapsus, a syckenes that is nowe called Illi acus, whiche is a peyne in the guttes. Cordatè, wysely. Cordatus homo, a wytty man, and of great memory. Cordi est, it is to my mynde, it contenteth me. Cordilla, the yong fry of the fyshe called tuny. Cordolium, sorowe, grefe at the harte. Corduba, a citie in Spayne. Cordumenum, a spice called Cardomomum, wherof one kynde is that, whiche is called in englyshe graynes. Cordus, a, um, that thynge, whiche springeth or commeth late in the yere. Cordi agni, latewarde lambes. Cordum foenum, latewarde haye. Coreaceus, a, um, of lether. Corgo, olde wryters vsed for Profecto. Coria,Victruui. coriorum, are in buyldynge certayne settynge or layinge or thinges in one order, eyther in height, or in thyckenes. Coriago, aginis, the syckenes of cattayl, whā they are clunge, that theyr skynnes do cleaue faste to theyr bodyes. Coriandrum, an herbe and seede called coly∣ander. Corianum, that whiche is commonlye called Coriandrum, in englyshe Colyander. Coriarius, a tanner. Coriatium, of lether. Corinthiacus, a, um, that whiche is of the cy∣tie of Corinthus. Corinthia uasa, plate of the mettall of Co∣rinthe, whiche was a myxt mettall. Corinthus, a citie in Achaia, whiche was in that parte of Greece, that is now called Mo¦rea, wherof came a prouerbe. Non est cuiu∣slibet Corinthū appellere. It is not in euery mannes power to aryue at Corinthus: whi∣che dothe signyfie. It perteyneth not to euery manne to attempte thynges daungerous, or harde to achieue. Vide originem in chiliadi∣bus adagiorum Erasmi, uel in Aulo Gellio. Corium, a bowe case. Coritus, the skynne of a beast, also lether, the pane of a wall made with lyme and sande. Corna, nae, the name of two cities. Cornelia, the proper name of dyuerse noble women, of the whiche one was suster to Sci¦pio, and mother to Tyberius Gracchus, and Caius Gracchus, who beinge men of excel∣lent eloquence in the latine tunge, were ther∣in tought onely of theyr sayde mother: This woman was of a meruaylous temperaunce. For on a tyme she was in companye with o∣ther ladyes of Rome, whoo beholdynge her to be but meanely apparayled, they deman∣ded of her if she had no better raymente: she poyntynge to her two sonnes, whiche than wente before her, aunswered, sayinge: here is my freshe apparayll, wherin I do delyte. The same noble woman knowynge that her husband dyd priuily company with her bond woman, dissembled and wolde not here of it, thynkynge that it were inconueniente, that her husbande, who had ben oftentimes in the greateste and moste honourable romes in the citie, and also had vainquished many greate prynces, shulde be rebuked by her. And after his deathe she maried that woman in a wor∣shyppefull place, gyuynge with her a great sum of money. whose example very fewe wo∣men haue folowed sense her tyme. Cornelius, a proper name of dyuerse noble Ro¦maynes, of whom mention shall be made in theyr surnames. Cornetum, a groue of hauthorne. Corneus, a, um, of hauthornes. Cornicen, a blower in a horne. Cornicor, aris, ari, to make a chatteryng like a choughe, or to gape for a pray, as Erasmus doth expounde it. Cornicularius, a certayne office in armes, con∣cernynge capitall sentences. Corniculum, a garment perteyninge to soul∣diours. Also somtyme a towne in Italy. ❀Cornicum oculos, configere, to prycke out the crowes eyes.Eras. in chilli. Is a prouerbe vsed, whan we wolde signifie, that one with a newe de∣uyse, had obscured the doctrine or estimati∣on of them, whiche had ben afore hym, and had made them to seme, that they knew or se nothynge. It maye be also sayde, where one man wyll make all other menne blynde, that haue bene before hym, and dothe reproue or dissolue that, whiche hath benne allowed by wyse men. Cornigenus, a, um, of the kynde whiche hath hornes. Corniger, geris, al thing that beareth a horne. Cornix, nicis, a byrde called a crowe. Cornu, a horne, by translation the corners and wyndynges of ryuers. Also the two wynges of a battayle be called Dextrum cornu, & si∣nistrum cornu, Cornucopiae, was a horne that Hercules pluc∣ked from Achelous, whiche horne the Nym∣phes or immortall ladies fylled with sweete floures and fruites: There is before an o∣ther opinion therof.
Cornupes, pedis, euery beaste that hath horne on his feete. Cornupeta, a beaste that stryketh with his hornes. Cornus, nus, a tree called in frenche vng Cor∣neillier: there be none of them in Englande: and therfore it lacketh an englyshe name. Cornutus, a, um, that whiche hath hornes. Corolla, a garlande. Corna, the fruit of Cornus, and be called Cor¦neilles in frenche, whiche be lyke to olyues, but that they be red and somewhat lengar. Corallarium, an addition or aduantage. Corona, a crowne, a garlande, a chaplette, a company of people standynge rounde lyke a cercle. Also the cerkle about the moone. Coronae militares, were garlandes of dyuers sortes. One named Triumphalis, was first of laurel or baye leaues, afterward of golde, whiche the chiefe Capytayne waare on hys heade, whan he hadde the hoole vyctorye a∣gaynste hys ennemies, and hys seruauntes dydde weare garlandes of olyue. An nother was called Obsidionalis, whiche was gy∣uen to the chiefe capitayne, whan he had rai∣sed any siege, beinge about any of their tow∣nes or fortresses, and that garlande was of the grasse growynge in the place where the siege was layde. An other was called Ciuica, whiche was of holly beynge euer greene, and was wouen with oken leaues, this garlande was gyuen to hym, whiche had saued a Ro∣mayne, that he were not taken of manye en∣nemies fyghtinge valyantly for him. Muralis was gyuen to hym that fyrste didde skale the walles maulgre the enemies: and therfore it was made like vnto imbatilmentes. Castren sis was gyuen to hym, whiche fyrste entered by force the campe of the ennemies. Naualis was put on his heade, whiche in battayle on the sea, fyrste bourded the shyp that was as∣sayled. Oualis was worne of the chiefe capi∣tayne, whanne the victory was without she∣dinge of bloude, or that the battayle lacked his circumstance in the appoyntment. Mura∣lis, Castrensis, & Naualis, were of goulde, Oualis was of the lyttell sweete bushe called Myrtus. Coronamentum, a multitude of crownes or garlandes. Coronarius, ria, a maker of crownes or gar∣landes. Corone, a towne in Grece, in the partes now named Morea. Coronea, a Citie in the parties of Boeotia in Greece. Coronis, nidis, the nose of a shyppe. Also an ende, the extreame parte, the top, the horne, or other lyke Corono, aui, are, to crowne, or set on a crown or garlande. Coronopus, an herbe whiche by the descripti∣on of Dioscorides and Theophrastus, I do suppose to be Dent de lyon. Corporalis, le, corporall. Corporatio, Corporatura, the quantity, state, or facyon of the body, corporature, corpulēcy Corporeus, a, um, that whiche is of a bodily substaunce. Corporo,Ennius. aui, are, to kyll. Corpulentus, corpulēt or grosse in body, sleshy. Corpus, corporis, a body. somtyme it signifi∣eth but sleshe onely. also sometyme all maner of substaunce. Corpusculum, a lyttell or small body. Corpore uiciati, they whiche do lacke some member at theyr natiuity. Corrado, rasi, dere, to shaue or scrape, to take awaye, spoyle, sell, or alienate. Corrector, toris, a correctour or amender of faultes. Corrigia, a thonge of lether, a lachet of a shoo. Corrigo, rexi, rigere, to correct or amende. Corrigiola,Dioscori. an herbe whiche runneth on the grounde lyke grasse,Ruellius. but it hath leaues lyke rue, but somewhat longer and softer, vnder the whiche the sede spryngeth, and hath flou¦res partely whyte, partly red. But Manar∣dus sayth, that it hath leaues like to an ashe. and therfore is called Fraxinella. Corripio, pui, pere, to rebuke, properly it is to take a thynge quickely, and with haste Corripere sese ad aliquem,Terent. in Hecy. to go to one ha∣stelye. Corripere sese intro, to enter hastily. Corripere se repēte,Plaut. in Mercat. to go his way sodeinly. Corripitur febre, he is taken with a feuer. Corripitur, somno, he is fast a slepe. Corriuales, they whiche do loue to gether one woman. Corriuare, is properly of beastes, to go to ge∣ther to watrynge. Corriuor, uari, is of waters whā they of smal brokes do become ryuers. Corroboro, are, to make stronge or bygge, to harden. Corruda, an herbe called wylde sperage. Corrogo, are, to gather greetsūmes of money. Corrugi, furrowes made in hylles, to conuey water, to washe the owre of mettall. Corrumpo, rupi, rumpere, to corrupt, to vi∣ciate, to distroy, to suborne, to tempt, or pro∣cure by gyftes,. Corrumpere igni, to burne vp.Salust. Corrumpere oportunitates, to lose oportu∣nity or occasion. Corrumpere rem familiarem,Salust. in Iuguri. to waste his substaunce.
Corruptela, corruption or defylynge. Corruptor, a distroyer, a waster, a corrupter of thynges. Corruptus, ta, tum, corrupte, viciate, rotten. Corruo, rui, ruere, to fall downe to gether, to fall greuously, to fayle. Corruerunt opes, the goodes were wasted. Cors, cortis, idem quod Chors, a court, whi∣che serueth for pultry, to fede at large. Corsica, an yle in the myddell sea betwene Geane and the yle of Sardinia, called Cors. Corsicum mare, the sea about the yle of Cors. Cortex, corticis, a rynde or barke. Corticatus, ta, tum, hauynge a rynde or bark. Cortina, a dyers fat. Also it is the table of A∣pollo, from the which he gaue aunswere. Ca∣to taketh it for a vessell, oute of the whiche oyle is let runne. Also that whiche is called a corteyne of lynnen clothe or sylke. Also places deuided with cortaynes be called Cortinae. Cortinale, the place where vessayles be sette, wherin wyne and hony be sodden. Cortinon radyshe sede. Cortona, a citie in Tuscane. Cortyna, or Gortyna, a Citie in the yle of Candy. Corus, the northwesterne wynde, a southwest wynde. Corusco, aui, are, to brandishe or glytter. Coruinus, a, um, of a crowe. Coruinus, was also the name of a noble oratoure. Reade in Messala. Coruns, a crowe. Corybantes, the priestes of the ydoll Cybe∣les, whiche as madde men waggynge theyr heades and daunsynge, playinge on cymba∣les, ran about the stretes, prouokynge other to do the semblable. Coryces, curious persons, craftye inuestiga∣tours or serchers of matters. Also a hyll in Crete lyinge on the sea syde. Corycium, a gardeuiandes or walet, or other lyke thynge to put in vytayles. Corycum, the name of a citie and mountayne in Sicyle. Corydalus, a larke. Coryletum, a groue of hasylles. Corylus, a hasyll and a hasyll nut, or fylberde. Corymbi, bearies of an yuy, or other whiche do growe in the same fourme. Corymbifer, an yuy tree. Corymbites, a kynde of spurge. Coryphaeus, the chiefe in euery order, or in knowledge. Corythus, a towne in Tuscane nere to Arctiū Corytus, a bowe case, or a quyuer for arowes. Coryza, the pose or distillation out of the hed into the eyes and nose. Cos, or Ceos, or Cea, an yle not farre from Grece, wher Hippocrates the phisition was borne. Cos, cotis, a whet stone. Coticula, a lyttell whetstone. Cosmeta, a chamberer, or woman that appa∣rayleth her maistres. Cosmicus, a, um, worldely. Cosmitto, for Committo. Cosmographia, the description of the worlde. Cosmographus, he that describeth the worlde. Cosmus, a proper name. Cossi, wormes bred in trees, whiche the peo∣ple of Phrigia dyd eate for a delycate meat. Also men or women that haue theyr bodyes riueled or sull of wrynkels. Costa, a rybbe. Cosyros, an yle in Affrike. Cotaria, a quary where whetstones be foundē. Coticula, a touche stone, wheron they try gold and syluer. Cothurnus, a slypper, speciallye hyghe solyd, somtyme it is taken for a hyghe and arrogāt fourme of speakynge or writynge. Cotidie, dayly, day by day. Coton, an hauen made with stone. Also a town in Siria, of the whiche a certayne kynde of smalle fygges, are called plurally, Cotona, uel coctona. Cotonea, a quince tree. Cotoneum, a quince. Cottalus, the sounde whyche a stroke maketh with any thynge. Cotula, is an herbe, whiche hath leaues lyke camomyll, and a yelow floure lyke to an oxe eye. Of this be dyuerse kyndes, one is called Buphthalinos, an other Cotula fetida. Coturnix, nicis, a byrd called a quayle, whiche (as Plinius and Solinus do wryte) appereth not vntyll in the ende of sommer, and thanne they flee ouer the sea easely without makyng haste, and whan they perceyue lande, they do assemble in flockes, and fly moche faster. They wryte also, that these byrdes doo fede on seedes of venomous herbes, and therfore in the olde tyme they were not eaten of wyse men: for that byrde hath the syckenesse called the fallynge euyl. Auicen in the seconde canō, and Galene de complexionibus, and Lucre∣tius. li. 4. do affyrme, that this byrd fedeth on the herbe called Elleborus, or Veratrum, whiche of it selfe is venomous: all be it phy∣sitions do gyue it sometyme for the purgati∣on of melancholy. Auicen in the sayde place wryteth, that it is to be feared in carynge of quayles, leste thereby maye be ingendred the crampe and sickenesse called Tetanus. Cotyla, or Cotyle, was a measure, whiche af∣ter the sayinge of Galene, was in some place xii. ounce measures, in some place .xvi. Iu∣lius
Pollux sayth, that it is the thyrde parte of Choenix, that whiche is called Georgica, or perteynynge to husbandrye, receyueth in weyght of wyne .i .li. and halfe an ounce, of oyle .xi. ounces, of hony .i .li. di. and .vi. drā∣mes, of our measure a pynte and one ounce measure. That whiche is called Veterinaria, or belongynge to horse leaches, is in measure xii. ynches, and conteyneth of wyne .xi. oun∣ces, and .ii. scriples, oone obolum, and one siliqua: of oyle .x. ounces, of hony .i .li .iiii. ounces di. one dramme, and one scriple. It is of our measure iuste halfe a pynte. Coty∣la, is also a vessell or cup to drynke of, suche as Diogenes vsed, before he lerned of a child to drynke out of his hande. Also Cotyle som tyme sygnifieth al the holownes of a cup. al∣so the ioynt of a mans thyghe. Cotylum, a place in the mountayn of Ida, out of the which runneth thre great riuers, Sea mander, Granicus, and Acsopus. Couinum, a maner of a charyot. Couinarius eques, a horseman that faught leapynge out of a chariot vnto a horsebacke. Counium, a towne in Dors. shyre called Dor∣chester. Counos, the yle of Shepey in Kente. Cous, a man of the yle of Cos. Coxa, the haunche, properly the bones of the buttocke. Coxendix, dicis, the hyp or houkill bone. Coxendicis morbus, the ache of the hyp. com∣monly called Sciatica, whiche commeth of a grosse fleumatiue humour, whiche lyeth a∣bout the synewe called Ischias, in the holowe bone of the hyp. C ANTE R. CRABRO, onis, a great waspe cal∣led a hornet. Cracentes,Pom. Feft men that are leane. Some∣tyme it is taken for graciles. Crambe, a kynde of colewurtes. Cramben repetitiam, is called of Iuuena∣lis a declamation to be often herde, with mo¦che tediousnes to the herers. Cranaus, a kynge of Athenes, whoo succeded Cecrops. Craneum, a place of exercise at Corinth. Cranium, the foremoste parte of the skull. Crantor, oris, the name of a philsopher. Crapula, an inflammation and head ache, whi¦che commeth of excesse of drinkynge. It is al¦so taken for drunkennes. Crapulam edormiscere, to sleape out drun∣kennes vntyll he be freshe agayne. Crapulam exhalare, to vomyte whan one is drunke. Cras, to morowe, in tyme commynge. Crasis, a greke worde, signifieth complection, temperature, or mixture of natural humours Crassamen, & Crassamentum, the thycknesse of any thynge Crassa Minerua, a grosse wyt, whiche doth no thinge exactely. Crassesco, sesci, sescere, to make fatte or ful of fleshe, or thycke. Crassiore Musa, with a more playne or intel∣ligible sense. Crassities, & Crassitudo, fatnesse, thyckenes grossenes. Crasso, are, to make fat. Crassus,Plaut. in Pseud. a, um, fatte, fleshye, thycke, grosse, poysy. Crassae compedes, weyghty gyues Crassus, was the surname of noble Romaines, of the whiche two specially are worthy to be remembred, for the notable qualities whiche were in them. The one of them was named Lucius Crassus, whiche nexte to Tully was the moste excellent oratour that euer was a∣monge the Romains, of whom and of Quin∣tus Sceuola, Tully in his boke called Bru∣tus, wryteth in this wyse: Thynke not (I saye) Brutus, that in this Citie were euer two more excellente persons, for where it is well knowen, that of all counsaylours, the one (that is to say Sceuola) was moste elo∣quent, the other (that is to say Crassus) was in counsaylinge moste excellent. Lyke wise in all other thynges they were vnlyke one to an other. But so as ye coulde not tell, vnto whō of them ye wolde wyshe to be lyke. For Cras∣sus of all them that were delycate and ioly, was the most sober. Sceuola of al them that were sober, was the most freshe and plesant. Crassus with gentilnes had sufficient seueri∣tie: in the great seueritie of Sceuola, there lacked no gentylnesse. This commendation of Tully declareth these two men worthy to be counsaylours in a weale publyke. Crassus, called Marcus, beinge none Empe∣rour, was the rychest man of a pryuate per∣on that was of the Romayns. Plutarchus wryteth, that he was sente generall capitain agaynste the Parthians. He had in his trea∣sure seuen thousand and a hundred talentes, whiche do amounte of our money to a thou∣sande thousande, a hundred thousande, thre hundred and fifty poundes, ouer and besides that he had gyuen the .x. parte of his moue∣ables to Hercules in offerynge. and had made a feaste to all the people of Rome, appoyn∣tynge to euery man the rate of three Minas, euery Mina beynge of our moneye .xxxv. s. xi. d. q. whiche is in thre Minas .v .li .vii. s. ix. d. ob. q. for euery mans portion. whiche
consyderyng the multitude of people, whiche were at that tyme in Rome, beinge than the greatest citie and mooste populous in all the worlde, it semeth that the summe was inesti∣mable. He wolde say, that he ought not to be called a ryche man, excepte he could with his yerely rente maynteine a legion, whiche con∣teyned .vi. thousande foote men, and .v. hun¦dred men of armes commonly. By the which wordes of Pliny recited in his .xxxiii. boke▪ the .x. chapiter, it may wel be supposed, that where a lyttell before, the same Plinye este∣meth the ryches of Crassus to be .xx. thou∣sande Sestertia, which in the rate of our mo∣ney is syxe score and .xi. thousande, thre score and fyue poundes, the same summe was the yerely reuenewes of Marcus Crassus, eue∣rye Sestertium beinge .vi. li. xi. s. ix. d. ob. the whiche reuenewes were not onely of his possessions, grayne, fruite, and cattell, but also of the labours of a greate multytude of bonde men, whiche he dyd lette to hyre vnto them that had nede of theyr seruyce, they be∣inge instructed in all maner of sciences and artes. Of whom there were .v. hundred car∣pentars, of al the other a moch greater num∣ber, all that they gayned, cam to his cofers. Moreouer he practised vsury, lendynge light¦ly to all men that wolde borowe, but if they brake promyse with hym, he was in exacting therof extreame and rigorous. He gat infy∣nite substance by the possessions & goodes of men attaynted in the tyme of Sylla, who fa∣uoured hym. Therwith he was excedyng co∣naytous and vnstable, but vsynge moche ly∣beralitie and affabilitie towarde the people, he was alwaye in great estimation amonge them, he was also eloquent, and wold plead in euery commune cause. Fynally beinge ste∣red with couaytous, and enuye, whiche he hadde to the great honours that Caesar and Pompey had obteyned, he procured warre agaynste the people called Parthi, by whom bothe he and his sonne, with .xxx. thousande Romaynes wereslayne, and many also were taken, whiche (as Plutarch wryteth) hap∣pened by his negligence, he beinge more in∣dustrious about the gatherynge of moneye, than he was in gouernynge and orderynge his armye. He dyed afore the incarnation of Christe. 51. yeres. Crastino, aui, are, to deferre from day to day. Crastinô, idem quod Cras. Crastinus, a, um, perteininge to to moreowe, or tyme to come. Crater, is a bason of a water cundit, wherein∣to the water runneth out of pipes or cockes. Cratera, uel Crater, teris, a great cup. Also a great hole on the top of the meruaylous hyll of Aetna in Sicile, out of the whiche yssueth flames of fyre. It is also the vessell of a well. Craterra,would a buckat to take vp water. Crates, grates of yron or wood. They be also the watling of a wal or house klayed or that∣ched. Also the name of a philosopher, whiche to the entente he moughte the more quyetlye study philosophy, he beinge ryche, threwe al his goodes into the sea, sayinge: hense with a mischiefe ye vngratious appetites, I had leauer drowne you, than ye shoulde drowne me. Supposynge, that he moughte not haue vertue and ryches to gether. Crathis, the name of two ryuers, the oone in Grece, the other in Calaber. Craticula, a gredyron, wheron meate is broiled Cratinas, a ryuer in Affryke. Cratinus, a poete, whiche wrate comedies. Cratio, iui, ire, to couer with grates, to wattil. Cratippus, the name of a philosopher. Cratos, power or dominion. Cratilus, the name of a philosopher, to whom Plato wrate a boke. Crea, the shyn, behynde the which is the cause of the legge. Creator, the fyrste maker of a thynge. Creator urbis, the founder or fyrst buylder, the firste maker, or causer. Creatua, a creature or thynge made of no∣thinge. Creber, bra, brum, frequente, or accustomed. Also standynge or beynge thycke to gether, as trees. Crebresco, brui, brescere, to be wonte, to be commune. Crebritas, & Crebritudo, oftnes, or thicknes in beinge or growynge together. Crebro, often, Credibile, that whiche maye be beleued. Creditor, oris, he vnto whom a manne oweth any thynge. Creditum, that thynge that is owed. Credo, didi, dere, to beleue, to truste, to com¦myt, or delyuer a thynge to be saufly kept, to publyshe. Credere uerba alicui, to tell to one his coun∣sayle. Creditur tibi,Plaut. i Sticho. I truste the. Creditur male, it is yll lente. Creduis,Plaut. i curcul. uel Creduas, for credas. Credulitas, tatis, light beleue. Credulus, he that beleueth lyghtly. Cremasteres,Colum.  capi. 25. the synewes, wherby the stones of a man or beaste do hange. Crementum, increase. Cremera, a ryuer. Cremium, fryed meate burned to the panne. Cremo, are, to bourne. Cremôna, a towne of Italy.
Cremor, ôris, the iuyce of barley steped in wa¦ter, beaten and pressed. Crenae, the dentes about the leafe of an herbe or tre lyke to a sawe. Also it is the scores whi¦che menne vnlerned doo make on styckes for theyr remembrance. Also Crena, is the nocke of a bowe or arrowe. Creontes, the name of a kynge, whose dough∣ter Iason maryed, whan he had left Medea. Creophilus, the name of a poete. Creo, aui, are, to gyue the fyrste beinge vnto any thynge: also to geat a chylde, to cause. Creare magistratum, to ordeyne an officer. Crepa, of olde wryters vsed for Capra, a gote Crepare,gilius to be broken, also to speake or preach Crepêrus, a, um, doubtfull, ambiguous. Crepida, & Crepis, pidis, a shoow with lat∣chettes, some take it for a corked shoe or slip∣per, bycause of the noyse, whiche it maketh whan a man goeth. Crepidarius, rij, he that maketh showes or slyppers. Crepidatus,oratius. he that weareth slyppers. Crepido, inis, a creke on the waters side, wher¦on the water beateth. Also the mouthe of a well, and the extreme parte of any place. Crepidula, a lyttell slypper. Crepitaculum, a tymbrell, or other instrument whiche beinge touched with the hande, ma∣keth a sounde. Crepito, ani, are, to make a noyse or boūsing. Crepitare dentibus, in ente. to crashe with the tethe. Crepitat mihi uenter, my bealy courleth. Crepitulum, an ornament of the heade, which with meuynge of the head, yeldeth a sowne. Crepitus, a bounse or great dyn or noyse. Crepo,Vergilius pui, pare, to make a great noyse, or sounde, also to be broken. Crepuit foris, the dore craked. Crepundia,Plat{us} in Amph. tryfles or small gyftes gyuen to li∣tell chyldren, as lyttel belles, tymbrelles, and suche lyke toyes. Also the fyrste apparayle of chyldren, as swathels, wast cotes, and suche lyke. And by traslation they say, A crepun∣dijs erat uirtuti deditus: From his chylde∣hode he was euer gyuen to vertue. Crepusculum, the breake or fyrste sprynge of the daye, called the twylyghte. Cresco, creui, crescere, to growe or increase. Creuit haereditatem, he is increased in his lyuclode, or he hath inheritaunce fallen vn∣to hym. Creta, an yle lying betwene the part of Grece called Peloponesus, nowe Morea, and the Rhodes, and it hath on the northe parte the sea called Aegeum and Cretense, on the southe the sea of Aegypte and Affrica, it is now called Candy. In this yle was Iupy∣ter nouryshed, whome the paynimes named theyr chiefe or principal god. There also Mi¦nos raigned, & Radamāthus gouerned vnder hym with moste exquisite iustice, as ye may rede in theyr places. Of whose lawes other countreys toke theyr fyrste paterne, and yet not withstandynge the people of that coun∣trey were noted of olde authors to be vicy∣ouse and shameful lyars, as Epimenides the great philosopher, wrate in a verse recited by saynct Paule in his epistoll to Titus, saying Cretes alwaye ben lyars, vngratious bea∣stes, and slouthfull paunches. Creta, is also chalke. Cretatus, a, um, layde with chalke. Cretaeus, & Cretensis, a manne of Crete or Candy. Creterra, a bucket to drawe vp water. Crethmos, uel Cretamus, an herbe growyng on the sea rockes, whiche we call Sampere. it is of some called Creta marina, the leaues are kepte in bryne or salte to be eaten with fleshe, as a sauce. Creticus, a, um, of Crete of Candy. Also a fote in meter, whiche hath the fyrste and thyrde syllable longe. ❀Cretizare cum Cretensibus.Eras. in chilli. A prouerb v∣vsed where a craftye man wyll deceyue hym that is crafty: a these steale from a thefe: or a lyer lye before theym, whiche vse to make leasynges. Cretosus, a, um, full of chalke. Cribro, aui, are, to syfte or sarce. Cribrum, a sieue or a sarce. Crimen, minis, a faulte, an offence, blame, matter layde agaynste on by action or suite. somtime a faulse suspition. Criminale, criminall, wherin is an offence or faulte. Criminatio, blame, false reporte, or reproche. Criminor, aris, ari, to blame, to rebuke, to lay to ones charge, to accuse. Criminosus, a, um, rebukefull, worthy blame. Crimissus, a ryuer of Grece. Crines, heare of the heade. Crinire, to laye forthe the heare. Crinita stella, a comete or blasynge sterre. Crinitus, he that hath moche or longe heare. Crinon, a red lyly. Crisa, the name of a towne buylded by Crisus, Phocus sonne. Crispina, by the description of Io. Agricola, semeth to be the bryer called Respis. Crispulus, he that hath his heare kurled. Crispus, kurled. It was also the name of Sa∣lustius: reade in that place. Crista, a krest, or any thynge growynge on the heade of a foule or beaste, as a cockes combe or the feathers on the head of a byrde, called a coppe.
Criticus, he that iudgeth the actes or warkes that men do wryte. Critici dies, the dayes wherein physitions gyue iudgemente of the contynaunce of the syckenesse. Crito, a philosophers name of Athenes. Critobulus, was a phisition, of whom Pliny speaketh. li. 7. Crobylon, a caule to were on ones heade. Crociatus, a, um, coloured lyke saffron. Crocinum, idem. Crocitus, the noyse that a rauen or crowe ma∣keth, called crokynge. Crocitatio, idem. Crocodilus, an yll beaste, whiche is bredde in Aegypte, and lyueth partely in water, parte∣ly on lande, and is in facion lyke a dragon, but he hath small eyes, very longe tethe lyke to a sawe, & lacketh a tunge, and meueth on∣ly the ouermoste sawe, and not the nether, and hath great nayles and strong on his fete: there hath ben sene of theym .xx. fecte longe, and the skinne on his backe is vnpenetrable. He deuoureth not only men, but also bestes, whiche do come nighe to the ryuer of Nilus or other there aboute. And yet not withstan∣dinge the Egyptians dyd honour that beast, in so moche as if any were kylled, they cau∣sed hym to be salted and buryed. They bring forthe egges no more than geese egges, and that .lx. at a tyme, the male and female syt∣tyng on them by tourne. Reade more in Tro∣chilus of this beaste. Crocodili lachrimae, Crocodiles teares. A prouerbe applyed vnto theym, whiche ha∣tynge an other man, whome they wolde de∣stroye, or haue destroyed, they wyll seeme to be sory for hym. It is taken of the propertys of Crocodilus the monster, who beholdynge a man commynge, whom he wolde deuoure, he wepeth, and after that he hath eaten the body, he washeth the heade with his teares, and than eateth it also. Croco, & Crocito, to make a noyse lyke a rauen. Crocomagma, matis, the duste or refuse of saffron. Crocotirium, cakebreade. Crocotulae, garmentes of the coloure of saf∣fron. Crocotularius, a dyet. Crocus, & Crocum, saffron, whiche of al mē is knowen. It is hotte and drye in the fyrste degree. Croceus, a, um, of the colour of saffron. Crocuta,Constant. a beaste, whiche Solimus calleth a monster, begotten betwene the beaste called Hyena and a lyoesse: he neuer closeth his eyes or wynketh, on both sydes of his mouth he hath as it were but one tothe, they breake all thynges with theyr tethe quyckelye, and swoloweth, and forthwith dygesteth it. The nature of them is betwene a dog & a wulfe, but he is moche worse than any of them. He counter fayteth the voyce as well of men, as of other beastes. Croesus,Const. was kynge of Lydia, sonne of Haly∣attes, who subdued many greatte countreys in Asia and Greece, and gathered innumera∣ble ryches. He on a tyme demaunded of the wyse man Solon: Who was the happyeste man that euer he see. He sayd, Tellus a man of Athenes, whoo had honeste and good son∣nes, and they also had lyke good chyldren, al whiche he sawe in his lyfe. And whan he had lyued a good tyme honestlye, he at the laste fyghtynge agaynste the ennemies of his coū∣trey, after that he had vainquished them, he dyed a fayre deathe, and in the same place was honourably buryed of the Athenienses. And whā Croesus asked, who was most hap¦py next Tellus, he sayde: Cleobis and Bito, whiche were Argiues, and had a competent lyuynge, and were of suche strength, that in all games in prouynge of strengthe, they ob∣teyned the pryce. On a festiuall daye of Iu∣no theyr goddesse, theyr mother being an old woman, wolde be caryed vnto the temple in a wayne, but the oxen, whiche shulde drawe it, were not come from the fielde, wherfore her two sonnes, takynge the beame of the wayne, drewe theyr olde mother therein .vii. myles and more, and soo broughte her to the temple of Iuno, all men meruaylinge and cō∣mendynge the yonge men, al womenne pray∣synge the mother for bryngynge vp of suche chyldren, the mother beynge surprysed with ioye, as wel for the acte of her sonnes, as al∣so for the fame and commendation thereof, standynge afore the ymage of Iuno, prayed, that her sonnes mought haue that thyng gi∣uen them, whiche were the beste thynge that euer mought happen to men▪ whan they had sacrifised, eaten and drunke with moch plea∣sure and ioye, they fell on sleape, and neuer awaked,▪ whose ymages al the people of their countrey did set vppe with moche honour at Delphos. Croesus beinge abashed, sayd vn∣to Solon: My frend of Athenes, settest thou so lyttell by our felicitie, that thou preferrist before vs these priuate persons? Solon an∣swered, Truely Croesus, in processe of tyme many thynges are sene, which men wold not se: and many thynges be suffered, that men wolde not suffer. And after that he had moch spoken of mans calamitie, at the laste thus he concluded his sayinge: The ende of eue∣ry thynge is to be loked on, whereto it shall
come, for god pluckith vp by the roofes many men, vnto whom he gaue all fortune at plea∣sure. Cresus made hereto no coūtenance, but estemyng Solon to be but a fole, consyderyng that he passynge so lyght vppon the thinges, whiche appered to be good, bad hym to take heede of the ende of all thynges, he settynge lytell by Solon, let hym depart. A good space after, Cresus by the comfort of the answeres of Apollo at Delphos, attemptynge warre a∣gaynst Cyrus kyng of Persia, at the last was taken of him, who causid a great pyle of wod to be made redy, and Cresus beinge in gyues to be set on the toppe therof, than forthwith Croesus remembryd the wordes of Solon, that no man lyuyng was blessed, or on al par¦tes happy, and therwith lamentyng, he cried, O Solon, Solon, Solon. Whyche Cyrus heryng, caused to be demanded of hym, who it was that he namyd. Croesus with moche difficultie at the last tolde what he was, and finally declared all that before was rehersyd. Whiche after that Cyrus had herde, he re∣cognisyng hym self to be also a man, soore re∣pented, that he went aboute to bourne hym, whyche was equall to hym in honour and ry∣chesse, and cōmaunded hym to be taken from the fyre, whiche than beganne to flame, and soo with great difficultie he was delyuered. And afterwarde Cyrus entertayned hym ho∣nourably, and vsyd his counsayle, whyche in many thynges he founde verye profytable. Moche more Herodotus the noble hystoryan wryteth hereof in Clio, whyche I wold god were radde oftentymes of kynges and theyr counsaylours, for whose commoditie I haue wrytten this Epytome or abbreuiation, to no man tedious, whiche hath a good nature. Cromis, was he, to whome Hercules gaue the horses of Dyomedes, whyche wold cate menne. Cronia, were the feastes dedycate to Satur∣nus, whiche were also callyd Saturnalia. Cronium, is the northe sea callyd Mare con∣cretum, or glaciale, the frosen sea. Crotalum, an instrument, whyche the Egyp∣tians vsyd in sacrifyce, made of two plates, whiche beaten togither, made an harmony. Crotalus, he that hath a sownynge voyce, and a shylle. Croton, loke after in Ricinum. Cruciabilitas, tourment, affliction. Cruciatus, tourment. Cruciatio, idem. Crucifigo, fixi, figere, to crucifye. Crucio, are, to tourment. Crudaria, a veyne of syluer. Crudelis, le, cruell. Crudesco, dui, descere, to be rawe. Cruditas, tatis, rawnesse of humours, or ylls dygestyon. Crudus, a, um, rawe, fresshe, or newe made, not rype. Crudus homo, whose stomacke can not dy∣gest well. Crudus ensis, a cruell sworde. Cruda poma, fruites that are not rype. Cruentati oculi, eyen redde as bloudde. Cruento, aui, are, to make blouddy. Cruentus, a, um, blouddy, cruell. Crumena, a pourse. Cruor, bloud, whiche cometh out of a wounde. Crus, cruris, the parte of the legge, whyche is from the knee downe vnto the ankle, callyd the shanke. Crusculum, a lyttell or small legge. Crusta, the vtter part of euery thynge that is not eaten. Also the scurfe of a scab or wound▪ also playster of a wall. Crustarius, a pargettour. Crustata, wheron is layde playster, or thynne shardes of stone. Crusto, aui, are, to lay playster or parget. Crustulata, a meate made of crustes of breade. Crustulum, a crust of breadde, of a pastye, or of meate rosted,Vergilius. broyled, or fryed. Crustum, idem. Crustumnia pira, peares red on the one syde. Crustuminium, a towne in Italy. Crux, crucis, a crosse, galowes, or other lyke, also all maner of tourment. Cruci dare aliquem,Flaut. in milite. to hange one. Crypsorchis, is where a mans stones are re∣mouyd out of theyr place. Crypta, a voult lowe in the grounde. Crypticus, a, um, secrete or hyd vnder the erth. Cryptoporticus, a place vnder the grounde, with wyndowes lyke to a parler, where men do dyne in the summer tyme for heate. Crystallina, vessell and cuppes of crystal stone. Crystallus, & Crystallum, a stone callid cristal. ¶C ANTE T. CTenes, the foreteethe. Cteniatrus, a horse leach, he that healeth diseases of horses and cattell. Ctesipho, or Ctesiphon, the name of a warke∣man, whiche made the great temple of Dia∣na at Ephesus, a worke wonderful, and reno∣med through the world, the which was after burned of one Herostratus, onely bycause he wolde for some dede be spoken of. ¶C ANTE V. CVbatio, a lyenge. Cubatus, tus, a syttynge on broode, as a henne dothe. Cubicularis, re, that pertayneth to the chābes.
Cubicularius, a seruāt that awaiteth in the chā¦ber, a chamberlayn or grome of the chamber. Cubiculum, a bed chamber. Cubicus, a, um, square as a dye. Cubile, a bed. somtyme it is taken for a closet. Cubitale, a foresleue of a garment, which keue¦reth the arme from the elbowe downewarde. Cubito, aui, are, to lye often with one. Cubitor, toris, an oxe or horse, whiche wyll lay hym downe whan he shulde warke. Cubitus, & cubitum, an elbow. somtyme a me∣sure callyd a cubite, that is to saye, one foote and an halfe, but a cubite in geometrye con∣tayneth .vi. of our common cubites. Cubo, bui, bare, to lye downe, properly it is of sycke men, or of women with chylde. Cubus, is a fygure foure square on all partes lyke a dyce. Cucubo, aui, are, to make a noyse lyke an owle. Cuculió, onis, a keuerynge of the head, whiche men dyd vse whan they walked in the nyght. Cuculus, & cucullus, a byrde callyd a cuckow. Cucullus, a hoode, whiche men or women doo weare for the rayne, or whan they mourne. Cucuma, a vessell of brasse or tynne, fascyoned lyke a cucumer, wherwith bathes were filled and emptyed. Cucumer, eris, & cucumis, a fruyte callyd a cucumber. Cucumerarius, a gardyn, where cucumbers to growe or be kept. Cucurbita, a fruite callyd a gourde. Also Cu∣curbita, & cucurbitula, is a cuppe, wherwith surgions do drawe out bloud with scarifieng of the skynne, callyd cuppynge. Cucurbitarium, a place where gourdes be sowē Cucurbitarius, a louer of gourdes. Cucurio, iui, ire, to make a noyse lyke a cocke. Cudo, cusi, cudere, to stryke as smythes do▪ al∣so to coyne. In me haec cudetur faba, this thing shal light on my necke. Cuias, cuiatis, of whense. Cuius, a, um, whose. Cuium pecus,Plaut. in Men. whose cattall? Cuiusmodi, what, what fascion, what maner. Cuiusmodi homines erunt?Cice. pro Cluen. What maner of men shall they be? Cuius{que}modi.) Vereor enim cuius{que}modi es Rosci,Cice. pro Roscio. ne ita hunc uidear uoluisse seruare, ut tibi omnino non pepercerim, I feare me, that in what so euer state thou art in Rosce. lest it shalbe thought, that I wolde so excuse or defende him, forasmoch as I haue not al∣way sparyd the. Cuiuscun{que}modi genus hominum,Salust. in Catal. of all ma¦ner of sortes of men. Culcitra, a mattresse. Culcitrula, a lyttell mattresse. Culcitula, a lyttell staffe.Festus. Culeus, amonge the Romans was the greatest measure, and receyueth twenty of the measu∣res callyd Amphora, whyche amounteth to two thousand, eyght hundred, foure pounde of measure, euery pounde beinge xii. ounces▪ of our measure .v. score galons. It was alsoo a sacke of lether, whereinto they whyche had slayne theyr fathers or mothers were sowen, and with them also were put alyue, a cocke, a serpente, and an ape, and throwen all to∣gyther in to the ryuer of Tyber. And this was the punyshement of paricides or murde∣rers of theyr parentes. Culex, culicis, a gnatte. Culicem colant, camelum deglutientes, they strayn a gnatte through theyr tethe, and swolow downe a camell. An apt prouerbe ap∣plyed by our fauiour Christ vnto the Phary∣seys, whiche dyd aggrauate smalle offences, and mayntayned great enormities. It may be nowe vsed agaynste suche persons, whyche seeke out and doo punyshe small offendours, and let the great trespassours against the law go quyte vnpunyshed. also them, whyche are scrupulous in thynges of lyttell importance, and in ambytion, auaryce, extortion, aduou∣trye, thefte, murder, treason, or heresy, they fynde no daunger of conscience. Culigna, a bolle or dyshe to drynke of. Culina, a kytchyn. sommetyme the meate that is dressyd. Culinor, aris, ari, to do the offyce of a cooke. Culleolum, the vtter shale of a nutte, whyche is grene. Culmen, minis, the roufe of a house. Culmus, the reede or strawe of corne, from the roote to the care. Culpa, is an offence doone not wetynge, or not intendyng to do hurte. Culpa carere,Plaut. in capt. not to offende. Culpam commereri to commyt an offence. Culpam in alterū conferre, to lay the blame to an other. Culpa teneri, to be in faute. Culpito, tare, to blame often. Culpo, pare, to blame. Cultellum, a lyttell knyfe, or a whyttyll. Culter, & cultrum, a knyfe. Cultrarius, was he that kylled the beast, and di¦uyded hym in the sacrifyce to ydols. it may to nowe taken for a slaughter man. Cultus, tus, apparaile, somtyme it is taken for honour done to god. Culullus, an erthen cuppe, suche as the galye cuppes be. Cululus, a lytle chalyce or cup of erthe, whyche
the bysshoppe vsed in sacrifice. Cum, with, whan, whyles, where, forasmoche, as well. Cum mihi tum illi, as well to me as to hym. In Cum, is some thyng lasse vnder∣stande, in tum, some thyng more. Quod cum omnibus confitendum est, tum nobis praeci∣pue, Which thing ought to be confessed of al men, and of vs most specially. also Cum signi¦fieth albeit. Nam cum sedulo, munditer nos habemus, uix aegre amatorculos inuenimus, Although we appoint vs neuer so clenlye,Plaut. in . yet vneth fynde we any louers. The ancient wri∣ters, whan it signified, whan, where, and for as moche, they wrate it Quom. Cū dicto, forthwith, as sone as it was spokē Cum imperio est, he beareth a rule. Cum maxime, excedyngly. Cum maxume, to moche. Cum potestate est, he is in authoritie, or in an hygh offyce. Cum primis, very. Cum primis nobilis, de∣ry noble. Cum stomacho, dysdaynfully. Cum tempore, in a certayne space. Cum tua pace,Terent. in Elecyra. sauyng your displeasure. Cum uenia tua, with your lycence. Cuma, a towne in Greece. Cumae, a citie in Campania. Cumanus, a man of that citie. Cumatilis, le, a colour callyd blewe. Cumera, a great vessel, wherin corne was kept eyther of wykars or of erthe. Cumerum, a vessell vsed at weddynges. Cuminum, an herbe and sede callyd cummyn. Cumueni, Bigor in Fraunce. Cumulate, abundantly. Cumulatim, in an heape, or heaped vp. Cumulatus, a, um, augmented. Cumulo, aui, are, to make an heape, to fylle, to adde more. Cumulus, an heape. Cumae, & cunabula, cradels, wherin chyldren be rocked. somtyme it is taken for the age of in∣fancy also for the begynnyng of thynges. Cunctanter, slowly, softe and fayre. Cunctatio, & contatio, a taryeng, an abidyng, a prolongyng of tyme, a doubtyng. Cunctator, oris, a taryer, a differrer. it is also he whiche speaketh lyttell, and taryeth longe in his speakyng, as some doo, more to seeme wyse, than that they be wyse. Cuncti, altogither. Cunctor, & contor, aris, to tarye, to prolonge tyme, to abyde, to doubte. Cunctus, a, um, all togither. Cuneus, an axe to cut wod, which is small and thyn before, and brode and thycke after, that the wod may ryue the better. also a wedge to cleaue wodde with. By translation it is a company of footemen in battayle, that gothe in a lyke order, small before, & brode behinde. There was a lyke fourme in the Theatre or place, where men behelde playes. It is some tyme taken for a company of people. Cuneatim, in the sourme afore declared. Cuneatus, a, um, that whiche appereth to be in the sayd fourme of Cuneus. Cuniculum, an hole in the grounde. Cuniculus, a beast callyd a cony. Cunila, is an herbe, wherof be iiii. kyndes, one is callyd Capitata, which is our sauerye. An other gallinacea, which som do call Origanū heracleoticum, in englysh the maioram, whi∣che hath the smal leaf. The thyrd is that, whi¦che is also callyd Origanū, which I suppose to be peny royall with the brode leafe. Cunire, to shyte. Cunilago, a kynde of sauery.Pom. Fest Cunnus, a womans wycket. Cupa, a cuppe. Cupedinarius, an huckstar that selleth meate and drynke. Cupes, Cupedia, & Cupedula, delycate mea∣tes, or desyre of deynty meates. Cupido, dinis, the sonne of Venus, god of loue. Cupido, in the feminine gender, vehement de syre or appetite. Cupide, desyrousely. Cupiditas, tatis, couaytise. Cupidus, a, um, desyrous. somtyme it signifieth a louer. Cupiens, he that desyreth a thynge. Cupiens tui est, he loueth the hartily. Cupienter, with great desyre. Cupîtus, a, um, desyred. Cupressus, a cypresse tree. Cupressinus, a, um, of cypresse tree. Cuprum, mettall callyd copper. Cur, wherfore, or why. Cura, care, thought, study, diligence, warke or labour, also loue. Curabitur, it shall be done. Curae habere, Curae esse, to care fore. Curas adimere, to set all care asyde. Curam figere, infigere, defigere, configere, to set care and study on a thynge. Curis laxari, to be out of care. Curatio, cure, charge. Curatio mea est,Plaut. in paenu. it is myne offyce or charge. Curator, gardeyn in socage, or he to whom the custody of a madde man or foolysshe is com∣mitted. also he to whome any thing is cōmit∣ted, to suruey, or to prouide thinges necessary for a wele publick, or to order such thingis, as he hath in charge, concernyng as wel priuate thingis as they that do belōg to a cōminalte. he may be {pro}perly callyd a surueyour. Curatorius, a, um, belonging to the sayd office. Curatus, in good poynt or state.
Curatus, a, um, done with dylygence. Cures, a cytie of the Sabines. Curculio, onis, a lyttell worme in grayn callyd a myte or wyuelle. It is also the wesyll of the throte of a man, wherby he draweth wynde. Cur cura, an ylande in the sea Adriatike. Curêtes, were the priestes of Cybeles, whyche fyrst inhabyted Italye. they were also callyd Corybantes. There were other people so cal∣lyd, whiche were next to Aetolia, also other in Dalmatia,Leonicus in uaria hi¦stor. now callid Slauonia. Curêtes callyd also, Idaei dactyli, were .v. brethern in the yle callid Creta, vnto whom Rhea caused her sonne Iupiter to be brought, fearyng the yre of Saturnus her husband. Theyr names were these, Hercules, Iolaeus, Paeonius, Epi∣medes, Iasius, & Idas. Curetis, was the olde name of the yle callyd Creta. Curia, Romulus the fyrst kynge of Romaynes diuided the people of Rome into .xxx. partes, and bycause the cure or charge of the weale publike was depeched by the consent and sen¦tence of theym, he callyd theym Curias, and afterwarde he added vnto theym other fyue, and that euerye manne in his owne Curia, shoulde obserue holye dayes, and doo sacry∣fyce. Curia, was also the courte of the Se∣nate, and sommetyme vsyd for the courte or sessyon of  udges, whyche haue , whome we name iudges Curiae dominicales, maye be taken amonge those courtes, whyche we call courte barons. Of the occasion and begynnynge of Curiae dominicales, rede the coment of Zasius vpon the title of the lawe ciuile, De origine iuris. Curiae ueteres, where priestes minystryd a∣boute theyr ceremonies. Curia hostilia, was a place buylded by Tul∣lus Hostilius kynge of Romayns, where the Senate dyd sytte aboute the affayres of the citie of Rome. Curiata commitia, were great assemblies cal∣lyd of the people, out of euery of the .xxxv. di∣uysyons callyd Curiae, whiche beinge sette in xxxv. sundrye particions, affyrmed or denyed suche lawes or constitutions as were purpo∣syd vnto theym, and the lawes so made, were named Leges curiatae. Curiales, they whiche be of that court. Curio, of Varro is taken for a place, where priestes consulted of thynges concernynge di∣uine ceremonies also a curate, or he that hath the spyrytuall charge in a parysh also it was the surname of a familye in Rome, whereof were many excellent oratours. Curio magnus, as Sipontinus writeth, is taken of Plautus for oone made maygre or leane with care and busynes. Curionem agnum, Plautu  be. Curionatus, the offyce of a Curionium, the moneye  acu∣rate for doinge his offyce Curiositas, tatis, curiositi Curiosus, is of Robertu  his di∣ctionarie of latine and  to be the mayster of the  to sende in haste  affay∣res. But of what  it. I knowe not. Curiosus, a, um,  sommetyme on the yll parte,  is vsyd, than is : sometyme on the better  very careful and busy about  eyther oure selfes, or . Curius, the surname of noble Romans, of whō chiefly was one callid Marcus Curius, a mā of meruailous honesty, constance, & grauitie, which after many great victories, whiche he (being capitayn) had ageynst the Samnites. Sabines, & the noble king Pirrhus. he deui∣ded among the people of Rome, the feldes, ap¦pointing to euery man .xl. acres, & retained by their consentes as moch to him self, and whā they wold haue giuen to him more, he refused it, saying, He was an yl citesyn, that thought it not ynough for him, which was inough for other. Whan the ambassadors of Samnites brought hym a great summe of golde, he syt∣tyng by the fyre boylyng of rapes, sayd vnto them: I had leauer eate in my erthen dysshe, and haue dominion ouer them, that haue soo moche golde. Whan he was accused of with holdynge of money, he brought forth a tree barrelle, whyche he occupied whan he dydde sacrifice, and toke a solemne othe, that of all the pray that was gotten of theym, whom he vanquysshed, he kepte no more but that bar∣rell to his owne vse. Curmundula, peares verye delycate, hauynge so thynne parynges, that men dyd eate theym vnpared. Curo, aui, are, to care for a thyng, to take hede, or be diligent about a thynge, to be doinge of a thinge.Terent.  Andria. Cura ut ualeas, Loke to thy helthe. Curasti probe, thou haste done euery thynge well. somtyme to prepare, to heale one that is sycke, to take refection or comfort. Curabo, I wyll doo my dilygence. Curabo illi pecuniam, I wylle prouyde that he shall haue money. Curabitur,Terent.  Heauton. it shal be prouided, it shalbe done with dilygence. Curareaedes, to take hede to the house, that nothynge be loste.
Curare aliena, to meddle with other mennes busynesse.Plaut. in Sticho. Curare amicos, to entertayne frendes or at∣quayntaunce. Curare faciendum, to cause or make it to be done. Curare fidem, to kepe promyse. Curare munus suum,Plaut. in Trinum. to do his offyce. Currens, he that runneth. Currentem incitare, to exhorte or sette for∣warde hym, that of his owne courage is wel dysposed to a thynge. Curriculo, quyckely. Curro, cucurri, currere, to rounne. it is also to passe away fast, as a shyp dothe. Curriculum, a short space of tyme. Also a run∣nynge place. Curriculus, a lyttell carre. Curruca, a lyttell byrde, whiche hatcheth and bryngeth vp cuckowe byrdes▪ it is supposyd to be an hedge sparowe. Currus, a carre. Cursim, runnyng, with all spede, very spedily. Cursito, aui, are, to runne often. Curso, aui, are, to runne alway or often. Cursor, oris, he that runneth in poste. Cursorius, a, um, pertaynyng to runnynge. Cursura, a course. Cursus, us, idem. Curtus, a, um, shorte. Curta supellex, lyttell or smalle substaunce. Curuamen, minis, a crokednes. Curuesco, uesci, uescere, to be croked. Curuipes, he that hath a crooked foote. Curulis, & curulae, were lytell carres or drays, hauynge in theym chayres of yuory, wherein they satte, whych were hed officers in Rome. sommetyme it is vsyd of poetes for the same offycers. Curuatio, curuamen, curuatura, a bowynge or bendynge. Curuo, aui, are, to bowe, or make croked. Curuus, a, um, crooked. Cuscuta, a weede, whiche twyneth about her∣bes, hauyng a redde stalke. Cuspidatus, ta, tum, poynted. Cuspidatim, poyntyng, or poyntwyse. Cuspis, idis, sometyme signifieth the poynte of any weapon. sometyme the steele, sometyme a speare head. Custodi, the custody, kepyng, or warde. some∣time he that kepeth, somtime he that is kept: sometyme the prison. Custodia, iui, dire, to kepe, to obserue, to retain. Custoditio, the kepynge. Custoditus, a, um, kept. Custos, custodis, a keper, a warden, or garden. Cuticula, a thynne skynne. Cutiones, they whiche in sellynge make many prices er they come to a poynt. Cutis, the inner skynne. Cuturnium, a vessell, out of the whiche wyne was poured in sacrifices. C ANTE Y. CYamea, a stone, whiche being broken,  lyke to a beane. Cyaneae, or Cyanitae, ylandes or rather rockes vnder Bosphorus Thracius. Cyaneus, a, um, & Cianus, a, um, a bright blue colour lyke a saphyre loupe. Cyanus, a blewe floure Arowynge amonge corne, callyd a blewebottell. Cyathisso, are, to syppe or to quafte all out, or halues. Cyathus, a cuppe. it is also a measure contey∣nynge of oyle one ounce and an halfe, of wine one ounce .v. drammes, and done scriple, of hony two ounces and dī. Cybele, & Cybeles, was the wyfe of Saturn, and was namyd of paynymes, the mother of the goddis, which hath diuers other names, as it shall appere in their places. Cybium, a fyshe whiche is foure square. Cyborium, a kynde of appuls of Alexandry. Cyclades, ben fifty yles in the sea callyd Egeū Cyclaminus, is an herb, which the apoticaries do name Panis porcinus. An other is of the same name, which they call Sigillum Mariae. Cyclas, cladis, a womans gowne with a long trayne. Cyclops, clopis, an ancient people inhabiting the yle of Sicile, whiche were lyke giantes, hauyng but one eye in theyr forheades. Cyclus, a rounde place in Athenes, where thin¦ges were solde. also a coyne or poyse. Cydarum, a bote. Cydnus, a ryuer in Cilicia, whyche rounneth frō the great moūtayne callid Taurus, & pas∣seth through the citie callyd Tharsos, which ryuer is so colde, that whan the great Alexā∣der, in his iourney agaynst Darius, went in∣to it to refresh hym, he was so mortified with colde in all his body, that he shuld haue died, had not that excellent and faythfull phisition Philyp recouered hym. Cydon, one of the notablest townes of Candy. Cydonium, a quynce peare. Cygneus, a, um, of a swanne. Cygnus, a swanne. Cylindraceus, a, um, in the forme of a laugat. Cylindraceus, a, um, lyke a roller. Cylindrus, an instrument, which is round like a pyller, & turneth, wherwith loddes of erth are broken, callyd commonly a roller. Cyllene, an hylle of Archadye, where they saye Mercurius was nouryshed. Cyllenius, one of the names of Mercury.
Cylydros, a serpente that rolleth hym selfe as he gothe. Cyma, yonge colewortes, also the tender parte of the stalke of euery herbe. Cymatilis, chamblette. Cymba, a bote. Cymbalaris herba, an hebe that groweth in mudwalles, hauynge a leafe lyke to yuy, but moche lasse, and a lyttell purple floure. Cymbalistae, they that play vpon cymbals. Cymbalum, an instrument of musyke. Cymbium, a piece or cup to drynke wyne in. Cymbrica Chersonesus, the countrey of Den∣marke. Cyminum, cummyn. Cyminus, a lake in Italy. Cynaethium, a citie of Archady. Cynanche, a syckenes callyd the squynce, why∣che is in the throte and iawes. Cynara, an herbe nowe callyd Artochokes. Cyneas, was an excellente wyse man, who be∣ing sent from kynge Pirrhus ambassadour to Rome, the next day after he came thither, he saluted al the senate & gentylmen by theyr names. Seneca in prologo libri primi decla∣mationum, sayth, that he saluted the senate, and all the people standynge about to beholde hym, by theyr names. Cynegetica, volumes writen of huntyng. Cynici, were a secte of philosophers, which do signify doggish for the similitude of theyr con¦ditions with dogges: for they barked at all men, & occupied women openly, & liued with∣out any prouisiō, the fyrst author therof was Antisthenes, next hym folowed Diogenes. Cyniphes, bytyng gnattes with longe legges. Cyniphia, the skynne of a gote. Cynnaberis, is that whiche apothecaries doo call Sanguis draconis. Cynocephalus, siue Canips, is a beast lyke an ape, but greater and more puissant, and hath the head more lyke a dogge. Diodorus Sicu∣lus saythe, that in bodye and fourme they be lyke to a man, and hath a lyke voyce. I sup∣pose it be those, whyche we do call Baboris. Horus Apollo writeth, that they pysse .xii. ty∣mes in the day, and as often in the nyght, de∣claryng euery houre of the day and the nyght by makyng their vrine▪ also that the dogge of that kynde soo lamenteth the wane of the moone, that during the tyme that she is dark before the chaunge, he loketh neuer vpward, nor eateth any thynge, but hangeth downe his head; and sheweth a countenāce of sorow▪ also peple vnder the great Cane, hauing hea∣des lyke dogges be so callyd. Cynodontae, are dogges teethe, whyche doo growe in the latter age. Cynoglossa, an herbe callyd houndes tunge. Cynomyia, a fly that dothe sucke the bloud of beastes▪ some call it a hors fly▪ all be it by the etimologye of the worde, it mought be better called a dogflye. Cynorrhodos, eglantyne. Cynos, in latyn is Canis, a dogge, also a citie in Locris. Cynosarges, a place in Athenes, where chyl∣derne were exercysed, whyche were bas∣stardes. Cynosbatos, the wylde eglantyne, which doth beare lyttell thynges lyke to spounges, and also a floure lyke theother eglantyne. Cynosura, a fygure of sterres in heauen, callid Vrsa minor. Cynozoon, a stynkynge herbe. Cynthia, one of the names of Diana. Cyparissus, a cypresse tree. Cyperus, is that whiche of the apothecaries is callyd Iuncus oderatus. Cyperus Babylonicus, Galyngale. Cyperus, & cyperis, an herbe hauynge leaues lyke sedges▪ also a roote lyke gynger. Cypria, was one of the names of Venus. Cyprium, mettall callyd copper. Cyprus, an yle in the sea callyd Carpathium, agaynst the coūtray callid Siria, on the north it hath Ciliciam, on the southe and the east Egypt. It is in lengthe after the description of Strabo .175. myles, after .viii. furlonges to a myle. Some supposed, that it was at the fyrst a portion of Siria, deuided by erthqua∣kes. This contrey abūdeth in wyne, oyle, met¦tal, & vitriol, & canes, wherof sugar is made. Also Venus was ther had in moch reuerence, in so moche as men before they dyd set forthe theyr doughters in mariage, offred theym to suche straungers as came into the countrey, to be by them defloured, and afterward ma∣ryed them to husbandes. Cyprinus, & Cyprius, a, um, of Cypers. Cypseli, byrdes callyd martlettes. Cypselos, the waxe of the eate. Cypselus, was kyng of Corinthus, father of Periander, one of the seuen sages of Grece. Cyrserum, a great shyppe or carryke. Cyrenaica secta, was a secte of philosophers, who affirmed the chiefe felicitie to be in car∣nal disertation, of the whiche secte Arisrip∣pus was chiefe. Cyrene, nes, a famous citie in Libia▪ also a ci∣tie in the yle of Cypers. Cyreneus, a man of that citie. Cyrnea, a goblet to drynke wyne in. Cyrnus, the yle whyche is callyd Corsica or Corse, Cyrnij, people of the yle of Corse. Cyrrhea, a citie in the mountayne of Helycon. Cyrrus, the name of ii. riuers, one in Armenia, the other in Media.
Cyrus, was a noble kyng of Persia the sonne of Cambises and Mandanes, whyche was doughter of Astyages kynge of Media, who bycause that he dreamed, that he sawe spring out of the secrete places of his onely dough∣ter, a vyne, with whose branche all Asia was keuered, he caused the chylde to be throwen in to a deserte, to be deuowred of beastes: but by goddes prouydence a bytche gaue it sucke, vntylle it was founde by a shepeherd, who brought it vp. At the laste he was kyng of Persia and Media, and subdued the more parte of Asia. This man excelled all menne in his tyme in goodly personage, gentylnesse, prowesse, lyberalitie, wysedome, and me∣morie. Sollinus wryteth, that of the exce∣dynge multitude of menne, whiche were in his hoste, he soo retayned the names, that commynge daylye amonge theym, he named euery manne by his propre name, whan he spake vnto them, The resydue of his woun∣derfull vertues be written by Xenophon most eloquentely in greke. At the laste he beynge vnsatiable in couaytynge countrayes, was slayne by Tomiris the queene of Scithia, with .CC. thousande Persians. Cyssus, uel Cysthus a kynde of yuye that gro∣weth alone also the name of a ryuer. Cythera plural. an yle agaynst Candy. Cytherea, one of the names of Venus. Cytheron, an hyll in Boeotia. Cyrinus, the fyrste bud of the floure of pome∣granate. Cytisus, an herbe, whyche is good to gyue to cattell agaynst the rotte. Cytrago,Coelius. ginis, the herbe, whych is commonly callyd baulme, of the apothecaries Melyssa. Cyttarus, the hyghe parte of the fyrmament▪ alsoo the hooles of a honye combe be callyd Cyttari, and also wherin akornes be sette on the stalke. Cyzicus, the name of an yle by Grece. ¶D ANTE A. DACIA, A. CVN∣treye beyonde Hun∣grye, on the northe parte of the riuer of Dano, or Danubius. Now is Denmarke callid by that name, whyche in the olde tyme was callydde Cymbrica Cherso¦nesus, and the people were callyd Cimbri. Daci, & Dani, people of the coūtrey of Dacia. Dacicus, a, um, pertaynyng to that countrey. Dacus, a, um, idem. Dactylides, grapes beinge longe lyke a finger. Dactylus, a fynger, a foote in meter, hauynge one longe syllable, & .ii. short. it is also a date. Daedala,Leonicus in uarsa hi¦stor. were feastes celebrate yerely in honor of reconcilynge of Iuno to Iupyter rede be∣fore in Citheron. Also Daedala, was the gene¦rall denomynation of ymages wroughte, of whome it semeth to some that Daedalus toke his name. Daedala of Lucretius is vsyd for Terra, for the diuersitie of thynges and four∣mes, whiche be in it. Daedalus, the name of an excellent carpentar of Athenes, whiche fyrste founde the sawe, the twybyll, and the augor, and made the place in Crete callyd Laberynthus. Doemogorgon, onis, whom Paynyms callyd the god of the erth, fyrst creatour of the erth. Daemon, monis, as Proclus writeth, is taken in diuers significations, one is that, whiche euery where hath souerayntie, and prouideth next vnto god, and so Iupiter callith Saturn Daemon. Also that which for euery man par∣ticularly prouideth▪ also the reasonable soule is of Plato in his boke callyd Timaeus, callid Daemon animalis, & in his boke callyd Sym∣posium, the loue of the mynde about the con∣templation of the diuine pulchritude, or vn∣speakable beautie is callid Daemon. Porphy¦rius supposid, that Daemon in euery mā was nothyng els but vnderstandynge. Plato also affirmeth in his boke callid Phoedo, that vn∣to the soules, which to come into this lyfe, is gyuen Daemon, whiche is the beholderand sercher of his thoughtes and deedes, whiche after that the soule is departed from the bo∣dy, remayneth styll with hym, and forthewith bryngeth hym sodaynely before the Iudge, where by his testymony he eyther delyuereth or condempneth hym. These wordes of Pla∣to approcheth nygh to the assertion of chry∣sten doctours, whyche do affyrme, that God appoynteth to euery reasonable soule, a good aungell and a bad. Sommetyme Daemon, is
taken for god, and therfore Apuleius intitled his boke De deo Socratis, and not De daemo¦ne Socratis, although Socrates hym self al∣waye soo named that thynge, that restrayned hym from doing or admitting any thing that was yll or inconuenient. Porphyrius hath of Daemon manye other opynions, whyche I passe ouer, bicause they may ingender in busy wyttes, rather errour than wysdome. More ouer this wold be also remembred, that Dae∣mon beynge a Greke worde, is dyuersely wri¦ten in Grecke, one waye with their lyttell o, callyd omicron, and than dothe signifie that whiche the latynes do cal Genius. Cicero na∣meth it Lar, whyche sygnifieth pryuate god∣des or spyrites appointed to euery particular persone or howse, which in effect is our good aungell, or our badde. Sometyme it is writ∣ten with the great O, callyd of the grekes O∣mega, and than doth it signifye, God, wyse∣dome,Daemoniū or fortune. Lykewise Doemonium in the neutre gender sygnifieth god, godheade, the power of god, whiche doth order and go∣uerne the hole worlde.Daemoni{us}. Daemonius in the ma∣sculine gēder, had diuers significations, and the one contrary vnto the other. for it signy∣fied happy, like to god, diuine, or meruailous, contrarywise, miserable, vnhappy, vnfortu∣nate. Therfore where this worde Daemoniū is written amonge the auncient grekes, that onely sentence, wherein it is, wylle not be well vnderstande, without consydering what gothe before, and what foloweth after. Not withstandyng among christen authors, Dae∣mon & daemonium, be indifferently taken for a diuel or damned spirite. This haue I remē∣bred not for children onely, but also for suche as perchaunce be ryght well lerned in the la∣tyne tunge, and yet in suche wordes made of greke, may happen to mysse the proper signi∣ficatiōs of them, not readyng greke authors in their owne tongue. Daemoniacus, & daemoniosus, possessyd with an yll spirite. Daemonicus, a, um, dyuellysshe. Dagnades, a kynde of byrdes, whyche the E∣gyptians vsyd to tye with theyr garlandes,Pom. Fest. whanne they were drynkynge, whyche with contynuall syngyng, bytynge, and pluckyng at theym that dranke, wolde not suffer them to sleape. Dahae, people in Scithia, valyaunt and cruell in battayle. Dalida, uel Dalila, an harlot dwellyng in Ga∣za, in the countrey of the Phillistians, whiche deceyued the stronge Samson. reade more of her in Samsons description. Dalmatia, is part of the great countrey callyd Illiria or Slauonia. It hath on the west Croa∣tiā, on the east Bossinā, on the north the great mount callyd Albanus mons, and the coūtry callyd Seruia, on the southe the sea callyd A∣driaticum, or the goulfe of Venyce. Dalmata, a man of that countrey. Dalmaticus, a, um, of that countrey. Dalmaticatus, apparailed ike a Slauonoyse. Dama, a falowe decre. Damascus, a famous and moste auncient citie in Siria or Surry, dyuyded frō Iudea with the mountayn callyd Antilibanus, and boun∣deth vpō Arabia petreia. To this citie is the greatest resort of marchauntes from the par∣tes of the south and east that is in the world, for spices, and clothes of sylke, and of golde, It is supposed to be the fyrste citie that euer was inhabited, and also that in the fyeldes of Damascus, callyd Ager Damascenus, god made Adam the fyrst man. Damascena pruna, ar damsins, which do grow about Damascus, and be greater and lengar than other damsyns whan they be dryed, we call them prunes Damascene, whiche of Ga∣lene are more commended than other of that kynde, they louse the bealy, but they restrayn distyllations. Damasonium, is nowe callyd among the Gre∣kes, that moste excellent and precious fruite, whiche is callyd Myrobalanum, which kynd is nowe callyd Myrobalanum Indum. Damia, one of the names of the goddesse Cybele. Damatris, the priest of her temple. Damnas, for damnatus, is sometyme vsyd a∣monge olde Ciuilions.Marcu. Quisquis mihi haeres erit, dare damnas esto, fidei{que} eius cōmitto, uti det quantas summas dictauero, Who so euer shalbe myn heyre, shalbe bounden to pay it, whom I put in trust to pay al suche money as I shall appoynt. Damnatior,Cice. in L. more worthy deathe. Damnatus,Pisonem. condempned, reproued, compellyd, boūden by necessitie.Terent. Tuus est damnatus gna¦tus, non tu, Thy sonne is bounden to doo it, and not thou. Damnifico, feci, facere, to do harme. Damno, aui, are, to condemne, to disherite, to compell, to delyuer, to blame, to reproue. Damnari causa indicta, to be condemned be∣ing absent, or not suffered to speake. Damnari uoti, to perfourme the auowe, and optayn that, wherfore the auowe was made. Inter ipsam dimicationem,Ti. Li. 7 aedem Iunoni Mo¦netae uouit cuius damnatus uoti, cum uictor Romā reuertisset, Dictatura se abdicauit, In the myddle of the fyght, he auowed to make a temple to Iuno Moneta, which vowe after that he had performed, and hauing his desire was retorned to Rome, he surrēdrid the great office of Dictator. Damnari uotis, is takē of
Virgil, to auowe or bynde with a vowe. Damnosus, a, um, harmefull, or hurtefull, or hauynge moche harme. Damnum, harme or hurte. Damni dati formula, an action of trespasse, for takynge awaye any thynge from vs. Damno auctus, he that is indamaged. Damnum contrahere, to get losse or harme by any thynge. Damnum dare, to hurte, or to do harme. Quid facias illi,Terent. in Andria. qui damnum dederit, aut malum? whate wylte thou do to hym, that doeth hurte or displesure? Damnum resarcire, to recompense for har∣mes that are done, to make satisfaction or amendes. Damoetas, a shepeherdes name in Vergil. Damon, a philosophers name of Pythagoras secte. Dan, a towne, whiche is in the boundes of Iu∣dea, on the northe parte. Danaē, was doughter of Acrisius kynge of Ar¦giues, vnto whom beinge closed in a stronge toure Iupiter came in the fourme of a shure of golden raine in at the top of the hous, and lyinge with her, gat on her Perseum, after∣warde a valyant knyght, whiche gaue that name fyrste vnto the countrey and people of Persia. By this fable is signified, that Iu∣piter sente treasure priuely vnto Danaē and also to them whiche had the kepynge of her, wherwith they beinge corrupted, dyd suffer Iupiter to enter into the towre and accom∣plyshe his pleasure. The fable declareth the force of money and gyftes in the assaultynge of chastitie. Danaides, the doughters of Danaus. Danaus, the kynge of Argyues, that had fyfty doughters, the whiche al, sauynge one, slew all theyr husbandes in one nyghte. Daniel, elis, an holye prophete of the trybe of Iuda, a noble man horne, and of the kynde of honourable personages, that serued the kynge: he being a yonge chyld was brought vnto Babylon, and became a manne of suche temperaunce, that among the iewes he was taken for to be Eunuchus, or a man gelded. He continuallye bewayled Hierusalem, and in fastynges refrayned from all concupys∣cence. In fourme of bodye he was drye and leane, but in the fauour of god he was beau∣tyful. He by his prayer restored Nabuchodo¦nosor, in to his fyrste fygure, where he was trāsformed of god in to a monstrous beaste, not with standynge that a lyttell before, he by the same Nabuchodonosor, kynge of Ba∣bylon, was throwen in to a dungeon among hungrye lyons, whiche neuer wolde touche hym to hurte hym. He beinge afterward de∣lyuered, prophesied bothe of the comynge of Christe, and of the empires of Babylon, Me¦dia, Persia, the Grekes and the Romayns, and fynally died at Babylon, and there was buryed. he lyued before the incarnation of Christe. 619. yeres. Danisma, vsury. Danista, an vsurar. Danisticus, a, um, perteynynge to vsury. Danubius, a famouse ryuer called Dunow, af∣ter the description of Plinie hath his begyn∣nynge in Germany out of an hyll called Ar∣noba,Li. 4. ca. 12 and passynge by countreys innumera∣ble, reteyneth his name: but as sone as he en∣treth into Illiria, he is than called Ister, and receyueth in to hym .lx. other ryuers, well nigh the one half of them, being nauiagable. fynally beinge in syxe wonderfull greate ar∣mes, he falleth in to the sea called Pontus. The same is affyrmed by Tacitus, sauynge that he nameth the hyl, where Dunow sprin¦geth, Arbonā, and not Arnobam. Danunt, Plautus doth vse for dant, they giue. Dapalis coena, a supper, wherat be many and dyuers incares. Dapatice, feastfully, plentuousely. Dapes, delycate and precious dysshes, or ban∣kettes. Daphne, the proper name of a lyttel mayden, and also of a wood. Daphnis, nidis, in latine is a laurell. Also the sonne of Mercury. It was also a dylectable place withoute the citie of Antioche. Also it was the name of a portion of Lycia by the sea syde. Daphnites, one of the names of Apollo. Daphnoides, an herbe lyke to laurel, now cal∣led lorell or laury, whiche causeth a vehemēt purgation. In the plurall number, they be the beryes of laurell. Daphnon, a place where laurell groweth. Dapifer, he that beareth a dyshe at a banket. Dapino, to gyue, as it were a delycate dishe. Dapsa, a sacrifice, whiche was made in wyn∣ter, and in sprynge tyme. Dapsile, abundantly. Dapsilis, abundant, liberall, or large. Dapsilis lectus, an excellent good bed. Dapsilia dicta,Plaut. in Trucul. wordes frankly spoken. Dardanarij, forestallers of markettes, whiche do bye before hande, to sell dere afterwarde. Dardania, the countrey where Troy stode. Dardaniae artes, wytchecrafte. Dardanus, the name of a prynce, reigninge in that parte of Phrigia, where Troye stode, whiche was of hym called Dardania. Daricus, money of Persia. Darideus, the name of a kyng of Persia in the tyme of Tyberius, Caius, Claudius the emperours.
Dariorigum, Vanes in Britayne. Darius, the name of dyuerse kinges of Persia. Daseia, thycknes of breath. Datarius, a, um, giuen. Also an officer in Rome whiche subscribed the date of letters. Datatim, one gyuyng to an other, as at the tos∣synge of a ball. Daucus, yelowe caret, wherof the rootes sod∣den in brothe, are pleasaunte and holsome. Constantine sayeth, that it is hotte and dry in the seconde degree. Other kyndes there bē of this herbe, whiche I wyll not speake of, bycause they are not so necessary. Daunia, a parte of Italy nowe called Apulia. D ANTE E. DE, of, but ioined with a verb or nown, it signifieth withdrawynge or takynge awaye, as Decortico, I barke or take awaye the rynde. Depilo, I plucke awaye the heare: somtyme it signifieth downward, as, Deorsum descendo, I go downewarde. Somtyme contrary, as, Dehortor, I gyue contrarye aduyse: Dedoceo, I teache con∣trary.Terentius Somtyme it signifieth for, as, Quan∣tum me amas de fidicina hac? Howe well doest thou loue me for this synging wenche? De die,Cicero. to day. Ergo ne una, orationis pars de die dabitur mihi:Plautus. Than shal I not be suf∣fered to speake one lyttell worde to day. De die uiuere,Cicero. in phil euery daye, or frome daye to day, to lyue. De compacto,Pla. in cap Terent. in Hecy. by agrement. De filia te adij, I come to speake with you for your doughter. De illis uerbis caue tibi,Plaut. in Bacch. beware howe thou speakest suche wordes. De imperio decertatur,Plaut. in Men. they fyghte for the empyre, or chiefe rule. De improuiso,Plaut{us} in Trucul. at aduenture, vnsoughte for, or vnloked for. De industria,Terent. in Heauton. of purpose. De integro, eftsones from the begynnynge. De manu in manum,Cicero. from hand to hande. De istac te amo,Terent. in Eunucho I loue the for her sake. De mea sententia, by my counsayle. De meo,Plaut. in persa. of my good. De tuo, of thy good. De meo exemplo aedificet,Plaut{us} in Mostel. lette hym buylde accordynge to my plat. De more, as it hath ben accustomed. De nihilo nihil est irasci,Plaut. in Epidic. It is foly to be an∣gry for nothynge. De nocte abijt,Plaut. in rudente. he wente awaye at nyght. De nocte uigilare, to wake in the nyght. De pace legatos mittebat, he sente ambassa∣dours to treate of peace. De praefacili exores, Thou shalte lyghtely opteyne. De proximo senex,Plautus. the olde man that dwel∣leth hereby. De repente, sodeynly. De subito, idem. De scripto dicere, to speake that which was before written vnto hym. De sua sententia, of his owne heade or fan∣tasy without other counsayle. De sententia alicuius, by ones counsayle, as one aduysed hym. De uia languebat, he was sycke by reason of his iourney. Dealbo, aui, are,Ti.  to make whyte, to blaunche. Deambulatio, a walkynge forthe, or abrode, out of the house. Deambulatorium, an aley to walke in. it may sometyme be vsed for a galery. Deambulatorius, a place wherein men vse to walke. Deambulo, aui, are, to walke vp and downe. Deamo, aui, are, to loue or fauour. Deartuo, aui, are, to ioynte, or to cut of by the ioyntes, to dismember. Deauro, aui, are, to gylte, to laye ouer al with golde. Debacchor, aris, ari. to rage, as it were in a drunkennes, to be wood angry. Debellare, to vaynquishe, Debeo, bui, ere, to ows. Debilis, weake or feble. Debilito,Festus. tare, to make feble or weake. Debitio, onis, the acte of owynge. Debitor, oris, he that oweth, a dettour. Debitum, a det or duetie. Debiti iudicatus, condemned in an action of dette. Deblatero,Non. Ma rare, to speake folyshely, to bable rebukefully. Deebrior, aris, ari, to be drunke. Debris,Sol. ca. 4 a towne in Aethiopia, where as be the people called Garamantes, in the whiche towne is a wel wherof, the water in the day tyme is colde as yse, and in the nyght is boy∣lynge hotte, the countrey beinge the hotteste parte of all Aethiopia. Decachinor, aris, ari, to skorne. Dechachordū, an instrument with .x. stringes. Decacumino,Pom. F aui, are, to strike of the top. Decalcatum, washed ouer with lyme. De caltaria in carbonariam, oute of the lyme kyll into the cole pyt.Eras. in chil. A prouerbe, wher∣by is sygnified frō one myschiefe to an other. Decalogus, the boke of holy scripture, contey∣nynge the ten commaundementes. Decaluo, to make very balde. Decaphorus,Ci. ad At. a lytter borne by ten men. Decapolis, a countrey in Iudea, beyonde the riuer of flume Iordane, conteining .x. cities.
Decaprotiae,Aldatus . generall receyuours of tributes and finances, which stande always charged with any thynge that is minished or lacketh. Decapulo, aui, are, to empty pots or cuppes. Decarchus, a capitayn ouer ten men of armes. Decedo, cedere, to depart from a place, to mi∣nishe or appayre, to gyue place to an other, to dye. Decedamus hinc, go we hense. Decedere de suo iure, to remytte somewhat of his ryghte. Decedere de suo more,T. Liui. to chaunge his cu∣stome. Decedere instituto suo,Ci. in Ve. . to do other wyse thā he was wonte. Decedere itinere,Plautus. to tourne out of the waye for some pourpose.Ci. in Ve. Decedere officio,Terent. in Adel. to do agaynste his duety, to do no more his duety, Decedere uia, to goo out of the waye, or to gyue the way to an other of courtesie. Decedet nihil de summa,Cic. At. 1. there shall be no∣thynge minyshed. Decedi,Cic. de se∣tute. to haue place or waye gyuen. Haec e∣nim ipsa sunt honorabilia, quae uidentur le∣uia at{que} communia, salutari, appeti, decedi, assurgi, deduci, reduci. For those thynges ar honorable, whiche seme to be of small effect and commune, to be awayted on, to be sued vnto, to haue the way gyuen, to be rysen vn∣to, to be brought vnto the courte, & brought agayne home. Decem, the number of ten. December, the name of one of the twelue mo∣nethes. Decemiugis, a teme of ten horses. Decempeda, a perche or polle .x. fote longe. Decempedator, he that meteth with a polle. Decem tabulae, were the olde lawes of the Ro∣maynes fetched out of greece, whervnto af∣terwarde were two tables added by theym, whiche were called Decem uiri. Decemuri, after that the lawes of the Gre∣kes were broughte vnto Rome by Spurius Posthumius, Publius Sulpitius, and Au∣lus Manlius, ambassadours sente for that purpose to Athenes, than were there ten men chosen and appoynted, which of the same la∣wes and auncient customes of the citie, shuld make lawes, wryte them, and publyshe them. And theyr authorite was aboue al other, that they mought make lawes, and if nede were, interprete them. And where before were but . tables of lawes, they added vnto them .ii. mo, and so al those lawes together, were cal∣led Leges duodecim rabularom, and the di∣gnitie of those men was called Decemuira∣tus,Decēuir. and euery of them  called Decēuir, and theyr authoritie Deceiraleius. Decendium, the spare of ten dayes. Decennalis, le, of ten yeres. Decenium, the space of ten yeres. Decens, tis, conuenient, Decentes,Terent. comely semely, or as it is conueniēt. Decenus,Hecyra. a, um, a . Decermina, thynges pulled , in makinge thynges cleane. Decerno, creui, cernere, to decre, determyne, purpose, or discusse. Also to contende, to trye by battayle. Decernere quaestionem, to ordeyne. that an examination be made. Decerpo, psi, pere, to pull or plucke of. Decerto, aui, are, to contende or fyghte toge∣ther. Decessio, a departynge from any thynge. Decet, it besemeth, it is conuenient. Decet me haec uestis, this garmente becom∣meth me well, Dedecet, it is inconuenient, vnsyttyng. Decido, di, dere, to cut of. Also to decide or discusse a matter in variaunce. Decido, ere, to fall of, or awaye. Decidere ab archetypo, to vary from the co¦py or paterne. Decidere á spe, to be disappoynted of that, that he loked for. Decidit fructus, he loste all the profyte that shulde come of it. Decidua, are those thynges that fall awaye, as leaues of trees. Decidus, a, um, subiecte to fallynge. Some∣tyme it signifieth hangyng downe. Testes pe¦cori armento{que} ad crura decidui: The stones of shepe & ruddar bestes ben hanging downe to theyr shankes. In the fyrste sygnification, Omnibus caua cornua & in mucronem de∣mum concreta sunt,Plin. 11. cernis tantum solida, & omnibus annis decidua: Al haue theyr hor∣nes holowe, but beynge sharpe at the endes, there be they concrete or without holownes, onely decre haue hornes full and massy, whi∣che euery yere do fall of or to speake it more properlye, whiche heades euery yere they do caste. Decies, ten tymes. Leonardus Portius, in his boke De sestertio, wryteth, that he had ob∣serued, that where Decies and other aduer∣bes of number, hauynge that termination, whan they were added to an other number for multipiyenge therof, they sygnified no more than they represented, as decies cente∣na, ten hundred. Decies millena, ten thou∣sand. But whan they were founden by them selues to signify the quantity of a thyng that folowed, they were multiplied by an hūdred thousand, as Decies sestertium, ten hundred thousande sestertij. Duodecies talentum, for
xii. hundred thousande Talenta. Of the fyrst he bryngeth examples of Martianus Capel∣la, Macrobius, Plinius, Varro, and Colu∣mella: Of the seconde he bryngeth oute of Tacitus, Tranquillus, Plinius, and Cice∣to in secunda Philippica Afterward he sup∣poseth, that in the olde tyme, whan the said numbers were multiplied with an hundred thousande, they dydde than put an, N, be∣twene thee, and the, s. as Deciens, duode∣ciēs, milliens, and to the profe therof he brin¦geth in Varro de analogia, & Pedianus in secundam actionem Ciceronis in Verrem. Concerninge the computation of Decies Se∣sterium, the same is affyrmed by Budeum, and the reuerente father Cuthbertus Ton∣stallus, at the wrytynge hereof mooste wor∣thy bushop of Durham, in his boke De sup∣putatione. Decima, a tenthe parte. Decimanus, siue Decumanus, a, um, great, as, Decumana porta, the great yate or entry into a campe of an army. Decimo, aui, are, to take away the tenth part from the resydue. Decimari legiones, was whan the tenth per¦son of euery legion was put to deathe. Decimus, a, um, the tenthe, the chiefe or prin∣cipall, as, Decimum quod{que} ouum, euerye tenth egge. Decimus quis{que} fluctus, euery tenthe ryuer. Decipio, cepi, cipere, to Deceyue. Decipula, a gyn or trap to take byrdes. Decircino, aui, are, to vnbowe, or to brynge out of compasse, or roundnes. Decius, the name of a noble house of the Ro∣maynes. Declamatio, onis, an exercise in fayned orati∣ons, or amonge our lawiars a moote. Declamatorius, a, um, perteynynge to suche exercyse. Declamo, aui, are, to declame or exercise in pleadynge fayned argumentes, whiche a∣monge the lawyars of this realme is called mootynge. Declaro, aui, are, to declare, to open a thinge whiche is darke. Declino, aui, are, to eschewe, to leaue, to turne away, to leade awaye, to alienate. Decliuis,Plinius. ue, that whiche is redy to fall. Decliuis aetate,Varro. fallen in age. Decoctor, oris, he that hath wasted all his substaunce, and is brought to extreme pouer¦tie, specially by lechery and discplayinge. Decollo, aui, are, to stryke of a headde by the necke. Also to fayl, to deceyue or disappoint. Vna est,Plautus. quae decollauit, One woman there is, whiche hath deceyued hym. Decolor, oris, yll coloured. Decoloro, aui, are, to stayne, to spyl the colour. Decolorus, a, um, lackynge colour, or yll co∣loured. Decoloratus, a, um, idem. Decoquo, coxi, coquere, to boyle, or to sethe very moche. Somtyme to chaunge, or digest perfectely. Also to consume or waste a mans substaunce, or to brynge detriment or losse. Decoxit domino suo foetura, the increase of cattell came to lyttell aduauntage vnto his mayster. Decor, decôris, the grace that one hath, that what he dothe or speaketh, becommeth hym well. Decore, honestly. Decôro, aui, are, to beautifie or make fayre or pleasaunt to the eyes or eares. Decoro, aui, are, penultima correpta, to do honour to a man. as, Magnum principem decorat sapientia: wysedome dothe moche honour vnto a great prynce. Decorum, a semelynesse, or that whiche beco∣meth the person, hauynge regarde to his na∣ture, degree, study, office, or profession, be it in doinge or speakynge, a grace. sometime it signifieth honesty. Decorus, a, um, honest, semely, fayre. Decortico, aui, are, to barke a tree. Decotes, thredebare garmentes, or garmentes worne to the vttermoste. Decrepitus, a very olde man. Decrepita senectus, extreme age. Decresco, scere, to waxe lesse. Decretorius, a, um, iudiciall. Also decreed, stablyshed. Deretorij dies, dayes in the whiche physi∣tions maye perceyue the importaunce of a syckenes by certayne tokens in the paciente, whiche be also called Dies craetici. Decretorium tempus, Decretorium sydus, wherby iudgement is gyuen of the increase that shall succede of any thynge. Decretum, a decre, a thynge determyned. Decubo, aui, are, to lye downe. Decubo, cubui, cumbere, to lye downe. Also to dye. Deculto, aui, are, to hyde vnder. Decumanus, a general receyuour or collectour of taxes or subsidies, or other lyke exactions. Decumbo, bere, to lye downe. Decuplatus, a, um, ten tymes doubled, or ten folde. Decuplo, aui, are, to double .x. tymes. If it be an aduerbe, it signifieth ten tymes, or ten folde. Decûplum, lyke wyse. Decuppa, he or she that selleth wine by the pot Decuriatio, makyng of knyghtes or capitains. Decures, olde writars vsed for Decuriones. Decurio, ouis, an offyce or dignitie, hauyuge
authoritie eyther ouer ten men of armes,Cicero. in Pasonem. or the tenthe parte of a companye. Also it was taken for the lorde Chamberlayne to the em∣perour. also they were in other cites the same that Senatours were at Rome.Sueto. in Demit. Decuria, was the order, offyce, or companye, whiche was vnder the offyce of Decurio. Al∣so the company of iuges, as we haue of the kynges benche, commune place, and Esche∣ker, and Decurio, he that is chiefe of them. Decurro, cucurri, currere, to runne downe. by translation it signifieth to run from the one ende to the other: to iuste. Decursio,Ti. Liuius. de bel. Ma . 10. iustes, as at the tilte or randon. Decursionem indicere, to proclayme iustes. Decursorium, a tournayeng of many together in fourme of battayle.Suetonius in Neron. Decurtatus, a, um, shortned, abbreuiated. Decus, decoris, honour. Decussatim, in tenne partes, or in euen porti∣ons cut. Decusis, tenne hole partes or ten Asses. Also pieces equally cut, more ouer the diuysions of tymber sawen in equall partes. It is also a fourme in any thynge representyng the let∣ter, X, whiche parted in the middel, maketh an other figure called Quincunx, V. Decusso, aui, are, to cut or drawe out in length, or to cut or diuide in ten partes. Decutio, cussi, cutere, to strike of. Dedecet, it is not honest or conuenient. Dedecoro, aui, are, to dishonour, dyshoneste, reproue, or defyle. Dedecus, coris, dishonour, dishonesty, reproche Dedico, aui, are, to dedicate, or tell a message. Deditio, a rendrynge vp of a place besieged. Dedignatio, disdayne. Dedignor, aris, ari, to disdayne. Dedisco, didici, dicere, to vnlerne or forget. Dedititius, a, um, recreante, or he that yeldeth hym selfe. Deditus, a, um, gyuen, rendred. Dedita opera, by his owne consente, of his free wyll, purposely. Dedo, didi, dedere, to gyue vtterly or for euer, or to become subiecte, to render vp, to yelde hym selfe to an other in battayle. Deditionem facere, signifieth the same. Dedere aliquem morti, to slea. Dedoceo, cui, cêre, to teache a man otherwise than he hath before lerned. Dedoleo, lui, lere, to cesse frome sorrowe or peyue. Dedolo, aui, are, to hew or cut lyke a carpēter. Deduco, xi, cere, to brynge downe, or to leade or drawe, or brynge frome one place, or one thynge to an other. Somtyme to moue from his purpose. somtyme to bringe home honou∣rably from any place. Also to abate of a sum. Deducere riuos, to tourne the ryuer. Deducere uocem, to speake small. Deducta eó res est, the thynge is come to that poynte. Deerro, aui, are, to go out of the right waye, or reason. Defaecatus, a, um, fyned or cleane from the lyes or dregges, as wyne, whiche is not troubled Defaecatus animus, a cleane and vncorrup∣ted mynde. Defaeco, aui, are, to drawe from the dregges, or to let wyne lye vntyll it be fyne. Defalco, aui, are, to cut of, take away, or my∣nishe, whiche nowe maye be sayde defalcate. Defamo, aui, are, to defame. Defatigatio, werynesse. Defatigo, gare, to make one werye, or to fa∣tigate. Defectio, where a countrey, fortresse, or army dothe forsake theyr lorde or capitayne, and taketh the cōtrary part. also lacke or default. Defector, toris, he that so departeth or rebel∣leth, or goeth from one to an other. Defectus, a, um, that which lacketh any thing. Defectus, tus, lacke, rebellion, or departynge agaynste couenant or promyse. Defectus solis & lunae, the eclyps of the sun and the mone. Defectus animi, sownynge or lyenge in a traunce. Defecta corpora, bodyes consumed with syckenesse. Defendo, di, dere, to defende, to putte of, to prohibite. Defensito, aui, are, to defende often. Deferro, detuli, deferre, to brynge to, to dys∣close, to accuse, or appeale, to bestow, to giue office or dignitie, to attribute. Deferre ad aliquem, to reporte vnto one. Deferre aliquē furti, to appech one of felony. Deferre mandata, uel postulata, to doo a message. Deferre nomen, to complayne. Deferre primas, to gyue place or preminē to one. Deferunt de me apud uos,Cicero de lege agra they reporte of me falsely vnto you. Deferueo, ferui, êre, to be colde or paciente. Deferuesco, sci, scere, to waxe pacient or cold, to appease hym selfe, or with drawe his fury. Defetiscor, sci,Priscianus to be wery. Defessus sum, idem. Deficio, feci, ficere, not to suffise, to lacke, to leaue, to disagre, to rebell, or departe frome hym, with whome he is retayned, or goethe from one capitayne to an other, to reuoite. Also to forsake or fayle.Cicero. Prudentia nun{quam} de∣ficit oratorem. Prudence neuer fayleth an o∣ratour. Quem sanguis uires{que} deficiunt:
Whom bloude and strength fayleth.Caesar. Ab co defecerat, he went from hym to his ennemy. Defigo, fixi, figere, to dryue in a nayle or o∣ther thynge. Defigere all quem colaphis,Plaut{us} in persa. to gyue oone a cuffe on the eare, or to beate oone with the handes. Defigere curas, to set al care on any thinge Defigere in animis, to make it cleaue in mennes myndes. Defigere in oculis populi, to make all the worlde loke on it. Defigere oculos, to loke desyrousely on a thynge. Defigi diris precationibus, to be accursed. Defixerat pauor cum admiratione, feare & wonder strake them to the hartes. Defixa radicibus, styckyng hard to the rotes. Definio, iui, ire, to defyne, determyne, or dys∣cusse. Definite, expresly, shortely, or at fewe wordes. Definite & distincte, particularly and spe∣cially. Definitio, onis, a defynition, whiche expres∣seth in fewe wordes, what it is that is spo∣ken of as, Homo est animal rationale, mor¦tale: a man is a thynge lyuely, reasonable, and mortall. Definitum est, it is concluded. Defioculus, he that lacketh syght in one eye. Defit, there lacketh. Deflacco, aui, are, to weare out. Deflagro, aui, are, to burne excedyngely, or to be burned. Deflecto, xi, tere, to bowe downe. Deflectere ex itinere, to tourne oute of the waye. De recto deflectere, to go out of the ryghte waye. Deflexit de uia consuetudo, the custome is chaunged or tourned. Deflectemus in Thuscos, let vs tourne our waye to the Tuscanes. Defleo, eui, ere, to wayle or lament, to besory. Defloccatus,Plaut. in Epidic. worne for age. sometyme passed the floure of youth. Defloreo, & Defloresco, ere, to fade, or to fal awaye as floures do, or to lese beaulty. some tyme it signifieth to burgen or floure. Defluo, xi, ere, to flowe downewarde, to fall of or awaye, or come to nothynge. Defluus, a, um, that whiche floweth or falleth awaye from any thynge. Defluuium, Defluxus, the fallyng of the heare. Defodio, di, dere, to bury or hyde a thynge in the grounde, to dyg downe, or in to the erth. Defoetus, a, um, destitute. Defore, neuer to be here after. Deformis, me, foule, deformed. Deformo, aui, are, to destroy or wast, to make in picture the fourme of a thynge. Deformare areas, to sette out quarters in a garden. Defraudo, aui, are, to begyle, to mynisshe or take awaye the profyte of an other. Defrico, aui, are, to rub moche, or to rub of. Defrigo, xi, gere, to fry moche. Defringo, xi, re, to breake down or cut down. Defrugo, aui, are, to weare out laud, or make grounde barrayne by any meanes. Defruor, frui, to take the fruite of any thyng. Defrutare, to boyle newe wyne. Defrutum, newe wyne boyled vntyll the oone halfe therof be consumed. Defugeo, gi, ere, to refuse. Defunctorie,Vlpian. remysly, lyghtly, without study, diligence or care. Defunctus, a, um, dead. Defuncta morbis corpora,Liuins. bodyes recoue∣red from sickenes or diseases. Defunctus fato,Idem. escaped his destiny. Defundo, fudi, dere, to powre downe. Defungor, geris, to vse no lengar, to leaue or resygne, to perfourme, to escape. Also to be discharged properly of an offyce or comman∣demente. Defungi in hac re,Terent. in Phorm. to be out of this busines, to be discharged of this matter. Defungi regis imperio, to do the kynges cō∣maundement. Defunctus iam sum, I haue nowe done my duetye. Degener, is, he that in his maners is vnlyke to his auncestours, or base of lygnage. Degenero, aui, are, to be vnlyke to his aunce∣stours in maners. It maye be sayde of fruy∣tes, whiche waxe wylde. Dègero,Plaut. in Aulul. gessi, gerere, to carye awaye, and waste. Degerere laborem alicui, to ease one of his labour. Deglabro, aui, are, to plucke of heares. Deglûbo, bi, bere, to pul of the rynd, or other lyke thynge, to blauncue. Deglutino, aui, are, to louse that whiche kle∣ueth faste, or is glewed. Dego, gi, gere, to dwell in a place, to brynge to an ende. Degere aetatem, to lyue. Degere uitam, idem. Degere tempus, to passe the tyme. Degrummor,Lucill. ari, to directe, to lay by lyne. Degulo,Affra aui, are, to consume in gloteny. Degummo,Pom. Fe mi, mere, idem quod Degustare, to taste. Dehinc, from henseforthe, more ouer. Dehisco, sci, scere, to gape, or open by it selfe, or kleue as a tree dothe.
Dehiscit fios, the floure spredeth. Dehonestamentum, a disfigurynge, or dis∣honestie. Dehon esto, aui, are, to dishoneste. Dehonestus, a, um, dishoneste. Dehorroi, tari, to dyscourage, to exhorte to the contrary. Deianîra, the wyfe of Hercules. Deidamia, the concubine of Achilles, on whom he begat Pirrhus. Deiectus,xe. pro cina. & Deiectio, a castynge oute of pos∣session, or a disseison. Deiectio alui, a siege caused by medicine. Deiectus arborum, fallynge of trees. Deiectus gemmae uel collis, the imbosment of a stone or tree. Deierator, toris, a great swearer. Deiero, aui, are, to sweare depely, or a greate othe. Dencio, ieci, ijcere, to throwe downe, to caste downe, to tourne awaye, to put oute of of∣fyce.Clad At.  16. Also to dysease or put out a man of his possessyon. Deijcere aluum, to go to the stoole. Deijcere de gradu, to brynge out of a con∣stante mynde. Also it signifyeth to put out of his place, to depryue of dignytie or autorite. Deijcere de possessione, to put out of pos∣sessyon. Deijcere de sententia, to make one chaunge his opinion. Dein, moreouer, furthermore. Deinceps, one after an other, in order, from henseforthe, or thensforth, afterwarde. Deinsuper, vpwarde Deintegro, eftsones. Deiphile, the mother of Diomedes. Deiphoebus, the name of a sonne of Priamus and Hecuba. Deiugo, aui, are, to vnyoke, to vnioyne, to disseuer. Deiungo, xi, gere, to vnioyne. Deiurium, a great and solemne othe. Deiuro, to sweare depely. Deiurus, he that sweareth solemnely. Delabor, delabi, to be let downe, to fal downe of a hyghe place, to be wasted, consumed, or come to naught, to decay. Delacero, are, to teare in pieces. Delachrimo, idem quod delacrimor. Delachrimor, aris, ari, to wepe or send out dro∣pes lyke teares. De lana caprina. A prouerbe where men do contende for a trifle, as who sayeth, whether a gote beareth wull or heare. Delanio, aui, are, to cut in pieces. Delapidata, pauementes. De lapide emptus, A prouerbe signifieng a person of moste vyle condition, lyke as sla∣ues boughte standynge on a stone in the mar¦ket place, were moste vyle. Delasso, aui, are, to make wery. Delatio, an accusation secretly made, or a se∣crete complaynte. Delator, oris, a secrete accusat, a complayner. Delauo, uare, to washe mightely. Delebile, that whiche maye be put out, or put awaye. Delectamentum, pastyme, solace. Delectatio, delectation in the sences of hering seinge, taste, and smellynge. Delecto, aui, are, to delyte, to leade, to allure to a thynge. Delector, aris, ari, to take delectation or pleasure. Delectus rerum, choyse or election of thynges also of men apte for the warre. Delectum habere, sometyme signifieth to take musters for the warres. Delego, aui, are, to assigne to some offyce, mes¦sage, or other necessary and great busynesto commit a cause or matter to be determyned, to sende in ambassade or message. Delêneo, niui, nire, to pacify, appayse, or set in quiete. Deleo, leui, ere, to distroye, to put oute any thynge that is wrytten, to remoue, or put awaye. Deleterion, venome. Deletile, that distroyeth or putteth out. Deliacus, a, um, of the yle of Delus. Delibatio, tastynge, or the takyng of assay. It is also sacrifyce of meate or drynke. Delibatorium, a place apte for suche sacrifyce. Deliberabundus, he that aduiseth hym, or as∣keth counsale in euery thynge. Deliberatio, aduisement, or consultation. Deliberator, he that taketh leysour to be ad∣uised what he shall do or saye. Deliber ratio, wherein any thynge is consulted. Delibero,  to be aduysed, to take ad∣uyse, to  to doubt, to consulte. Delibo, aui, ari, to taste a thynge. sometyme to violate, urte, to distroy, or corrupt, to sacrifice, to aine water by forowes, to take awaye by lyttell and lyttell. Delibare de gloria alterius, to minish or take awaye some portion of an other mans praise or honour. Delibro, aui, are, to pull of the barke or rinde of a tree. Delibutus, a, um, oynted. Gaudio delibutus,Gellius. replenished with ioye. Delibutus periurns,Salust. stayned or defyled with periury. Delicatè, wantonly. Delicatus, a, um, delicate wantonly broughte vp.
Delicia,Festus. the tymber whiche maketh the ende of a house aboue, called a gable. Deliciares regulae, the tyles at the gable ende Delici porci,Varro. yonge suckynge pygges. Delicium, cij, & Deliciae, arum, delyces, recre∣ations, pastymes, pleasaunt fantasies, gene¦rally all thynge, wherin one taketh syngular pleasure or delyte. sometyme it is taken in a good parte, somtyme in a bad. And whan it is spoken by one, of any person whom he spe∣cially loueth or fauoreth, it may be interpre∣ted in this wyse: Meum delicium, or meae deliciae, my derlynge, my sweete harte, and suche other like elegancies of Venus secreta∣ries. And whan it is spoken of a thynge, than in this wyse: Quid agit Comum, tuae me∣ae{que} deliciae? Howe is it with Comum our most pleasaunt and dilectable place of resort? Deliciarum causa, for pastime or recreation. Delicias, facere, to be wanton, to be squay∣mysshe, to playe the cockney. Delico, aui, are, to explane. Delictum, an offence whan a thyng is vndone, omission. Deligo, légi, ligere, to chose or picke out. Delimo, aui, are, to fyle or shaue of frome any mettall. Delingo, xi, gere, to lycke of. Delinimentum, delectation, an allectyue, or swetenesse in felynge. Delinio, iui, ire, to annoynt, to rub pleasantly, to touche. Deliniare, to drawe as a paynter doethe, er he do laye on colours. Delinitus, touched swetely, annoynted, pacifi∣ed, appeased. Dilinquo, liqui, linquere, to omyt to do well, to offende. Deliquium, lacke. Deliquium animi, whā a man is in a swoun. Deliquium solis, the eclips of the sonne. Delirans, dotynge. Deliratio,Cicero. dotage, foly. Deliramentum, idem. Deliro, aui, are, to go out of the ryghte waye, properly to go out of the forowe, and make a baike, as pioughmendo. Also to dote. Delirus, he that swarueth from reason, a do∣tarde or dotynge foole. Deliteo, tui, ere, to lye hyd. Delitesco, idem. Delitum, blotted. Delius, a, um, of the yle called Delus. Delius natator, was one perfecte in swim∣mynge, whiche became a prouerbe, that whā a thynge was spoken or written, harde to be vnderstande, and requyred a cunnynge expo∣sitout, than wolde they say, Delio natatore eget It requireth a counynge or subtylle exposytour. Delos, an yle by Grece, where Apollo and Di∣ana were borne, and is one of the yles called Cyclades. Delphi, a citie and people in Greece. Delphicus, a, um, of that citie. Delphicum oraculum, the answere made at the temple of Apollo in Delphos. Delphinus, a greatte fyshe of the sea called a Dolphin, whose mouth is almost at his bea∣ly, or elles no fyshe mought escape hym, he is so swyfte in swymminge, but he can not take any fyshe but lyinge vprighte, his tungue is moueable and apte for voyce, contrary to o∣ther fyshes, and hath a camoysed nose, and a compased backe. He delyteth in musyke. There hath ben knowen to loue children, and receyued them to ryde on theyr backes by the space of .xxx. myles in the sea, whiche haue ben beholden of moche people. who that rea∣deth Plinium & Appianum in uaria historia shall fynde of this fishe thynges to be won∣dred at. Delphos, a citie in the countrey called Phocis, on a mountayne in Greece called Parnassus, there was the great and famous temple of A¦pollo called Delphicus, where the diuel gaue aunsweres by women, whiche there serued for the purpose. Delta, is the letter D, in greeke. It also signi∣fieth the number of foure, as in latine letters it signifieth fyue hundred. Also at Memphis the moste famous citie of Egypt, the ryuer called Nilus maketh a place in the furme of this letter, whiche is this  wherfore that place was called Delta. Delûbrum, a place wherin be dyuers ymages of god and saynctes. Deludificor, cari, to begyle. Deludo, si, ere, to mocke, to deceyue, to abuse. Delumbis, be, weake. sometyme wanton. Delumbatae radices, rootes nypped of, or bro∣ken, to the intente that they shal wax greater Delumbo, bare, to debilitate, or make feble, or of no strengthe. Deluo, lui, ere, to washe cleane, or washe out. Delutamentum, clayenge. Deluto, aui, are, to laye claye on any thynge. Dêmades, a great oratour in Athenes, who in sodayne orations without any study, excelled Demosthenes, in so moch as Plutarch wry∣teth, that whan Demosthenes was constray¦ned to speake vnto the people vnprouyded, who beyng tymorous somtyme stayed in the myddell of his oration, Demades wolde a∣ryse out of his place, and fynishe that orati∣on, which Demosthenes had begun, wherin appered the diuersities of wyts, which now adays is also perceyued. But Demades was
of so corrupte maners, that Antipater was wont to saye of hym, whan he was olde and decrepite, that he was lyke to beastes, which were offred in sacrifyce, of whom nothynge remayned but theyr tungues and bealyes. fi∣nally the ende of his auaryce, prodygalitie, flattery, and falsehoode was this He with his sonne callyd Demea, commyng vnder co∣lour of frendshyp into Macedonye, where in dede he had secretely conspired with Antigo∣nus, ennemy to Antipater kyng of that coun¦trey, he and his son were takē by Cassander, chief capytain of Antipaters army, and first his sonne Demea was slayne in his armes, that the bloud sprange into the fathers face, and than him self after many reproches tou∣chynge his treason and vnkyndnes, was also cruelly kylled. Demagis, moche more. Demando, aui, are, to commytte any thynge to one for to do. Demarchus, a ruler of the people. Demeauculum, a place to discend into, a cellar. Demeare, to go downe, or go away. Demens, madde, he that regardeth not what he dothe. Demensum,Terent. in Phorm. a certayn quantite of meat, drink, or grayn, gyuen to euery seruant, to fynd him one moneth. it is also a measure conteynyng foure Romaye bushels.Plaut. in Men. Demensus, a, um, measurerd. Dementer, madly, foolyshly, vnaduysedly. Dementia, madnes. Dementio, tiui, ire, to be madde. Demento, aui, are, to be madde, to make mad, to make foolyshe. Demereo, rui, ere, to wynne or gette. Demereor, eris, reri, to bynde by frendshyp, to wynne ones fauour, to make a frende, to de∣serue thanke. Demergo, si, gere, to drowne a thyng, or depe it in water or other lycour. Demergere semen, to cast sede īto the groūd Demersus, a, um, drowned. Demersus aere alieno, deepe indetted, or in great dette. Demersae leges opibus, lawes subdued with money, or lawes layde in water for money. Demeter, the name of Ceres. Demetio, to mete dyligently, to esteme. Demetior, idem. Demeto, tii, tere, to repe. sometyme to gather. Demetrias, a towne of Thessaly. Demetrius, was a proper name of dyuerse Greekes, of whome two were excellente, the oone a kynge of Macedonye, the other was a noble oratoure surnamed Phalarê∣us. The kynge Demetrius was sonne of Antigonus kynge of Macedonye, where he alsoo raygned: He was of a goddlye stature, and of soo excellent fauour and beaultie, that no paynter or karuer mought truely counter∣faite hym. for it semed, that there were in his vysage bothe terriblenes and mercy, grauitie and gentylnes, wherwith was ioyned a prin∣cely maiestie. He was in tyme of recreation of all kynges most pleasant, whan great af∣fayres were in hande, he surmounted al other in study, dilygence, and greatnes of wyt. He had his father and mother in wonderfull re∣uerence excedynge all men. Not withstanding he was noted moche of incontinence. he was full of prowesse and valyaunt, and delyuered Grece from Ptholomees tyrannye, and van∣quished him on the sea, he also subdued Athe∣nes, and all the countreye of Boeotia, with the citie of Thebes, he hadde warre at one tyme with Ptholomeus kyng of Egypt, Ly∣simachus kyng of Asia, and Seleuchus king of Syria, and Pyrrhus Kyng of Epyrus, and oftentymes vanquyshed theyr armies, but in conclusyon he beynge vanquyshed by Seleu∣cus, was by hym commytted to an honoura∣ble pryson, that is to say, kepte in a towne of Syria, callyd Cheronesus, where he hadde appoynted vnto hym fayre palayces, plesant orchardes and gardeynes, and had the com∣pany of suche as he lysted, where, with ydel∣nesse and excesse of voluptuous pleasures, he fell sycke and dyed, wham he was of the age of .lxiiii. yeres. Demetrius Phalare{us}, was a noble philosopher & orator, disciple to Theophrastus, of whom Tully writeth in his fyrst boke of offices, sa∣yeng, that he was a subtyll disputer, but noo vehement oratour, yet was he swete and dilec¦table. he for his excellent vertues was gouer∣nour of the Atheniēses ten yeres. And bicause he had greatly enryched the citie of Athenes in yerely reuenues, and adorned it with com∣modious buylding, the people in the honor of hym dyd set vp .CCC. and .lx. of his images made in mettal. But afterward he being ab∣sent, by the meanes of certayne enuious per∣sons, the people condemned hym to dye, & al∣so pullyd downe his images, and somme they dyd breake, and some solde, onely oone was kepte hole in the castell, wherof herynge De∣metrius, he sayde: yet haue they not plucked down vertue, for the which they did sette vp those images. This mā causyd Ptholomeus the kynge of Egypt to make his great libra∣tye, and to sende to the Iewes to haue theyr lawes and prophesyes translated into greke, who sente vnto hym of euery trybe, twelue great lerned menne, who dydde accomplyshe his desyre, and are callyd Septuaginta in∣terpretes, all though there were of theym.
lxxiiii. persones. This manne lyued afore the incarnation of Christ .277. yeres. Demigro, aui, are, to chaunge habytations or lodgynges, to remoue frome one place to an¦nother. Demigrare ab improbis, to forsake vnthrif∣ty or yll company. Demigrare de statu, to chaunge the fascion or forme of lyuynge. Demigrare de uita, to dye, to deceasse. Deminuo, nuere, to mynyshe or make lasse. Demiror, aris, ari, to meruayle moch. somtyme it signifieth to knowe not. Demisse, aduerb. with great humilitie. Demissae aures, hangyng eares. Demissi homines, men fallen from rychesse to pouerty.Cice. pro murena. Demissio, abashement, lacke of courage, fals∣nes of harte. Demissitia tunica, a longe cote. Demissa loca, lowe groundes. Demissa toga, a longe gowne. Demisso capite, the hed hangyng downward Demissis labijs, hauyng babberlyppes, ba∣berlypped. Demissis humeris uirgo, a mayden hauynge lowe shulders. Demissus, a, um, humble. Demitto,Vergilius georg. 2. misi, tere, to sende downe, to humble my selfe, to lay downe. also to dygge. Demittere equum in flumen, to make his horse to leape into the ryuer. Demittere in pectus, to sette at his harte, to kepe in remembraunce. Demittere animum, to abate courage, to lose courage. Demiurgus, an offycer or magystrate amonge the people, whiche purposed to them al thin∣ges, whervpon they shuld treate, as the spea∣ker of the parlyament amonge vs. Demo, mere, to take away or abate. Demere fidem fabulis, to make that mē shal not beleue tales. Demere soleas alicui, to pull of ones shoes. Demere ungues,Plaut. in Aulul. to pare ones nayles. De capite demptum, appayred in substance or valewe. Democratia,Tit. Liui. a fourme of a common wealthe, where the people haue authoritie without a∣ny other state. Democraticus, he that fauoureth the common¦welth, where the people haue auctoritie. Demôcritus, an excellent philosopher, who be∣ing a chylde, lernyd of certayne wyse men of Chaldea astronomy, and theyr diuinitie, after warde he went into Perse to lerne geometry, and than into Chaldea, to knowe dyuine mi∣steries, longe after he retourned to Athenes, where he gaue his possessyons and rychesse innumerable vnto the weale pulyk, reseruing a lyttell gardeyne, wherin he mought at more lybertie, serche out the secretes of nature. He wrate many wonderfull warkes in naturall phylosophye and physycke. Also whan he be∣helde the Cytie of Athenes, he contynually laughed at the foolysshe diligence of theym. whyche sparyd for no peynes to get authori∣tie and ryches, whiche they were not sure to kepe, other whiche laboured to gette theyr chylderne great possessions, who eyther dyed before the fathers, or els ouerliuing theyr fa∣thers, shortly spent ali that theyr fathers left vnto theym. But the Athenienses, not percei∣uyng the cause of his laughter, thinking him to be madde, causyd Hippocrates the phisy∣tion to go vnto him. Who perceiuyng the oc∣casion of his laughter, sayde, Democritus is not madde, but the Athenienses be madde, at whom he dothe laughe. He was before the incarnation of Christ. 492. yeres. Demodocus, the name of an harper, of whom Homer maketh mencion. Demogorgon, was an enchaunter, whyche was supposed to be of suche excellencye, that he had authoritie ouer all spirites, that made men aferde. Demolior, iri, to throw downe any thyng that is buylded. Demolio, idem quod demolior. Demoliri culpam,Plaut. in Bacch. to dyscharge hym of the faute or blame. Demolitio, a subuertion or beatynge downe of a thynge. Demonstratio, onis, a shewynge. Demonstratiuus, a, um, that sheweth, or is she∣wed, or mete to be shewed. Demonstratiuum genus, a fourme of spea∣kynge, wherin oratours dyd eyther cōmende or dysprayse any man openly. Demonstro, aui, are, to shewe openly. Demophon, the son of Theseus and Phedra kynge of Athenes. Demorior, iri, to dye vtterly. Demoror, aris, to tary longe, to kepe backe, or cause to tary. Demosthenes, was the moste excellente ora∣tour of the Greekes, and was fyrste a dys∣cyple of Plato, but after he folowed Ebuli∣des an oratour, and vsyd suche wonderfulle diligence and labour to attayne to the perfe∣ction of eloquence, that where he hadde an impedymente in his pronuncyation, he by puttynge smalle stoones into his mouthe, and inforcynge hym to speake treatably, He at the laste attayned to mooste perfecte fourme of speakynge. Of his wysedome remayneth amonge other this praty exaumple. Whan kynge Philyp, the father of great Alexander
besieged Athenes, and sore distressed it, vpon certayn treatises offered by them, he requyred to haue delyuered vnto hym ten oratours, of the whiche Demosthenes was one, and than wolde he rayse vp his siege. That herynge Demosthenes, and commyng into the cōmon counsayle, he rehersed this fable. On a tyme the wolues exhorted the shepherdes to be in league with them, whervnto the shepeherdes accorded, than the wolues requyred to haue delyuered vnto them theyr mastiues, whiche were the cause of debate betwene theym, the shepeherdes thervnto graunted, and delyue∣red to the wolfes theyr dogges, the most vigi∣lant kepers of theyr flockes, afterwarde the wolues beyng without any fear, not only dyd eate now & than a shepe, to alay their hunger, but also for their plesure did tear & rent other in peces. In lykewise said Demosthenes, king Philyp, after that he hathe taken from you your oratours, whyche by theyr wyse aduer∣tisementes haue hitherto preserued you from his tyranny, he wyl do the semblable. Which the Athenienses herynge, they agreed to his counsayle, and valyauntly defended and pre∣serued the citie. This man was afore the in∣carnation of Christ .345. yeres. Demotus, put abacke. Demoueo, uere, to remoue. Demoueri gradu, to be dryuen backe, to be constrayned to recule. Demptus, ta, tum, put out. Demulceo, cêre, to stryke gentylly and softely with the hand, as we do to chyldren or houn∣des, whan we make moche of them. Demum, at the last. sometyme it signifieth on∣ly, or alway, fynally. Demussata contumelia, dysplesure done by dis∣symulation. Demuto, tare, to change his maner or facion. Denaria,Tōstallus. the numbre of .xxxix. M. of the coyne callyd Denarij. Denarius, in weight is the seuenth parte of an ounce: In coyne it was as moche in poyse and valuation as our grote, whiche wayeth of our money nowe currant .vi.d. ob. and the vii. parte of an halfe peny. Denarius, a, um, that whyche conteyneth the number of tenne. Denarro, aui, are, to tell in order. Denascor, denasci, to ceasse to be, to dye. Denaso, to cut or pull of the nose. Denato, aui, are, to swymme downe. Denego, aui, are, not to giue, or to deny to giue. Deni, ten togither. Vxores habent deni duo∣deni{que} inter se communes,Cas. li. 5. Ten or twelue to gither haue wyues in common amonge them. Denigro, aui, are, to make blacke. Deni{que}, in conclusyon, finally. Denominatio, the namynge of a thynge. Denomino, aui, are to name. Denormo, are, to sette out of rule, or order. Denoto, aui, are, to blame. Dens, dentis, a toothe. also euery thyng, wher∣with an other thyng may be holden fast. Dens arator, the coulter of a plough. Dense, an aduerbe, sygnifieth thycke or close togither, as whan many be assemblyd in a ly∣tell roume. Densitas, tatis, & densitudo, dinis, thyknes. Denso, aui, are, to thycken or make thycke. Densus, a, um, thycke, harde, closed togyther, compact, plentuouse. Dentale, the share of a plough. Dentatim, in order lyke teethe. Dentatus, he that hath great tethe, strong tethe or many teethe. Denticulare, to thruste in his teethe. Denticulus, a, um, dentatus, a, um, dentosus, a, um, toothed. Denticulatae falces, syckles. Denticulatus, he that hath lyttell teethe. Dentifrangibilium, a thynge wherwith teethe are broken. Dentifricium, a medicine wherwith the teethe be rubbed, to make them whyte. Dentiloquus, he that speketh betwene the tethe or lyspeth. Dentio, ire, to put forth tethe, or breede tethe. Dentiscalpium, an instrument, wherwith tethe be scraped. Dentirio, onis, a puttynge forthe or growynge of teethe. Denubo, psi, bere, to marye, or wed on the wo∣mans parte. Denudo, aui, are, to dyspoyle or make naked. Denumero, rare, to pay money. Denunciatio, menassynge. Denunciatio testimonij,Caesar. an iniunction to ap∣piere. Deuncio, aui, are, to shewe or tell a thynge to an other man, or denounce. also Denunciare testimonium, to bryng wytnes into the court of iudgement, as they do in the Chauncerye, where wytnesses are compellyd to come. Denuntiauit ut adesset, he summonyd hym to appiere. Denuntiare inimicitias, to declare hym to be his ennemy. Denuntiare bellum, to proffer warre or bat∣tayle. Denuò, agayne, eftesoones. Denus, a, um, the tenthe. Deocco, care, to harrowe lande, or breake it with rollers. Deonero, rare, to dyscharge or dysburdeyn. Deoratus, desyred, hartyly prayed. Deoro, aui, are, to desyre hartily. Amonge oute
lawyers is to plete or to conclude in pledyng. Deorsum, downewarde. Sursum deorsum, vp and downe, hyther and thyther. Deorsum uersum, downe ryght. Depaciscor, sci, to make couenaunt, to agree v∣pon certain couenātes, to promise, or to patise Depactus, a, um, couenanted or patised. Depactus est cum hostibus, he patised with the ennemyes. Depalmo, aui, are, to buffette. Depango, xi, gere, to plant or sette. Depasco, paui, pascere, to eate as a beast doth, to feede beastes in pasture. Depasce possessionem alienam, to feede his cattell on an other mans pasture. Depascor, idem. Depastus, ta, tum, eaten with beastes. Depastio, feedynge of cattell. Depaupero, rare, to impouerysh or make poore Depecto, xui, uel xi, tere, to kembe diligently. Depectus, uel depexus, a, um, kempt, trimmed Depeculor, aris, ari, to robbe a common weale, a prynce, or a place halowed. Depeculator, a robber. Depello, puli, pellere, to put down, put away, or remoue, to put asyde. Depelli portenta, whā monstrous or strange thynges do happen, betokenyng some yll ad∣uenture, to happen, to repeale it by prayers, auowes, or other good dedes. Depulsio, idem quod propulsio. Depulsus, put downe. Dependeo, ere, to hange downe of a thynge, to depende. Dependo, di, dere, to paye. Dependere operā, to take peyn about a thīg Dependere poenas, to be punysshed, to suffer peynes. Deperdo, ere, to lose. Deperio, ij, ire, to peryshe, to dye, to loue inor∣dinately, to be loste. Depesco, scui, scere, to dryue cattell. Depessus, rente, torne. Depexus, well trymmed. Ego ne si uiuo adeo exornatum dabo, adeo depexum, ut us{que} dum uiuat meminerit sem∣per mei?Terent. Trowe ye that I wyll not so decke hym and trymme hym, that he shall thinke on me, as longe as he lyueth? Depilis, without heare. Depilo, aui, are, to pull of heare. Depingo, gere, to depaynte, to describe. Deplano, to make playne. Deplanto, to plante, or sette. Depleo, pleui, plere, to fylle. Deplortus, a, um, without hope of recouerye or remedy. Amedicis deploratus, forsaken of phisitiōs. Deploro, aui, are, to lament, to bewayle. Deplure, to rayne downe ryght. Deplumis, me, that whiche hath fewe fethers or none. Depono, posui, nere, to lay downe, to depriue or take away, to put away, to leaue. Deponere arma, to put of his harneys. Deponere bellum, to ceaste from warres. Deponere exercitum, to discharge the army. Deponere imperium, to leaue the rule or go∣uernaunce. Deponere inimicitias, to leaue all malyce. Deponere negotium, to leaue busynes. Deponere semina, to plante. Deponere soleas, to put of ones shoes. Deponere onus, to discharge a bourdeyne, or charge. Deponere aliquid apud aliquē, to lay a thynge in guage or pledge, or to delyuer to one a thynge to kepe. Depositarius, he vnto whom one hath delyue∣red a thyng to kepe. also to whom any thyng is layde in gauge. Depositus, a, um, layd downe, lefte in an nother mans kepyng. somtyme it dothe signifie des∣perate,Ci in Ver. or he whyche is in desperation. Ita{que} mihi uideor magnam & maxime aegram & prope depositam reipub. partem sucepisse, Therfore me semeth I haue taken in hand a great part of the weale publike, not only be∣ing feble, but also almost ī extreme desperatiō Depositum substantiuum, that which is left in the custody of one. also a guage. Depopulatio, destruction or desolation of a coū¦trey, depopulation. Depopulor, ari, to destroy or waste a countrey. Deportati, they whyche are exyled, hauyng no {pro}pertie left in any goodes or landes, after the definition of lawiers, how be it other authors do vse that worde generally for men exyled. Deportatus, banyshed. Deporto, aui, are, to cary or bryng away, to ba¦nyshe. somtime it signifieth to reporte. Deportare exercitum, to bring home agayn the army. Deportare triumphum, to brynge home the victory. Captiuos Romam depor∣tare, to cary prisoners to Rome. Deposco, poposci, poscere, to desire moch or re¦quire. Deposcere omnibus pollicitationib{us}, to demand or sollicite with faire promyses. Depositorius, he that leaueth a thynge with an other man. Depositum, that which is left in an other mās kepyng, or that is layd to pledge. Depostulare, where the inferiour requireth a thynge of his superiour. Depraedor, ari, to robbe a countrey or towne. Deprauatus indulgentia, marred with to moch liberte. Deprauati mores, yl or leud cōditiōs. Deprauate, contrary to right or rayson.
Deprauo, aui, are, to make yll, to depraue. Deprecatio, whan we confesse that we haue offended. Deprecator, he that sueth or intreateth for an other man that he shuld not be punyshed. Deprecor, cari, to besech, to refuse, to desyre the contrary to put away, or deny that which we wold not haue, to haue in detestation, to resyst to delyuer a man by prayer. Deprecari ueniam, to aske forgyuenes. Deprecari alicui ne uapulet, to make a re∣quest or desyre for one that he be not beaten. Deprecari iniuriam, to requyre that he wyll not do to hym any wronge. Deprecari auaritiae crimina, laudibus fruga∣litatis, To requyre to haue oone excusyd for his nygardeshyppe: bicause that his tempe∣raunce in lyuynge is worthy cōmendation. Deprecari maleuolentiam, to excuse him of blame, for the ioy that he hath of an nothers mysfortune. Claudij inuidiam Gracchi charitas depreca∣batur, Gracchus was so welle beloued, that for his sake, the fautes of Claudius were hid and not spoken of. Deprecari munus, to excuse hym in takynge on hym an offyce or charge. Deprecari culpam to excuse hym selfe, and desyre that the faute be not layde to hym. Deprecari periculum, to praye that he falle not into perylle, or that he be in no daunger. Deprecari mortem, to desyre pardon of deth, or to endeuour hym to saue ones lyfe. Depraehendo, di, dere, to take a man vnwares to knowe, to perceyue. Depraehensus est in sermone, he was taken in his wordes. Depraehensus est in scelere, he was taken with the fault. Depressus, a, um, lowe. Deprimo, ere, to kepe down, to thruste downe. Deprimere naues, to make shyppes to synke and be drowned. Deprimunt me quae porto, My burdeyn ma∣keth me to stoupe. Depromo, to draw out, to declare, to fetch out Depromere ex libris, to fetche out of bokes. Depromit ex sensu suo, he fetched it frome his owne wytte. Depropero,Plaut. in paenu. rare, to make moche haste. Depso, psi, psere, to wark a thing with the han¦des, to the intent to make it softe, to kneade dowe, waxe, or other lyke thyng. Depuber, depuberis, a chylde or yonge beaste, whiche are not come to rype yeres. Depudet, he hath layde asyde shame. Depudico, aui, are, to dyshoneste or vyolate a woman. Depugnatur, the batayle was fought. Depugnatus, a, um, well fought. Depugno, aui, are, to fyght valyantly. Depulsio, a puttyng of, or lettynge a thyng that it can not approche.Ci. phil. 8. Quae causa iustior est belli gerendi, quam seruitutis depulsio? What better cause is there to fyghte, than that we wolde let, that we were not brought into seruitudo. Depurgo, aui, are, to clense any thynge vnder foote. Depurgare crimen, to dyscharge hym of the faulte whyche is layde vnto hym. Depuro, to make cleane or pure. Deputo, aui, are, to cut of, to esteme, to iudge, to repute. Deputare rationes,Terent. to recken or make ac∣compte. Depunio, nere, to beate. Derado, si, dere, to shaue of, or barke of. Derbices, people in Asia, aboute the sea callyd Mare Caspium, whyche haue this custome, that whan theyr frendes come to the aege of lxx. yeares, they slea theym, and eate them, callynge all theyr neyghbours vnto the feast. Olde women they slea not, but oonely doo strangle theym, and afterwarde doo burye theym. Semblably, yf menne dye before the sayde age, they alsoo do burye theym. They punysshe euerye offence, be it neuer so lyttel, with deathe. Dercaei, a people of Greece, in the coostes of Thrace. Derce, a welle moste colde in sommer. Derelinquo,Cice. post redditum. liqui, linquere, to forsake vtterly. De repentè, sodaynly. Derelictus, ta, tum, forsaken. Pro derelicto rem aliquam habere, to forsake a thynge. Derelictui habere,Au. Gel. to care not for a thynge, or to neglect it. Deribitores, they whiche do number an army, and do pay to the souldiours theyr wages. Derideo, risi, dere, to laugh to skorne, to mock. Deriduculum, a scorne or mocke. Deripeo,Plaut. in Men. ripui, pere, to take away, to dispile. Deripere aliquem capillo, to pull one down by the heare of the head. Derisus, a, um, mocked at or had in contempt. Derisus, us, mockery. Derisor, a mocker. Deriuo, aui, are, to deriuate from one to an no∣ther, to lay to one, as to lay to a mannes de∣faute, or charge, to take frome one, and gyue to an other. Derogito,Plaut. in Asin. to make instaunt desyre, to praye hartyly. Derogo, aui, are, to mynyishe, to derogate, to take away. Derogare fidem alicui, to putte noo truste in one.
Deruncinare, to cut or pulle of that whyche is superfluous. Deruo, ui, ere, to fall downe. Des, a poyse of eyght ounces. Desaltare, to daunce. Desaeuio, saeui, uire, to be wod angry, somtyme to ceasse to be angry. Descendo, di, ere, to go downe, to descend, som¦tyme onely to go. Descendere in altum, to go depe downe. Descendere in aciem, to go into the batayle. Descendere in sese, to humble hym self, or to consyder in him self the basenes of his estate. Descendere in causam, to come in stryfe. Descenditur gradibus, one goth down by step¦pes. Descensus, fus, a goyng downe. Descentio, idem. Descio, iui, ire, to knowe not. Descisco,Persius. iui, sciscere, to disagree, to leaue one, and go to an other, to rebell. Desciscere a se, to chaunge his fourme of ly∣uyng or fascion. Describo, psi, ere, to write out of a copy, to or∣der or appoynt, to paynt or wryte aduysedly, to declare or describe. Descriptio, a copy, a description. Describere pecuniam in ciuitates, to assesse summes of money in a taxe to be payd in sun∣dry cyties. Describere rationes, to make accomptes in an order. Describere in genere, to dyuyde a thyng in∣to dyuers kyndes. Latronem & sycarium aliquem describere, to sygnifie one by the name of theefe or mur∣derer without rehersyng his proper name. Descriptius, in better order. Descriptio populi, a deuydyng of the people into dyuers partes or bandes in a quarell be∣twene two persons. Descriptiones temporū, the hystory of thyn∣ges whiche haue hapned, accordyng to the or¦der of tyme. Deseco, aui, are, to cut in sunder, to cut of. Desecare prata, to mowe medowes. Desectio, a cuttīg or mowing down of straw or grasse. Desedeo,Columel. li. 6. cap. 3. dere, to sytte downe. Desero, ui, ere, to leaue or forsake. Deserere pignus, to lose his gage. Deserere uadimoniū, to make defaut, where one is bounde to appere before a iudge, or o∣ther great officer. Deserto, aui, are, to forsake. Desertor, he that leaueth his countrey, & gothe to his ennemyes. Desertus miles, a souldiour whyche depar∣teth without lycence. Deserta regio, a countray not inhabited. Desertus ager, a fyelde out of tylthe. Desertus, forsaken, not inheritable, where no man dwelleth, a desert or wyldernes. Deseruit me fides & fama, I haue loste my credence and good name. Deseruio, uiui, ire, to obey or serue humbly, som¦tyme to do yll seruyce. Deseruire studijs,Pli. in epi. to apply lernyng or study. Deses,Terenti. desidis, vnoccupied. Desiccare,Plautus. to drye vp. Desideo, sedi, desidere, to sytte stylle, to abyde in a place, to be ydell. Desidia, slouthfulnesse. Desidiosus, a man full of ydelnesse, slouthfull. Desido, sedi, ere, to syt styl or contynually, to sit on a thing, to syt on a chamber stole. It is also properly whan the erthe doth gape or thynke. Terra desedit, the groūde openeth or gapeth. Designata, for praedestinata. Designatio, a diue or ordināce, an appointmēt. Designator, toris, a marshall, whiche setteth or appoynteth euery man to his place, conueny∣ent to his degree or offyce. Designatus, assygned, ordeyned. Designati Consules, Praetores, Tribuni, they which were elected & apoynted to succede thē which at that tyme exercised the sayd offices. Designo, aui, are, to assigne, to note or sygnify, to do a thyng newly, also to chose a thing, and appoynt it for some purpose. Desilio, lui, ere, to leape or lyght downe. Desinas, holde thy peace. Desino, sii, nere, to leaue, to ceasse. Desinere artem, to leaue the crafte. Desinit in uiolam, it draweth to the coloure of vyolette. Illae orationes legi sunt desirae, those oratiōs are no more radde. Descistere conatu, to leaue his enterprise. Desistente autumno at the ende of Autumne or haruest. Desipio, pui, ere, to do folyshly, to wax folyshe. Desisto, destiti,Terent. in Phor. desistere, to leaue of. Desistere litibus, to leaue suite. Desita ars, a science out of vse, not spoken of. Primus Papisius est uocari desitus, He was the fyrst which was left to be callyd Papisi{us}. Desolatus, a, ū, that is made desolate or distroyd. Desolo, aui, are, to make desolate. Desolor, ari, to com forte. Despectio, onis, a dispitīg, a lokīg downward Despecto, aui, are, to loke behynd. Despectus, tus, regard or sight, somtime despite. Despectus, ta, tum, despysed. Desperanter, desperately. Desperatio, onis, despayre. Desperatus, a, um, desperate, also wherin oone hath none hope. Despero, aui, are, to despayre.
imperfection, corruption. Vitium offerre uirgini, to defloure a vyrgin. Vito, care, to eschewe or beware. Vitrearius, a glassemaker, or a glasyer. Vitreolum, an herbe growing on walles, whet with vessell beinge skoured, is made wonder full bryght. Vitreus, a, um, of glasse. Vitrinus, na, num, idem. Vitricus, a father in lawe, or stepfather. Vitriolum, a diminutine of uitrum. Vitrosus, a, um, whiche hath plenty of glasse. Vitrum, glasse. Vitra, a fyllet or headbande. Vitula, an he flat, or yonge cowe. Vitulari, to reioyce. Vitulatio, reioycynge. Vitulinus, a, um, of a calfe. Vitulinae carnes, beale. Vitulus, a calfe, not onely of a cowe, but also of an elyphant, and of great fysshes. It is alsoo a fyshe callyd a seale. Vituperium, a rebuke. Vitupero, rare, to rebuke. Vituperatio, a rebuke gyuen. Vituperator, he that rebuketh or blamethe annother. Vituperones, rebukers. Viuacitas, & uiuatia, amonge olde wryters bo∣dyly strength. Viuacissimus, most lyuely or stronge of nature. Viuaciter, strongely. Viuarium, a place, where wylde beastes, byr∣des, or fysshes be kepte. It may be callyd as well a ponde, as a parke, a counnyngar, a walke for byrdes. Viuatior, more lyuely. Viuatus, & uiuidus, full of lyfe or naturalle strengthe. Viuax, uacis, lyuely, stronge of nature. Viuerra, a ferrette. Viuidus, da, dum, lyuely, quycke. Viuior, & uiuissimus, olde wryters vsed for more lyuynge or moste lyuynge. Viuiradix, dicis, a yonge vyne set with the rote it is also euery plant, wherof the rote is quik though the flemme or sprynge be deade or corrupted. Viuitur. Quid agitur? T. Viuitur. Howe is the matter? T. I lyue as well as I may. Viuo, uixi, uiuere, to lyue, to haue a mery lyfe. Viuere diem, to lyue without any prouysyon or stoore. Viuus, ua, uum, that whych lyueth, also quyck, naturall, stronge, vehement, or great. Vix, vnethe, scantly, hardly. Vix dum, idem. Vix tandem, in conclusyon. Vix, for Non. Vix Priamus tanti, tota{que} Troia fuit, Kynge Priamus and all Troye was not so moche worthe. Vix, with moche a do. Si idem istuc imitamuur, ita tamen uix uiuimus. Although we doo the lyke, yet with moche adoo we lyue. ¶V ANTE L. VLcero, rare, to make a scabbe also to ex∣asperate or make grefe. Vlcerariae herbae, herbes that make blysters. Vlciscor, sceris, sci, to auenge. Vlcus, ceris, a hydde myschiefe. It is also cor∣rupt matter gathered within the skynne, and couered with a scabbe. It is any maner of soore where the skynne is broken. ❀Vlcus tangere, to rubbe one on the gall, to speake of a thynge whiche is dyspleasaunt to one for to haue remembred. Vlex, an herbe lyke to rsemary, whyche dra∣weth to it golde. Vliginosus, sa, sum, soked with longe aboode of water. Vligo, ginis, naturall moysture of the erthe al∣way remaynynge. Vlius, a name of Apollo. Vllo, olde wryters vsed for ultus fuero, I shall be reuenged. Vilus, la, lum, any. Vlmus, a tree callyd an elme. Vlmeus, mea, meum, of elme. Vlmarium, a groue of clmes. Vlna, a fathom, also an elle. Vlpicum, great garlyke. Vls, of whome commeth ultra. Vlterior, ulterius, further, more beyonde. Vltimus, ma, mum, laste, sometyme it signify∣eth fyrste. Vltima platea, at the ende of the strete. Vltimis aedibus, on the back side of the hous. Vltio, vengeaunce. Vltor, & ultrix, he or she that taketh vengeāce. Vltra, beyonde, more, moreouer. sommetyme shrewdly or frowardly. Vltrò, wyllyngly, without desyre or cohertion. Vltro citro{que}, hyther and thyther, sometyme it sygnifieth from one to an other. Vltroneus, a, um, wyllyng, with a free wylle. Vlubrae, a citie in Italy. Vlula, a shryche oule. Vlulatus, a barkynge. Vlulo, lare, to howle as a dogge or a wolfe. Vlua, teke or weedrs of the sea. Vlysbona, a citie in Portugal, called Iushbon. Vlysses, the son of Laertes and Autholia kinge of the yles of Ithaca and Dulichium, a man excelling all other grekes, which cam against Troy, in eloquence and subtiltye of wit, who after the subuercion of Troy, whan he hadde
wandred ten yeres on the seas, and marches thereof, and hadde seene many countrayes. Fynally he retourned home, and there a good space of tyme remayned vnknowen, and suf∣fred many dysplesures of the wowars of his wyfe the chaste Penclope, whom by the help of Thelemachus his sonne, and his swyne∣herdes, he at the last slew. Not withstandyng afterward he him selfe was slayne by Thele∣gonus his bastarde sonne, with an arrowe, nat beyng knowen of the same Thelegonus. ¶V ANTE M. VMbella, a lyttell shadowe. also a skryne to kepe away the lyght of the sonne. Vmber, of the countrey of Vmbria. Vmbilicatim, in the facyon of a nauyll. Vmbilicatus, ta, tum, made lyke a nauyll. Vmbilicus, the myddes of euery thynge. alsoo the nauyll. alsoo a lyttell cerkle made in the grounde, to knowe whyche waye the wynde standeth. Also it is a lyttell smothe stoone, or pyppell stone, a bose, suche as is sette on the backe of a boke. Ad umbilicum adducere, to bryng to a poynt Vmbo, bonis, the bose of a bucklar or shield. Vmbra, a shadowe. It was also that, whyche was callyd a goste of a man being dead, whi∣che not onely paynyms but also chrysten men supposed dyd appere vysybly vnto men. Vmbraculum, a place, where menne mought be oute of the sonne, or that whyche made shadowe. Vmbraticus, ca, cum, lyke a shadowe. Vmbraticus homo, a man lyuynge at ease, and out of all labour or busynesse. VMbraticae artes, craftes exercised in the sha¦dowe, as the more part of handy craftes. Vmbratilis, le, that whyche is done in the sha∣dowe, or as it were with ease, and withoute any sweate or peyne. Vmbratiles res, tryflynge thynges or trifles. Vmbratilis pugna, exercise of fetes of warre out of batayle as in a house. Vmbri, people in Italy now callyd Spole tani. Vmbria, a parte of Italy. Vmbrifer, ra, rum, makynge shadowe as a great wodde dothe. Vmbrina, & umbra, a fysshe, whyche by the description of Paulus Iouius, seemeth to me to be an Halybutte, for the greattenesse and delycacye of the head, and symylitude to a sturgyon. Vmbro, brare, to shadowe. Vmbrosus, umbrosa, brosum, hauynge moche shadowe. Vmbro, bronis, a ryuer in Lumbardye, callyd also Lamber. ¶V ANTE N. VNA, togyther. Vna cum Cicerone, to∣gyther with Cicero. Vnanimis, & unanimus, of oone mynde and wylle. Vnanimus consensus, one hole consent. Vnanimitas, tatis, concorde. Vncia, an ounce. also an ynche. Vnciarius, a, um, of an ounce. Vnciatim, ynche by ynche. Vncinatus, a, um, hooked or crooked. Vncinus, a lyttell clubbe or batte crooked at the ende. Vnciola, an ynche. Vnctio, an annoyntynge. Vnctuarium, a place nyghe to a stoufe or hotte howse, where men be annoynted after that they haue swette. Vnctum, the leafe of a hogge, whyche is the fatte that lyeth by the backe and rybbes, whi¦che husbandes vse to rolle vp, and keepe for to make saulues, orels or frye meate, as fry∣towes and pancakes. Vnctura, an annoyntynge. Vnctus, ta, tum, annoynted or greased. Vncus, a batte or croked clubbe. also any thyng croked at the ende. Vncus, a, um, croked. Vnda, water, proprely a wawe. Vndabundus, da, dum, makynge great or ma∣ny wawes. Vndans, wawynge or mouyng lyke to wawes. Vndatim, lyke to wawes of the sea. Vndeunde, of what place so euer it be, or from whense so euer it commeth. Vndecun{que}, idem. Vnde, from whense, wherto, wherby, wherof, wherfore, what to do. Vndegentium, idem. Vndecim, eleuen. Vndecimus, ma, mum, the eleuenth. Vndenus, na, num, idem. Vndelibet, from whens thou wylt. Vndeuigesimus, a, um, the nynetenthe. Vndeuiginti, nynetene, lackynge one of .xx. The lyke signification is, where unde is ioyned to any gret nūbre, as triginta, quadraginta &c. Vndeuis, idem quod undelibet. Vndique, on euery syde. Vndicola, he that dwelleth on the water. Vndisonus, na, num, that maketh a noyse lyke to wawes, whan they ryse and fal in the wa∣ter, or dothe roore as the water dothe at a greate floudde. Vndiuomus, a, um, that whyche casteth water out from hym. Vnedo, a kynde of wylde fruite lyke appuls, whiche is bytter, and hurteth bothe the head and the stomake.
Despicabilis, to be despysed. Despicatus, tus, despite, disprayse. Despicatus, he by whom no man setteth. Despicientia, despectio, despyte. Despicio, spexi, cere, to loke or behold downe, to despise. also for Aspicere, also to set litle by Despicor, cari, to despise or disprayse. Despicus, a watche man, to see who commeth, as it is in Calyce. Despolio, aui, are, to dispoyle or to robbe. Despoliare digitos, to pull the rynges from ones fyngers.. in ite. Despondeo, di, ere, to affiaunce or betrouthe. also to promise ones son or doughter in mari∣age. Despondere animum, to be in despera∣tion, or wery of lyfe, to despayre of any thyng that a man seketh for. Despondere sapientiam, to despaire to come to great wysedome. Despondêre prouinciam,Cicero de prouinc. consu. to gyue charge or rule of a countrey. Despondêre sibi domum alicuius, to make hym selfe assured to haue an other mās hous. Despondebitur, one shall make them agreed. Desponso, are, to affiance a woman. Desponsus, & desponsa, affianced or promised in mariage. Desponsatus, idem. Desponsata & destinata laus, prayse looked for and dewe. Despumo, aui, are, to skym or clarify any likor. Despuo, ui, ere, to spet down, or spet on a thing Despuere in mores, to blame the maners or conditions of one. Desquamo, aui, are, to skale a fyshe. Desquamare pisces, to take of the skaales from fyshes. Desquamare arbores, to barke trees. Desquamare uestem, to burle clothe. Destino, aui, are, to purpose, to appoynt, to de∣pute, to prepare, to chese, to tye to a thinge, to sende, to set a price. Quanti destinat aedes? For how moch wyll he sell his house? Destinare puellam, to promyse the mayden in mariage to one. Destinare diem necis alicui, to apoynt a day whan one shall be kylled. Destinare animo, uel animis, & in animo, to purpose in his mynde. Destinatio, a purpose to dye. Destituo, ui, ere, to forsake, to leaue, to depriue, or take fro, to louse, or vnbynde, to set downe a man. Destituit omnes seruos ad mensam ante se,Cecilius. He dyd set downe all his seruantes at the table before hym. Destituere spem, to disapoint one of the trust that he had in hym. Destituit aliquem, he brake promise with one Destituit ciuitatem, he dysapointed the citie. Destitutus, ta, tum, forsaken, destitute. Destringo, xi, gere, to bynde harde or cut. Destringere, for Abradere, also to abate. Destrinxit aciem, it blemysheth the syght. Destructile, that whiche shalbe distroyed. Destruo, xi, ere, to distroy or throw down that whyche is buylded. Destruere testes, to distroy the wytnesses. Desubitò, sodaynly, vnprouided. Desubulo, aui, are, to perce, properly with an awle or bodkyn. Desudasco, scere, to labour vntyll he sweate. Desudo, aui, are, to sweate moche or labour. Desuesco, su eui, escere, to dysvse or brynge out of custome. Desuefacio, Desuefio, idem. Desuefactus, out of custome or vse. Desuetudo, dinis, a dysvse. Desuetus, ta, tum, out of vse. Desultor, toris, he that can vaulte a horse, and leape from one horse back vnto an other. Also those men of warre, that in tyme of battayle wolde leape downe of theyr horses quyckely, and fyght on foote, and leape vp agayne as quyckely, were callyd Desultores. Desultorij, equi, horses which seruid for that purpose. Desultura, lyghtynge vp and downe, autynge of an horse. Desum, defui, deesse, to lacke, to fayle. Desum ere, to take, or to chese. Deesse caussae, not to defend one, not to take ones parte. Deesse occasioni, not to take a thynge whan occasion hapneth. Deesse officio, not to do his dutie or indeuor. Deesse sibi, to be negligēt in his own busines. Defuit animus, his courage fayled. Non desunt qui interpretentur, some men to interprete. Desuper, from aboue. Desursum, idem. Desyderabilis, le, worthye to be wysshed for or desyred. Desyderatio, & desyderium, desyre, loue, stu∣dy, delyte, sommetyme it sygnifieth absence. Multarum rerum desyderio te angi, necesse erat, Nedes must ye be greued with the sorow full remembrance of dyuers thynges. Desyderati, men dead or slayn in batayle. In eo prelio trecenti capti, quin quaginta millia de syderata sunt, In that batayle three hundred were taken, & fifty thousande slayne & dead. Desyderium, idem quod desyderatio, somme∣tyme absence. Desydero, aui, are, to desire, to with for a thing also to require, to loke for. Lepid{us} qdego desy¦derabā, fecit, That I desired Lepid{us} did. Ne∣ nunc uires desydero adolescētis nō plus{que}
adolescens, tauri uires desyderabam, Nor I nowe do more wyshe to haue a yonge mannes strength, than whan I was yonge, I wyshed the strength of a bulle. Virtus nullam aliam mercedem suorum laborum desyderat, prae¦ter hanc laudis & gloriae, Vertue requireth none other rewarde for her labour, but this onely of prayse and renoume. Quis ab eis ul∣lam rem laude dignam desyderat? Who lo∣keth for of them any thyng worthy cōmenda∣tion? Si erit bellū, ut uideo fore, partes meae non desyderabuntur, If we chaunce to haue warre, as I perceyue there wyll be, there shal lacke nothyng in me, in doing my dutie: or sor my parte I wyll not fayle. Curia uires meas non desyderat, The senat hath no nede of myn ayde. Desydero abs te aliquid, Me seemeth thou doste not as I wolde haue the to do. Desyderauit nōnun{que} Agrippae patiētiā, He was sory that Agrippa was no more pacyent. Vt ego tuum dolorem, amorem{que} desyde∣ro, I fynde lacke that thou dost not loue, nor arte not soory. Desyderata in magno philosopho grauitas, The grauitie whiche is requyred to be in soo great a phylosopher. Desyderio urbis flagrari, to be very sorye for the citie. Detectus, ta, tum, dyscouered, disclosed, made apparant and manyfest. Detectus caput, he that hathe his heed vn∣coueryd. Detego, tegi, tegere, to dysclose or dyscouer. Detegere stomachum, to utter his somake or mynde. Detendeo, di, dere, to stretche out, or stretche forthe. Detentio, a withholdyng or retaynyng. Deter, lackyng somewhat, yll. Deterior, warse. Deterrimus, warste. Detergo, & detergeo, si, gere, to wype of, to make cleane, to scoure. Detergere fastidia, to put away lothsomnes. Deterior, deterius, wars, in wars condition. Deteriore iure esse, to be in wars condition. Deterrimus, a, um, warste. Deterrimè, an aduerbe, whyche sygnifieth in warst condition, moste vngraciousely. Determino, aui, are, to determyne, to discusse. Detero, teri, terere, to bruyse, to beate oute, as grayne is beaten oute of the eare with thres∣shinge or treadyng, to empayre. Deterere calces, to weare out shoes. Deterere sumptū, to lose his cost or expencis. Deterreo, ui, ere, to put in feare, to let by feare. Deterritus, abashed. Detestabile, abhominable, detestable. Detestatio, abhorrynge, execration, summo∣nynge with witnesse. also Apuletus taketh it for geldynge. Detestor, ari, to abhorre. Among Ciuilians De¦testari is to summon a man with wytnes. Detestari inuidiam, to eschue reproche. Detexo, xi, xere, to wayue, or to wynde. Detineo, nui, êre, to withhold, to restrayn from lybertie. Detondeo, detondi, dere, to sheare or clyppe. Detono, aui, are, to make a great sounde. Detorqueo, torsi, quêre, to bow, to turne out of the ryght way. also to tourne a thynge frome the one syde to the other. Recte facta detorquêre, to interprete in an yll part that whiche is well done. Praue detorta opinio, an opinion mystaken, and far from the true meanynge. Detractio, pluckyng away or from one. it is al∣so dispraysing or yl reporte. it signifieth alsoo withdrawyng of any thyng necessary. Detractio sanguinis, lettyng of bloudde. Detractio alieni, the takynge away of an o∣ther mans goodes. Detractor, toris, he that reporteth ylle or spea∣keth yll of one. Detraho, traxi, trahere, to drawe or plucke of. Detrahere alumnū māma, to wean a chylde. Detrahere de coelo, to pull out of heauen, or from heauen. Detrahere alicui, to report yll or say yl of one. Detrahere de authoritate Senatus, to haue the senate in contempte. Detrahere de se, to blame hym selfe. Detrahere de pecunia, to abate of the money Detrahere de suis commodis, to mynysh his commoditie or profyte. Detrahere in iudicium, to bryng in iugement. Detrahere sanguinem, to drawe blud of one. De fama alicuius detrahere, to mynysshe the estimation of one. De pōdere detrahere, to abate of the weight De suo iure detrahere, to remit or abate som¦what of his ryght. Fidē uerbis alicuius detrahere, to cause one not to be beleuyd. Ex summo detrahere, to abate of the summe Ex redditu detrahere, to minish his reuenues Precio detrahitur, the price is abated. Detrectatio, a refusell or denier to do a thing. Detrectator, tôris, he that refuseth. Detrecto, tare, to refuse to do a thyng. it alsoo sygnifyeth to abate. Aduersae res etiam bo∣nos detrectant, Aduersitie abateth mens re∣putation, although they be good men. Detrimentum, detriment or damage. Detrimentum facere, to sustayne damage. Detrimentosum, that which is cause of moche damage or hurte. Detrudo, si, ere, to thruste downe: sometyme
to constrayne or inforce, to caste or putte one out of any place. Detrudere comitia in aduentū alicuius, To deferre or put of the parliamente vntyll his commynge. Detrudi in carcerem, to be put in prison. Detrudere regno, to put one oute of his royalme. De sententia detrudere, to make one to for∣sake his opinion. Detrudunt naues scopulo, they pulled backe the shyppes from runnynge on the rocke. Detrullo, aui, are, to put from one vessell into an other. Detruncatio, a cuttynge shorte. Detrunco, aui, are, to cut of short, or in pieces. also to lop or shrede a tree. Detruncare uitem, to cut a vine. Detulit, he broughte. Detulit illi laudem, he referred all the prayse vnto hym. Detrubo, aui, are, to beate downe, or to pulle from a thinge, to throwe downe one frome a hyghe place. Deturbare aliquem aedibus, to thruste oone out of the house. Deturbare de mente, to make one madde. Deturbare possessione, to put one out of posession. Deturgeo, gi, gêre, is whan a thynge whiche is swollen or blowen, doeth assuage it selfe. Deturpo, aui, are, to make foule or defyle. Deua, a ryuer in Scotlande called Dee, and the towne called Dondee is also Deua. Deuana, a towne in the North parte of Eng∣lande called Dancaster. Deuasto, aui, are, to waste. Deucalion, was the sonne of Prometheus, a man of moche wysedome and vertue, whoo saued moche of the people of Greece in the tyme of an vniuersall floudde, whereby the more parte of Greece was drowned: The poetes fayne, that after the floude, he asked counsayle of the goddesse Themis, howe mā kynde mought be restored, and it was aun∣swered: If he and his wyfe Pyrrha did cast the bones of theyr mother behynde them. Deucalion beynge verye wytty, perceyued that the erthe was mother of al thynges, and that stones were the bones of the erth. Ther∣fore he threw stones behynde hym, and they became men, and his wyfe dyd lyke wise, and they became women: But in dede he saued the people by bryngynge them vp to the hyll called Parnasus. He was before the com∣mynge of Christe. 1534. yeres. Deueho, xi, ere, to cary from a place. Deuello, uulsi, uellere, to pull away. Deuenio, ueni, nire, to come down from high to low, frō ryches to pouertie, from prosperi∣tie to aduersitie: somtyme generally to come. Deuenusto, aui, are, to make foule. Deuerbero, aui, are, to beate moche. Deuerbium, the laste ende of a worde. Deuerro, ri, ere, to swepe ane. Deuersus, turned downewarde. Deuestio, stij, ire, to vnclothe. Deuexitas, holownes. Deuexo, aui, are, to vexe moche. Deuexus, a, um, holowe or lyke to a valey. Deuictus, ouercome. Deuincio, xi, cire, to bynde faste. Deuincit se sceleri, he bryngeth hym selfe in daunger for the offence or missedede. Deuinco, uici, uincere, to vaynquishe. Deuinctus, bounden, properly in duety or offyce. Deuio, aui, are, to go out of the waye. Deuirgino, aui, are, to defloure a mayden. Deuîto, aui, are, to eschewe. Déuius, a, um, out of the ryght we. Deuium iter, a waye not haunted or vsed to be gone. Deunx, deuncis, xi. ounces, and a measure. whiche was as moche as a temperate man vsed to drynke at .xi. draughtes. It is some∣time taken for the .xi. parte of any thynge. Deuoco, aui, are, to call asyde, or call way,  call or fetche downe. Deuocare in suspitionem, to brynge in supition. Deuolo, aui, are, to flee or runne from a hygh∣er place to a lower, to go with spede. Deuoluo, ui, uere, to tumble or roll downe: by translation it signifieth, it is fallen, or come from one to an other, or hapned. Deuolui ad otium, to be gyuen to ydelnesse. Deuolui retro, to be tourned backe. Deuolutus, ta, tum, toumbled downe. Deuoluta est hereditas, the inheritaunce is fallen or come. Deuona, a town in Almayn called Newemark betwene Nurenberg and Rentzburg. Deuoro, aui, are, to deuoure. Sometyme to beare. Hoc taedium mihi deuorandum est, this la∣bour muste I susteyne. Deuorare dicta, to take good heede vnto wordes. Deuorare hominum ineptias, to set lyttell by mennes foly. Deuorare libros, to reade ouer manye and sundry boke hastely. Deuorare molestiam paucorum dierum, to passe lyghtly ouer a thynge, whiche is a lyt∣tell whyle greuous. Deuorare nomen alicuius, to forgette a mannes name.
Deuorare orationem, to here a tale without takynge any heede. Deuorare pecuniam, to consume al his sub∣staunce. Deuorare spe lucrum, to couayte a thynge so moche, that he thynketh that he all redye hath it. Deuoratae urbes, cities beynge sunke with erthe quakes. Deuoti, men whiche promysed to lyue and dye in the seruyce of princes or capitaynes. Deuotio, onis, a curse, a vowe to dye, or to make a man dye. Deuotiones, dyuilyshe inuocations to the da∣mage of one. Deuoto, aui, are, to bynde by a vowe. Deuotorius, a, um, concernynge a vowe or curse. Deuotoria carmina, inuocations, curses. Deuotus, faythfull and obedient. Also gyuen or determined to do some thynge. Deuotus, a, um, vowed or cursed, dedicate. Deuoueo, êre, to vowe or curse, to consente to dye. Deuouére se, to make a vowe to dye in any quarell, or for saufegarde of other. Deuotus, he that maketh the sayde vowe. Deuouêre se amicitiae alicuius, to gyue hym selfe hole to the loue of one. Deüro, ussi, ûrere, to burne. DEVS, God. Dextans, tantis, a weyght beinge .x. ounces. some haue taken it for .x. dosayne. Dexter, tra, trum, ryght or apte. Dexter, dextri, of the ryght hande. sometyme it signifieth apt, conuenient, quycke, and di∣ligent, prosperous, fauourable. Dextera, uel Dextra, the ryght hande: some∣tyme on the ryghte syde. Dexteram tender, to gyue to one his hand. Dextram dare, to helpe or ayde. Dextram dextrae committere, to promyse faythe and trouth in hande. Dextere, properly, aptely, featly. Dexterior, Dexterius, more proper or apte. Dexteritas, tatis, aptenes and redynes in the thynge that a man goeth about. Dextero, aui, are, to leade in the ryght hande, to couple horses, in a teeme. Dextimi, horsemen beynge on the ryght wynge in battayle. Dextimus, olde writars vsed for dexter. Dextrale, a bracelet to weare on the ryghte arme. Dextrocherium, the same. Dextrarij, horses ioyned in a teeme. Dextrorsum, towarde the ryght hande. Dextrouersum, idem. D ANTE I. DIA, an addition to womens names, whan theyr folyshe louers wyll make them equal to goddesses. It is also au¦yle by Greece called Naxus, Fynallye this worde Dia is a worde set before al noble con¦fectiōs deuysed by the Grekes, as, Diacala∣minthe, Diacitonites, Diapapauer. &c. Diabathra, a certayne sorte of shoes vsed in Greece. Diabethe, a sickenes whiche causeth, that one can not holde his veryne. Diabolus, the dyuell. Howe be it in greeke it signifieth properly a falfe accusar. Diacôdion, is a syrupe made with the heades of the herbe called popy, and water, whiche profyteth agaynste reumes, and to cause one to sleape. Diaconus, a deacon, in Greeke it signifyeth a mynister. Diacytoniten, or Diacydonium, a confection made with the iuyce of quinces and hony or sugar, whiche is an excellent medicine to fe∣ble stomakes. Diadêma, a highe cap, wheron an Emperour or kynge weareth his crowne. Diaeta, a parler to soup in. Also diete in eatyng or drynkynge. Also a place where iudgemen∣tes were gyuen. Diaetarij, seruauntes that do awayte on the ta∣ble. Somtyme suche as do haunt dyners and suppers to the intente to steale somewhat. Diaetetica, that parte of phisike whiche cureth by dyete. Diagridion, a certayne confection made with Scammony, for to pourge choler. Dialectia, is the arte, whiche teacheth to in∣uent quyckely, to dispute aptely, and fynal∣ly to trye what is trewe and what is false. It is commonly called logike. Dialecticus, a logician. Dialectus, a maner of speche, as we wold saye diuersities in englyshe, as Northern speche, Southern, Kentyshe, Deuenyshe, and other lyke. Dialexis, disputation. Dialis, Iupiter. Also it signifieth of one daye, as, Consul dialis, a consull of one daye. Diâlogus, a disputation betwene two. Diâmeter, a lyne, whiche diuideth any figure in to two equal partes. Diâna, the doughter of Iupiter, whiche fle∣inge the company of men, to the intente that she wold not be meued with carnal lustes, she continuallye exercised her selfe in huntynge wylde beastes, and for her chast lyfe, she was honoured of the paynyms for a goddesse. she is also taken for the moone.
Diapasma, is a composition of dyuerse sweete pouldres to cast on the body, to thintent that superfluous sweate maye be put awaye. It maye be also taken for a swete persume or pomeambre. Diapason, a concorde in musyke of fyue tunes, and two halfe tunes. Diapente, of fyue. Diaphanum, clere throughe out, as christall. Diaphonia, a discorde. Diaphora, a difference. Diaphoresis,Linac. in eth. Gal digestion, or euaporation. Diaphoreticus, ca, cum, that whiche doth dis∣solue and sende forthe humours or vapours. Diaphragma,andin{us}. is a skyn in the lowest parte of the brest,Alex. Be. whiche diuideth the place where the harte and lunges ben, from the stomacke and bowelles, soo that the vapours rysinge vpwarde shall not come to the spiritual mem¦bers, wherby the mynde and rayson mought be indamaged. Diapyganon, a confection made with the herb called Rue, whiche is also called Diaspoliti∣con, an excellent medicine agaynste lacke of good digestion, agaynste peyne in the breste, the sydes, the lyuer, and the raynes, it molli∣fyeth the bely, comforteth the stomacke, and maketh good digestion. Diaria febris, a feuer whiche dureth but oone daye, if the sicke man do kepe good dyet. Diarium, prouision for one daye: Also a booke declarynge what is done daye by day. Diarrhaea, a laske or flyxe without inflamma∣tion or exulceration, which of the late phisi∣tions is called fluxus humoralis. Diastole, a distintion or poynte, whereby oone worde or sentence is distinete from an other. Diatesseron, of eyght. Diatretum, a cuppe imboced, and cunnyngely wroughte. Diatritos, abstinence by the space of iii. dayes Diaulus, a measure of grounde conteyninge .ii. furlonge, euery furlonge being of a hundred fiue and twenty fete. Dibapha, any colour in silke or clothe, whiche is twyse steped in the dye vate, we calle it a depe colour. Dica, a cause, an accusation, a iudgment. Dicam impingere,Terent. in horm. to brynge an action a∣gaynste one. Dicam scibere alicui,Plaut. in ulul. to enter an action a∣gaynste one. Dicacitas, tatis, scoffynge or bourdynge. Dicaculus, & Dicacula, mery in talkynge. Dicaearchus, a iuste prynce. Also the name of a philosopher. Dicassis, for dicas, tell on. Dicax, cacis, a rayler or reprocher. Dice, for dic. Dichas, a measure of two palmes, or .viii. fyngers. Dico, caui, care, to vowe, to offer, to dedicate to gyue for euer. Dicamus tibi hunc totum diem, this day is youres to do with vs what it shall lyke you. Dicare operam suam, to offer his seruyce. Dico, xi, cere, to saye, to tell, to byd, to pro∣myse, to affyrme, to defende: as, Cicero di∣xit causam Milonis: Cicero defended Mi∣los cause. Also to appoynte, to call a thynge by name. Dicere causam, to make answere to an acti∣on or playnte. Dice illi, for dic illi, tell hym hardely, Dicere diem, to sewe a man, or call hym vp, (as we vse to saye) by action, wryte, or com∣maundement, properly to cause a man to be bounden to appere and make aunswere. Dicere Dictatorem, to name or make a Di∣ctatour. Dicere dotem, to assigne dowry. Dicere doti,Terent. in Heauton. to assigne dower by promyse. Dicere ex animo, to speake as a manne thynketh. Dicere ex tempore, to make an oratiō with out study. Also to speake vnaduisedly. Dicere ius, to gyue commaundement or sen∣tence on a peyne. Somtyme it signyfieth to gouerne by lawes a towne or countrey. Dicere contumeliam, to outrage or rayle on one. Dicere leges, to appoynt lawes, or conditi∣ons of peace, as by the vāquisher to him that is vaynquished. Diem dicere nuptijs uel operi: to appoynte a day for meryage. &c. Dicere mulctam, to sette or assesse a fyne or summe of money to be payed by hym, which hath commytted a trespasse. Dicere in utran{que} partem, to susteyn the say∣inge of bothe parties. Dicere nummos, to promyse money. Dicere sacramento, to take an othe, proper∣ly as they do, whiche be retayned in warres. Dicere salutem, to salute or recommende hym vnto one: also to pray god to send hym good helth and well to do. Dicere sententiam, to gyue sentence or iudgemente. Dictamen, a thyng wrytten by an other mans instruction. Dictamum, an herbe, whose leaues are lyke penyroyall, but greatter and somewhat hore and mosy, and byteth the tunge lyke gynger, but it hath neyther floure nor seede. Constā∣tinus calleth it Dictamum, and saythe that it is hote and drye in the thyrd degre. There is in this herbe wonderfull and incompara∣ble
vertues, as well agaynste all poyson, as also in drawynge forth any thynge, whiche stiketh faste in any parte of the body. Dictator, the hygheste offyce in the publyke weale of the Romans, which was also callyd Magistor populi, the mayster of the people, whiche for the space of syxe monethes, hadde the authoritie of a kynge. And therfore that dignitie was neuer gyuen but only whan the state of the citie was in any ieoperdy. Dictatura, the office or dignitie of Dictatour. Dicta, signified mery sentences. Dictata, interpretations, expositions, or decla¦rations, made by maisters vnto theyr scolers whiche they do wryte. Dictatum, a mynute gyuen by one to an other to wryte a letter by. Dicte, a citie in the yle of Crete or Candy. Dicteria, mery quippies or tauntes wyttyly spoken. Dictito, onis, a worde, a fourme of speakynge Dictio, aui, are, to speake of or in dyuers pla∣ces, to tell a thynge ofte. Dicto, taui, tare, to reherse to one that whiche he shall wryte. Also to inuestigate or expound the sence of any author. Also to brynge to re∣membraunce. Dictare rationem, to yelde accompt. Dictum, spoken or sayde. Dictum factum, sodaynely. Dictum puta, I knowe what thou wol∣dest saye. Dicto obediens, he that dothe that, whiche he is commaunded. Dicturio, iui, ire, to go about, or prepare to speake. Dictynna, one of the names of Diana. Dictynnus, a hyll, wherin the temple of Dia∣na was situate. Dictys, one of the Centaures, and an histogra¦phier of Candy. Didascalus, a schole maister. Dido, the name of a ladye that buylded Carthage. Didrachma, two of the coynes called Drach∣mas, of our money nowe .xi. d. ob. Diduco, xi, cere, to brynge into sondry partes, or to diuide or pull aparte, to open a thynge that is shut. Diducere argumenta in digitos, to marke & deuyse an argument on his fyngers endes. Diductum stare, to set one foote here, an o∣ther there. Didymae, arum, ylandes of Aphrike, that bounde on Egypt. Didymus, is in latine Geminus, in Hebrewe Thomas, in englyshe, a twynne in byrthe, or bouble a man. Diecula, a lyttell whyle. Dierecta, in an yll tyme. Dies diei, a daye. Somtyme it signifieth tyme or season. Dies critici, the dayes in whiche phisitions do gyue a certayne iudgement in sickenes. Dies legittimi, amonge lawyars be called or∣dynary dayes, or dayes in courte. Die decies, ten tymes in a daye. De die, for Interdiu, in the daye tyme. Diem de die expectabam, I looked frome daye to daye. Diem dicere, ai, Dicere diem. Diescit, it is daye, it waxeth daye. Diespiter, one of the names of Iupiter. Dieteris, the space of two yeres. Diffamo, aui, are, to sprede by fame. Diffarreatio, a certayne sacrifice, whiche was betwene a man and his wyfe. Differitas, olde wryters vsed for differentia, dyfference. Differentia, a difference. Differo, distuli, differre, to spare or deferre. somtyme to bryng from one place to an other Somtyme to reporte abrode: somtyme to de∣uyde or cut a sonder:Cicero. somtyme to set in order: sommetyme to dyffer or be in dyfference. At uide quid differat inter meā opinionem & tuam: But see nowe what dyfference is be∣twene thyne opinion and myne. Differ mam alicui, to sprede ones name abrode. Differre sitim, to endure thyrste. Differre uadimonium, to gyue a daye ouer to hym, whiche is bounden for his appa∣raunce. Differri, to be so vexed in mynde, that a man woteth not what to do. Diffibulare, to vnbuckle, to open, to vngyrde. Difficile, aduerbium, hardely, difficultly. Difficilis, le, harde, vneasy. Difficul, for difficile, Difficultas, difficultie. Difficulter, with great peyne or labour. Diffidentia, mistruste. Diffidenter, without great truste or hope. Diffido, dere, to mistrust. Diffindo, di, ere, to cleaue in sunder. Diffindere diem, loke in Diffundere. Diffindere medium, to cut of in the myddel. Diffindere minute humum, to cut cleane by the grounde. Diffisum saxū, a stone clefte or cut on sunder. Diffinio, iui, ire, to diffyne or declare in fewe wordes playnely the signification of a thing. Diffinitio, onis, a diffinition or declaration of the nature, qualite, or proper signifycaon of a thyng by generaltie, specialtie, & difference. Diffiteor, fisus sum diffiteri, to deny. Difflo, are, to blowe downe.
Diffluo, xi, ere, to flo Diffluere otio, to be drowned in ydelnes. Diffringo, fregi, fringere, to breake in pieces. Diffugio, gi, gere, to flye hyther and thyther, to refuse to do. Diffugium, Refuge. Diffundere diem,daeus in ota. to put of a matter vntyl the nexte daye. But Policianus, in Miscellaneis dothe affyrme, that it ought to be rad Diffin¦dere diem, as well in the digestes, as in all other authors: who of them saye moste true∣ly, I remyt it to the iudgement of the reders Diffundo, si, dere, to scatter. Diffusum uinum, wyne drawen into the vessell. Diffusiora consepta, greate groundes, in closed. Diffusa, sus, a great Sowe and a fatte. Diffuse, an aduerbe, sygnifieng, scatered here and there. Digama, a woman that hath hadde two husbandes. Digamus, he that hath had two wyues, com∣monly called Bigamus. Digamma, amonge latines is the letter F. Digeries, a disposion or order. Digeri, to be resolued. Digero, gessi, gerere, to dispose, to order, to interprete or make playne, to deuyde, to dy∣gest, to cary hyther and thyther, to declare. Digerere crines, to trymme the heare. Digerere mandata, to do in order that oone is commaunded. Digerere cibum, to digest meate. Digestio, an order of thynges. It is also dige∣stion of meate and drynke in to the vaynes and members. Digitalia, thynges worne on the fyngars, as thymbelles. Digitalis, le, perteynynge to the fyngar. Digitali crassitudine, the thyckenes of a fynger. Digiti, are muskylles, or a lyke kynde of shell fyshe. Digitulus, a lyttell fyngar. Digitus, a fyngar. It is also a measure, wher∣of foure doo make .iii. ynches, and it is the xvi. parte of a fote. ❀Digitis extremis uel summis attingere, to touche a thynge with the fyngers toppes, v∣sed for a prouerbe: where one hath vneth at∣tayned to any part of a thynge. Digitum tollere, to fauour or consent. Digitum trāsuersum, signifieth in a sentence a lyttell or small distaunce. Digitum transuer sum ab eo, non discedebat: He wente not from hym a fyngar breade. Digladiari, to fyght together with swordes. by translation to contende or stryue. Digladiatio, a fyght, a stryfe, a debate. Dignatio, great estimation: sometyme fauour or familiaritie with noble men. Dignè, worthily. Dignitas, tatis, honour gyuen or due to a man for his merites: somtyme a state of nobilitie, or great authoritie: somtyme beautie proper¦ly of a man, specially in gesture and com∣munication. Dignatio, idem. Dignitas uultus, a sygnification of honestie or worshyp. Dignitatem suam tueri, to saue his honour. Dignari, to be reputed worthy. Digno, aui, are, & Dignor, ari, to iudge oone to be worthy, or to be estemed worthy. Dignosco, noui, scere, to discerne or know by dyuers meanes, Dignoro, aui, are, to marke as menne marke beastes to knowe them. Dignus, a, um, worthy, meete or apte. Digredi in latus, to tourne on the one syde. Digredior, dieris, gredi, to departe or go awaye. Digressio, a departing. Digressus, idem. Digredi ad pedes, to lyghte on fote. Dijouis, Iupiter. Dijudicatus, ta, tum, determyned by sentence. Dijudico, caui, care, to iudge betwyxte two thynges. Dilabor, eris, labi, to slyp or go away, to fall downe as a house dothe: sometyme it signy∣fyeth to fayle, to decaye. Dilacero, aui, are, to teare or rent in pieces. Dilaneo, are, idem. Dilapido, aui, are, to consume goodes, or spēd riottously or wastfully. Dilapsa & diffluxa, fallen and scatered here and there. Dilatio, delaye. Dilapsi domos, departed home to their hou∣ses without any busynesse. Dilato, aui, are, to stretche out in breadthe. Dilemma, tis, an argument, whiche on euery parte taunteth hym, to whom it is spoken. Diligens, tis, diligente or louynge. Diligenter, diligently, aduisedly. Diligentia, diligence or loue. Diligo, lexi, ligero, to fauoure or loue meanly somtyme to diuide. Dilorico, aui, are, to vndo, or cut a cote, or o∣ther thynge beinge sowed. Diluceo, cere, to be bryght or clere. Dilucescit, the daye appereth. Dilucide, euidently, clerely. Dilucido, dare, to declare or make a thynge playne to vnderstande. Dilucidus, clere, bryghte.
Diluculò, an aduerbe, which signifieth betime in the mornynge. Diluculo, laui, lare, to waxe daye, to appere to be daye. Diluculum, that portion of day, whiche is be∣fore that the sonne ryseth. Diludium, the leuynge of playe, or the space betwene recreations or playes. Diluo, ui, ere, to washe or make cleane, to put awaye, to release, to alaye as wyne is alayde with water, or to temper, to purge, or dis∣charge a cryme, or faulte layde to one. Dilutum, is wyne or other lycour, wherin any herbe or other thynge is deaped by a certain space, whiche some phisions call infused. Dilutus, ta, tum, alayde or tempred. Dilutus color, a faynte colour or vnperfecte colour. Diluuium, & Diluuies, is whan the erthe is surrounded or drouned with moche rayne. Dimâno, aui, are, to flowe abrode, as dyuers streames out of one sprynge. Dimembro, aui are, to deuyde. Dimensio, measurynge. Dimensum, & Demensum, measured. Dimetior, dimensus sum, dimetiri, to measure or meete. Dimetiri digitis, to accompte on his fingers. Dimeriens, that wherewith a thynge is measured. Dimicatio, battayle. Dimicatio prelij, the rage or whurle of the battayl. Dimicatio capitis, a battayle for the sauyng of a mannes honour. Dimico, aui, are, to fyghte or contende with some thynge. Dimidiatus, a, um, the halfe deale of that whi¦che is not seuered or diuided. Dimidio, an aduerbe signifieng halfe. Dimidio plus, dimidio minus, halfe more, halfe lesse. Dimidius, a, um, the halfe deale of that whi∣che is diuided. Dimidium plus toto, is spoken where a man intendeth to shewe that the meane is beste. Diminuo, ui, ere, to mynishe, or cut of. Diminutio, the minishinge or abatynge. Diminutus capite, & Diminutio capitis, Vi∣de ante, Capitis diminutio. Dimissus, a, um, is some tyme taken for abiect. Dimissoriae litterae, letters missiue, sente frō one to an other. Deiecit uultum, & dimissa uoce locuta est, She dyd caste downe her loke, and with an humble voyce sayde. Dimissio, a leaue to departe. Dimitto, si, tere, to sende dyuerse persons into dyuerse places. some tyme it signifieth to let to depart, to gyue leaue, to ceasse, to leaue, to let passe, to suffer, to humble. Also to gyue, to let downe, to forgyue. Dimittere literas, to sende letters. Dimittere boues in pascua, to put kyne to pasture. Dimittere consilium, to dissolue a counsayle. Dimittere è manibus, to let one escape. Dimittere sanguinem, to let bloude. Dimittere de summa, to abate of the summe totall. Dimittere debitorem, to release a dettour. Dimittere creditorem, to paye his det to his creditour. Dimittere facultatem rei gerendae, to lose or let slyp that power, whiche one hath to do a thynge. Dimitri osculo, to kysse at departing. Dimixos, a lampe with two lyghtes. Dimoueo, uere, to remoue or put out of a place or roume. Dim ouere perfrangere{que} custodias, to breake the prease, and passe throughe the kinges garde. Dimulgo, aui, are, to publyshe abrode. Dindymene, & Dindyme, one of the names of Cybele, called the mother of the goddes. Dindymus, the rydge of the hyll of Ida in Phrigia. Dinumero, rare, to paye money. Diobolaris, a common and vyle harlot. Diobolares meretrices, harlottes, whiche be hyred for lyttell money. Dioecesis, sios, a iurisdiction, a gouernaunce. Also the diocese of a byshop. Diodôrus, a philosopher of Socrates sect. and Diodôrus Siculus,Ci. in B &  a story wryter: and an o∣ther Diodôrus a stoycke philosopher of whō Cicero wryteth. Diogenes, a famous philosophers name. Diomedes, a noble capitayne of the Greekes at the siege of Troye. Dione, a goddesse of the sea, mother of Venus Dion, was sone of a noble man of Sicile called Hipparinus, and brother to Aristomacha, wyfe to the elder Denyse. wherfore he was longe tyme in great fauour with hym, in so moche as Denyse commaunded his officers, that they shuld gyue to Dion al that he wold aske. But after that Dion had ben the herar of Plato, and folowed his doctrine and gra∣uitie. Denise no more fauoured hym. Sem∣blably the seconde Denyse, not withstandyng that Dion with al diligence indeuoured him selfe to brynge hym vp in vertue and honour: yet bycause he was graue in maners and of great seueritie, and was not pleasaunte, the fauour lyttell and lyttell relented, and at the last Denyse gathering suspition of Dion, sēt
hym in exyle: who retournynge after diuers conflictes for the liberty of his countrey, be∣ynge often betrayed of his frendes, and de∣ceyued by them, whome he trusted, fynallye was slayne in Siracusis, the chiefe Citie of Sicile. He was a man of excellente vertue & wysedome, and of a great courage, and ther∣fore was aboue all other fauoured of Plato. But by to moche lybertie in speche, and pro∣curynge libertie vnto the commune people, more than was necessarye, he broughte hym selfe to perpetuall inquietnes, and at the last to confusion. The tyme of his beinge shall be declared in the ly of Plato. Dionysius, reade in Bacchus. It was also the name of two kynges of Sicile, whiche for theyr crueltie and auarice were called tyran∣tes. The fyrste was sonne of Hermocrates a ryche man of Sicile, whom for his valiant∣nesse in armes the Sicilians ordeyned to be theyr capitayne agaynste the Carthagynen∣ses, whiche inuaded theym, and menaced to distroye theyr countrey, and take from them theyr liberte. But after that the enmies were vanquished, Denyse, which preserued his con¦ray from bondage, of a benefactour became a cruell tyrant. This man desyrouse to se the wyse Plato, who thanne was famous, with importunate requestes caused him to come to Sicile from Athenes. But hauyng with him communication, in the whiche Plato com∣mended rightwyse gouernaunce, and disprai¦sed tyranny, Denyse beinge therwith offen∣ded, wolde haue slayne hym, but beinge let by the intercessiō of Dion and Aristomenes, he gaue him to Polydes the ambassadour of the Lacedemonians, to sell whan he came in to Grece. the residue ye may rede in myboke of the knowlege, which maketh a wise man. The other Dionysius or Denyse was son to this man, like in conditions, but that he was better lerned. He also made meanes to haue Plato come vnto hym, and a good space had hym in moche reuerence, and herde his lessōs in philosophy. Fynally suspectinge hym, that he conspired agaynste hym with Dion, and other, whom he had expelled, vnethe at the desyres of Architas prynce of Tarentum and other, he suffered him to retourne vnto Athe∣nes. So lyghtly are the myndes of great men towarde lernynge satisfied, and for small oc∣casions offended, excepte suche as do set all theyr delyte in vertue, and do esteme it aboue other plesures. the tyme of this man shal ap∣pere in the lyfe of Plato. The father was no¦ted of rauin & crueltie, for the which he was ones dryuen out of Sicile, and by pouertye constrayned to teache chyldren in Italy. Also he was reproued for hauynge his eares al∣wayes open and redy to here detractours,  for his timerous and suspitiouse lyuing, that he wolde be enuyroned with a great gard of straungers and bondemen, mistrustynge his owne people and kysemenne: that he wolde speake to the people from the top of a towre: that he wolde haue his berde neyther shauen or klypped by any man, but onely with wal∣nut shales very hot, he caused it to be burned. And yet at the laste was he slayne of the peo∣ple, curiositie not so saulfly kepynge hym, as Beneuolence mought haue done, if he had folowed the doctrine of Plato, as he semed to do. Dioptra, a geometrical instrument, to dyscerne altitudes and distaunce. Victruuius vseth it for wayinge or pluckyng vp of water. Dioscorides, called also Pedacius and Pha∣cas, was a worshypfull knyghte of Egypte, who ioyninge lernynge to chiualry, being in the hoste of the Romaynes in sundrye coun∣treys, in tymes vacant from battayle, made diligent serche of the figures and vertues of dyuerse herbes and other thynges necessarye for medicine, and moste truely wrate of them in greke, as Galenus testifieth. He lyued vn∣der Cleopatras and Antonius. Dioscoron, an yle in the borders of Italy. Diospolis a citie of Aegypt. There be .iiii. o∣ther of the same name in Aegypt, but verye small cities in comparyson of this. Diotae, vesselles of erthe with handels, wher∣in wyne was kepte. Diphthera, a shepeherdes cote made with shepe skynnes. Diphthongus, two vowelles ioyned to gether called a diphthonge, as ae, oe, au, ei. Dipois, idis, any garment lyned, but it is ta∣ken for a doublet. Diploma, tis, a charter of a prynce or citie, or a wryt. Dipondium, a weyght of two pounde. Dipsacon, whyte brere. Dipsacus, a wylde tasyll. Dipsas, a lyttell worme lyke a serpente, of co∣lour whyte, the tayle diuided with .ii. black lynes.Pau. Aeg. He is also called Praester, he that is stungue of this worme, feleth forthwith in∣tollerable heate, and therwith so great drith, that no drynke maye extincte his thyrste, al∣thoughe he shall neuer cesse from drynkynge, and soo dyeth he without remedye, as some do suppose. Dirae, cursinges. Dirce, a womans name, the wyfe of Lycus kynge of Thebans. Directe, or Directo, an aduerbe signifienge right or streyght, or in a right fourme. Directus, a, um, strayght or right.
Diremptio, a breakynge or dissoluynge, or separation. Diribitores, distributers of money, or paye maysters. Diribitorium, the place of payment. Dirigeo, gui, gêre, to strynke for colde, or for feare. Dirigere acumina ad caelum, to rayse theyr toppes highe or vpwarde. Dirigere aciem, to set a battayle in order. Dirigo, exi, gere, to make streight, or ryght, to order. Dirimo, remi, ere, reptum, to breake or leaue of. Ea res consilium diremit, that thynge brake or dissolued the counsayle. Also to put of, or deferte. Dirimere bellum, to cause warre to ceasse. Dirimere controuersiam, to make the par∣ties agreed. Dirimere actionem, to delaye a matter. Dirimere litem,Cicero. to make an ende of a matter in varyaunce or suite. Dirimere societatem, to breake felowshyp. Diripio, Vide in deripio. Diripere oppidum,Plinius. to sacke a towne. Diris, an hyghe hyll of Mauritania, nowe cal∣led Atlas, Diritas, ratis, cruelty, vengeance. Dirumpo, rupi, rumpere, to brasse or breake a sunder. Diruncio, iui, ire, to wede out, or purge that whiche is naught. Diruo, rui, ruere, to breake downe to the grounde. Diruptus, ta, tum, braste or broken. Dirus, a, um, vengeable. Dirutus, a, tum, broken dow to the ground dystroyed. Dis, diris, called the god of ryches: sometyme it signifieth ryche. Ditior, rycher. Discalceatus, vnshodde. Discalceo, ceare, to pull of ones shoes. Discapidino, aui, are, to vnclose or open. Discedo, scessi, dere, to departe. some tyme it signifieth an exception, as, Quum discesse∣rim à fratre, nemo est mihi te charior. Ex∣cepte my brother, no man is to me more dere than thou arte. Also it signifieth diuision or openynge: as, Quum terra discessisset ma∣gnis quibusdam imbribus, discendit in illum hiatum: whan the erthe by occasion of moch rayne opened, he wente downe in to the cleft or swalowe. Discedere à sese, to forgete hym selfe, or to be out of his mynde. Discedere superiorem, he wente awaye vaynquisher. Discedere inferiorem, he wente awaye vanquished. Discedere ab armis, to put awaye theyr harneyse. Discedere ab officio, to do no more his duety Discedere à iure, to do agaynst the lawe. Discedere a sententia, to change his opiniō, Discedere in diuersa, to be of sondry opiniōs Discedit usus fructus, he loseth the possession and profyte. Discescit mos, that maner or vse is lefte. Discessio, a departynge. Discessus, us, idem. Discessio facta in eius sententiam, the more part went on his syde, & was of his opinion. Disceptatio, disputation or contention. Disceptatio libera, iudgement accordynge to the conscience of hym that iudgeth. Disceptatio legittima, iudgement accordyng to the lawe. Disceptator, a iudge, arbitrour, or dayes man. Discepto, aui, are, to dispute or contende, to arbiter or iudge. Disceptare armis, to trye by battayle. Discerniculum, a pynne or other lyke instru∣ment, wherwith women dyd diuyde the shed of theyr heare before. Discerno, decreui, cernere, to departe or sun∣der one thynge from an other. Also to stryue or vary, to knowe distinctely. Discernere armis, to fyghte in battayll. Discerpo, psi, ere, to pluck or teare in pieces. Discinctus, dyssolute, or negligent, or vnable for the warres, cowarde. Discindo, scidi, scindere, to cut of. Discingo, xi, gere, to vngyrde. Disciplina, lernynge, as it is perceyued of the scholer, doctrine as it is tought of the may∣ster. It is also a good fourme of lyuynge. Disciplinosus, apte to lerne. Discipulus, a scholer or disciple. Discludo, si, dere, to shut out. Disco, didici, discere, to lerne. Dedisco, ere, to forget that whiche was▪ ones lerned. Discobolus, he that throweth a dishe. Discobinatus, wounded or cut. Disconuenio, ni, nire, to disagree or dyscorde. Discolor, dyuerse of coloure. Discoquere, to make to boyle. Discorda, dyscorde. Discordo, are, to discorde or agree yll. Discors, dis, dyscordant, agreynge yl together Discrepo, aui, are, to disagree or discorde. Discrete & Discretim, Seuerally. Discrepantia, difference. Discretio, onis, a separation. some tyme electi∣on of good from euyl, discretion. Discretus, seuered or parted. Valla sayth, that
it is he that discerneth the qualities of men, and value of thynges. Discrimen, minis, diuersitie or difference. also the shedynge or partyng of the heare. alsoo it sygnifieth peryll or danger, somtyme battayl. Discriminale, an instrumēt wherwith the hear is parted or shadde. Discriminatim, distinctly a sunder here & there Discriminatus, ta, tum, distincte, in a diuersitie. Discrimino, aui, are, to deuyde. Discrucior, ari, to be moche vexed or troubled in mynde. Discûbo, bare, to lye downe, to sleape. Discumbo, cubui, cumbere, to syt at meales. Discumeatus, openyd with a wedge or other lyke thynge. Discupio, to desyre very moche. Discurro, rere, to runne hyther and thyther, to wander. Discursus, runnynge hyther and thyther. Discussoria medicamenta,Plaut. in . medycines, whyche do dissolue or breke thinges congelid or tough Discus, a dyshe. also a rounde stone hauynge an hole in the myddle, whyche in olde tyme men vsed to throwe vp into the ayre, to the intent to exercyse them selfe. Discobolus, he that throweth suche a stone. Discutio, ssi, tere, to cast or shake downe, to re∣moue, to examyne, or dyscusse. also to dissolue humours gatheryd into an impostume. Disertus, well spoken. Diserte loqui, to speke wel and to the purpose. Disijcio, disieci, disijcere, to caste a sunder. Disiecta milites, the hoste dyspersed. Disiunctio, a separation. Disiunctus, ta, tum, separate. Disiungo, xi, ere, to vnioyne, to separate. Dispalescere, to publyshe abrode. Dispalo, aui, are, to wander hither and thither. Dispalati, scattered. Dispando, si, dere, to stretche out. Dispar, vnlyke, vnmete. Disparo, rare, to seuer. Disparatum, is that whyche is separate frome any thyng by layeng to his contrary. Dispartior, tiri, to diuide, or be dyuyded. Dispello, dispuli, dispellere, to expelle or putte from many places, or many wayes. Dispendiosus, sa, sum, harmefull, vnprofitable. Dispendium, losse by negligence or superfluous expenses. Also it signifieth harme. Dispendo, di, ere, to spende. also to stretch out. Dispenno, ere, to stretche. Dispensator, toris, a stewarde or other offycer, sayinge out money for householde, a dispenser of thynges. Dispensatio, layēg out of mony for an other mā Dispenso, aui, are, to lay out money. Dispendo, di, ere, to lose. Dispereo, rij, rire, to be loste vtterly. Dispeream, I pray god that I dy: It is a word vsyd in the stede of an othe, in the affirmance or denyenge of a matter. Disperij, I am vndone. Dispergo, spersi, gere, to sowe abrode, or to scatter. Dispertio, tiui, ire, to gyue parte to one, parte to an other. Iniuriam dispertiuisti, pinguiorem agnum isti habent, Thou haste not parted it equally, for they haue the fatter lambe. Dispesco, cui, ere, to dryue beastes from theyr pasture. Dispesso, ssi, ere, to sprede abrode. Dispicientia, circumspection, aduysement, dili∣gent consyderation. Dispicio, xi, cere, to discerne, to espy, to cōsider. Displicio, cêre, to dysplease. Displina, she that hath dyspleased. Displodo, si, dere, to spreade. Dispolio, idem quod despolio. Dispoliabulum,Plaut. in Bacch. a despoylle, a place where all myschiefe or robbery is done. Dispondaeus, a foote in meter, that hath foure syllables longe, as Oratores. Dispono, sui, ere, to dyspose, to order. Dispositè, ordynately. Dispositus uir, he that setteth his wordes in good order. Dispudet, I am ashamed, or he is ashamed of that whiche is done. Dispulueo, are, to make a thynge in poulder. Dispumo, are, to skymme of. Dispunctio, an examination. Dispungo,Budaeus in annota. xi, gere, to put out thynges writen, settynge pryckes vnder euery letter. Dispungere rationes, to examyn an accompt Disputo, taui, tare, to dyspute, to make playne to be vnderstande, to rayson. Disquiro, siui, rere, to inserche dylygentely, to inquyre. Disquisitio, where euerye mannes opynyon or sentence is demaunded vppon a mattier in iudgement.Budeus in anno. Disraro, aui, are, to make thynne that whyche is thycke. Disrumpo, for dirumpo. Dissecatus, ta, tum, cutte as a bodye is in an a∣notomye. Disse co, caui, care, to cut in pieces. Dissectio, onis, an anotomy. Dissemino, are, to sowe ouer all. Dissentaneus, a, um, not accordynge. Dissentio, tire, & Dissentior, tiri, to thynke con¦trary or to dysagree. Disseparo, aui, are, to dysseuer one frome an nother. Dissepimentum, the partition in a wall nutte, wherwith the kernell is dyuided.
Dissereno, aui, are, to waxe fayre wether. Dissero, rui, rere, to sowe seedes, sometyme to dyspute or declare. Disserto, idem. Dissertabundus, a great dysputour. Dissertatio, disputation or treaty of any thyng. Dissertio, a partition of landes. Dissideo, ere, to be at varyance or dyscorde. Dissidiosus, one that loueth discord or variāce. Dissidium, variance or dyscorde. Dissidentia, idem. Dissignatio, a gatheryng togither of people to wonder at one which is of myscheuous con∣dytions. Dissignatores, men that had the ordrynge of playes vsed to be made at the buryell of no∣table personages, whyche dydde appoynt the standynges and seates to euery state. Dissigno, aui, are, to make a sygne or token, somtyme to appoynt. Dissilio, liui, ire, to leape downe frome a place. sometyme to braste, to leape here and there. Dissimilis, le, vnlyke. Dissimiliter, in a dyuers facion. Dissimilitudo, dinis, diuersite, varietie in form Dissimulanter, without any semblaunt or coun¦tenaunce. Dissimulatim, idem. Dissmulatio, dyssemblyng. Dissimulantia, idē. Dissimulator, toris. Vt qui dissimulatòres stu∣diorum fuerint, They made semblaunte as they had not studyed. Dissimulo, aui, are, to dyssemble, to make as yf he knewe nothynge, to shewe countenaunce contrary to his thought. Dissipatio, a scattering, or bryngyng one thing into many small pieces, or a wastynge. Dissipalis, le, easy to be broken in pieces. Dissipo, aui, are, to scatter or sprede abrode. also to bringe vnto nought, to breake into pieces. Dissitus, ta, tum, set farre of, dystant. Dissocio, are, to breake company. Dissoluo, ui, uere, to lose or vnbynd, to spede, to pay seueral dettes, to pay that which is owid Dissoluere aliquem,Plaut. in Mercat. to dyspatche one frome longe taryenge. Dissoluere religionem, to do agaynst the re∣lygyon, to breake the religion. Dissoluere interrogationem, to assoyle a question. Dissoluere, to depeche hym selfe of busynes. Dissolutis criminibus, after that he had made aunswere to that whyche was layde to his charge, & was therof acquyted. Dissolutio stomachi, uide Nausea. Dissolubilis, le, easy to louse. Dissolui, to be payde or dyscharged. Dissolutè, an aduerbe whiche signifyeth disso∣lutely, without care. Dissolutio, a dissoluyng or lousynge. Dissolutio criminis, a pourgation. Dissolutus, ta, tum, loused. also he which liueth at his owne pleasure, contrarye to the lawes or good customes. Dissonantia, a dyscorde in voyces. Dissono, naui, nare, to dyscorde. Dissonus, na, num, that whiche doth not agree. Dissuadeo, si, dêre, to disswade, to assay to turn one from his opinyon or purpose. Dissuasio, the acte of dissuadyng, dissuasion. Dissuasor, sôris, he that dissuadeth. Dissuauiatio, the acte in kyssyng swetely. Dissuauior, ari, to kysse swetely, and with mo∣che delectation. Dissuefacio, & dissuesco, scere, to leaue the olde maner and custome. Dissue tudo, lacke of vse. Dissuetus, ta, tum, vnwont, not accustomed. Dissulto, aui, are, to leape hyther and thyther. Dissuo, ere, to vndoo a thynge. Distaedet, I am weary of a thynge. Distantia, dystance. Distendo, di, dere, to stretche out, or retche, to fyll as a bottell is fylled. Distentus, full, bollen out. Disterminatio, a dyuision of grounde. Distermino, aui, are, to dyuide one place from an other. Distero, striui, sterere, to breake small, to pound or braye a thynge in a morter. Distichon, two verses contaynyng one matter. Distillatio, onis, a distryllyng, specially from the heade, called a reume or catarre, the pose. Distillo, aui, are, to distyll, or drop downe. Distincte, distinctely, seuerallye, where euerye thynge is in his place and order. Distinctio, a dyuersitie, distinction, separation. Distineo, nui, ere, to let or withholde with bu∣synesse or vrgent causes, to hold or put backe. Distineri, to be let. Distinguo, xi, ere, to dyuyde. also to make di∣stynction. Distito, aui, are, to stande aparte, or be dystant one from an other. Disto, aui, are, to differre, to be distant, or to be a certayne space from a thynge. Distorqueo,Ter i Eunuc si, quere, to sette awrye. Ah illud uide, os ut sibi carnifex distorsit, O, loke how the hangeman setteth his month awrye. Distortus, wry, out of fascion, defourmyd. Distractio, separation, alienation, or pullynge away, or a sunder. Distractus, ta, tum, pullyd on sunder. Distraho xi, ere, to plucke away, or to dyuyde, or to withdrawe a thynge, somtyme by tran∣slation it is taken for to sel, also to fynyshe or conclude matters in variaunce. Controuersias distrahere, to ende controuer∣sies or suites.
Distribuo, ui, ere, to distrybute, or gyue in sun∣dry partes. Distribuere causam, to diuyde his pleadyng into sundrye partes, or to make many plees of one matter. Distribute, in partes or portions. Distributio, partition, distribution. Districté, straytely. Districtus, let from doinge of a thynge. Distringo, xi, gere, to bynde fast, or to strayne harde, to rubbe of or clense the fylthe or soyle of the body, to thretten to strike, or to drawe out a sworde. Gladium distrinxit, he drewe out his sworde. somtyme to gather, as Sere∣no coelo manibus distringi oliuam oportet,Coluel. In a faire clere day the oliues must be gathe∣red by hande. Distringere crustam panis, to chyp bread, or to part of the cruste. Districtus negorijs, let with busynes. Distrunco, care, to cut of a piece of a thynge. Disturbo, aui, are, to caste downe, to lette the enterprise or purpose of one. Disulcus, an hogge, whiche hath the bristels of his necke diuyded. Diteo, & ditesco, sci, scere, to make riche, or be ryche. Dito, taui, tare, idem. Dithyrambus, a verse made in the honour of Bacchus. Ditio, onis, a dominyon. Ditior, rycher. Ditissimus, rychest. Ditrochaeus, a foote of foure syllables in verse, hauyng one longe, an other shorte, an nother louge, the fourthe short. Diu, longe tyme. also the day tyme, wherof co∣meth Interdiu, in the day tyme. Diua, a woman saynte. Diuagor, ari, to wander from place to place. Diuarico, aui, are, to stryde, or to spreade wyde one from an other, as boughes of a tree. Diuello, li, ere, to pull away by violence. Diuendo, didi, dere, to sell to dyuers persones, or in dyuers parcelles. Diuerbia, the partes of a comedy or interlude, where many persons speake togither. Diuersa pars, the contrary parte. Diuersito, aui, are, to tourne often to a thynge, or to resorte. Diuersitas, diuersitie. Diuersor, ari, to resorte, or repayre to a place. Diuersorium, an Inne, wherto men in iourney do resort to bayt or be lodged, a lodgyng. Diuersorius, a, um, pertaynynge to anyune or lodgynge. Diuersus, a, um, dyuers or separate. Diuersum distrahi, to be drawen hyther and thyther. Diuerse, idem. Diuerticula, bywayes, or syde wayes, oute of the hygh waye. Diuerticulum, a bayte. Diuerto, ti, tere, to turne from one thyng to an other, to take lodgyng or to bayte. Diuerto ad te, & apud te, I comme to lodge with the, or to tary for a tyme with the. Diuertere uia, to turne out of the hygh way. Diues, diuitis, ryche. Diues auis, whose ancetours were great mē. Diuexo, aui, are, to vexe or trouble. Diuexare rem suam, to waste his substance. Diutius, lengar. Diutussime, longest. Diuidia,Plaut. in Bacch. tediousnes, somtyme it betokeneth di∣scorde, busynes, trouble, variance. Diuidiculum, an head of a cundyte. Diuidium, a partition or dyuident. Diuido, si, dere, to dyuyde or part in sunder. Diuidere sententiam, wher in a counsayl one in his rayson semeth partely to affirme, part∣ly to disaffyrme any thynge, whyche is to be done: he that reasoneth nexte, requyreth hym that hath spoken, to diuyde his argument, & abide vpon one part, whiche he wyll eyther confyrme or reproue, lyke as our lawyers vse to do, whan dyuers titles are brought in one pleadyng, they pray the court, that the contra¦ry part may abyde vpon one of them, wher∣vnto they wyll aunswere. Diuiduum, that whiche maye be seuered or di∣uided. Diuinatio, onis, a foreiugement or coniecture. also where a matter commeth in iudgement, without writing or witnes on any of the par¦tes, that iugement may be callyd Diuinatio, a dyuynation. Diuinipotens, he that hathe power in dyuyne thynges. Diuinitas, godheade. Diuinitus, godly, or of god. Diuino, aui, are, to telle truthe, as well of thyn∣ges present, as of thynges passed: for the more parte it sygnifieth to coniecte of thinges pre∣sent, what shall happen. Diuinus, a, um, that whiche pertayneth to god, diuine. Diuisio, onis, wherby we declare what is in va¦ryaunce, or wherby we expresse, of what thin¦ges we wyll treate. also a diuysion into sun∣dry partes. Diuisor, oris, amonge the olde Romaynes was he whiche at the election of great officers, di∣uided or gaue money to the people, in the na∣mes of them, which sued for the offyce, to the intent for to attayne it. Diuisus, a, um, dyuided. Diuisus, idem quod diuisio. Diuisura, idem. Diuitiae, diuitiarum, diuitijs, diuitias, rychesse. Diuito, aui, are, to make ryche. Dium, the daye lyghte vnder the fyrmamente.
whan we saye. Sub dio aliquid fieri, it syg∣nifieth some thynge to be done abrode, or out of the house. Diunt, olde authors vsed for dent or dederint. Diuortium, a diuorse or separation of a manne and his wyfe. somtyme a departynge from a∣ny other thynge. Diurno, aui, are, to lyue longe. Diurnus, na, num, perteynyng to day, as Diur∣ni libri, bokes contaynyng the actes done eue∣ry day. somtyme a dayes hyre. Dius, dia, come of a gentyll stocke. Diutinus, na, num, longe contynuynge. Diutissime, very longe, or to longe. Diutius, lengar. Diutule, a lyttell whyle. Diuturnitas, a longe space of tyme. Diuturnus, na, num, longe contynuynge. Diuulgatio, a publycation, or makyng a thyng common to all men. Dinulgo, aui, are, to publyshe abrode, to sette a thynge in suche condition as euery man may vse it at his plesure, to make a thing common Diuus, ua, uum, worthy a diuine remembrance. Nowe they take Diuum & diuam, for a man or woman saynct. ¶D ANTE O. DO, dedi, dare, to gyue. also to offer or proffer.Terentius Vt res dant sese, As thynges offer them selues. also to bring. Magnā dabit ille ruinam arboribus, He shall bringe a great fall vnto trees.Vergilius also to say, tel, or declare, to do. Quamobrē has partes didicerim pau∣cis dabo. For what cause I lerned that part, I wyll tell the in fewe wordes. Pol haud pa∣ternum istud dedisti,Terent. In fayth thy father ne∣uer taught the to do this. also to obey, to con∣forme. Da te mihi, Conforme the to my wyll. Do manus, I reder me, or I am vanquished. Do lego, I gyue by testament or last wyll. Dare auribus, to flatter, or speake to please. Dare damnas, to paye damages, or to make satisfaction. Dare facultatem, to gyue lybertie or power to do a thynge. Dare fidem, to promyse faythfully. Dare in pedes, to flee or runne away. Dare in ruborem, to make ashamed. Dare insidias, to deceyue one. Dare in uiam, to take a iourney. Dare iusiurandum, to take an othe. Dare malum alicui, to do one a shrewd turn. Dare mancipio, to delyuer on warrantyse. Suo periculo is emat, qui eam mercabitur, mancipio ne{que} promitter, ne{que} quis{que} dabit, He that wyll haue her,Plaut{us} in persa. let hym bye her at his owne peryll, for no man shall promyse or deli∣uer her on warantyse. Dare manum, to put in his hand priuyly, as they do to men of law, or priuy solicitours, or corrupt offycers. Dare mutuum, to lende. Dare negotium, to assigne or appoint bissy∣nes, or a thynge to be done. Dare operam, to apply, to gyue or take hede, or to helpe. Dare potestatem, to cōmyt authoritie or po∣wer, or remyt a thyng to an other mans plea∣sure or lybertie. Suarum omnium rerum illi potestatem dederat, He gaue hym the rule of all that he had. Dare poenas, to suffre punyshement. Dare se alicui, to folow one, or to obserue his commaundementes. Dare ueniam, to forgyue. Dare uerba, to deceyue by fayre promyses. Dare uitio, to dysprayse, to blame. Danunt, idem quod dant, they gyue. Datarius, a, um, that whiche is to gyue. Datatim ludere, to tosse from one to an other as men play at tenyse. Datu meo, of my gyfte. Datum est, it is predestinate. Doccus, a tymber piece. Doceo, cui, cêre, to teache or gyue knowledge, or to informe, to aduyse, to proue. Docêre fabulam, to play a comedy. Docibilis, apt to be taught. Docilis, le, lyghtly taught or instructed. Docilitas, aptnes to lerne. Doctè, connnyngly. Doctor, he that teacheth other. Doctrina, ae, doctrine, which procedeth of the teacher. Disciplina, lerning takē of the skolat. Doctus, ta, tum, lernyd, that is to say, knowing a thyng without experyence. Vide peritus. Documentum, a lesson. Documentum statuere, to gyue to oone the fyrste instruction. Documento habere aliquem, to take exam∣ple by one, to beware by an other man. Dodona, a citie in Grece, wherby was a wod, in the whiche men thought that trees spake. Dodone, the doughter of Iupiter & Europa. Dodra, was a drynke made of nyne thynges, herbes, iuyce, water, wyne, salt, oyle, breade, hony, and pepper. Dodrans, antis, a poyse wayenge nyne ounces. It is alsoo nyne of the measures callyd Cia∣thi. Also it is sometyme taken for the nynthe parte of any thynge dyuyded. It also signy∣fyeth the length or bredth of twelue fyngers. Caulis Dodrantalis, a stalke or stemme .xii. fyngers hygh. Dogma, atis, a certayne determination, which in sectes of philosophers euery one had, with
out the whiche the sect fayled. sometyme they be callyd Placita. Dogmatistes, he that induceth any sect or new opynyon. Dolabra, a carpenters axe. Dolabro, aui, are, to hewe as a carpentat. Dolenter, sorowfully. Dolentia, griefe. Doleo, ui, ere, to fele peyne or grief, to be sory. Dolere caput, pedes, oculos, the head, fete, or eyen to ake. Doleo tuis rebus aduersis, I am sory for thy mysfortune or trouble. Doleo tuam uicem, I am sory on thy behalf. Dolium, any great vessell of wyne as a tunne, pype, butte, or hoggeshead. In the olde the olde tyme it contayned .xxx. of the measures callyd Am∣phoras. Doliris, great as a tunne. Doliaris heluo, a gorbealyed glutton. Doliarium, a wyne sellar. Dolichus, a space of grounde contaynynge .xii. furlonges. Dolio, iui, ire, to graue in metall. Dolo, aui, are, to cut or hew with an axe or sith. Dolare opus aliquod, to make a thyng rude∣ly or grossely, as it were to rough hewe it. Dolobella,Varro. an hatchet. Dolon, the proper name of a manne of Troy, that was very swyft of foote. Dolones, a scurge, hauīg a dagger, or other like thing closed within it. It is also a certayn tac¦klyng of shippes.Seruius. also a lytel sayl callyd a tryn¦ket. Dolopes,Liuius. a people of Thessaly. Dolor, is, griefe or peyne of bodye or mynde, also sorowe. Dolorificus, ca, cum, that which maketh grefe or sorowe. Doloro, aui, are, to cause one to haue sorowe or peyne. Dolosè, deceytfully. Dolosus, deceyptfull or crafty. Dolus, deceypt. Dolus malus, euerye crafty deceypt to com∣passe a man, whereby he receyueth damage, mal ingin. Doma, atis, a solar or flat keuering of a hous. It is somtyme taken for the house. Domator,Sueton. idem quod domitor. Domesticatim, by householdes, hous by house. Domestici, householde seruantes. Domesticus, ca, cum, pertayning to household. sometyme it signifieth tame, famyliar. Do∣mestica exēpla, exāple of their own kynrede. Domi, at home. Domi nobiles, honorably in their own coūtry Domi belli{que}, in deedes as well of warre as of peace. Domi & militiae, aswel in peace as in warre. Domicilium, a mansion place. Domicoenium, an home supper. Domina, the lady or maystresse. Dominatus, tus, domination, or authoritie ouer other, maystershyp. Dominatio, idem. Dominum, a lordshyp or rule ouer other. Dominor, ari, to rule or haue soueraynty. Dominus, a lorde or maister, to whom other do seruyce. also an owner. Domiporta; a pyllar or other lyke thynge, that beaneth vp an house. Domis, was taken of old writers for dominus Domitalis, apt, to be tamed or broken. Domitio,Lucretius. onis, a retournyng home. Domitor, toris, a tamer or breaker of that, whyche is wylde. Domitura, the act of tamynge or breakynge of any wylde beast. Dominus, ta, tum, made tame, subdued, or van∣quyshed.Tibullus. Domnonij a people of a countrey in England callyd Donshyre. Domo, aui, are, to make tame, somtyme to van¦quyshe. Domare hostes, to vanquyshe enemies. Domuitio, a departynge home. Domo,Cicero de diuina. from home. Domū, to the hous, or home, somtyme at home. Domuncula, a lyttell or poore house. Domus, mus, mui, a house generally. sometime a temple or church. also a family or kynrede. also a mans countrey. also a nest of byrdes. Domus,Liuius. the accusatif case plurel, home to their houses. Domus, mi, mo, a dwellyng house. Donarium, a howse, where suche thinges were kept, that were giuē to the goddis. It is som¦tyme taken for a gyft or rewarde. Donatio coronae, garlandes that in the olde tyme were worne in playes. Donatio, a gyfte. Donatio propter nuptias, a womans do∣werye. Donatistae, wer cheres, whiche affirmed, that the congregation of christen people was no where but with theym. Wherefore those, whiche came from the catholyke parte vnto them, they did eftsons baptise them. also they affirmed, that in the churche were not people good and yll, but onely good, and that they onely pertayned vnto the churche. The au∣thor of this heresy was named Donatus, and was of the countrey of Numidia, aboute the yere of our lorde. 353. Donatiuum, a gyft in money or grayne, gyuen by emperours vnto the people. Also to souldi∣ours aboue theyr wages. Donatiuus, he that is able to gyue. Donatus, he to whome any thyng is gyuen. Donax, cis, a reede or caue, wherof thy made arowes.
Donec, vntyll, sometyme as longe. Donec uiuo, as longe as I lyue. Dono, aui, are, to gyue lyberally or freely. Donare ciuitate, to make a cytesyn. Donare aeternitate, to make a {per}petual memorial of one Donum, a gyfte. Donysa, a yle in the sea Aegeum. Dorcas, cadis, a bucke or a doo. Dores, was a generall name of dyuers people in Grece, as of Creta, Rhodus, Sicilia, and dyuers other countrayes, so callyd of a peo∣ple inhabiting by the mountayn callid Oeta, which wandryng lyke to the Gothes, by fors wanne certayn places in the sayd countrays, and fynally subdued the olde inhabitantes. Doria, & Dorica, names of countrays ioyning to Athenes. Dorica lingua, the langage of the people cal∣lyd Dores, & was the .v. tunge of the Grekes Dorica, was a certayne fourme of musyk, whi¦che represented a wonderful grauitie, & ther∣fore was assigned to noble personages, and vsed in Tragedies. Dorion, a towne of Achaie. Doriphori, were certayn gentylmen attending about the personnes of kynges, whiche bare iauelyns in theyr handes. Suche of late ye∣res princis haue also vsed to haue, and ar cal∣lyd speares, although they beare only in their handes battayle axes. Doris, a nymph of the sea, and is interpretate bytternesse. Dormio, miui, ire, to sleape. Dormire in urramuis aurem,Terent. in Heauton. is a prouerbe which signifieth to be without any maner of care. It may be englyshed, To sleape soundly on bothe sydes. Dormisco, scere, to begyn to sleape. Dormitator, a sleaper. Dormito, aui, are, to sleape soundly. Dormitorium, that which pertayneth to slepe. Dorodocia, corruption of Iudges with gyftes and rewardes. Doronicum, a precyous & holsom rote brought from Mauritania, whiche is of the quanti∣tie of a mans fynger, and knottye as it were ioyntes. And is putte into confections made for the diseases of the stomacke, and lacke of perfecte dygestion. Ruellius supposeth it to be that, whyche of the Grekes is callyd Ar∣nabo, of some Carnabum, or Zamabum, It is hot and dry in the thyrde degree. Dorophorus, he that carieth a present. Dorpia, were certain days, which the Atheniē∣ses kept solemne, in open feasting & bāketting Dorsualia, panels, whiche horsis doo weare on their backes, whan they cary or drawe. Dorsuarius, a, um, that whiche beareth or cari∣eth any thyng on the backe. Dorsum, a backe of man or beaste. Dorsum in mari,Seruius. a heape of sande gathered in the sea, whiche watermen do calle a shelpē. Dorsus, idem. Dorylás, the name of a ryuer in Phrigia. Dos, dotis, dowery, land giuē in mariage to the husbande for cause of the mariage only, it is also a qualitie of a {per}son gyuen of nature. Dores animi, indowmentes of the soule, that is to say, the giftis of grace. Dotes corporis. indowmētes of the body, that is to say, braul∣ty, strength, helth. &c. the giftes of nature. Doralis, le, that pertayneth to dowry, as Bona dotalia, dotalis fundus, goodes or landes gi∣uen in mariage with a woman. Doto, aui, are, to indowe. Doxa, in greke signifieth opiniō, somtyme glo∣rye. ¶D ANTE R. DRacêna, the female dragon. Drachma, the .viii. parte of an ounce in weight or mesure. It was also a coyne sygned with a bullocke, which counteruailed as moche as a poyse grote, being .viii. grotes the weight of an ounce. Drachma auri, was .xii. syluer dragmas, of our money nowe .v.s.ix.d. Draco, onis, a dragon. It was alsoo the name of hym, whiche firste dyd gyue and write la∣wes to the people of Athenes, wherein he ap∣poynted death for euery small theft. wherfore it was sayde, that he wrate his lawes with the bloud of men. Draconarius, a standerde bearer. Dracones, of Pliny be taken for old branches of vines, also it is an herbe, whiche is other∣wyse callyd Pyretum, it bourneth and byteth the tunge, as well the leafe as the roote, in englyshe Pelytory of Spayne. Dracontias, a stone taken out of the heade of a dragon, the head beinge sodaynly stryken of, or els it resolueth in the brayne, whyle the dra¦gon dyeth. it is also callyd Draconîtes. Draconîtes, idem. Dracontium, an herbe callyd Dragons. Dracunculus, a lytel dragon. it is also an herbe callyd Dragons, namyd also Dracontea. Dragma, a grype or handfull. Draguntea, an herbe callyd Dragons. Drama, matis,, where in a comedy or interlude, dyuers personages be brought in, some aby∣dyng, some departynge. Drangiana, a prouynce in Asia the more. Drepanum, the name of a citie in Italy callyd nowe Trapani. Dromedarius, & Dromada, a certayn kynd of camelles, whiche haue two bunches on their backes, and are meruaylous swyft, and may
sustayn to be thre dayes without drynk whan they be iourneyed. Dromus, the place where men do runne horses, to try the swyftnes of them. Dropax, a noble oyntment made with pytche, excellentely cōmended of Galenus, and other famous phisitions. Druides, were somtyme in France callyd Gal∣lia, one of the two estates, of like cōdition as the spiritualtie is nowe among vs. They had in great estimation woddes of greatte okes, where they vsed theyr sacrifices and supersti∣ous ceremonies. And they had in a meruayl∣lous reuerence al thyng that grew on an oke, specially mysselden, affyrmynge that it was sent from heuen. Theyr sacrifice was in this fourme: Fyrste vnder an oke, wheron grewe mysselden, they caused meate to be prepared and sette, than to as there brought forth two white bulles, whose hornes were than newe bounden, that is to saye, were fyrst set in the plough or wayne. Than the priest being clad in whyte, clymmed vp to the tree, and hauing a byll of golde in his hande, he dyd shread or cut of the mysselden, than offred they the sa∣crifice, prayeng vnto god, that the gyft whi∣che shulde be gyuen, mought be to theym that receyued it, prosperous & fortunat, supposing that the beaste, whiche was barrayne, yf he dranke of the mysselden, shoulde be fruyteful, and that it was a sure remedye agaynste all poyson. It is supposed, that theyr superstiti∣on came first out of this yle callyd Britayne. Drupae,Ruellius. are olyues or oyle bearies, whiche are betwene grene and rype, and doo begynne to waxe blacke. Drusus, the name of a Romayn, of ryght noble lygnage and eloquence, but he was proude and ambitious. Dryas, the proper name of a man of Thessaly, frende of Nestor. Dryades, were fayries of woddes. Dryinus, a lytell worme, somtime founde in the rootes of an oke, whiche is so mischeous a poyson, that if one treade on hym barefoted, forthwith the skyn cometh of, & all the legge swellyth. And which is more to be meruayled at, they which do handle him, that is hurt, lo∣seth his skyn. About the place where the sayd worme hath bitten, there is a rednes with a swellyng, & there riseth lyttel wheales, out of the which cometh a watry humour. also there hapneth to him, which is hurt, frettynges in the stomake and bealy.Galen. Pau. Aeg. One remedy therfore is akornes beaten in a morter, & drunke with wyne. Also the roote of an holy bruised & laid to the place, dothe mitigate the peyne. Drylon, a ryuer of Slauony. Drymodis, afterwarde Pelasgus, is now cal∣lyd Archady. Dryopteris,Dioscori. is an herbe, which groweth on old oken trees amonge the mosse, and is lyke to ferne, but the creues or incisions of the lea∣ues be lesse, and the rotes be rough and twi∣sted togither, and in taste somewhat sweete. Some call it Osmende royall. Dryos, slyme growynge in okes. ¶D ANTE V. DVBENVS,Pom. Fes. was of the old Romans taken for Dominus. Dubio,Plautus. aui, are, to be in doubte. Dubiat quid agat,Vergilius. he is in doubte what he shulde do. Dubitatim, Dubiè Dubitanter, doubtfully. Dubitatio, & dubietas, doubte. Dubito, aui, are, to be in doute, or to tract time, to mystruste. Dubitatur, men doubte. Dubius, a, um, doutfull. Dubius, is he that hath two ways, and woteth not which to take. Dubia coena, a banket, wherat are soo many and dyuers meates, that a man knoweth not of whiche he may eate. Dubiae res, thinges doubtfull or daungerous. Ducatus, tus, the gouernāce or condute of men. Also a duchy. also Ducatus, ti, a coyne callyd a ducate. Ducatus praestare, to be capitayn of an host, to bryng men to battayle. Ducenarius, a capytayn of .CC. men. Ducenti, tae, ta, two hundred. Ducentesimus, a, um, the two hundred. Ducenties, two hundred tymes. Duceni anni, two hundred yeres. Duco, xi, cere, to leade them that be wyllynge, to haue respect to a thynge, somtyme it signi∣fieth to allect or styre with som plesant mean. also to reuolue, also to draw, as a mā drawith a sword. also to get. somtyme it signifieth do∣ing, as Ducere somnos, to sleps. also to build or make vp. somtime to turn awey, as Ducere uultus, to turne away the visage. To delay or prolong to go down. Ego me duco ab arbore. I went down of the tree. also to wed, or do the act of mariage somtime to suppose. Hanc esse in te sapiētiā existimāt,Cicero de amicitia. ut oīa tua in te posita esse ducas, Men thinke that wisedome to be in you, that ye thynke all that which is your owne, to be in your selfe and not in fortune. Ducere aetatem, to spend ones tyme. Ducere animā, to lyue. Ducere animo, to cōsider, to think. Ducere animum, to recreate the mynd. Ducere aquā, to conuey water from a spring. Ducere bellum, to prolong battayl or warre. Ducere colorem, to waxe ruddy. Ducere dāno, to take it for a damage or losse Ducere aliquem ex aere, to counterfaite one in mettalle.
Ducere diem ex die, to put of frō day to day Ducere fossam, to cast or make a dyche. Ducere honori, to esteme it honourable. Ducere horas extremas, to lye in dyenge. Ducere infra se omnia humana, to esteeme all thynges lesse than hym selfe. Ducere lateres, to make tyles. Ducere laudi, to tourne it to prayse. Ducere lineam, to drawe a lyne. Ducere minoris,Plautus. to esteme it les, to set les by. Ducere mortuum, to be dead. Meos ne ego ante oculos illam patiar, alios amplexarier? mortuum herclè me duco satius. Shall I suf¦fer hym to imbrace her before myne eyes? by god I had rather be deade. Ducere mucronem, to drawe a sworde. Ducere noctē iucundis sermonibus, to passe forth the nyght in pleasant talkynge. Ducere nomen ex re aliqua, to be named af∣ter some thynge. Ducere officij, to suppose it to be his duetie. Ducere parui, to set lytell by. Ducere prae se neminem, to set by noo man but hym selfe. Ducere principium, to begynne, or to take a begynnynge. Ducere probro, to dysprayse. Ducere pro falsis, to take it for lyes. Ducere similitudinem ex aliquo, to take a paterne of a thynge. Ducere somnos, to sleape. Ducere spiritū, to fetch or draw breth, to liue. Ducere sulcos, to make furrowes. Ducere suspiria, to sygh. Ducere utilitatem, ex re aliqua, to get profyt by a thynge. Ducentur suspitiones ex ipso facto, of that acte men shall gather suspition. Ducere usuras, to contynue payment of mo∣ney taken by vsury. Vallum ducere, to make a trenche. Vultum ducere, to frowne or lowre. Duci errore, to be deceyued, to be in a wrōge opynyon. Duci ineptijs ac fabulis, to take pleasure in fantasies and fables, to beleue leasynges and flatterynges. Duci uentre, to loue good morsels. Rationem salutis ducere,Steph. to regard helthe. Nihil ducere in bonis praeter uirtutem, to e∣steme nothyng to be good besyde vertus. Duco,Verro. aui, are, to gouerne. Ductarius funis, a torde that is drawen. Ductilis, & ductile, easy to be drawen. Ductim, with leysure. Ductito, aui, are, to leade about often. Ducto, aui, are, to leade about, to take a wife, also to esteme. Ductare restim, to leade the daunce. Ductor, toris, a guyde. Ductus, ta, tum, ledde. Ducta cicatrix, a wounde cleane healyd, no∣thyng remainyng but a seame or marke. Ductus, tus, tui, a cundyte, wherby water doth rounne. Ductus aquarū, the course of water by tren∣ches or pypes. Ductus oris, the fascion of the face. Ductus literarum, the order of letters in a∣ny wrytynge. Dudum, but late, sometyme longe agone, or a great whyle. Dudum, sometyme it signifieth before. Incerti∣or multo {quam} dudum, more vncertayne than it was before. Duella, the thyrde parte of an ounce. Duellator, a warryour. Duellica ars, the feate or science of armes. Duello, aui, are, to fyghte within lystes, or in battayle. Duellum, battayle betwene two. Duellona, men in olde tyme called Bellona. Duicensus,Fes. the taske of two men ioyntly, as of the father and the sonne. Duidens, a shepe of two teethe. Duillus, a citesens name of Rome, which fyrst triumphed for victory on the sea. Duis, of the āciēt writers was vsid for dederis Dulcadium, euery swete meate. Dulce, & dulciter, swetely, gentylly. Dulcedo, dulcitas, Dulcitudo, & Dulcor, swete¦nes Dulceo, cere, to be swete. Dulcesco, sci, scere, to become swete. Dulciarius, a pastlar. Dulciarius panis, a marchepayne made with almondes and sugar. Dulcidulus, a, um, a lyttell swete. Dulcifluus, flowynge swetely. Dulciloquus, he that speaketh swetely. Dulcis, ce, swete, pleasant, contrarye to sharpe or vehement. Dulcisonus, sownynge swetely. Dulco, caui, care, to make swete. Dulia, the seruyce of a bondman or slaue. Dulichium, an yle in the sea Malyake, or as some say Ionio. Dum, somtyme sygnifieth whan, or whyles, as Dum dormis, fures domum intrant, whiles thou sleapest, theues enter into the house. som¦tyme vntyll, somtyme as longe. Vs{que} ne ualu∣isti? C. Perpetuo recte dum quidem illic fui, Dyddest thou well all that whyle? C. ye al∣way well, as longe as I was there. also it si∣gnifieth wherfore. also, so that. Somtyme it dothe but make vp a word, as Adesdum, pau¦cis te uolo, Come hither, I wold a fewe thin¦ges with the. Nihil dum, not yet. Dumetum, a thorny or bushy grounde.
Dummodo, so that. Dumosus, a, um, roughe of brembelles and thornes. Dumtaxat, onely, at the leaste waye. Non dumtaxat, for non solum. Dumosus, a, um, full of brembels or briars. Dumus, all kyndes of thornes or briers. Donum, a countrey in England called Durhā. Duo, dui, ere, to gyue. Duo, Duae, two. Duodecim, twelue. Duodecies, twelue tymes. Duodecimus, a, um, the twelfe. Duodecies, Sestertium .xii. hundred thousand Sestertia. Duodeni, twelue to gethether. Vide deni. Duodeuiginti, eyghtene. Duodeuiceni denarij .xviii. pense. Duodetriginta, xxvii. Duonum, olde writers vsed for Bonum. Duplares, knyghtes or suche souldiours as had double alowaunce. Dupliciarij, idem. Duplaris numerus, a noumber doubled. Duplex, duplicis, double or two: or twyse as moche. Dupli, double so moche. Duplicato, at the double. Dupliciter, two wayes. Duplico, aui, are, to make double. Duplio, onis, the double. Duplus, a, um, double. Dupondius, & Dupondium, two pounde weyghte. Durabile, durable. Duracinae uuae, grapes with thycke skynnes. Duram, some thynke to be the name of a riuer, neere to the whiche the Gyauntes made the towre Babell.lel. 3. Some woll it to be a fielde, as in Danyell. Duramen, & Duramentum, the arme of a vyne. Durateus, a, um, wooden, or of wood. Duratus, ta, tum, hardened. Durè, & Duriter, hardely or cruelly, with moche peyne. Dureo, rui, ere, to be harde or cruell, Duresco, sci, scere, to waxe harde. Dureta, the Spanyardes call a vessell, that they vse to washe and bain them in. Duria, or Turia, the name of a ryuer nere to Valentia Duricia, & Duricies, & Duritas, hardenes, rudenes, rigour. Duricoria, thynges whiche haue harde skins. Duricors, dis, harde harted. Duriusculus, a, um, the diminutiue of durus. Duro, aui, are, to endure or contynue, to su∣steyne or suffer, to harden or make harde. Durus, ra, rum, harde, peynefull, or cruell. Dura prouincia, a sore charge, a thyng hard to be brought to passe. Duri oris uir, a rygorous person. Duro ingenio, dull wytted. Duumuiratus, tus, an offyce, wherin the autho¦ritie is commytted to two men. Dux, ducis, a capitayne or leader. D ANTE Y. DYastole,Galen. in definit. is a lyftyng or rysyng vp of the harte, the arteryes, the brayne, and rymes whiche do inclose the brayne, and that is in lengthe, breade, and depenes, sensible to feele by the poulses. Dynasta, uel Dynastes, a lorde of great power, a prynce, a ruler. Dynastea, a rule or gouernaunce. Dynastia, myght, power. Dyrrachium, a citie in Cicyle, whiche fyrste was called Epidamnus. Dys, in composition, signifieth yuell, difficile, or impossible. Dyscolia, difficulty. Dyscolus, intractable. Dysenteria, is a perylous flyxe with excoriati∣on or rasynge of the bowels, continual tour∣mentes, and some bloude yssuynge forthe.Galenus. The causes therof be sharpe or venemons hu¦mours,Alex. Cō. procedynge of yelowe choler vnna∣turall, sharpenes of the bloud, salte fleume, melancholy aduste. somtyme of yll medicines or impostumation of the lyuer. sometyme by defaulte of the members annexed. sometyme by the yll habite of all the body. Dyspnoea, is difficulty in fetchynge of brethe. The causes therof be these: stoppynge of the wayes, wherby the brethe shoulde passe: de∣stillations, or reumes hot and sharpe, or cold and fleumatike. some tyme lepry by knorres in the throte, or lunges, comen of a melan∣choly matter. Dysuria,Galen. a sycknes, whiche letteth a man that he can not pysse. The causes therof be these, Extention or bollynge out of the bladder af∣ter vehemente retention or kepynge backe of vrine: congelynge of bloud or matter in the necke of the bladder or instrumente of vrine: of stones or impostumation there. Also of sto∣nes, grauell, apostume, werte, or hard fleshe bred in the reynes of the backe.
E ante A. E FOR THE more parte signifieth of. E conspectu fugere, to go out of sight. E diuerso, on the contra¦ry part, or on the other syde. E facili, easyly. E longinquo, fer of. E me ne quidem metuas, as for me be not aferde. E Pamphilo grauida est, she is with chylde by Pamphilus. E Pamphilo peperit, she had a chylde by Pamphilus. E proximo aspicere, to se nighe hande. E proximo uicinus, my nexte neyghbour. E regione, face to face, one dyrectly against the other, or on the other syde directely. E re nata, consyderynge the matter. Ere na∣ta melius fieri haud potuit, consyderynge the matter, or as the case required, it mought be no better. E renibus laborat, he is sycke in his backe, or grieued with the stone. E re tua, perteynynge to thy profyt. E re publica, concernyng the common weale. E uia languet, he is wery of his iournaye, or sycke with goinge or ridynge. Euestigio, forth with. E ANTE A. EALE is a beaste in Inde founde about gret ryuers,Sol. ca. 65 Plinius. li. 8. ca. 21. like to a horse, saue that he hath a taile like an Oliphant, in colour blacke or day, & hath iawes like a bore, and therin tuskes a cubite longe and more, which are apte to what vse the beaste wyll, for they do not stand fast, but are bowed as he listeth, so that whan he doth fight, he setteth vp the one, and holdeth downe the other, to the in∣tent that if the one in fyghtynge waxeth dul, or is broken, the other shall serue hym. Eantes, the name of a storye wryter, whiche was in that age, that Pygmalion reygned in the easte parte. Eatenus, vnto that, in that maner of wyll, till that tyme, vntyll, vntyll than. Eatenus, ne, quid, pro solum. E ANTE B. E BEATI, they which from great pros∣peritie are fallen into mysery. Ebeo, are, to brynge out of prosperitie. Ebenus, uel Ebenum, a tree whiche is black in colour, and is odoriferous, whā it is burned it hath vertue to clense the eyen. This tree groweth in India,Vergil. 2. whiche beinge cut, wax∣eth as hard as stone.Georg. Sola India nigrum fert ebenū: India alone bryngeth blacke ebenns. it is also written with, h. rede Hebenus. Ebibo, ebibi, ebibere, to drynke all out. Ebionitae, were heretikes, which denyed that Christ was god. And affirmed that al partes of the olde lawe, oughte to be kepte with the newe lawe. And they receyued onely the gos∣pel of saynt Mathew, and reiected the other, and also all the epistols of sayncte Paule. The author of that secte, was one Ebion, a∣bout the yere of our lorde .88. Eblana, a citie in Irelande called Dublyn or Deuyllin. Eblandior, diri, to get a thynge by slattery. al∣so to lyke. Eblandiri solitudidines ruris, to make, that lacke of company in the countrey shall not be greuouse. Eblanditus, ta, tum gotten by flattery. Eboracum, or Eburacum, a citie in Englande called Yorke. Eboratus, a, um, of yuory without. Eboreus, a, um, of yuory. Ebosus, an yle betwene Sardinia and Affrica, the erth wherof wil not suffer any venemous thing to liue, where also do brede such num∣ber of conies, that they distroy the iles nexts adioyninge. Ebriatus, drunke. Ebrietas, tatis, drunkennes. Ebrio, aui, are, to make drunke. Ebriolus, la, lum, a lytell dunke, or a lyttell person drunke. Ebriosus, a, um, often drunke. Ebriulo, are, to make drunke. Ebrius, ia, um, drunken. sometyme abundant. Ebron, a mountayne in Palestina. Ebudes, yles in the sea about England, where the people do lyue by whyte meate and fishe. I suppose they be the yles nyghe wales and the west countreye. Ebuleus, the son of Iupiter and Proserpine. Ebullio, liui, lire, to buble vp, as water dothe whan it rayneth. Ebullirio, bublynge. Ebullo, are, to buble out, or braste out. Ebulus, an herbe called walworte, whiche is lyke to yonge elder tree. Ebur, & Ebor, oris, yuory: Dioscorides callith it Thamaeacte. Eburatus, couered with yuory. Eburneus, ea, um, Eburnus, of yuory. Eburones, people of the countreye called Liege or Luke, beyonde Brabant. E ANTE C. ECardia, a kind of amber which hath in it the figure of an harte blacke or greene. Ecastor, an othe, by Castor, whiche may stande for, By my fay.
Ecbasis, a fygure in speakynge, called digressi∣on, where a manne leaueth for the tyme the pryncipall matter. Ecbatana, the chiefe citie of the realme of Me∣de. there is a citie in Siria of the same name some tyme called Ephiphania, and maye be written Egbatana. Ecce, an aduerbe demonstratiue, whiche signi¦fyeth Lo, see, properly where a thynge so∣daynely hapneth. Ecce tibi, wylte thou see, take heede. Ecce me, lo here I am. Eccere, an aduerbe of swerynge, signifieng as moche as Per Cererem. Some vse it for ec∣ce, lo nowe, or se nowe. Eccentrici orbes, are spheres one inclosyng an other, so that the one is ouer the other, and the one is conteyned within the holownes of the other. Eccillum,Plautus. for ecce illum, see hym. Eccistam,Terentius for ecce istam, see her. Ecclesia, an assemblye, a counsayle. Amonge christen authors, it signifieth the congrega∣tion of people in the fayth of Christe. Ecclesiastes, a preacher. Eccubi, lo where. Eccum, eccam, eccos, eccas, lo he is here, lo she is here, lo these men be here, lo these wo∣men be here. Echemythia, taciturnitie or stylnes, Echenëis, a fyshe called also Remora, whiche cleauynge to the keele of a shyp, wyll retayne hym, not withstandynge the violence of any wynd that bloweth. Echi,Columel. lyttell narrowe valeyes or dales betwene two hylles. Echidna, a water serpent. Echinades, ben ylandes in a riuer of Grece cal¦led Achelous, which diuideth Aetolia from Acarnania. Echinatus, ta, tum, hauynge a rough and prie kynge shale or shell. Echinata folia,Plinius. leaues hauynge prickes. Echimus,Hermola. in Corell. cap. 201. the kouerynge or vttermoste shale of a chesten nut, or other whiche is roughe and prickynge. It is also a sea fyshe whiche hath on hym a shelle with pryekes, and hath the pryckes in stede of fete, but he goeth not but onelye tumbleth, for whan he is taken, the prickes seme to be worne and made blunte. some haue very long pryckes and lytel shels, and they be called Echinometrae. These fis∣shes be of sundry colours, some whyte, some red, some purple, some blue, and some grene, as Perottus wryteth in his Cornucopiae, that he sawe them, but he sayeth, whan they be deade, the freshe and dilectable colour va∣nisheth awaye. It is also a beaste called an yrchen or hedgehog. It was also a vessell of brasse amonge the Greekes, whereinto the sayinge of witnesses were put and sealed. Al∣so a parte of hey, and a sorte of pottes. Also a certayne fourme of bracelettes, whiche wo∣men vsed to weare. Echion, an herbe called also Alcibiadion, gro∣wynge in wayes and roughe groundes, lyke to languedebease, & hath floures like borage, but er they be full spred, they be purple of co¦lour, and the seede therof is lyke the head of an adder. Echioni, Thebanes, so called of Ethion, one of the fyue that holpe Cadmus, to buylde Thebes. Echites, a stone specked lyke a serpent. Ecnephias, a storme, where a cloude is broken and falleth. Echo, a sound, whiche reboundeth to the noise or voyce, that is made in a valeye, or in gret woodes. Eclegma, aris, a medicine, whiche muste not be eaten or chewed: but beinge in the mouth suffred to styl downe in to the stomake by lit∣tell and lyttell. The Arabian phisitions doo cal it Lohoch. Eclipsis, a wanynge or faylinge. Econa, an ymage. Econcula, a lyttell ymage. Econtra, contrary wyse. Econtrariò, idem. Ecpetala,Coelius. were cuppes amonge the Greekes, whiche were large and wyde. Our flat bol∣les, wherin we drynke wyne, maye nowe be so called. Ecphractica medicamenta, medicines, whiche deopilate, or open the condutes or passages in the bodye whiche are stopped or farted. Ecphsis, a plaine interpretation of the letter, leauynge no parte vndeclared. Ecquando, at what tyme, or lo whan. Ecquis, but lo who, se who. Ecquid, but what, lo what. Ecstasis, a stoonyinge, a damp, a traunse, whā a man forgetteth hym selfe. Ectasis, a figure, wherby a syllable naturally shorte, is produced or made longe. Ecthlipsis, where the letter M, ioyned with a vowell, is not sonned. Eccrapeli, they which abhorre the common fas¦tion or olde vsages. Ectropium, whan the nether lyd of the eie fal∣leth, and cannot ioyne with the our lyd. Ectypum, that whiche is made accordynge to a paterne. E ANTE D. EDACITAS, vnsatiable fedynge. Edax, edacis, a great eater or consumer. Edo, edonis, the same.
Edearrae, they whiche haue the orderynge of the kynges meate. Edem, signifieth pleasure dilectation. Edentatus, he that hath his tethe taken out, totheles. Edento, aui, are, to make toothles, to beats out ones tethe. Edentulus, totheles. Edera, yuy. Edessa, a citie beyond the ryuer of Euphrates. Edico, xi, cere, to commaunde, to ordeyne, to declare or publyshe. Edicta, ordinaunces or commaundementes of them, whiche be in great authoritie. Edictio, idem quod edictum. Edicto, tare, to declare or pronounce often tymes. Edilia, all thynges that appertein to be eaten. Edissero, ui, rere, to explane or declare, to tell or reherse. Edissere nobis fabulam hanc, Tell or reherse vnto vs that tale. Editio, a settynge forth or publyshynge of a thynge, as of bokes or proclamations. Edititius iudex,Cice. pro planc. a iudge named and chosen of the one parte. Edituus, a sextan of a churche. Edo, es, edi, esum, uel estum, to eate or feede. Ede nasturtium, is applyed to a dulle and grosse person: and for as moche as Nafturti∣um, called Cressis, beynge eaten, doth make the nose tynkell, and therby causeth the dull spirites to wake, therfore by this prouerbe is ment: Plucke vp thy spirites: or, Awake dullarde or luske. Edor, ederis, edi, to be eaten. Edo, edidi, edere, to execute or do a thynge, or to cause a thynge to be done, to brynge or set forth, to delyuer in wrytynge, to publishe. Edere animam, to dye. Edere annos, to tell what age a man is of Edere authorem, to name the author. Edere caedem, to make a great slaughter. Edere cantus, to synge Edere certamen, to fyght valyauntly. Edere clamorem, to crye out. Edere exemplum, to shewe an example. Edere facinora, to do myscheuous dedes. Edere foetus, to brynge forth fruite. Edere frondē, to burgen, to put out leaues. Edere indicium, to tell or disclose who were his companyons in any yll deede. Edere iudicium, to reherse or gyeue iugemēt. Edere leges, to gyue lawes. Edere librum, to set forthe a boke. Edere luci, to brynge to lyghe. Edere ludibrium, to mocke at a thynge. Edere ludos & spectacula, to cause playes and pageantes to be shewed to the people. Edere mandata, to declare his message as he was commaunded. Edere nomen, to gyue a name to one. Edere nomina, to brynge forthe names in wrytynge, as we vse to do in taskes, subsi∣dies, and mousters. Edere operam annuam, to serue one yere. Edere opera uirorum fortium, to do valiant¦ly and as men of great prowesse. Edere oracula, belonged to god, or that whi¦che was taken for god, to make aunswere to the thynge whiche was demaunded. Edere ouum, to laye an egge. Edere partum, to be delyuered of chylde. Edere postulara, to delyuer a byll of request conteynynge many thynges. Edere praelium & bellum, to make warre. Edere pugnam, to fyght. Edere rationes, to make accompte. Edere risus, to laughe. Edere scelus, to do a myscheuous dede. Edere scriptum, to shewe by writinge. Edere signum, to make a token. Edere specimen, to shew a proufe. Edere spiritum, to dye. Edere stragem, to make a great slaughter of men, Edere strepitum, to make a noyse. Edere testes, to brynge forth wytnes. Edere uitam, to dye. Edere uerba, to speake. Edere uoces, to crye. Edere urinam, to pysse. Edoceo, cui, cêre, to instructe or infourme one of a thynge. Edolo, aui, are, to hewe or cut cleane and smothe. Edom, Esawe was so called, and the countrey where he reigned. Edomus, a hyll nexte to Pangeum in the bor∣ders of Thessaly. Edones, people of Thrace, neere to the sea cooste. Edonides, were women, whiche styred with a diuine furour, dyd celebrate the mysteries of Bacchus. Edonij, people of Thrace. Edonus, a hyll where the same people inha∣byteth. Edormisco, scere, to sleape soundly Edormiscere crapulam, to sleape vntyll he be sober agayne, whan that one is drunke. Edormire crapulam, to sleape out a surfet. Educo,Vergi xi, cere, to brynge forthe. also to draw out, as, Hoc dicens, eduxit corpore telum, That sayinge, he drewe the weapon oute of his body. Somtyme to reyse vp. some tyme it signifieth educare. Educatio, nourishynge or bryngynge vp of chyldren.
Educo, aui, are, to nouryshe or brynge vp from chyldhode. Edulco, aui, are, to make very swete. Edulis, le, that maye be eaten. Edulium, is what so euer is set on the table at dyner and supper to be eaten, saue the bread. Eduro, rare, to make very harde. Edurum, not harde. E ANTE E, & F. EETON, Andromaches father, that reigned at Thebes in Cilicia. Effari, to speake, but properly it pertey∣ned to byshoppes and Augures, whan they dyd dedicate any place, or consecrate any thynge. Effartio, effarsi, ire, to stuffe or fyl a thynge. Effascino, aui, are, to bewyche a thynge, wher¦by eyther the forme is chaunged, or the thing dyeth, or is in some wyse destroyed. By this worde Solinus maketh mention, that in Af∣frica be certayne kynreds, wherof the men and women, if they prayse fayre trees, good∣ly corne, pretye chyldren, galante horses and fat, forthwith they dye: Plinius wryteth of some, whiche beholdynge any personne sted∣fastely with an angry countenaunce they do distroye them. Lyke experience haue ben sene in this realme, as credyble personnes haue reported. Effata, were certayn prayers, whiche the diuy∣nours vsed to make at the ende of theyr diui¦nation or tellynge the successe of thynges. Effaxillo, aui, are, to cut of by the arme pyt. Effectus, effecte. Effectum dare, to brynge to passe. Effero, extuli, efferre, to carye forthe, or put out, to deuulgat or tell abrode, to aduaunce or promote. Some tyme to ouercome or sub∣due. Also to commende: some tyme to holde vp, to set forthe. Some tyme to mynishe or∣appayre. Efferre aliquem laudibus, to extoll one with prayses. Efferre cadauet, to cary a body to be buried Efferre clamorem, to crye out. Efferre in humeros, to beare on his shulders Efferre manum, to lyfte vp his hande. Efferre sese, to aduaunce hym self. Efferre pedem,Plaut. in capt. to go out or go forthe. Seruate istum sultis intus serui, ne quoquam pedem efferrat, Kepe hym in, syrs if ye woll, that he go forth no whether. Efferre se letitia, to be glad without mesure. Efferri funere, to be caryed to buryenge so∣lemnely. Effero, aui, are, to make ymages of wyld bea∣stes. also to make wood as a beaste. Efferueo, êre, to boyle moche. Efferuesco, scere, to begyn to boyle or sethe. Efferuescentia uerba, hot angry wordes. Effexis, for effeceris. Efficatia, effecte or vertue. Efficax, acis, effectuall. Efficientia, idem quod effectus. Efficio, feci, ficere, to brynge to effecte. Efficere argentum alicui, to get money for a man by some meane or deuyse. Efficere morbos, to iugender diseases. Efficere nuptias alicui, to be the cause of the maryage of any. Efficere pollicita, to kepe promyse. Id similitudinem panis efficiebat, it serued in the stede of bread. Efficiam tibi, tua ut sit, I wyll brynge it to passe, that she shall be thyne. Effigies,Plautus. a signe made to the similitude of a man or beast. Effigia, the same. Effigio, are, to counterfayte ones ymage in payntynge or keruynge. Effilatum, that whiche is sowed or stitched on a garment, as a garde or purfle. Effilo, lare, to sowe. Effingo, xi, gere, to make lyke. Effio, fieri, to be done. Efflagito, aui, are, to desyre or aske a thynge importunately. Efflictim, excedingly. Effictim amare, to loue ardently, oute of measure. Effligo, flixi, fligere, to tourment. Efflo,Plaut. in persa. aui, are, to blowe away, or blowe forth. Efflare animam, to dye. Efflauit animam spes, I haue no maner of hope or truste. Effloreo, & Effloresco, to bloo, as a floure dothe at the fyrste comyng out. Effluo, uxi, ere, to flow or runne out, as wa∣ter dothe out of a fountayne. Effluet,Plaut. in Trucul. it shal be tolde abrode, I wyl not kepe counsayle, all men shall knowe it. Effluxerat, it was out of remembrance, it was forgotten. Effluxit,Terent. in Eunucho it is quite gon. Effluit aestas, the sommer is passed. Effluunt uoluptates, pleasures do passe a∣waye lyghtly. Effodio, ssi, & di, ere, to dyg out. Effoeminati, men wanton and delicate, or ten∣der, endurynge no hardnes. Effoemino, aui, are, to effeminat or make delicat Effoeta, she that hath latelye broughte forthe a chylde. Also a woman paste teemynge. Effoetus, ta, tum, hatched, as a byrde that is come out of the egge. Also barrayne, cousu∣med, feeble.
Terra effacta, lande spente or worne with bearynge of moche grayne. Effoetum corpus, a weake body. Effreno, nare, to vnbrydle. Effrenus, na, num, without a brydle, rashe in maners. Effringo, effregi, gere, to breake to pieces. Effractus fame, made feble for lacke of meat Effugio, gi, ere, to escape. Effugit memoria, it is forgotten. Effugere nuptias,Plaut. in Bacch. not to be maryed. Effugium, discomfiture or flyght. Effundo, fudi, dere, to poure out. somtyme it signifieth to consume, to put out. Effundere aerarium, to waste the treasure. Effundere extremum spiritum, to dye. Effundere honores in mortuum, to make for hym that is dead a sumptuous buryal, or an honorable entierement. Effundere patrimonium, to spende and con∣sume his inheritaunce. Effundere peditatum, to dicofit the fote∣men. Effunduntur omnibus portisad opem fe∣rendam, they gathered to gether in greatte routes at euery gate to defende the citie. Effuse, effusius, effusissime, oute of measure, excedynge, abundantly: more vehemently. Effusio, pourynge out sometyme it signyfieth prodigalitie, or outragious expenses. Effusus, sa, sum, discomfited, scattered, put out, or poured out. Effusa laetitia, excedynge ioye or myrthē. Effusi in fugam, they ranne awaye on euerye syde. Effusus cursu, he that runneth with all his myghte. Effutio, iui, ire, to speake vnaduisedly, or foo∣lyshely, or hastely, or that whiche shoulde be kepte secrete. E ANTE G. EGELASTE, a towne in the hygher parte of Spayne. Egelidor, ari, to relent or dissolue, as yse that thaweth. Egelidus, da, dum, neyther hot nor colde, but a lyttell out of the colde. somtyme it is taken for colde. Egens, lackynge. Egens est consilij, he lacketh counsayle. Egenus, nedy, or lackynge somewhat. Egeo, egui, ere, to nede or lacke. Egeria, was an ydoll, to whom women with chylde did offer, supposynge that therby they shulde trauayle easely. Egero, si, rere, to beare out. Egerit aquam fons, the fountayne pousheth out water. Egesta, a city in Sicile, which Aeneas builded. Egestas, tatis, necessity, or lacke of thynges ne∣cessarye, pouerty. Egestio, onis, distribution abrode. It is also the puttynge forth of ordure or dunge. Egestosus, a, um, very poore. Ego, I. Egomet, I my selfe. Ego ne? whoo I? Potin est hic tacere? P. ego ne? optime. Can this felowe kepe counsail? P. who I? in the best wyse. Egredior, eris, gredi, to go forth, or go out. Egregie, excellently. Egregius, a, um, excellent. Egurgito, aui, are, to drawe out, as lycour out of a place. E ANTE H & I. EHEM, is a word spoken, whan a man is moued with some thyng, whiche is new¦ly hapned. Eheu, alas. Eho, an interiectiō of callyng, it signifieth how Ehodum ad me, how come hether to me. Eho tu, how syrra, whan one calleth a man to hym, forgettyng his name. Eia, somtyme it exhorteth, somtyme it blameth. Eia haud sic decet, well. it wolde not be so. Eia uero age, dic, well, go to, speake on. Eiectitius, a, um, beynge cast out. Eiecto, tate, to throwe out. Eiectus, ta, tum, caste out. Eijceo, ieci, ijcere, to caste out or put out. Eiulatio, a brayeng out with lamentation. Eiulo, aui, are, to crye out, to wayle. Eiurare, to do besyde the lawe, to renounce. Eiuratio, renouncynge. Eiusmodi, & Eiuscemodi, the same. Eiusdem farinae, of the same sort or condition. Eiusdem notae, of the same estimation or state. E ANTE L. ELabor, eris, elabi, elapsum, to slyp orslyde. somtyme to escape. Elaboratus,Ci. in  ta, tum, perfectly or kunning∣ly wrought or done. Omnes apud hunc or∣nati, elaborati{que} sunt uersus, All the verses that he writith, at elegant & cunningly made. Elaboro, aui, are, to labour. Elacatena, a sauce vsed in the olde tyme. Elactesco, scere, to tourne into mylke, or waxe whyte as mylke.Ruell. Elaeomeli, is a certayne kynd of gumme, thic∣ker than hony, thynner than rosen, fatty and vnctuous, which runnith out of the stemmes of olde trees, which groweth in a countreye callyd Palmyris in Syria.
Elamitae, be called the prynces of Persians, of Elam the sonne of Sem, as Iosephu sayth. Elangueo, êre, to be sycke. Elanguesco, scere, to waxe feble. Elaphoboscon, an herbe, whiche some do calle Gracia dei, Elapsus, a, um, escaped out of some daungier. Elapsa est spes, hope is loste. Elapsa ex oculis hominum anguis, the ad∣der stale awaye out of euery mannes syght. Elate, of Dioscorides, is that wherin a palme or date tree bearynge fruite is wrapped. Ga¦lene taketh it for the tender and yonge bran∣che of a palme. Hesichius dothe affyrme the same. Elaterium, wylde Cucumbers, whiche hath leaues lyke to gardeyne cucumbers, but the fruit is moch lesse lyke as it were long akor∣nes, and hath a great roote & a whyte. They be called of some men Cucumeres anguini. There is also a medicine so called, made of the iuyce of them, to pourge choler & fleume vpwarde and downewarde. Elatine, is an herbe, whiche hath leaues lyke to pelytory of the wal, but lasse and rounder, heary and thyn, hauynge braunches halfe a fote hye, fyue or syx comming out of the rote, full of leaues, byndinge in taste: it groweth for the more parte amonge corne. Ruellius sayeth that it is communely called Campe∣stre Rapistrum, wylde rapes. Elatio,Cic. offi. 1. is taken sometyme in a good part, som∣tyme in an yll parte: in a good parte, In hac elatione & magnitudine animi, facillime pertinatia, & nimia cupiditas, principatus, innascitur:Cic in To In this hyghnes of harte and greatnes of courage, there is breadde verye lyghtly wylfull appetite, and to moch desire of great authoritie. In an yll parte. Parium comparatio, nec elationem habet, nec sub∣missionem: The comparyson of theym that are equall, hath in it neyther arrogance, nor yet submission. Elatus, hyghe or aduaunced, properly in harte or courage. sometyme it sygnifieth proude or arrogante. Elauo, elaui, elauare, siue elauere, to washe cleane, to rynse clothes. Elauare se bonis, to be cleane washed frome all his goodes, to spende all, and leaue no∣thynge. Elea, a citie in the countrey of Lucania. Eleates, a man of that citie. Electio, onis, an election, an approbation. Electo, aui, are, to chose. Electrum, that which is in englyshe called am∣ber,Plinius. wherof beades be made. It is also taken for a mettall, parte golde, parte syluer. Eleemosina, almes. Elegans, tis, elegant, freshe, gorgious, cleane. polyte. Elegantia, elegancy, gorgiousnes, cleannes, beauty in wordes. Elegîa, a lamentable songe or verse. Elegiacus, ca, cum, perteynynge therto. Elegiographus, a wryter of lamentable ver∣ses, or balades. Elego, elêgi, eligere, to chose. Elegus, idem quod Elegia, Elei, people in Grece in the countrey somtyme called Peloponessus, nowe Morea. Elelisphagos, the herbe called saulge. Elementa, the fyrste or pryncipal matter, wher of all thynges do take theyr begynnyng, whi¦che be .iiii. in number, fyre, ayre, water and erthe. Also the letters where of syllables be made, are called Elementa. Elenchus, an argument, reprouynge subtyllye an other argumente. It is also a table in a boke, to shewe the places by letter or other wyse. It is more ouer a great perle, or other precious stone, whiche women were wont to hange at theyr eares. Eleo, eui, ere, to spot or soyle. Eleoselinum, is an herbe whiche is called Smalache. Elephantezographi, be called these peynters, whiche paynte with yuory. Elephantia,Constant. seu Elephantiasis, a kynd of lepry, wherein the fleshe dothe swell, and is full of spottes, and is ingendred of blacke choler. Elephantiacus, a lepre. Elephantiae be serpentes soo called bycause he whom they do byte,Solinus. falleth in to that kynde of leprye called Elephantia. Elephantini libri, amonge the olde Romaynes were bokes, wherin theyr lawes were wryt∣ten, whiche concerned the nobilitie. Elephantinus, pertayninge to an olyphant. Elephas, a puissant beaste called in englyshe an Olyfant,Aristo. de natura a∣nima. li. 2. ca. 1. 5. 6. li. 9. c. 46. whiche is the greattest of all foure footed beastes, whose fore legges be lengar than his hynder legges, and hath ankelys in the lower parte of his hynder legges, and al∣so fyue toes on his fete vndeuyded, his snout or nose is so longe, and in suche fourme, that it is to hym in the steede of an hande, for he neyther eateth nor drynketh, but by brynging his nose to his mouthe, therewith he helpeth vppe his maister or keper, therwith he ouer∣throweth trees. He hath but .iiii. tethe on e∣uerye syde of his mouthe, wherewith he ea∣teth or gryndeth his meate. He hathe alsoo two greatte tuskes, the male greatter than the female, and they are bowyng downward His tungue is very lyttel, and further with∣in his mouthe than in other beastes, so that vneth it maye be seene. Of all beastes he is
the moste gentyll and tractable, for by many sondry wayes he is taught, and doth vnder∣stande, in so moche that he lerneth to do due honour to a kynge: he hath a great percey∣uynge, and excelleth in sharpenesse of wytte, the female, whiche he ones seasoneth, he ne∣uer afterwarde toucheth. The male Oliphāt lyueth .CC. yeres, at the leaste C.xx. yeres, the females almoste as longe, but the floure of theyr age, they saye, is about .lx. yeres. They can not suffer wynter nor colde. He lo∣ueth ryuers, and wyll often go into them vp to the nose, wherwith he bloweth and taketh wynde, but swym he can not for the weight of his body wyll not let hym. Plinius and Solinus do wryte, that they vse none aduoul¦try: and if it happen that they mete with a man in wyldernes being out of any way, gen¦tylly they wyll go before hym, and bryng him into the playne way. In battayle ioyned they haue no lyttell regarde to them that be woū∣ded, for they brynge them that be soore hurte or wery into the mydle of the hoste to be de∣fended They are made tame with drynking the iuyce of barley. They haue contynuall warre agaynst dragons, whiche desyre their bloud, and therfore lyinge in a wayte as the Olyphant passeth by, the dragon (beinge of an excedynge lengthe) wyndeth his tayle a∣boute the hynder legges of the Olyphant, & letteth hym to go, & than thrasteth his heade in to the Olyphantes nose, and exhausteth his breathe, or elles byteth hym in the eare, wherto he maye not reche with his nose, and whan the Olyphant waxeth faynte, he fal∣leth downe on the dragon, whiche is full of bloud, & with the poyse of his body breaketh hym, so that his owne bloud, with the bloud of the Olyphant runneth oute of hym men∣gled together, whiche is called Cinnaberis, in englysshe Synopre. Eleuies, a purgation. Eleuo, aui, are, to lyfte vp. sometyme to take awaye, to mynishe, to extenuat. Eleus, a ryuer whiche watreth a great parte of Media. Eleusina sacra, ceremonyes of Ceres the god∣desse. Elices, furrowes in the fyldes, to conueye water. Elicio, cui, cere, to drawe out, to get out or picke out a thynge or a worde. Elicito, to drawe often. Elico, aui, are, to tourne vp so downe. Elico, onis, he that turneth thynges oute of order. Elido si, dere, to hytte agaynste a thynge, to breake, to presse out, to exclude, to strangle, to kyll. Elidere ignem è silice, to beate fyre out of a flynte. Elidere sonum, to make a noyse in beatinge one thynge agaynste an other. Eligo, legi, eligere, to chose. Elimino, aui, are, to put or caste forthe frome a place fer of. Elimo, aui, are, to fyle or make cleane. Elinguis, without a tungue, specheles. Elinguo, aui, are, to plucke out ones tungue. Eliquo, aui, are, to melte. Elis, a citie of Archady. Elissa, one of the names of Dido. Elix,Colum licis, a furrowe made for water to passe. Elixo, aui, are, to sethe or boyle. Elixus, a, um, sodden boyled. Elleborus albus, an herbe called lyngwort, the roote wherof is called nesynge pouder. Elleborus niger, an herbe called beares foote. Ellobia, thynges whiche were hanged at the eares of women. Ellum,Dona. for ecce illum, see where he is. Elocutio, onis, a proper fourme of wordes and sentences. Elogium, a testification or wytnes in wordes, of prayse or disprayse, of honour or reproche. It is somtyme a superscription on a tombe. Elongo, aui, are, to remoue far of, to make longe, to deferre. Elops, a fyshe called also Accipenser. Eloquentia, eloquence. Eloquium, speche in a pleasant maner. Eloquor, eris, qui, to speake, properlye it is, whan I set a thynge forthe in speakyng, that the herers maye vnderstande it, as I con∣ceyue it. Elotae, amonge the Lacedemonians was as moche to saye, as commune mynisters, or seruauntes, as sergeantes, or suche as in London they do call yomen. Elpénor, a companyon of Vlisses, which with other, Circe tourned into an hog. Eluceo, cere,Verg to shyne. Elucesco, sci, scere, to be very bryght. Elucido, aui, are, to shyne or make bryghte outwarde. Eludo, si, ere, to mocke or deceyue. Also to leaue playenge. Elucefico, caui, care, to depryue of lyght. Elucus, he that is sicke of the drynke of yester∣daye. Also a louer of trifles. Elugeo, gi, gere, to leaue mornynge. Elumbus & Elumbis, he that hath feble loy∣nes, and can not stande vpryght. Eluo, lui, luere, to washe out. Eluo, aui, are, to lyue in glotony, or to spende superfluously. Elusa, an yle agaynste Cipers. Elusco, aui, are, to make one purblynde.
Elusis, & Elusin, a citie in the prouince of Atti∣ca, not farre from Athens. Elutheria, fredome, gentylnesse. Eleutherius, the name of a man, and is inter∣pretate, free, gentyll. Eluto, aui, are, to soke out water. Elurrio, aui, are, to powre out of one vessell in∣to an nother. Eluuies, ordure or fylth caused of abundance of water or other lycour. Elychnium, the matche whyche is in a lampe, and standeth in oyle. Elysium, a place where poetes dyd suppose the soules of good men to dwelle. Elysii campi, the same place. ¶E ANTE M. EMaciatus, ta, tum, made leane. Emacio, aui, are, to make leane. Emacitas, affection or desyre to be always byeng of some thynge. Emancipati, are they whyche are out of theyr fathers rule,Festus. or they whiche are made subie∣ctes to an other man.Cicero in Catal. Emancipator, a feoffour or alienour. Emancipatus, ta, tum, alyened. Emancipo, aui, are, to infranchise or make fre, or set at libertie. somtyme it is vsed in the con¦trary sence, to binde or make bond. It is most cōmonly where a man disposseseth hym selfe and puttith an other man in possession of lād. Emaneo, mansi, nere, to well out of a place. Emano, aui, are, to issue or flowe out. Emansor, oris, he that wandreth longe, and at the last returneth home, a lrker. Emargino, aui, are, to take away scurfe aboute the brymmes of woundes or sores. Emasculo, aui, are, to geld, or to take away the courage of a man, or to abuse a man chylde in lecherye. Emath, a citie that is nowe callyd Antioche. Emathia, a part of the royalme of Macedonia. Emaus, a notable cite of Palestine, which now is callyd Nicopolis. Emax, cis, he or she that is redy to bye any thīg. Embamma, matis, sawce. Embata, a shyppe callyd a barque. Emblema, blematis, pictures made of wodde, stone, or mettall of one colour, sette in wodde, stone, or mettall of an other colour, as we see in chesse bourdes or tables callyd counters, it is moche vsyd in Italy. It is of som taken ge¦nerally for smalle ymages, floures, or other lyke thynge attached to any other thynge, as on cuppes of golde or syluer. Embolismus, the addyng of a day in the yere. Embolium, the argument or fyrst entry into a play or enterlude. Embrio, onis, sygnifieth the chylde conceyued before it receyueth perfecte shappe of a man or woman. Emedullo, aui, are, to take out marrow. Emendico, caui, care, to aske in fourme of beggynge. Emendo, aui, are, to amende. Emergo, emersi, gere, to issue or come out of the place where a thyng is drownyd. Emergere ex aliquo negotio, to depeth him selfe of the busynesse. Emergere ex incommoda ualitudine, to be recouered of a noyous dysease. Emerseram commode ex Atio in Appi∣um,Cicero. I departed in good tyme from Antium to Appium. Emereor, emereri, to desee to the vttermost. Emeriti senes, olde wrne souldiours, which were pardoned of warres, and not withstan∣dynge had pencyons, whyche were callyd E∣merita stipendia. Emeritum stipendium, the laste wages that a man taketh in warres. Emeriti senes, olde men excused from labour by age. Emico, care, to shyne forth, to hold vp the fyn∣ger, or some other thyng, to daunce or leape. Emigro, grare, to go from one place, to dwelle in an other. Emineo, nui, eminere, to shewe or excell aboue all other, to be hygher than other. Eminulus, a, um, a lyttell rysing in height. Eminus, farre of. Emissarium, a suse, or place to let water out of a ponde or ryuer. Emissarius, somtyme it signifieth hym, whyche is sent before in battayle to espye, or to skyr∣myshe. sometyme a seruaunt, whiche is alway at hand, redy to be sent forth. also it signifieth suche a persone, whyche is ordeyned of hym that is in any great office or authoritie, to ad∣uaunce his bryberye. also it signifieth a horse stalyon, whiche serueth to get coltes. Emississius, a spyall. Emitto, misi, mittere, to send forth, to publyshe, to manumyse. Emmanuel, is interpreted, God is with vs. Emo, emi, emere, to bye. Emodus, a hylle, whyche about the border of Indy, is dyuided into two boughtes. Emolumentum, profyte gotten of labour. Emorior, emori, to dye vtterly. Emortualis dies, the day of deathe. Emoueo, uere, to put away. Empedocles, the name of a phylosopher, whi∣che supposed all thynges to haue theyr beinge of amitie and varyance. Empetron, is an herbe which is comonly called Sampier, which groweth on the sea rockes, and is kept in salt or brine to serue for sauces.
it is medicinable agaynst the stone. It is also callyd Calcifraga, of some Creta marina. Emphasis, an expresse significatiō of that, whi∣che is intended. Emphracta,Galen. in definit. shyppes or barges coueryd. Emphysodes febris, a vehement heate whiche causeth to be in the mouthe wheales and in∣flammations. Emphyteosis, the making of a thing better thā it was, whā it was receiued or letten, as land. Emphyteota, he that taketh a thinge, and pro∣myseth or couenanteth to make it better than he receiued it. Empiricus, a practyser, properly of phisyke. Emplasticum, a playster. Emplastratio, is graffynge betwene the barke and the wodde. Emplastrum, a playster. Emporetica charta, paper wherin marchantes or grossers do put theyr wares. Emporium, a place wherein is kepte a marte or fayre. Emporeuma, shypmanshyp. Emptitius, a, ū, that which is or may be bought Emptito, aui, are, to vse to bye. Empyrema, a collection of matter in the bulke of a mans body.Galen. Empyrium coelum,Met. li. 1. the heauen, whiche is next aboue al the seuen spheres, and signifieth the fyry heauen. Emunctorium, an instrument, wherewith the snuffe of a candell is taken away, a snuffer. Emunctae naris,Terent. of a clene & sure iudgement. Emunctus auro,Horatius. spoyled of his treasure. Emungo, xi, gere, to snuffe a candell. alsoo to make clene a mans nose somtime it signifieth to dispoyl a man of money, properly by craft. Emussicata, made or wrought by rule. Emutio, tire, to hūme or make any other sowne lyke a man that is dumme. E ANTE N. EN, lo, see. Enaema,Galen. iu definitio. a medicine of a dusky color, good to heale freshe woundes. Enarratio, a playne declaration or exposition. Enarro, rare, to tell a thyng at length. Enascor, sceris, sci, to grow or spring of a thing Enato, tare, to swymme out. Encaenia, an innouation or renewyng. It was amonge Iewes the feaste of dedycation of theyr temple. Encanthis, a dysease in the eyes. Encaustes, he that formeth or facioneth a thing with fyre. Encaustice, makyng of ymages with the fyre. Encaustum, vernyshe, enamyl, or other picture, wrought with fyre. Enchiridion, a handle of a thynge, sometyme a dagger. sometyme that parte of an ore, that the waterman holdeth. It is vsurped for a boke in so lyttell a volume, that a man maye alway cary it with hym. Enchiros, a beast bred in the orient, as gret as a bull. Enchrista, thynne oyntementes. Encimibomata, maydens kyrtels or petycotes. Encyclios, & Encyclia, the circle or course of all doctrynes. Encyclopaedia, that lernynge whiche compre∣hendeth all lyberall scyences and studies. Endelechia, a consummate perfection, whiche Aristotle dyd put besides the foure elementis. Endeploro, aui, are, to make intercession with teares. Endoprocinctum, whan men went out of the campe vnto battayle. Endromis, a certayn garment whiche is heary and rough lyke to yrysshe mantelles, whyche men vsed in baynes and places of exercyse. Endymion, the name of a man, whiche founde the course of the moone. Wherfore the poetes fayned, that the mone loued him, and descen∣ded downe to kysse hym, whyles he slepte. Enectus, slayne. Energia, a demonstration, whan a thyng is so descriued, that it semeth to the reder or herer, that he beholdeth it, as it were in doynge, an efficacye or operation. Energificus, effectuall. Eneruis, & eneruus, without synewes. Eneruo, aui, are, to debilitate or make feble. Engaddi, a citie in Iudea, from whens the pre¦cyous balme commeth. Enim, forsothe. somtyme it is expletiue, & doth but fyll vp a sentence, to make it sounde well. sometyme it is a copulatiue. Sed enim, but for as moche. Enimuero, forsothe. Enipeus, a ryuer of Thessaly, nere to which the batayl was fought betwene Cesar & Pempei Eniteo, tui, ere, to indeuor, to inforce to do a thīg Enitor, teris, enixus sum eniti, idē quod eniteo. Enixa, a woman late delyuered of chylde. Enixe, & enixum, diligently, with all force. Enixus, us, delyuerance of chylde. Enixa opera, trauayl, wherin a man imploy∣eth all his puissance. Enna, a citie of Sicile, situate in a hygh place. Ennius, an old latin poete, borne at Tarentū, a citie now in the royalm of Naples, as som do suppose at a towne callyd Rhudii in Italy, & was brought to the cite of Rome by Cato the Censor. for his lerning and most honest condi¦tions he was interly beloued of Scipio Affri∣can, wherfore he causid his image to be set on his sepulchre. he made many bokes in sundry kindes of versis, but the stile that he vsid was
very ancient and homely, but they contayned moche graue and substancyall sentences of greatte wysedome. He dyed atte the aege of .lxx. yeres. Enoch, a mans name in holy scripture. Enodis, enode, without a knot. Enodo, aui, are, to cut away the knottes, or to vnknytte. Enormis, me, great out of measure. Enos, was a great citie nygh to the mountayn callyd Lybanus before Noes floud, wherein dwellyd Gyantes, whiche had dominion ouer all the worlde from the sonne goynge downe to the sonne rysynge.Berosus. li. 1. They trustynge in the greatnes of theyr bodies and strength, inuen∣tynge armure and weapon oppressed all men, and gyuyng them selues to all bodylye lustes, they founde pauillyons, instrumentes of mu∣syke, and all wanton pleasures. They also did eate men, procured delyueraunce of chylderne before theyr ful tyme, and prepared them into delycate meates. They companyed carnally with their owne mothers, theyr doughters, theyr systers, with men and with beastes. And no myschiefe there was, whiche they dyd not ommyt, despisours of god and all relygion. Enotesco, scere, to come to knowledge. Ens, entis, the beinge of euery thynge. Ensis, a sworde. Enterocele, a dysease, whan the bowels be fal∣len into a mans codde. Enthymema, matis, an imperfecte syllogisme lackyng the maior, or the minor. Enucleatè clerely. Enucleo, aui, are, to take oute the kernelle of a nutte. It is alsoo to declare or make playne a sentence. Enyalius, the sonne of Bellona. ¶E ANTE O. EO, is, iui, ire, to goo. Eo inficias, I denye. Eo obuiam. I go to mete with one. Eo uenum, ire uenum, to be solde. Eò, therfore, forasmoche, vnto that. Eo loci, in that state. Eodem loci, in the same place or state. Eo secius, neuer the lesse. Eo us{que}, in so moche. Eon, the compasse of the eye. Eous, the easte. ¶E ANTE P. EPACTA, thynges added to. Epaminondas, was a Theban borne, son of an honest gentylman callyd Polym∣nus: he was in sundry qualities excellent, as welle of the bodye as of the mynde. For in all kyndes of musycke he was perfectely instruc∣ted, and therwith daunced excedyngely welle. He wrastelyd and ranne no man better, and in armes he was stronge, valyant, and hardy, and in marcyall polyrye equall to any than lyuynge. Also he was wonderfull well lerned in phyloso∣phy, specially in that whyche was taughte of Pythagoras, whyche was the moste dyffuse  pure doctrine, contaynynge most secrete and di∣uyne mysteries, whervnto he added most noble vertues, for he was temperate, wyse, of great grauitie, vsyng tyme wysely, perfect in chiual∣ry, of courage inuincible, soo diligent in obser∣uyng trouth, that he wolde at no tyme lye, ney∣ther in game nor in erneste. He was also conti∣nent, mercyfull, and wonderful pacient, suffring wronges not onely of the people, but also of his frendes. Moreouer he was secrete and trustye, so faythefull and louynge to his frendes, that when any of them were taken in warres, or any of theyr doughters redy to be maryed, and they not able to set them forth accordyng to theyr de∣gres, he wolde assemble the residue of his fren∣des, and exhorte theym to gyue to hym whyche lacked, accordyng to theyr powers. And he him selfe wolde lyberallye gyue to the quantitie of his substaunce, which was but lyttel, although he were in great authoritie (for he refused al re∣wardes, sauynge thankes onely.) And whan he hadde made a good summe of that whyche was granted, before he receyued it, he brought hym that shoulde haue it, vnto them that shuld gyue it, that he of them mought receyue it, and knowe howe moche he was beholden to euerye of them. he oftentymes refused greate summes of money and ryche presentes sente to hym by pryncis, all thowghe he were poore, sayinge: If the thynge were honeste whyche he was re∣quyred to doo, he wolde doo it bycause it was good without any rewarde: if it were yll or not honest, all the goodes of the worlde, shulde not make hym to do it: If it were profytable vnto his countrey, he was bounden and redye to do it freely. If it were otherwyse, all the ryches of the worlde moughte not counteruayle the loue that he bare to his cōmune weale. In eloquence no Thebane moughte be compared vnto hym, and his sentences were graue and very compen¦dious, wherwith in counsayles he vanquished and dyd put to rebuke greate and famous ora∣tours. In battayle he ouercame the Athenien∣ses and Lacedemones, and in one daye had the vyctory of all Grece. At the last in a battayle at Mantinea, betwene the Thebanes and the La∣cedemones, he was striken and wounded vnto deathe with a longe speare, the heade remay∣nynge stylle in his bodye, yet retayned he lyfe vntylle it was tolde hym that his hoste hadde
the vyctory, than sayd he: I haue lyued longe ynough, for I dye vnuanquished, the yron be∣inge drawen out of his body, he dyed, before the incarnation of Christ .CCClxxii. yeares. This one thynge is to be well consydered (as Probus fayth) The citie of Thebes before Epaminondas was born, and also after that he was dead, was vnder the rule and in sub∣iection of other people. But during the tyme that he was a gouernor in the weale publike, that citie was heade and pryncipall ouer all Grece, by the which it may be wel perceiued, that one such noble mā is more thā a hole city Epanalepsis, a replication or repetition. Eparcus, the president of a prouynce. Epatica, an herbe callyd lyuerwort. Epauxis, an increase. Ephabus, the sonne of Iupyter that buylded Memphis in Egypt. Ephebia, the age wherein one entreth into the state of a man .xv. or .xvi. yeres. Ephebus, he that is of that age. Ephemera febris, is a feuer so callyd, bycause that it is apt to be curid in one day,Galen. but being neglected,Met. li. 10. it cometh to be in dyuers sortes of feuers, & accordyng to the natures of them cō¦tynueth lengar The cause therof is of sūdry occasyons, somtyme of outward heates, som¦tyme of moch labour or werynes.Alex. Tral lian. li. 5. somtyme of oppilation, somtyme of replecion, specially of dyuers meates and drynkes, otherwhiles of longe abstinence or watche, or of corruption of that wherwith the body is nouryshed. Ephemeris, a boke wherin is writen that, whi¦che is done dayly, or a boke of reckenyng. Ephemeron, is that which apothecaries do cal Hermodactilus, an extreme purger of fleme. Ephesus, a noble and auncient city in Asia the lesse, it is interpreted by saynet Hierom. My vvyl, there runneth by it a great ryuer callyd Caystrus, out of the which be deriued many other ryuers. In this citie was the famouse temple of Diana, which was numbred amōg the seuen wonders of the worlde. It was edi∣fied by all Asia in a Cxx. yeres, & was sette in a ferme or maryce, the foundation being first layde with coles troden or rammed hard, thā flyces of wolle layde theron, and all this was to saue it from erthquakes. The temple was in length. 425. fote, in bread. 220. In it were 127. pyllours, euery of them .lx. foote highe, made by kinges, the roufe was of cedre trees and the doores of cypres. This temple was burned by a leude person of purpose to get a renoume in hystories therby, for as moche as he was couetous of glory, and hauyng none excellent qualitie to attayne thereto, he put∣tyng wylde fyre into the roufe, dyd burne all the temple. his name was Herasostratus, as Strabo writeth. Therof proceded a prouerb, Herasostrati gloria, applied to them, whiche do seeke for a renowne or prayse of a mysche∣uous acte. phi, a measure contaynyng .iii. busshels. Ephialtes, is a dysease, where one slepyng thin¦keth, that a great weight lyeth on hym, and taketh his wynd from hym, it is of som callid the mare, whiche is none other thynge but a fumositie risynge from the stomacke or harte vp to the brayne, there oppressynge the ver∣tue animall. Ephimeron, the great wylde lylye. Ephippium, the harneys of a horse or mule. Ephira, rae, or Ephire, res, a towne of Achaie, whiche nowe is callyd Corinthus. Ephod, a stole, whiche a prieste weareth about his necke, whan he is at masse. Ephori, were certayn men in authoritie among the Lacedemonians, as Tribuni were amōge the Romaynes, to whom men mought appele from the kynge, as in Rome they mought ap∣pele from the cōsules vnto the Tribunes. It was alsoo the name of a wryter of hystories scholer to Aristotle. Epibata, a souldiour on the sea. Epibarra, the ladder that goth vp to the toppe castell of a shyppe. Epicedium, verses in commendation of a dead man. Epicharmus, the name of an excellent phyloso∣pher of Syracuse. Epicheremata, argumentes made in reasoning. Epicoenum, of bothe kyndes male and female. Epicterus, the name of a stoike philosopher. Epicurus, the name of hym, which dyd put the principall goodnes in voluptuositie. Epidamnus,Stra. li. 7. a towne in the southwest parte of Grece on the sea syde, callyd also Dyrrachiū. Epidaurus, a citie in Grece in the countrey cal∣lyd Achaia, wherin there was a famous tem∣ple dedicate to Aesculapius, to the whyche a great multitude of sycke people dyd resorte, and som in their slepe had shewed vnto them that medicine, wherby they shoulds be cured of theyr syckenesse. Epidicticon, demonstratyue. Epidromes, the armynge of a nette. Epigastrium, al the bely, from the boulke down to the priuy membres, whyche is callyd also Abdomen. Epiglossis, or Epiglottis, a smalle thyng in the innermost part of the tunge, like a litle tunge Epigramma, a superscription. Epigrammatarius, he that writeth verses cal∣lyd Epigrammata. Epigriphus, he that hath a croked nose. Epijcia, or Epijces, is that part of iustice callyd in latyn Aequum & bonum, in englishe there
is not yet any one word sounden therfore, but that therby may be vnderstande, that equitie whiche omitteth parte of the rigour or extre∣mitie of a lawe that is written, or cōformeth iustyce to the occasion newely hapned, which was not remembred of the makers of the law applyeng it to the thyng whereof least detry∣ment may seme to ensue. Epilepsia, callyd also Morbus comitialis, & Morbus sacer, & morbus Herculeus, in en∣glyshe the fallyng sycknes, or foule euyl, is af∣ter Alexāder an affection of the heed & brayn in the part wherein is contayned vnderstan∣dyng, the chief of al sencis. Galen saith it is a cold humor, wherwith the celles of the brayn ar not perfectly stopped, prohibiting the soule to execute his operatiō, vntyl nature hath eft sones openid the natural cūdites of the brain, remouing that humour. It hapneth (as Con∣stantinus writeth) of one of thre causes, ey∣ther of a humour fleumaticke or melancholye bredde in the hyndermoste part of the brayn, or of a wynde grosse and colde, oppressing the brain, or of humors aboūdyng to moch in the stomacke, so that the sume therof ascendeth vp to the brayne by the synewes, by whose grossenes the wayes or passages of the vitall spirites are stopped. Epilepticus, he that hath that dysease. Epilogus, a conclusion in writyng or speaking. Epimelis, is a kynde of medlar tree, the fruite wherof hath in it thre stones.lo. Agric. Epimenides, a noble phylosopher in the yle of Creta, now callid Candy, who being a yong man sent by his father to seke for a shepe, be∣ynge weary, and for the heate of the day, he went into a denne or holowe place in an hylle to rest hym, where he slepte continually .lvii. yeres, and than being awaked, he went forth to seke for his shepe, and not fyndynge hym, he retourned home, and fyndyng an other mā dwelling in the hous, which was his fathers and beholdyng euery thyng alteryd, he wente into the citie, where at the last he founde his yonger brother, beinge a man of great yeres, of whome he knewe all that was happened, and after became a meruaylous philosopher, and wrate of the nature of thynges, and of the diuyne generation, and had the gyfte of prophecy as som do suppose. He lyued as La∣crtius writeth .Clxxix. yeres, after other mēs sayinges .Cxciiii. yeres, and was before the incarnation of Christ .Cxlvii. yeres. Epimythion, the declaration of a fable in a mo¦rall sence. Epinicia, verses contaynynge prayses. Epinicium, feast or ioy made for victory, as bon fyres and bankettes therat. Epinyctides, a wheale or poushe, which ryseth on the skyn by nyght. Epiphanes, notable or famous. Epiphania, a manifestation, it is also a solemne feaste in the churche. Epiphonema, an exclamation. Epiphora, a syknes of the eyes callyd the drop∣pynge of the eyes. Epirrhedium, a waggen or carte. Epiroticus, ca, cū, of the contray callyd Epirus. Epirus, a regyon in the southeweste parte of Grece, ioynyng to the sea callid Ioniū, & mar¦cheth on the north vpon Thessaly, on the east vppon Achaia, on the weste vpon Albania. Episcopatus, a bysshopryche. Episcopium, a byshops palayce or house, or a place to espy out of. Episcopius, a, um, pertaynyng to espiall. Episcopus, a byshop, sometyme an espye. some∣tyme a clerke of the market. Epistathmi, by the interpretation of Budeus, are harbigers, appoynters of lodgynges, for the trayn of princis, whervnto Budeus deui∣seth a latyn name calling them Designatores mansionarij, or cretarij, but in myne opinyon the greke name may be vsyd well & properly. Epistola, a letter sent from one to an other. Epistolium, a lyttell epystle. Epistomium, a spoute sendynge forthe water from a cundyte, a tappe or other lyke thynge. Epistylium, the chapiter of a pyllar. Epitaphium, a scripture wrytten on a graue or sepulchre. Epithalamium, a songe beinge sunge at a wed∣dynge, or verses made in the prayse of theym that are maryed. Epithema, a medicine layde to the region of the harte or lyuer, to coole it. Epithetes, a deceyuour. Epitheton, an addition, properly applyed to a thing for som notable qualitie, which it signi¦fieth, as Senum mare, the rough sea, Garrula pica, the chattering pye. Crudelis Nero, the cruelle Nero. Campi florigeri, the flourys∣shing fieldes. Epithymia, miae, concupiscence, desire. Epithymum,Ruelli{us}. is the floure of the harder tyme like vnto sauery, the toppes beyng thinne and light, and hauynge the stalkes like vnto hea∣res. The difference betweene that and the o∣ther floure of tyme, is, that this is greene of the colour of an herbe, the other is white. It groweth moste specially in Creta,Constant. nowe cal∣lyd Candy. It is hotte and dry in the myddell of the thyrde degree, and purgeth melancoly or blacke choler. Epitogum, ī, a garment worne vpon a gowne. Epitome, mes, a brydgement or breuiate. Epitritus, a foote of foure syllables, of whiche one differeth euer from the other thre.
Epithyrum, a meane to conserue olyues. Epitrope, procuration, wardshyp. Epityrum, a chese cake. Epothedice, good breakers of horses. Epos, epôdos, a kynd of verse or song, whiche contayneth thynges concernyng as well god as man also which hath the fyrst verse lengar than the seconde, as, Beatus ille qui procul negotijs Vt prisca gens mortalium. Epulae, arum, meates, also a bankette made to many persons. Epularis, are, belongynge to a feaste or banket. Epularis sermo, communication mete for a feast or banket. Epulatorius, a, um, apte to be eaten at a feaste or banket. Epulis, fleshe that groweth on the gummes a∣bout a mans teethe. Epulo, nis, plurali epulones, men boden to a great feast, or they whiche come vnboden, to eate the reuertion. Amonge the Gentiles they were callyd by the priestes, to eate that why∣che was lefte of the sacrifice. Epulor, ari, to eate at feastes or bankettes. Epulum, a great feast, whervnto all the people assembled, whyche amonge the olde Romay∣nes was made eyther to the honour of some of theyr goddis, or at the buryenge of some notable personage. It may be nowe taken for a churche feaste,Ci. pro L. Planco. or feast of a brotherhead, or dyner made at a buryal or interment. It hath ben somtyme vsed to be taken for a banket. ¶E ANTE Q. EQuappium, an herbe callid also Hippose∣linon, in englyshe Alysander. Equa, a mare. Equarius,Val. Max. a, um, pertaynynge to horses. Equarius medicus, a horse leache. Eques, a horseman contrary to a foteman. some tyme it is taken for a knyght: but I suppose that amonge the Romanes Equites, were ta∣ken for them, whiche we call gentylmen. Equester, stris, stre, pertaynyng to Eques, as, Equestris ordo, the state or degree of gētylmē Equestres copiae, the number or company of horsemen. Equestria, the placis assigned to gētilmē, where they sat to behold any solemn sightis or placis Equiceruus, a beast in the orient hauing hornes and a long mane to the shulders, and a beard vnder his chyn, and feete rounde like a hors, and is as great as an harte. Equidem, verily, truly. somtyme in a sentence it sygnifieth nothyng but to supply the numbre in a sentence. Equiferus,Plinius. a wylde horse. Equila,Varro. a lyttell mare. Equile, a stable for horses. Equimentū, the hire of a stalliō to seson a mare. Equinus, na, num, of a horse. Equio, iui, ire, whā a mare desireth to be sesoned. Equiria, runnyng with horses, a playe dedicate to Mars. Equisessor, a man on horsebacke. Equisetum, an herbe callyd horsetayle. Equiso, onis, a horsbreker, somtime a horskeper Equitabilis, le, able to be ryden. also a place, in whiche horses mought easily walke. Equitatio, a rydynge. Equitatus, an host of horsmen. also the act of ri∣dyng, somtyme the state or order of gētylmen. Equitium, the esquyry or company of the stable. Equitius, the proper name of a man, & surname of a family in Rome. Equito, aui, are, to ryde. Equuleus, a horsecolt. also a maner of torment made of burnyng plates, lyke to a horse, wher in men were tourmented. Equulus, a nagge or lyttell horse. Equus, a horse. Equus carpentarius, a cart hors, or charyotte horse. Equus citatus, a horse taken vp. ¶E ANTE R. ERadico,Plaut. in Epidi. care, to plucke vp by the rootes. Eradicare aures alterius, to pulle oone harde by the eares. Erado, rasi, ere, to scrape of, or out of a thyng. Eranthemum, a kynde of camomylle hauynge purple floures. Erasi,Pli. in pa neg. men put out of wages. Erasinus, the name of a ryuer. Erasistratus, a noble phisition of the house of A∣ristotle, who for healinge of kyng Antiochus receyued of Ptholomeus his son, a hunderde talentes, which to amoūt in our money .xiiii.M.CCC.lxxv.li. he was afore the incarnati∣on of Christ .CCxliii. yeres. Erasus, a, um, rased or scraped out. Erato, the name of one of the Muses. Eratosthenes, the name of a philosopher. Ercinia, a wonderfull great wod in Germany. Erciscere, to deuyde properly landes. Erciscunde familiae, of household to be diuyded or parted amonge dyuers heyres. Ercius, one of the names of Iupiter. Erebus, one of the ryuers of Hell. Erectiore aīo esse, to haue a more lusty corage. E regione, on the other side, on the contrary side E re mea, uel tua, for my profyt or thyne. E re nata, by occasion wherof. E re publica, for the profit of the publike weal. Erenibi, people in Arabia, which go naked. Eremodicium, defaut of apparance at the day whan one is bounde to appere, whych in the
digestes, tit de minor, infra. Et in cod. de iu∣dicijs,Budaeus in anno. is corruptly rad Hermodicium. Erêmus, a desert or solytary place. Eretum, a strete in the Sabines towne. Erga, towarde. Erga festum natalis Christi, a∣gaynst Christmasse. Ergasterium, a warkehouse. Ergastes, siue Ergasticus, a workeman. Ergastularius, the gayler or keper of the prison. Ergastulum, a house where men were compel∣lyd to work on stone or mettall. now it is takē for a prison, and somtyme for the prisoners. Ergastulus, a gayler, sommetyme it signifieth a labourer. Ergasylus, the proper name of a man. Ergatum, an engyne to drawe vp thynges of great poyse or weyght callyd a crane. Erginus, was a tyraunt, whiche Hercules sub∣dued and slewe. Ergo, therfore. sometyme it is spoken disday∣nousely. Fac ergo quod lubet, than do as the lyst. somtyme exhortyng. Ergo age, go to. som¦tyme it signifieth bicause Illius ergo, for his sake. Virtutis ergo, bycause of vertu. Erguminus, a man possessed with an yll spirite Eriba, the stepmother of Mercury. Erica, an herbe growyng in wodes, and is like to Maioram. Erîce, the sweete broome, whyche hath leaues lyke to rosemary, but that the leaues are som what pryckynge. Erichinus, a fyshe of the sea callyd a rochet. Ericthonius, the fyrst kyng of Athenes, which inuented a charyot. Eridanus, a ryuer in Italy, nowe callyd Padus in Italyon Po, nigh to the citie callid Patauiū Erigerō,Io. Agric. an herb callid also senecio, groūdswel Erigo, rexi, rigere, to set vp, to lyft vp. Erigere scalas ad moenia, to set vp ladders or a ladder to the walles of a towne. Erigere ad spem, to put in hope. Erigite animos, lyft vp your spirites. Erimantus, a dyuynour. Erinaceus, an hedgehogge or vrchyn. Erinnys, the name of one of the furies of helle. Eriphyle, the wyfe of Amphiaraus, and syster of Adrastus, whyche betrayed her husbande for a bracelet at the siege of Thebes. Eripio, pui, pere, to take away, to delyuer. som∣tyme to make haste. Eripe fugam, flee away in haste. Eripuisti à me librum, thou haste taken my boke from me. Eripuisti me á periculo, thou haste delyuered me from peryll. Eripuisti mihi pecuniam, thou haste taken my money from me. Eris, an herbe growynge in Egypt, and may be interpretate contention. Erîthace, the meate of bees while they do warke Erodius, a fowle, the greattest that flyeth, and ouercommeth and eateth the egle. Erogatio, distribution of thinges to other men, a lyberall gyunge. Erogito, tare, to desyre hartily. Erogo, aui, are, to employ or bestow on a thing. Eros, loue. Erotema, tis, a demaunde. Erotematicus, he that often demaundeth. Errabundus, moche wanderyng, or vacabunde. Erratica, herbes which do grow of them selfes without culture, ye may call them weedes. Erraticus, ca, cum, that crepeth here and there, as Vitis erratica, a creping vyne, that shoteth out in dyuers places. Erratica herba, a runnyng wede. Erratio, a goynge out of the way. Erratus,Terent. in Adelphis dus, Erratun, ti, n errour or synne. Erro, aui, are, to erre, to wander. Errrare de uerbis alicuius, to mysvnderstand the wordes that one speaketh. Errones, starters asyde, vagabundes. Error, properly where falsehode is affirmed or taken for trouthe, or trouthe for falsehod. som tyme ignorance, also deceypt. Erubesco, bui, bescere, to be ashamid, or to blush Eruca, an herbe callyd Rokat. also a worm cal∣lyd the canker worme, whyche commonly is vpon colewortes. Eructo, taui, tare, to belke or breake wynde out of the stomacke. Erudero, aui, are, to throwe out, or cary away rubbel, as morter, stones, & other like thinges of olde buyldyng decayed or pullyd downe. Erudio, iui, ire, to teache any arte of science. Eruditio, doctryne or teachynge. Eruditus, lernyd or taughte. Erugo, an vnkyndely moysture, wherby corne growynge is putrified. Eruila, a grayne callyd tares. Eruilia, some do suppose to be frenche beanes. Erumpo, rupi, rumpere, to braste out. somtyme to leape forthe. ❀Erumpet in neruum istaec fortitudo, is a prouerbe, whyche is dyuersely expound, for it may signify: This courage of thyn may bring the to a halter, or to sytte by the heeles: or it may signifie. This great strength or courage of thyne wyll come vnto nothyng. which pro∣uerbe is taken of archers, which oftentymes when they put forth most strength, they breke the strynge of theyr bowe, and the arrowe falleth downe at theyr fete, wherby the shote is lost, and cometh to nothynge. Erunco, caui, care, to wiede out. Eruo, ui, ere, to drawe out with force. Eruptio, is whan an hoste issueth hastily out of a campe or fortresse, & fallith on their enmies.
Eruum, a kynde of pulse, callyd also Orobos, there is of it bothe whyte and redde. Erymanthus,Plin. li. 4▪ a mountayne in Archady, where Hercules ouercamme a boore, that distroyed the fieldes. There are also a wodde and a ry∣uer of the same name. Eryngium, or Erynge, a kynde of thystels ha∣uynge longe leaues, a long stalk with a round knap full of long pryckes in the fourme of a starre. The rote wherof beinge condite or cō∣seruyd in hony with cynamome and cloues, comforteth nature, and styreth courage. It is callyd Yringium, & Centum capita. Erysipelas,Galen. an inflamation with rednes, wher∣with is a feuer or horrour in the body. Erythace, bees meate, whyle they labour. Erythacus, a byrde callyd Robyn redbreast. Erytheus, was a kyng of Athenes. Erythios, an herbe callyd redde beetes, as I do suppose. Erythraeum mare, the redde sea, so callyd of a kyng callyd Erythrus, which in englysh signi¦fieth redde. For in dede the water of that sea is of the colour of water, as dyuers greatte authors, and also experyence do affyrme. Eryx, the name of a mountayne in Cicyle, and of a city theron buylded, wherin was edified a temple to Venus, whereof Venus is callyd Erycina. Quid geminas Erycina meos sine fine do∣lores? O Venus, why doste thou contynual∣ly double my sorowes. ¶E ANTE S. ESalas,Epiphani{us} was a prophete in Ierusalem the tribe of Iuda,Hierony. in whom was such abun∣dance of the spirite of prophecye,Eusebius. that he prophecyed so moch of Christe, that he semed to be rather an Euangeliste, than a prophete. He was of suche holynesse, that in the tyme of kynge Ezechias, whan a citie was besie∣ged, he by his prayer optayned of god, that water sprange vp in lyttell quantitie, so that the people dyd not perishe for lacke of water, And whan the ennemyes sought euery where to asswage theyr thyrste, they moughte not fynde water. And whan the enmies had won the cytie, and besieged Seloum, as often as the Iewes came for water, the water ranne out of the earthe abundantly, and they toke water, but the straungers whan they came, coulde not fynde it. This holy man for his li∣bertie of speche in rebukyng the synne of the pryncis and people, and prophecienge of the vengeance of god vpon the coūtray and peo∣ple, was cut in two partis with a saw, & bu∣ried vnder an oke, but afterwarde he was trā∣slatid & laid by the sepulture of kīgis, he was before the incarnation of Christ .96. yeres. Esalon, is a byrde, which breaketh crowes eg∣ges, and her byrdes be distroied by the wolfe, and lykewise she kylleth the wolfes whelpes, yf she may come by them. Esau, the sonne of Isaac, and brother of Iacob. Esca, all maner of meate, as well for menne as beastes. Escarius, a, um, pertaynynge to meate. Escaria mensa, a table wherat men doo eate meate. Esculentus, ta, tum, any thyng to be eaten. Esculus, an oke bearynge akornes. Esito, aui, are, to eate. Esse in amicis, to be one of his frendes. Esseda,Cic. fam. epist. a wayne. Essedarius, a charyot man. Essedo nes, a people whiche do eate theyr fren∣des whan they be dead, and drynk in the scul∣les of theyr heades. Esseni, or Essei, people inhabytynge the inner∣most part of Iudea towarde the west,Plinius. 5. whiche do lyue without women,Solinus. & do contemne golde and syluer, and all other ryches, and do lyue by eatyng of dates. There resorteth continu∣ally vnto them by the ordināce of god men frō diuers partes, so that their company do neuer faile, but none is receiued, except the merit of his vertue and chastitie doth aduaunce hym. Esto, be it. Estrix, a woman rauenour or deuourer. Esuriales feriae, wake dayes. Esuries,Varro. hunger. Esurigo, idem. Esurio,Plaut{us} in persa. onis, an hungry felowe. Esurio, iui, ij, ire, to be a hungerde. ¶E ANTE T. ET, and, as wel. Te admirantur & ciues & hospites, as well thy countrey menne as straungers doo wonder at the. Some∣tyme it sygnyfyeth but, by an interrogation, somtyme that is to say. Annos natus iam se∣xaginta, & senex. Nowe thre score yeres old▪ that is to say, an olde man. Etenim, for also, semblably, surely. Etesiae, wyndes whiche do commonly blowe in sommer, about the Canycular dayes. Ethalia, the name of an yle in the sea callyd M Ligusticum, whiche is by Ieane. Ethanion, the name of a certayn vessell. Etheocles, the sonne of Oedipus and Iocasta his mother. Ethicus, morall. Ethmus, the myddell brydge of the nose. Ethnicus, a Gentyle. Ethologos, he whiche with voyce, gesture, and countenance expresseth the maners of men. Ethopela, an imitation of other mens maners.
Ethici pictores, paynters, whiche in pictures do lyuely set out the maners and affections of men. Etiam, also, more ouer, yea, ye forsothe. Etiamne, is it so? is that inoughe? Etiamnum, yet, vntyll than, vntyl that time. Etiamnunc, vntyll nowe. Etiamsi, althoughe. Etruria, a countrey in Italy called Tuscana. Etrusca lingua, the Tuscane tungue. Etrusci, Tuscanes. Etsi, albeit. Etymologia, true sayinge, or true exposition, or reason. E ANTE V. EVANDE, Mars daughter of Thebes the wyfe of Aesopus: and the wyfe of Capanei was also so called, whiche lo∣ued her husbande so feruently, that whan she harde he was taken at Thebes, she fell nere deade in a swowne, and after whan his fune¦rall was celebrate, she lepte in to the fyre. Euado, si, uadere, to escape, to passe, with daungier, to appiere, to clyme, to delyuer, to be, to come to. Euadere ad frugem bonam,Cice. prlio. to come to good thryfte, to thryue, to waxe honest. Euaenetus, a kynge of the Lacedemonians. Eualeo, lui, ère, to waxe hole or stronge. Eualesco, scere, to waxe very stronge. Eualuo, aui, are, to put out of the dores. Euan, an exclamation to the prayse of Bacchus and is as moche to saye, as Bone puer, O good chylde. Euander, the proper name of Carmentis son, and is interpretate a good man. He lefte his countrey Archadia, and came into Italy, and entrynge into the mouthe of Tiber, and ex∣pulsynge the inhabitauntes, rested in the hil Palatine, where he beganne to buylde the towne Palanteum. Euaneo, & Euanesco, scere, to vanyshe away. Euangelia, orum, pluraliter. were sacrifyces and solemne prayers made after good ty∣dynges. Euangelium, good tydinges. It is also a re∣warde gyuen for good tidinges. nowe it sy∣gnifieth the gospell. Euanidus, a, um, vnfruitfull. Euanno▪ are, to van corne or other lyke thing. Euapelus, a foole or ydeote. Euax,Plautus. an interiection of reioysynge. Euax iur∣gio uxorem tandem abegi. Heida, I haue yet at the laste dryuen my wyfe awaye with chidynge. Euboea, an yle in the Greeke sea, and the name of the citie situate in the same. Eubulus, the name of a story writer, and is in∣terpretate prudent. Eucarpia, a citie of Phrigia, where growe great plenty of very fayre grapes. Euceria, oportunitye. Eucharistia, good grace, a rendrynge of thāke. It is nowe taken for the sacrament of the aultar. Euchila, meates of good iuyce. Euclides, the name of a famous geometrician. Eudoxia, good renoume, or good fame. Eueho, uexi, uehere, to cary out. somtyme it signifieth to extoll or lyfte vp. Euemerus, the name of an olde story wryter. Euenire, to happen by chaunce. Euenit ex sententia, it came to passe as I, thou, or he wolde haue it. Euenit praeter sententiam, aut praeter spem, It hapned other wise than I, thou, or he thought, or trusted. Euenus, a ryuer descendynge from Thrace, and deuidynge Calydonie. Euenta, thynges whiche happen in conclusyō. Euentus, tus, hap. somtyme it is taken for the ende or conclusion of a thynge. Euentum praestare, to warrante all that whiche shall happen. Euerriator, he that hath goodes of the testa∣tour with condition, that if he perfourm not his laste wyll, or do disturbe it, he shall lose all that he hath. Euerriculum, a fyshynge net called a drag. Euerro, ri, rere, to swepe cleane. Euersio, distruction. Euersus, a, um, dystroyed. Euerto, ti, tere, to tourne vp set downe. Euestigio, by and by, at an instant. Euganei, people of Venece. Euganei montes, mountaynes in Italy by Padowe. Euge, well done. Euhoe,Plaut. in Men. a noyse, whiche they do make that are in great heuynes and waylynge. Euidens, entis, euydent, apparaunte. Euidenter, clerely. Euilla, a countrey in the oryent, about the whi∣che the ryuer Phison, whiche we call Gan∣ges, that commeth out of Paradyse, dothe runne. Euiratus, of womanly or chyldishe conditions. also he that lacketh his genitours. Euiresco, scere, to become grene. Euiro, aui, are, to take awaye a mannes mem∣bers of generation. Euiscero, aui, are, to bowell or drawe out the guttes of any thynge. Euiscus, called also Althea, an herbe named great malowe. Euito aui, are, to flye, to eschewe or beware.
Eulogium, a worde well spoken, a prayse, a benediction. Eumelus, the son of Admetus kyng of Thessa∣ly, gotten on Alcesta his wyfe. Eumenides, furies of hell. Eumolpus, a mans name of Athenes, whome Suidas wryteth to be the sonne of Museus the poete. Eumonides, a mannes name of Thebes. Eunomia,Budeus. a iuste constitution or ordinaunce of lawes. Also due obedience of the lawes. Eunomius, was a great heretike of the sect of Arrius, whervnto he added of his owne ma∣lyce, that the sonne was in euery thynge vn∣lyke to the father. And that the holy gost had no medlynge with the father nor the sonne. Moreouer he affyrmed, that all they whiche kepte the faythe that he taught, shulde be sa∣ued, hadde they committed neuer so great a synne, and continued in it. He was about the yere of our lorde .353. Eunucho, & Eunuchiso, to gelde men. Eunuchus, a man gelded. Euocati, souldiours, whiche for somme neces∣sitye be sodeinly called out of the fieldes vn∣to battayle. Euoco, aui, are, to call out, to call forthe, or call away. Euocare testes, to brynge forthe witnes. Euolo, lare, to fle awaye. Also to escape. It si∣gnifieth somtyme to take away by stelthe. Euolao, uere, to turne hyther and thyther. Euoluere se turba, to wynde hym selfe out of trouble. Euomo, mui, mere, to vomyte, to caste out. Euomere iram, to wreake anger. Euomere uirus, to spyt out his poyson. Eupalia, a towne in Locris, whiche some call Eupalion, and some Eupolyon. Eupatorium, an herbe called agrimony. Euphonia, good sounde. Euphorion, a poetes name of Calcidony, whō Gallus dyd translate. Euphragia, an herbe called eyebryght. Euphrasinum, an herbe called buglosse. Euphrates, one of the ryuers, that come out of Paradise, whiche passeth throughe the citie of Babylon. Ephrosine, bourage. Euphrosyna, the proper name of a woman. Al∣so the name of one of the thre graces called Charites. Eupilis, a lake in Fraunce Cisalpine. Euripides, the name of an excellente poete a∣monge the Grekes, whiche wrate tragedies most excellently. Euripus, a small cundite rysynge of a greatte heyght. Also a dyche made to inclose places to playe in, in the stede of hedges▪ some doo take it for a smalle ponde or stewe. Also an arme of the sea, or a narrowe passage be∣twene two places. Eurotonus, a northeast wynde. Europa, is the thyrde parte of the worlde, and is diuided from Asia with the great seas cal∣led Hellespontus, Propontis, & Bosphorus Thracius, & Pontus Euxinus. And hath the vttermoste boundes in the northeaste the ry∣uer called Tanais. And from Affrike it is dy∣uyded by the sea called Mare mediterraneū. It was also the name, of a fayre mayden doughter of Agenor king of Phoenicia, whō Iupyter transformynge hym selfe in to the fourme of a bull, dyd rauyshe, as poetes dyd wryte: which of some is interpreted, that Iu¦piter caryed her awaye by force in a shyp, in a decke or maste wherof was a baner or stre∣mer, wherin was paynted a bull. Eurotas, a ryuer that runneth before the town of Lacedemonia. Eurus, the caste wynde. Euryale, the doughter of kynge Minois. there was an other of that name, he doughter of Proetus kynge of Argiue. Euryalus, the name of oone of the prynces of Peloponnese. Vergil feyneth a Troian to be so called. Eurydame, was the wyfe of Leutichis, kynge of Spartans. Eurydice, the wyfe of Orpheus. Eurylochus, the kynge of Phlegia, which de∣stroyed Thebes, before Cadmus bulded it. Eurynomus, a dyuell whome as the aunciente Greekes dyd suppose eate and consumed the fleshe of deade men, leauyng the bones bare. whom they paynted in a terrible figure, ha∣uynge longe tethe or tuskes, syttynge in the skynne of a vulture, of colour betwene black and blewe. Eurypylus, one of the sonnes of Hercules that reigned in the yle Cous. Eurythmia, is a beaultye in the true furminge of the members, where the heyght accordeth with the bread, and the breade also with the length. fynally all thynge answerynge to his iuste proportion. Euterpe, one of the Muses. Eutheca, a store house. Euthymia, quietnes, surety of mynde, or har∣tes case. Eutices, was an heretike and abbot of a mo∣nastery in Constantinople, about the yere of our lorde .450 He affyrmed that Christe had but one onely nature, that is to saye, diuine, or of god, lyke as he was one persone. This heresy was condempned in the counsayle of Ephesine, and Eutices sent into exyle. Eutrapelia, gentylnes good maners.
Eutrapelus, gentyll and pleasaunt. Euxinus pontus, a parte of the sea, whiche de∣uideth Europa from Asia. E ANTE X. EX, signifieth of, or fro. Ex aduersum,rent. in el. euen agaynste it, on the other syde. Ex aduersum ei loco, agaynste that place. Ex aequo & bono, accordynge to equitye and reason. Ex aequo & bono facere, to do iustely or in∣differently. Ex animo, of good wyll, of a good courage. Ex ante diem Nonarum Iuniarum, the se∣uenth daye of Iune. Ex argumento, in token therof. Ex composito, as it was agreed. Ex dignitate tua, & ex repub. facis. Thou doest according to thyne aucthoritie, and for the weale of thy countrey. Ex dignitate nostra,. epist. accordynge to our e∣state or dignitie. Ex dignitate tribuere, to gyue accordynge to his estate. Ex equo pugnare, to fyght on horsbacke. Ex fide,ad At. fama. Summa erit haec, statues, ut ex fide fama, re{que} mea uidebitur This shall be the hole effecte, that thou doo, as it shall seme for myne honesty, accordyng to the trust that I put in the, and for my profyte. Ex insidijs, by treason. Ex more, accordynge to the custome. Ex superabundanti, more ouer. Exacerbesco, ere, to wax sharpe. Exactio, a pyllynge of the people. Exactor, a demaunder of money. some englysh it a Comtroller. I take it to be a gatherer of toll or tax. Exactus, ta, tum, passed, very diligent, exact, expelled, demaunded, perfectely done or performed. Exacuo, cuere, to make very sharpe, to steere. Exaedifico, aui, are, to buylde perfectly. also to dryue out of the house. Exaequo, quare, to make egall. Exaeuio, uire, to waxe gentyll or mylde. Exaggeratio, a heapynge to gether. Exagito, aui, are, to vex, to anger. Exagoga, rente, reuenewes. Exagogae, they whiche cary any thyng out of the house. Exalburno, nare, to take out the fat iuyce that is in some woode. Exalto, aui, are, to mount or lyft vp. sometime to prayse very moche. Exaluminati, oryent perles. Examen, minis, a swarme of bees. Also the ne∣dyll or tungue in balaunces and beames. Some tyme it signifieth a iuste examination or tryall. Exanima infantium, a company or sorte of chyldren. Examino, aui, are, to examine. Examo, mare, to loue well. Examurco, aui, are, to drawe oyle cleane from the mother. Examussim, iustely, by rule. Exanclo, aui, are, to drawe out cleane, to em∣ty. somtyme to suffer, to vanquishe, to make. Non potest hic sine tua opera exanclari cla∣uus, This nayle can not be made withoute thy helpe. Exanguis, gue, without bloude, tymerous, or fearefull. Exanimalis, without soule or lyfe. Ex animo est, it is as nature requireth. Ex animo facio, I do it with my good wyll, or as my mynde gyueth me. Ex animi sententia, accordynge to myne ap∣petite, or as I wolde desyre it. Ex animo illi faueo, I fauour hym with all my harte. Exanimatus, ta, tum, made aferde, or trou∣bled in mynde. sometyme it signifieth dead. Exanimo,Plautus. aui, are, to kyll. some tyme to make aferde. Prius{quam} intus redij exanimatus fui. Or euer I came in agayne I was made a∣ferde.Q. Curt. Multos exanimauit rigor insolitus ni∣uis. The vnaccustomed chyllyng of the snow depryued many of theyr lyues. Exanimus, ma, mum, & Exanimis, me, dead, put in feare. Exanio,Columel. aui, are, to put cleane away. Exanthema, a wheale or a poushe in a mans skynne. Exardeo, si, dere, to be vehemently inflamed. Exardesco, scere, to waxe hotte, or to be vehemente. Exareio, fieri, to be dryed vp. Exareo, rere, to be drye. Exaresco, sci, scere, to drye. Exarmo, aui, are, to make tame, properly to breake the tethe of wylde beastes. Also to vn¦arme, or to take harnes from a man. Exarmare actionē, to make the action faint or feble. Exarmare nauem, to take awaye the tacke∣lynge from a shyp. Exaro, aui, are, to care well. also to wryte. Exasceare, to polysshe, or make playe, as carpenters do after that they haue hewed. Exaspero, aui, are, to make sharpe. Also to make very angry. Ex asse, of the hole. Haeredem fecit ex asse. He made hym heyre of all the hole. Exauctorati, souldiours or seruauntes put out
of wages, or dismissed of theyr seruice. Exauctoratus, deposed or put out of office. Exauctoro, aui, are, to put out of wages. some¦tyme to disgrade a knyght, or other lyke. Exaudio, iui, ire, to here beneuolentely or perfectely. Exaugeo, gere, to increase moche. Exauspicaui ex uin culis, I haue had yll lucke sens I cam out of prison. Exbalisto, aui, are, to trumpe or deceyue. Ego hunc communem meum, at{que} nostrum om¦nium hostem exbalistabo lepide, I wil feat∣ly deceyue this myne ennemie, and all oures in commune. Excalceo, ceaui, are, to pull of hosen or shoes. Excalfacio, cere, to make very hote. Excandefacio, feci, facere, to chaufe or make angry, to make very hote. Excandescentia, vehement anger or wrathe. Excandesco, sci, scere, to be very angry. Excanto, aui, are, to charme. some tyme to shute out.Plautus. Excarnificatus, torne or rent with tourmentes Excarnifico, caui, care, to rente or cutte in pieces. Excedo, cessi, dere, to departe or go forth, to passe or excede. Excessit ex ephebis,Terent. in Andria. he passed boyes age he waxed a man. Excedere ex pueris, to be passed boyes age. Excedere officium, to do more than his duetye. Excellens, excellent, surmountinge. Excello, li, ere, to excell. Excelsitas animi, the valyantnes or heyght of courage. Excelsus, a, um, hyghe or great. Exceptio, an exception. Excepto, aui, are, to take or drawe to. Exceptor, oris, he that wryteth faste that whi¦che other men do speake. Excerebro, aui, are, to beate out the brayns of any thynge. Excerno, creui, cernere, to shyte, properlye it is to trye out the yll from the good. Excerpo, psi, pere, to gather here and there the chiefe of any thynge. Excetra, a serpente, of whom the heade beinge cut of, thre came vp for it. It was also cal∣led Hydra. Excidium, the sackynge of a towne or citie, or the vtter distruction therof. Excido, cidi, cidere, to fall out of a thynge, to destroye, also to cut out of a quary of stone. Excidit animo, it is out of my mynde. Excidere animo, to be forgotten. Excidere formula, to lose his action. Excidit numero ciuium, he is not of the nū∣ber of citezens. Excieo, ciui, cire, to moue or shake out. Excio, ciui, ire, to moue vehemently, or to call out, to waken. Excipio, excepi, excipere, to excepte, to take or receyue, to trye or inserche, to separate, to take by crafte, to gather, to hyde, to succede to resiste without any busynes. Also to take vnwares or sodeynly. Excipere furem,Plaut. i  to receyue a felone as an accessarye. Excipere notis, to wryte in cifer, or other compendiouse fourme. Excipula, a weele to take fishe. Excipuus, a, um, wherwith any thynge is taken. Exciso, aui, are, to crop, to teare, or to beate. Excisus, a, um, gelded. Excito, aui, are, to stere, procure, or incourage. Exclamo, aui, are, to cry out, to cal for aloude. Excludo, to shyt out, to delyuer, to hatche eg∣ges, to make to appiere. Excogitatio, inuention. Excogito, tare, to fynde or inuent by thinking Excolo, excolere, to garnyshe or decke. Also to haue in reuerence. Excomposito, in order appoynted. Exconsules, & Exquestores, rehersed in the Code of ciuile lawe do signifie (as Alciatus dothe affyrme) they whiche are or haue bene in the dignytie of Consul or Quaestor, but they dyd neuer minister in those offyces, or toke the aduauntages thervnto belongynge. Also they whose fathers were Consules or Questores whan they were borne. whiche as∣sertion is contrary vnto Petrus Crinitus, who in the .xv. boke De honesta disciplina, sayeth that they were called by those names after they had accomplyshed theyr ministra∣tion. whiche sentence Alciatus sharpelye re∣prueth. Dispunctionum. li. 4. Excoquo, quere, to boyle a thynge vntyll it be drye. Excorio, aui, are, to plucke of the skyn or hide of a beaste. Excors, excordis, a sole or a man harteles. Excreo, aui, are, to spyt out. Excrementa, thynges of digestion expulsed, moyste or drye,Gale defin wherof there ben .ix. ordure, fleume, choler, melancholy, vrine, sweat, fylthe of the nose, spyttle, mylke. Excresco, excreui, excrescere, to growe out, or to growe moche. Excretio, is the superfluitie of excrementes be¦inge in the body. Excretum, the refuse or offall of any thynge. Excruciabilis, le, worthy to be tourmented. Excrucio, are, to tourment. Excubiae, arum, watche as well by daye as by nyghte.
Excubitor, he that watcheth. Excubitus, watche. Excubo, aui, are, to watche, as they which in battayle, or in the garde of a prynces per∣son do. Excudo, excusi, excudere, to beate or stryke out, some tyme to fynde out with studye, to hatche.ergilius Vt primum silicis, scintillum excu∣dit Achates. as sone as Achates had stryken fyre of the flynte. Exculco, care, to treade out or wrynge out. Exculpo, psi, pere, to graue or intayle ymages, also to get any thynge by hearynge of one. Exculpere oculum, to thruste out ones eye. Excurio, aui, are, to put oute of companye or courte.. Apollonium ideo, excuriauit, quia nihil habeba: Therfore dyd he put Apolloni∣us out of the courte, bicause he had nothinge Excuro, rare, to dresse a thynge curiously. Excuratus uictus, meate curiously dressed. Excuratus homo, a galyarde felowe. Excurro, rere, to runne out of a place. Excursio, a digression in speakynge, a skyrmish in warres. Excursor, a currour. Excursus, sus, where one passeth his boundes. Excusabilis, le, that whiche maye be excused. Excusatius, more excused. Excusatoria epistola, a letter of excuse. Excuso, aui, are, to excuse. Excussores equi, gambaldynge horses. Excussorium cribrum, a rengynge syue. Also a course bulter. Excussus, a, um, shaken. Excutio, ssi, tere, to shake, to chose. Iuuentu∣tem ex tota Asia excussimus. we haue cho∣sen out all the yonge men that are in Asya. Excutere aliquem, to rob one, to shake one out of his clothes. Excutere iugum, to shake of the yoke. Excutere lachrymas alicui, to make the tea∣res come out of ones eyes. Excutere uomitum, to make one to spue. Excussi grandine, beaten with hayle stones. Excutiunt cerebrum tua dicta, thy wordes do trouble my brayne. Exdecimo, aui, are, to tythe out. Ex diametro opposita, so contrary the one to the other, that they maye neuer agre. Exdisposito, by an order, of a purpose. Exdorsuo, aui, are, to breake the backe bone. Execo, aui, are, to cut without. Execratio, cursynge. Execro, aui, are, to abhorre, to curse. Execror, idem. Exectus, gelded. Exedo, di, dere, to eate as a worme or sore doth, to eate vp. Exedra, a parlour, or other lyke place. Exegematicus, a fourme of speakynge, where the poete onely speaketh. Exegeticon, idem quod expositiuum, uel enar ratiuum, by the whiche one expoundeth or declareth a thynge. Exemplar, a sample, wherby we attempte to make a thynge lyke to its sometyme the oone is vsed for the other. Often tymes they bothe do signifie an example, where one thynge is compared with an other. Exemplum, an example to folowe, eschewe, or beware. Exemptilis, le, that whiche maye be taken a∣waye. or taken out. Exemptus, exempte, or priuileged. Exemptus est rebus humanis, he is deade. Exeo, exiui, exire, to go out, to eschewe, to braste out. In memoriam exire, to be in remembrance. Exit in fabulam, it is made a tale. Exit de potestate, he is not able to gouerne hym selfe: he is in ward, or vnder a gardain. Exentero, aui, are, to make a hole in a thinge. Exequiae, funeralles, the whiche are doone in the buryall of any persone. Exequior, aris, ari, to execute the funeralles. Exequor, eris, qui, to do or execute. sometime to declare or expresse. Exequi mortem, to dye. Exequi sermonem, to speake. Exerceo, cui, cere, to exercise. some tyme to dryue oute of the house, to set on warke, to vse. Exercere aetatem, to lyue. Exercere Bacchanal, to be drunke. Exercere discordias, & simultates, to haue varyaunce or contention. also to get or win. Exercere sumptus, to get theyr expenses. Excercere tellurem, to tyll well the grounde. Exercio, ciui, ire, to amende or repayre. Exercitatio, exerecyse, vse, or custome. Exercitatus, exercysed. Exercitium, exercyse or vse. Exercito, taui, tare, to exercyse. Exercitus, tus, an hoste of men of warre. Exercitus, ta, tum, exercised, vsed in labour, weryed, hardened. Exero, erui, erere, to go forthe, to drawe out, as a man wyll drawe out a sworde.Statius. Fulgen∣tem{que} exerit ensem, And he drewe oute his bryght sworde. also to lyfte vp. Exerere uincula, to stryke of his gyues, or to take out of pryson. Exerto, aui, are, to shewe forthe abrode. Exertus, ta, tum, shewed forthe. Exfio, I purge or clense. Exfodio, dere, to dyg out. Exgurgito, tare, to take or cast out of the cha∣nell or streame.
Exhaeredatus, disinherited. Exhaeredo, aui, are, to disherite. Exhaeresimus dies, the daye whiche maketh the leape yere. Exhalo, aui, are, to puffe out. Exaurio, iui, ire, to drawe out cleane, to make empty. Exhaurire labores, to spende labour. Exhebenum, a stone wherwith goldesmythes do polyshe golde. Exherbare, to plucke vp herbes or weedes. Exherbandus est locus,Columel. the place muste be weeded. Exherbatio, weedynge. Exhibeo, bui, bere, to proffer, to set abrode, for all men to beholde. Exhibere negotium, to put to busynes, or trouble. Exhibere rationes, to make accompte. Exhibere spectaculum, to make commune playes or triumphe. Exhillaro, rare, to comforte or reioyse. Exhomologesis, confession. Exhorreo, rui, rere, to feare horribly, or with tremblynge. Exibilo, aui, are, to whistel or hysse a man out of the place. Exifilare, idem. Exigo, exegi, exigere, to expell or shut out. also to requyre, to inqui, to do. Exigere aetatem,Plautus. to lyue. Exigi matrimonio, to be deuorced. Exigere nomina,Ci. in Ve. to compell men to paye theyr dettes. Exigere pecuniam, to demaunde money. Exigere suppliciū ab aliquo, to punisshe one. Exigere tempus, to passe forthe the tyme. Exigue, an aduerbe whiche signifieth verye lyttell. Exiguus, a, um, lyttell. Exilio, lij, iui, ire, to go out hastely, or to leape out. Exilis, le, sclender, small. Exilium, exye. Exilica causa, a matter agaynste them, whi∣che were in exyle. Eximie, excellently. Eximium, excellent, very great. Eximius, a, um, excellent. Eximo, exemi, mere, to take away, to except. Eximere actionē, to barre one of his action. Eximere ex aerarijs, where one hath his Qui etus est in the Escheker, or other lyke place, to discharge one vpon his accompte. Eximere ex reis, to acquite one of an offence. Eximere noxae,Ti. Liui{us} to release one of a trespasse commytted. Exin, from thensforthe. Exinde, idem quod exin, afterwarde, frome thensforthe. Exinantio, niui, ire, to emptye, to bryng to naughte. Exinsperato, vnloked for, whiche noo man hoped. Existimatio, supposell. sometyme reputation. Existimo, aui, are, to trowe or suppose, to de∣cerne or iudge. Existo, extiti, existere, to be, to appere, to be set vp, or aduaunced. Exitiabilis, le, deadly. Exitialis, le, deadely, or that causeth deathe or myschiefe. Exitium, deathe or myschiefe. Ex iure manu consertum uocare, was a fourm of contention for lande in this wyse: The de¦maundant before the iudge sayd in this wise vnto the tenaunte.Cice  Murea The lande whiche is in S. is myne. I saye it is myne by the lawe, I require the, trye it there with me accordynge to the lawe. The tenaunte answered: frome whense thou haste requyrred me to trye with the accordynge to the lawe,Ge.  thense I doo eft∣sones appeale. Than went they together to the place in demaunde, to thintent that they shulde bryng with them a tyrfe of that grūde to the iudge in the citie, and in his presence demaunde and answere as for the hole lande whiche was in contention. Exlex, he that lyueth without lawe, or out of lawe. Exloquor, qui, to speake as it is, to speake al. Exobsecro, crare, to make great desyre. Exoculatus, whose eyes be put out. Exoculo, lare, to put out ones eyes. Exoculasso,Plaut. i rude sere, idem. Exodia, were wanton toyes myxte with ver∣ses in a comedy or interlude. Exodium, a songe at the ende of a comedy or interlude. also the ende of a matter. Exolesco, leui, lescere, to leaue growynge. somtyme to growe myghtely. Exoletus, he that is passed growynge. also old or out of vse. It signifieth also a man chylde abused agaynste nature. Exoluo, ui, uere, to vnbynde, to paye all clere∣ly, to recompense or gyue in rewarde, to de∣lyuer. Suspitione exoluere, to delyuer from suspition. Exoluere religione, to discharge from vow or conscience. Exomida, a garment with our sleues, a taberd or chymere, Exonero, rare, to discharge or vnburden. Exopolis, he that dwelleth in the suburbes of a towne or citie. Exopto, tare, to desyre feruently, or wyshe. Exorabilis, he that is easy to be intreated in a matter.
Exorabulum, a crafty fourme of desyringe or askynge a thynge. Exorbeo,ut. in idi. bui, bere, to sucke vp. Exorbito, aui, are, to go out of the tracke or carte lose, or to go out of the ryghte way. Exorbo, in phi. bare, to make one that he can not se. Exorcismus, an adiuration or coniuringe. Exorciso, aui, are, to adiure or coniure. Exorcista, an adiourour or coniurour. Exordine, without ceassynge. Exordior, iris, iri, to begyn. Exordium, a beginninge. Exorior, iris, iri, to be borne, to appere out, to ryse as the sun doth, to inuade. Exorno, aui, are, to garnysshe or make fayre, to apparayle rychely, to ordeyne. somtyme to make foule, or out of apparayle. Exoro, aui, are, to induce or optayne by desire, to desyre hartely. Exorare ueniam, to aske pardon. Exors, exortis, out of felowshyp. Exos, without bones. Exosso, aui, are, to bone, or plucke out bones. Also to pull out the strynge of a lamprey. Exoticus, a, um, a straunger, that is come out of an other countrey, and dwelleth here. Expalleo,li. in epi laut. in aina. lui, lere, to be pale. Expallio, aui, are, to robbe one of his gar∣mentes. Expalpo, aui, are, to grope out. Expando, di, ere, to sprede out. Expapillo, aui, are, to make naked to the pappes. Expato, aui, are, to come abrode, or in to an open place. Expectatio,Donatus. desyre of thynges certayne and loked for. Expectus,Donatus. ta, tum, desyred. Expectati parentes,Terent. in idelphis were yll parentes, and worthy to be hated, as who saith, theyr death were dayely to be desyred. Expecto, aui, are, to tary or abyde, to obserue or take hede. Expecto quid uelis, I marke what thou wylte saye: or elles, I desyre to knowe what thou woldest. Also to hope. Ex∣pectate uenis: Thou comest euen as I wold haue the. Expectoro, aui, are, to put out of the breast or stomake. Expeculiatus, he that hath nothynge of his owne. Expedio, iui, ire, to delyuer, to spede, to ca∣ry out. Expedire manus, to holde vp the handes. Expedire rationes, to dispatche matters. Expedire rem, to declare the matter plainly Expedire se cura to discharge hym of care.rent. in orm. Expedi, tell on quickely. Expedibo,Pl. in epi. for expediam. Expedir, signifieth also, It is expedient or ne∣cessary, it is come to passe. Expeditum erat, it was expedient. Expeditio, a settynge forthe towarde battayl. Expeditus,Plaut. in Trucul. ta, tum, delyuered, dispatched. Expediti milites, souldiours in lyght harnes Expello, puli, pellere, to expell or put out. Expendo, di, ere, to ponder or waye, to consi∣der, to examine straightly, to paye truely, to spende money. Expendere scelus, to be punyshed iustely for his offence. Expensae, expenses, or dispenses. Expensum,Caeli. Ci. uel expensam, hath also an other proper signification. Mentio facta est de le∣gione ea, quam expensam tulit C. Caesari Pōpeius: Mention was made of the legyon which Pompey reckened to be at the charge of Caesar.Sceuola. Creditores suae expensum ferre debent: The creditours oughte to beare the losse, whiche is hapned by theyr negligence. Expensum ferre, to spende or lay out money. Expergiscere, Expergefacere, Expergificare, to wake a man out of his sleape. Expergiscor, eris, Expergifio, I am waked, or wake. Expergefactus, ta, tum, wakened. Expergitus, slepte inoughe, wakened by an other. Expergo, experexi, expergere, to waken. Experge te,Cicero awake. Expergere facias, idem. Experrectus, idem quod expergefactus. Experientia, experience. Experior, iris, iri, to attempte, or assaye, or proue. Expers, tis, without any parte, lackynge experience. Expers doloris, without peyne. Expers lucis, without lyghte. Expers mortis, neuer dyenge. Expertus, a man of experience. Expertus, ta, tum, attempted, taughte. Expersus, sa, sum, spronge with lycoure, or weate. Expes, without hope. Expetendus,Plaut. in persa. da, dum, worthy to be desyred. Expetesso, sere, to demaunde. Expetisso, sere, to desyre vehemently. Expeto, iui, tij, ere, to desyre moche, or coueit, to happen, to wyll. somtyme to take, to passe ouer.Plaut. in Ruden. Also to purchase. Mirum quin tuum ius meo periculo expetam. It is meruayle, but I shall purchase thy right with my great dā∣gier.Plaut. in Amph. It is also to redounde or turne. Nam deum non par uidetur facere, delictum su∣um, suam{que} culpam expetere in mortalem ut sinat: It is not sittinge for god to do, that his offence and faulte, shulde redounde to a
mortall person. Expetit tuam aetatem illud facere:Plaut. in penulo. Thyne age requireth to do it. Expetunt multa iniqua, many vnhappye thynges chaunceth. Expiamentum, satisfaction. Expilator,Asconius. a robber, whiche leaueth nothynge behynde hym. Expilo, aui, are, to rob, poll, or take by extor∣tion, or deceypte, to spoyle. Expio, aui, are, to pacify god with satisfacti∣on or prayer, whan we thynke he is displesed Expiare scelera.) Tua scelera dij immorta∣les in nostros milites expiauerūt:Cicero in pisonem. God hath punyshed our men of armes for thyn offēces. Expiro, aui, are, to dye. Expiscor, aris, ari, to seke for fyshe, to fysshe out, or serche priuily, to get or wyn. Tandem nescio quid ab eo expiscatur: Fynally I can not tell what he wynneth or getteth by hym, or what he trusteth to haue of hym. Explano, aui, are, to make playne. Explanto,Columel. tare, to pull vp that whiche is set. Explendesco,Sueton. in Tito. scere, to appere clerely. Expleo, eui, ere, to fyll, fulfyl. Also to saciate, to comforte. Exple animum curis,Terent. in Hecyra. put all care out of thy mynde. Explico, aui, are, to extende. also to vnfolde, to declare, to tell or shewe a thynge playnely. Explicat ensem,Ouidius. He draweth out his sword. Explicat & coenas unica mensa duas:Martialis. He maketh two suppers at oone table. Also to brynge to passe. Explica aestum meum,Cic in pis. put me out of this fan¦tasy or doubte. Explicata, broughte to passe. Explodo, osi, dere, to dryue out with noyse or rebukes, or clappynge of handes. Explorator, an espy, or priuie serchour. Exploratus,Cic. de se∣nectute. a, um, well knowen, or suerlye knowen. Exploratum est mihi, I knowe surely, I am sure. Exploratum habeo, idem. Exploro, aui, are, to bewayle with exclama∣tion, to serche out diligently, to proue with serchynge, to be aduised, to drye or exhauste, to espy. Explosus, sa, sum, conuicted or reiected. Expono, sui, nere, to expowne or declare, to set or brynge a thynge out of that, wherin it is, some tyme to caste out a thynge, to the in¦tente that it maye perysh. Also to spende, to sette forthe to be shewed. Exporto, tare, to beare or cary out. Exposco, poscere, to aske or desyre instantly. Expositi, chylderne caste out to be peryshed. Exposititij, the same. Expositio, an exposition or declaration of any thyng difficulte or harde to be vnderstande. Expostulatio, a quarell or complaynt. Expostulator, he that complayneth of wronge done by his frende. Expostulo, aui, are, to complayne, to make a quarell. also to wyll. Expostulare iniuriam, to complayne of wronge or displeasure, to hym that dothe wronge. Expresse dicere,Plin  episto▪ to speake properly and to the poynte. Exprimo, to presse or wrynge out, to expresse or declare playnely. Exprobratio, a reproche. Exprobro, aui, are, to imbrayde, to twie. also to laye in reproche. Expromitto, misi, mittere, to promyse or vn∣dertake for an other. Expromissor, he that promy or is suertye for an other. Expromo, prompsi, mere, to shewe forthe, or open. Exprompta memoria, a redy wyt. Expugno, aui, are, to wyn by assaulte or force. Expulso, aui, are, to meue a thyng with moch thrustynge, or to put awaye. Expulsor, & Expultrix, a putter awaye, man or woman. Expuncti, were souldiours discharged, or put out of wages. Expungo, punxi, pungere, to put awaye, or remoue. Expungor, geris, gi, to be cancelled, or put oute, or rased. it is also spoken of iudges, whan they be put oute of commission. It is also to quite. as, Munus munere expungi∣tur: One good turne is quyt with an other. Expuo, pui, puere, to spyt out. Expuere miseriam ex animo,Tere   to put mysery cleane out from the mynde, to forget mysery. Expurgo, are, to make all cleane. Expurgare se,Plaut. i Mili. to declare hym selfe innocente. of that whiche is layde vnto hym. Expurgationem habere, idem. Exputo, aui, are, to shrede or lop a tre, to cutte cleane awaye. Also to vnderstande perfectely to coniecte. Exputresco,Plaut. in curcul. scere, to rot. Exquiliae, a mountayn in Rome, where watch was kepte. Exquilinus mons, the same mountayne. Exquiro, exquisiui, exquirere, to serche out. Exquisite, & Exquisitim, exquisitly, with mo∣che study and diligence. Exquisitus, ta, tum, exquisite, moche serched for. Exquisito opus est, it must be loked for. Ex syngrapha agere, to do thynges extremely
or rigorously, as it were that one sued an no∣ther vpon an obligation scalyd. Exta, the inward, as the hart, the lyuer, the lū∣ges or lyghtes, and the splene. Extemplo, forthwith. Extemporaneus, a, um, sodayne. Extēporalis, & extēporanea oratio, an orati¦on or matter spoken or writen without study. Ex tempore, sodaynely, without studye, or for the tyme. Extendo,Plaut{us} in Bacch. di, dere, to extēd, to continu, to {pro}lōge Extentare uires, to thrust out strength in doing a thynge. Extenuo, aui, are, to minyshe, or make lyttell. Exter, ra, rum, straunge, commen farre of. Exterebro, aui, are, to perce through. also to in∣serche curyousely. Extergeo, tersi, tergere, to wype cleane. Extergo, idem. Exterminatus, banyshed. Extermino, aui, are, to driue out, or pul downe. Externo, aui, are, to make madde. Externus, na, num, whiche is not of that coun∣trey, a straunger. Extero, reri, terere, to beate out. also to whet or grynd. Exterreo, ui, ere, to put in feare. Exterus, ra, rum, that which is not of this coū∣trey or place. Extillo, aui, are, to droppe out. Extimeo, mere, to haue great feare. Extimesco, extimui, extimescere, to drede moch Extimus, a, um, the outwardmost, or laste. Extinguo, xi, gere, to put out, proprely as fyre, whiche may be eftsones kyndled. somtyme it signifieth to slea or dystroy, somtime to make a distinction or diuersitie betwene thyngis. Extirpo, are, to plucke vp by the rootes. Extispices, sothesayers by lookynge in the in∣wardes of beastes. Extispiciū, & extispicina, the craft of sothsayēg. Exto, titi, tare, to be, to remayn, to be apparant. Extollo, extuli, extollere, to aduant or prayse, also to lyft vp, to prolonge, to magnify. Extollere liberos,Plaut. in lostel. to bryng vp chyldren. Extorqueo, torsi, ere, to finde out the trouth by tormētes, to take away by force, or pluck away. Extorris, is he that is made to voyd, or is dry∣uen out of his countrey. also a vagabunde. Extortus, constrayned by tourmentes. Extra, without, excepte. Extra iocum, in ernest. Extra precium,Cicero. aboue any pryce. Extraho,ueto. in Claud. traxi, trahere, to drawe out. Extrahere diem, to put of a matter from day to day.Caesar. Extrahere certamen,Ti. Liui{us} to deferre battayle. Extrahere iudicium,aulus iu∣ cons. ad hib. to deferre iugement. Extraneus haeres, he that is not the very heire. Extrarius, he that is not of the same howse or kynrede. Extra telorum iactum, out of arowe shotte, out of gunshotte, signifyeth out of daunger, or in saulfegarde. Extremus, a, , somtyme it signifieth the begin¦nyng, somtyme the ende, sometyme arst. Extrema linea, is spoken where a man wold signify a thyng to be last, and after all other. Extremis digitis attingere, to touch with the fynger toppes, is spoken, where is signified, that a mā hath vneth touched or felt a thyng. Extrico, aui, are, to delyuer, to shake of anye thynge that letteth. Extrinsecus, outwarde. Ex tripode, whan we speake of thynges, which are very true, & not to be doubted, as it were spoken of goddis owne mouthe. Extro, aui, are, to go out. Extrorsum, from without. Extrudo, si, dere, to thraste out. Extruo, si, truere, to ordeyn, to buyld or set vp. Extubero, aui, are, to swell moche. Extundo, tudi, tundere, to fynde out with mo∣che labour. Exturbo, aui, are, to put awaye, or to put out or from a thynge by vyolence. Exubero, aui, are, to abounde. Exuccum, without iuyce. Exudo, aui, are, to sende forth lycour. Exuerrae, the sweepynges of a house. Exuerto, tere, to preuente. Exugo, exugi, gere, & exugeo, to sucke out. Exul, exulis, a banyshed man. Exulcero, aui, are, to make a soore. Exulcerare animum, to displease the mynde greuousely. Exuinculis causam dicere, to plede in warde. Exulo, aui, are, to be banished, to liue in exyle. Exultabundus, reioycyng very moche. Exulto, aui, are, to reioyce excedyngly, to brag, to leape out. Exundo, aui, are, to ouerflowe. Exungo, xi, gere, to annoynte. Exungulo, are, to cut of ones nayles. Exuo, ui, uere, to put of, to dyspoile, or vncloth, to depryue. Exue mentem, put away that mynde. Exupero, aui, are, to excede. Exurdo, aui, are, to make deaffe. Exurgo, gere, to aryse vp. Exumae, clothing also hides or skyns of beastis. Exuiae serpentis, an adders skyn. Exybaphon, a salate of herbes. ¶E ANTE Z. EZechiel,Epiphani{us} de {pro}phet. a prophete of the countrey callyd Sarera in Syria, of the line of bishops. This manne hadde meruayllous reue∣lations and vysyons, and by hym god shewed many greatte myracles. For in the tyme of a
great scarsitie, he by prayer optayned of god abundance of fyshe, whereby the people were sufficiently refresshed. Also whan the people was oppressed with their enemies, he stoode agaynst them, & made them so abasshyd with myracles & wōderful sightes, that they being sore aferd, dyd cesse of theyr enterprise. More ouer being in the countrey of Caldey, he told to the people many thinges that were done in the temple of Ierusalem. He also brought the people out of Caldey vnto Hierusalem, to the reproche of the infidels. He being in Babylon iudged the tribe of Dan & Gad, for that they had wickedly done against the lorde, in perse∣cuting them which beleued in the law. And he shewed vnto them a terrible token, for adders deuoured their children and al theyr cattel. At the last he was slayn at Babylon by the duke of the people, bicause he reproued him of ido∣latrye. And he was buried in the fielde callyd Maur, in the monumēt of Sem & Arphaxad progenitours of Abraham. he prophecyed of the returne of the children of Israel, and also of the commyng of Christ. He lyued afore the incarnation of our lord .DC .xvii. yeres. ¶F ANTE A. FABA, a beane. Eritius Cordus, a physytyon of our tyme, affirmeth that the pulse, whiche we call benes, is not Faba, wher of Dioscorides, Celsus, Galenus, and Plinius do wryte. For that wher of they write, is rounde & lesse than our bean, wherof .xviii. made a dramme, where ours be so great, that some one beane weyeth a dram, and is somewhat longe and flatte. ❀Faba cudetur in me, The beane shall be knocked on me, sygnifieng the peyn or blame shall lyght on me. Faba inuersa, som do suppose it to be that herb, whiche is callid Lunaria, or Solanum somni∣ficum, reade in Solano. Faba Pythagorica, sygnifyeth the counselle of Pythagoras the phylosopher, where he byd∣deth that we shoulde not eate beanes, saying: Faba abstineto, whiche is by dyuers men di∣uersely expounde. Some declare it for a bare precepte, sayenge: That forasmoche as bea∣nes doo make the syght dull, and causeth ylle dreames, as Plynye sayth, or as Tully affir∣meth,In diuina∣tione. prouoketh inflation or moche wynde in the bodye, therfore Pythagoras forbare the eatynge of theym. But Aristoxenus affir∣meth, that Pythagoras dyd not eate more of any kynde of pulse than of beanes, bycause they easily loused the bely. Empedocles saith that Pythagoras commaunded to absteyne frō beanes, as it were from the act of lechery, because Cyamos signifieth not only a bean, but also the genitours. Plutarchus expoun∣dethe this precepte of Pythagoras in this fourme, as yf he hadds sayd: Absteyn from the ministration of a commun weale, bycause it is full of perylles, nor may not be without eyther rebuke or damage. In the olde tyme the consente of people was declared by bea∣nes, whiche yet dothe remayne at Venyce, as well in election of offycers, as in iudgemen∣tes and sentences, for by white beanes thyn∣ges are affyrmed, by blacke beanes they are denyed or refusyd. Fabacia, a beane ke. Fabalia, the refuse or of falle of beanes. Fabariae calendae, the calendes of Iune. Fabarius, ria, rium, pertaynyng to beanes. Fabella, a shorte tale. Faber,Plin. li. 32. a fyshe of the Spanyshe sea, also callyd Zeus,Colu. 3. and is in fygure rounde, and of a rus∣set colour.Oppi lib. 1. It is lyke to be that fysshe, whiche is callyd a lympe, and of late yeres, was foūd in the sea about Deuonshyre. Faber, fabri, almooste euerye craftes man that warketh with the hande. Faber lignarius, a carpentar. Faber ferrarius, a smythe. Auri faber, a goldesmyth. Faber, bra, brum, pertaynyng to a smythe. Faberrime, cunnyngly, very craftyly, or well. Fabianus, the proper name of a man. Fabitor, in the auncient tyme was taken for a maynteynour. Fabius, was the surname of a noble howse of the Romaynes, whyche had fyrste that name of sowyng or sellynge of beanes, as Cicero of the grayne callyd Cicer, Piso of peasyn, Porcius of swine. Of this name were diuers valyant capitaynes and wyse counsaylours, of whom one was callyd Fabius Maximus, who in his youthe exercysed bothe eloquence and prowesse, and therefore he after became as well in armes as in counsayle, a capytain mooste excellente, and subdowynge manye countrayes vnto the Romaynes, he tryum∣phed fyue tymes. Beynge made Dyctatour agaynste Annyball, he so temperyd prudence with manhoode or prowesse, that by des tractyng of battayle and traynynge Anniball frome place to place, and at sundrye aduaun∣tages skyrmyfshynge with hym, he minyshed his puyssaunce, and preserued the publyke weale of his countrey, where Minutius the Consule, who enuyenge hym, in fyghtynge
with Anniball, was vanquyshed by the Car∣thaginenses, and had ben slayne with all his armye, had not Fabius come vnto rescuse, who delyuered his aduersary & all his trayn, & caused Annibal for to retyre, who sayd than to his host, Did I not tel you before, that this clowde wolde at the laste brynge vs a storme? callynge Fabius a cloude, bycause of his ho∣ueryng. This man was afore the incarnati∣on of Christ .CC. yeres and somewhat more. Fabius Quintilianus, rede after in Quintilian{us}. Fabrè,Plautus. workmanly, craftily. Vt apologum fa∣cit? quam fabre? See what a defence be ma∣keth? how craftily he handleth it? Fabrefacio, fabrefeci, fabrefacere, to warke cū∣nyngly, to buylde. Fabrica, a warkehouse, or forge, sometyme the frame or warke. Fabrico, aui, care, & Fabricor, cari, to make, to inuent. Fabrilis, le, belongyng to handy craftes. Fabritius, a noble Romane, who being wonder∣full poore, not withstandyng refused a greate summe of money, sent to him by king Pirrh{us} touching with his handes all his membres, & saying vnto the kynges messangers, As long as he mought rule al that, whych he touched, he coulde lacke nothynge. Fabula, a fable or tale. sometyme an interlude. It is also a lyttell beane. Fabula palliata, a comedy of Greke. Fabula togata, a comedy of latyne. Fabulae, spoken in an answere without any o∣ther worde ioyned therwith, amounteth to as moche, as if one wold say, fables, trifles, fan∣tasies, iapes. somtime is added merae, as Merae fabulae, very trifles or fātasies, or as one wold say, that which ye say is not to be regarded. Fabulator, a teller of fables. Fabulinus, was supposed of the Paynims to be a god, whiche hadde the rule ouer chylderne, whan they began to speake. Fabulor, aris, ari, to talke. Fabulosus, moche talked of. Facesso, cessi, cessere, to go about to do a thing. sometyme to go away. Facesse hinc, get the hens. Facessit tibi negotiū, he putteth the to busy∣nes. Facetè, meryly, pleasantly. Facetiae, mery wordis or dedes without dishone∣sty. Facetus, ta, tum, merily, plesantly. Facies, a face somtyme the proportion of al the body, a vysage, a similitude. Facile, lyghtly or easily, without let or doubt. Facilis, le, lyght, easy, good to be entreated. Facilitas, easynes, gentylnes. Facinorosus, full of myschiefe. Facinus, an acte or dede. sometyme an yll dede. Facio, feci, facere, to do, to be occupied, to make, also to sacrifice, to profyte. Facere aucupium auribus,Plaut. in milit. to harken as a spye. Aequi boui facere, to take in good parte, or in good worthe. Animos alicui facere, to gyue one courage. Facere carnificinam,Pla. in cap to execute the offyce of an hangeman, in hangynge, beheaddynge, or quar∣tryng of men. Facere castra, to sette a campe. Facere certiorem,Cic. Cato. to ascertayne or aduertyse one by letter or messager. Facere compendium,Plautus. to make short, to abrige, to go a shorte waye to worke, to doo a thynge the sooner. Facere compotem, to gyue to one that thynge whiche he desyreth. Facere coniecturam, to coniect or deme, to di∣uine or esteme. Facere contum eliam,Plaut{us} in Asina. to do dyspleasure. Facere conuiciam, to rebuke or put to rebuke. Capitale facere, to make it felony or death. Cautiorem facere, to make hym wyser. Concilia facere, to gather togither for counsai∣lyng one with an other. Facere copiam, to gyue leaue. Facere copiam alicuius, to lette hym take his pleasure of one. Facere copiam argenti, to lende money. Gopiam cosilij sur facere,Terent. in Phor. to here theym that come for counsayle, and to gyue it to them. Facere consuetudinem,Cic. fami. epist. 13. to be famylyar. Deditionem facere, to yelde vp, as men van∣quyshed in warres. Facere delitias,Plaut. in penulo. to speake for pleasure or in mockage. Fac esse,Ci. in phi. admyt it be so, or admyt the case. Fac te esse qui sum, ymagyne that thou were, as I am. Eruptionem facere, to issue out vpon enmies. Facere fidem, to make one to beleue hym. Facere frugem,Plaut. in paenu. to brynge gaynes. Facere funus, to minyster funeralles. Gradum facere, to steppe forthe, or steppe vp, to wynne somewhat. Gratiam facere, to thanke, to release or acquite one of a thyng,Plaut. in curcul. to gyue leaue, to pardon. Facere gratum, to do plesure to one, or to wyn a mans fauour.Terent. in Eunucho. Facere grauidam, to gette with chylde. Facere iacturam, to haue a great losse. Impetū facere, to run on a thing with al force. Facere inditium, to tel or to gyue warnyng of a thynge that he knoweth. Facere ingenium suum, to do accordyng to his wytte or nature. Facere insidias, to ly in await to do harm to one Facere iter, to go or ryde. Iusta alicui facere, to performe all obsequies be longyng to deade men.
Lenocinium facere, to kepe bawdry. Facere lucrum, to wynne. Facere ludos,Terent. in Phorm. to mocke or skorne. Facere magni, to esteme moche. Modum facere, to kepe measure. Moram facere, to tarye. Morem facere, to brynge vp a custome. Multam facere, to forfayte a peyne. Mutuum facere, to do one for an other. Facere mecum, to make for my purpose. Facere naufragium, to runne to wrecke. Facere negotium, to do one dyspleasure. Facere nequiter, to do shrewdly. Facere nomina, to get detters, as by lendyng as they doo nowe by exchaunge, and in shyf∣tes, properly callyd vsury, and in bargaynes of corne, cattall, and other lyke, or in let∣tynge of landes. Obnoxium sibi aliquem facere, to bynde one to be at his commaundement. Facere ocium,Plaut. in milite. to gyue to one leysure. Facere palam, to tell a thyng abrode. Facere periculum, to proue, to assay. Facere pluris, to set more by. Facere propitium, to make hym thyne, or his good lorde or mayster. Facere quaestum, to gayne. Facere reducem,Plaut{us} in capt. to brynge one agayne. Facere rem, to get profit or gayn by a thing. Facere reum,Terent. in Adelphis Quin til. to accuse or sue one in a crymy∣nall cause. Facere risum, to laugh. Facere scelus, to do a myscheuous dede. Facere sementem,Cice de o¦ratore. to sowe grayne. Facere stipēdia, to be in wagis in the warres. Facere sumptum, to bestowe coste. Facere superbum,Pli. de ui∣ris illustr. to slee one. Facere technam, to play a crafty pageane. Facere terrorem, to put in feare. Facere transacta omnia, to brynge all thyn∣ges to a poynte. Facere turbas,Plaut. in Bacch. to make busynes. Facere uadimonium, to lay in gage or surety Facere uerba aut uerbum, to speake. Facere uindemiam, to gather grapes to make wyne.Plaut. in Epidi. Facere uitium, to falle in decay. Facere uoluptatem,Cic. in To to satisfy myne, thyne, or his pleasure or appetyte. Faciam ut te plurimum amem, I wolle loue the moche. Fecisse hoc oportuit, nedes muste ye haue done it. Facio plurimi, I make moche of. Floccifacio, I set not a strawe by it. Factio, a dyuysion of people in sundry opiniōs. also an acte. Factionum principes, the heades of rebelly∣on or sedytion. Factitius, a, um, made or counterfayte. Factito, aui, are, to do oftentymes. Factor, oris, a maker, a factour. Factum, a dede. Factum at{que} transactum, done and broughte to good passe. Factura, the warke. Facturio, iui, ij, ire, to desyre to do. Factus, tus, the deede. Facula, a lynke, or lyttell torche. Facularij, torche bearers. Facultas, tatis, power to do or speake. somtyme ryches, also facultie. Facundia, eloquence, or swete & pleasant speche Facundus, a, um, eloquent, well spoken. Faecatum uinū, wine that drinketh of the lyes. Faeciniae uuae, grapes, wherof commeth wyne, hauynge moche lyes. Faeculentum, full of lyes or dregges. Faecutinus, na, num, pertaynynyng to dragges. Faex, faecis, lyes or dregges, or groundes of any kynde of lycour. Faecem ciuitatis, men do call them whiche in a citie do lyue beastly and vyciousely. Faginus, na, num, of a beeche. Fagineus, idem. Fagus, gi, a beeche tree. Fagutal, was a chapell in Rome, wherin was a beeche, whiche was consecrate vnto Iupiter. Fala, a towre made of tymber. Falcarius, he that fyghteth with a byll. Falcarius, ia, um, pertaynyng to a byll. Falcatus, ta, tum, hoked, also any thyng wher∣on be hookes or other lyke thynge. Falcè, falsely. Falcicula, a lyttell hooke or bylle. Falcidia lex, wherby legacies were defalcate or cut of, where the fourth parte of the goodes were not assigned to the heyres. Falcifer, he that beareth a byll or hooke. Falcimonia, deceyptes. Falcito,Plaut. in Bacch. aui, are, to cut with a byll or hooke. Falco, aui, are, to cut of or mowe. Falco, onis, a hawke. Falernus, a cuntrey in Cāpania, now in the re∣alme of Naples, wherin grew the best wines of Italy, callid Falernum, mountflascon. Falisci, peple in Italy, also a kind of puddinges Fallaciae, deceyptfull wordes, or generally de∣ceiptes or crafty handlyng. Fallaciter, deceytfully. Fallax, acis, a person deceytfull. Fallo, fefelli, fallere, to deceyue, also to be hyd. Fallonia, is a trespas wherby the tenāt forsay∣teth to the lord, that which he holdith of him. Falsarius, a forger of writynges. Falsidicus, & Falsiloquus, a lyer, or false re∣porter. Falsifico, aui, are, to forge deedes, wrytynges, or seales.
Falsitas, tatis, falsehoode. Falso, aui, are, to forge. Falsus, a, um, false. Falsum habere, to deceyue. Falurica,Vergilius were weapons whiche were throwen out of toures. Falx, falcis, a hooke or bylle. Fama, fame, or renoume, somtyme opinion. Famam disipare, to sowe a brute or noyse in the people. Famelicosus, often hungry. Famelicus, ca, cum, hungrye. Famen, faminis, speche. Fameo, mui, ere, to be hungry. Fames, hunger. Famiger, geris, a spreader of fame. Famigerabilis, famouse. Famigerator, a teller of newes or tydynges, or a spreader of fame. Famigerulus, idem. Famigeratus, ta, tum, renoumed, famed. Famigero, to publyshe or dyuulgate a thynge. Familia, a houshold, a family, or kynred. It also signifieth all the seruantes of the house. Familiaria, were places of buryall for men and theyr seruantes. Familiaris, are, {per}taining to houshold. also fami∣liar. Familiaritas, custome, familiaritie. Familiariter, familiarly. Faminor, the olde writers vsed for Dicito, say, speake, telle on. Famulanter, humbly, seruysably. Famularius, a, um, seruisable. Famulatio, householde, or meyny. Famulatus, & famulitium, seruyce. Famulor, ari, to serue. Famulus, & famula, a householde seruant. Fanaticus, madde. In the olde tyme before that Christe expellyd the dyuell, whan that dyuels were honored in ydols, certayn persons aswel men as women, were possessed with diuelles, whiche lad them where they lysted, agaynste theyr proper wylles, & caused them to speake wonderfull thynges, some also sodaynly, and oftentymes dydde tell what shoulde happen. wherfore they were thoughte to be inspired with goddis, those persons were callyd Fana tici, Sometyme Fanaticus, is taken for the ke¦per of the temple or chappel, where the dyuell gaue answeres. Fanenses, & Fanestres, people of a town callid Fana, in a cuntrey in Italy callyd Marca An¦chonitana, in latyn Picenum. Fanesii, people in the north partes of the world whose cares be so great, that with them they keuer all theyr bodyes. Fannia lex, was an honourable and pertuous lawe made by Augustus, the noble emperour the consent of al states of the cite inforcing it all dignities approuinge it, the people gladly receiuyng it: by the which lawe the superflu¦ous charges in feastis, wherby the citie aboū¦ded in vices, were prohibited, and such tempe¦rance therin prouided, that in the great plays of the Romains, and those which were callyd Saturnales, they shulde not excede a hundred brasse pens, which were .x. Roman grotes cal¦lyd Denarij, in our money now currāt, amoū∣tith to .v .s .vi .d .ob. halfe ferthynge, and the fourth part of a farthyng. Tenne other dayes xxx. brasse pens, which is .xixd .ob .q. and a ly∣tel more. Euery other day .x. brason pens, whi¦che was .vi .d .ob. and the .vii. part of an halfe penye. This lawe was made .xxii. yeres after the lawe callyd Lex orchia, wherby was de∣termyned the number of them, whiche shulde dyne or soupe togither, and that the doores shuld be open while they sat, that mē mought perceyue if any moo came than the lawe had appoynted. But this lawe was not soo good as the other, for than moughte none come to theyr frendes, but they whiche were inuyted or boden. Fanum, a temple, where the dyuell gaue aun∣sweres out of an ydoll. Far, farris, somtime signifieth al maner of corn. albeit amonge auncient phisitions it is taken for meale, as well of wheate as of barly, pro∣perlye where the corne is beaten in a morter. Se Columellam li. 9. Farcilis, le, any thynge stuffed. Farcimen, minis, a puddyng, or a sausage. Farcio, ciui, cire, to stuffe. also to franke or fede, to be fat, to cramme. Farfara, an herbe callyd also Tussilago, & Vn∣gula equina, & Bechion. Farfarus, or Farfar, a ryuer of Syrie. Faris, fatus sum fari, to speake. Farraca, meates made of meale. Farrago, ginis, a mixture of sundrye kindes of grayn and corne. It is that whiche in Cam∣bridge shyre is callyd Bolymonge, wherin is barly, otes, and peasyn or vetches. Somtyme it is taken for a mixture of thinges good and bad togyther. Farratia, amonge the olde Romaynes were the ceremonies of matrimony.Cael. li. 15. Farreatio, a sacryfice made with cakes. Farreum, a wheaten cake. Farrinarium, a place where wheate or meale is kepte. Farrinus, na, num, & Farrinaceus, a, um, per∣taynyng to wheate. Fartile, stuffyng, or that wherwith any foule is franked or crammyd. Fartim, full stuffed or crammyd. Fartores, & Fartrices, puddyng makers. Fartum, a puddynge.
Fariura, the crafte or maner of stuffynge or crammynge. Fas, leful before god, stādīg with the law of god Fascelis, a name of Diana. Fasces, roddes bounden togither, & an axe in the myddell, whiche were borne before the chiefe officers of Rome, in declaring their authorite wherof some had syx, and some mo. Fascia, a swathell, or swathyng bande, or other lyke thyng. sometyme any gyrdell. Fasciculus, a grype, or thing boūden togyther, it is also a nosegay, or any thing knyt togither, which may be borne in a mans hande. Fascino, aui, are, to transforme by enchantmēt, or to bewytche. Fascinus, & Fascinum, & Fascinatio, an inchāt¦ment to transforme or disfigure any thynge. Which so inchanted, is of the cōmon people callyd, taken, or forspoken, or forloked. Fasciola, a lyttell bande. Fascior, fasciari, to swathe a chylde. Fascis, is a burdeyne or knytche of wod, or any other thynge. Fascis sagittanī, is takē for a sheffe of arowes Faselus, a bote. Fasti, were bokes, wherin were contayned cer∣tayne ceremonies and causes of sundry thyn∣ges amonge the Romayns, concernyng theyr feastes and solempnities, whiche were longe kept from the knowledge of the comon people, vntyll they at the last were deuulgate by one Caius Flauius. Fasti dies, were certain days, wherin the offi∣cer of Rome callid Praetor, mought speke on∣ly these thre wordes, Do, dico, addico. It may be now vsyd for holy dayes. Fastidio, iui, ire, to contemne with dysdayne, to abhorre, or haue in abhomination. Fastidiosus, a, um, full of dysdayne. Fastiditus, ta, tum, hated, abhorrid, abhomined. Fastidium, hatred, {pro}perly where one abhorreth the sight or presence of any thyng. Fastigio, aui, are, to make or raise vp in height. Fastigiū, an altitude, or the top or height of any thing. somtime it signifieth the state of a person in any dignitie. sometime the ende of a thyng. Fastigium imponere, is spoken whan a man wyl signify a matter or thyng to be finyshed & brought to a poynt. Fastus, tus, hautenes of mynde, pryde. Fatalis, le, pertaynyng to desteny, fatall, some∣tyme mortall. Fateor, fassus sum, fateri, to affirme, to confesse. Fathisco, scere, to gape wyde, as the erth doth in a great drythe. Fatidicus, fatidica, a reeder or teller of destenies or a sothesayer. Fatifer, Fatifera, a brynger of doth or pestilence. Fatigo, aui, are, to make wery, to trouble moch to strike, to stire or prouoke, to restrain or let Fatiloqua, a wytche. Fatiloquus, fatiloqua, a southsayer. Fatisco, fatiscere, to be wery. Fator, aris, ari, to speake moche. Fatua dea, the name of the erth, so callid bicause chyldern whan they be borne, do not vtter any voyce, vntyll they haue touched the erth. Fatuitas, atis, folyshenes. Fatum, the ordinance & disposition of almighty god, desteny, goddis prouidēce, somtime deth. Fatuus, an ideot, that lackith natural knowlege Fatuus,Iuuenalis. a, um, vnsauery, without any maner of tast. Fauentia, a citie in Italy. Fauentinus, a man of Fauentia. Faueo, ui, fauere, to fauour. Fauere linguis, to kepe sylence. Fauilla, a sparke of fyre. Fauistae, certain cellars in the court of the Capi¦tol at Rome, where were wont to be laide the baners of the Romayns, whyche were borne in warres. Also therin was put the treasure of money, which the pristes of the temples in the Capitole dyd employe about thynges ne∣cessary to their superstytion and ceremonies. Fauna, the goddesse callyd also Ops, opis. Fauni, were named of the poetes rusticall god∣dis & monstruous beastes lyke vnto men. Faunus, an auncient kyng of the olde Latynes, some of Picus. Fauonius, one of the wyndes, callyd the south∣west wynde. Fauoniana, peares whiche are redde. Fauorabilis,Gellius. fauoured of many. Faustè,Plautus. prosperousely. Faustus, a, um, prosperous. Faustulus, a shepeherde whiche was the noury∣sher of Romulus and Remus. Fauulus, a lyttell hony combe. Fauus, a hony combe. Faux, faucis, a cheke. Fauces, strayte passages. Fax, facis, a torche, a candel, or other lyke thing, whiche brennyng gyueth lyght. Faxim, let me doo. Faxint, lette theym doo. Faxo, I wyll or shall doo. ¶F ANTE E. FEbricito, aui, are, to be sycke in a feuer. Febricula, a lyttell or easy feuer. Febriculosus, feuerous, or hauynge ofte the feuer. Febrifuga, an herbe cōmonly callid Feuerfew. somme thynke that it is one of the kyndes of the herbe, whyche is callyd of olde wryters Parthenson. Febrilis, le, pertaynyng to a feuer.
Febrio, iui, ire, to haue a feuer. Febris, a feuer, whiche is an vnnaturall heate kyndled at the hart, brought frō thens by the veines & arteries, by meane of the spirite and veynes into al the body, sensibly hurtyng his natural operatiō. Therof be thre kyndes, one is callid Hectica, which is in the spiritis and principall humors, and also in the firme par∣tes of the body,Hectica. and is eyther by him self pro∣ceding of continuall anger, labour, famyn, ex∣cesse of lechery, inflaming and drieng the mē∣bers, or folowing other syckenesses. somtyme vnyuersall, specially in a body cholerike or me lancolike, orels particular, as whā it hapneth after the wekenes of the .v. principal mēbers, the hart, the lunges, the lyuer, the stomake, or the raynes. An other is named Ephemera, or Diaria,Epheme∣ra which is an inflamatiō of the spiritis vital, natural, or animal. In the vital spirites it hapnith by wrath inflaming, by thought or sorow restraining, by hot aire chaufing, or by cold aire stoppyng. In the naturall spirites it hapneth by hunger or thirst inflaming, by hot meates or hot drinkes inflaming, by repletiō oppressing, by superfluous laske or stopping, by accustomed exercise neglectīg or forbering of customable baines, sweat or bloud lettyng. In the spirites animal it hapneth by to moch being alone, or without recreation, by moche watch or lack ofslepe, by to moch & oft slepīg by a catarre or reume, by vntemperat heate or coldnes of the aire, or by to moch labour & ex∣ercise. An other feuer is callid Humoralis, & also Putrida, which is in the humors, the mat¦ter wherof is eyther blud,Putrida. coler, fleume, or me¦lancoly. This feuer hapneth either by feruēt∣nes of the son or aire, or by lack of accustomid exercise, baines, or euacuation, by dayly sur∣fets, inordinate walking or meuing after mea¦les, drinking moch wine after meate, hot con∣fectiōs or spices after meales. Of superfluite of meates & drinkes cometh repletion, which stoppeth the pores of the skyn, & the holes of the litle vains callid Capillares, bicause they be as smal as heares. And that stopping or opi¦lation letteth the vēting out of naturall heat, by reason wherof the heate of the natural hu∣mor, nature not being able to rule it, boileth & sendeth vp fumes, which which whirling about com¦meth to the hart, and inflameth it, & passynge forthwith by the veines and arteries, into all the bodye, maketh the feuer called Putrida, whiche accordynge to the humour wherin it raigneth, it taketh a sundry name, as ye shall reade in their seuerall places. Februa, sacrifices & ceremonies for purging of soules Februarius, the month of February. Februatus, ta, tum, that which was so purged. Februo, aui, are, to purge soules by sacrifyce or prayer. Februum, in the Sabines tungue is callyd pur¦gyng or clensyng. Februus, is also Pluto callyd god of Helle. Fecialis, was a certayne officer of armes, whi∣che denounced warre or peace, where as was hostilitic or cause of batayle, whiche may be nowe taken for an ambassadour, sent for su∣che a purpose, or for an heralde. Fel, fellis, the gaule, sometyme it is taken for griefe of the mynde. Felicones, men which ar necessary for nothing. it hath an other signification, whiche for the abominablenes therof I wyl not write, sens it is more expedient that it remain vnknowē. Felis, a cat. somtime it signifieth a weasyll. Fello, aui, are, to sucke. Felsina, a citie in Italy nowe callyd Bononia. Feltrum, a towne in Italye in the countray cal∣lyd Marchia Taruisina. Femen, minis, plu. femina, the inner part of the thigh. somtime the priuy mēber of a woman. Feminalia, the keuering of the thighes. Femoralia, breeches. Femur, oris, the thigh, som englishe it the hāme Fenestella, the {pro}per name of a story writer, whi¦ch florished in the later days of Tiberi{us} Cesar. Fenestra, a wīdow. somtime an entry into a thīg Fenestratus,Plautus. ta, tum, open. Nulla est fenestrati∣or domus, No house is more open. Fenestrenula, a lyttell wyndowe. Ferabites, wylde. Ferae, ferarum, feras, wylde beastes. Feralia, & feralis dies, a day dedicat to the īter¦nal goddis, to pacify thē toward the soules de∣{per}tid. They were also sacrifices done for soules. Feralia amicula, wyndyng shetes, & suche like thinges, wherin deade bodies were lapped. Feralia officia, solemnities about dead bodies Feralis, le, deadly or mortall. lamentable. Feralis cultus, mournyng apparayle. Feralis dies, the day of buryenge. Ferax, acis, fruitefull, or that bryngeth forthe moche fruite. Ferbeo, bui, ere, to boyl or sethe. Ferculū, a dysh with meat. also a pagent caried or borne to be loked on. sometime it signifieth the stage or place, wherin the pagent is set. Ferè, almost, nygh, welnygh. Ferentarij. men armed in lyght harneys, redye to come quyckely to succours, whiche foughte with dartes, swordes, or slynges. Ferentinum, a citie, whiche after Pliny stādeth in the first region of Italy. Ferentum, a citie in Apulia. Feretrius, a name of Iupiter, gyuē by Romul{us}. Feretrum, a beere wheron dead bodies ar born. somtyme a thyng, wheron images, relykes, or iewelles are borne. Feretrus, a mountayn, of whiche the howse of
Pherctre was named. Feriae, feriarum, ferias, holy dayes, dayes va∣cant from labour. Feriae esuriales, fastynge dayes. Ferinus, na, num, wylde as a beaste, or pertay∣nynge to wylde beastes. Feriatus, vnoccupied, or ydle. Ferio, percussi, ferire, to stryke, to stablyshe. to knocke. Ferire foedus, to make a league or truse. Ferire iugulum, to slea, to hyt the marke. Ferior, aris, ari, to ceasse from labour. Feritas, tatis, a naturall wyldnes, crueltie. Fermè, almoste, weluygh. Fermentescere, to increase or waxe. Fermento, aui, are, to meddle or myxe well to∣gyther, as leuen with dowe. also to leauen. Fero, fers, tuli, ferre, to beare, to suffer, to leade or bryng, to saye, to name, to desire, to brynge forth, to haue, to bost, to take away, to receiue to optayne,Cice. ad Q fratrē. to accustome. Balbum uero qui est istius rei, quemadmodū scribis adiutor, in o∣culis fero, Balbus, who as thou wrytest, is the helper of all this matter, I loue hartily. Ferre acceptū, to receyue, to write that whi∣che is receyued, to knowledge to haue recey∣ued a benefyt or profyte. Ferre ad coelum, to extoll or prayse a man ex∣cedyngly▪ Ferre in astra idem. Ferre ad populū, to aske aduise of the people Aegre ferrè, to take it greuousely. Aequo animo ferre, to take paciently. Ferre annos aut uetustatem, to endure long, to beare well his aege. It is proprely spoken of wyne or other lyke thynge. Ferre conditionem, to proffer, to put to the choyse, to offer a condition. Ferre expensum, to spend or lay out, to write expenses, to bestowe. Ferre fortunam, to vse fortune. Ita fama ferebat, so the bruite went. Fortiter ferre, to abyde or sustayn cōstantly. Fructūex aliquo ferre, to take profit by one. Ferre gradum, to go forth. Ferre grauiter, to take a thing greuousely. Fero tibi iudicem, I am content to be iudged by suche one, let hym be iudge betwene vs, or iudge the matter betwene vs. Fer manum, gyue me thy hande. Fer me, supporte me, helpe me. Ferre moleste, to take a thynge displesantly. Ferre obscure aliquid, to dyssemble a thyng. Odium ferre, to be hated. Ferre osculum, to kysse. Ferre palam, to speake it abrode, to publishe a thyng secret. Partum ferre, to be with chylde. Pedem ferre, to go forth. poetice. Personam alienā ferre, to play an other mās part. Praemium ferre, to be rewarded. Pretium ferre idem. Primas ferre, to haue the pryce or preemy∣nence,Alc. to be chiefe. Priuilegium de aliquo ferre,Zas. whan the prince or magistrate requireth the people to inacre a thyng in preiudyce of any particular person. Ferre quaestionem, whā the magistrates de∣syreth the people to ordayne iudges extraor∣dynary in a priuate case. Si ira res fert, yf nede be. Repulsam ferre, to be refused or put backe in a requeste. Responsum ferre, to haue an answere. Ferre sententiam, to shewe his opinion. Sese obuiam ferre, to go and mete with him. Signa ferre, to marche against enmyes with baner dysplayed. Ferre sitim, to suffer thyrste. Suffragium ferre, to gyue voyce in election, or other consent. Ferre suppetias, to succour. Sus{que} de{que} fero, I care not, I passe not on it. Ventrem ferre, to be with chylde. Ferri, to be borne or caryed Ferocio, ciui, cij, cire, to be fierse. Ferocitas, tatis, fiersenesse. Ferociter, fiersely. Feronia, the goddesse of woddes. also a citye vnder the hyll Soractes. Ferox, ferocis, fierse, hardy. Ferramentarij, they whiche warke in yron. Ferramentum, an instrument or toole of yron. Ferraria, an yron myne. Ferrarius, a, um, {per}taynyng to yron, or of yron. Ferratus, ta, tum, hauing yron on it, or closed to yron. Ferreus, a, um, of yron. Ferro, aui, are, to set yron on. Ferrugineus, a, um, grene colour. Ferrûgo, ginis, rust of yron, a murray colour, some callyth it a sadde blewe. Ferrum, yron, sometyme weapon. Ferrumen, minis, glewe, syse, sowder, or suche other byndyng or cleauynge matter. Ferrumino, aui, are, to ioyne or myxe togyther, properly mettals, to soulder. Fertilis, le, fertile or fruitefull. Fertum, a cake made of sundry grains & spices Feruefacio, to cause to boyle. Ferueo, es, is, iui, êre, to be chauffed or het. Feruidus, a, um, feruent diligent. Ferula, a rod or stycke, wherwith childrens hā∣des be striken in scholes, callid a palmer. also a cane or reede. also a pot stycke. Ferularius, a, um, lyke a cane or rede. Feruor, oris, heate. Ferus, a, um, wylde, cruell, terrible. Fescenini, verses sunge at weddynges. Fessus, a, um, weary. Festina lente, spede the slowly, is spoken wher a
man wyll signifie a thyng to be done, neyther to hastely nor to slowely, but in a conuensent temperance. Se my boke of the Gouernour, in the chapiter of maturitie. Festinanter, hastely, quickely, or swyftly. Festinatio, haste or spede. Festinatò, spedely, in haste. Festino, aui, are, to make haste, to be troubled Festinus, a, um, hasty, quicke. Festiuitas, tatis, myrthe. Festiuo, aui, are, to kepe holy daye. Festiuus, a, um, mery, prouokynge myrth, ioy∣ous. also perteynynge to holy dayes. Festra, a lyttell wycket. Festuca, the yonge tender sprynge of a tree or herbe. also a moote. Festus, ta, tum, feasteful or solemne. Fesulae, an olde citie in Tuscane not far frome Florence. ¶F ANTE I. FIBER, a beaste called a beuer, whiche is also called Castor, whose stones are vsed in medicine, and are called Casto∣reum. It is also a kynde of waspes. Fibrae, are the extreame partes of the lyuer, the harte, or the lungues, or of other thynges, wherin is any diuision, they maye be called lappes, brymmes. Also smalle thynges lyke heares, hangynge at the rootes of herbes and trees. Fibula, a buckle of a gyrdell, or other thynge lyke therto, a tache, a claspe. Fibulo, aui, are, to buckle, to ioyne together tymber, or bourdes, or other lyke thynges. Ficaria, a fyg tree. Ficarius, an eater of fygges. Ficetor, oris, he that loueth or gadereth fygges. Ficedula, a byrde whiche fedeth on fygges and grapes. Ficetum, a place where fyg trees do growe. Ficolea, a staffe or stake of fyg tree. Ficosus, full of sores in the heade or berde. Fictilis, fictile, erthen, or made of erthe. Fictitius, a, um, fayned, or dissembled, or counterfayte. Fictor, oris, a counterfaytor, a fayner. Fictus, ta, tum, made to the simylytude of a thynge. Ficulnea, a fyg tree. Ficulneus, a, um, & Ficulnus, a, um, of a fygge tre. Ficus, in the masculinè gender is a fyg: in the feminine gender is a fygge tree. It is also a sore or scab, growyng in the places of a man∣nes body, where that heare is. Fideicommissarius, a feoffee of trust. Fideicommissum, a feoffement of truste. Fideicommitto, misi, tere, to infeoffe. Fideiussor, oris, a suerty, or borowe. Fidelia, an erthen vessell seruynge to dyuers purposes. Fidelis, faythfull, loyall, trusty, or sure. Fidelitas, tatis, faythfulnes, loyalty, or suerty. Fidena, a towne in Italy. Fidenna, confidence. Fides, fidei, belefe, trust, promyse. It is a sta∣blenes and truthe in promyses and couenan∣tes. It is also a faythfull execution of thyn∣ges committed or promysed. Fides labefactata, credence loste. Fides publica, the credence or promyse of all the people and rulars. Fide bona, without fraude or couyne. Fide nulla es, thou kepest no promyse. Fide sua, mea, tua, iubere, to vndertake. Fidem accipere, to be beleued. Fidem astringere, to promyse faythfully. Fidem deserere, to breake promyse. Fidem fallere, idem, Fidem habere, to beleue. Fidem labefactare, to lose credence. Fidem liberare, to kepe promyse. Fidem mutare, to be inconstant of promyse. Fides, fidis. the strynge of any instrument. some tyme a harpe or lute. Fidîcen, cinis, a harpe: it maye be called a fid¦dell. It is also he that playeth on that in∣strumente. Fidîcina, a woman harper or luter. Fidicula, a rebecke or gytterne. Fidículae, plural. a tourment made with cor∣des or strynges, wherwith men be tourmen∣ted, to make them to cōfesse treson or felony. Fido, fisus sum, fidere, to truste. Fidutia, truste, confidence: sometyme hope. It is properly that truste, wherin any thynge is delyuered by one man to an other, to thyn∣tente that he shall redelyuer it, whan he is required. Fiduciaria mancipatio, aut uenditio, a srate in landes made vpon confidence of truste: a mortgage. Fiduciaria possessio, a possession to an other mannes vse, or vpon condition. Fidus, a, um, trusty. Figlina, ae, a potters warkehouse, or potters crafte. Figlina plural. vessell of erthe. Figmentum, the warke or warkemanshyppe. some tyme a lye, or a thynge fayned. Figo,Columel. xi, figere, to thrust in. sometyme it sig∣nifieth to dryue or fasten in the erthe.Ver. Geor lib. 4. Palum humi fixit, he droue the stake in to the groūd Also to plant or set.Iuuenal. Ipse feraces Figat humo plantas. He woll set in the grounde the fruit
full plantes. sometyme to stryke. Figere ceruos, to hunt dere with bowes. Figere legem, to set an acte of parlyamente or ordinaunce on a wall or post, to the intent that all men maye rede it. Figulus, a potter. Figura, a fygure. Figuro, aui, are, to make or fourme. Filiaster, a son in lawe by an other wyfe, or an other husbande. Filictum, a ferny grounde. Filicula, ferne growynge on trees, ralled in a greke name Polypodion. Filistim, a countrey that is nowe called Ascalō. Filius, a sonne. Filia, a doughter. Filij, some tyme dothe conteyne bothe sonnes and doughters. Filins terrae, a newe begunne gentyll man, or a gentyll man of the fyrste head. Filix, licis, ferne. Filo, aui, are, to spyn or make threde. Filum, a threde. somtyme the proportion of a thynge. Fimbria, the sayrtes or hem of a garment. Fimetum, a dunge hyll. Fimum, a boxe, out of the whiche men do cast dyse. Fimus, dunge of cattell. Finalis, le, fynall or laste. Findo, fidi, findere, to cut, to cleaue. Fingo, xi, gere, to make, to fourme, to fayne, to counterfayt. Finge animo, suppose or put the case. Fingere mores alicui, to fascion oone in maners. Vultum fingere, to make countenaunce not to be mery or sorowefull, where in dede he is mery or sorowefull. Finio, iui, ire, to fynyshe or ende. Finis, the ende, the conclusion. also entente or purpose, whervnto any other thynge hath re¦lation, or is made or done for. Fines plural the borders or marches of a cun∣traye, boundes. Finitimus, ma, mum, nyghe ioynynge. Finitio, a definition. Finitor, oris, a setter of boundes. Fio, fieri, to be, to be estemed. Nulla adeo ex re istuc fit, nisi ex nimio otio. This cometh of nothynge but of to moche ydelnes. Ex ea re quid fiat, uide. Take hede what foloweth therof. Fit obuiam casu ei multitudini. C. Cu¦rio. By chaunce C. Curio mette with that rout. Illud fit saepe, that oftentimes hapneth. Firmamentum, a suerty or stabylitie. also that which is called the ground of a cause or mat∣ter Also the fyrmament or heauen visible. Firme, assuredly, stedfastly, constantely, faste. Firmitas, & Firmitudo, stablenes, constance, surenes. Firmiter, idem quod firme. Firmo, aui, are, to assure, to make stable or sure, to affyrme. Aluum firmare, to bynde the bealy, or make one costyfe. Firmare corpora cibo, to strength their bo∣dyes with meate. Dotem firmare, to be at a poynte what he wyl giue in mariage with his doughter. Firmare fidem, to performe or make assu∣rance of promyse. Also to accorde to a thinge. Firmatae cibo uires, he is made strong with good meates. Firmus, stable, constant, wel fortified, assured. Fiscalis, le, perteyning to the kynges treasure. Fiscella, chese fate. Also it is a thynge made with withes and halters, wherwith cattell was so moselled, that they mought not byte any yonge syrynges or buddes of trees. Fiscellus, a lyttell hyll in Italy, not far from Tiber. Fisci, Fiscinae fiscellae, great sachels, wherein were put great summes of money. Fiscina, a great basket. Fiscum, the kynges Escheker. Fiscus, reuenewes of the kynges crowne. It si∣gnifieth sometime a panyar of wykars. some tyme a bag, wherinto money is put. Fissibilis, le, that maye be cut or slyt. Fissilis, le, idem. Fisura, a cut or clefte. Fistuca, an instrument, wherwith pyles of wood be dryuen into the ground, and stones in pauynge, called a rammer. Fistucatio, pylynge or pauynge. Fistula, a pype, as well to conuey water, as an instrument of musick. also the wesel or throte boll. Also a tappe or faucet. also a dysease or sore, whiche cometh of a putrified humour, and continually runneth. Fistulosus, full of holes lyke a spunge. Fistulosa terra, erth barrayne of nature, whi¦che serueth neyther to tyllage nor pasture. Fit, in happeneth. Fitiges, be beastes of Aethiope, of a brown co∣lour, hauynge two pappes in the brest as mā¦hath: nor they be so wylde, but they maye be tamed: nor so tame, but they woll hurt those that greue them. Fixus, a, um, fyrme, faste. ¶F ANTE L. FLABELLVM, an instrument, wher∣with in the heate of sommer wynde is fanned, and blowen into mennes vysa∣ges, to coole them.
Flabrum, a blowynge or puffe of wynde. Flacceo, & Flaccesco, ere, to wydder, or wax feeble, or to haue no force. Flaccidus, a, um, wythered, feeble, weake, hangynge downewarde, lollyng, or flagging. Flaccum, bruised. Flaces, the ortes of olyues. Flagella, the smalle braunches or twygges of trees or vynes. Somtime scourges or flayles, wherwith corne is threshed. Flagello, aui, are, to scurge, to thresh, to blame or rebuke. Flagitiosus, an vngratious persone, full of myschiefe. Flagitium, an yll or myscheuous dede, worthy rebuke and punishment. Flagitium ruum est, it is by thyne vngracy∣ousnes, or throughe thy defaulte. Nam id no bis tam flagitium est, quàm illa non facere uobis quae modo dixti, For that is in vs as great a faulte, as it is in you that you haue not done it. Flagitio ardêre, to be conuict of a gret offence. Flagito, aui, are, to aske importunately and with clamour. Flagratores, they whiche for money do suffer them selues to be beaten. Flagrio, onis, a slaue. Flagro, aui, are, to burne with a flame of fire. sometyme to loue or desyre inordinatly. Flagrare infamia, to be very yll reported of. Flagrare inopia, to be in great necessitie or pouertie. Flagrare inuidia, to be excedyngly hated. Flamatica, a tree burned with lyghtenyuge. Flamea, clothe or sylke of yelowe colour. Flamen, the great priest amonge the Gentiles. Flamen, hoc, the blaste in an instrument. Flameum, a veyle or typpet of yelowe, whiche womenne dyd weare, whan they were newe maryed. Flaminea, a countrey in Italy, called also Ae∣milia, and commonlye Romandiola, in the whiche are the cities of Bononia, Fauentia, Imola, Rauenna, & Ariminum. Flaminea uia, an hyghe waye from the citie of Rome vnto the citie of Ariminum. Flaminia, the house of the archeprieste. Flaminica, the wyfe of the great prieste called Flamen, whiche moughte not be deuorsed from her husbande for any cause. Fest Also a wed¦dynge gowne, whiche was of yelowe colour. Flaminium, was an attyre that wedded wo∣men dyd weare on theyr heades. Flamma, a flame. sometyme peryll. Flamefcere, to be inflamed. Flammeus, a, um, burnynge or flamynge. Flammigena, comen of fyre. Flammiuomus, sendynge out flames. Flandria, a countrey called Flaunders. Flaueo, & Flauesco, aui, are, to be lyke golde, or of yelowe colour. Flauus, a, um, yelow, or of the colour of gold. Flebilis, le, lamentable. Flecto, & Flexo, xi, tere, to bowe, to bende, to leade. Flegma, fleume. Flegmen,Festus. is where with moche goynge the bloude issueth out of the tooes. Fleo, eui, ere, to wepe. Fletus, wepynge. Flexanima oratio, an oration or speche, wher∣by a mannes mynde is styred to pitie, reioy∣synge, or other lyke affection. Flexilis, le, any thynge that maye be easely bowed or bente. Flexipes, pedis, he that hath croked feete. Flexura, the bowynge. Fligo, xi, ctum, to tourmente or vexe. Flo, aui, are, to blowe. also to make coyne of mettall. Flocci, flockes of the sheryng of wolen clothes. Floccifacio, & Floccipendo, I set nought by. Flocculi, fyne flockes. Floces, lyes or drastes of wyne. Floralis, florales ludi, playes made in the ho∣nour of Flora an harlot, whiche gaue a great treasure vnto the people of Rome. Floreo, rui, rure, & Florido, aui, are, to flo∣ryshe or to haue floures. Also to excell. some∣tyme to prosper. Floresco, sci, scere, to burgen, or to brynge forthe floures. Floreus, a, um, made of floures. Floridus, da, dum, garnyshed with floures. sometyme freshe or lusty. Floriger, eris, bearynge floures. Florulentus, ta, tum, full of floures. Flos, floris, a floure. Fluctio, onis, the reme or pose. Fluctiuagus, wandrynge in ryuers or waters. Fluctuatim, troublensly, doubfully. Fluctuatio animi, whan a man doubteth what is beste to do. Fluctuatio stomachi, whan the meate swym∣meth in the stomacke. Fluctuo, aui, are, to waue vp and downe as the water dothe: by trāslation it signifieth to thynke nowe one thynge now an other. Fluctuosus, a, um, troublous, vnquiet, stormy. Fluctus, a floudde, a waue of water styred by tempest. Fluentia, the auntient name of the citie called Florence in Italy. Fluentum, a ryuer or streame. Fluescere, to be resolued or relented. Fluidus, da, dum, flowyng, telente, resolued. Fluito, aui, are, to flowe continually. somtime.
to flyt or swymme. Flumen, inis, a greate ryuer. some tyme the course of the water. Flumineus, a, um, of the ryuer. Fluminosus, a, um, full of ryuers. Fluo, xi, ere, to runne as water dothe, to pro∣cede or come of a thynge, or to growe. Fluor, Fluxus, & Fluctio, a flyx. Flustrum, the full tyde in the sea, or other wa∣ter, whiche ebbeth and floweth. Fluta, a fyshe, lyke to an eele, called a lamprey. Fluuialis, le, of the ryuer. Fluuiatilis, le, that whiche is in the ryuer. Fluuius, a floud or ryuer. Fluxura, lechery. Fluxus, a, um, vnstable, or that whiche dureth but a whyle, large, or wyde, relented, leche∣rous and wanton. ¶F ANTE O. FOCALE, a kerchefe, whiche men and women dyd weare about theyr cheekes. Focaneus, a braunche of a vyne, whiche groweth out of a twyst or forked bough. Focaria, a fyre pan. Focatius, breade baken on the hot roles. Focillo, aui, are, to nouryshe or comforte. Focula, nourishinge meates. Foculo, aui, are, to nouryshe or sustayne. Foculus, a lyttell pan, wherin fyre is borne. Focus, a pan or herthe, wherin fyer is. some∣tyme it signifieth fyre. somtyme priuate hou∣ses or tenementes. Fodico, aui, are, to perse or prycke, or bore. Fodina, a place where a thynge is dygged. Fodio, fodi, fodere, to delue. Foecunditas, plenty. Foecundo, aui, are, to make fruytefull, or plentuouse. Foecundus, a, um, plentuous, or frutfull. Foede, villaynously, shamfully. Foederatus, a confederate. Foedero, aui, are, to confederate. Foedifragus, a breaker of leage or truse, or entercourse. Foedo, aui, are, to polute or defyle, to destroy, to rent or teare, to consume. Foedus, da, dum, foule, defourmed, cursed, or cruell. Foedus, deris, a treaty of peace, or league be∣twene pryns, n enterse, a trisse after battayle: somtyme it signifieth a lawe made in the tyme of warres. Foelicitas, tatis, felicitie, prosperitie, abundāce of all thynges. Foelicito, aui, are, to make prospeous. Foelix, licis, hauynge abundance of al thinges prosperouse, commodiouse, or profytable. Foemina, a woman. Also in beastes the female. Foenarius, a, um, perteyninge to hay. Falces foenariae, hokes or sythes for to cut hay. Foenebris, bre, pertayninge to vsury, or vnre∣sonable gayne. Foeneratitius, a, um, the same. Foenerator, oris, an vsurer, or lender for vn∣reasonable gayne. Foenero, aui, are, & Foeneror, rari, cum da∣tiuo, to lende for vsurye. Foeneror cum ab∣latiuo, to borowe, or make a shyfte, or to lay to mortegage. Foeniculum, fenell. Foenile, an hey house. Foenisecium, hey harueste. Foenisex, secis, a mower of hey. Foenograecum, fenegreke. Foenum, hey. Foenusculum, a bottell of hey. Foenus, noris, vsury, also vnreasonable or vn∣lefull gayne, comynge of that thynge, which is lente. It is somtyme fruite, which the erth bryngeth forth without any labour. Foeteo, tere, to stynke. Foetidus, a, um, stynkynge. Foetifico, aui, are, to brynge forth, moste com∣monly as a beaste or byrde dothe. Foeto,Varro. taui, tare, the same. Foetor, oris, stynche or yll sauour. Foetuosus, a, um, full of bredynge. Foetura, the tyme from the conception vnto the byrthe. Also the increase of cattell. sometyme it signifieth the increase or commynge forthe of other thynges. Foetus, tus, all thynge that is broughte forthe by generation. Sometyme the fruite of tres. Foetus, ta, tum, full, or great with yonge, as a woman with chylde, or a beaste. Foliatius, a, um, full of leaues. Foliatus, ta, tum, leaued, or hauynge leaues. Folium, a leafe. Follico, caui, care, to snuffe or fetche backe wynde with the nosethrylles. Folliculus, the husk wherin the eares of weate or other corne is inclosed, whan it is greene, called the hose. Also a sacke wherein corne is put. Follis, a below, wherwith fyre is blowen. Also a ball blowen full of wynde. Semblablye a bed stuffed onelye with wynde. It is also a bag, wherin money is. Fomentum, a nouryshement of naturral heate. It is also any thynge layde to the body in the fourme of a playster, to mittigate the peyne or griefe of any disease, callyd fomentation. Fomes, fomitis, any matter, wherewith fyre is kendeled and kepte burnynge. Somtyme it signifyeth that, whiche feruentely styrreth
vs to do any thynge. Fons, fontis, a fountayne or well. Fontanus, a, um, of a fountayne. Aqua fontana, well water. Fonticulus, a lyttell well or sprynge. Forago, a skayn of yerne. Foramen, minis, a hole. Foras, without. Foratia, a markette womanne, whiche selleth egges, chykens, and other lyke thynges at the market. Foratus, tus, a hole. Forbea, a kynde of hot meate. Forcipes, a payre of tongues, or other lyke instrumente. Forcus, a proper name of a man. Forda, a mylche cowe that bryngeth forthe calues. Fore, to be hereafter. Forem, res, ret, I shulde or had be, thou shul∣deste or had be, he shulde or had ben. Forensia, habites or robes, worne onely in pla¦tes of iudgement. Forensis, se, perteyninge to places of iugement or courtes wherin lawes be exercised. Also a iurrour. Fores, dores. Forfices, sheres. Forficuli, lyttell sheres. Fori, the hatches of a shyp, or place where mē beinge in the shyp do walke vp and downe. Also stages or galeries, from whense the no∣ble men of Rome behelde the playes called Circenses. Foria, dunge that is liquide or thyn. Forica, commune draughtes or Iakes. Foriculae, lyttell dores. Forinsecus, without. Forio, iui, ire, to discharge the bealy of ordure Foriolus, he that hath a laske. Forma, fourme or shape sometyme beaulty, fascion, maner. Forma stata, a meane beaulty or stature. Formiae, a towne in Campania. Formica, an emote, or ant, or pismere. Formicatio, that whiche is communely called a ryngeworme. Formidabilis, le, that whiche is to be drad. Formido, dinis, dreade or feare. Formido, aui, are, to haue great feare. Formidolose, fearefully. Formidolosus, he that feareth other: also he that is feared of other. Formo, aui, are, to forme, to make in fascion. Formosus, a, um, fayre. Formucales, a payre of tongues. Formula, an instrument or deede in wrytynge, a style in writinge, and a fourme in pleading. Formula iniuriarum, an action of trespas. Formula excidere, to be barred of his actiō. Formulam intendere, to brynge an action. Formularius, a practiser of the lawe. Fornacaria, dais whan the women did naught els but bake bread. Fornax, a chymney or ouen. Fornax calcaria, a lyme kyll. Fornax lateraria, a brycke kyll. Fornicarij, they which haue stalles or bouthes vnder the vaultes or arches of churches or palayces, where they sell theyr wares to thē that passe by, as they do in westminster hall. Fornicarius, a, um, perteyninge to lechery. Fornicator, a lechour. Fornico, aui, are, to make an arche or a vault. Fornicor, ari, to commyt fornication. Fornix, nicis, an arche or a vault. Foro, aui, are, to perce or bore a hole. Forpices, cysfars to clyp heare. Fors fortune. somtyme it is vsed for forsitan, peraduenture. Fors fortuna,Terent. in Hecyra, good fortune or chaunce. Fors fuat, god sende the good fortune, god speede the well. Forsitan, & Forsan, peraduenture. Fortasse, Fortassis, idem. Fortè, perchance, peraduenture. Forte fortuna, by good aduenture. Fortesco,Neuius. scere, to waxe or be stronge. Forticulus, a lyttell stronge. Fortifico, aui, are, to fortifie or make stronge. Fortis, stronge, puissant, valiant of courage. Also fayre, somtyme ryche. Fortiter, strongly, valiantly, constantly. Fortitudo, dinis, strengthe, valiant courage. Fortuito, by chaunce, at aduenture. Fortuitus, ta, tum, that hapneth by chaunce. Fortuna, fortune. Fortunae, goodes, good fortune, aduancement. Fortunatae insulae, the fortunate yles, whiche are in the great occean sea, and of Pliny are named to be syxe: of Solinus but three: of Ptholome two, whiche he calletth also the yles of goddes. so called for the holsomnes of the ayre and wyndes blowynge there, also the plenty of good fruites and fertilite of the grounde. It is nowe thought of some men to be those yles, whiche are nowe called Cana∣ria, distant from Spayne towarde the weste one thousande and two hundred myles after the counte of Petrus Martyr. Of these yles are founden to be seuen in number. Fyrste a∣bout the yere of our lord. 1405. a frenchmen called Betanhor, at the commaundemente of Katharine thanne beinge queene of Castyle, found two of them, & one called the Launce∣lote, and the other Forte Ventura. Sone af∣ter oone Fernandus Peraria and his wyfe founde other two, and called the one Ferre∣am,
and the other Gomeram. After that the great Canaria was nde by Petrus de Ve∣ra, & Michael de Moxica. Laste of al by the commaundement of Farnando and Elyza∣beth late kynge and queene of Spayne, Te∣neriphe & Palma, were founde by Alphon∣sus Lugo. So that nowe all the .vii. yles be vnder the dominion of the kynge of Spayne. Not withstandynge some doo suppose, that these be not the yles, whiche were called For¦tunatae, but rather those whiche are more in the south, and be called nowe of the Portu∣galles Insulae capitis uiridis. Fertunatim, fortunately. Fortunatus, ta, tum, fortunate. Fortuno, aui, are, to make prosperous, to aug¦ment with good fortune. Forula, a wykat. Foruli, huches, wherin bokes were kept: nowe be they taken for keuerynges of bookes. Forum, a market, where thynges be solde. Al∣so a place where iudgementes are practised, and matters in lawe pleaded. Forum agere, to syt in iudgemente, to here and determyne causes. Forum, whan it is taken for a markette, hath commonly an other worde ioyned therewith, as, Forum boarium, the market where cat∣tell is solde. Forum holitorium, the market wher herbes be solde. Forum piscarium, the fyshe market. Forum Cornelij, a towne in Italye called Imola. Forum Iulij, a region or countreye of Italy, whiche sometyme was called Iapidia, nowe it is called Frioll. Forum Claudij, Tarentasia in Italy. Fossa, a dyche, or dike, or a mote. Fossilis, le, that whiche is dygged, or maye be dygged. Fossio, a dyggynge. Fossitius, a, um, that is digged. Fossor, oris, a dygger or dycher. Fossula, a lyttell dyche. Fossum Sempronij, a towne in Italy called Fossemborne. Also Fauentia. Fossura, a digginge. Fotus, ta, tum, dygged. Fouea, a den. Foueo, ui, uere, to nouryshe, to sustayne, to maynteyne, to weae or washe a thynge, to ordeyne or set,Cice. ad Q fratrē. to defende. Fouere aliquem, to kepe one his frende. Fouere in pectore, to thynke priuily. F ANTE R. FRaceo, cui, cere, to putrifie for age. Fracesco, sci, scere, idem. Fraces, lyes of oyle. Fracidus, da, dum, more than rype, rotten as fruite is. Fractus, ta, tum, broken. Fractus animo, discouraged. Fractae res, thynges spent or lost. Fractibello, wery of warres. Fraeno, are, to brydle, to restrayne, to stop. Voluptates fraenare, to maister the wanton appetites. Fraenum, a brydle. Fraenos adlubere, to restrayne. Fraenos inijcere alicui, to let one of his plea¦sure, to brydell hym that wolde not be ruled. Fraenum mordere, to take the bytte in the tethe, signifieth to set naught by. Fraetus, ta, tum, trustinge, ayded. Fraeti uirtute & uiribus, ayded with strength and puissance. Fraga, straweberies, the herbe is called Fragraria. Frageo, gêre, & Fragesco, sci, scere, to brast. Fragilis, le, frayle, broukle, sone broken. Fragilitas, frayltie, brouklenes, inconstancy. Fragiliter, weakely, inconstantly. Fragitides, the two great veynes, whiche do appire on eyther syde of the necke. Fragmen, & Fragmentum, a piece or gobet of a thynge broken. Fragor, oris, the noyse, whiche is made at the fallynge of any great thynge, rushynge. Fragosus, a, um, vneasy to clyme. Fragrans, tis, hauynge great or sote sauour. Fragrantia, ae, a great sauour. Framea, a speare or iavelin. Frango, fregi, frangere, to breake. Frangere animum, to discourage. Audatiam hostis frangere, to abate his en∣nemies courage. Frangere authoritatem ueteris disciplinae, to breake or distroye the olde rule or laudable custome. Fidem frangere, to breake promyse or ap∣poyntment. Frangere hominem, to cause one to relente from his purpose, to make hym to agree to his requeste. Opes inimicorum frangere, to impouerishe his enemies. Sententiā alicuius frangere, to confute ones opinion, and make it of no value. Frangi dolore, to be in extreame sorowe, or almoste dead for sorowe or grefe. Frangi metu, to be almoste deade for feare. Frangi pudore, to be excedyngely ashamed,
to be out of countenaunce. Franosus, a deceyuour. Frater, tris, a brother. Frater patruelis, a brothers son. Fraterculus, a lyttell or yonge brother. Fraternè, brotherly. Fraternus, na, um, of a brother. Fratilli, the fringe of tapesry, that hangeth next the grounde. Fratrare, properly is sayd of chylderns brestes, whan they do growe to waxe imboced. Fratres Aruales, rede before in Aruales. Fratria, a brothers wyfe. Fratricida, he that hath slayne is brother. Fratrueles, brothers chylderne, cousyn ger∣maynes. Fraudator, a deceyuer. Fraudo, aui, are, to begyle, to disappoynt. Fraudare aliquē suo testimonio, where one holdeth his peace, whan his frende is spokē of, and wyll not saye well of hym. Fraudare genium, not to satisfy the necessite of nature, or carnall appetite. Fraudare se uictu suo, to fare hardly for ny∣gardeshyp. Fraudare stipendium, to reteyne or kepe a∣waye wages from men. Fraudulenter, deceitfully. Fraudulentus, full of deceite. Fraudulosus, a begyler. Fraus, fraudis, deceyt. Also peryll, dangier. Fraxineus, a, um, of ashe, or ashen. Fraxinus, an ashe. Fraxo, aui, are, to go in watche. Fregella, a lyttell towne in Italy. Fremitus, a rorynge, properly of waters. som∣tyme a murmurynge, rumble, or noyse of peo¦ple assembled together. Fremo, mi, mere, to rore or make a noyse like great waters, or lyke a lyon. Frendeo, dui, dere, to grynde the teethe toge∣ther for anger or peyn. Also to grunt or grone for peyne. Frequens, entis, accustomed, moche haunted. Also assemble together, abundant. Omnibus relictis mihi frequentem operam dedistis, le¦uynge all other men, ye haue often tymes holpen me. Frequens auditorium, a great audience. Frequens adest, he cometh often. Frequens est cum eo, he is often tymes with hym. Frequentes fuimus ad ducentos, we were a great number about two hundred. Frequens senatus, all the senatours assem∣bled to gether. Venio in senatum frequens, I come ordinarily vnto the Senate. Frequentatio, an hauntynge, an assembly. Frequentia, great haunt, & company of folke. Frequentissimae aedes,  house moche haunted with people. Frequento, taui, tare, to haunt, to go together. Fresta faba, a beane bruised or broken. Fretum, a narrowe sea betwene two landes, as fretum herculeum, which is in the sea be∣tweene Spayne and the countrey of Moores, called the straictes of Marrok. Fretus,Cice. fam. epist. 12. of fruor, trustyng. De qua tamen ma∣gnam spem habemus, freri clementia colle∣gae tui: wherof not withstandynge we haue good hope, trustinge on the mercye of your companion. Friabilis, sone broken in small pieces. Fribolus, almost worth an halfepeny. Frico, caui, cui, care, to rub. Frictilla, a frytue, made with floure & bater. Frictus, Fricatio, & Frictio, rubbynge. Frictus, & Frixus, a, um, fryed. Frigefacio, feci, facere, to coole. Frigefio, frigefieri, to be colde. Frigeo, gui, & frixi, gere, to be colde or flowe. Frigero, aui, are, to coole. Frigesco, scere, to waxe colde. Frigidarius, a colde bathe. Frigide, coldely, vnaptly, vnpleasantly. Frigiditas, coldnes. Frigidulus, a, um, somewhat colde. Frigidus, da, dum, colde, daungerous, or noyfull. Frigilla, a dyrde, whiche syngeth in the colde wether, a ruddocke, or rod in redbrest. Frigo, xi, & frigui, gere, to frye. Frigorificus, ca, cum, made colde. Frigus, oris, colde. sometyme feare. Frigutio, tiui, tire, to quake for colde. Frio, aui, are, to breake small, specially be∣twyxte the fyngers. Frisii, people by Holande, wherof the countrey is called Fryselande. Frit, the grayne in the top of the eare, whiche is lesse than a corne. Fritilla, a froyse or pancake. Fritillus, a boxe, out of the whiche dyfe were caste on the tables. Friuiculum, discention betwene men and their wyfes, whiche cometh not to separation. Friuolo, vtensiles of lyttel value. Friuolarius, he that selleth stuffe of lyttell valu. Friuolus, a, um, vayne, lyght, of none estima∣tion or value. Frixorium, a fryinge pan. Frondarius, ia, ium, of leaues. Frondatio, a slyppynge of leaues. Also brou∣synge. Frondator, oris, a brouser, a wood loppr. Frondeo, & Frondesco, scere, to beare or haue leaues. Frondeus, ea, eum, that is of leaues.
Frondo, daui, are, to brynge forth leaues, Frondifer, bearynge leaues. Frons, tis, the forehead, the frunt, shamefaste∣nes, also countenaunce. also it signifieth the foreparte of an hooste. Frons causae, the begynnynge of the matter. Prima fronte, at the fyrste, at the entry, at the prime face. Porrecta fronte, with a mery countenance. Frontem explicare, to loke mirily. Frontem exporgere, idem, Frontem contrahere, to loke sowerly. Frontem ferire, is spoken where a mā signi¦fieth, that one disdayneth extremely an other Pernijt illi frons, he hath loste his countenāce. Frons, frondis, the leafe of a tree with the branches. Frontale, the hedstall of an horse. Fronto, tonis, he that hath a brode forehead. Frontosus, hauynge a great forehead, or not abashed. Fructifer, bearynge fruite. Fructificus, & Fructuosus, fruitefull. Fructuarius, he that taketh the fruite or pro∣fyte of a thynge, called of our lawyars Per∣nour of profyttes. Fructuarius, a, um, that whiche beareth fruit, or dothe perteyne of fruite. Fructus, tus, & ti, fruite. Also all profyte or reuenues that commeth of the grounde. Frugalitas, tatis, moderation in lyuinge, spe∣cially in apparayle and dyete, sober rule. also sufficiency. Frugaliter, temperately, soberly, profytably, without reproche, excesse, or ryot. Frugalior, frugalissimus, more temperate, most temperate. Fruges, aut Frux, frugis, increase of all those thynges, whiche the erthe bryngeth forthe, moste properly of grayne or corne. Somtyme it signifieth rent or reuenues. Frugi, moderate, profytable, necessary. Frugi aedificium, a house not sumptuous. Frugi homo, a good man, a thrifty man, an honest-man, temperate in expenses. Frugi seruus, a trusty seruaunt, whiche loo∣keth well to his maisters profyte. Fruiscor, sci, to vse at libertie. Frumen, the vppermoste parte of the throte, the gargyll. Frumentaceus, of corne. Frumentarius, ia, ium, perteyninge to corne. Frumentatio, takynge of corne. Frumentator, toris, a taker or pourueyour of corne. Frumentor, aris, to gather or puruey corne. Frumentum, all corne, that hath berdes or ey∣ies, it is moste vsed for weate or rye. Fruniscor, Cato vsed for fruor. Frunitus, wyse in vsynge of a thynge. Fruor, fretus sum, frui, to vse with dilectati∣on and profyte. Frui ingenio suo, to do as he wyll. Frustatim, in pieces or gobettes. Frustillatim, piece meale. Frustra, in vayne. Frustraes, thou arte deceyued or abused, frustra esse, to come to none effect. Frustra habere, aliquem, to abuse or de∣ceyue one. Ne frustra sis, that thou be not disappointed Frustra legati dissessêre, the ambassadours departed without hauynge theyr purpose. Frustratio, abusynge or deceyuynge of one. Frustro, aui, are, & Frustror, aris, ari, to de∣ceyue. also to do a thynge in vayne, or vayn∣ly to employ. Frustrari expectationem alicuius; to disa∣poynte one of that whiche he loked for. Frustrari expensas, to lose his costes and charges.Columel. Imprudenter facta opera frustantur expen∣sas, warkes made vnaduisedly maketh one to lose all that he hath bestowed. Frustrari laborem, to lose his peyne. Satis adhuc tua frustrata est fides, hytherto the truste that I haue had in the, hath mee∣ly well abused me. Frustulum & Frustillum, a lyttell gobet. Frustum, a piece or gobet. Frusus, a kynde of brembles, whose pryckes be not hooked. Frutex, that whiche hath a great stalke, and yet it is no tree, as fenell, caules, certayne malowes, and other lyke herbes. sometyme it is taken for the stem or stalke. Frutetosus, a, um, hauynge abundaunce of suche great herbes. Frutetum, seu Fruticetum, a place where gro∣weth herbes with great stemmes or stalkes. Fruticescere, to be a stalke. Frutico, aui, are, & Fruticor, aris, ari, to sprynge in stalke. ¶F ANTE V. FVAT, for fit. Fucatus, ta, tum, coloured or paynted, as some women be. Fucilis, le, false, coloured. Fucinus, a lake in Italy. Fuco, caui, care, to laye on a colour. Fucus, a dorre or bee without stynge, which en¦treth into hyues, and eateth vppe hony. Also payntynge, where one colour is layde on an other. It is also vsed for disceypte or false∣hoode. Fuga, flyght.
Fugax, gacis, he that flyeth lyghtly. also it sig∣nifieth swyfte. Fugio, gi, gere, to flee, to runne away, to escape to forget. also to eschewe. Fugit aciem tenuitas, it is so smalle that one can not see it. Fugit te ratio, thou vnderstādest not the mat∣ter. De Caesare fugerat me ad te scribere, Of Cesar I had forgoten to write vnto the. Nisi si quae me forte fugiunt, Except I haue forgotten somewhat. Fugiens laboris, abhorrynge labour or peyn. Fugiens uinū, wine that hath lost his verdur Fugientes literae, blynde letters. Fugitiuarius, a, um, startynge away, flyttynge, that gladly and quyckly runneth away. Fugitiuus, a, um, fugitiue, not abydyng. Fugitiuae aquae, waters, which be taken out of a commune ryuer by stelthe. Fugitiuus seruus, he that rounneth from his maister, willing neuer to retourne, or goeth to a place, frome whens he supposeth that his maister can neuer recouer hym. Eugito, aui, are, to use to runne away. Fugo, aui, are, to dryue away. Fulcimentum, a botreulx, or that wherwith a thynge is sustayned. Fulcio, si, cire, to support, to fortifie. Fulcra, bedsteedes. Fulgeo, si, gere, & Fulgo, gi, ere, to shyne. Fulgetrum, a leame of lyghtnynge. Fulgidus, da, dum, bryght. Fulgor, brightnesse. Fulgur, uris, uel oris, lyghtnynge. Fulguratio, the lyghtenynge whan it is in the clowdes. Fulgurator, the sender of lyghtnynge. Fulgurio, riui, rire, to caste lyghtnynge. Fulguritas, lyghtnes or bryghtnes. Fulguritassunt, stryken with lyghtnynge. Fulguritum, striken or blasted with lyghtning. Fulguro, aui, are, to sende forth lyghtnyng. Fulica, a sea byrde, more than a culuer, & blacke. Fuligo, ginis, the soote of a chymney. Fullo, onis, a fuller of clothe. Fullonica, fullars crafte. Fulmen, minis, lyghtnynge. Fulmino, aui, are, to lyghten. Fultura, a shoore. Fuluus, a, um, a colour myxt of grene and redde, a darke yelowe. Fumaria herba, an herbe callyd fumitorye. Fumarium, a smokye place, where wyne was layd, to the intent that it moughte the sooner waxe old▪ also the shank or tonel of a chimney. Fumisico, aui, are, to make smoke, to incense. Fumigo, aui, are, to parfume. Fumo, aui, are, to smoke. Fumus, smoke. Fumos uendere, is the practyse of them, whi¦che being nigh about a prince, or in his fauor do beare men in hande, that they speake for theym to the prince, where they speake neuer a worde: and cause menne to lyue thereby in fooles paradyse. Funale, a torche. Funales equi, horses which coupled with an halter, dyd go before the chariot. Funambulus, he that walketh on a rope. Functio, the exercyse of a weightye matter or offyce. Funda, a slynge. also a castynge net, a sachell or purse lyke a net▪ also a cercle of gold, or other mettall, wherin stones be set. Fundamen, & Fundamentum, a foundation. Fundibularij, slyngers of stones. Funditores, the same. Fundito, aui, are, to powre out often. Funditus, from the foundation, vtterly. Funditus me perdidisti, thou haste vtterlye vndone me. Funditus perij, I am vtterly vndone. Fundo, aui, are, to founde, to make stable. Fundo, fudi, fundere, to yette or caste mettal, to poure out, to shede, to throw down, to scatter, to discomfite, to gyue abundantlye, to speake moche, to lay downe. Fundere exercitum, & Fūdere copias, to di∣scomfite or defete an host, to slea al the army. Fundere lachrimas, to wepe excedyngly. Fundere uerba, to speake more than nedeth. Fundere uersus, to make verses sodaynly. Fundere urinam, to pysse moche. Fundum, the bottome of a thynge. Fundus, that whiche is vsed to be callyd lande or soyle. somtyme it is taken for a foundation. also for the chiefe author of a thynge. Funebris bre, funerall. Funepeus, a goer on a corde. Funerale, pertaynyng to funeralles. Funereus, rea, reum, {per}tainyng to the dead body Funero, aui, are, to bury. Funesto, aui, are, to violate a place with a dead bodye. Funestus, ta, tum, violated with dead bodyes. also mortall, bluddy. also pertaynyng to dead bodyes or deathe. Funetum, bowed or houped, as som vines be. Fungor, fūctus sum, fungi, to exercise an office. Fungi officio suo, to do his deuour. Fungi fato, to be deade. Fungi uita, to lyue. Fungi uice alicuius, to be in an nother man∣nes steede. Functus uita, he that hath fynyshed his lyfe. Funginus, a, um, of a mousherom. Fungosus, lyke a mousherom. Fungus, a tadde stools, a musherom.
Funiculus, a small rope. Funis, a rope. Funus, funeris, funeral exequies, or solemnite of burieng. somtime it signifieth the dead corps. Funus facere, to cause one to dye. Fuo, fui, futum, to be. Fur, furis, a thefe. Furax, acis, theuyshe, a great pycker. Furca, furcula, an hey forke. Furcifer, ciferis, a seruant, which for som light offence, was compellid to beare a forke on his necke, hauyng both his handes bounden faste therto, and so to goo through the towne, con∣fessynge his defaut, and exhortyng other that they shoulde not in lyke case offende, whyche was a great reproche. Furcilis, a dunge forke. Furcilla, an hey forke. also a galowes. Furfur, uris, branne. Furfureus, & Furfuraceus, a, um, of branne. Furiae, the furies of hell, which were thre, Ale∣cto, Tisiphone, Megera. Furiatus, a, um, furyous. Furibundus, a, um, wood, or very madde. Furio, aui, are, to make madde or wood. Furiosus, a, um, madde, or wood, frantike. Furnaceus, a, um, baken in an ouen. Furnaria, bakers craft. also a woman baker. al∣so a bakehouse. Furnus, an oen. Furo, furi, furere, to be wood for anger. Furor, oris, madnes. also fury, whiche is vehe∣ment concitation or styrynge of the mynde. Furor, aris, ari, to steale. Furtificus, a pycker or priuy stealer. Furtim, by stelthe, priuyly. Furtiuus, a, um, that whiche is done by stelthe or very priuyly. Furtiuae literae, & Furtiua scripta, letters whi∣che no man can rede but onely he, vnto whom they be sent, as letters in cyfer. Furtum, theft. It is defined to be a deceytfulle handlynge or vsyng of any thynge, or the pos∣session therof, to haue therby gaine or aduan∣tage, which is by the law of nature prohiby∣ted to be suffred. It is sometyme any act that is done pryuily, to thintent it shuld be secrete. Furti teneri, aut obstringi, to be answerable to felonye. Furunculus, a lyttel thefe. also a beaste callyd a stote, that kylleth rabettes. It is also a soore callid a felon. also a soore callid a cattes hear, whiche breketh out in the fingers with great wheales and moche peyne. Furuus, ua, uum, darke. Furuae hostiae, sacrifyce doone to Pluto and Proserpine. Fuscina, a speare with many teethe, wherwith fyshers do take troutes or yeles, by throwing of it, a troute speare, an yele speare. Fuscinula, a flesshehoke. Fuscus, ca, cum, brown of color, not fully black. Fusile, that whiche may be molten. Fusè, in lengthe, longe. Fusim, abrode, as it were molten. Fusores, melters. Fusorius, a, um, pertaynyng to meltynge, as, Ars fusoria, the craft of meltynge. Vas fusorium, a meltynge potte. Fustigo, are, to beate with a staffe. Fustis, a staffe. Fustuarius, a minister, whiche serueth to beate men with staues. Fusus, si or Fusum, a spyndell. Fusus, a, um, molten. Fusus humi, stretched on the grounde. Fusi fugati{que}, slayne and put to flyght. Futilis, le, that whiche wyll be sone poured out. Futilis, he that speaketh all that he knoweth shortely or vnaduysedly. Futio, tis, tere, to poure out or runne out. Futis, a vessell, wherewith water was poured into a lauer, to brynge water into a parler, or soupynge chaumber. Futuo, tui, tuere, to do the acte of generation. ¶G ANTE A. GABA, A TOVNE in Galilee. Gabalū, a towne in Fraūce nigh to Narbona, where there was made verye good cheese. Gabalus, a galowe tree, or gybet, wheron menne be hanged. Gabaon, a citie in the holy land nygh to Rama where Salomō doing sacrifice, spake with god. Gabaonitae, men of that towne. Gabata, a potage dyshe. Gabba, a citie in Siria. Gabij, orum, a city in Italye, whiche the Ro∣maynes dystroyed. Gabinus, a garment with two lappes, wherof the one cast backward, did girde him that dyd weare it, whiche garment the consule ware, whan he denounced warres. Gabriel, signifieth the puissāce or might of god Gades, two iles by the further partis of Spain beyonde Granade. Gaditanum fretum, is the entree out of the oc∣cean sea, into the sea callyd Mediterraneam, hauynge Spayne on the northe syde, and the Moores on the southe.
Gaeon, a great ryuer whyche runneth through Ethiope and Egypt, and is now callid Nil{us}. Gaetuli, people in Affrike. Gaetulia, a countrey in Affrike. Gagates, a stone callyd Ieate. Galactophagus, a eater of mylke. Galactopota, a drynker of mylke. Galanga, a spyce callyd galyngale. Galatae, uel Gallograeci, people of Galatia. Galataea, a nymph or mayden of the sea, & was doughter of Nereus and Doris. Gallatia, uel Gallograetia, a cuntrey in the lesse Asia, ioynyng to Phrygiam, & Lydiam. Galbanus, a gumme of a certayne tree, whiche is moche vsyd in playsters. Galbinus, a, um, delycate, wanton. Galbuli, thynges whiche doo hange on cypres trees, lyke small heares. Galea, a helmet or salette. Galeatus, he that hath an helmet of salet. Galenus, a noble phisition, borne in Pargamo a towne in Asia, sonne of Nicon a great geo∣metrician. This man in the arte of phisike ex¦cellyd all other before his tyme and sens, in so moch as in his ministration, counsell, or doc∣tryne, he neuer had reproche, as he hym selfe writeth. also he lyuynge (as som do write .Cx. yeres, after that he passed the aege of .xviii. yeres, vntyll the tyme of his deathe, he was neuer vexed with any syckenes, excepte the grudge of a feuer of one day, as he saythe in his warke De sanitate tuenda, and that hap∣ned onely by to moche labour. He louryshed in the tyme of the emperours Marcus Com∣modus, and Pertinax, and dyed onely for fe∣blenes of age, after the incarnation of Christ about .Cx. yeres. Galericulum, an vnder bonet, or rydyng cappe Galerita, a larke. Galerus, & Galerum, a hat. also a pirwike. Galetia, a cuntray in Spain, hauing on the east part the ryuer callid Seyn, in latin Sequana, on the south the royalme of Portugal, on the west and north the occean sea. Galgulus, a byrd, whom if one do beholde that hath the yelowe iaundyse, forthwith the man becometh hole, and the byrde hath the syknes. Galilea, is a cuntrey, which marcheth on Siria Arabia, and Egypte. Galiopsis, an herbe callyd Archangell, as some do suppose. Galla, a fruite callyd gaulles. Gallaria, a lampurne. Gallia, a noble region set betwene Spayn and Germanye, and on the easte bordereth on the mountayes callyd Alpes. That whych ioy∣ned to Germanye was callyd Belgica, and was cōtayned betwene the ryuer callid Scal¦des, and the ryuer of Sequana, or Seyne. That parte whyche marched to the moun∣taynes, was callyd Celtica or Lugdunensis, and was contayned betweene the ryuers of Seyne and Geronde. That whiche bordered on Spayne callyd Aquitania, was bounded with the mountaynes callyd Pyrenaei. Cesar boundeth the parte callyd Celtica, with the ryuers callyd Rhone and Gerounde, and A∣quitaniam, with the hylles callyd Pyrenaei, & the ryuer of Gerounde. Agrippa described Galliam betwene the ryuer callyd Rhenus or Rhene, the mountaynes Pyrenaei, the occean sea, and the moūtayns callid Gebenne & Iu∣ra. Moreouer that whiche is nowe callid Lū∣bardy, was callyd Gallia Cisalpina. Gallicanus, a, um, of Fraunce. Gallicia, a royalme in Spayne, callyd Galyce. Gallicinium, the tyme in the nyght whanne the cocke croweth. Gallicus, a, um, frenche. Gallina, a henne. Gallinaceus, a house cocke. Gallinaceus pullus, a chycke. Gallinarium, a place where pultry is kept. Gallinarius, & gallinaria, he or she that kepeth pultrye. Gallium, an herb lyke vnto clote, but it hath no burres nor pryckes, & groweth on stone walles. Gallo, are, to be madde. Gallograetia, a countreye in Asia, callyd alsoo Galatia. Gallus, a cocke, a frencheman, a priest of Cybe¦les, callid the mother of the goddis. also a ry∣uer in Phrigia, the water whereof, if it be drunke, it maketh one madde. Gallus, a, um, of Fraunce. Gamale, a towne in Iudea. Gammarus, a fyshe callyd a lopstar, or creuyse of the sea. Ganea, & Ganeum, a brothelhouse, a house of bawdrye and ryotte. Also Ganea is taken for gluttonye. Ganeo, onis, a ruffyan, a haunter of bawdye howses, a ryotter. also a rauener of delycate meates. Gangaridae, people betwene Assyria and India Ganges, is a great ryuer that dyuideth Inde, and is that whyche in holye scrypture is cal∣lyd Phison, one of the foure ryuers, whyche do come out of Paradyse. Iosephus doth in∣terprete it inundation li. 1. cap. 2. The bredth therof as Solinus wryteth, is in the naro∣weste place eyghte myles, the brodest twenty myles. Arrianus lib. 8. wryteth, that where hit is narroweste, hit is in breadthe a hun∣derde furlonge, whyche is eyghte myles, in manye places it spreadeth soo wyde, that where the grounde is moste playne, nor any hygh place appereth, noo man maye dyscerne
any thyng on the other syde. In the shalowest place it is an hundred foote depe. There run∣neth into it .xvii. great ryuers, euery of them able to beare a shyppe. In this ryuer of Gan∣ges is an yle, and therin is a great citie callid Palybotra, the countraye is namyd Prasia, the kynge wherof, as Pliny writeth li. 6. ca. 19. hath alway in wages, syxe hundred thou∣sande foote men .xxx. thousande horsemen, and ix .M. Olyphantes. Gangeticus, ca, cum, of that ryuer. Gangetica tellus, Indee. Gangilium, a sycknes in the head of a beaste, wherwith the head becommeth full of water. Gangraena, a soore callyd a canker. Gannio, nire, to barke or houle lyke a dogge. Gannitus, tus, barkynge or houlynge. Ganymedes, a Troyan chyld, whiche was fai∣ned to be rauysshed of Iupyter, and made his butlar. Ganzae, geese. Garamantes, people in Affrike, in the myddell of Lybia whiche are blacke Moores. Garganus, a hylle in Apulia. Gargara, a mountayn, and also a citie in Asia. Gargarizatio, a washynge of the mouth & throte to expell fleume out of the head. Gargarizo, to gargelle or wasshe the mouthe and throte. Gargarum, oone of the toppes of the moun∣tayn callyd Ida. Garrio, ire, to babble. Garrulus, a babbler. Garum, sauce made with fyshe salted. Garumna, a ryuer in France callyd Gerond. Garyophyllata, some thynke it to be the herbe, which is callyd herbe Benet. some suppose it to be that, whiche Plinye nameth Geum, the rote of this herbe gathered in Marche, smel∣leth lyke cloues, and Pliny writeth, that Geū hath black rotes, which do smel very swetely. Garyophylli, the spyce callyd cloues. Garyophyllus, Ruellius callith it Garryophil lea, a gylofer, next to the rose the fairest & soo test flour. it is also the tree that bereth cloues Gastrimergia, gluttony. Gaudeo, gauisus sum, gaudere, to reioyce, to be glad. Gaudere in sinu, to reioyce by hym selfe. Gaudium, ioy, myrth, an affection of the mynd, conceiued of an opynion of a thynge good or pleasant. Gaulus, a lyttell rounde bote, or a payle to re∣ceyue mylke. Gausape, a mantell to caste on a bed. also a car∣pet to lay on a table, some cal it a dagswayne. Some do expounde it a veluet cloke. Gausapina, idem. Gaza, the tresure of a kīg. also a cite ī Palestina. Gazella, a beast in the partes of India, of whō cometh muske. Antonius Musa writeth, that there be of them in Affrica, in figure like to a roo. Serapio saith, that they haue hornes, al∣so long tethe and white, aboute .ix. inches of length, standyng out of theyr mouthes lyke a bore. This beest naturally hath a superfluous bloud congelid on his bealy, and growith like an impostume, & whan it is ripe, the beast go∣eth to a tree or a stone, and rubbith theron his bealy, vntill the humor breakith out like vnto corrupt matter, which at the first stīketh, but whan it hath ben hanged a while in the ayre,  waxeth ripe, & than hath it an odoriferous sauour, and is callid muske. Gazella, is not a cyuet as som do suppose, for the cyuet is lyke a great cat, & the oote humour, whiche cometh from hym is like sweat, which is founden be∣twene her flankes. Wherfore vnto it is giuē a newe name, and is callyd Cibeta. Gazophilacium, a place where tresure is kept. ¶G ANTE E. GEbenna, a city in Sauoy callid Geneue¦ra, where among the women specially, raineth a disease callid Bronchocoele, which is a bolnyng or swellynge vnder theyr chynnes. Also Solinus nameth the parte of Alpes ioynyng to Sauoy, Gebennam. Gebuseus, the sonne of Canaan, of whome the olde inhabytauntes of Hierusalem were cal∣lyd Gebusei. Gedeon, the name of a iudge in Israell. Gedrosia, a countrey in Asia. Geenna, is taken in holy scripture for hell. Gela, a ryuer in Sicile. Gelabilis, le, that may be frosen. Gelasco, scere, to be frosen. Gelasini, the foreteethe, whyche be shewed in lawghynge. Gelasinus, he that laugheth to make other men laugh. Gelicidium, a frost. Gelidus, a, um, colde as yse. Gelo, aui, are, to freese. Geloi, fieldes in Sicile. Geloni, a people now callyd Tartarians. Gelothophyllis, lidos, an herbe, which (as Pnius writeth) beinge drunken in wyne with myrre, maketh laughyng without cessyng, ex∣cept the kernelles of pyneappuls myxte with pepper and honye, in the wyne of dates, be drunken after it. This herbe is founde about the ryuer callyd Borysthenes, in the furthest parte of Russia, and alsoo in the countreye callyd Bactrae. Gelu, yse. sometyme colde. Gemellariae, an instrument by the whiche oyle runneth out of the presse. Gemellus, lyttell or small twynnes.
Gemibundus, full of waylynge. Gemino, aui, are, to double. Geminus, a, um, the number of two. Also Ge∣minus is a twyn, where many chylderne are borne at one burdeyne, although they be thre or mo. also it is the name of a man, which in Hebrue and englyshe is Thomas. Gemma, the yonge budde of a vyne. also a pre∣cyouse stone. Gemmascere, to begyn to budde. Gemmatus, a, um, budded. Gemmo, aui, are, to bud or spryng, as a yonge graffe or vyne dothe. Gemmosus, a, um, that whiche is all of preci∣ous stones. Gemo, mui, ere, to grone, or to wal, or to make a lamentable noyse. Gemi cymba,Vergilius the bote cracketh, beynge o∣uercharged. Gemoniae scalae, a place from whēs the bodies of persons condemned were throwen downe at Rome. Gemonidae, women great with chylde. Gemursa, a corne, or lyke griefe, vnder the ly∣tell toe. Gena, the eye lydde. it is sometyme taken for the cheekes. Genauius, a, um, gluttonous. Genealogia, a pedegrewe. Gener, he that maryeth my doughter. Generalis, le, generall. Generatim, generally. Genero, aui, are, to ingender. Generositas, an aptnes to ingender, to bringe forth.Colel. sometyme it signifieth nobilitie. Generosus, a, um, of a gentyll or noble kynde. Generosus princeps, a puyssant and coura∣gyous prynce. Generosus equus, an horse of a good rase. Arbores generosae, trees whyche beare plenty of good fruyte. Genesis, generation. Genethliacus, an astronomer, or other lyke, whi¦che by the sterres set at a mans natiuitie, tel∣leth his fortune. Genezareth, a great meare or ponde in the lād of promyssion, and it is also callyd Mare Ti∣beriadis. Genialis homo, a man in his house very lybe∣rall and fresshe. Geniae, olde veckes full of vnhappynes. Geniculatim, ioynted as a wheate strawe is. Geniculum, the ioynte of a strawe, or stalke of an herbe. Genij, men whyche do gyue all theyr studye to eatynge and drynkynge. Genista, broume. Genimen, generation. Genitalia, the members of generation. Genitalis, le, pertaynyng to the byrth of a man. Genitale solum, the natural cuntrey or place where a man is borne. Genitale semen, the sede of generation. Genitalis dies, the day of natiuitie. Genitiua, sometyme generation. sometyme the seede of generation. Genitiuus, a, um, that hath power to ingender, or that which procedeth with generation. Genitiuae notae, markes wherewith a man is borne. Genitor, a father. Genitrix, a mother. Genitus, ta, tum, begotten, ingendred. Genius, an aungell. Among the Paynyms som supposed it to be the spirite of man, some did put two gouernours of the soule, a good and an euylle: Bonus genius, & malus genius, whiche neuer departed frome vs. sometyme it is taken for nature it selfe, or dylcetation moued by nature. Genio dare operam, to lyue voluptuousely. Genium defraudare, to absteyn from al thin∣ges pleasaunt. Geocha, a beaste lasse than a foxe, in colour a darke yelowe, ful of blacke spottes, I suppose it to be a blacke Ienet, the furre wherof is in Englande estemed aboue all other furres. Gens, gentis, a people, sometyme a kynrede. Genselia, whiche is compact of many families or kynredes. Gentiana, an herbe callyd Gentian. Gentilis, a kynsman of the same name & stocke. somtyme it signifieth a Gentile or Paynym. sometyme  countrey man. Gentilis, le, proper or familiar to that people, or kynrede. Gentilitas, tatis, gentilitie, the multitude of the people or family. Gentilitius, a, um, of the people or nation. Gentilitium nomen, the surname or aunciente name of a mans auncetours. Gentilitia sacra, ceremonies of that countrey or people. Genus, idis, & kyng of Illiria, callyd now Sla¦uony, whiche was the fyrst fynder of the herb callyd Gentian. Genu, a knee. Genua, a great citie callyd Geane. Genuini, the innermoste cheke teethe. Genuinus sermo, the natural speche or mother tungue. Genus, generis, is the begynning of euery thīg either of the personne that ingendred it, or of the place where it was ingendred. Orestes a Tantalo ducit genus, Orestes hathe his begynnynge of Tantalus, or is of the blode of Tantalus. Plato genere Atheniensis  Plato is of his bludde or auncetry an Athe∣niens. Also it sygnyfieth kynde. Genus uitae,
a kynde of lyfe. Genus mortis, a kynde of deathe. Genus animalium, a kynd of beastis. Also it signifieth that, which conteyneth ma∣ny sundrye kyndes, as Animal, comprehen∣deth a man, a byrd, a fyshe, and euery of them is genus to that, whyche in them is compre∣hended. As a brute beaste is genus to a hors, a lyon, a bulle, a dogge. &c. A byrde is genus to an egle, a crowe, a larke, a sparowe. &c. A fysshe is genus to a whale, a porpese, a had∣docke, a playce. &c. Geodesia, is a science of thynges concernynge sensible greatnes and figure. Geographia, the description of the erthe. Geomancia, superstitious warkyng in sorcery, by cercles and pryckes in the erthe. Geometer, a geometrician. Geometria, geometry, measuryng and propor∣tionyng of fygures in the erthe. Georgica, pertaynynge to husbandry. Geranium, an herbe callyd herbe Robrtr. Gergonia, a towne in Guyen, standynge on an hygh hylle. Germania, the countray callyd of some Duch∣lande, of some Almayn, is described by Ptho∣lome the .xi. chapiter, to be boūded on the west with the ryuer of Rhene, on the northe with the sea callid Germanicus oceanus, the south west part with the ryuer callyd Donow, the east syde is bounded with the bendyng of Do now vnto the hylles of Sarmatia. The name of Germania extendeth now further, for ther in is contayned many greate countrayes and cities, whyche somtyme were parte of Gallia Belgica, that is to say frō the ryuer of Rhene westwarde vnto our sea callyd Mare Britan∣nicum. Germani, people of Germany, or Germayns. Germané, brotherly. Germanus, substant. brother of one father and one mother. Germanus, na, num, come of the same stocke. Germanum nomen, the proper name. Mea germana patria, my verye or naturalle countray. Germen, minis, a branche of a tree or herbe. Germino, ai, are, to branche out. Gero, gessi, gerere, to beate. sometyme it signi¦fyeth to haue. Gerere aniciriā,Cice. fam. epist. 3. to practise freendshyp. Quo∣rum sunt de gerenda amicitia prae clarissime scripti libri, Whose bokes we haue howe to practyse fredshyp,Plinius in pane. very well written. Gerere bllum, to make warre. Gerere honores, to be in honor or auctoritie. Gerere magistratum, to exercyse an offyce. Gerere morem,Terent. in Adelphis. to obey. Gerere negotium, to do his busynes. Paternā speciē gerere, to be lyke his father. Gerere praeturam, to be in the office of a iuge Gerere pudorem,Cicero de amicitia. to be shamefast. Gerere rempub. to minister the publik weal. Simultatem cum aliquo gerere,Plaut. in Amph. to be at va∣riance with one. Gerontocomion, an hospitall, wherin old men are kepte, an almeshouse. Gerrae siculae, tryfles. Gerres, fyshe of the kynd of herrynges, it may be callyd pylchardes. Gerrones, talkers of tryfelynge thynges, or lyght matters. Gerula, a mayde that kepeth a chylde. Gerulus, a porter, or a manne hyred to carye bourdeyns. Gerusia, a place where the Senate dyd assem∣ble, a parlyament house. Geryones, nis, a king of Spayn, whom Hercu¦les dyd slea, and toke from hym certayn bul∣les and kyen of notable greatnes. Gesa, a haulberde. Gessoriacum, as some men do suppose, was the towne, whiche is nowe named Calays. Gesta, thynges whiche haue ben done, actes. Gestamen, minis, what so euer is borne, a bur∣deyne or cariage. Gestatio, the exercise, where a man is borne or caried on any thynge. Gestatorium, that wherin any thyng is caryed or borne, a flagon, a horse lytter. Gesticularius, a, ū, {per}taynyng to signes or tokēs of myrthe, with meyng the body or handes. Gesticulator, he that playeth with puppettes. Gesticulor, aris, to make suche signes or tokens of myrth, as in daunsynge. Gestio, iui, ire, to shewe the affections of the mynd by meing of the body, or any part ther of▪ somtyme it sygnifieth to delyte. Gestito, aui, are, to beare or weare oftentymes. Gesto, aui, are, to beare longe. Gestat uentrem, she is with chylde. Gestuosus, full of tokens of myrthe. Gestus, us, gesture, or countenaunce with mo∣uyng of the body. Gestus, ta, tum, borne, or done. Getae, people, whiche some suppose to be those, whiche are in Norway and Gothia. some say that they be more in the northeast in Scithia pertaynynge to Europa. Some thynke that it is the people of the countrays Valachia & Transyluania. Geuli, a people in Affrike. ¶G ANTE I. GIarus, a lyttel ile in the sea callid Ioniū, whervnto men condemned were exiled. Gibber, & gibbosus, & gibberosus, he which hath a croked back, or a great bunche on
any parte of the body. Gibbus, & gibba, a great bunche. Gigantomachia, a bettayle, which gyantes pre¦pared agaynst the goddis, as poetes fayned. Gigas, gantis, a gyant, a man or woman farre excedyng the comon stature of men, of whom as wel holy scrypture, as other credible wry∣ters doo make mention. Plutarchus a noble philosopher and hystorien writeth, that Ser∣torius a capitayn of Romans being in Mau∣ritania, brake downe the sepulchre of Anthe∣us, and therin was founde the body of a man of suche monstruous greatnes, that the same capytayne meed with a reuerend feare, cau∣syd the monument to be reedifyed Plyny wri¦teth, that in the yle calld Creta, now Candy, an hylle fell downe, and there was found the body of a man, whiche was in lengthe .xivi. cubytes, whiche are .lxix. fete, which was sup¦posed of some to be the body of Orîon, of som the body of Eion. Antonius Sabellicus af∣firmeth, that it was reported to hym of a cre∣dyble person, that in the southe parte of Can∣dye, there was founden by men, whych dig∣ed vp a great tree for the makyng of a shyp, the head of a man as great as a wyne vesselle callyd Dolium, howe great that vessell is at Venice, where Antonius wrate, I canne not telle: with vs it is taken to be the greattest vesselle, whiche was sometyme a utine, and yf it were soo great, it were wonderfull mon¦struouse, and also incredyble, but that he say∣eth one of the teethe of that head remayneth at Venyce, of a wonderfull greatnesse, by the whyche they that doo see it, maye make some gesse to the greatnesse of the head. Solinus remēbreth, that in the warres, which the Ro∣maynes hadde in Candye, that in a greatte rage of water, the grounde beynge broken vp, there was founde the bodye of a manne, beyng in lengthe .xxxiii. cubytes, whyche is xvi. foote and a halfe, the whyche being sene of Flaccus and Metellus, than capytaynes of the hoost of the Romaynes, they in behol∣dynge it, wondered at that, whyche they be∣fore wolde not beleue, whan they onely herde it reported. Aboute thirty yeres passed, and somewhat more, I my selfe beynge with my father syr Rycharde Elyote, at a monasterye of regular chanons, callyd Iuy churche, two myles from the citie of Sarisburye, behelde the bones of a deade man founde depe in the grounde, where they dygged stone, which be∣inge ioyned togyther, was in lengthe .xiiii. foote and tenne ynches, there beynge mette. Whereof one of the teethe my father hadde, whyche was of the quantytie of a greatre walnutte. This haue I wrytten, bycause somme menne wylle beleue nothynge that is out of the compasse of theyr owne knowlegé & yet som of them presume to haue knowlegé aboue any other, contempnynge all men but them selfes, or suche as they fauour. Gigeria, a meate made of garbage of pullayne and other thynges. Gigno, genui, gignere, to ingender or get. som¦tyme to make. Giluus, ua, uum, yelowe colour. Gingiuae, the iawes, wherin the teeth be sette. Gingiuerim, siue gingiberim, gynger. Gingrio, griui, grire, to chur or make a chirme as byrdes do. Gion, a great ryuer in Egypte, otherwyse cal∣lyd Nylus. Girgilhis, a reele, wheron threde is wounden. Giruli, fyshes, which I suppose to be menowes. Gith, an herbe, whiche is nowe callyd Nigella Romana, the seede therof is black lyke to o∣nyon sede, and is very soote, and the sauour therof exhausteth reumes of the heade. Githago, corkle growynge amonge corne, whi∣che is type. ¶G ANTE L. GLabella, the spare betwene the browes. Glaber, bra, brum, smoth without hear. Glabreco, scere, to be withoute heare or smothe. Glabreta, a plate hauynge nothynge growynge in it. Glabriones, they whyche lacke heare. Glacialrs, le, where yse is. Glacies, yse. Glacior, aris, ari, to be frosen. Glacitare, to make a noyse lyke a gander. Gladiatores, were men, whiche faughte vnar∣med with swordes. Gladiatorius, a, um, pertaynyng to that maner of fyghtynge. Gladiatura, the acte or feate to fyghte with a sworde. Gladiolus, a lyttel sworde or wodknife. also the name of an herb like to sedge, hauing a yelow flowre lyke in fourme to a floure delyce. Gladius, a sword. also a kynd of fysshe, whiche hath a bone in his forehead lyke to a sworde. Glandaio, feedyng of swyne with maste, cal∣lyd paunage. Glandium, Glandionica, the parte of a boore nexte the necke, the shelde or gammonde. Glandifer, ra, rum, that whiche beareth mast. Glandulosus, he that hath many kernelles. Glans, glandis, mast growing on okes, beeche, chestens, and other lyke, It is also a pellet of lead. also a kernel growing betwene the skyn and the fleshe. it is moreouer the forepart or nut of a mans yard. it is also a supposytorie.
Glans Iouis, a chesten. Glaphirus, a, um, iocunde, pleasant, iugraed, polyte, holowe, famous, subtyll. Glarea, properly grauell. Glareosus, a, um, grauelly. Glastum, an herbe callyd also Isais, in englysh Woad, wherwith as welle woulle, as wollen clothes are dyed blue, the leaues thereof are lyke to great sorrell, but that they be greatter and thycker. As Cesar wryteth in his tyme it was so commonly knowen in England, than beyng callyd Brytayne, that the people with the iuyce therof coloured theyr bodyes and vi¦sages to seme terrible to theyr ennemies, the women also, that goinge naked in certayn ce∣remonies they mought be like to people of E∣thiope. Of this herbe, woad is made in this wyse: They grynde it with whecles of wood runnyng in a cōpassed trough vntyl the iuyce be out of the herbe, and than they make the herbe into balles, and laye them on a bourded floore a certayne space vntylle they be pury∣fied and dryed into poulder. But the makyng hereof hath remayned vnknowen in Englād a thousande yeres and mo, vntyl nowe late an honest marchant of London, zelous of the cō∣mune weale of his countrey, hath eftsoones nouryshed that herbe in his gardeyn at Lon∣don, and by the example whiche he founde in the other countrayes beyonde the sea, he ma∣kynge howses and mylles to his importable charges, hath nowe experienced to make the same woad, to the inestimable commoditie of this royalme, if it be worthyly imbracid. The marchant at this tyme lyueth, and is named Goodman, a name right agreable vn∣to his qualities. Who deserueth to be incou∣raged of all good englyshemen, whiche ar not touched with dysdayne or enuye, that by his thanke and reward, other may the rather en∣deour them selfes, eyther to inuent by theyr wyttes, or to attempt by the example of other countrays, to augment the weale and honour of this royalme of Englande. Glaucinum, oyle whiche doth come from the o∣lyues before they be pressyd. Glauciolus, a horse with a wall eye. Glaucium, is a iuyce of an herbe, which the po∣tycaries do commonly call Memitha, whiche is vsed in medicine for diseases in the eyes. Glaucoma, matis, & Glaucomatū, ti, & Glau∣coma, mae, an humour in the eyen, lyke chri∣stall, whiche letteth the syght. Glaucopis, pidis, a man or woman, with gray eyes. Glaucus, ca, cum, gray colour. Glaucus, a god of the sea. also many men were callyd by that name. also the name of a fyshe. Gleba, a turfe or piece of erthe. Glessaria, an yle in the northe sea called Mare Germanicum. Glessum, crystall or beryll. Glis, iris, a fielde mouse, whiche slepeth al the wynter. Glis, glissis, potters claye. Glis, glitis, a thystell. Glisco, sci, scere, to growe, to waxe fat, to co∣ueyte or desyre feruently. Globo, aui, are, to gather rounde. Globuli, lyttell rounde cakes or pellettes. Globosus, a, um, rounde as a oule. Globus, & Globum, a boule, or other thynge very rounde. Also a multitude of men or bea∣stes gathered rounde togither. Glocido, aui, are, to cackle as a hen doth. Glocio, cire, idem. Glomero, aui, are, to wynde in rounde. also to gather together in an heape. also in an horse it is to go pleasantly. Glomus, mi, & Glomus, meris, a botome of threde. Gloria, the consent of good men in the prayse of a man or woman, called renoume, glory. Glorior, ari, to auaunt, to the intente to haue prayses, to extoll with bostynge. Gloriosus, a, um, renoumed, some tyme in the yll parte, vaynegloriousely, or bostynge hym selfe. Glos, glotis, the systars husebande, or bro∣thers wyfe. Glossa, a glose or exposition of darke speche. Glossema, wordes not moche vsed. Glossematicus, he that maketh a comment on a boke. Glubo, bi, bere, to pull of the barke or rynde of a tree. Glucidatum, swete and delectable. Gluma, the huske of wheate. Gluo, glui, ere, to streyne or wrynge harde. Gluten, & Glutinum, glewe. Glutinamentum, all glewyshe matter. Glutino, aui, are, to glewe or ioyne. Glutio, tiui, tire, to swalowe. Gluto, tonis, a glutton. Glyciamerides, a kynde of meate. Glycyrrhiza, lycorise. ¶G ANTE N. GNAFALIVM, an herbe, whiche is also called Chamezelon, whose lea¦ues are so whyte and softe, that it se∣meth to be flox. Gnafalon, a certayne flox. Gnafos, a tesyll, whiche tonkars do vse. Gnarauit,Liuius. & gnarauisse, for Narrauit & narrauisse. Gnarè, skylfully.
Gnarias, tatis, skylfulnes. Gnariter, for Gnare; wyteyly. Gnarus, a, um, skylfull. Gnauiter, diligently, lustely, valiantly. Gnauus, quicke, actiue, apte to euery thynge. Gnitur, uel Gnixus, olde writars vsed for Gig∣nitur, & Nixus. Gnomones, the teethe, whereby the age of an horse is knowen. They be some tyme taken for that, which sheweth the houres in a clock or diall. also rules to knowe any thyng by. Gnoro, for Noro. Gnosco, for Nosco. Gnosos, a citie in Ceta or Candy. Gnosius, a, um, of that citie. Gnostici, were detestable heretikes, when on good friday about the son set, assembled men and yonge womenne together, not sparynge daughters nor susters. After .ix. monethes passed they met againe in the same place. and then they plucked the chyldern newely borne from theyr mothers, and cuttynge them in pieces, and receyuynge theyr bloud in pottes and cuppes, they burned the body in to ashes whiche they dyd myxte with the bloud, and preserued it, to put in to theyr meates and drynkes. They also affirmed that neyther the lawe of nature, nor lawes of men were good and that whiche were called vertues were nothynge. ¶G ANTE O. GOaetia, a spyce of whiche crafte. Gobio, idem quod Gobius, a gogeon. Golias, was a puissant man of the Phi¦listians, whome kynge Dauyd beinge yet a chylde slewe, whan the Iewes were aferd to fyghte with hym man for man: his statte was, as the Byble reherseth .vi. cubytes and a span, which was ten fete, lackynge thre yn¦ches, accōpting it with the fete of mē liuing at that tyme, which vndoubtedly were more than they be nowe. his habergeon weyed .v.M. Siclos, whiche is .ii.M. and D. oun∣ces. and the yron of his speare weyed. DC. stilos, whiche is .CCC. ounces, where by his greatnes and strength maye be conieced to excede any man lyuynge in this tyme. Gomor, is a mesure of the Hebrues, and is the tenthe parte of Ephi, wherfore it conteineth of our standard measure nine pintes, an halfe pynte, a quarter, and about halfe an ounce. It is sometyme taken for as moche corne as one maye receyue betwene his armes. Gomorrha, & Gomorrlium, a city in Iudea whiche was consumed for horrible synne a∣gaynste nature. Gongylium, of Hippocrates and Galen is vsed for a pyll in medicyne, and for the simili∣tude thereof is signifieth the rape roote whi∣che is rounde. It is also called of some Gon∣gyles, or Gongylis, lidis. Gonorrliea, a dysease, wherby a mans sede go∣eth from hym vnwyttyngly. Gordium, was the principall citie of Phrigia. Gordius, was a poore husbandeman of Phri∣gia, hauyng but two yokes of oxē, who in the tyme of a sedition in the coūtrey, was by an∣swere made of an ydoll, chosen kynge there, whan he came with his wayn where the coū∣sayle was kepts, and beynge made kynge, and causynge the sedytion to ceasse, he made his yokes to be hanged vp in the temple of Iupiter, the eords therof beyng made in su∣che knottes, thbee it seemed not possible that they mought be vndone. Reade more hereof in Nodus Gorni: Gorgias, a famous rhetortrian in the tyme of Socrates, who inuented the craft to dyspute  sodaynly to euery question, or mat¦ter that was purposed, in a continuall orati∣on, and by teachyng rhetorike, cam so riche, that he was the fyrst that dyd sette an ymage of golde in the temple of Apollo at Delphos, he beinge of the age of a hundred and eyghte yeres, surmounted almooste all men of his tyme in bodily strength, perfectnes of fences, quycknes of wytte, and  of memory. Gorgones, monstruous women, whiche were vanquyshed by Perseus. Gorgonius, a, um, pertaynyng to Gorgones. Gorys, a citie of Candy. Gossampinus, after whyche beareth cotton. Gossipium, cotton. Gothia, an yle by Denmarke callyd Gutlande, not farre from Norway. Gothi, people of whome the fyrst camme out of Gutlande; vnto whom resorted a great mul∣titude of other people ouer of the northe par∣tes of the world, as wel out of the countrays now callyd Prutia, Liuonia, Russia, Tartaria, as diuers other partis callid somtime Scithia & makyng sundry kinges did depopulate and brynge in subiection the more parte of Euro∣pa, and fynally distroyed Rome, and inhaby∣ted the parte of Italye nowe callyd Lumbar∣dy, and lykewyse subdewed the royalmes of Castile and Aragon. ¶G ANTE R. GRABATVS, a couche. Gracchus, the name of a noble family or house in Rome. Gracilè, sclenderly. Gracilesco, scere, to waxe or become leane. Gracilis, le, Gracilentus, ta, tum, leaue or sclen∣der?
sometyme softe. Gracilitas, tatis, leannes, selēdernes, or softnes. Gracus, & Graculus, a byrde called a Iay. ❀Graculo cum fidibus nihil, the Iaye hath nought to do with the harpe, spoken of them whiche lackynge eloquence or good letters, do scorne them that haue lernynge. Gradatim, in order, or by course, lyttell and lyttell. Gradatio, a fourme of speakynge, whan of the fyrste sentence spryngeth the seconde, of the seconde the thyrde, and so forthe. Gradarij equi, amblynge horses. Gradator, a great goer, Gradior, to go by steppes, or steppe. Gradiuus, one of the names of Mars. Gradus, a greese or step, a degree in consangui¦nitie. also honour. De gradudeijci, to be caste downe from his place: wherby is signified to be abashed or moued from constancy of mynde. Deturbari gradu, hath the same significatiō. Gradu dimoueri,Cic. us. 2. & offic. 1. to be put out of estimation or authoritie. Gradu mouere,Liuius. to cause one to step backe. Graecanicus, ca, cum, come out of Greece. Graeca salix, red wyllowe. Graecia, the fountayne of prowes and doctrine, and norise of eloquence, was a great and fa∣mouse countrey, conteynynge these noble re∣gions: Epirus, Acarnania, Aetolia, Phocis, Locris, Achaia, Messemia, Laconia, Argos, Megaris, Atrica, Boeotia, Doris Phthiótis, Thessalia, Magnesia, Macedonia, & Thra∣cia. All the whiche of late yeres were vnder the sweete yoke of Chrystes relygyon, And nowe alas to the great discomforte of al per∣fecte chrysten men, are vnder the mooste cru∣ell subiection and seruitude of the greate ty∣rante the Turke, and become barbarous, ly∣uynge in the beastely superstition of the false prophete Mahomete. Graecisco, are, to folowe the Grekes. Graecor, aris, ari, to ryot in bankettynge and rybendry. Graecostasis, a place where ambassadours stode, vntyll they were sente for in to the Senate. Graecus, a mn borne in Greece, a Greeke. Graecus, a, um, of Greece. Graiugenae, Greekes. Graiae, crouches, styltes, or skathes. Grallatores, they whiche do go on styltes or skaches. Gramen, grasse▪ sometyme al herbes together, the swarthe. Graminosus, a, um, growen with grasse or herbes. Gramma, idem quod scriptulum, uel scrupu∣lum, a scruple, the .xxiiii. parte of an ounce. Grammataeus, a chauncellour. Grammatica, grammer. Grammaticus, he that teacheth grammer, or expoundeth aucthors, a profounde gram∣marian. Grammaticus, ca, cum, perteynynge to grammer. Grammatice loqui, to speake congruely. Grammatista, a smatterer in grammer, a mean grammaria. Grammatocyphon, he that wryteth on his knee. Grammatophylatium, the place where the re∣cordes, or commune writinges be kepte. Gramme, a lengthe without bredthe. Grammia, the fleume in the eyen. Granâtae, a reyalme and citie in Spayne, ioy∣nynge to the sea called Mare mediterrane∣um, whiche was vnder the subiection of the Moores about .DCCC. yeres: at the laste, by the great wysedome, polycie, and prowes of kynge Ferdinando and his queene Elyza∣beth, of famouse memorye late kynge and queene of Spayne, was eftsones restored vn¦to Christendome, and the Mores expelled. Granarium, a grayenarde, wherin corne is kepte. Grandebalae, haeres in the arme holes. Grandaeuus, very olde. Grandaeuitas, great age. Grandesco, scere, to waxe great. Grandiloquentia, a stately eloquence. Grandiloquus, eloquente, he that speaketh as it were with a great magnificence in worde Grandinatus, ta, tum, hurte or wounded with hayle. Grandinosus, a, um, full of hayle. Grandio, iui, ire, to make great. Grandis, de, auncient, or great. Granditas, tatis, the abundaunce of yeres, auncienty. Grandiusculus, la, lum, some what or a lyttell greater, or of good age, wel stryken in yeres. Granum, grayne or corne. Also the fiue hundred and .xxvi. parte of an ounce. Graphiarium, a case, wherin pensilles were kepte, it maye be called a pennar. Graphicè, properly, well, and kunningly. Graphicus, a, um, kunnyngely or perfectelye wroughte. Graphicus homo, a proper man. Graphis, phidis, the arte of portrayture. Graphium, a pensyll, wherwith men do wryte in tables. Grassator, he that by highe wayes, lyeth in a wayte to rob or sle men, an extortioner. Grassor, aris, ari, to rob or slee men passynge by the high wayes. Also to go or come on one
with a violente rage. Therfore in a sodayne and violent pestilence, it is sayde: Morbus grassatus, the sickenes kylleth men sodaynly. Grate, kyndely. Grates, thankes. Gratia, grace: sometyme it signifieth thanke, somtyme a benefite, sometyme rewarde, also peace or loue, somtyme cause or respecte, also prayse, authoritie, fauour. Mala gratia, signifieth displeasure. Mea, tua, uel eius gratia, for my sake, thyr sake, or his sake. Gratiam haber, to thanke. Gratiam inire, to get thanke. Gratiam referre, uel reddere, to requite one good turne for an other. Gratificor, ari, to gratifie, or doo a thynge thankefull, or to confer a benefyt, or do a good turne. Gratiosus, very thankfull. also in fauour with the people, or well estemed. Gratis, an aduerbe, betokenynge withoute re∣warde: Some tyme without deserte, for nothynge. Habitare gratis in alieno, to dwell on an o∣ther mannes grounde without paying rente. Seruire gratis, to serue without wages. Gratitudo, dinis, kyndnesse. Grator, ari, to gyue thankes to god with offe∣rynges: also to reioyse of good fortune. Gratuito, an aduerbe, signifyenge of good wyll, without benefyte. Gratuitus, ta, tum, without rewarde or vn∣hyred. Gratulatio, sometyme it signifieth a reioycing of some good fortune happened to hym selfe, or to an other man: sometyme a giuinge of thankes. Gratulabundus, he that doth reioyse, ut supra. Gratulor, ari, with a datiue case, to be ioyous for hym selfe or an other for any good thynge that hath happened. Tibi de hac tua felicitate gratulor,. I am ioy¦ous with the, or as glad as thou art, of this prosperitie that thou art in. Sometyme it si∣gnifieth to gyue thankes vnto god: but with an accusatiue case it signifieth to take thank¦fully any acte. Gratus, he that remembreth a good turne. also agreable, pleasant, or dilectable. Gratus, ta, tum, thankefull, pleasaunte, ac∣ceptable. Grauastellus,. an auntient father. Grauate, & Grauatim, greuously, or dysplea∣santly, or peynefully. Grauatus, greued. Grauedinosus, he that hath a heuy heade. Grauedinosus, a, um, heuy or vnlusty, dispo∣sed to do nothynge. Grauedo, dinis, heuynesse, griefe, disease. sometyme the mur or reume of the head. Graueolentia, stenche or stynke. Grauesco, scere, to be laded. Grauicors, cordis, he that hath a great harte. Grauida mulier, a woman great with chylde. Grauido, are, to get a woman with chylde. Grauiloquus, he that speaketh grauely and seriously. Grauionarium, a citie in Almayne called Banbergh. Graus, graue, heuy, greuous. sometyme sub∣stantialle, graue, or hauynge granitie, con∣trary to lyghtnesse or wantonnes. also greate or puissaunte: Somtyme olde or aged, some∣tyme sure or constante, some tyme plentuous or full. Terra granis, lande laded with . Grauis nuntius,Vergilius. heuy tidinges. Graue pretium, an highe pryce. Grauiter, & Graué, greuously, heuyly, substā∣tially, moche, wysely, sadly. Grauo, aui, are, to greue, to burden, to lade. Grauor, ari, to be grieued, or to take grye∣uousely. Gregalis, le, cattell, whiche is in the flocke. Gregarius canis, a cur dog. Gregarius miles, a souldiour taken at aduen∣ture, not chosen. Gregarius pastor, the chiefe shepeherde, whi∣che hath the charge of the hole flocke. Gregatim, in sundry flockes. Gremiale, an apron. Gremium, is the space betwene the .ii. thighes specially of a woman. Gressibile, apt to go. Gressutus, ta, tum, idem. Gressus, a step or goynge. Grex, gregis, a flocke, as well of men, as of cattell. Grossapina, cotten. Grossi, grene fygges. Grossipion, seu Grossapinus, a tree wherof cometh cotton. Grossuli, younge fygges. Grossus, a, um, great. Gruina, herbe Roberte. Grumia, a mydde place, from whense goeth foure wayes. Grumma, a thynge wherewith grounde is measured. Grumus, a barowe or hyllocke. Grunnio, ire, to grunte lyke aswyne. Grundio, idem. Gruo, gruere, to crye lyke a crane. Grus, gruis, a crane. Gryllus, a beaste more than a grashop, whiche destroyeth corne. Gryphus, a grype or gryffon: Also a capti∣ous,
an insoluble or diffuse argumente, a ryddle. Grypus, a nose risynge in the myddle. ¶G ANTE V. GVAIACVM, a tree growynge in the yles newe founden, the one called Corterati, the other Hispaniola, whi∣che be not farre frome the equinoctiall lyne & whiche tree is in the top full of branches, the leaues very small and meruaylous greene, it beareth fruite in the quantitie of a fylberde nut, hauynge within it a kernell, and with∣out a thyn shale. There is of this tree three kyndes: The wood of the one is harde and heuye, within blacke, without pale coloured hauynge lynes somewhat russet. The other is somewhat whyter withoute, but blacke within, not in so great a tompace The third is white within and without, hauynge very smal lynes. This wood boyled in water hath ben founde an excellent remedy agaynste the frenche porkes, and also the goute. Gubernacula nauis, the instrumentes, where∣by the shyp is ruled. Gubernator, a mayster of a shyp: also a gouer∣nour of a countrey. Guberno, nare, to gouerne. Guesseli, beastes lyke to myse, whiche haue theyr dunge as swete as muske. Gula, the throte: sometyme gluttony. Gulosus, a glutton. Guliocae, the grene shale of the walnut. Gummatus, ta, tum, dressed with gum, or rased. Gummatae arbores, trees that bryngeth forthe gum. Gummi, gum, whiche droppeth from trees. Gumminum, oyle made of gum. Gurges, gitis, a swallowe or depe pyt in a wa∣ter, or a gulfe. Gargito, aui, are, to swalowe or deuoure. Gurgulio, lionis, the gullye or gargyll of the throte, or throte bol. It is also a worme that bredeth in barnes, and eateth vp corne. Gurgustium, a darke and vyle habitation, a cabban or cotage. Gustatus, tus, taste. Gusto, aui, are, to taste. Gustus, tus, taste. Gutta, a drop. Guttatim, by droppes. Guttur, gutturis, the throte. Gutturosus, he that hath a swollen throte. Gutturnium, a lauer or yewer. Guttus, a cruet, or other lyke thyng, out of the whiche lycour is ponred droppynge. ¶G ANTE Y. GYGAEVS, a lake of Lydie. Gygemorus, a lyttell hyll, not far frome Thessaly. Gyges, the sonne of Dascylus, and one of the seruantes of Candaules kynge of Lydia (as Herodotus wryteth) or his companyon, as Trogus reherseth, was also kynge of Lydia by this meanes: Candaules the kynge had a wyfe, whom for the inordinate loue that he bare towarde her, he supposed to be the fay∣rest woman lyuynge. On a tyme he praysed his wyues beaulty vnto Gyges, addyng ther vnto, to the intente that he moughte the bet∣ter beleue hym, he wolde cause hum to se her naked: but Gyges refused to doo it, dissua∣dynge as moch as he could Candaules from that foly, with ryghte wyse exhortations. But Candaules obstinately persisting in his folyshe fantasy, dydde set Gyges in a secrete place, where he behelde his wyfe naked go∣ynge to bed, and as Gyges departed, the la∣dy behelde hym. And fynally the matter dys∣closed by her husbande vnto her, she kepyng silence, determined in her harte to be reuen∣ged on Candaules her husbande. For in that countrey it was an intollerable reproche to a man or woman to be seene naked. wherfore sone after callynge vnto her suche of her ser∣uauntes as she specially trusted, she sente for Gyges. who beinge come vnto her, she pur∣posed vnto hym this election, eyther he hym selfe to be slayne, or els to promyse her to slee Candaules, and take her to his wyfe, and the royalme with her, whiche he abborryng, and a good whyle resistinge, with sondry per¦suasions, at the laste fyndynge no remedy, he chase rather than hym selfe to dye, to sle Can¦daules, as he dyd lyinge in his bedde by the meanes of the queene, whome he toke to his wyfe and was kynge of Lydia. Plato. li. 2. de Iusto, in the person of Glaucus telleth vn to Socrates, that Gyges had a rynge, whi∣che was of a meruaylouse nature, for whan he tourned the broder parte of the rynge to∣warde the palme of his hande, he was seene of no man, but he mought see all thynges: And whan he turned the rynge on the contra¦ry parte, he was hym selfe seene openlye, by the meanes wherof he slewe Candaules, and commytted adultery with his wyfe. There was also an other called Gyges, a great gy∣ant, and brother of Briarêus. Gymnasiarches, the chiefe master of the schole, or place of exercyse. Gymnasium, a place where is commune exer∣cyse of the body. Sometyme a scholehouse. Gymnastes, he that teacheth chyldren, to exer∣cise
them in wrastlynge, or other lyke. Gymnastium, the arte of exercise. Gymnici ludi, playes exercised naked. Gymnosophistae, philosophers of Inde, which wente alwaye naked. Gymnus, a beaste whiche commeth of an horse an asse mare. Gyneconitis, that parte of the house, whiche serueth onely to women. Gynephilus, a great louer of women. Gynoecium, a nurcery. Gypso, aui, are, to playster. Gypsus, playster. Gyro, aui, are, to compasse or go in circute. Gyrus, a circute or compasse. Gyttheum, a towne, whiche Hercules and A∣pollo, laynge there asyde theyr stryfe and de∣bate, buylded together, and the inhabitantes of the same towne are called Gyttheres. ¶H ANTE A. HABENA, THE rayne of a brydle. some∣tyme it signifieth power or rule. Habenas adducere, to holde straight the bridle Habenas remittere, to slake the brydell. Hebeo, bui, bere, to haue, to holde, to possede or occupie, to esteme or suppose, to call, to dwell. Habeo audire, I can here. Habeo polliceri, I can promyse. Haberi aliquo numero, to be in some esti∣mation. Clodij animum perspectum habeo, I know what Clodius intendeth. Habere bene seu male, to do or prosper welle or yll. Bene habet, it is wel. Male me habet, it greueth me. Habere concionem, to preche, to declare a thynge to the people. Habet eum arcte, he kepeth hym shorte, or from lyberty. Fortunas suas uenales habuit, he hath solde all his goodes. Frustra habere, to be deceyued. Habet frustra, he is disappoynted. Habere gratiam, to thanke. In custodijs haberi, to be kepte in prison. Habere obuiam, to encounter or meete with one. Pensi habere, to take hede. Prorsus ne{que} fa∣cere, ne{que} dicere, quicquam pensi habebat: He cared not what he did, nor what he spake Principatum habere, to be more excellent. Habere quaestui rempublicā, to minister the weale publyke for his owne profyt. Habere rationem, to haue regarde or con∣sideration. Habere rationem cum terra, to labour the erthe. Res ita se habet, the thynge is at this poynt. Habere rem, to medle with a woman, Habere rem cum aduersario, to contende. Se munditer habere, to be clenly. Sermonem habere, to commune or deuyse. Habeo tibi fidem, I put my truste in the. Habilis, le, hable. Habitaculum, & Habitatio, a dwellynge place or habitation. Habitior, oris, more corporate. Habito, aui, are, to dwell. Habitudo, dinis, idem quod habitus. Habitus, tus, the fourme or state of the bodye, some tyme of other thynges. also apparayle. Also it signifieth a qualitie or propertie, whi∣che a man hath conceyued by education, long exercyse or custome. Habitus, ta, tum, had. Habraham, is interpreted Father of many dy∣uerse people. Hac, hyther. sometyme by this place. Ita nunc hac, an illac eam, sum inscerta consilij: Now whether I maye go hyther or thyther I can not tell. Hac non successit, alia aggrediamur uia, this waye it cometh not to passe, let vs now assay an other fascion. Hactenus, hytherto, so moche. Hadria, was a citie of Italy on the sea syde, by the whiche the sea betwene Italye and Sla∣uony was called Mare Hadriaticum. Hadrianopolis, a citie in Thracia. Hadrianus, a noble emperour, which in all sci∣ences was excellentely lerned: He was after Christis incarnation .Cxix. yeres, and ray∣gned .xxi. yeres. Hadrobalum, a kynde of swete smellynge gum that groweth in Media. Haebudes, are yles beyonde Scotlande .ii. dais saylynge, wherof be fyue. Haec illa est misericordia: Loo the pitie that this man hath. Vna haec spes est, This is al the comforte that I haue. Haedera, yuy tree. Haederatius, a, um, of yuy. Haedile, a stable wherin kyddes be kepte. Haedina, caro, kyddes fleshe. Haedus, a kyd. Haedui, people in Fraunce, whiche be now cal∣led Burgonions, and Burbonoises. Haematices, the sanguinary or bloud stone.
Haemonia, the countrey called Thessaly, Haemorrhois, Haemorrhoidis, a disease in the fundemente lyke teates or wartes, out of the whiche issueth bloude, called emorroides or pyles. Also a serpente, of whom if a man be striken, he bledeth to deathe. Haerba, an herbe. Haerbaceus, a, um, that is of herbes. Haerbarius, he that knoweth herbes and theyr vertues. Herbarius, a, um, of herbes. Haerbesco, scere, to be an herbe. Haerbidus, & Haerbosus, a, um, hauynge ma∣ny herbes. Haerediolum, a lyttle inheritance. Haeredipeta, crauers of goodes, flatterynge men to be theyr heyres. Haereditarius, a, um, perteyning to inheritāce. Bona haereditaria, goodes whiche do come by inheritaunce. Haereditas, tatis, inheritaunce or succession. Haereditas caduca, lande fallen by exchete to the lord, of whom it is holden. Haeredium, lande, wherein a man hath a state of inheritauncè. Haereo, haesi, haerere, to cleaue or stycke to a thynge. somtyme to doubt. Haeret in te omnis culpa, In the is put al the blame. Haeres, haeredis, an heyre, or he, which succe∣deth an other in his landes or goodes. Haeredem scribere, to make one heyre by te∣stamente. Haeredes secundi, heyres in remaynder. Haeresco, scere, to sticke faste, or be thruste in. Haeresiarches, an arche heretike. Haeresis, sios, a secte, an heresye, an obstynate opinion. Haereticus, an heretike. Haesito, aui, are, idem quod Haereo. Hagiographa, holy scripture. Hagiographus, a wryter of holy scripture. Hagnus, a lambe. Hagnellus, a lyttell lambe. Hagninus, a, um, of a lambe. Halcyone, was daughter of Neptunus, and wyfe of Caeyces, whom shee beholdynge to be drowned, she for sorowe drowned her selfe. wherfore the poetes do wryte, that they were bothe transformed in to byrdes, and called Halcyones, rede before in Alcyones. Halec, lecis, a fyshe called herrynge. Also a sauce made of fyshe. Halesina regio, a countray wherein is a well, the water wherof beinge alwaye quyet and playne, if one standynge by it doo playe on a shalme, or other lyke pype, the water in the well wyll ryse, as it daunced, in so moche as at the laste it wyll mounte and run ouer the brynmme of the wel: and the pype ceasynge, the water wyll forthewith falle and become quiete. Halesius, a ryuer not far from Aetna. Halialmon, a ryuer of Macidon. Halicacabus, an herbe called of the apotheca∣ries Alkekengi. Halietus, an egle, that haunteth about the sea. Halieutica, bokes contayninge the propertyes of fyshes. Halimon, a thorne lyke to a whyte thorn, gro∣wynge by the sea syde, and hath leaues lyke to an olyue tree, but they be broder. Halito, aui, are, to vapour out. Halitus, brethe or vapour. Halizones, people of Paphlagonie, so called bycause they are nuyrroned aboute with the sea. Hallucinor, ari, to be in a dreame, to be decey∣ued, to erre, or to take a matter wronge, to take one thynge for an other. Hallux, the great toe, whiche lyeth ouer the nexte toe. Halmades, be olyue beryes condite in bryne, as Ruellius affyrmeth, who sayth, that Co∣lymbiades be they whiche do swym in theyr owne oyle. al be it (as he sayth) men do con∣founde the one name with the other. Halmyris, a kynde of colewortes crispe and delycate to eate. Halo, aui, are, to sende forthe sauour. Halo, lonis, a myste, whiche sometyme happe∣neth to be about the moone. Halophanta, a great lyar. Halosis, captiuitie. Halteres, ris, a plummet or weyghte of leade, whiche daunsers on cordes do holde in theyr hande. Halycarnasus, a citie in the lesse Asia, in the countrey called Caria, on the sea syde. Halyetus, a faulcone. Hamadriades, nymphes or fayries of the woodes. Hamatilis, le, perteynynge to a hoke. Piscatus hamatilis, fyshynge with a hooke, or anglynge. Hamatus, ta, tum, to be furnyshed with hokes Hamiota, uel Hamota, an angler or fysher, with an angel or hoke. Hammon, onis, Iupiter in the Egyptian tunge. Hamo, aui, are, to crooke. Hamonus, a, um, a colour somwhat red. Hamus, a hoke, somtyme a chayne. Hannibal, was son of Hamylcar, the moste no∣ble and valyant capitayne of the Carthagy∣nensis, whoo makynge warre with the Ro∣maynes .xvi. yeres, contended with them in prowes and polycie, wynnynge frome them
theyr dominions in Spayne and Italy. Fy∣nally beynge vainquished by Scipio, he fled to Antiochus kynge of Asia, afterwarde to Prusias kynge of Bithynia, of whom vnder the colour of amytie he was betrayed, and shuld haue ben delyuered to Flaminius that tyme ambassadour to Prusias. But Hanni∣bal perceyuynge it, chesynge rather to dye than to come into the handes of the Romay∣nes, toke poyson, whiche he kepte for that purpose, sayinge: Lette vs delyuer the Ro∣maynes from the care and feare, which they haue of vs, with a fewe mo wordes of indi∣gnation, and so dyed before that he mought be delyuered some do wryte this name with∣out h. Hanum, or Hanus barbatus, a vesselle with a great bealy, wherin wyne or water was wōt to be broughte to the table. Haphe, a colour on the body, lyke to them that be leperous. Hara, a swynes stye or cote. Harena, uide ante in arena. Hariolus, a southsayer. Harmonia, harmony or melody. Harmonides, a Troian carpentar, whiche made the shyppes that brought Paris in to Greece. Harpa, & Harpax, acis, a grapelynge yron, for to close shyppes together. Also a poll with a hooke on the ende, that shypmen vse. Harpago, ginis, a grapull of a shyp. also a cou¦pers instrumente, wherwith he dryueth on houpes, an addyse. Harpago, aui, are, to take by violence. Hapalice, a womans name, the doughter of Harpalus kynge of Thrace. Harpasa, a towne of Asia. Harpe, a sworde lyke to a sythe. Harpocrates, the god of silence. Harpocratem reddere, to put one to silence. Harpyiae, monstruous byrdes, hauynge may∣dens vysages, and talons of a meruaylous rapacitie. wherfore men that be rauenous, and greate gatherers of goodes, be named sometyme Harpyiae. Haruspex, spicis, a diuinatour, or tellar of thin∣ges to come by the lokynge in the bowels of beastes. Also he, whiche obserueth tymes in doinge of thynges. Haruspicina, the arte of hym, whiche is a di∣uinatour. Haruspicium, the diuynation or tellynge of thynges to come, by the lokynge in beastes bowelles. Haspis, pidis, the bowynge made lyke a cerkle in roufes of houses, or of a wheele. Hasta, a speare. Hastam abijcere, signifieth to leue suite, to dispayre of the matter in variaunce. Hastae purae, were without yron, and in the old time were giuen for a price to them that vain¦quished fyrste in battayle. Hastarium, sellynge vnder the standerd. Hastati, speare men Hasticus Iudus, runnynge at the tylte with speares. Hastile, a speare staffe. Haud, in no wyse. Haud inuito, wyllyngely. Haud nihil, some thynge. Haurio, hausi, rij, ire, to drawe or take out, to here, to se, to take a thyng gredely, to woūd, to fatigate or make wery, to make empty, to consume. Hausit coelum, he sawe heauen. Hausit corda pauor, feare made theyr cou∣rages faynte. Haurire dolorem, to endure heuynesse or sorrowe. Haurire supplicia, to suffer punisshemente or peynes. Hauritorium, any thynge wherby water is dra¦wen out of a well. Haustrum, a bucket to drawe water. Haustus, tus, a draught in drinkinge. Haustum facere, to drynke. ¶H ANTE E. HEANA, a foundation. Heautontimorumenon, the name of one of the commedies of Terence, whiche is as moche to saye, as tourmentynge hym selfe. Hebdomas madis, & Hebdomada, ae, a weke Also the number of seuen in dayes, yeres, or other tyme. Hebe, hebes, the doughter of Iupiter and Iu¦no, who was buttelar of Iupiter before the raueshynge of Ganymedes, and she was cal∣led of the Paynimes, the goddesse of youth. Hebenus, a tree, whereof the wood is blacke lyke ieate, and it beareth neyther leaues nor fruite. loke in Ebenus. Hebeo, & Hebesco, scere, to be dull. Hebes, hebetis, dull. Hebetesco, seu Hebetasco, scere, belongeth properly to the eyes, to be dull in sighte. Hebero, aui, are, to be duske, or made darke. Hebetudo, dinis, dulnes or duskyshenes. Hebiones, of men in olde tyme, were called poore folkes. Hebraei, Iewes, whiche came of Abraham, Hebraicus, Hebrician, or of Hebrew. Hebron, a village by Hierusalem. Hebrus, a ryuer in Thracia. Hecameda, the daughter of Arsinoi, whiche
was gyuen to Nestor for a gyfte. Hecate, a name of the moone. It was also Pro¦serpina. Hecatombe, a sacrifice, wherin were kylled an hundred beastes. Hecatompolis, a countrey hauynge an hun∣dred cities therin. Hecatompus, he that hath an hundred feete. Hecatontarchus, the capytayne of an hun∣dred men. Hecta, the pexynge of a man. also a lytel puffe, whiche ryseth in breade whan it is bake. Somtyme it signifieth a tryfle. Hectica febris, the feuer that consumeth. Hector, the son of Priamus, the mooste noble and valiaunt of all the Troianes. Hecuba, was the wyfe of Priamus kynge of Troye, and doughter of Cysseus kynge of Thracia, a woman of noble courage & most vnhappy fortune: for hauynge al her sonnes slayn, and also her husband, her fayre daugh¦ter Polyxea kylled on the graue of Achylles, her other doughter Cassandra taken pryso∣ner, and beholdynge the noble citie of Troye burned, her selfe a captyue, her yongeste son Polydotus kylled, she fynally waxed madde, and dyd byte and stryke all men, whome she met, wherfore she was called dogge, and at the laste was her selfe kylled with stones by the Greekes. Hecyra, a mother in lawe. Hedonius, expenses in voluptuous thynges. Hedui, people in Fraunce, nowe called Bur∣gonious. looke Haedui. Hegesias, was a philosopher of the secte called Cirenaica. who so moche commended death, that many whiche herde hym, kylled theym selues. Heiulo, aui, are, to wayle, cryenge out. Helciarij, shypmen whiche drawe thynges of greate weyghte in to the shyp, with roopes, or do drawe the shyppe to the shore or frome the shore. Helcium, the harueys of carthorses, whereby they drawe. Helena, was doughter of Iupiter and Leda the wyfe of Tyndarus kynge of Lacedemo∣nia: She for her wonderfull beaultie was twyse rauyshed. Fyrste at the age of .ix. yeres by Theseus, afterwarde by Paris the Troi¦an, she than beinge wyfe vnto Menelaus: The which was the onely occasion of the ten yeres siege of Troye, and finally the destru∣ction of the mooste famouse Citie, with the deathe and losse of moste noble prynces, and of people innumerable. Loke more in Troia. Helenium, an herbe commonlye called Enula∣campana, in englyshe Helycampane. Heliades, the doughters of the Sun and Ne∣aera, that is to saye, Phaētusa, Lampetia, and Lampetusa, whiche lamented so moche the deathe of Phaëton theyr brother, that therwith they dyed, and were transformed (as the poetes do fayn) in to trees, out of the which cunneth the gumme called Electrum, in englyshe amber, whereof beades be made. Helias, the prophete of Thesbis, of the coun∣trey of Arabia, a leuite of the tribe of Aaron, he dwelt in Galaad, for Thesbis was an ha¦bitation dedicate to priestes. In the tyme of his byrthe his father Sobac dyd see in a vy∣sion, that menne beinge apparayled in white dyd call the chylde, and threwe hym into the fyre, and gaue to hym a flame of fyre to eate, the father rysynge vp wente to Hierusalem, & shewed his visyon vnto the pristes: and he that gaue answeres, sayd vnto hym: beware that thou do not discloe it. The habitation of this chylde shall be lighte, and his worde a demonstration, and shal iudge Israel in the sworde and fyre. This is that Helias that brought fyre thryse out of heauen, and bare rayne in his tungue, and was taken vp in to heauen in a fyry storme. That which is writ¦ten more of Helias in the Byble, it maye be there rad, sens the Bible is nowe commonly rad in englyshe. Helicon, a mountayne in Aonia, dedicate to the musis. Heliocaminus, is a soller set in a sunnye placeo where the heate of the sun maye be receyued, whiche was vsed in the olde tyme. Heliochrisos, an herbe hauyng a yelow floure, a marygolde. Heliogabalus, was supposed to be the bastard sonne of Antonius Caracalla, Emperour of Rome, and (as Lampridius wryteth in his lyfe) of Semiamitra, or (as Egnatius wri∣teth) of Scenides his cousen, he was made emperour after the deathe of Macrinus and Diadumenus, being but a boy of .xvi. yeres olde. He so moche exceded in detestable leche¦ry and promotynge of vyle persons and ry¦bauldes, that fynally he was hated of al mē, and at the laste slayne and drawen throughe the citie of Rome, and throwen in to the ry∣uer of Tiber. Albeit he was warned afore of astronomers, that he shoulde dye a vyolente deathe, and therfore he had prouyded ropes of sylke, if nede were, to hange hym selfe: al∣so swordes of golde to kyll hym selfe: alsoo stronge poyson in iacinctes and emerauldes to poyson hym selfe, if he were inforsed: more ouer he made a very hyghe toure, hauyng the floore of bourdes keuered with plates of golde, bordered with pretious stones, frome the whiche toure he wolde throwe hym selfe downe whan he were pursued. But all this
nothynge auayled, for he was slayne by kna∣ues, and throwen into Tiber, as is before wrytten. More of hym maye you reede in the lyfe of Alexander Seuerus, whyche I dydde translate into englysh, and callid it the ymage of gouernaunce. Heliopolis, a citie in Grecia callyd also Corin∣thus. An other in Egypte. Helioscopium, a lyttell tree lyke to a fygge tree and hath leaues lyke a plane, but greatter and blacker. Helioselinum, an herb lyke to smallage, which groweth in watry groundes, and hathe but one leafe. Heliotropium, a floure, whiche in the sonne ri∣synge dothe open, and at the sonne set closeth. other do thynke it to be cihory. som supposeth it to be marygoldes or ruddes. Helissaeus, was the prophet of Abelmuth, of the lande of Rubim. whan he was borne in Gal∣galis, the cowe of golde in Selom cryed soo lowde, that she was herd at Hierusalem. And the prieste sayde, that it signifyed, that a pro∣phete was borne that day, whyche shuld dis∣solue keruen ymages, and breake in pieces y∣mages, whyche were caste of mettalle. Ma∣ny meruayles almyghty god shewed by him, whiche ye may reade in the byble nowe being in englyshe. Helix, icis, of some men is taken for a kynde of wyllowe tree, of some men for yuy. Helias, ladis, the countray of Grece. Helleborus, an herbe, the roote wherof pour∣geth melancoly. loke in Elleborus. ❀Helleborum edere, is a prouerbe spoken to men, whiche are very melancholy, or be wylde brayned. Hellenes, the sonne of Deucalion, of whome the Grekes were named Hellenes. Hellespontus, is the fyrst part of the sea, which diuideth Europā from Asia, and is in bredth but .vii. surlonges, whyche lacketh one fur∣longe of a myle. Heloi, in hebrue signifieth god almighty. Helorus, a ryuer in Sicile. Heluatia, a garment, which was vsyd in Lidia, and was of the colour of a cowes hyde. Heluati, rauenous eaters. Heluella, small wortes or herbes. Heluerij, people called Suicers, or Suiches, by desyre of warres, ennemies to all mankynd, subiectes neyther to god nor to prynce, as re∣dy for money to serue as wel Turkes, as chri¦sten pryncis. Heluo, onis, he whych in eatyng and drynking spendeth al his substance, a reueller. somtyme a glutton onely. Heluo librorū, an insaciable reder of bokes. Heluor, aris, aris, to eate rauenousely. Heluolum, a colour betwene redde and whyte lyke the colour of clothe callyd french tawny. Heluolum unum, claret wyne. Helxine, an herbe callyd pelytory of the wall. Hem, an interiection of blamyng, disdaynyng, meruaylynge or shewynge. Hemeridion, whiche dureth but one day. Hemerobius, one days sustynance. also a worm whiche lyueth but one day. Hemerodromus, a currour, whiche rounneth many myles in one day. Hemicadia, vesselles callyd a tierce, halfe a hoggeshead. Hemichorium, halfe a daunce. Hemicranea, a peyne in halfe the head, callyd the mygrym. Hemicyclum, a compasse chayre. Hemyclus, an halfe cercle. Hemina, a measure whiche is halfe Sextarius, ten ounces of measure, whyche lacketh two ounces of our halfe pynte, and conteyneth in weight of oyle .ix. ounces, of wyne .x. ounces, of hony .xv. ounces. Hemiola, gayne of all, and halfe as moche, as if of .iiii. s. be gotten .vi.s. Hemiolus, a proportion in arithmetike, con∣taininge the hole number, and half that num∣ber, as one to thre .xv. to .x. Hemionum, an herbe good against all yexis. Hemionitis, tidos, is the herbe, whiche is com∣munely callyd hartis tungue, as Leonicênus supposeth. Hemis, halfe. Hemispherium, halfe the compasse of the visi∣ble heauen or firmament. Hemistichium, halfe a verse. Hemitogium, halfe a gowne. Hemitritaeus, an halfe tertian feuer, whose course is euery .xxxvi. houres, or whiche hath the course of a tercian. Hemodes, certaine iles in the douche sea. Hemus, a great mountayne in Thracia, nyghe to the sea called Propontis, whiche is syx mi∣les in height. Hendecasyllabus, a verse of .xi. syllables. Henula, a littell chappell. Heo, an interiection, how, in callinge one. Hepatica, an herbe callid Lyuerwort. reade af∣ter in Lichen. Hepiolus, a fly like a butterfly, whiche flyeth at night into the leame of a candell. Hepsema, must boiled to the thirde part. Heptaphillon, an herbe callyd tormentill. Heptapleuron, an herbe callyd Plantayn. Heptapolis, was somtime the name of Egypt, by reason of seuen cities, whiche fyrste were in it. Hepthemimeris, where a syllable naturallye shorte is made longe in a verse, whiche dothe
hap in the begynnyng of the fyrst foote. Hera, the name of Iuno. It is also the maistres of a bondman or bondewoman. it is alsoo an herbe callyd Clary. Heraclea, a town in the confines of Europa. Heraclee, a towne very nere to Naples. Heracleon, an herbe lyke to Organum, it gro∣weth in watry places, and hath a flowre lyke a lylly: and whan the floure is fallen, it hath a head lyke a popy: It is also an other herbe growynge in plashes, hauynge a lyttell stalke, whiche excedeth not foure fyngers hygh, ha∣uyng a redde floure, and leaues lyke Corian∣der: this herbe healeth all woundes, yf it be layde vnto theym. It is callyd Heraclion syderion. Heracleotica nux, a wall nutte. Heraclia, a kynde of the water lyly callyd Ne∣miphar, hauynge a whyte floure. Heraclides, the name of a philosopher. Heraclitus, a philosopher, which always wept whanne he behelde the people, consyderynge howe busye they were to gather treasure, and howe neglygente in the welle bryngynge vp of theyr chyldern, his warkes of a pourpose were obscur and hard to be vnderstande. Heraclius, the name of an emperour. It is also a touche stone. Herba, an herbe. Also generally all thinge that groweth on the erthe, not being wood some∣tyme a wede. Herbam dare aut porrigere, where a manne yeldeth hym, or confesseth hym selfe to be van¦quyshed. Herba paralysis, the small daysye. Herbaceus, a, um, of herbes or grasse. Herbare, to brynge forth herbes. Herbarius, & herbaria, he or she that dothe ga∣ther herbes for phisitions. Also he which kno∣weth the properties of herbes, and maketh medicines of theym. Herbarius, a, um, pertaynyng to herbes. Herbesco, scere, to make herbes or wedes. Herbidus, a, um, idem quod herbaceus. Herbilis anser, a grased goose. Herbosus, a, um, full of herbes or grasse. Herbula, a lyttell herbe. Herceus, one of the surnames of Iupiter. Hercinia, a great wodde in Germanye, whiche is in breadth .ix. dayes iourney, and in length xl. dayes iourney, as Cesar wryteth. Pompo∣nius Mela affyrmeth it to be .lx. dayes iour∣ney in length. Hercisceor, ceris, sci, or Ercisceor, sci, to make partition betweene coheyres, and to assygne to eche of them theyr portion. Therof cometh Familiae herciscundae, a title in the digestes of the lawe ciuile. Hercle, a worde vsed to ornate a sentence in maner of an othe, as God helpe me, truely, in faythe. Herculanus, a, um, of Hercules. Herculanus morbus, the fallynge syckenes. Herculanus nodus, was a certayne knot harde to be vndoone, by the whyche a subtylle que∣styon or syllogysme maye be sygnyfied. Fe∣stus Pompeius wrytethe, that in the olde tyme the custome was, that the newe ma∣ryed bryde, whan she went to bedde, shoulde be gyrte with a woullen gyrdelle knyt with Hercules knotte, whyche the housbande for good lucke shulde vndoo in the bedde, that he mought be fortunate in gettynge of chyldren. for Hercules is reported to haue .lxxii. sonnes and one daughter, as Aristotle writeth De na¦tura animalium li. 7. cap. 6. Herculeana pars, It was the custome of men in olde tyme to auowe the tenth part of their goodes vnto Hercules, and that tenthe parte was callyd Herculeana pars. Hercules quaestus, sygnifieth the same. Herculea, an herbe commonlye called Millium solis, of Dio corides Lithospermon. Herculeius, a Romane, whyche fauoured the parte of Marius. Hercules, semeth to be a generalle name gyuen to men excellyng in strenthe all other men of theyr tyme. for Cicero De natura deorum, wryteth, that amonge auncient writers were founde .vi. Hercules. Varro affyrmeth, that there were .xliiii. Hercules. Fynallye there is noo notable mencyon made but of two, the one called Hercules Aegyp̄tius, or Libi∣cus, whyche is supposed to be Osyris, of whom is wryten hereafter. The other, whi∣che was longe after hym, who was sonne of Iupyter and Alemena, and was callyd Alcides by his proper name, and for his in∣comparable strengthe and laboures, whyche he tooke for the commune profytte of man∣kynde, he was named alsoo Hercules. All be yt Berosus the Caldey affyrmeth Hercu∣les to be the sonne of Osyris, and kynge of Aegypte, and was callyd Hercules Libyus, bycause that he conqueryd Libyam. And sayncte Hierome on the tenthe chapyter of Genesis wryteth, that this Hercules was he that perfourmed the twelue notable labours, whyche poetes doo wryte of, and not Alcides sonne of Alemena. The fyrst of the twelue la∣bours (was as Diodorus Siculus writeth) the sleing of a lyon in the wod callid Nemea, which far exceded al other lyons in greatnes, whyche mought not be slayne neyther with mettall, nor with stone. Wherfore he was con¦strayned to slea hym with his handes. The seconde labour was in the kyllyng of Hydra the monster in the fennes of Lerna, whyche
hadde a hundeede neckes with serpentyne hea∣des, and whan one head was stryken of, there dyd ryse eftsoones two other heades. The third labour was the takynge of the great wyld bore of Erimanthus, whiche wasted the countreye of Arcadia, and all people drad hym, but fynal∣ly Hercules toke hym alyue, and bearynge hym on his shulders, broughte hym to kynge Euri∣stheus. The fourthe labour was the battayle, whyche he hadde alone with a great number of men callyd Centauri, whyche were of greatte strengthe, and as swyfte as horses: all theym he slewe whan they assaulted hym. The fyfthe labour was the takynge of a great hart in run∣nynge, whyche for his swyftenesse hadde his hornes guylte. The syxthe labour was the de∣struction of the byrdes callyd Stymphalides, whyche consumyd the fruytes and grayn of the countrayes adioynynge. The seuenth was the makynge cleane of the halle of Augeus, beinge fulle of dunge, whyche Hercules perfourmed by wysedome, bryngynge the ryuer callyd Pi∣gnio through out the halle, whych by the swift course of his streame in one day caryed awaye all the dunge, without any reproche vnto Her∣cules. The eyghte was the bryngynge of a bull from the yle of Creta into Greece, drawynge hym alonge the sea. The nynthe was the ta∣kynge of Diomedes kyng of Thracia, and ca∣stynge hym to his horses, whome he fedde with mannes flesshe, and was hym selfe of theym deuoured, and after Hercules breakynge those wylde horses, and makynge theym gentylle, broughte theym to Euristheus. The tenthe la∣bour was his voyage into Spayne, the sleynge there of Gerion and his sonnes, and takynge the greatte kyne, whyche he gaue to a kynge in that countray, who contynually afterwarde of the bulles commynge of that kynde, yerely of∣fered one in sacrifyce to the honour of Hercu∣les. The leuenth was, his goynge into helle, and fetchynge thense Theseus and Perithous and bryngynge with hym in a cheyne Cerbe∣rus the dogge of helle, hauynge thre heades. The twelfthe and laste laboure was, the ta∣kynge of the golden appuls out of the gardens callyd Hesperides, and sleynge of the terryble dragon, whyche contynually watchynge, kepte those appulles, whyche were callyd goulden, for the beaultie of theym. Somme do say, that they were sheepe, whose fleeses were of the co∣loure of golde, and the dragon sygnyfyed the dylygence and strengthe of the shepcherdes, whyche kepte theym. These were the twelue laboures of Hercules, whereof grewe this prouerbe: Herculei labores, where the labours doo seme impossible to be achieued. Herculis cothurnos, was vsed for a pro∣uerbe, where in a thyng of lyttell importance was sette forthe any great cloquence or other thynge solemne more apte for a greatter mat∣ter, as one shulde putte Hercules hosen on a chyldes legges. Lyke vnto that accorded the sayenge of the wyse kynge Igesllaus, whan one commended to hym a rhetorician, whych by his craftye eloquence made tryfles and smalle thynges to seeme greatte. The kynge answered: That sowter deserueth no prayse, whiche putteth a great showe on a very lytell foote, meaning therby, that the wordes shuld as welle accorde with the matter, as the gar∣ment with the persone. This is so commune a vyce nowe a dayes amonge studentes of elo¦quence, that in writynge and speakynge, they seeme to prepare the hose, or they knowe the measure of the legge, wheron they wyl put it. Hercules Gallus, as Lucianus wryteth, was in the olde tyme in Fraunce an ymage made lyke an olde manne with a balde heade, and vnkempte, his heare very whyte, the skynne of his face ryuellyd, and as it were bourned with the sunne, wearynge on hym a lyons skynne, and bearynge in his ryghte hande a great clubbe, in his lefte hande a bowe, a qui∣uer at his backe, drawynge after hym a mul∣titude of people tyed by their eares with a ly∣tell chayne wrought with ambre and goulde, but they were so easyly tyed, that laughynge and with good chere, they wyllyngely solo∣wed, and as it seemyd, they wold not be lou∣sed, and the other ende of the chayn was tyed at Hercules tungue, who looked towarde theym with a lawghynge countenaunce. This ymage sygnyfyed eloquence, whyche for the puyssaunce thereof, resemblyd rather Hercules thanne Mercurye. And his age be∣tokenyd that eloquence is for the more parte substancyall and vehement. That Hercules or rather eloquence draweth men by the ea∣res tyed to his tungue, sygnyfyeth the affy∣nitie betweene the tungue and the eare, and theyr gladde and voluntary folowynge, syg∣nyfieth with what dilectation eloquence dra∣weth menne to her perswasyons and exhor∣tations. Herculeus, a, um, puyssant or myghty. Here, for heri, yesterday. Herebus, the depest place in helle. Heri, yesterday. Hericius, an yrchyn or hedgehogge. Herilis, le, pertaynynge to the lorde or mayster. Herillus, a philosopher of Calcidony. Herinatius, an hedgehogge. Herma, an ymage of Mercurius. It is also an ymage, the head wherof may be chaunged. Hermae, be alsoo ymages sette or layde on se∣pulchres.
Hermaphroditus, the sonne of Mercury and Venus. Also he that is bothe man & woman. Hermathena, was two ymages togyther of Mercury and Minerua. Hermerotes, small ymages, properly of lyttell chyldren with whynges. Hermes, is, & Hermetis, Mercury. Hermesia, a confection made by the Persians with honye, myrre, saffron, and the wyne or iuyce of dates, with the kernels of pyne ap∣puls, which beyng taken of a man with mylk and also of women after that they be concey∣ued, shall bryng forthe chyldren in personage and wytte verye excellent. Democritus wry∣teth of a lyke medycine, by the whiche chyl∣derne fayre, good, and fortunate shall be be∣gotten. Hermione, was doughter of Menclaus and Helene, who being a chylde, was by Tynda∣rus the father of Menelaus in his absence affianced to Orestes the son of Agamemnon: but afterward she was maryed by her father to Pyrrhus sonne of Achilles, whom Orestes dyd afterwarde slea, and wedded Hermione and had by her thre sonnes Thessamenes, Co¦rynthus, and Orestes the yonger. There was an other Hermione daughter of Mars and Venus, and wyfe of Cadmus, whom the po∣etes fayned to be with her husbande, tourned into a serpent. Hermodactylus, is supposed to be that which of Aetius and Paulus is callid Ephemeron. Actuarius maketh mētion of two kyndes cal¦lyd Hermodactyli, whiche are as moche to saye, as Mercurij digiti, in englyshe Mercu∣rius fingers, for the similitude that they haue with fyngers. whereof the one is white, the other is redde, whiche Ruellius supposeth to be that whiche the Arabians do call Been ru∣beum, & Been album. Hermodôcus, a phylosopher of Ephesie. Hermogenes, a proper name of a famous rhe∣torycian. Hermoglyphus, a grauer of ymages. Hermon, a lyttell hyll that standeth on Iordan Hermopôlis, the name of a citie that Hercules buylded. Hermupoa, an herbe callyd Mercury. Hermus, a ryuer whiche in the middes parteth the fieldes of Smirnee, & fallith from the hyl Dorylao, and diuideth Phrigia from Caria, wherin Virgil supposed to be golden sande. Hernia, the disease, whereof men be callyd bro∣sten, for that theyr bowels or other matter, is fallen into theyr coddes. Hernici, people in Campania. Herniosus, he that is brosten. Herodes, the sonne of Antipater, whiche in the v. yere of Augustus, was of the Romaynes declared kynge of Iewes, and he reygned .37. yeres. of that name were dyuerse other kyn∣ges, of whom Iosephus writeth abundantly. Herodianus, a noble hystorian, which in greke wrate moste eloquentely and truely the lyues of the emperours from Marcus Philosophus to Gordianus the yonger, which boke is most eloquently translated into latyn by Angelus Politianus. Herodius, a byrde named a faulkon. Herôdotus, was a noble hystorian, borne in the cytie of Halycarnassus in Asia, he wrate most eloquently a general hystory of the actes done in Europa and Asia by the space of .CC. and xl. yeres, vntyl the warre among the Grekes callyd Peloponesiacum, whiche Thuridides with an equaile style wrate and perfourmed. He floryshed before the incarnation of Christ 200. yeres. Heroicus, a, um, noble or pertaynyge to no∣blenesse. Heroida, a noble woman. Heros, herois, an halfe god, or he whyche for the loue of vertue susteyneth greatte labours and peryll. Herostratus, a poore folyshe man, who to haue a perpetuall fame, burned the most famouse temple of Diana at Ephesum, and after de∣tected hym selfe, and was put vnto deathe. Herpeta, a tetter. Hersilia, the wife of Romulus king of Romans Herus, a lorde or mayster. Hesione, was doughter of Laomedon kyng of Troy, and syster to Priamus, whom Hercu∣les at the fyrste destruction of Troy gaue in mariage to Thelamon a noble prince of the Grekes. Hesiodus, an auncient poete of the grekes, whi¦che fyrste wrate of husbandry, whome Ver∣gile folowed in his Georgikes. Hesperia, Italy. Hesperia ultima, Spayne. Hesperides, the thre daughters of Atlas, which kept the gardens, wherin grew the golden ap¦puls, that were taken away by Hercules. Hesperidum horti, the gardeyns wherin were the golden appuls, nowe callyd orenges. Hesperus, the west sterre. Hesternus, na, num, of yesterdayes. Hestiaea, is a part of Thessalye saythe Strabo, and Ptolom. and in Homerus it is a towne in Euboea, Stephanus sayth it is a cytie in Acarnania. Heterogenus, a, um, of an nother kynde. Hetruria, the countreye of Thuscane, wherein the citie of Florence is. Hetruscus, a, um, of the countraye callyd He∣truria. Hetrusca disciplina, was a certayne doctrine
taught in Thuscane, concernyng the interpre¦tation of lyghtenynges, tokens in the firma∣ment, & thinges that were monstruous, whi∣che was of suche estimation amonge the aun∣cient Romaynes, that it was decreed by an ordinance of the senate, that into syxe partes of that countrey shulde be sent syxe sonnes of noble men, to lerne that arte. Heu, alas. Heus, howe. Hexaclinum, a parlar, wherin syx persons may soupe. Hexagonum, syxe cornerde. Hexameron, of syxe dayes. Hexametrum, a verse of syxe feete. Hexapeda, a measure called a fathom. Hexaphorus, a lytter or chayre to be borne by syxe men. Hexaplum, uel hexapla, an example. Hexasticum, syxe verses togither. ¶H ANTE I. HIARBAS, the sonne of Iupiter, whi¦che was king of the Getulians, & made war ageinst Dido quene of Carthage. Hiasco, scere, to gape, open by him self, or sprede as floures done. Hiato, aui, are, to gape often. Hiatus, tus, a gapynge. Hibernia, the yle callyd Irelande. Hibiscus, an herbe, whiche Galenus doth calle wylde malowe. it is also callyd Althea, Ruel∣lie sayth, that it is the same, whiche the po∣thecaries do calle Bismalua, or Maluauiscus, whiche is the double malowe. Hibris hibridis, a wylde hogge, engendred be∣twene a wylde bore, and a tame sowe. Hic, this man. also here or in this place. some∣tyme it is taken for Tum. Hic illi flentes ro∣gare at{que} orare coeperunt, Than began they to desyre and pray. Tu si hic sis, aliter sentias, If thou were I, or es I am, thou woldest thynke otherwyse. Hic amor, hoc studium, that is youre desyrs, there aboutes ye go. Hic quis est, Who is this? Hic somnus est mihi, this is my maner of sleapynge. Hicce, haecce, hocce, for hic, haec, hoc. Hiccine, haeccine, hoccine, for hic ne? haec ne? hoc ne? Hiccine est Simo, Is not this Si∣mon somtime it is taken doutfully. Haud ni∣hil ambigam, hiccine fuerit Ascanius, an ma¦ior quam hoc: I doubte somwhat, whyther this were Ascanius, or an other elder thā he. Hiera, an yle betwene Sicile and Liparis. also the name of a way, of a woman the wyfe of Thelaphus kyng of Misie. Hieracium, an herbe, whiche some do suppose to be sowthistell. Hieranthemis, the floure of the herbe camamel. Hierapicra, a medicine to purge fleume & cho∣ler, and somtyme it is callyd onely Hiera, it is of sundry spyces confectioned in a poulder. Hierapolis, a citie in Asia. Hierarchia, the holye gouernaunce or prynci∣palytie. Hieratica, fyne paper. Hieremias, the prophete, was borne (as Epi∣phanius writeth) at Anathothis, and was slayne by his people at Taphnas, in Egypte. But afterwarde the Egyptians had hym in great honour, and buryed hym in the place, where stode Pharaos palayce, for he draue thens serpentes and crocodiles. This is the prophet, whiche before the alteration of the temple, toke the arke or holye coffer, and that which was in it, & caused a stone to swalowe it vp, saying to the priestis and auncient men that were present: Oure Lorde is departed from Sina to heauen, and shall returne with an holy puissance, and this shall be the sygne of his commynge, whan al people shall honor a tree. he sayde moreouer vnto theym: Neuer man shall open this arke, neyther prieste nor prophete, except Moyses the elect of god, the tables with in it, no man shall vnfold, excepte Aaron. And at the resurrection, fyrst this ark shall ryse, and shall come out of the stone, and shall be set in mount Sina. And all saynctes shall resorte therevnto, there to receyue the Lorde, and shall flee frome the ennemy, whi∣che wolde haue destroyed theym. And he sealed the stone, wrytynge therein the name of oure lorde. And the sygne was lyke as it were grauen in yron, and a clowde than ke∣uered the stoone, but noo manne knowethe that place. Hieri, people beyonde Sauromatas. Hiero, ronis, a kynge of Sicile, whyche was lyke a priuate person, very rude and homely, and of his nature fierse and vntractable. but after he became sycke, and ceassed frome bu∣synesse, the feuer nowe and than taking hym, he became a man of good maners and hono∣rable. And in the meane tyme, that he was not vexed with the feuer, he fell to lernynge. Wherfore beinge recouered, he vsed the com¦pany of Simonides, Pindarus, and Bacci∣lides, most excellēt poetes at that tyme liuing who in their writinges brought his name in an honorable remembrance. Hierobotane, an herbe callyd Veruen. Hieroceps, an yle in Cyprus nere to Paphus. Hierocomion, a laserhouse. Hieroduli, ministers in temples and churches. Hierogliphica, mysticall letters or cyphers a∣mong
the Egyptians, whyche were ymages sygnifyenge hole sentences. Hieron, uel Hiereon, a chapell. Hieronymus, the moste noble and famous in∣terpreter of holy scripture, he was after the incarnacion of Christe aboute .CCClxxxvii. yeres, as he hym self writeth. he was borne in a towne callyd Strido, which was in the cō∣fynes of Hūgary and Dalmatia, his fathers name was Eusebius. Hierophanta. the declarer of mysteries or holy scripture. Hierosolyma, or Hierusalem, after the Hebrue the chiefe citie of Iudea (as Eusebius wry∣teth) was in compas about .vi. myles and a halfe, and as the same author sayth li. 9. Prae∣parationis euangelicae, ca. ult. was callid Hie¦ron Salomonis, that is to saye Salomons house: And after by corruption of speche was callyd Hierusalem & Hierosolyma. But Ly∣ranus on the .xxviii. chapiter of Genesis wri∣teth, that it was fyrst buylt by Melchisedek, and by hym callyd Salem, that is to say pea∣syble. forasmoche as he was kyng of peace & iustyce. also that it was callid Solyma, Luza, also Bethel, Hierus, Hierosolyma, & Aelia. Albeit Iosephus de bello Iudaico, li. 7. ca. 26. affirmeth, that the fyrst buylder therof was Chanam, whiche made there a temple, & cal∣lyd it Hierosolyma, where before it was cal∣lyd Solyma. Saynt Hierom De locis acto∣rum apostolorum, sayth, that the citie was callyd Aelia, of Aelius Hadrianus the empe∣rour, whyche eftsones repayred it, after that it was distroyed by Titus, and made it lar∣ger. It was fyue tymes wasted, and last was distroyed by Titus, after the incarnation of Christe .lxxiii. yeres. Hierotheus, the proper name of a man. Hila, a smalle gutte or ar gutte. Hilarè, meryly, ioyousely. Hilaresco, scere, to be mery. Hilaria plurali, the .viii. calendes of Apryll, whā the day and nyght haue equall houres, and the day begynneth to increase. Hilaris, re, & hilarus, mery or ioyous. Hilaritas, tatis, myrthe. Hilarius, the proper name of a man. Hilaro, aui, are, to make one mery or ioyouse. Hilarodus, a synger of a wanton & delycat song Hillus, the sonne of Hercules by Deianyra. Hilum, the lyttell blacke, whiche is in the ende of a beane. It is sometyme taken for nothing or nought. Hima, a mule whiche is begotten betwene an horse and asse. Himulus, & himula, lytel bea∣stes of the same kynde. Himera, a ryuer in Sicile, deuided into two partes, the one freshe water, the other salt. Hin, is a measure of the Hebrues, whiche after the accompte of Senalis, is of our measure one galon and a pynte, and receyueth in poyse of wine .xvi.li. and. dī. and two ounces: of oyle xv.li. of hony .xxv.li. Hinc, an aduerbe signifieng from thense. some tyme, for that cause. Hinc ille lachrimae, For that cause were the teares, or that was the matter wherfore he wepte. Hinc loci mei, frome my countray or towne that I came fro. Hinc scibo iam ubi siet, I wylle wete of hym nowe where he is. Hinc, illinc, here and there. Hinc & illinc, on euery syde. Hinc inde, idem. Hinc illinc uenit, he commeth I knowe not from whense. Hinnio, iui, ire, to neye lyke a horse. Hinnulus, a fawne or hynde calfe. ❀Hinnulus leonem, there is to be vnderstād coepit, uicit, or prouocat, the kydde or fawne toke, vanquyshed, or prouoked the lyon to ba∣tayle. A prouerbe applied to a person feble or ignorant, whiche by any meane hath vanqui∣shed hym, whiche is more puissant than he, or prouoketh him to batayle, or contendeth with hym, whyche is wyser or better lerned than he hym selfe. Hinnus, hinna, & hinnulus, hinnula, a mule in∣gendred betwene an asse and a mare. Hio, aui, are, to gape, also to wonder or meruail Hiant flores, the floures do spreade. Hiosciamus, an herbe callyd henbane. Hippacen, chese made of mares mylke. Hippaco, aui, are, to fetche breath quyckly. Hippagium, caryage on horsbacke. Hippago, ginis, a ferybote. Hippagogius, an instrumente wherewith sto∣nes are polyshed. Hipparchus, capitayn of the horsemen. Hippeas, a kynde of crabfyshe. Hippei, cometes or blasyng sterres, hauing ma∣nes lyke horses. Hippiades, ymages of women on horseback, as the women of Amazon were alway paynted. Hippiae, ben a kynd of creuyses in the countrey callyd Phoenicia, which be so swyfte, that it is impossible to ouer take them. Hippias, a rhetorician (as Apulei{us} saith Flori∣dor. 2. excelled al men in the multitude of craf∣tes, and was equall to any man in eloquence, but of what countrey or kynred he was, it is vncertayn, he came on a tyme to Pisa, to the great tryumphe callyd Olympicum, and all thynges that he dyd weare vpon him, was of his owne makyng: his shoes and patens, his cote wrought of the fynest threde, with three threde stytches, a bawdrike of baudkyn with chaungeable colours and sundrye pictures,
a mantelle of whyte ouer all, and a rynge on his fynger with a stone, wherin was a sygnet moste perfectly wrought. And all this dyd he worke with his owne handes. Also he caryed with hym a lyttell oyle bottell, with a narow mouth, the resydue rounde and flatte, with a lyttell instrument to stryke sweate frome his body hangyng therat. He played excellentely on euery instrument, he sange his owne ver∣ses in all kyndes, whyche no man coulde a∣mende. In all partes of rhetorike, logyk, and philosophy, he vanquyshed many and of none was vanquyshed. He ran, wrastelyd, and dyd other feares of actiuitie, that all men behol∣dyng hym, were therwith abashed. Finally in nothyng he semyd to be ignoraunt, weake, or vnable. Not withstandyng Plato in two di∣alogues bringeth in Socrates disputīg with him: In the one inserching what beaultie is, in the other what a lye is. he concludeth and proueth Hippias to be an arrogant and igno¦rant folle, forasmoche as praysynge beaultie, he wyst not what beaultie was, and bostyng that he before any other man coulde discerne a lyar frome a true man, he coulde not make of them a tru diffinition. By this it appereth howe moche the commune iudgement of men varieth, and is inferior to the iugement of a perfect wyse man, as Socrates was. Hippiatrus, an horse leache. Hippius Tyrius, was he that fyrst made shyp∣pes, whiche serue onely for burdeyn, callyd in latyn Naues onerariae. Hippo masc. gener. the name of two cities. Hippobotos, a feedor of horses. Hippocampus, & hippocampae, fysshes lyke horses on the forepartes. Hippocentauri, were a people in Thessalia by the mount of Pelius, whiche were also callid Centauri, the which were the fyrst that were sene in Grece rydyng on horses, wherof came the fable that Centauri, were halfe menne, halfe horses. Hippocomus, an horsecorser. Hippocrates, the name of a physition mooste excellent. Hippocrene, a fountayne in Boeotia, dedicate to Apollo and the .ix. muses. Hippodamia, doughter of Oenomaus, kyng of Arcadia, vnto whom it was tolde by a sothesayer, that whan his doughter dyd marye, he shulde dye. Therfore whan his doughter cam to the yeres of mariage, he ordeyned a price of runnynge with charyottes, and causyd to be proclaymed, that who so euer dydde vayn∣quyshe hym therin, shulde haue his doughter to wyfe, and he that was vaynquysshed by hym, shulde dye. Many of the wowers were slayne. At the laste Pelops the sonne of Ta∣talus, desyryng to hauē the said mayden, pro∣mysed pryuylye to Myrtilus whyche drau the kynges charyotte, that yf he dydde wyn the pryce. Myrtilus shulde lye with Hip∣podamia the fyrste nyghte. vppon the whyche couenant Myrtilus made the extree of waxe, by occasion wherof, the chariot fell downe & was broken, & Pelops had the price, Wher∣fore Oenomaus slewe hym selfe, and Pelops enioyed the lady and the royalme. Moreouer whan Myrtilus asked that, which was pro∣mysed hym, Pelops threwe hym into the sea next adioynyng, which therof was euer after callyd Mare Myrtoum. There was an other lady callyd also Hippodamia, whyche was wyfe of Perithous, for whome the battayle was betwene the people callyd Centauri, and them whiche were namyd Lapythae. Hippodamus, a breaker of horses. Hippodromus, a brode way, wherin many hor∣ses many runne togither. Hippolapathum, an herbe callyd pacience. Hippolytus, the sonne of Thescus, who at the complaynte of Phedra his stepmother, was pursewed by his father, and he in a charyote fleyng was ouerthrowen amonge the sharpe stones, and rente all to pieces. Afterwarde Aesculapius reuyued hym, and restoryd hym to healthe. Wherfore he wolde be callyd Vir¦bius, that is to say, twyse a man, forasmoche as he had twyse lyued. Hippomachia, tourneyenge on horsebacke and iustynge. Hippomanes, an herbe, wherof if horses done eate, they forthwith run madde. It is also a venomous humour, runnyng out of the shap of a mare, whiche if a man hap to receyue in∣warde, he shall be madde, Plinius sayth, that it is a lyttell flesshe in the forehead of a colte, whan he is newe fooled, blacke, and as moch as a date, whyche the mare plucketh awaye with her teethe, as soone as she hath fooled: and if any man do take it awaye before her, she neuer after wyll loue her foole. Hippomaratrum, wylde fenell. Hipponax, was a Greke poete, borne in Ephe¦sus, who was defourmed in vysage, but in style sharpe and vehement, in so moch as whā a kunnynge payntour named Bubalus, had paynted his ylle fauoured face, to make men laughe at it: Hipponax made agaynste hym suche vengeable verses, that for anger and shame, he caused hym to hange hym selfe in his howse. Hipponomus, a hearde or keper of horses. Hippopera, a male or bougette. Hippophaës, the herbe callyd tasyll. It is also callyd Labrum Veneris, & Virga pastoris. Hippopodes, peple ī the Scithik occeā, which
haue fete lyke horses. Hippopotamus, a beast lyuyng in the ryuer of Nyle, hauyng fete lyke an oxe, his backe and mane lyke an horse, & neygheth lyke an hors, a wyndyng tayle, and tusked lyke a boore. Hipposelinon, some suppose it to be the herbe callache or smallache, or marche. Reade after in Olus atrum. Hippotela, a fole of an asse. Hippotoxota, an archer on horsebacke. Hippuris, an herbe callyd in latyn Equisetum, or Cauda equina, in englysh horsetayle, but it is commonly callyd cattes tayle. Hir, hiris, the palme of the hande. Hira, the gutte whiche is callyd Ieiunum. Hircinus, a, um, gotyshe. Hircipilus, a man that is heary. Hircosus, a, um, that stynketh lyke a gote. Hircquus, the corner of the eye. also he that is gogle eyed. Hirculus, a kynde of Spikenarde. Hircus, a gote bucke. It is alsoo the ranke sa∣uour, whiche yssueth out of the arme holes. Hirquitalus, a chylde, whiche passeth the age of xiiii. yeres, and begynneth to be styrred with lechery. Hirquitallire, to enter into that age, or aptnes to lechery. Hirrio, iui, ire, to narre lyke a madde dogge. Hirsutus, ta, tum, rough. Hirtae, hedges made of thorne. Hirtus, ta, tum, idem quod hirsutus. Hirudo, inis, a horseleache or blud sucker. Hirundo, inis, a swalowe. Hisciacus, he that gapeth moche. Hisco, sci, scere, to gape as one doth for sluggi∣shenes, after slepe, or for lacke of slepe. Also it is to proffer to speake, or open the mouthe to speake. Hismaëlita, a sarasyn. Hispalis, uel Hispalum, a citie in Spayn nowe callyd Sibilia, or Siuii. Hispania, a countrey in the west part of Euro∣pa callyd Spayne, and was sometyme callyd Iberia, and Hesperia, and is enuyronned on the south part with the sea callyd Mare me∣diterraneum, which diuideth Europa from Affrica: on the north part with the sea callyd Mare Cantabricū, on the west with the great occean sea: on the east with the moūtayns cal∣lyd Pyrenaei, and the parte of the royalme of Fraunce, callyd Aquitania & Narbonensis, And this coūtry is diuided by Ptholome into thre regiōs: Bethicā, wherin is Granado, Si¦uyl, Corduba. &c. Lusytaniam, wherin is Por¦tugal, Galicia &c. Tarraconensem, wherin is Castil, Liōs, & Arragon. At this time it cōtei∣neth fyue royalmes: Granado on the southe part toward Affrik, Portugall on the weste, Galitia and Biskay on the northe, Arragon on the easte parte, Castylle, and Lyone in the myddell. Moche of the weste parte, by rea∣son of rockes, forrestes, and lacke of water is not fertile nor well inhabyted. The northe parte by reason of moche colde is not plentu∣ouse: the southe part is wonderfull fruitfull. It is in lengthe, as Strabo writeth .vi. thou sande furlonges, which is .DCCC. and fyfty myles, in bredth fyue thousand furlong, whi∣che is .DCxxv. myles. Plinius next vnto Ita¦ly extolleth it in fertilitie aboue al other cun∣trayes. Solinus compareth it with the beste countrays in plenty of grayne, wynes, oyle, syluer, golde, and yron. Statius and Claudi{us} famous poetes, do no lesse commende it. Hispidus, a, um, bristeled or rough heared. Historia, a story. Historicus, a writer of hystories. Histrio, onis, a player in enterludes and stage players. Histrionicus, ca, cum, pertaynyng to players. Histrix, icis, a beast hauynge sharpe prickes on his backe, callyd a porkepyne. Hiulco, aui, are, to make to gape or chynke. Hiulcus, ca, cum, gapynge, or chynked, as the grounde is in a great drithe. ¶H ANTE O. HOC, this or that. Hodie, to daye. Hodiernus, na, num, of this daye. Hododocus, a robber by the hygh way. Hodoeporicum, a boke to cary in iourney, whi¦che may be callyd a iournall. Hodoeporus, a trauayler by the way. Holocaustum, properly the beest, which hauing his bowelles taken out, is layde hole on the aultar and burned. Holographum, a testament al writen with the hande of the testatour. Holor, oris, a swanne. Holoserica uestis, a garment all of sylke. Holus, alias Homolus, a hyll of Thessaly. Homeromastix, ticis, the reprocher of Homer, generally Homeromastices, be taken for all reprochers & false correcters of lernyd men. Homêrus, the chiefe of all poetes, and was na∣med Melesigenes, but bycause he was blynds, he was callid Homêrus, which in the tungue callyd Ionica, signifieth blind. Cicer. Tusc. 5. saith in cōmendation of Homer: It is writen (saith he) that Homere was blynd, yet see we his picture & not his poeme. for what cōtrey, what marches, what hoste, what nauy, what motiōs of mindes, as wel of men, as of bestis are expressed in such wyse, that he maketh vs to se, that he saw not. Plutarchus in the boke
whiche he wrate of hym, saythe, that in his two warkes he comprehended both the par∣tes of a manne, for in Iliade he descrybed strengthe and valyauntnes of the bodye: In Odyssea he dothe sette forthe a perfecte pa∣terne of the mynde. Notwithstandynge for his vndescrete fablynge of goddes and god∣desses, Plato excluded hym out of his weale publyke, whiche he deuysed. Homicida, a murderer, a man kyller. Homicidium, murder, or manslaughter. Homilia, a sermon. Homo, a lyuynge creature, hauynge capacity of reason, subiecte to death, a man, woman. or chylde. ❀Homo bulla, a man is but a bubbel. A pro∣uerbe signifieng the shortnes and vncertain∣tie of mannes lyfe, resemblynge it to a bub∣bell of water, whiche shortly ryseth, and as shortly vanisheth and commeth to nothynge. ❀Homo homini deus, man is man is god, ap∣plyed to hym whiche with any syngular bene¦fite helpeth a man aboue his expectation. ❀Homo trium literarum, signified somtyme in mokage, a man of a noble lynage, bycause noble men wrate theyr forenames, theyr na∣mes, and surnames with three letters, as P. Cor. Scipio. C. I. Caesar. It is sometyme ta¦ken for a thiefe, bycause in Fur, are but thre letters. Homocapnus, a man whiche sytteth alwaye in the smoke, or by the fyer. Homoeosis, a similitude. Homogalactus, a foster brother. Homogenes, of one kynde. Homoglossus, of the same tungue or language Homoleum, a cap of the olde fascion. Homologia, a confession, consent, or couenant Homomeria, lykenes in partes or members. Homonaea, the proper name of a womā, wher∣by is signified concorde. Homonymon, where many thynges haue one name, but dyuers in effecte, as a man, whi∣che is a lyue, or paynted, deuyded by this ad¦dition, a very man, a paynted man. Homosipyi, they whiche slepe together vnder one roufe. Homousios, of lyke substaunce. Homulus, & Homuncio, a lyttell man, or of all reputation.  estas, tatis honestie. , aui, are, to rewarde with honour.  us, ta, tum, honest. Honor, oris, Honos, noris, honour, dignity. sometyme beaulty. also reuerence, honesty. Honorem praefari, is where one shall speke of any thinge that is not honest, than to say: Sauynge your reuerence. Honoraria, playes made at Rome, to the ho∣nour of Bacchus. Honorarium, a presente gyuen to ambassa∣dours, greatte offycers, and Iustyces at theyr fyrste commynge, or executyng of their authorities. Honorarius, a, um, perteynynge to honour. Honorificēs, honorificentior, honorificentis∣simus, a, um, vsynge or doynge thynges ho∣nourably. Honorificentissime, in a very honorable forme or maner, very honorably. Honorifico, aui, are, to do honour, or to honour. Honorificus, ca, cum, that bryngeth honour. Honoro, aui, are, to honour. Honorus, a, um, that is with honour. Hopistographi, rolles written on bothe sydes. Hora, an houre. also tyme of an houre, a day, or a yere. Horaeum, somer honey. It is also a sauce made of fyshe. Horarium, the space of an houre. Horatius Flaccus, a famous poete borne at Ve¦nusium a towne in Apulia, a man excellent in sharpnes of wyt and quickenes of sentence. He was addict to Epicures sect, & somwhat wanton in maners thoughe he do liberallye note vices of other men in his verses, called Satyri, in balades to syng to the harpe, whi∣che were in .xviii. sondrye kyndes of verses. he passed all other that wrate in latyne: he was in good fauour with the emperour Au∣gustus, by the meanes of Mecoenas the em∣perours minion, whoo toke in hym for his myrth and wyt moche dilectation, to whom and to Augustus he wrate diuerse epistelles in verse, comprehendynge great wysedomes in compendious sentences, and dyed whan he was .lvii. yeres old as Eusebius writeth▪ he was after the incarnation of Christ about x. yeres. Horda, a cowe great with calfe. Hordeaceus, a, um, of barley. Hordearij, they whiche do lyue with eatynge barley. Hordearius, a, um, perteyninge to barley. Hordeum, barley. Horestes, the sonne of kyng Agamemnon, whi¦che slewe his mother, bycause she conspyred with Aegisthus her aduouterer to slea his father. Horia, a fyshers bote. Horiola, a lyttell fyshers bote. Horizon, tis, a cercle diuidyng the halfe sphere or ouer parte of the firmamente, from the o∣ther halfe, where, to our syght, it semeth that the heauen toucheth the erthe. Hormesion, a pretious stone of the colour of fyre.
Horminode, a grene stone, compassed with a cercle of the colour of golde. Horno, an aduerbe signifieng this yere. Hornotinus, a, um, of one yeres growynge. Hornus, na, um, of this yeres. Hagnus hornus, this yeres lambe. Hornae fruges, this yeres grayne. Horologium, a dyall or a clocke. Horomasdes, amonge the Caldees was na∣med the good god. Horoscopo, are, to marke the houre. Horoscopos, the diligent markyng of the time of the byrthe of a chylde. Horoscopus, that parte of the firmament, whi¦che euery houre riseth from the easte, astrono¦mers do call it the ascendent. Horoscopus, pa, um, eyery thynge, wherein houres be marked. Horrearius, the keper of the barne. Horreo, rui, ere, whan a manne thynketh that his heare dothe ryse also to quake for cold or feare. sometyme to feare moche. Horrent agri, the fieldes are vnpleasant and vnfruitefull. Horresco, scere, whan a man feeleth within hym greate colde or tremblynge to begyn, as in a feuer, or in a greate feare. some tyme to quake. Horreum, a barne, wherin corne is layd. some tyme a storehouse, wherein any other thynge is kepte. Horribilis le, horrible or terrible. Horrificus, idem. Horride, without any good fascion or plesure. Horridulus, tymorus. Horridus, da, dum, hydeous, or he that qua∣keth for colde or feare. Horrifico, aui, are, to make aferde. Horripilo, aui, are, to be roughe. Horrisonus, na, num, hauynge a terrible sowne or voyce. Horror, oris, a sheuerynge or quakynge for colde or feare. Horsum, hither, or hytherwarde, an aduerbe. Hortatus, tus, exhortation. Hortensia, the doughter of Hortensius, a wo∣man moste eloquent. Hortensius, an excellent oratour of Rome, of a wonderfull memory. Hortensis, se, perteyninge to a gardeyne, or of a gardeyne. Hortor, aris, ari, to exhorte. Hortus, a knot gardeyne, or a gardeyne for pleasure, or an orcharde. Horti pensiles, gardeyn made on the toppes of houses. Horula, a lyttell houre, Horus, was an Egyptian, whiche wrate and declared the secrete maner of writyng, which the Egyptians vsed, called Hieroglyphica. Hostomaticus, syckely. Hospes, hospitis, a Gest, whiche lodgeth in an other mannes house. also a stranger, or a mā, inhabitynge out of the countrey. Hospita terra, a countrey, wherby a man may peasibly passe. Hospitalia, lodgynges in an house, which serue onely for strangers. Hospitalis, le, vsynge a gentyll entertaynment or gladly receyuynge a straunger. Hospitalis Iupiter, was soo called, bycause straungers or Gestes whan they were yll in∣treated in theyr lodginges, they called hym to witnes, desyringe hym to reuenge hym. Hospitium, a housea lway redy to receyue fren¦des. sometyme a lodgynge. also an hospitall. somtyme frendshyp shewed in hospitalitie. Hospitor, aris, ari, to receyue frendly in to his house. Hossimi, they that be borne without nosethrisls Hostia, an hoost or sacrifice offered to attayne victory of ennemies. Hosticus, ca, cum, hostile or ennemy. Hostilis, le, perteyninge to an ennemy. Hostimentum, recompence, one for an other. Hostio, iui, ire, to recompence, to assuage, or abate, to offende. Hostis, an ennemie. Hostium, a measure of a hundred and forty bu∣shels. Also a dore. Hostorium, the staffe, wherwith all measures be made euen, a stryke. ¶H ANTE V. HVber, eris, a pap or vdder. Huber, ra, rurr, fruitfull or plentuous. Hubero, aui, are, to make plentuous or fruitfull. Huberrime, very plentuously. Hubertas, tatis, plenty. Hubertim, plentuously. Hucertus, ta, tum, abundant or plentuous. Huc, hyther. Hui, an interiection of wonderyng. Hui meam sororem, ho my sustar. Hui tam cito, ho, ho, so shortly or sone. Huic, to that place: also to hym or her. Huiusmodi, & Huiuscemodi, such. Hulula, a shriche owle. Hululo, aui, are, to houle. Humanitas, humanitie, or nature of m doctrine perteyninge to man. Humaniter, gentylly. Humanitus, of men. Humanus, na, um, gentyll, tractable, courteys mercifull, and frendly. Humecto, aui, are, to make moyste.
Humeo, mui, ere, to be moyste or wet. Humesco, scere, idem. Humerus, the shulder. Humidus, moyste. Humigatus, wet. Humilio, aui, are, to make lowe, poore, or abiecte. Humilis, le, base, lowe. also symple or poore, abiecte, vyle. Humilitas, tatis, basenesse or lowenes, humy∣litie, whiche as Speusippus defyneth, is a gentylnes of the mynde, lackynge wrathe or anger. Humi, a lowe, or on the gronnde. Humo, aui, are, to bury or hyde. Humor, oris, humour or moysture. Humus, erthe beinge moyste. Hungaria, reade after in Pannonia. Hunni, people whiche came out of Scithia, and inhabited Hungary. H ANTE Y. HYacinthina, were solemne ceremonies done in the night. Hyaccynthinus, na, um, violet colour. Hyacinthus, called also Vaccinium, hath lea∣ues lyke porret, an hande breade in heyghte, lesse than a mannes lyttell fynger, greene of colour the toppe lyinge downe full of purple floures, and the rote rounde, the floure sprin¦geth out in spryng tyme, with the violet, and before the rose. Of this floure were fayned two sondry fables, One, that it was a boye, whom Apollo loued, whom by misfortune he slewe, wherfore he tourned hym in to this floure. An other fable is, that it sprange of the bloude of Aiax the valiante Greeke, and that certayne veynes of the floure seme to ex∣presse the figure of those two letters. AI. It is also a pretious stone of the colour of golde called a Iacincte, whiche hath a soueraygne vertue agaynst the commune plage specially if it be so worne, that it do touche the veyne commynge from the harte. Hyades, are .vii. sterres, whose names ar Am∣brosia, Eudora, Pasithoë, Coronis, Plexau∣ra, Pytho, & Tythe, they be troublous, and rayseth stormes and wyndes, and they goo downe the .xiiii. calendes of Maye. Poetes name them the doughters of Atlas and Ae∣thra. wherfore they ben also called Atlandi∣des. But bycause that in lamentynge theyr brother Hyas, which was slayn by a lyones, they worned away and dyed, and therfore by Iupiter were translated vnto the firmament they were afterwarde called Hyades, by the name of theyr brother. Some saye that they were the nouryces of Bacchus, and were cal¦led Dodonides Nymphae, of a towne and forrest called Dodona. The Romaynes cal∣led them Succulae, and also Paralicium. Hyalargus, a glasyer. Hyalinus, glasy. Hyalus, glasse. Hyberia, a region in Asia, ioynynge to Arme∣nie, enuyrronned with the mountayne called Caucasus. It is also the olde name of Spain Hyberna, places where men of warre do reste them in wynter. Hybernacula, places prepared to wynter in, specially in the besiegynge of townes or for∣tresses. Hybernia, Yrelande. Hyberno, aui, are, to make abode in wynter. Hybernus, na, um, perteyninge to wynter. Hyberus, a great riuer in Spayne, nyghe to Tarrhacon. Hyble, uel Hybles, a Citie in Sicile, and a mountayne nyghe to it, wheron groweth plē∣ty of tyme, and therfore the hony whiche is there, is of all other moste pleasaunt. Hybrida, is a dog, ingendred betwyxt a hound and a mastyue, called a limmar, or mongrel. Hybrides, halfe wylde. Hybris, idis, a kynde of haukes, whiche sel∣dome is sene in the daye, but seketh his pray in the nyghte. Hydaspes, a great ryuer in Indie. Hyderon, a disease, whan the skyn is fylled with water. Hydra, a water serpente. It was also a mon∣ster, with whom Hercules faughte, and as sone as he had stryken of one head of the mō∣ster, immediately sprange vp an other. 3 Hydram secare, to meddle with an endles matter, or where after one mischiefe happe∣neth an other. Hydragogus, he that bryngeth water to a place by furrowes or trenches. Hydrargyrum, a certayne thynge, wherwith syluer is gylte in the stede of quicke syluer. Hydraulis, an organ player. Hydraulos, an instrument to pushe out the wa¦ter by violence. Hydria, a water pot. Hydrolapathon, water dockes. Hydromantia, diuination in callynge of spiri∣tes to appere in water. Hydromel, water and hony sodden to gether. Hydropiper, seemeth to be the herbe whiche the pothecaryes do commonly cal Eupatory. Hydropota, he that drynketh alway water. Hycca, a great fyshe, whiche Hermolaus Bar∣barus taketh for a sturgeon. Hydrops, dropis, the dropesy. It is a sicknes (as Trallianus wryteth) whiche commeth of the lyuer made soo colde, that it maye not
suffitiently boyle the meate that is receyued, and conuerte it in to the substaunce of pure bloud, but turneth it into a warry substance, or into wynde, or elles into fleume. By occa∣sion wherof (as Galenus and Paulus doo saye) the lyuer being feble, the colde matter, whiche aboundeth, is sente into other mem∣bers, whereof commeth yll habyte or fygure of the body. It procedeth of three causes: of a primatiue cause, as by moche colde drynke forthwith after labour, or bayninge, goinge longe in the sun, or drynkynge moche fasting. Of a procedynge cause, as of an yl complexi∣on, hot or colde, or oppilation, wherby good humours are let to be iugendered, and yl hu∣mours to be expulsed. Of a ioynte cause, as of water or wynde possedynge eyther all the members, or onely them which serue for nou∣ryshement of the body. Of this sickenes be thre kyndes: Tympanites, Astites, Hypo∣sarcha, reade more of them in theyr places. Hydruntes, a citie in Calabria. Hydrus, a water serpente. Hyemo, aui, are, to rest in the wynter tyme. Hyems, wynter. Hyena, a beaste lyke a wulfe, whiche hath a mane ouer all his backe and necke, but the heares be longer and harder. Hymber, a shoure of rayne or hayle. Hymen, a skynne in the secrete place of a may∣den, which whan she is defloured, is broken. Hymenaeus, was called the god of maryage. Hymera, the name of a ryuer. Hymettus, a hyll by Athenes, where was ho∣ny of all other moste pretious. Hymnus, a prayse in a songe. Hyoscyamos, an herbe called henbane. Hypaepa, a citie, where were meruaylous fayre women. Hypaethra, an aley in a gardeyne, or galerye without any couerynge. Hypagogeus, an instrument, wherwith stones are polyshed. Hypanis, a ryuer in Scithia. Hypasis, or as some do wryte Hypanis, Arria∣nus calleth it Hyphasis, a great ryuer, whi∣che runneth out of the mountaynes of Sci∣thia into Inde, and cometh into the famous ryuer of Ganges, and is in breade .vii. fur∣longe, as Diodorus wryteth. lib. 17. The streame therof is so swyfte, that no man may passe ouer it, by the space of fyue dayes say∣lynge, the water is freshe: after that it com∣meth within foure dayes saylynge of the sea it is wonderfull bytter, by reason of a bytter fountayne, whiche runneth in to it. At this ryuer the great Alexander fynished his iour∣ney, & went no further into Inde, but there dyd set vp .xii. great aulters of stone, euerye of them fyfty cubites in greatnes. Hypata, a citie of Thessaly. Hypenium ouum, an egge whiche hath ney∣ther whyte nor yelke. Hyperaspistes, a protectour, a great shielde. Hyperbaton, a longe dependynge, or superflu∣ous sentence. Hyperbole, excesse in aduaunsynge, or depres∣synge: as hygher than heauen, whiter than snowe, swifter than lyghtenyng, slower than a snayle, worse than the dyuell. Hyperbolicus, ca, cum, excedynge credence. Hyperborei, people dwellynge in the further∣moste parte of the northe, and as some haue supposed, vnder the northe pole called Polus Arcticus. Pomponius Mela writeth, that the countrey is but lyttell, hauynge the sun ouer them, and beinge fertile of it selfe, the people verye iuste, and lyuynge lenger and more pleasantly than other men, alway with out busynesse or labour, knowynge neyther warre nor debate: Lyke to this dothe Pliny write. li. 4. cap. 12. Solinus saythe, that some men do appoynte them rather to Asia, than to Europa. Other doo set them meane betwene the sun goynge downe with the An¦tipodes (whiche are people hauynge theyr feete agaynste oures) and the sunne rysynge with vs. Finally he saythe, that they be in Europa, where they haue .vi. monthes con∣tinually daye, and .vi. other monethes con∣tinually nighte, the wyndes there be alwaye holsome, and they knowe neyther sickenesse nor vnquietnes. Wherfore Strabo wryteth li. 15. that some men affirmed, that they did lyue a thousande yeres. Festus Pompeius wrate, that they exceded the lyfe of man, ly∣uynge aboue a hundred yeres, and therfore were they called Hyperborei, as it were ex∣cedynge the commune terme of mannes lyfe. and whan they be wery and tedious of their lyfe, as Mela and Solinus doo wryte, ma∣kynge good chere with theyr neyghbours, & hauynge garlandes on theyr heades, they throw them selfes from a certaine rocke into the depe sea, estemyng that to be the best deth and fourme of burienge. Hypercatalecticum metrū, where aboundeth one syllable or two. Hypericon, an herbe called sayncte Iohn̄s wurte. Hyperion, of the poetes called the sunne of Ti∣tan & Terra, father of the sun, the mone and the morrowe, and sometyme he is put for the sunne. Hyperthyron, is a transumpte or haunce. Hyperthyrum, that whiche is nexte ouer the browe of a man. Hyphen, where dyuers wordes be pronounced
vnder one accente, as Quandoquidem, ut∣cun{que}. &c. Hypnales, adders, whiche stynginge a man, he dyeth sleapynge. Hypocaustum, a hote house or stewe. Hypochyma, a graye humour keuerynge the eye, called also Glaucoma. Hypocondrium, the inwarde parte of the bo∣dy aboue the nauel, and vnder the stomacke. Hypocrisis, false dyssimulation, fayned ho∣lynesse. Hypocrita, an hypocrite. Hypodidascalus, an vsher or substitute in teachynge. Hypogeum, a place vnder grounde. Hypoglossida, lyttell rounde thynges made by phisyke to lye vnder ones tungue, whiche is dyseased with reumes or griefe in the throte. Hypomnema, matis, an exposition or com∣ment. Hypopodion, a foote stoole. Hypopyus, where matter runneth out of the eyes. Hyposarcha, is one of the kyndes of dropesy, wherby all the bodye bolneth or swelleth. It cometh by the increasynge of bloude, colde, thyn and watrye, infused in to all the mem∣bers, in the defaulte of the thyrde digestion, caused by the weakenes of the stomake and lyuer, the wayes wherof beinge stopped, the power wherby superfluities are separat and expulsed, is made feble, wherby the body doth gather vitious iuyce and wyndes. Hyposphagma, where the skinne of the eye by some stroke is so hurte, that the bloud soden∣ly spredeth ouer the eye. Hypostasis, substaunce. It is also that, which dothe ryse in vrine, where there is good dy∣gestion, if the residence be whyte, lyght, and rysynge in fascion lyke a peare, the smal ende vpwarde. Hypotheca, a pledge. also a doctrine. Hypothesis, an argumente, matter, or cause, whervpon one shuld argue, dispute, or speke. Hypothicos, a lynnen rochet. Hypothyra, seu Hypothyrides, the dore, or ra∣ther the place open, where the dore is. Hypothyron, a groundsyll, or threshold. Hypozigia, all drawynge cattell. Hypsicratea, the wyfe of kynge Mythridates, whiche folowed hym in all his warres, be∣ynge armed lyke a knyght. Hypsiphyle, was doughter of Thoas kyng of Lemnos, whan the women there by a com∣mune consent, had slayne all the men of that countrey in one nyght, she saued her father, and dyd let hym departe. After whan Iason goynge towarde the conquest of the goulden flyse, came vnto Lemnos, she beinge in loue with hym, conceyued by hym twoo chyldren twynnes, and whan they were borne, the wo¦men of that countrey wolde haue put her to death for the sauyng of her father, but she in fleinge was taken by pyrates, and gyuen to Lycurgus kynge of Nemea, whose sonne she nourished. But whan the Argiues wente to destroye Thebes, Hypsiphyle whyle she went to shewe to the Argiues a fountayne, left the chylde lyinge on the grasse, who was slayne by a serpent. wherfore whan the father of the chylde wold haue put her to deth, the kinges of the Argiues defended and saued her. Som other do wryte, that Hypsiphyle, whan shee perceyued that Iason dyd not returne to her agayne accordynge to his promyse, she threw her selfe into the sea, and was drowned. Hyrcania, a countrey in Asia. Hysginum, a coulour lyke scarlet. Hysopus, & hysopum, an herbe called hisope. Hysteralgia, peyne of the bealy. Hysterologia, & Hysteron proteron, a maner of speakynge, where the laste is set before the fyrste, and as it is sayde: the carte before the horses. ¶I ANTE A. I IS THE IM∣peratiue moode of Eo, and doth signi∣fie Go thou. It is also a forme of spe∣kynge, whan we do correcte, exhorte, or mocke any man. I nunc, & rebus ni∣mium confide secundis, Go to, and put all thy truste in prosperitie. I nunc, & dormientem excita, go thy waye and awake hym. Ia, was the yonger sonne of Atlas, and souneth as moche as a voyce. Iacchus, one of the names of Bacchus, called god of wynes. Iacea nigra, is as Brunfelsius supposeth, the herbe, whiche is called Morsus diaboli. Iaceo, cui, cere, to lye, to extende out or be of length sometyme to be. In medio campus iacet, In the myddle is a fylde. Also to be dead. Ille iacet, he is deade. Somtyme to be contemned or nought set by. Maximas uero uirtutes iacere necesse est, uoluptate domi∣nante, Carnall dilectation rulynge, nedes muste excellent vertues be nothynge set by.
Iacent, they are without vertue, courage or estimation. Iacent uirtutes, vertue is naughte set by. Iacent pretia, they are of a lowe pryce. Iacet grauiter, he lyeth sycke. Iacet oratio, the oration is without any grace or spirite. Iacens animus, a desperate mynde, or out of courage. Iacente te, thou beinge sicke. Iacio, ieci, iacere, to throwe, caste, or shoote, somtyme to set or laye. Iacere fundamentum, to set or laye a foun∣dation. Iacob, a patriarch, sonne of Isaac. Iacobus, a proper name, in englyshe Iames. Iactanter, bostyngely. Iactantia, boste. Iactatio, idem. Iacito, taui, tare, to boste often. Iacto, aui, are, to throwe, to reuolue, or tosse in the mynde, to vexe, to throwe downe and heate, to auaunt or glory, to speake vaynly, to set forthe, to tosse, to caste out. Iactuose, braggingly. Iaculatio, Iaculamen, & Iaculamentum, a shot, or caste with a darte, or iauelyn. Iaculo, aui, are, to shoore or cast farre. Iaculor, aris, idem. Iaculum, any thynge that maye be shot or cast far, moste comonly a darte or lyghte iauelyn. Iaculus, a serpente, that lyeth vnder trees, and sodaynly with a meruaylous vyolence per∣seth any beaste, whiche happeneth to passe by hym. Iam, nowe, also incontinent, or forthwith. Iam ne imus? shall we not go nowe? Iambus, a fote in meter, which hath the fyrste syllable shorte, the other longe. Iam diu, longe agone. Iam dudum, nowe late, but a whyle sense. Iamiam, euen nowe. Iam inde, incontinent after. Iam olim, nowe late. Iam pridem, a lyttell whyle paste, but late. somtyme forthwith. Iam tum, for that tyme. Ianiculum, a parte of Rome and a mountayne in it. Also a gate of the same name. Ianira, the doughter of Ocean and Tethis. Ianitor, toris, a porter. Ianthina, violet colour or purple. Ianua, a dore or yate. Ianuarius, the moneth of Ianiuer. Ianus, some suppose to be Saturne, some to be Iaphet one of the sonnes of Noe. Cicero cal∣leth hym the superioure worlde, or heauen. He was made hauynge two visages, eyther bycause the heauen tournynge, the yere re∣tourneth, where it began: or elles bycause it knoweth what is passed, and foreseeth what shall happen. This god, or rather ydoll, had a temple in Rome, whiche in the tyme of warres was alway open, and in the tyme of peace was shut. And therfore whan in stories mention is made, that the temple of Ianus was a shut, than is it to be vnderstande, that the Romaynes had peace vnyuersally. Ianum claudere, in olde tyme sygnifyed to make vnyuersall peace, for in the temple of Ianus at Rome were two dores, which were opened whan the Romaynes made war, and whan warre was finished and all thynges in quiete, than were they shut. Iapetus, the father of Prometheus. Iapigia, a countrey in the realme of Naples, called Calabria. Iapix, gis, a wynde, which commeth out of the partes of Apulia, and is a westerne wynde. also one of the sonnes of Dedalus, and was kynge of Calabria, whiche of hym was cal∣led Iapigia. Iasminum, a tree and lyttell floure called Iasemin. Iason, onis, he whiche fyrste conquered the fleese of golde. Iaspis, pidis, a stone called Iasper. Iatraleptes, a phisition or surgion, whiche cu∣reth with oyntmentes. Iatraleptice, curynge by oyntmentes. Iatronice, a booke of phisike. Iatros, a phisition. ¶I ANTE B. IBERIA, the auntient name of Spayne. Also an other countrey nyghe to Armeny. it is of some wrytten with h. Iberi, & Ibres, Spaniardes, or men of the o∣ther Iberia. Iberis, or Hiberis, an herbe lyke to kresses, but moche greatter, the stalke is a lyttell cubyte in heyght, in somer it beareth a whyte floure, and hath a lyttell sede, which groweth about all the stalke. Hermolaus dothe interprete it wyld kresses. Manardus writeth, that some menne calleth it Lepidium. Aetius calleth it Cardamine, whiche in latine is Nasturtium in englishe kresses. Iberus, a ryuer in Spayne. Ibi, there. Ibidem, there, or in the same place. Ibis, a foule or byrde of Aegypt which is high, and hath stiffe legges, and a longe byl. They profyt moche to the countrey in kyllyng and eatynge serpentes, which out of Libya be ca∣ryed into Aegypt with a southern wynd. also it is taken for an enuyous person.
¶I ANTE C. ICaria, an yle in the sea Icario, whiche is al¦so called Icaros. Icarus, the father of the chaste Penelope. There was an other Icarus, which was the son of Dedalus, who hauing wīges with his father flew out of the yle of Crete: but whan he flewe higher than his father commaun∣ded hym, the waxe, wherwith the fethers of his winges were glewed, beyng molten with the heate of the sun, and the fethers fallynge of, Icarus was constrayned to fall into the sea, whiche was afterwarde callyd Mare I∣carium. Also Icarus is a mountayne in the region of Athenes. Ichneumon, a beaste in Aegypt, of the greate∣nes of a cat, and is fascioned lyke a mouse, who crepeth in to the bodye of a Cocodryll, whan he gapeth, and eatynge his bowelles, sleeth hym. It is also a kynde of waspes. Ichnographia, is a plat concernynge buyldyng wherin is onely contayned the place, wheron the buyldynge shall stande, hauynge lightely described with rule and compace the forme and fascion of euery court quadrāt, and flore therin comprehended. Also an instrument like a compace, wherwith are made the descrip∣tions of the sun. Ichnusa, the yle nowe called Sardinia. Ico, ici, icere, ictum; to strike. Icona, uel Icon, an ymage. Iconicus, ca, cum, so paynted or fourmed, that in euery member the very similitude is expressed. Iconismus, a description. Iconium, a towne in the countrey of Capado∣cia, an other in Asia the lasse. It is also a mannes owne ymage lyke hym selfe. Ictericus, he that is diseased with the iaundise. Icteros, a sycknes called the iaundise. Icthybolus, a fysher. Icthyocolla, a fyshe of whose skynne water glewe is made, and the same glue is also cal∣led Iectyocolla. Icthyophagi, people by southe Indie, whiche do eate onely fyshe, not onely the people but also theyr cattell is fedde therewith, and do weare garmentes of the skynnes of fyshes. Also (as Strabo wryteth) they houses be made with whales bones and oyster shelles, for the rybbes of the fyshes do make the bea∣mes and rafters, of the iowes ar made dores of the backe bones are made morters, in the whiche the fysshe is pounded, and dryed at the sun, and therof do they make theyr bread myngled with a lyttel wheate. Arrianus. li. 8. wryteth, that the rybbes of whales were sene there by the capitaynes of kynge Alexander, whiche were aboue .xxxvii. fote, and a halfe longe, wherewith theyr houses were builded Ictyopola, a fyshemonger, or seller of fyshe. Icthyopolion, a fyshe market. Icthyotrophia, a ponde or stewe, wherin fy∣shes be fed. Ictis, idis, a whyte wesyl, whiche destroyeth bee stalles and eateth the hony. ¶I ANTE D. ID, that. Id, quod res est, whiche is trouth Id aetatis, of that age. Id eurat scilicet, he careth moche therfore. whiche is spoken as who sayth, he careth no∣thynge for it. Id locorum, for Id. Id temporis, at that tyme, or suche a tyme. Id temporis est, the tyme is suche. Ida, a mountayne, whiche lyeth nyghe Troye. Idaei dactili, people called also Coribantes. Idaeus, a, um, of the mountayne of Ida. Idalium, a citie in the yle of Cypres. Idalius, a mountayne and a wood in Cypres. Idaspes, a ryuer runnyng by Parthia and In∣de, and at the laste falleth into the great ry∣uer called Indus: in this ryuer is founde mo∣che golde and pretious stones. Idcirco, therfore. Idea, a figure conceyued in imagination, as it were a substaunce perpetuall, and like as of one seale procedeth many pryntes: so of one I∣dea of a man procedeth many thousandes of men, and semblably of other Ideas procedeth thynges innumerable. So that Ideae, be as it were externall examples, wherby all other thynges be created, and this is Idea, wherof Plato speaketh. Idem, the same thynge, or the same man. also lyke or semblable. Identidem, eftsones, in the same wyse. Ideo, for that cause. Idicus, ca, cum, of the mountayne of Ida. Idiographae literae, a priuate letter. Idiographum, a priuate writinge. Idioma, matis, a proper fourme of speche. Idopathia, the proper passion of a disease. Idiota, Idiotes, a man or woman vnlerned. Idipsum, the same thynge, or one thynge. Idolium, a lyttell ydoll. Idololatra, a worshypper of ydoles. Idololatria, ydolatry. Idolothysa, offerynges to Idolles. Idolothytum, that whiche is offered to ydols. Idolum, an ydoll. Idomenêus, a kynge of Crete or Candy, whi∣che came with the greekes to Troye. In his retourne beinge troubled with tempeste, he vowed, that if he returned saulfe in to his
royalme, he wolde offer what so euer he met with all fyrste. wherfore whan he wold haue offered his son, who fyrste met with hym at his landynge, the people dyd aryse agaynste hym, and draue hym out of the countrey. And than sayled he into Apulia, and buylded there a citie, whiche he called Petilsa on the moun∣tayne called Salentinum in Calabre. Idoneus, a, um, apte. Idula, a sheepe that was offered euery Idus to Iupiter. Idumaea, a region in Syria, ioyninge to Ae∣gypt, and bordereth vpon Palestina. Idume a citie in the countrey called Idumaea, about the whiche are abundance of palme or date trees. Idus, Ides of monethes, whiche do diuide Nonas from Calendes. ¶I ANTE E. IEcinorosi, men sicke in the lyuer. Iecoraria, an herbe called lyuerwurt. Iecur, coris, & Iecinoris, the lyuer of a man or other thynge lyuynge. Iecusculum, a lyttell lyuer. Ieiunium, fastynge. Ieiuno, aui, are, to faste or absteyne. Ieiunum, the gut, whiche goeth downe to the foundement. Ieiunus, he that is fastynge. Ientaculum, a breakefaste. Iento, aui, are, to eate meate fore dyner. Iessen, a fowne, where Ioseph met his father Iacob, and broughte him into Aegypt. IESVS, the sonne of god, and of the mooste pure virgine Mary. Althoughe after the cō∣mune translations of the byble into latine, it semeth, that there were dyuers other Iewes so named: yet in the Hebrewe tungue, as Reucline wryteth in his boke De uerbo mi∣rifico, There was some diuersitie in the let∣ters of the name of our sauiour, from them, whiche were in the other called Iesus. For in his glorious and wonderfull name were the vowelles called Tetragrammaton, with one consonant called Schin, whiche is one S. of the Hebrewes, wherin was a misticall or hyd sygnification of his diuinitie, although the hole name be interpreted Sauiour. who beyng equal in diuinitie with god the father begotten of hym before that the worlde was created and without tyme, wyllyngly for the redemption of man descended in to the bodye of the blessed virgin Mary, and was concei∣ued in her by the holy goste the thyrde person in godheade, and of her was borne the. 3962. yere after the creation of the worlde. And be∣inge god and man lyued here. 32. yeres, in fourme of pouertie, and than beinge betray∣ed by his owne disciple, was by the Iewes his owne people moste cruelly nayled on the Crosse, the yeare after the creation of the worlde. 3994. I ANTE G. IGITVR, therfore, from hense forthe, afterwarde. Ignarium, any thynge, out of the whiche fyre maye be beaten. Ignarius lapis, a fyre stone, or flynt, out of the whiche fyre is beaten. Ignarus, ignorant, without knowledge. Ignatius, was an holy byshop of Antioche, the thyrde after sainct Peter, and was dysciple of saynct Ihon̄ the euangeliste. In the tyme of Traia he was condemned to be deuo∣red of beastes, and as he was led towarde Rome with ten men of war, whom for their crueltie he called tenne leopardes, he by the way confyrmed all christen men in the fayth, aswel by praiers as by letters, saying in this wyse: So that I maye fynde Christ and im∣brace hym, I wolde there shoulde come vnto me, fyre, gybbettes, beastes, crashyng of bo∣nes, rentinge of all the body, and all the ur∣mentes of the dyuell. And whan he herde the corynge of lyons, which shuld deuoure hym, he ioyously sayde: I am the wheat of Christ let me be grounde with beastes tethe, that I may be founde to be pure or fyne manchet. He was martyred after the incarnation of Christe about .lxxx. yeres. Ignauia, cowardnes. also lacke of courage. Ignauit, he made hym a foole. Ignauiter, with a false harte, or cowardly. Ignauus, a, um, cowarde. Ignesco, scere, to be set on fyre, or to made fire. Ignia, certayne fautes, whiche erthen pottes haue in the inealynge. Ignicula, are certayne prouocations, natural∣ly gyuen to imbrace vertue. Igniculus, a sparke of fyre. Ignifacio, feci, facere, to set on fyre. Ignio, iui, ire, to inflame. Ignipotens, one of the surnames of Vulcanus. Ignis, the fyre. Some tyme it is taken for an harlot. Ignis sacer, a sore, wherin is an excedynge in∣flammation and burnynge. Ignitabulum, a fyre pan. Igniuomus, he that spytteth fyre: the sunne is some tyme so called. Ignobilis, Ie, vnnoble, vnknowen. folyshe, of none estymation. Ignominia, reproche, infamie. Ignominis, without renoume.
Ignorabilis, le, vnknowen. Ignoranria, ignorance, lacke of knowlege, and is referred to the wyt of the person. Ignoratio, lack to be knowen, and pertayneth to the thynge or acte. Ignoro, aui, are, to knowe not. Ignosco, noui, noscere, to lerne and knowe per¦fectlye. also to forgyue, to haue excused, not to knowe, or be ignorant. Ignotus, vnknowen. also ignorant. ¶I ANTE L. ILA, the lest portion of a thyng that may be imagined also the stuffynge of a pudding, or other lyke thynge. Ila, or Ilua, an ylande in the Tuscane sea. Ile, is that whiche is set in the hyghest parte of a man. Ileos, the colyke. Ileosus, the colyke, and he that hath the colike. Ilex, licis, a tree callyd holye or holme, whereof one kynd beareth grayne, whiche the Arabi∣ans do calle kermes. Ilia, great guttes. Iliacus dolor, the frettyng of the guttes. Ilias, adis, the warke of Homerus, of the siege of Troy. Iliberis, a citie in the prouince of Narbone. Iliceus, a, um, of holy or holme. Iligneus, a, um, idem. Ilione, the {pro}per name of a doughter of Priam{us} Ilioneus, the proper name of a Troiane. Ilissus, the name of a ryuer in the prouynce of Athenes. Ilithya, a name of Diana. Ilium, the palayce of Priamus. Illabor, beris, labi, to throw him self into a thīg Mediae{que} minans illabitur urbi, & thretninge them, he threwe hym selfe into the citie. Illaboratus, ta, tum, that which is made or done without labour. Illac, on that syde. Illaetabilis, le, without myrth, or lackyng mirth or pleasure. Illatebro, aui, are, to hyde in corners. Illaudatus, not worthy to be named. Ille, he. Illecebrae, thynges dilectable, whiche draweth and allureth the mynde to imbrace them, fly∣kerynge intycementes. Illecebrosus, a, um, that whiche pleasantly al∣lureth one to fauour it. Illecto, aui, are, to drawe pleasantly. Illectus, ta, tum, pleasantly styred or prouoked. Illepidus, without dilectation or grace. Illex, illegis, lawlesse, also wanton. Illex oculus, a wanton eye. Illibatus, ta, tum, vntouched, vntasted. Illiberalis, vngentyl, without kindnes, or cur¦sy. Illiberale facinus, an vncurteys pagen. Illiberaliter, vngentylly, excedingly yll, mysche∣uousely. Illiceo, illicui, cere, to prouoke or styre plesantly Illicet, nowe go to, incontinent. Illicium, a prouocation. Illico, anon, in the same place. Illido, lisi, dere, to dryue or beate to a thynge. Illinc, from that place. Illineo, iui, ire, to annoynte on. Illino, ini, ire, to anoynt harde, to spot or soylle. Illisus, a, um, dryuen or beaten to. Illiteratus, vnlerned. Illiusmodi, of that sorte. Illix, licis, a prouocation or styrynge. Illo, to the place. Illotis manibus rem aggredi, to go about a great thing without reuerence, or dishonestly to handle a thyng of great estimation. Illotis pedibus fere idē. also without shame. Illuc, in that place or there. Illuceo, xi, cere, & illucesco, scere, to be lyghte or clere. Illudo, si, ere, to mock, to hurt in iaping, or play¦eng. Illuminus, a, um, without lyght. Illunis, dark, whan the moone doth not shyne. Illustris, famous, clere, noble inrenoume. Illustro, aui, are, to make lyght or clere, to make famous or wel knowen, to set forth that whi¦che is hydde. Illutibilis, that which can not be washed away Illuuies, vncleannes, fylthynesse in manne or garment. Illyria, Illyris, or Illyrium, a great countray be∣twene Italy, Germany, Thraciam, & Mace doniam or Epirum, and hath on the one syde the sea callyd Hadriaticum, on the other syde the great riuer of Danubius. That countrey is nowe callyd Slauony. Illyricus, ca, cum, of Illyria. Ilus, the king of Troians son, that builded Iliū. ¶I ANTE M. IMaginarij, baner barers, wherein be yma∣ges paynted. Imaginarius, a, um, done for a fourme or fa∣scion, and not in effecte. Imaginatus, ta, tum, fygured or fourmed into an ymage. Imagino, naui, nare, to make ymages, or to counterfayte. Imaginor, aris, ari, to ymagyne. Imaginosus, a, um, full of ymages. Imago, imaginis, an ymage, a symylitude, a shethe or case. Imaguncula, a lyttell ymage. Imaus, a mountayne in Iudea Imbecillis, le, & imbecillus, a, um, feble.
Imbecillitas, tatis, feblenes. Imbellia, cowardyse. Imbellis, le, vnapt to warres, coward or weak. Imber, a showre. Imberbis, be, beardlesse. Imbbo, bibi, bere, to drynke in. Imbrex, bricis, a spowte or gutter, oute of the whiche rayne is conueyed from the house. It is sometyme taken for tyle or slate, that lyeth on the house. Imbriciū, the couering or ueising of the hous. Imbrico, to couer with tile, or other like thyng. Imbricosus, a, um, full of gutters. Imbrifer, bryngyng shoures. Imbrus, an ylande of Thrace, and a towne in the same is so callyd. Imbubino, aui, are, to defyle with menstru∣ous flyxe. Imbulbito, taui, tare, to defile with chyldrens dyrte. Imbuo, bui, buere, to dye cloth or sylke, to teche as one teacheth his apprentyce. Imitor, aris, ari, to folow the exāmple of an other. Immanis, ne, cruell, great, horrible. Immanitas, tatis, crueltie, greatnesse. Immemor, forgetful, he that doth not remēber. Immemorabilis, le, vnworthy remembrance. Immensus, a, um, of suche greatnes, that it can not be measured. Immerens, he that hath not deserued. Immergo, mersi, gere, to drowne or to plunge a thynge in the water. Immergere se in consuetudinem, to enter in to depe familiaritie or acquayntance. Immersit se in ganeum, he is gotten into a tauerne or he hath thruste him selfe into a ta∣uerne or alehouse. Immeritò an aduerbe, without deseruynge. Immerito meo, without my deserte. Immigro, to go dwell in a place. Immigraui in ingeniū meū, I came to myne owne rule, or to be rulyd by myne owne wyt. Imminens, that whiche is at hande. Imminens ingenium, a runnyng wyt. Imminens Dario, wylling to assayle Darius Immineo, nui, nere, to hange or houer ouer a thyng as it wold fal, to take hede or espy. also to be nigh. Mors propter incertos casus quo tidie imminet, Death by vncertayne chaun∣ces; is euery day nigh. Bellum imminet ab. Tarquinis, it is at the poynt to haue warre with Tarquines. Imminet exitio alterius, he is redy to slee one Imminent in fortunas nostras, they be at hād and redy to robbe vs of our goodes. Imminuo, nuere, to cut of. Imminuere caput alteri, to breake ones heed. Imminuere ius, to defalcate or minish the au¦ctoritie or state of a person. Imminuere maiestatem, to ōmyt treason. Imminuere pudicitam uirginis, to defloure a mayden. Immisceo, scui, scere, to myngle togyther. Immisericorditer, without pitie. Immissum, layde in to abyde, as a beame of a house, or other lyke thynge. Immitis, te cruell, without pitie. Immitia poma, appuls which at not yet ripe. Immitto, misi, mittere, to send in. somtyme it si∣gnifieth to let grow in length. Ne{que} barbam immiseris isam, Neither let this berde grow in length. Respicimus dira illuuies, immista∣{que} barba, We beheld, O what an horrible fil∣thynes and a beard growen in lengthe. also to bryng or sende on the contrary parte. Hoc fu∣turum esse dixerunt, ut post breue tempus immitteret deus regem, qui expugnaret Iu∣daeos, It shuld come to passe (sayd they) that god shuld sende to the contrary parte a kyng, which shuld vanquishe the Iewes. Alij Tar∣quinium a Cicerone immissum aebant, ne Crassus suscepto malorū patrocynio rēpub. turbaret, Some sayde, that Tarquine was brought in craftily by Cicero, lest that Cras∣sus, in taking on him the defence of misdoers, shuld therby bring sedition into the weale pu¦blik. Immittere rudētes, to let go the ropes or cables. In medios hostes se immisit, he thrast hym self into the myddle of his ennemies. Immo, but rather, yea rather, yes, yea but. Immobilis, le, vnmoucable. Immodeste, out of measure, also to moche. Immodestus, ta, tum, without temperance. Immodicè, to moche. Immodici, many. Immodicus, ca, cum, great or moche. Immóla, a citie in Italy, whiche was somtyme callyd Forum Cornelij. Immolo, aui, are, to offer in sacrifice. Immorior, immori, to dye on a thynge. Immoro, rari, to abide or continue in a thyng. Immortalis, le, vnmortall, that, lyueth euer. Immortalitas, a perpetuali lyfe. Immunis, exempt, without office or charge. Immunitas, tatis, fraunches or libertie. Immunitus, ta, tum, not defended. Immurgio, gij, gire, to murmure within one Immustulus, a litle byrd, I suppose it be a wen Immurabilis, le, vnchaungeable. Immuto, tare, to change one thing for an other Impago, ginis, a tenon whiche is put into the mortays. also a pyn which is driuen into tym¦ber, to make it ioyne and abyde. Impancro, crare, to inuade or go into a place. Impar, not equall, not sufficient. Imparatus, vnredy, vnpurueyed. Imparens, disobedient. Imparibilis, le, that whyche canne not suffer or
susteyne. Impauidus, he that feareth not. Impeccabilis, he that neuer offendeth. Impedimentum, let, impediment in warres. Impedimenta, is the cariage and traffike, that gothe with the hoste. Impedio, diui, dire, to let, to staye, or supporte, to defyle. Impeditus, is properly he, that hathe his feete so bounde, that he can not goo. Impedo, aui, are, to vnderset. Impello, puli, pellere, to perswade instantly, to inforce, to plucke downe, or infeble. Impendeo, di, dere, to hange ouer. Impendent mala, myschiefe is nygh. Impendiò, very moche or more. Impendium, expense or coste. Impendo, di, dere, to spende or lay out money, to bestowe, to employ. Impensa, benefyttes. Impensa, sae, expenses. Impensè, proualde. Est impense improbus, he is a very yll man. Impensibilis, without consyderation. Impensius, excedynge, more greuous, or dys∣pleasant. Imperator, the chief capitayn in warres, Now the emperour. Imperatum, commaunded. Imperiosè, stately, rygorousely. Imperiosus, a maisterly man, rigorous, or cruel in gouernaunce. Imperitabundus, ful of rule, or rulyng moche. Imperitia, lacke of knowledge. Imperito, aui, are, to rule or gouerne. Imperitus, not expert, easy to be deccyued. Imperium, a solemne cōmandement, a preemi∣nence in gouernance, auctoritie royall. Imperium exequi, to do that is commanded. Impero, aui, are, to commaunde. Imperare cupiditatibus, to rule desyres or appetytes. Impertio, tiui, tire, & impertior, tiris, perti, to participate with one, to gyue parte of that whyche he hath. Impertire salute, to salute. Impertitur, part is gyuen. Impesco, scere, to put a beaste into a good pa∣sture to feede. Impetigo, ginis, a rynge worme. Impeto, tiui, tere, to inuade. Impetrabilis, le, that may be gotten by desyre. Impetrasso, trassi, sere, to get by desire or instāce Impetritus, infixed, mortaysed, as it were in a stoone. Imperro, aui, are, to optayn by desyre or request Impetuosus, violent or hasty in wrathe. Impetus, tus, & impes, petis, violence. Impetus animi, vehemence of the hart. Impetum dareuel facere, to rounne with a great raundon on any thynge. Primo impetu, at the first assaut, at the fyrst brunt. Impiatus, not purged of syn. Impiè, wyckedly, cruelly, mischeuousely. Impietas, tatis, hatrede of god, crueltie, wyc∣kednes, impietie. Impiger, diligent, not slowe, valyant. Impigrè, diligently, without slouthe. Impingo, pêgi, pingere, to hit one in throwing som thing at him. Dicam tibi, impingā grā∣dem. I wyll lay a weighty mattier vnto the. Caput parieti impingere, to knock ones hed agaynst the walle. Impingere compedes, to put on gyues. Impingere culpam in aliquem, to laye the blame on one. Impingere nauem, to run the ship on a rock, or to dryue hym on lande, as is the commune sayenge. Impinguo, aui, are, to make fatte. Impio, are, to defile, to distayne hym self with a dishonest or foule deede, specially agaynste god or his parentes. Impius, cruel, hatyng god and good menne, he that careth not for god, an vngracious man, a myscheuouse man. Implano, aui, are, to deceyue. Impleo, eui, ere, to fyll, to accomplyshe, to put in execution. Implere uncem alterius, to take in hande an other mans charge, to exercyse an other man∣nes offyce. Implet ulnas hominum quatuor, it rontey∣neth fully two fathomes. Implexus, wounde in. Implicitus, ta, tum, wrapped or tied fast togider Implicitus morbo, attached or detayned with syckenesse. Implico, caui, care, to wrap in, to tye fast, to de∣tayne. Implicat ad speculum caput, she boūd vp her head at a glasse. Imploro, aui, are, to desyre lamentably. Impluo, ere, to rayne in. Implutus, wette in the rayne. Impluuia, a cloke to weare in the rayne. Impluuiatus, ta, tum, coloured as it were wette in the rayn. Impluuium, a place in the house, whereby they vsed to receyue rayne water. Impolitia, negligence about the weale publike. Impono, sui, nere, to put one thing on an other also to gyue, to inioyne, to lay to ones charge. Imponere alicui, to abuse or deceyue one. Calculum imponere, to caste accompte. Imponere claues alias portis, to change the kayes of the gates. Clausulam disputationi imponere, to con∣clude or make an enoe of the disputation.
Imposuit exercitum Brundusii, he layde his hoste in garryson at Brundusium. Iniuriā alicui imponere, to do wrong to one. In stipendium argentū imponere, to assesse what men, or townships shal pay to the soul∣dyours wages. Laborem imponere, to apoynt him busines. Imponere sibi laborem, to charge hym selfe with great peyne and trauayle. Imponere legem, to set a lawe on a thynge. Imponere legem alicui, to appoynt a manne what he shall do. Imponere summam manum, to achieue the thynge that a man gothe about. Modum imponere prosperae pugnae, to hold a meane, or to vse temperaunce, where the battayle is prosperouse. Imponere mulctā, to set a peyn, as iuges do. Necessitatem imponere, to constrayne. Onus imponere, to gyue in charge. Imponere praesidium ciuitati, to set a garri∣son in a citie. Imponere praetium, to set a pryce. Silentium imponere, to commande silence. Imporco, aui, are, to make a balke in caryng of lande. Importunitas, tatis, whiche hath no commodi∣tie of tyme nor of place. Importunus, na, nū, out of season, importunate. Importuosus, a, um, without porte or hauen. Impos, impois, vnable, without power. Impostor, oris, he that deceyueth with promi∣ses, or selleth false ware for good. Imposturam facere, to deceyue in maner a∣foresayde. Impotens, tentis, he that can not resyste his appetite or affections, somtyme it is vsurped for puyssaunt. Impotentia, debilitie. somtyme immoderate power, also vnabilitie to resyst. Impraesentia, & impraesentiarum, at this time or for this present tyme. Imprecor, aris, ari, to desyre, to wyshe. Impressio, onis, a violent assaulte. Imprimo, pressi, primere, to prynt, to seale. Improbè, yll, naughtily, vnhappyly. Improbitas, tatis, dishonestye, vnthryftynesse, wantonnes, obstynacye, malapertnes, raue∣nye, wylynesse. Improbus, an yl man, dishonest, obstinate, wan¦ton, malapert, wyly, vnsatiable. Improbus aliae rei, good for none other thing. Improba facies, an yll fauoured face. Facinus improbum, a shrewde tourne. Labor improbus, great trauayle. Improba merx, vnlefull marchandyse, or of smalle profyte. Improbum os, a leud or myscheuous tunge. Improbi postes, rotten postes, or beinge in any wyse vnsufficient. Improbum testamentum, a testamēt vnsuf∣ficient, lackynge the circumstance or forme. Improlis, uel improlus, he which is not yet a ci∣tisē. Improperiū, imbraiding of a defaut. Impropero, aui, are, to imbrayde a man with some defaute. Improuidus, he that prouideth not for the time commynge. Improuidus, da, dum, that whyche commeth sodaynly, and vnloked for. Improuisè, & improuiso, vnthoughte on, or vnlooked for. Improuisus, a, um, idem quod improuidus. Imprudens, dentis, vnware, also not circūspect Imprudens harum rerum, not knowynge of those matters. Imprudenter, vnwysely, vnaduysedly. Imprudentia, lacke of foresyghte, that it was not thought on. Impubes & impuber, a man chylde before the age of .xiiii. yeres, a mayden before .xii. Impudens, shameles. Impudenter, shamefully, dishonestly, vnaduy∣sedly, wantonly. Impudicitia, vncleannes of lyuynge. Impudicus, vnchast, vncleane in lyuyng. Impulso, aui, are, to perswade often. Impulsus, perswaded, prouoked, inforced. Impune, without damage, without punysshe∣ment or griefe, in vayne. Impunitas, tatis, lacke of punishment, libertie without punishment, pardon of punishment. Impurus, ra, rum, dishonest, vyle, reprochable, sluttyshe. Imputatus, ta, tum, vncutte, or neuer cut. Imputo, aui, are, to repute or ascribe, to lay the blame or defaut. also to reken one thyng with an other, or to acoōpt one sum with a nother. Imus, ma, mum, the lowest, or most lowe. Imus pes, the sole of the foote. Imus sonus, the base in songe. Imo à pectore, from the bottom of the hart. ¶I ANTE N. IN, sygnifyeth in. In aduersum, on the contrary part. In annum, for a yere. In bonis, amonge good men. In coenam, for supper. In conspectum aspice, to loke before the. In diem addicere, to sell vpon condition that a thynge be done by a day. In diem uiuere, to lyue withoute carynge for to morowe. In dies singulos, day by day. In horam, for one houre. In horas, from houre to houre. In lucem, vntyll day. In magno munere, for a great rewarde.
In manu uel manibus est, it is in his power, at hande, or casy, or in hande. In manum dari, to be giuen apart, or seuerally. In meam partem, on or for my parte. In medium afferre, to bryng forth to a common vse or commoditie. In mentem uenire, to come to mynd or remem∣brance, to be consydered. In nauem ingreditur, he went into the shyppe. In noctem, vnto nyghte. In numerato habere, redy, or at hande. In numerum, in order. In ordinem ducere uel cogere, to bring downe from authoritie, to minishe estimation or power. In ore est omni populo, all the people speaketh of it. In partem, for thy part. Age sis, tu in par∣tem nunciā hūc delude, at{pro} amplexare hanc, Go to nowe for thy part, deceyue hym hardyly, and take her vnto the. In partem dimidiam decoquere, to boyle it to the halfe deale. In paucos dies, for a lyttell whyle. In pedem, for euery foote. Is se ternis nummis in pedem tecum transegisse dicebat, He sayd, that he bargeyned with the for thre pēce a fote, or for euery foote .iii. pence. In perendinum, after to morow, or .ii. dais hēs. In portu sum, I am saufe. In posterum, fynally, in conclusyon, from hens forthe, hereafter. In potestatem esse, vnder the rule, or at the ple∣sure of one. In praesentia, at this tyme, In praesens, idem. In primis, chiefly, specially, aboue al other thin¦ges. In priuato & publico, at home and abrode In procliui est, it is easy to do, or to bring to pas. In promptu est, it is easy to know, it is aparāt. In propatulo, before all men. Iam in propinquo certamen erat, nowe was the battayle at hande, or the day of the battayle was come. In proximo, at hande. In publicum redigere, to confiscate, to take for a forfayte. In re ipsa, to experience. In re tua, for thy profyte. Inre praesenti, in a playne and euident matter. In rem nostram, it is for our profyte. In rem praesentem excurrere, to come on the lande whiche is in demaunde. In rem praesentē producere, to bring the mat∣ter to light, to expresse the thyng perfectly. In rem praesentem uenire, where the landes in debate, doo come in viewe, by the assignement of iudges, vnto them which be callyd viewers, whiche shal se the boundes and quantitie of the lande in variance. In serum, vntyll nyght. In speciem, by dissimulatiō. Ducentes paucos in speciem captiuos, faynyng that they cari∣ed a few prisoners with them. Praeclara clas∣sis in speciem, it semed a fayre & great nauy. In spem uenire, to begyn to hope. In tempore, in season, oportunately. In tutum eduxit legiones, he brought his ar∣my out of daunger into a sure place. In uiros diuidere, to gyne to euery man. In uniuersum, generally. In utran{pro} partem, of the one syde and other. Inaccessa, an ylande of Egypt, to the whiche is no commynge. Inachus, the fyrst kynge of Argies. Inanescere, to be vayn, and of none estimation. Inaniloquus, abablar. Inanimus, m, mum, without soule. Inanio, iui, ire, to make empty. Inanis, ne, empty, vacant, ydelle, lyght in esty∣mation. Inanis accedit, he cometh without bryngyng any thynge with hym. Inanitas, & inanitio, emptynes, voydnes. Inaresco, scere, to drye vp. Inarime, an yle in the Thuscane sea. Alsoo a mountayne. Inaudio, iui, dire, to here. Inauditus, ta, tum, neuer harde of, straunge to heare. Inauris, a rynge, or other lyke thynge hangynge at the eare. Inauro, aui, are, to make ryche. Inauspicatò, vnluckely. Incaeduus, a, um, vnvsed to be cutte. Incaero, aui, are, to couer with wax. Incalesco, lui, scere, to be or waxe very hotte. Incallidus, symple, without craft or subtiltie. Incandesco, dui, descere, to be very hot angry. Incantatio, & incantamentum, a charme. Incanto, taui, tare, to charme. Incapistro, straui, strare, to halter, or to bynde with an halter. Incassum, in vayne. Incautus, vnware. Incedo, cessi, cedere, to go or walk, to go state∣ly, to enter. Incēdo, di, dere, to inflame, to set fire on a thīg. Incentio, onis, the sowning of instrumentes. Incepto, aui, are, to begyn often. Incerniculum, a rangynge syue, wherin corne is clensed or it be grounde. also a sarce. Incerno, ni, nere, to syfte in. Incerto, taui, tare, to make doutful or vncertain Incertus, ta, tum, vncertayne or doubtfull. Incesso, ssi, ssere, to make angry, to do displea∣sure to one, to accuse. Incessere hostes iaculis, to caste dartes or ia∣uelyns on the ennemies. Incessit ambos inopia, bothe of theym are vexed with pouertie.
Cupido eum in cessit, there toke him a desire, there came a fantasy vnto hym. Is incessit mos, they had taken such a custom. Incesto, aui, are, to ppllute. Incestuosus, he that doth often pollute. Incestus, ta, tum, polluted. Incestus, tus, is lechery cōmytted with one, whi¦che is nygh of kynne or aliaunce to hym that commytteth it. also it sygnifieth all maner of pollution. Inchoo, aui, are, to begyn. also to performe. Incîdo, cîdi, ere, to cut, to graue. Incisa, loste. Spe incisa prius quam praedicta dies adesset, Hope being lost, er euer the sayd day was commen. Incido, di, ere, to happen, to falle sodaynely, to come by chaunce. Inciens, a woman nigh her tyme, to trauaylle of chylde. Incile, a gappe or trenche. Inciles, trenches, to conuey water from a riuer, into a medowe or other lowe grounde. Incilo, aui, are, to blame or reproue. Incino, ni, nere, to syng, proprely to fayn a small breast. Incipio, coepi, cipere, to begynne. Incisim, piece meale, gobet meale. Incisio, onis, incisyon or cuttynge. Incisura, a cut or garse. also incisurae, be the lynes in the palme of the hande. Incitabulum, Incitamen, & Incitamentum, a prouocation. Incitas, pouertie, necessitie. Incitéga, a thynge wheron greate vesselles. of wyne are couched. Incito, taui, tare, to prouoke. Inclamo, aui, are, to call for one, to crye out on one, rebukefully to call in. Inclareo, uel inclaresco, ere, to be knowen of all men. Inclementer, without mercy, cruelly, sharply. Inclementia, crueltie, lacke of mercy. Inclino, aui, are, to inclyne or bowe downe. Inclinare acies, whan the hoste doth recule. In uitium inclinare, to begyn to be nought. Inclinari opes ad Sabinos, rege inde sump∣to uidebantur. The chiefe substance & power turned to the Sabins, after that a king was made of theyr people. Cum omnem culpam in collegā inclinaret, Whan he had layde the blame to his felowe. Inclinata respublica, the weale publik decaid. Includo, si, ere, to include or shut in. Inclytus, ta, tum, gloryous, famous, of greatte renoume. Incoctile, a pot wherin meate is sodden, also a brason or copper vessell, tyuned within. Incoctus, ta, tum, vnboyled or rawe. Incoctae mulieres, women which do trymme their heares to moche. Incoenatus, not hauynge souped. It incoenatus cubitū, he goth to bed supperles. Incoenis, without supper. Incogitabilis, forgetfull, not consideryng what he dothe. Incogitans, vnaduysed. Incognitus, ta, tum, vnknowen. Incola, he that dwelleth in an nother countrey, than where he was borne. Incolatus, dwellynge in a straunge countrey. Incolo, ui, ere, to dwell in a place. Incolumis, holem, without sycknes, lackynge no reparation or amendement. Incolumitas, tatis, helthynesse. Incomitatus, beinge without company, alone. Incommodè, vncommodiousely, yl fauouredly Incommodo, aui, are, to hurte. Incommodus, da, dum, incommodious, daun∣gerous, damageous. In commune, equally. Incompactum, vnioyned, or yll ioyned. Incomprehensus, not comprehended. Inconcinnus, a, um, vnmete, yll proportioned. Inconcussus, stable, that can not be shaken. Incōditè, aduer. without faciō, or without order Inconditus, ra, tum, out of order or facion, rue, also weryshe. Inconditus, ta, tum, vnmade, vnbuylded. Incongelabilis, le, that can not be frosen. In consiliari, to be callyd before the counsell. In consilio adesse, to be of counsayl in a mattee of lawe. Me quo{que} Petilius, ut sibi consilio ad essem rogauit: Petilius also desyred me, that I wold be of his counsayle. Inconsultè, without counsayle or vnaduysedly Inconsultus, lackynge aduise or consyderation, he that wyll not aske counsayle. Inconsultu meo, without my counsayle. Inconsutilis, without any seame. Inconsutus, ta, tum, vnsowed. Inconsyderatè, vnaduisedly. Inconsyderatus, he that nothyng considereth. Incontinens, he that is not chast, or kepeth him not to one woman. Incoquo, xi, quere, to seethe or boyle in a thing. Incordio, aui, are, to putte into a mans harte, to perswade hym. Incoxo, aui, are, to fytte as women or taylours done without a stoole. Increatus, neuer created. Increbresco, sci, scere, to waxe, to be spradde or moche knowen. Incredibilis, le, incredyble, not to be beleued, meruaylouse. Incrementum, increase. Increpito, aui, are, to blame or rebuke often. Increpo, pui, pere, to sounde or make noyse, al∣so to rebuke, to prouoke. Incresto, eui, scere, to growe moche or more.
Incubatio, & Incubitus, lyenge in, syttynge to hatche egges. Incubo, bonis, they that set all theyr studye on treasure. Incubo, aui, are, to ly in or vpon, to cleaue to, to sytte ouer a thynge, to sitte on egges, as a hen doth, to occupy, to possede, to imbrace, to no∣ryshe, to dwell in, to care. Incubus, a spirite, which assuming the forme of a man, medleth with women, also that which is callid the mare, wherewith men be oppres∣sed in theyr sleape. Incudo, dônis, he that worketh on an anuyll. Inculco, aui, are, to porre in. Incultus, a place vnhusbanded or vntylled. Incumbo, bere, to indeuour, to take in hand, to happe, to leane vpon, or fall on a thynge. also to be inclyned to some thynge. Incumbo ad studia, I gyue my mynde to a thynge, I applye me. Ad salutem, reipublicae incumbere, to trauel about the commune weale. In causam incūbere, to maintayne that part. Incumbere gladium, to thruste hym selfe on a sworde. Incumbunt tecta centenis columnis, the rofe is borne vp with an hundred pyllours. Qui in teipsum incubuerunt, whiche are fal∣len or throwen on thy necke. Incunabula, all that longeth to the swathelinge of a chyld, thynges pertaynyng to infancy. Incunabulum, a cradell. Incuria, neglygence, yll husbandry. Incurro, rere, to run agaynst one, to runne in. Incursus, & Incursio, inuasion of ennemies. Incuruesco, scere, to bowe downe, or be croked. Incuruo, aui, are, to make crooked. Incuruus, a, um, crooked. Incus, ûdis, an anuyll. Incuso, aui, are, to accuse. Incutio, cussi, cutere, to throwe in. Indago, aui, are, to seeke or serche, to vente, to seke as a hounde dothe. Indago, ginis, serche. Inde, from thens, there, from thensforth, after warde, of hym or her. Vxorem duxit, nati filij duo, inde ego hūc maiorem adoptaui mihi: He toke a wyfe, and had by her two sonnes, from him I toke this, which is the elder, and made hym myne heyre. Inde ab initio, from the fyrst begynnyng. Inde est, therof it commeth. Indecens, vnsyttynge, vnconuenient. Indecor, coris, not regarded. Indecorè, an aduerbe, sygnifieng vnhonestly, vnconueniently. Indecoris, re, idem quod indecor. Indecorum, vnhonest. Indefensus, without defence. Indefinitus, a, tū, not determined or discussed. Indemnatus, he that is cōdemned without ma∣kynge answere, or not beynge herde. Indemnis, without hurt or harme, defended. Indemnitas, eschewyng of damage. Existimans indemnitati suae consuli posse, Thinking that he mought eschue damage or daunger. Indeprecabilis, he that wol not be intreated, or wyll not forgyue. Poena indeprecabilis, punisshement without remyssyon. Index, indicis, he that accuseth or appecheth an other man. also he that for to escape punyshe∣ment, or for some rewarde, discloseth the con∣spiracy, whervnto he was made priuy it is al¦so the forefynger, and a touche stoone to trye gold, also the table of a boke, wherby certayn chapiters or notes be founden. India, a great countray and ryche, callyd in en∣glyshe Indee, lieng on the south east partis of the world, which as Ptholomeue writeth, is in two partes. The one is callid Indes, with in the ryuer of Ganges, which on the west is boūded with Aracosia & Gedrosia, on the east with the greate ryuer callid Ganges, on the north with the hyll called Imâus, on the south and weste with parte of the Indian sea. The other part of Indee, without Ganges, is boū∣ded on the west with the saide ryuer of Gan∣ges, on the north with part of Scithia & Se∣rica, on the east with the regiō callid Sinarū, on the south with the Indian sea. Nearchus, whiche was one of great Alexanders admy∣ralles, affirmed (as Arrianus writeth) that it was foure monethes iourney by the playnes of Indee. Megasthenes sayd, that the bredth of Indee, whyche was from the weste to the east, contayneth .xvi. thousande furlong, whi∣che is two thousande and a .C. myles. The length, whiche was frō the north to the south xxii. thousande furlonge, which is two thou∣sande DCCCI. myles. Ctesias affirmeth i to be as moche as the resydue of Asia. But Onesicritus, which wrate the actes of Alexā∣dar, demeth it to be the thirde parte of Asia. There is alway two summers, and fruites & grayn is there twyse gathered, the wyndes to always temperate, & not troublons, the bea∣stes & foules moch greater than in other coū∣trays, and of more dyuers kyndes. The na∣mes of the countreys and cities there, be now otherwyse, than they were in the tyme of the auncient writers. They whyche be now kno∣wen, shall be declared in theyr places, with al¦so the mountaynes and ryuers, whyche are great aboue all other. Indicatio, estymation, or valuation. Indicatura, idem. Indicatus idem. Indicium, is where one, whiche was particy∣patour
in an offence dothe dyscouer the actes and deuyses of his companyons. Indicio esse, to betoken or declare. Indico, caui, are, to disclose, to manifest, & make openly knowen, to demonstrate, to accuse, to set or tel the price, to delyuer in possession that whiche is bought. Indico, dixi, dicere, to denounce or declare so∣lemnely, and for a great cause, as batayle, fa∣stynges, funralles, counsayles, tryumphes, and other great thinges. also to set a tribute or taxe, and to appoynte or commmaunde. Indicere consilium, to calle or commaunde a counsayle. Indicere iustitium, to cōmande a vacation, or as we do say, to kepe no terme. Indicere pecuniam populo, to sette a taxe or subsidy on the people. Indictio, the space of .xv. yeres. also a taxe gran∣ted by the people. Indictiuus, ua, uum, that whiche is declared or appoynted. Indictus, ta, tū, declared or denounced solemnly. Indicta causa, the cause or matter not knowē, declared, or defended. Indidem, from thens, forthwith the same. Indies, dayly, from day to daye. Crescente in∣dies multitudine, the multitude or mēber day∣ly increasynge. Indigena, of the same countrey or towne borne and bredde. Indigentia, nede or necessitie. Indigeo, gui, gere, to lacke. Indigestè, inordynately. Indigestio, yll digestyon. Indigetes, goddis made of mortall men, somme take them for priuate goddis, pertaynynge to particular places. Indigitamenta, bokes contayning the names of goddis, and the mistical significatiō of them. Indigito, taui, tare, to name or call by name. Indignor, aris, ari, to disdayne. Indignus, vnworthy, myserable. Indigus, nedy or lackynge. Indipisco, sci, scere, & Indipiscor, sceris, sci, to optayne; to vsurpe. Indiscriminatim, indifferētly, without diuersite Indisertus, without eloquence. Indiuidiū, that may not be diuided or separate. Indo, indidi, indere, to set or name also to print. Indocilis, a dullarde, that can not be taught. Indoctus, vnlerned. Indolentia, lacke of peyne. Indoloria, idem. Indoles, towardnes and disposition to vertu in chyldren: in men, token of vertue. also very no¦bilitie or honour, aptnes to good or euyll. Specimen indolis dare, whan in youthe one sheweth a likelyhode of towardnes to vertue. Laetae indolis adolescens, of a pleasant or me∣ry nature. Tania indoles in Lauinia erat, so good or ver¦tuous a nature there was in Lauinia. Equorum indoles, the rase of horses. Fructuum indoles, the terrage, verdure, or sent of fruytes. Frugum indoles, the good growthe and ful∣nes of grayne. Indomabilis, e, that maye not be made tame. Indomitus, wylde, vnbroken. Indubitatus, ta, tum, vndoubted. Induciae, true, or peace for a certaine tyme. Induco, xi, cere, to induce, to brynge in, to per∣swade, to illure, to incline, to deceiue, to cancel to defete, to put on, properly hosen or shoen, to infixe or stablish▪ Ita induxi in animū, I haue infixed or stablyshed in my mynde. Inductio, a forme of argument, proceding from the particulars vnto the vniuersalles. also an argumente, whiche by gettynge the assent in thynges not doubtful, proueth the thyng whi¦che is intended. Indulco, aui, are, & indulcoro, aui, are, to make sweete. Indulgenter, fauourably, without rygour. Indulgentia, & Indulgitas, gentylnes in suffe∣raunce, also mercy. Indulgeo, dulsi, gére, to graunt lyghtly, to con¦sent to a request. Also to giue respite, to be gē∣tyll and mercyfull, to pardon. Indulge ualetudini ruae, take hede to thy helth Nimium illi indulges, thou carest to moch for hym, thou folowest him to moche, thou ma∣kyst to moche of hym. Indumentum, a garment. Induo, dui, ere, to putte on a garment or other lyke thyng, to transforme or translate, to cast in, to annoynte. Induere personam alterius, to speake in the name or stede of an other man. Induere personam iudicis, to represent or do the office of a iudge. Induere postes pice, to laye on pitche on the postes. Induere sibi ingeniū nouū, to change his nature. Speciem latronis induere, to vse the fascion of a thefe. Vaetustatem induere, to become olde. Indui fructu, to be chargid or laded with fruit Indui sua confessione, to be takē by his owne confession. Induit se in florem, it blossometh. Induperator, oris, an emperour. Indus, a noble riuer, whiche commeth from the great mountayne of Taurus, and incloseth Inde on the west, and runneth into the Indi∣an sea. Into this ryuer runneth .xv. great fa∣mouse ryuers, the leaste of theym more than
the great ryuer of Donow, where he is bro∣dest. Strabo sayth that they which do write most inoderately of Indus, done affirme that he is in breade fifty furlung, which is twelue myles and a halfe. The water therof causeth great settilitie whan it ouerfloweth, & ther∣of many sondry pleasant and holsome fruites do sprynge without labour. Indusiarius, a maker of peticotes. Indusiatus, clad in a peticote. Indusium, a peticote. Industria, a vertue comprehendynge bothe stu∣dy and diligence, industry. Industrie, wyttyly. Industrius, he that is wytty and actiue. Induuiae, apparayle, Inebrior, aris, ari, to make drunke, or be drunken. Inedia, hungar. Ineffigiatus, ta, tum, vnfascioned, without good proportion. Ineo, iui, ire, to begyn, to go in, to deserue, to get, to wynne, to optayne, to treate. Inîre is sometyme where the male leapeth the female, as the horse keuereth the mare. Also to consi∣der or vnderstande. Inire cursum, to begyn his course. Falsam gratiam inire, to get faynt or vnsure frendes. Inire foedus, to make a leage or treatye of peace. Inire fugam, to flee as men do in battayle. Gratiam inire, to get thanke or frendes with some pleasure done vnto them. Inire magistratum, to enter in an offyce. Inire pacem, to make peace. Inire bellum, to make warre. Inire uiam, to finde the waye. Rationem inire, to seke meane, or to consy∣der howe a thynge maye be done. Inire societatem, to fall in feloweshyp with one. Inire suffragia, to assemble people for an ele∣ction, or to consent to any matter. Inita, subducta{que} ratione, al thynge rekened or well accompted. Ineunte aetate, in youthe. Ineunte uere, at the begynning of the spring of the yere. Ineptio, iui, ire, to trifle, to do a thynge vn∣mete for the purpose. Ineptus, ta, tum, vnapte. Ineptus, a triflar, vsynge nothynge in order, vnapte to the purpose. Inermis, vnarmed, a man yolden. Iners, inertis, without any science, or crafte, an ydell person. also vnprofitable. Inertia, lacke of crafte, ydelnes. Inerticula, a vine, wherof the wyne is so good, that none yuell procedeth therof. Inesco, sci, scere, to cram or fode. also to deceiue Ineuitabilis, le, that can not be eschewed. Inexercitus, ta, tum, not exercised, vnoccupied. Inexhaustus, a, um, neuer reasynge. Inexploratò, without serche. Inexputabilis, le, that maye not be numbred. Inextricabilis, le, that can not be shaken of, or dissolued. Infabre, vncunningely, vncraftylye, yll fa∣uoured. Infamia, infamy. Infamis, me, infamed. Infamis digitus, the myddle fynger. Infamo, aui, are, to infame or yll report. Infandum, that maye not be spoken. Infans, a chylde that can not yet speake. It is also euery thynge that is very yonge. Also it signifieth not eloquent. some tyme an ideote that can not speake. Infantia, chyldehod also folyshenes. Infantilis, le, pertayninge to chyldhode. Infarcio, cij, & ciui, cire, to infarse or stuffe, or fyll. Infatuo, aui, are, to make folyshe. Infector, toris, a dyar of colours. Infectus, tus, dyenge or staynige. Infectus, ta, tum, infected, dyed, stayned, poy¦soned. also vndone or not done, not made. Infecta pace, without any peace made. Infectum reddere, to vndo that whiche is done. Infensus, displeased, moued with anger or hate toward an other. also he that bearith malice. Inferiae, sacrifice done to infernall goddes. Infernalis, le, infernall. Infernas, atis, the lowe. Infernè, alowe, or benethe. Infernus, hell. Infernus, na, num, lowe. Infero, intuli, inferre, to brynge in, to throwe in, to adde to, to caste in, to conclude. Inferre arma, to make warre. Inferre crimen alicui, to lay to ones charge. Inferre sermonem, to talke. Stuprum inferre, to commyt adultery or for∣nication with a kynswoman. Inferus, ra, rum, where nothynge is lower. Infestiuus, ua, um, vnmete for disporte. Infesto, aui, are, to do displeasure with sondry incursions or rodes. Infestus, a mortall ennemye. Infestus, ta, tum, that standeth agaynst a man to the intent to indamage him. Infesta signa, standerdes or bauers displayed in battayle on bothe partes. Infestum mare, the sea occupied with pyra∣tes and robbers. Infestus ager, a daungerous countreye to
passe throughe. Infestus animus, a malitious mynde. Infibulo, aui, are, to claspe to gether. Inficias ire, to doubt or deny. Inficiator, oris, he that denyeth. Infici, feci, ficere, to dye clothe, to slayne or infecte. Inficior, aris, ari, to deny or disaffyrme. Infidus, da, dum, vnfaythfull. Infimâtes, the base people. Infimo, aui, are, to brynge lowe. Infimus, a, um, the lowest or moste base. Infirmitas, tatis, vnstablenesses, weakenes, sickenes. Infirmo, aui, are, to make weake. Infirmus, ma, um, vnstable, sycke, feble. Infit, he sayde, he began. Inflammo, aui, are, to inflame or set on fyre. Inflecto, ctere, to bowe or plye. Infligo, xi, gere, poenam aut opprobrium, to punyshe or rebuke. Influo, xi, ere, to runne in to a thynge, as wa∣ter or other licour dothe. Informo, aui, are, to shape or fourme, to en∣fourme or teache good maners. Inforo, aui, are, to declare at the barre in a place of iudgemente, to pleade. Also to perf¦cate or make a hole. Infortunium, yll chaunce. Infra, within, benethe: in number it signifieth lasse or fewer. Infractio, slouthfulnes. Infractus, ta, tum, vnbroken, sure. Infractus animi, styf of courage. sometyme it signify∣eth discouraged. Infrendes, chyldren lackynge teeth. Infrendo, di, dere, to crashe the teth for anger Infringo, fregi, gere, to breake to pieces. Infrunitus, a foole, that knoweth not howe to vse a thynge. Infuco, care, to colour a thynge, intendynge deceypte. Infulae, be the labelles, whiche do hange on e∣uery syde of a mytar. It was in the old tyme the attyre that priestes dydde weare on theyr heades. They were also tapets of linen, wher¦with temples were hanged. Infumibulum, the shanke or tonnel of a chym∣neye. Infumo, aui, are, to drye in the smoke. Infundbulum, a tounnell, wherinto licure is poured, whan vesselles are fylled. Infundo, fudi, fundere, to poure in. Infurnibulum, a piele, wherwith breade is put into the ouen. Infuscare uim merum, to alay wyne with water. Ingemo, gemui, ere, to lamente or bewayle moche. Ingeniculor, aris, ari, to bowe the knee, or make courtesy. Ingeniculus, a fygure amonge the sterres, cal∣led nowe Hercules. Ingeniosus, wytty. Ingenium, the proper name of a thynge. alsoo wytte. Ingens, tis, wonderfull great. Ingens animus, a great courage. Ingenuatus, come of an honeste stocke or kynrede. Ingenuè, frely, frankly. Ingenuitas, tatis, fredome. Ingenuus, a free man borne, or a gentylman. Ingenuus, a, um, naturall. Ingenua facta, noble actes. Ingero, gessi, gerere, to brynge in, to myxte. Ingerere cibum, to gyue to one meate. Ingerere dicta in aliquē, to chyde with one to say yll of one. Ingerere malum, to do displeasure. Omnia mala ingerebat, he dydde the warst that he coulde. Osculum ingerere, to kysse one passynge by. Ingerere pugno, to stryke with the fyste. Se ingerere, to aduaunce hym selfe in com∣pany, or to be malapert. Ingitas, tatis, pouertie. Inglorius, a, um, of no renoume or fame. Ingluuies, gluttony. also the craye or gorge in byrdes. Ingrandesco, sci, scere, to ware great. Ingratijs, maulgre one. Ingratis, agaynste my wyll, or our wyll. Ingratus, ta, tum vnthankefull, displeasante, constrayned, or agaynste a mannes wyll. also vnkynde, and not remembrynge frendeshyp, or beneuolence. Ingrauesco, sci, scere, to ouercharge. Ingredior, eris, gredi, to enter. Ingruo, ui, ere, to inuade, to be imminent, pro∣perly spoken of battayle or tempest. Inguina, the priuie members of men and wo∣menne. Inguinaria, an herbe which cureth the diseases in priuy members. Inguinium, a citie in Liguria, aunciente and ryche. Ingurgito, aui, are, to deuoure gluttonousely. Inhabilis, le, vnapte. Inhabito, tare, to dwell in a place. Inhereo, to cleaue or stycke to. Inheresco, sci, scere, to sticke faste. Inhalo, aui, are, to drawe in brethe. Inhibeo, bui, bere, to forbyd. Inhibere imperium, to haue charge or rule. Inhibere nauem, to caste ancre, or to saye a shyppe, whiche is vnder sayle, that she sayle not a full course.
Inhibere supplicia alicui, to execute tourmen¦tes on one, or to put one to deathe. Inhio, aui, are, to gape. also to couet moche. Inhonestè, dishonestly. Inhonestus, ta, tum, dishonest. Inhonor, without honour. Inhonoratus, ta, tum, lackynge honour. Inhorreo, rui, rere, Inhorresco, scere, to ab∣horre, to quake for feare. Inhospes, he that wyll lodge no man. Inhospitá tecta, houses where no man maye lodge. Inhospitalis, le, vnapt for lodgynge. Inhumanus, cruell, vncourteys. Inhumo, are, to put into the grounde. Inibi, euen there, anon, amonge them. Inijcio, ieci, ijcere, to cast or throwe in, to cast at some thynge, to throwe with violence, to put on. Inijcere manum, to scase or take possession of a thynge. Inijcere manus in aliquem, to apprehend or attache one. Inijcere scrupulum alicui, to put one in a fantasy. Inijcere studium alicui, to cause one to study. Manus iniectio, a seaser of lande. Inimicitia, hostilitie, contrary to amity. Inimico, caui, care, to make ennemies. Inimicor, caris, cari, to practise hostilitie. Inimicus, an ennemy. Ininde, from thens. Iniquè, mischeuously, or vniustely. Iniquitas, tatis, parcialitie, contrary to iustice. Iniquus, a, um, not euen or playne. also not in∣differente or iust. sometyme great, straighte, or narrowe. Iniquo animo ferre, to be myscontented or sorowefull. Initiatus, instructed or entered in rules concer∣nynge religion. Initio, aui, are, to instructe in thynges concer∣nyng religion. also to begyn to do a thynge. Initior, aris, ari, to begyn. also to be weaned as chyldren be. Initium, a begynninge, a sacrifice to Ceres. Inito, aui, are, to walke in. Initor, toris, a stalyon. Inîtus, the leapynge or keuerynge of a mare by a horse. Iniuges, cattell neuer yoked or broken, whiche were sometyme sacrifised. Iniungo, xi, gere, to inioyne, to appoynte, to laye on, as a man wyl ad to a gret burdeyne. Iniuria, wronge, iniury, reproche, damage. ta∣ken lyke an aduerbe, it signifieth without cause, without deserte. Iniuria tua, throughe thy default. Iniuriosus, a wronge doet. Iniurius, a, um, wrongfull, he that dothe any thynge agaynste the lawe. Iniussu imperatoris, without the emperours commaundement. Iniustus, ta, tum, vniuste, also excedynge iuste measure. Iniustè, vniustely. Innascor, sci, to be ingendred in one. Innatus, ta, tum, ingendered. Innato, aui, are, to swym in a place. Innitor, teris, inniti, to assaye, to indeuoure. Innocens, vnharmfull, innocent. Innocentia, integritie, true intente. Innocuus, a, um, vnharmfull, he that dothe none harme. Innotesco, sci, scere, to be knowen. Innoxius, a, um, wherin is no damage, that whiche can do none harme. Innumerato, in a redynes, Innuo, nui, ere, to graunt or assent with nod∣dynge of the heade, Ino, was daughter of Cadmus, wife of Atha∣nsas kynge of Thebes, whiche her husbande bèynge mad, and Learchus her sonne slayne, she threwe her selfe into the sea. Inocco, aui, are, to harowe in. Inoculatio, graffynge betwen the rynde and the wood. Inoculo, aui, are, to graffe betwene the rynde and the wood. Inodorus, without sauour. Inoffensus, vnhurte. Inofficiosum testamentum, where the father by testament gyueth awaye from his son his landes or goodes without cause. Inolesco, sci, scere, to waxe great. Inopia, pouertie, lacke of thynges necessary. Inopinatus, vnthought on, or vnloked for. Inopiosus, a, um, needy. Inops, pis, pore, lackyng helpe. also vnburied Inops ab amicis, dispuruayed of frendes. Inops amicorum, idem. Inora, beastes without mouthes. In posterum, at the laste, in conclusion. Inprimis, specially, pryncipally, chiefely. In promptu, redy, or in a redines. In promptu esse, to be playne or without any difficulty. In promptu ponere, to set forth in sight. In quam, I sayde. In quantum, in as moche, or for as moche. Inquies, quietis, & Inquietus, ta, tum, vnrest∣full, vnquiete. Inquieto, aui, are, to vnquiete or trouble. Inquilino, naui, nare, to dwell in a straunge place. Inquilinus, he that dwelleth in a place, where neyther he nor his auncetours were borne. Inquino, aui, are, to defyle or polute.
Inquio, I saye. Inquiro, siui, quirere, to inquire. Inquisitius, more intentifely, more inwardely. Insania, madnes, peuyshenes, dotage, fro∣wardenes. Insanio, iui, ire, to be mad or peuyshe, to dote, to do vnaduysedly. Insanitas, madnesse. Insanus, mad, peuyshe, dotynge, regardyng no counsell, frowarde, vntractable. Insatiabilis, le, vnsatiable. Inscendo, dere, to go vp, or to clyme. Insciens, vnwyttynge: also not thynkynge on that he doth. Insciencer, ignorantly. Inscientia, ignoraunce. Inscitia, idem. Inscius, a, um, ignoraunt. Inscribo, scripsi, scribere, to wryte in or vpon, to name or intitle. Inscriptus, a, um, vnwrytten, wrytten vpon, named or intitled. Insecta, be all flyes and wormes, that be deui∣ded in theyr bodies the heade and brest from the bealy and tayle: as bees, waspes, emoces or pismeres, and suche lyke. Insequor, eris, sequi, to folowe or pursue. Infero, serui, rere, insertum, to set in, to ioyne. whan it hath inseui, instum, it sygnyfieth to graffe. Inserto, aui, are, to set to. Insertorium, the bonde or thonge, wherwith a tergate or buckeler is hanged on a mannes arme. Inseruio, uiui, ire, to seru. Insideo, es, sedi, fidere, to syt on, to syt in, or be in, to besiege, to abyde in a place. Insidiae, wyles to intray a man, er he be ware. Insidior, aris, ari, to practise wiles, to intrap or betray a man. Insidiose, wylily, craftely. Insidiosus, a, um, full of wyles. Insido, is, sidi, re, to enter to the intente to abyde. Insigne, a notable signe or token. Insignia, signes or tokens of honour, wherby euery astate or great aucthoritie is knowen. a robes, maces, swordes borne vpeyghte, cappes of mayntenance, and other lyke thin∣ges. Also some tyme tokens of doctrine and vertue: as staues typped with syluer, whi∣che bedells beare before doctours, hoodes furred, crownes of laurell. it may be also ta∣ken for the armes or bages of gentylmen. Insignio, iui, ire, to note with some signe. also to doube knyghtes. Insignis, ne, notable, excellente, marked with some speciall token to be knowen. Insignite, & insigniter, notably. Insilio, liui, ire, to leape in or vp. Insimul, together. Insimulatio, an accusation or appeale. Insimulo, aui, are, to accuse or appeale. also to fayne or dissemble. Insinuatio, a colourable and crafty begynning of an oration, dissemblynge somme thynge, where the matter maye not be fauourablye herde. Insinuatus, a, um, wounde to gether. Insinuo, aui, are, to brynge in to, to conioyne, to put in a mannes mynde couertelye and craftely. Aliquem alteri insinuare, to brynge one in fa¦uour with an other. In causam insinuare se, to consyder the grūde of a matter. Insinuare se, by lyttell and lyttell to crepe in∣to fauour or credence. Insinuare se in consuetudinem, to enter in a¦quayntaunce, or become familiar with one. Insinuare se in sermonem aliquorum, to c∣terlase communication with them, which be alredy talkynge of a matter. Insipidus, a, um, vusauery. Insipiens, entis, without discretion. Insisto, institi, insistere, to set fast and fyrmely, to indeuour, to prouoke or sollicite. somtime to assyste. Insistebat in manu Cereris dex∣tera simulachrum pulcherrime factum vi∣ctoriae. There was in the ryghte hande of Ceres an ymage of vyctory moste pleasaunt∣ly wroughte. Aliquod negotium insistere, to go aboute some affayre or busines. Hastae insistere, to leane on a speare. Mente & animo insutere in rem aliquam, to employe al wyt and mynde on some thing. Omnes itinera insistant sua, let euery man go his owne waye. Quam insistam uiam? what waye shall I kepe? Vestigijs alienis insistere, to folowe other mennes doinges. Insistere uestigijs laudum suarum, to conty∣nue in his well doing. Vrijs insistere aut ingredi, to cary by the way or to go forthe. Insitio, onis, graffynge. Insitium, the stocke. Insitium, the graffe. Also a iegot or other lyke meate stuffed with fleshe and egges chopped or mynced. Insitiuus, ua, uum, infarsed or stuffed. Insolabiliter, without comforte, desperatelye. Insolatio, a sunnynge. Insolatus, a, um, sunned. Insolens, not wont or accustomed, haut, arro∣gant, presumptuous.
Insolenter, arrogantly. Insolentia, seld omnes of vse in any thyng, vn∣hauntynge of a place. Also presumption, wan¦ton pryde. Insolitus, not wonte. Insolo, aui, are, to drye in the sunne, to bleach Insomnes noctes, nyghtes without slepe. Insomnia, ae, lacke of power to sleape. Insomniosus, sleapy, or he that sleapeth moch. Insomnium, a vayne dreame. Insons, so ntis, innocent or not gylty. Insonus, a, um, without noyse. Inspectius, more auysedly. Inspecto, taui tare, to beholde attentiuelye, to wayte on. Inspectio, a beholdynge, an ouersyghte, a con∣trollement. Inspector, an ouerseer, a controller. Inspicio, spexi, cere, to beholde, to ouersee, to controll, to consyder a thyng throughly. Inspico, aui, are, to make a thynge smalle, lyke to a wheate reede. Inspiro, aui, are, to inspire, to blowe in. Instans, tis, an instant, the least part of tyme. Instanter, instantly. Instantia, thynges that be present. Instantia, dilygence. Instar, as it were, or lyke. Instat, it is nigh, it is come, it is at hande. Cae∣sar ubi se diutius duci intellexit, & diem in∣stare, qua die frumentum militibus metiri o∣portebat, Whan Caesar perceyued, that he was delayed, and the daye was nyghe come, whan he must nedes delyuer corne to his men of warre. Instatio, the instant tyme. Instauratio, reedifieng, repairyng, renewynge. Instauro, aui, are, to new make, or begyn agayn any thynge sometyme to renue or reforme, to reedyfye. Instaurare bellum, to make warre eftsones. Insterno, straui, sternere, to couer, to spreade. Instigo, aui, are, to styrre or prycke forwarde. Instigo, inxi, gere, to meue inwardly. Instinctus, inwardly moued. Instita, a purfle. Instito, aui, are, to repugne or withstande. Institor, oris, a chapman, a mercer, also he that selleth apparayle and fyne stuffe, going about therwith, also a marchantes factour. Institorius, a, um, pertaynyng to chapman. Actio institoria, an action agaynst the mai∣ster for the acte of the factour. Instituo, tui, tuere, to institute, to begyn, to in∣struct, or teche, to ordeyn. Aueo scire quarū re¦rū rationē instituat, I wold fain know where about he gothe, or what he intendeth to do. Senex institui lyra non erubescebat, beynge old, he was not ashamed to be taught to play on the harpe. Accusationem instituere, to commence an ac¦tion, or make a complaynt by byll. Astutiam instituere, to inuent a crafty mean. Certamen sibi instituere cum aliquo, to be at varyance with one. Collegium instituere, to founde a college. Consuetudinem instituere, to enter into fa∣myliaritie. Delectum militum instituere, to raise men to the warres. Quaestum sibi instituere, to begyn a waye to haue gayne or profyte by it. Vitam sapienter instituere, to prepare hym selfe to lyue wysely. Instituta, auncient maners and customes, al∣so ordynances. Pro meo instituto, for my purpose. Institutiones, instructions in doctrine. Insto, as, institi, stare, to require instantely, to solicite, to styck to, to resist, to persyst, to prese on, to come on, or immediatly folow. also to be nygh. Vestigijs alicuius instare, to folow one foote by foote. Instat, it is now. Periculum instat, danger is at hande. Instant à me tibi dona, I am at the poynte to doo the good. Instratum, à counterpoynte. Also it sygnifieth all tapisey, which serueth to couer any thing. also the trappier or apparayle of an horse, an horseclothe. Instrumentum, an instrument or toole. also or∣dinance of warre, vessell, and all necessaries of householde and husbandry. somtyme it sy∣gnifieth a deede or charter concernyng lande, dettes, or couenauntes. Instructus, ta, tum, instruct, taught, furnished, garnysshed. Instructiores peditum copiae, the foote men were in better order and better appoynted. Vir instructissimus, a man furnished with al thynges necessary or conuenient. Instruo, struxi, struere, to set in order or aray, to instruct, to fournishe, to prepare. Domum instruere, to garnyshe a house with all thynges necessary. Epulas instruere, to prouyde for a feaste or banket. Insidias instruere, to prepare thingis to intrappe or deceyue one. Instruendae fraudi aliquanto intentior, some∣what busy in deuysyng how to deceyue. Insubres, Lumbardes, properly men of the du∣chy of Melayn. Insucco, aui, are, to soke in lycour. Insuesco, sueui, scere, to be wont. Insuetus, ta, tum, not vsed. Insula, an yle inuyronned with water. it is also a house in a towne, hauynge none other hous
ioyned to it, but stretes on euery syde of it. Insularis, re, belongyng to an yle. Insularius, a, um, most vile, proprely men bauy∣shed into yles to dygge mettall. Insulatus, ta, tum, made an yle. Insulto, taui, tare, to leape vp, to scorne or speke in the reproche of a man. Insultura, a leapyng vp or into a thynge. Insum, inesse, to be in some thynge. In summa, vniuersally, alway, fynally. Insummo, are, to fynyshe. Insumo, psi, ere, to spend or lay out money. Insuper, furthermore, moreouer. Insusurro, aui, are, to whisper in ones care. Integer, gra, grum, if it be spoken of age, it si∣gnifieth yong & lusty, if it be spokē of a man, it signifieth honest in all poyntes & qualities: in a thing it signifieth entier or hole. also safe Integer aeui, lusty of age. Integrasco, sci, scere, to be renewed. Integritas, honesty without corruption, inno∣cency. Corporis integritas, good disposition of the body. Integro, aui, are, to begyn agayn, to renewe. Integrè, truely and diligently. Integrum esse, to be at a mans liberte, or in his power. Non est integrum Gn. Pompeio cō∣silio iam uti tuo. It is not now in Pompeys power to do after your counsell. Ego, si mihi esset integrum, susciperem hoc crimen. If I were at my libertie, I wold take that blame vpon me. Constituent quid agant quibus in∣tegrum, est, They whyche yet haue done no∣thynge, let them take hede what they do. Si mihi esset integrū, if it were in my power, or if it were to do that I haue done. In integrum restituere, to bring it to the fyrst estate, to restore it to the point that it was at In integro esse, is spoken where in any mat∣ter or affaire, there is nothyng done, but that euery man may do as it lyketh hym. Sed quo¦niā hec iā neque in integro esse possunt, but forasmoche as there is noo remedye, or that these thynges may not be holpen, or may not be in as good poynt as they were. Intellectualis, of vnderstandynge. Intellectus, vnderstandynge. Intelligentia, the perceyuyng of the mynde. Intelligibile, that may be vnderstande. Intelligo, lexi, ligere, to vnderstande. Intemerata, perfecte sacrifyces, all thynges obseruyd. Intemeratus, ta, tum, vndefyled, vncorrupted. Intemperans, he that dothe euery thyng with∣out order or measure. Intemperiae, goddesses hauīg power to do harm Intemperies, & intemperantia, vnteperatnes. Intempesta nox, mydnyghte, whan all thynge is in sylence. Intempestas, tatis, the caulme of the water, whan there is no tempest. Intēpestiuè, vntimely, out of due tyme or order. Intempestiuus, a, ū, thing out of tyme or season. Intendo, di, dere, to bende or stretche also to loke diligently on a thynge, to knyt or tye, to inforce with might. Intendere animum, to set or fyxe the mynde. Intendere formulam, to bringe an action a∣gaynst one. In tenebris saltare, signifieth to do a thing vn¦aduisedly, and without any iudgement. Intentatus, not assayed. Intentio, signifieth not intent or pourpose, but forthe act that is appoynted or executed. Intento, aui, are, to menace. Intentus, ta, tum, set or fyxed. Inter, betwene, amonge. Inter coenam, for in coena. Inter nos amamus, we loue togyther one an other. Inter opus, whyles he was busy. Inter paucos dies, in a shorte tyme. Inter poenam, beyng to tourment. Inter sacrum & saxum, in the poynt to perish and be vtterly loste. Inter uias, on the way rydyng or goyng. Interamna, a citie in Italy. Interana, the inwardes of a man or beast, Interaneus, a, um, that whiche is within. Interaresco, sci, scere, to be dryed vp. Interbibo, bi, bere, to drynke all out. Intercalaris, re, & intercalarius, a, um, put or sette betwene. Intercalaris dies, the day of the leape yere. Intercalaris mensis, the moneth in the which certayn dayes were set, that lacked to make the yere complete, which moneth is Februa∣rye Reade abundantly hereof in Solino & Macrobio, whiche wold be tedious to write in englyshe, specially in this Dictionary. Intercalaris uersus, a syngular verse often re¦peted amonge other verses. Some do call it, in englyshe balades and songes, the foote or refrete of a ditie. Intercalo, aui, are, to set or put betwene. Intercapedo, dinis, a space or pause. Intercedo, cessi, cedere, to make intercession, also to go betwene, or be betwene. Quadrin∣gētorū remigū obsequio cōtra se intercedit. He letted that .iiii. hūdred watermen that ro¦wed dyd not obey hym. Vaeteres mihi neces∣situdines cū his omnibus intercedunt, Ther is great amitie of a longe tyme betwene vs. Tribuni inter cesserunt, The Tribunes dyd let or prohibyte. Intercedit mihi tecum amicitia, There is a∣mitie betwene the and me. Pro alio intercedere, to answer for an other man. Intercessêre pauci dies, in a few days
after, a lyttell whyle after. Quae ratio tibi cum illo intercesserat? What acquayntāce haddest thou with him? or what haddest thou to do with hym? Intercessio Tribunorum, a let or prohibitiō of the Tribunes against the auctoritie of other officers. Intercessor, he that lettith a matter, that it may not go forwarde. Intercîdo, cîdi, ere, to cut sūder in the middes. Intêcido, cidi, ere, to decay or perishe betwene this and that. Intercino, nere, to syng betwene or in the mid∣dell of a thing, as in comedies or enterludes, whiles newe personages be in preparyng. Intercipio, caepi, ere, to preuent or apprehende one vnware, to take in the myddes, or in the meane while, sometyme to take all. Intercipere iter, to kepe or inclose a way, that men may not passe. Intercipere literas, to take letters on the way from hym that carieth them. Intercipere sermonem, to dysapoynt one of his purpose. Intercisa & porrecta, cut of & made longer. Intercisi dies, were days diuided, part holyday part warkeday. Intercludo, si, ere, to shut in, to stop, to lette. Intercludere corporibus suis aduentum ini∣micorum, To be them selues in the warre, to let their enemyes to enter. Dolorem intercludi, to be enuyronned with heuynesse. Fugam intercludere, to keepe the passages that they escape not. Libertatem intercludere, to lette theym of theyr lybertie. Spem cōmeatus intercludere, to put theym from hope to haue vitayles. Intercolumnium, the space betwene pyllars. Intercus, cutis, a disease betwene the skyn and the fleshe: Whan it is an adiectiue it sygni∣fieth inwarde. Intercutibus uitijs madentes, ouerwet with inwarde vices. Intercutaneus, a, um, that is within the skinne. Interdico, xi, cere, to prohibite greuousely. also to resyst or let. Interdico alicui aqua & igni, was a condem¦nation in Rome, whereby one was depriued from the vsage of water and fyre, wherby he was constreyned to depart out of the limites of the empire of Rome. Interdicere de ui hominibus armatis, to or∣dayne that he by whose meanes one supposeth that he is putte out of possession with force, shall set hym eftsones in possession. Vestigijs interdicere, to forbidde one that he go not a certayne way. Nihil interdico, I wyll not lette the, I care not for it. Interdictum, a prohibytion, a menace, somtime a determination of the possession of a thynge in debate. Interdiu, in the day tyme. Interdum, sometyme. Interea, in the meane while▪ also neuerthelesse. Interealoci, in the meane space. Intereo, rij, ire, to dye vtterly. Interequito aui, are, to ryde betwene. Interesse, to be present. Publicis consilijs inter∣fuimus, we were present at the comnune coū¦sayl. also to be betwene. Id morari uictoriam rati, quod interesset amnis, supposynge that the cause why that they had not orthewith the vyctory, was forasmoch as the riuer was betwene them. Magni sua putabant interesse, They thought that it made moch for the pur∣pose, or for their profite. Triginta ferme in∣terfuere anni, There were almost thyrty ye∣res betwene them. Interest mea, tua, sua, nostra, uestra, it behouith me, the, hym. vs, you, or it pertayneth to me, the, hym, &c. Also it maketh matter, or is a di∣uersitie. Si nihil interest regis, peto ut dum dico, uinculis liberer, If it be no mattier to the kynge, I pray you, whyles I do speake, let me be without gyues. Somtyme it signifi¦eth to be in the middes. Nihil interest tui, It is no matter to the. Nihil interest eius, it ma¦keth no matter to him. Interest eius, It is his part, or it is for his profyte. Quid ergo inter est, proferantur, nec ne? What maketh it matter, where they be brought forth or no? Nec interest discentium, quibus quidque no minibus appelletur, It maketh no matter to them that do lerne, by what names any thing is callyd. Permagni interest, It maketh mo∣che of the matter. Inter hominem & beluam hoc maxime interest, This is the most diuer¦sytie betwene a man and a beast. Interficio, feci, to slea. Interfluo, xi, ere, to flowe betwene. Interfoemineum, a womans priuy token, wher¦by she is knowen from a man. Interfundo, fudi, fundere, to poure betwene. Intergerimus, a wall added to an olde founda∣tion or wall to sustayne it. Interhaec, in this meane tyme. Interi, they that be within. Interiaceo, cui, cere, to putte betwene, to caste betwene. Interibi, in the myddle of that place. Interiectus, ta, tum, put or cast betwene. Interiectae collibus ualles, valeys lyenge be∣twene the hylles. Interiecti inter philosophos, & eos qui rem pub. administrent, Whiche be neyther philo∣sophers nor yet mynysters of a cōmon weale,
but participatours of the one and the other. Interiectum tempus, the meane tyme. Interncio, ieci, ijcere, to lay or put betwene. Interim, in the mean space or tyme, in the mean season. also somtime, sodeinly, other while. Interimo, emi, imere, to kylle. Interior, & interius, the inner. Interitus, deathe. Interiungo, ere, to tary. Interius, more inwarde. Interlino, nere, to enterlyne. Interloquor, eris, qui, to speake in a mans tale. Interluceo, cere, to shyne betweene, or in the myddes. Interluco, care, to make a glade in themyddell of a wood. Interlunium, the spare of tyme, in the whyche neyther the olde moone dothe appere, nor the newe moone is sene. Interluo, ere, to flowe betweene, to wasshe be∣tweene meales, or other actes. Intermedius, a, um, in the myddell. Intermestris luna, the newe moone at the ve∣ry chaunge. Intermestrum, the tyme whan the moone is at the poynt to chaunge Intermico, to shyne in the myddes. Interminor, aris, ari, to thretten soore. Intermitto, tere, to leaue or put of for a tyme. Consuetudinem intermittere, to forbeare fa¦mily ariti or resorte. Intermorior, to dye vtterly. Intermortuus, a, um, dead for a season. Internecio, an vnyuersall slaughter. Internitio, idem. Interneco, are, to slea all at ones. Internectiuum bellum, warre to the vtter dy∣struction and deathe. Internicinum bellum, warre to the vttrance. Internodium, a ioynt in a mans fynger. also a ioynt in a strawe or reede. Internosco, scere, to know a thyng amonge o∣ther thynges. Internuncius, a messanger or meane betweene two persons beynge at varyance. Internus, na, num, that whiche is within, or inwarde. Inter opus, euen in the doinge. Interordinium, a space betweene that whiche is in order. Interordo, dinis, idem. Interpellatio, a let in a mans busynes. Interpellator, a distourber or letter or other, that they may not do theyr busynes. Interpello, are, to interrupt or let one that spe∣keth or doth any thynge. also to require, to aske or demaunde. Interpellare debitorem, to call on a dettour. Interpensiua, certayne pieces of tymber, why∣che are set from the corners of the wal, to the endes of the rafters, to conuey rayne water into the spoutes. Interpensiui parietes, walles whyche ryse vp∣pon an other walle, and haue no foundation in the grounde. Interpola, newe inuentions or deuises. Interpolator, oris, & Interpolatrix, tricis, he or she that refresheth old thynges, and do make them seme newe. Interpolis, le, Interpolus, la, lum, renewed, refresshed. Interpolio, are, to put or set betwene, to reme, or refreshe any thynge. Interpono, sui, nere, to put betwene, to resyste. Interponere fidem publicam, to promise vp∣pon the credence and consent of al the people. Interpremo, to stoppe or close in. Interpres, pretis, an interpreter or trāslater, al∣so a stikler betwene two, which ar at variāce. Interpretamentum, & interpretatio, an inter∣pretation or translation. Interpretor, aris, ari, to interprete, expoune, or translate, also to iuge or esteme. Virtutem ex consuetudine uitae interpretê∣mur, Let vs iuge the vertue of the person by his custome of lyuynge. In bonam partem interpretari, to take it in good parte. Peruerse interpretari, to meane shrewdly. Interputo, are, to cut betwene. Interrafile, that whiche is playne betwyxt two partes, grauen or imbosed. Interrex, regis, he that ruleth in the mean time betwene the ceassyng of the auctoritie of one principall gouernour, by death, or otherwise, vntyl an other be elected into the same office. Interregnum, the sayde meane tyme of gouer∣naunce or rule. Interrogo, are, to demaunde a question. Interrogati legibus, to be tried by examinati∣on, that they had offended against the lawes. Interrumpo, rupi, pere, to breke in the middes Interscalmia, the spaces betwene the oores in a boote or galey. Interscapilium, the space betwene the shulders vnder the necke. Interscindo, di, dere, to cut in the myddes. Intersepio, sepsi, pire, to diuide in the myddell with some inclosure. Interseptae, the gristell, whiche maketh parti∣tion betwene the nosethrylles. Intersero, seui, serere, to sowe or set betwene or in the myddes. Intersono, are, to make noyse in the myddes, or betwene. Interspiro, are, to spryng vp in the myddes. Interstertio, to strawe betwene, or throw thin∣ges betwene.
Interstitium, a distance or spare betwene. Intersum, interesse, to be present, also to differ, to be dyuers. Stulto intelligens quid inter∣est? What diuersitie is there betwene a fole and a wyse man? Intertextus, a, um, wouen or wrought betwene or tinselde, as cloth of tynsell or baudkyn. Intertrigo, ginis, gallyng, whiche happeneth by the occasyon of sweat betwene the legges, the toes, or fyngers. Intertrimentum, the waste or losse of a thynge by wearyng or occupienge. Interturbo, are, to trouble excedyngly. Interuaco, are, to be vacant or voyde betwene. Interuallum, a space betwene. Interuello, ere, to plucke vp here and there. Interuenio, ire, to come in the meane whyle, to be present amonge other. Interuenium, the space betwene the veynes. Interuerto, ere, to take away craftily or falsly. Interuiso, ere, to visit among, or now and than Interula, a shyrte or smocke. Intestabilis, he which by the lawe can make no testament, somtyme it signifieth detestable. Intestatus, he that dyeth without makyng any testamēt, intestate. also he that dyeth making none heire by testament. also a man out of cre¦dence, whom no man wyl take for a wytnes. Intestina, the bowels, or inwarde part of man, or other thynge lyuinge. Intestinum bellum, where people do war with∣in theyr owne realme. Intestium odium, hate with hart and mynd mortall hatrede. Intestinum opus, the inwarde buyldynge of tymber and parget. Intimus, moste inwarde, moost secrete. also he whom a man most specially fauoureth. Intingo, xi, gere, to depe, as one doth his fyn∣gar into licour. Intorqueo, si, quêre, to thruste in by throwing of a darte, or other lyke thyng. also to turne or wynde in. Intra, within. Intra famā, lesse thā the opiniō the mē haue. Intra modū, lesse thā a mean, short of a mean Intrarius idem quod intimus. Intrarius amicus, a speciall frende. Intrico, care, to wrappe. Intrinsecus, within. Intritus, broyed in a morter. Intrò into a place. Intro, are, to enter  in. Introcludo, si, dere, to shutte in. Introduco, xi, cere, to bryng or leade in. Introeo, iui, ire, to go in. Introgredior, eris, gredi, to come in. Intromitto, misi, mittere, to lette in. Introrsus, into, within. Introrumpo, rupi, rumpere, to breake in. Introspicio, spexi, spicere, to loke in. Introuoco, are, to calle in. Intueor, eris, eri, to beholde, to take hede. Intus, in a place. Intusium, a shyrt or smocke. Intutus, ta, tum, vnsure. Intybum, semeth to be the general name of all kyndes of endiue and cykory. yet Dioscorides diuideth it into .ii. kyndes, the one wyld, the other which is sowē, & of that also he makith two sortes, the one with a brode leaf, which I take to be endiue, the other with a narow leaf which I take for the cōmon cykory, that whi¦che is wylde, is callyd Erraticum. Inuado, si, re, to inuade, to enter, to apprehend. Inualesco, lui, scere, to waxe strong, to be cōfir∣med or stablyshed. Inualetudo, dinis, feblenes. Inualidus, da, dum, feble, weake. Inuectiuae orationes, orations made agaynste one, in reprouyng his maners and lyuyng. Inueho, uexi, uehere, to cary in a thyng, to cary a thynge into a place. Inuehor, eris, uehi, to rebuke one vehemently, and with violent and foore wordes. Inuenio, ire, to fynde a thynge whyche a man seketh for. In uerba iurare, to be sworne as princis coun∣saylours and seruantis be sworne vnto them. also to do fealtie. In uersum, in number and order. Inuerto, tere, to tourne in, to turne vp so down, to turne in and out after the vulgar speche, properly to turne euery thing contrary to the ryght fourme and fascion. Inuestes, yōg childrē about wtout hear on their bodies Inuestigabilis, le, that may not be foūd wt sekīg. Inuestigo, are, to seke out, to fynde in sekynge, to enquyre. Inuestio, iui, ire, to adorne or garnyshe a thyng. Inueterati, olde shrewes or vnthriftes, men in lykyng vnthriftily waxed olde. Inueteresco, raui, scere, to wear out for age, to be out of vse, to be aged or old. also worn out, almoste consumyd. Inuicem, togyther, one the other. Inuicē diligūt, they do loue one an other. also it signifieth for thy yt. Habes res urbanas, inuicē rusticas scri∣be, Now thou knowest thaffaires of the cite, for thy part write what is done in the cuntrey. Inuidentia, enuy, grief to behold or here that an othre in an prospereth. Inuideo, uidi, ere, to haue enuy at an others {pro}∣speritie. also to se inwardly or through a thīg. Inuideo tibi doctrinam, I haue enuye at thy lernynge. Inuidia, enuy, hatred, yll wylle. Inuidia facti sui, the displeasure of his act, or
attemptate, or the dede whereof he was en∣uied and hated. Inuidiam concitare alicui, to brynge oone in hatred or yll opinyon. Facere inuidiam, idem. Inuidiosa res, a thynge whiche bredeth enuy or hatred. Inuidiosè, enuyousely. Inuidiosus, an enuyouse persone. sometyme he whyche is enuyed. Inuidus, he that hath enuy. Inuigilo, are, to haue watche of a thynge, or to lay watche, to care. Inuinius, he that neuer drynketh wyne. Inuisus, a, um, neuer sene. also hated or odious. Inuitatus, boden, as to a feaste or banket. Inuito, tare, to bydde. alsoo to delyre, to fylle the bealye. Inuitus, ta, tum, vnwyllyng, or agaynst a man∣nes wyll. In uniuersum, vniuersally. Inuius, a, um, lackyng a way, or where nothing can passe. Inumbro, are, to make shadowe, somtyme it si∣gnifieth to defende. Inunco, care, to catch, as it were with an hoke Inundatio, a floudde. Inundo, to ouerflowe or surrounde. In unguem, to the poynt, perfectly. Inuoco, are, to calle in, to calle for helpe. alsoo not to calle. Inuolo, are, to steale, to lay violente handes on one, to flee out. Inuolucris, a byrde not redy to flee. Inuolucrum, & inuolucre, euerye thynge whi∣che serueth to keuer or wrappe in it an other thynge. Inuolucris simulationum tegi, to be hyd vnder crafty couerynges of dissimulation. Inuoluo, uere, to wrappe. Inuoluolus, & Inuoluola, a worme lyke a can∣ker, whiche is on vynes, and whanne he is taken of, he wrappeth hym selfe rounde to∣gyther. Inuolutus, ta, tum, wrapped. Inuro, inussi, inurere, to marke a thynge with an hotte yron. Inurere alicui notam censoriam, to brynge to one a notable reproche. Inurere infamiam alicui, to brynge vppe a sclaunder of done, whyche wylle neuer be layde. Leges inurere, to mae lawes, to the perpe∣tuall dyshonour of a we publyke. Inutrium, a towne in Almayn callid Insprngh. Inuus, is the rustical god of the Paynyms cal∣lyd also Pan. ¶I ANTE O. IO, an interiection, sygnifyenge sommetyme griefe, as in Tibullo, Vror iò, O I burn. sometyme excessiue gladnes, as in Ouidio Dicite iò Paean. Ioannes, a proper name of Hebrue, and sygni∣fieth the grace of god. Ioannes Baptista, sonne of Zacharias, and E∣lysabeth of the tribe of Leui, was sanctified before that he was borne, and declared by an aungell that his name shuld be Iohn̄. And by¦cause his father dyd not forthwith beleue it, he was specheles vntyll the eyght daye after the byrthe of the chylde, and that he hadde wrytten in tables, his name is Iohn̄, than was his mouth opened, and he spake glory∣fyenge god, and made than the psalme: Be∣nedictus dominus deus Israel, quia uisitauit & fecit redemptionem plaebis suae. This man was of suche perfection and holynesse, that oure sauyour Christe testified of hym, that he wente in the spirite and trouthe of Helias the prophete, but yet was he more thanne a prophete, and was the messanger whiche god promised by the prophet Mala∣chias, that he wolde sende, whiche shuld pre∣pare the way before hym. Semblably Iohn̄ testified of Christ, that he was the true lyght that lyghted euerye man that commeth into the worlde, and that he was in the worlde, and the worlde was made by hym, and that he bare recorde, that he was the sonne of god. Iohn̄ lyued in wyldernesse, his gar∣ment was of camelles heares, and his gyr∣dell of askynne aboute his loynes, and his meate was Locustae and honye of the wod∣des. He baptysed only in water teachyng re∣pentaunce and the approchyng of the kyng∣dome of heauen. But bycause he sayd to He∣rode, that it was not lefulle for hym to haue his brothers wyfe, he was by hym putte in prysone, and fynallye at the petytion of the doughter of Herodiades, who daunsyd be∣fore hym (by the perswasyon of Herodia∣des, who was the wyfe of his brother) the heade of Iohn̄ was stryken of, and in a dysshe was brought by the mayden vn∣to her mother in open bankette. Iosephus antiquitatum li. 18. calleth hym a very good man, who commaunded the Iewes to la∣bour to gette vertue, to obserue iustyce a∣monge theym selues, to kepe trewe relygion towarde god, and by baptysme to ioyne to∣gyther in oone. Alsoo he saythe, that many men thoughte, that in the battayle betwene Herode and Aretha, by the iust vengeance of god for puttyng Iohn̄ Baptyst to death, the hoste of Herode was vtterlye distroyed. He was born before Christ carnally moneths
and was put to death before Christe suffered his passion, one yere. Ioannes, apostle and Euangeliste, the sonne of Zebedaeus, and brother of Iames the apostle callyd the more, was of Christ most tenderly beloued, and in the tyme of the emperoure Domitian, was exiled into the ile callid Path¦mos, where he wrate the boke of reuelatiōs callyd Apocalypsis. After the death of Do∣mian in the tyme of Pertinax he retourned to Ephesum, and there remaynynge vnto the tyme of Traiane, he raysed many churches, and dyd sette theym in order, and beynge of great age, dyed .lxviii. yeres after the passion of Christe, as Sophronius writeth, and was buried at Ephesum. Polycrates an auncient and holy byshop in Asia, in his epistoll to Vi∣ctor bysshop of Rome, wryteth in this wyse: Also Iohn̄, whiche layde his head vpon our lordes breast, who was the chiefe prieste, and ware the pontificalle plate or table, martyr and doctour of the church, slept at Ephesum. He wrate his gospell last of all the Euange∣listes in the last ende of his lyfe, wherin he de¦clareth the diuinitie of our sauiour, more thā any of the other, whiche by the holye ghoste was reserued vnto hym. Iocasta, was doughter of Creon, and fyrst wife of Laius kyng of Thebes, after whose dethe she being ignorant, maried Oedipus her na∣tural sonne. After that her sonnes Polynîces & Etheocles, whyche she had by Oedipus had one slayne the other in battayle, she alsoo kylled her selfe. Iochabella, the name of Moyses mother. Iocor, aris, ari, to speake meryly or in disport. Iocosus, a, um, & iocularis, re, mery sportfull, prouokyng myrth. Ioculus, a lyttell sporte or myrthe. Iocus, plurali ioca, a mery worde, disporte. Iohel, a prophet born in Bethon in the lande of Rubim, he prophecied moche of Hierusalem, and fynall conclusion of Gentiles. Iōlaus, the sonne of Iphiclus, of whom the peo¦ple of Sardinia, were named Iolenses. Iōle, the doughter of Euritus kynge of Aeto∣lia, whom Hercules loued soo moche, that he serued her in a womans apparayle, and span on a distaffe. Ion, a stone of a violet colour. Ionas, a prophet of the countrey of Cariatha∣maum, not farre frome Azotus a citie of the Grekes nygh to the sea in Siria, was in the tyme of Helias, and was the son of the pore wydowe, and hym dyd Helias restore vnto lyfe for the hospitalytie of his mother. And whan he came to ful age, he was by almygh∣tye god sente to the greate citie of Niniue in Assyria, and as he wolde haue fledde frome our lorde, and haue tourned his iourney vn∣to Tharsos, he was deuoured of a whale, & beynge at the last cast vp vnto the lande oute of the whales mouthe, whan he had ben thre dayes in the whales bealye, he went forthe and preached in Niniue in suche wyse, that the people by penaunce restrayned the sword of god, whiche was redy to stryke them. Af∣terward Ionas vexed with heuynes of mind retourned to his countrey, nor there longe a∣bydynge, he takynge with hym his mother, went to the lande of Sur, and as he haunted the lande of Saar he there dyed, and was bu¦ryed in the graue of Cinezeus the iudge, He prophesied that whan men shuld se in Hieru∣salem moche people come from the west par∣tes of the worlde, than shulde the citie be di∣stroyed vnto the harde erthe. Ionas in hebru signifieth a culuer, or a distroyer of people. Ionia, a region of Grece in Asia, wherein were the cities of Ephesus, Miletus, Priena, and other, and the people therof be callyd Iones, and the tungue Ionica, and the sea ioynynge to it Mare Ionicum. Ionicus, ca, cum, & Ionius, a, um, of Ionia. Ioppe, a citie of the countrey of Palestina, not farre from Hierusalem, standynge by the sea, some men doo suppose to be the hauen callyd whyche Porte Iaffe. Iordanis, a fayre riuer in Iudaea, which diuideth Galile from the resydue of Iudaea, and fallith into the dead sea. Ios, an yle where Homerus was buried. Ioseph, the sonne of Iacob the patriark, was through enuye solde by his bretherne vnto a marchant, who brought hym into Egypte, & gaue him to Putiphar great master of hous∣holde with kyng Pharao, whose wyfe bour∣nynge in concupiscence, bicause that Ioseph woide not cōmyt adultery with her, she cau∣sed him to be cast into prison. where he decla∣ringe to the kinges cupbearer the significa¦tion of his dreame, afterward he was by the same cupbearer remembred vnto king Pha∣rao, whā he had dreamid a dreame, which he wold haue expouned. And he expounding the kinges dreame, whiche signified .vii. plentu∣ous yeres, and .vii. scarse yeres of corne, was made by the kyng high stewarde of his roy∣alme. So that by his most excellent wysedom such abundance of grayne was brought into the kinges barnes, and there kept during the vii. plentuous yeres, that the .vii. scars yeres next ensuynge it suffysed not onely to relieue all the people of Egypte, but also refresshed other countrayes, and made the kynge exce∣dīgly rich. Moreouer the brethern of Ioseph being sent by Iacob these father to bie corne in Egipt, not knowing their brother Ioseph
were by hym sundry tymes apprehended, and compellid to fetche theyr yōger brother Ben-Iamyn, and at the last Ioseph discouerynge hym selfe vnto them, caused them to fetch his and theyr father into Egypt with all his fa∣mily, where they were honourably entertay∣ned of kynge Pharao and Ioseph. And Io∣seph had there two sonnes, Effraim and Ma¦nasses, and lyued a hundred and tenne yeres. Ioseph signifieth increase, or a great officer, he dyed before the incarnation of Christe a∣bout .MDClii. yeres. Iosephus, the sonne of Mattathias, a priest of Hierusalem, whiche wrate in greeke the bat∣tayle of the Iewes and distruction of the ci∣tie by Vespasian and Titus, wherat he hym selfe was present. He wrate also of the anti∣quitie of the Iewes, in .ii. sundry argumētes. He was amonge the Romains had in such re¦uerence & honour, that his ymage was set vp in the cite. He had the spirit of prophecye, & beyng prisoner tolde vnto Vespasian that he shuld be emperour of Rome. Also in his boke of antiquities he writeth in this wise: At this tyme was Iesus a wyse man, if it be leful to call hym a man, he was a doer of wonderful workes, and a teacher of those men, whiche wyllingly do here thinges that be true, he ioy¦ned vnto hym many Iewes and also Genti∣les, this man was Christ. Whan Pylate by the enuy of the chiefe men of our nation had iudged hym to be put on the crosse, he forsoke not them, whom from the begynnynge he lo∣ued, but appered to them the thyrde day, eft∣sones alyue, accordynge as the prophetes by diuine inspiration spake before of hym, and that innumerable myracles shuld be done by hym. Hytherto wrate Iosephus. wherby ap∣pereth his excellente wysedome, and specyall grace, whyche he had receyued, and it repu∣gneth not moche, that in his harte he imbra∣ced the fayth of Christ .He was after the in∣carnation of Christ .lxxvi. yeres. Iotapata, a citie in Syria. Iouiniani, were mē of armes, so callid of Maxi¦mian the emperour, whiche dyd valyantly in the countrey of Illyria. Iouis, the genitiue case of Iupiter. ¶I ANTE P. IPHIANASSA, the wyfe of Melam∣pos, whom for her beaultie Iuno tourned into fury or madnesse. Iphiclus, sonne of Alemena, borne with Hercu∣les at one byrthe, but Hercules was gotten by Iupiter, but Iphiclus was goten by Am¦phitrio. And whan two serpentes came to the cradelle of Iphiclus, and slewe hym, after whan they came to Hercules, he toke in eue∣ry of his handes one and slewe them. There was an other Iphiclus, whiche was the son of Philacus and Clymene, who Hesiodus sayth, was so lyght and swyft, that he ranne vpon the eares of wheate as they grewe, and did not hurt them, also that he ran on the wa¦ter as well as on the lande. Reade Coelium lectionum antiq. li. 2. ca 5. Iphigenia, the daughter of king Agamemnon, with whom he offered in sacrifyce goynge to Trope. Iphîtus, the sonne of Praxonidis, which fyrste ordeined the solemne plays callid Olympiada Ips, ipos, a lyttelle wourme bredyng in hornes and vines. Ipse, ipsa, ipsum, he, she, that same, by demon∣stratyng or shewynge the person or thyng spo¦ken of. Ipsemet, he hym selfe. Ipsippe, to hym and to none other. Ipsulces, plates embosed lyke to fygures or y∣mages of men or women. ¶I ANTE R. IR, the holownes of the hande. sometyme it sygnifieth the hole hande. Ira, wrathe, an appetite to punyshe hym, of whom we be offended. Iracundia, anger, displeasure agaynst one, a de∣syre to be reuenged. Iracundus, shortly or sone angry, hasty. Irascor, eris, irasci, to be angry. Irate, angerly. Iratus, angry. Irceus, a kynde of puddynges. Ircipes, an harowe. Ire inficias, to deny, to say the contrary. Ire alicui obuiam, to go to mete with one. Ire in ius, to goo to the lawe, or to here the iugement in his matter. Ire in nernum aliena causa, to goo to pryson for an other mans sake. Ire in subsidium, to go to succour one. Ire pedibus, to go on foote. Ire pedibus in sententiam, to consent to the sentence or raison of an nother, whiche hathe spoken, or to be of the same opinion. I prae, go before. I sane, si quid festinas magis, goo before yf thou be in haste. Irenarches, & Irenarcha, he whyche is in auc∣toritie to see peace kepte in a countreye or ci∣tie, whyche amonge vs maye be callyd a iu∣styce of peace. Iris, iris, uel iridis, the rayne bowe. it is also a floure deluce, the roote wherof is very soote, and is commonly callyd Yreos.
Irinium, oyle of Ireos. Ironia, is a fygure in speakyng, whan a man speaketh otherwyse than he thynketh, as in scoffyng or bourdyng, calling that fayre whi∣che is soule in dede: that good whiche is yll: that eloquent whiche is barbarous. sembla∣bly reasonyng contrarye to that I thynke, to the intent to mocke hym, with whom I do di¦spute or reason. Ironicè, mockyshly, scoffyngly. Ironicus, he that vseth that fashion in spekyng. Irpices, rakes with yron tethe, wherwith they drewe vp weedes. Irrasus, vnshauen. Irraucio, raucui, cere, to be hoorse. Irremunerabile, that may not be rewarded or recompensyd. Irreparabile, that may not be repayred or resto¦red to the fyrst astate. Irrepo, psi, pere, to crepe in. Irreprehensus, a, um, that can not be reproued. Irretio, iui, ire, to take or holde in, as it were in a nette. Irretitus, taken, lapte in with crafte, or fayre promyses. Irrigo, to water grounde, to bryng water into the fieldes out of a ryuer. Irriguus, a, um, the grounde or fielde that may be easily watered. somtyme the water, which may be easily diriued into the fieldes. Irripio, pere, to plucke in. Irrito, are, to make voyde and of none effect. Irrito, hauyng the last sillable sauing one long, to prouoke, to kendle wrath, to styre vp. Irrettus, ta, tum, voyde of none effecte or force. Irrogare mulctam, to sette a peyne. Irructo, are, to blowe in by belkynge. Irrugio, gere, to bray out. Irrumo, are, to sucke in. Irrumpo, rupi, rumpere, to breake in, or enter with force. sometyme to breake a sunder. Irruo, to rounne hastily or furiousely into bat∣tayle, or vpon any thyng. somtyme to falle in or cast in. Irus, a beggar of whome Homere maketh men¦tion, who was great and feble, and beyng in Ithaca the countrey of Vlysses, he being ab∣sent, consumed his vittayles with the woars of Penelope. Wherefore Vlysses at his re∣tourne home slewe hym with his fyst. ¶I ANTE S. IS, a pronowne, whyche sygnifieth he. Isaeus, a famous rhetorician, whiche inuen∣ted to make euery matter compendious. Isagoge, an introduction Isagogicō, a way to introduce, or begin to tech Isapis, a ryuer nigh to Caecenna. Isara, a ryuer comyng out of the ryuer of Rone where the hyll callyd Cemenus is ioyned to the Rone, and so runneth by Druentia into the goulfe of Venyce. Isatia, an ile against Velia, callid also Oenotris Isatis, woad, reade before in Glastum. Isauria, a region of Asia, ioyning to Cilicia, som do take it to be part of Cilicia. Isaurum, a citie in the countrey of Pamphilia. Isca, a citie in Deuonshyre, callid Exceter. Ischalis, a town in Som̄s. shire callid Ilchester Ischia, the huckle bone. it is somtyme taken for the ache in the sayd bone, which vulgar phi∣sitions do call Sciatica. Ischiadicus, uel Ischiacus, he that hath the ache in the hyppe commonly callyd Sciatica. Ischiros, idem quod fortis, stronge. Isiaci, the priestes of the goddesse Isis. Isis, callyd also Iō, one of the harlottes of Iupi¦ter, whom he turnyd into a cowe for feare of Iuno his wyfe. Isitium, a certayn pudding, som call it an ysyng. Ismaēl, was the son of Abraham by Agar his wyues mayden, of whom the sarazins be cal∣lyd Ismaelitae as they be also callyd Agarêni. Ismarus, a mountayne in Thracia. Ismenias, the name of an excellent mynstrelle, whyche played on the shaulmes. Ismenides, the women of Thebes. Ismenus, a ryuer in the countrey of Boeotia. Isocolon, where two sentēces ar in lyke length. Isocrates, the name of a famous orator, of won¦derfull eloquence, out of whose schoole proce¦ded the most excellent oratours of Grece. Isodomon, a fourme of buylding, where euery thynge is equally straight. Isonomia, equalitie of lawes, as where they be indifferent to all maner of persons. Isopleurus, thre edged. Ispalis, a citie in Spayne callyd nowe Syuile. Israel, sygnyfyeth a manne seyng god. It was also the name of Iacob the patryarke. And the people of the Iewes were also callyd by that name, howe be it sommetyme it was attrybuted onely to tenne trybes, the trybes of Iuda and Beniamyn beyng seuered from theym. Issa, an yle in the Venycian sea, ioynynge to Slauony. Issus, a rytie in Sicile, and a ryuer of Siria. Ister, a greate ryuer callyd also Danubius, in duche Donawe, it commeth out of an hyll in Germany, callyd of Pliny Arnoba, of Ptho∣lome Abnoba, of Tacitus Arbôna. It re∣ceyueth into it thre score ryuers, whereof the more parte be nauygable, and rounneth by Swaue, Bauyer, Owstryke, Hungarye, Valachia, and so through Europa, and fal∣leth in to the sea callid Pontus. in seuen sun∣dry
dry places as Solinus and Mela doo write. But Plinius and Tacitus affirme but syxe. Herodotus, Arrianus, & other but fiue. while it is in Germany it is callyd Danubius, and when it cometh into a part of Thracia called Istria, wher it is brodest, it is thā callid Ister. Isthmus, a narrow part of the countrey, where ii. seas are but a smal distance a sunder, inclo∣syng the lande on bothe sydes. In such a place is set the citie of Corinthus in Grece. There be dyuers such places in Grecia, and of them were certayne playes callyd Isthmia. Istic, there, where thou arte. Istria, a part of Italy, marching on Illiria, cal∣lyd nowe Slauony. ¶I ANTE T. ITA, an aduerbe of answeryng or affirming and somtyme signifieth yea. somtyme so. Ita est, euen so it is. Ita loquor, yea so I say. Ita aiunt, so men say. Ita me deus amet, so god loue or helpe me. Ita ne? but is it soo? or is it as thou sayest? also it signifieth a note of disdayne. Ita ne cō¦temnor abs te? Settest thou so lyttell by me? Ita ne beatus quidem est? is he therfore than happye? Ita negotium est, so the case requyreth. Ita opus est facto, so must it be done. Ita sane, yea truely. Ita ut erat, as it was in dede. Ita ut fit, as it hapeneth. Dum rus eo, coepi egomet mecum inter uias, ita ut fit, ubi quid in animo est molestiae, aliam rem ex alia co∣gitare, Whan I went downe into the coun∣trey, by the way riding, as it hapneth often∣tymes, whan any displeasure commeth to my mynd, I bethought me of one thyng & other. Ita{que} wherfore than, and therfore. Itaque, and so. Italia, a noble countrey callyd Italy, whyche is enuyronned on the west with the mountayns callyd Alpes, on the north with the sea callid Mare Adriaticum, on the ast and the south with the sea callyd Mediterraneum, & Fretū Siculum. It also conteyneth these regyons: Liguriam, Ethruriam, Vmbm, Flamineā, atium, Aprutium, Campaniam, Apuliam, Venetiam, Picênum, Galliam Gisalpinā, cal∣lyd Lumbardy. The length therof after Pli∣ny is a thousande and .xx. myles, the breadthe in som place betwene the two seas .CCCCx. myles, in some place it passeth not .Cxxxvi. myles. it was somtyme named Magna Grae∣tia, bycause it was inhabyted with Grekes, as Myrsilius dothe write. Solinus doth re∣semble the fygure therof to aok leafe, ex∣tendynge more in lengthe than in breadthe, towarde the ende beynge diuided, as it were into two hornes, whereof the one lyeth to¦warde the sea callyd Ionium, the other lo∣keth to the narowe sea of Sicile callyd Fre∣tum Siculum, in the narowest place it passeth not in bredth twenty myles. Italica, a citie in Italia, which by an other name is callyd Confinium. There is an nother in Spayne, where Silius Italicus was borne. Italicensis, a citisen of Italica. Italicus, ca, cum, of Italy. Italus, an Italyan. Item, in lyke maner, so, also, euen as, afterward Iter, eris, Itiner, neris, a iourney, also a way. I∣ter habeo ad Caesarem, I take my iourneye to the Emperour. Iter conficere, to performe a iourney, to go or ryde a iourney. Iter facere, to go a iourney. Itero, are, to doo a thynge eftesoones, to goo backe agayne. Iterum, eftsones or agayne. Ithaca, an yle lyenge before Athasis, and was the countraye of Vlysses, who therfore was callyd Ithacus. Ithome, a towne in Peloponeso, an nother in Thessaly. Ithonia, a countrey in Grece. Ithyphallus, the name of Priapus the moste dishonest and abhomynable ydoll. Also Ithy∣phalli were dishonest persones, whiche in ho∣nourynge theyr ydoll Bacchus, daunsed ha∣uyng betwene theyr legges coūterfayt mem∣bers of horryble greatnes. Ithyra, a towne on the mountayne of Taurus. Itidem, semblably, also. Itinerarium, a commentary or boke of remem∣braunce, contaynyng thynges commytted in iourneyes. Also it is a kalender of myles in the distaunce of places, with the tyme of a∣bode in euery place, lyke to gestes of princis. Itineror, aris, ari, to go in iourney. Ito, taui, tare, to goo moche. Ituria, a region in Arabia or Siria, of whyche the people are callyd Ituraei. Itus, & Itio, a going. Quid noster itus & redi∣tus, What our goyng and commyng. Itys, the sonne of Tercus▪ and Prognes, who as poetes doo fayne, was tourned into a fesaunte. ¶I ANTE V. IVBA, the name of a beaste. also the name of a kynge of Mauritania. Iubar, a sterre, whych is also callyd Hesper{us} & Lucyfer. It is somtyme takē for brightnes. Iubeo, iussi, iubêre, to cōmād, to desyre, to wish,
to exhort, to decree. Iubeo te saluêre, god saue you. Dionysium iu∣be saluêre, commende me to Denyse. Iubero habere animū bonum, byd hym haue a good harte, or byd hym be of good chere. Iubilo, are, to declare in the voyce, the ioye and gladnes of the harte, whiche maye not be ex∣pressed with wordes. Iubilium, ioynd gladnes in voyce, not expres∣syd in wordes, or with a shoute. Iucundè, merily, gladly, pleasantly, dilectably, swetely. Iucunditas, dilectation, pleasure, reioysynge. Iucundor, aris, ari, to be ioyous and mery. Iucundus, a, um, he or that whiche is the cause that an other reioiseth, dilectable, pleasant to see or here. also louynge. Iudaea, acountrey in Asia, whiche hath on the weste the sea callyd Mare Cyprium, on the north Phoeniciam & Siriam, on the east Ara∣biā, on the south the land of Egypt. It recei∣ued the name of Iudas the son of Iacob the patriarke, where before it was callid Chana¦naea, of Chananaeus, the fourth son of Cham. Iudaei, not onely the people of Iudea, but also they be so called which do obserue their super¦stition. They were expellid out of this realme of Englande in the tyme of kynge Rycharde the first, for their crueltie in sleyng of christen chyldren, like as they haue ben out of France and Spaine, & nowe of late out of Portugal. Which now be suffred eftsones to repaire hi∣ther, & here to inhabite vnder a counterfaite colour of faith, wherby no lyttell corruption is happened in our religyon, by their secrete workynge, many of theym beinge phisitions of the body, but priuy murderers of chrysten mens sowles, as it wyll ones more playnely appere, to our no lyttell peryl, shame, and di∣shonour, except god wyll shortly put into the hartes of gouernors, to remembre what mor∣tall and naturall hatred the kyllers of our sa∣uiour and his obstinate ennemies and blas∣phemours hath born alway toward vs, pray¦ing in their sinagoges for our distructiō, and after credence ones gotten, vnder the cloke of phisyke, wylfully and ioyousely kylleth vs. Iudaicus lapis, callyd also Tecolithos, a stone founde in Iudea, whyche is of the quantitie and figure of an akecorne, or of an olyue (as Solinus writeth) white & fayre with an or∣der of lynes so correspondent, that they seme to be wrought with the hand and turne. Al∣bertus mineraliū li. i. calleth it Cegolites. Iudex, iudicis, a iudge. Iudex ordinarius, he that hath auctoritie of his proper iurisdictiō, to sit in iugemēt with out cōmission, as the chief iustice of Englād, the maire of a city incorporat, and a coroner. Iudex delegatus, he that sitteth by cōmissiō, as all other iudges and iustyces. Iudicatio, the question come in iudgement. Iudicatò, an aduerbe, whyche signifieth with a iudgement or consyderation. Iudicatum, the thyng iudged or determined. Iudicatū facere, to obey the sētēce or iugemēt. Iudicatus, tus, tui, iudgement. Iudicialis, le, of a iudge. Iudiciarius, a, um, pertayning to a iuge, or that whiche is to be iudged. Iudiciaria controuersia, where the iudges do not agree in one opinion. Iudico, are, to iuge or deme, to suppose, to giue sentence, to condemne. Iuditium, iudgement. Iuditia legittima, iudgementes gyuen accor∣ding to the determined law written, or by an∣cient custome approued. Iuditia publica, iugementes gyuen by them, which be callid iuges, & haue places certain, and do not renue their cōmissiō, as the iuges of the kynges benche and commune place. Iuditiū capitis, iugement in causes criminall. Iuditium dare, to grant a commission, to here and determyne a matter. Iuditium rescindere, to reuerse a iugement. Iuditium habere, to gyue iudgement. Iuditio perfundere, to bring one to the poynt to be condemned. Iuga, the benches in a shyppe or bote. Iugale uinculum, the bonde of matrimony. Iugalis, he that is yoked. Iugantinus deus, was amonge Paynims the god, whom they supposed to haue auctoritie ouer the rydges of hylles. Iugarius, he that dryueth a plough with oxen, or a wayn. Also a strete in Rome, where was an altar of Iuno, at the whiche if any were wedded, they supposed that matrimony to be most surely ioyned. Iugatorius, a draught oxe. Iugeratim, by sundry furlonges. Iugere, to crye lyke a kyte. Iugerum, & Iugus, geris, as moche ground as one yoke of oxen wyll eare in a day. som sup∣pose it to contein in lēgth. 240. fete, in bredth halfe so moche. some say that it is more. Leonardus Portius sayth, by the auctoritie of Columella, that Iugerū conteyneth .xxviii. M. and .viii.C. feete. Iuges, oxen lyke in greatnesse, callyd, yokes or payres. Iugis, continuyng in one thynge. Iugiter, contynually. Iuglans, andis, a wall nutte. Iugo, are, to yoke or couple togither. Iugosus, rydged. Iugula, a celestyall sygne, contaynynge three
sterres, callyd also Orion. Iugulo, are, to slea, not onely with wepon, but also with syckenes. Quartana neminem iu∣gulat, The feuer quartayn sleeth no man. ❀ Iugulare mortuos, to kylle deade men. A prouerbe applyed to them, whyche do speake or write to the rebuke of them that are dead, or as Erasmus dothe thynke it more apte, it may be sayd by them that impougne a boke, whiche is of all men condemned, or resoneth agaynst a sentence of all men reiected, or dys∣prayseth a thynge, whyche is of all men ab∣horryd. Iugulus, the forepart of the necke which is di∣uided into two great synewes, Dexter & si∣nister. Iugulum ferire, to slea properly in the necke. Iugulum petere, whan an oratour or man of lawe towcheth vehementely the poynt of the matter, and with manyfest and soore argu∣mentes and reasons, semeth to assaut and op∣presse the cōtrary part, as it were with sharp weapons. Iugum, a yoke▪ also the ridge of an hyl or bank. also the beame whereon weauers doo tourne theyr webbe, also a thyng lyke to a galowes, vnder the whiche in sygne of reproche, they that were vanquysshed were constrayned to creepe, whiche was made with two speares standynge, and one speare ouerthwart. also a frame wheron vies are ioyned. also a beame wheron balances do hange. also the syde bea∣mes in a shyp, in the which the transomes ar fastened. It is also a rolle of timber, wheron the imbrouderer or worker of carpettes doo rolle vp the thynge that they worke on. Iuli, are the mosynes or soft heares, whiche do growe on the beardes and vysages of yonge men, before that they be shauen, and somtyme it signifieth the same yonge men. Iulia, a kynred, which proceded from Ascanius, sonne of Aeneas callid Iulus. Also a towne in Cales in the countray of Spayne. Iuliobona, Hounflete in Fraunce. Iuliobriga, a towne in Spayn callid Logroino. Iulio magus, Angiers in Fraunce. Iulis, a city in the yle of Caea, the countreye of Simonides the poete. Iulius, the moneth of Iulye, whyche toke his name of Iulius Cesar. Iulum, as Ruellius writeth, is that which clea¦ueth fast to a hasyll nutte or fylberte cluster∣wyse in a compact hardnes, and as it were a very longe synew hangeth by one stalke. Iulus, otherwyse named Ascanius, the sonne of Aeneas. Iulus, is also a lyttell wourme with many feete, bredyng in vynes and okes, whi∣che is also callyd Conuoluolus, Inuoluolus, & Voluola. It is also the mosynes of the out¦ward part of fruites, also the yonge fruit im¦mediately after that the floures be fallen. Iu∣lus is also a fyshe, which is guyde vnto wha∣les, which also is callyd Hegeer. It is more ouer a songe dedicate to Diana. Iumentum, euery beast that draweth or bereth burdeynes, also a lyttell carre. Iunctim, ioyntly. Iunculi, meates callyd iunkettes. also a fresshe chese made on rushes called a iacke man. Iuncus, a bulle russhe. Iuncus odoratus, is of two sortis, one is of Pli¦ny callyd Triangularis, of Dioscorides An∣gulosus, of Theophrastus, Cyperus. The stalke is lyttel and redde, and if it be bruised, it smelleth lyke to a rose, the best groweth in Arabia and Nabathea, the warst growith in Affrica. An other sort is round, and hath flou¦res, which be medicinable, and it is of the a∣pothecaries callyd Squinantum. Reade in Schoeno. Iungami, people in the countrey of Liguria. Iungo, xi, gere, to ioyne. ❀ Iungere uulpes, to yoke or couple wolfes. Aprouerbe signifyeng to do a thynge whiche is impertinent, or without any reason. Iuniculi, the longe twygges of the vine whych do shote out of lengthe, and wolde be layde on a frame. Iuniperus, a swete bushe, callyd Iunyper. Iunis, ne, yonge, wherof cometh Iunior, yōger. Iunix, icis, a yonge cowe or heffar. Iunius, a propre name of the Romans, as Iuni∣us Brutus, Iunius Columella. it is also a mo∣neth callyd Iune: for whan Romulus hadde fyrste diuided the people into olde men and yonge men, callid in latyn Maiores & Mino∣res, he honoured them with two monethes. callynge the one Maius, or Maye, the other Iunius, of yonge men callid in latyn Iuuenes. Iuno, was doughter of Saturne and Opis, si∣ster and wyfe of Iupiter callyd also Hera. Iuno moneta. Sone after that kinges were ex∣pellyd out of Rome, there was a great erth∣quake, at which tyme there was herde in the Capitol out of the chapelle of Iuno, a voyce warnyng them that they shuld make a ful pa¦cification of her wrath, and so doing the erth quake ceassed. Of that warnyng, whiche in latyne is Monitio, she was callyd Iuno mo∣neta. And to the honor of her was made one chapell in the capitoll by Camillus, an other on the hyll callyd Auentinus, wherin was set her ydoll brought from the citie callyd Veiae destroyed by the Romaynes, bothe these cha∣pelles were callyd Aedes Iunonis Monetae. Iunonia, one of the yles that are callyd Insulae fortunatae. Iupiter, Iouis, the son of Saturnus and Opis
kynge of Creta, who draue his father out of his royalme, and was a man valiant & wise, but excedingly giuen to lechery, in deflouring as welle maydens as wyfes. Not withstan∣dynge for his prowesse and wytte, after his deathe he was of all the Greekes honoured for a God, and callyd father & kyng of god∣dis. His name was in suche estimation amōg the Gentiles or Paynyms, that they gaue to hym souerayntie in al thinges. In so moch as they also named hym god of hospitalitie. And therfore whā any thyng was violate either by the good man of the house or by his guest, they callid on Iupiter Xenius: whan trust in frēdshyp was broken, they callid to vengeāce to Iupiter Philius, whan cōpanions betrayd one another Iupiter Heterius, whan kynsmē, Iupiter Homoginus, whan they which were in league togither deeyued eche other, than cryed they Iupiter Enhorcius. Iura, a mountayn of Fraunce whiche diuideth high Burgoyn from Swizerlande. Iuramentum, an othe. Iuratus, sworne. Iurgiosus, a, um, braulynge, full of contention. Iurgium, a braulyng or a small contention. Iurgo, are, to brawle or chyde. Iuridicus, ca, cum, accordyng to the law, or be∣longyng to the lawe. Iurisdictio, iurisdiction, power, or auctoritie to minister and execute lawes, as dyuers ci∣tis and countrayes haue by the grauntes of emperours and kynges. Iuro, rare, to sweare. Iurare in lege alterius, to sweare to kepe the lawes or ordinances of an other. Iurare in uerba alterius, to do fecaltie, or to be sworne a subicete. Iurulentus, ta, tum, full of iuyce or lycour. Ius, iuris, law auctoritie, liberte, power, right, sometyme the place where the lawe is myni∣stred. also lycour or iuyce. Ius annulorum donare, was amonge the old Romayns the same almoste, that is nowe to make a knyght. Ius municipale, a priuat law or custom, whi∣che a citie or towne hathe within it selfe, for the good order of theyr commune weale. Ius moribus constitutum, ryght made of cu∣stome. Ius dicere, to gyue iudgement. Ius dicis, thou speakest reason. Ius bonum dicis, your request is reasonable. Iure, with good cause. Iure uel iniuria, by right or wronge. De iure meo, tuo, suo decedere, to omyt som part of the rigour or extremitie of the lawe. Pro suo iure agere, & summo iure agere, to take the extremitie of the lawe. Summum ius, the rygour of the lawe. Iuscum, & Iusculum, brothe, wherin meat hath ben sodden. Iuisiurandum, a solemne othe or promyse made to God. Iussa, commaundementes. Iussus, a, um, commaunded. Iusta, sacrifyces doone for deade men: nowe it may be vsed for funerall exequies. Iusta soluere, is {pro}prely in funeral obsequies, to do and perfourme all thynges therevnto necessarye. Iustinianus, an emperour comen of a poore kyn¦red, his mothers brother Iustinus emperour before hym being but a swnie herde, succeded his vncle at the age of .xliiii. yeres in▪ the em∣pyre, and gouernid it nobly by the space of .xl. yeres, augmentynge it honourably. And cau¦sed the lawes ciuile, dispersed in infinite vo∣lumes, to be reduced into fyftye bokes called the Digestes, and caused to be made .iiii. bo∣kes of institutes, and likewise the Code, con∣taynyng the decrees of emperours, although he hym selfe knewe noo letters. An excellente prince, if he had not ben corrupted with aua∣ryce, and the heresy of Eutichianus. he was after the incarnation of Christ .517. yeres. Iustitia, Iustice, is a pereet vertue (as Aristotle sayth) referred to a seconde person, and ther∣fore chiefe of all vertues, more wonderfulle than the bright sterres Hesperus and Lucy∣fer, comprehending in it al the partes of ver∣tue, this is callid iustice vniuersal. But there is a more particular iustice, which in the law ciuile is defined to be a constaunt and perpe∣tuall wyll, gyuyng vnto euery body that whi¦che belongeth vnto hym, whiche is callid his right. More abundantly hereof shall ye fynd in my warke callyd the Gouernour. Iustitium, a ceassyng for a tyme from ministra∣tion of lawes in places iuditiall. Iustus, a iust or rightuous man, an vpright and true meanyng man It is taken oft tymes in holy scripture for a vertuous mā or good mā. Iustus, ta, tū, equall, meane betwene two extre∣mities. somtyme it signifieth greatnes. Iusta pars, the great parte. sometyme it signifieth amonge lawyers, true or verye. Iustus filius, his very son Iusta magnitudo, neyther more nor lesse, the iust quantitie. Iusta seruitus, seruyce without rigour. Iustas inimicitias, great hostilitie. Iusti honores, honours due. Iusto labore, with great labour. Iuturna, the syster of Turnus. Iuuamen, Iuuatio, & Iuuamentum, helpe. Iuuenalia, playes vowed for the healthe of yonge men. Iuuenalis, le, pertaynyng to youth. Iuuenalis dies, a day celebrate to youthe.
Iuuenalis, is also the name of a poete, whyche wrate Satyres. Iuuencus, & iuuenca, yonge, not only men, but also beastes. Iuuenculus, idem. Iuuenesco, scere, to waxe or be yonge. Iuuenilis, le, yonge. Iuueniliter, yongly. Iuuenis, a yonge man. Iuuentus, tutis, youthe. sometyme a multytude of yonge men. Iuuerna, the olde name of Irelande, callyd of some Iuernia, & Hibernia. Iuuo, uas, iuui, are, to helpe, to delyte. Iuuat mihi, It doth me good, it is a pleasure to me. Iuxta, nygh, ioyntly, or togither, euen lyke, ac∣cordynge. Nunc uero quo in loco res nostrae sint, iuxta mecum omnes intelligitis, Nowe howe the matter standeth, ye al know as wel as I: orels in what case our busines is, ye vn¦derstande all as moche as I do. Iuxtim, nygh to. ¶I ANTE X. IXION, was king of Thessalia, who fals∣ly brake the promyse that he made to his wyues father, and threwe hym into a pyt of fyre. He also callid by Iupiter vnto a feast, styred Iuno to commyt auoutry, whiche Iu∣pyter perceyuynge, he made a cloude lyke vnto Iuno, and delyuered her to hym, on whome he gatte the people callyd Centauri, but whan he aduaunted that he hadde com∣panyed with Iuno, he was dryuen downe in to helle, and there was bounde to a wheele, alway tournynge and fulle of serpentes, as poetes fayned. Ixon, a greatte whyte byrde of the kynde of rauens. ¶L ANTE A. LABASCO, labascere. & Labascor, sceris, to fayle or decay. Labda cus, a king of The∣bes, father of Lai{us}, who was father of Oedipus, or Edippus. Labecula, a lyttle spotte or blemysshe. Labefacio, facere, to breake or distroy. Labefacto, tare, to make feeble, to appayre, to subuerte, to corrupte. Labellum, a lyppe. Labeo, onis, a man or woman hauyng greate lyppes. Also a nettle callyd blynd nettle. Labes, a spotte, whiche sodeynly happeneth to thinges that are smothe. Labia, & Labra, lyppes. Labicanum, a towne in Italy. Labici, the inhabitantes of that towne. Labicus, was the name of the sonne of Minos, who was named also Glaucus. Labilis, le, vustable, which wyl sone fall, slyp{per}. Labina, slyppernes. Labio, is a fyshe, whiche I suppose to be in en∣glyshe callyd Codde, with the greate lyppes, it was also the surname of a Romayne. Labo, are, to falle downe sodaynly. Labor, eris, lapsus sum labi, to slyde, to dye, to fayle, to fall downe by lyttell and lyttell. Labor, labour, trauayle. Laboriae, the name of a countrey in Italy, vul∣garly callid Terra laboris, the land of labor▪ Laborinus, a fielde in Cāpania, where the stub¦ble of corne is soo great, that the people doo burne it in stede of wodde. Laboriosus homo, a peynefull man. Laboro, are, to labor, to be in heuynes or grefe. Animo laborare, to be carefull. Ex renibus laborare, to haue peyn in the rai¦nes. Fame laborare, to dye for hunger. Foenore laborare, to be in dette by reasone of vsurye. Laborare frigore, to be almost dead for cold. Ingenio laborare, to be troublyd in wyt. Laborare iniuria, to suffer wronge. Laborare morbo, to be sycke. Nihil laboro, I care not, I passe not on it. Non laboro, idem. Odio apud hostes laborare, & contempt inter socios, to be hated of his enemies, and not regarded of his frendes. Laborare podagra, to haue the goute. Vis laborare, to be vitious. Laboratur uehementer, they studied diligēt∣ly to brynge a matter to passe. Labrum, a lyppe. also the brymme or brynk of a
ryuer or fountayne. also a vat or lyke vesselle necessarye to be bayned in. Sometyme a vat for wyne after that it is pressyd. It maye be vsyd for a keele vate, whereinto ale or biere is putte. Labrum Veneris, is taken for tasyll, although Dioscorides dothe not remember, that it ser∣ueth to the vse of toukars, but assigneth that rather to other two herbes, the oone callyd Hippophaes, or Hyppophyes, and the o∣ther Hippophaestos. Labrsca, wylde vyne. Laburnum, a tree growyng on the mountayns callyd Alpes, the woode therof is white and harde, and hath a floure a cubyte in lengthe, whyche no bee wylle touche, he groweth not but in drye places, and hateth water. Labyrinthus, a place conteynynge many romes in suche wise prepared, that who so euer was brought into it, moughte not issue out of it, withoute a guyde very perfect in it, or with∣out a threde leading hym, wherof the botome or klewe shoulde be left at the entre. Of this name were thre principall places, oone in E∣gypte, by the paterne wherof the other were made. And that is described by Herodotus (who writeth that he sawe it) saying that it was aboue the grte poole callyd Myrios, towarde the cytie of Crocodiles. Strabo in his .xvii. boke callyth the sayd poole or meare Muris. Herodotus in Euterpe saith, that first there were .xii. halles keueryd .vi. toward the north, and .vi. towarde the south, all inclosyd with one wall. within the walle were houses in two dyuers sortes, one sort vnder ground, an other aboue ground ouer them, euery sort being in numbre thre thousand and fyue hū∣dred. The ouermost, whiche (as he sayth) he beheld, the nethermost he mought not be suf∣fred to se, but as he herde by report of theym which sawe it, he wrate: The ouermost whi∣che he did behold, exceded al workes of mens handes, for he went from a hall into parlers, from parlers into chambers, from chambers into other solars, and frome parlours into o∣ther halles. The beame which bare the flou∣res was of stone, wrought with ymagery, eue¦ry hal inuyroned with pyllers of white stone. In the ende of that Labyrinthus, standeth a stone large benethe, and smalle on the toppe callyd Pyramis, which is of length .xl. paces, in the whiche ar wrought great ymages, and therat is the encry vnder ground to the other Labyrinthus. An other Labyrinthus was in Creta, made by Dedalus by the commande∣ment of Minos for a prison, but it was moch lasse than the other. But by dyuers doores, entrynges, & issuinges out, it deceyued them, whiche came into it. The thirde was in Ita∣ly by a towne callid Clusiū, which was made by kynge Porsena, & as Plinius and Varro do write, was of square stone, the sydes .xxx. foote brode, in height fyftye feete. Into the whyche who so euer went without a clew or bottome of threde, coulde neuer returne. On this place stode .v. Pyramides or steples one at euery corner, & one in the myddell, eueriche of them .CI. fote hygh, on the toppes of them great bolles of brasse, and thervppon horses with wynges, from the whiche dydde hange chaynes, hauyng belles at them, which being meued with wynde, rendred a sharpe sownd. also vpon the foure bolles of brasse stode four other Pyramides or sharpe pyllers of a hun∣dred foote high, and on that whiche was on the myddle stode oone sharpe pyllour, whose heyght Varro durst not reherse, bicause it se∣med a thing incredible. Al these thinges were made by great kynges, whych hauyng abun∣dance of treasure, and lackyng lernynge, dyd set theyr delite in suche vayne ostentation. Lac, lactis, mylke. ❀ Lac gallinaceus, The milke of an henne. A prouerbe applyed to theym, whiche lacke no∣thynge, or to thinges whiche for the scarsitie of them be very pretious. Lacaena, a kynde of apparaylle. also a woman of Lacedemonia. Laccia, a fyshe callyd a cheuyn. Lacedaemon, a noble citie in Grece, callyd also Sparta, in the region of Achaia, the coun∣trey is callyd Laconia. Lacer, & Lacerus, a, um, torne or rent. Lacerna, a short cloke, whiche men of warre be wont to weare. Lacernatus, cloked, or clad in a cloke. Lacero, are, to rent in pieces, or to gyue many woundes. Lacerare diem, to lose the day, to spende the tyme about nought. Lacertosus, hauing great brawnes and synues. Lacertus, & Lacerta, a lyzerde, an euet. also the part of a mans arme, from the elbowe to the wrest of the hande, properly the brawne and synewes of the arme. Lacesso, siui, & cessi, ssere, to rent or go aboute to rent the good renome of a man also to pro¦uoke a man to wrath or dysplesure with wor∣des, writyng or act: to rayl on a mā, to pryck a man with som yll language or act. Lachana, all kynde of herbes, whiche serue for the porte callyd wortes. Lachanopoles, a sellar of herbes. Lachanopolium, the herbe market. Lachesis, one of the three ladies callyd Parcae, whiche poetes dyd fayn, to haue the rule and continuance of mans lyfe. Lachrima, a teare in wepynge.
Lachrimo, are, to wepe. Lachrimula, a lyttell teare. Lacides, garmentes that be rent. Lacinia, is a redde musheron, whych spryngeth at the roote of a chesten tree. Laciniae, gardynges of a garmente, properlye where the skyrtes be cut in sundry fascion. In lacinias, in pieces, in iagges. Laciniosus, a, um, cut in sundry fashions, win∣dyng and turnyng dyuers ways, agged. Lacinium, an elbowe of lande, lyenge betwene the sea, callyd Hadriaticum, and the sea cal∣lyd Ionium. Lacio, lacui, & lexi, lacere, to bring into a snare or to wynde one in, to deceyue hym. Lacon, ónis, a man of Lacedemonia. Laconia, the countreye where Lacedemonia standeth. Laconicus, ca, cum, of the countrey of Laconia Laconicum, a hote house or drye bayne. Laconismus, a shorte fourme of speaking, con∣taynyng moche sentence in a fewe wordes. Lactarius, a, um, meate made of mylke, all her∣bes whiche haue iuyce lyke mylke. Lactarius, rij, he that maketh sundrye meates of mylke. also they whiche do sell mylke. Lacteo, ere, to sucke mylke. Lactes, places within the rybbes of a man, be∣nethe the nauel, so tender, that it may not suf∣fer any wounde or stroke. as Probus saythe. som say that they be caules, wherin the small bowelles do lye. Lactesco, scere, to be tourned into mylke, or to be fylled with mylke. Lacteus, a, um, of mylke or like mylk also that whiche is nouryshed lyke mylke. Lacticinia, whyte meates made of mylke. Lactidiaci, stryken about the nauell. Lacto, are, to fede with mylke. also to deceyue with fayre wordes. Lactuca, an herbe callyd letuse. Lacuna, a dyche, wherin water standeth. also a trenche, wherby fieldes are drayned. Some englyshe it, a synke. Lacunar, a beame. also suche a thynge as dothe yet hange in marchantes houses, ouerthwart theyr halles, wheron be set a greate number of candelles. Lacus, cus, a depe place alwaye full of water, whiche is diriued into brokes and ryuers. also the vessell which receyueth wyne, whan the grapes ar pressed. also the principal beam that goth ouerthwart the house. Lacus Lemanus, Losane in Peemountayne. Lacutrres, great cabages. Ladaes, was a man, who ran so swiftly, that on the sande he left no print of his foote. Ladanum, a gumme whiche runneth frome an herbe callyd Lada or Ledum, whiche is com∣monly callyd Labdanum, and is most vsed in pomaunders. Ladon, a ryuer in Arcadia. Laeander, a yonge man, which for the feruent loue that he bare to a fayre mayden callid E∣ros, vsed to swym frome Abidus, to Sestos, ouer the sea callyd Hellespontus, at the laste was drowned, whiche Eros beholding to be dead, threwe her selfe also into the sea from a high towre, of whom Musaeus, & Ouidius, in his epistoles do write. Laedo, laesi, dere, to hurt or do displeasure. Laedere maiestatem, to derogate any thynge of the kynges auctoritie or prerogatiue. Laesae religionis culpa, heresy or lollardy, con¦tempt of religion or ceremonies. Laemargia, gluttony. Laemargus, a glutton. Laemuschaton, the rewarde gyuen to him that vanquisshed at playinge or fyghtynge with weapons. Laena, a garment lyned, whiche the diuinours called Augures, dyd weare. Laerte, a citie in Cilicia. Laertes, the father of Vlysses. Laertius, the name of oone, whiche wrate the lyues of phylosophers. Laestrigones, were people in the confynes of Campania, whiche eate mans fleshe. Laetabilis, glad, or reioysefull. Laetamen, compasse or mucke layde in the fiel∣des, to make corne and grasse to growe plen∣tuousely. Laete, ioyousely, gladly. Laetisico, care, to make glad. Laetifco, scere, to be glad. Laetitia, gladnes, reioysyng of the mynd, which dothe appere also outwardly. Laetitudo, dinis, idem. Laetor, aris, ari, to be gladde, or to reioyse with outwarde sygnes. Laeto, are, to make gladde. Laetus, a, um, ioyous and glad. Laetus homo, a glad man. Laeta ouis, a good sheepe. Laeta seges, & lae∣tum legumen, plentyfull corne and grayn. all other thynges not hauyng lyfe, beinge callyd Laeta, do signify dilectable to beholde, or that do please the eye of the beholder. Laeuigo, are, to plane or make playne, or to po∣lysshe. Laeuis, leue, smothe or playne. Laeuitas, tatis, playnnesse or smothenesse. Laeuo, are, to make smothe. Laeuor, oris, smothenesse. Lagana, be thyn cakes made with floure and water, wherto was put fatte broth, pepper, saffron, and cynamome, frytuse. Lagari uersus, verses, whiche doo halte in the
myddes of the foote. Lagaron, is the part of the body from the sto∣make to the nauel, callyd also Hypocondriū. Lagena, a pytcher potte. Lageos, a kynde of grapes. Lagia, one of the names of the yle of Delos. Lagois, a kynd of fyshe, whiche may be callyd the hare fyshe. Lagonon, the frettyng of the guttes. Lagophthalmos, he that hath eyen like a hare, or in whom the ouerlyddes of the eyen do not meue downewarde. Lagopus, an herbe of the kynd of trefoyles cal∣lid trinitie grasse. some call it hare cummyn. some suppose it to be Dentdelyon, other Ga∣ryophyllacium, amonge the Germans it is callyd Harefoote. Lagorrophia, a warren or parke of hares. Laguncula, a lyttell pytcher. Lagygies, people in Sarmatia. Laicus, a lay man. Lais, was a cōmon harlot in Grece, who was of suche excellent beaultie, and therwith soo pleasant, that vnto her out of all Grece there came to Corinthus where she dwellyd, men noble and ryche in great numbers, to compa∣ny with her. On a tyme came to her Demo∣sthenes the greattest oratour of Greece, and desyred to lye with her, of whome she asked for one nyght a thousande Dragmas, whiche amounted to the rate of our money at this present tyme to xxiii .li .xix .s .x .d. The which Demosthenes heryng, he departed, sayinge in this wyse: I wyl not repent me at that price. Some write that she demaunded .x. thousand Dragmas, whiche was a talent. Laius, was king of Thebes, and father of Oe∣dipus, whome Oedipus vnwares slewe in battayle, and wedded his wyfe whiche was also Oedipus mother callyd Iocasta. Reade after in Oedipus. Laletania, a countray in Spayne. Lalisiones, oltes of wylde asses. Lallare, to speake lyke a babye: in the whiche worde the greke dothe approche nerer to the englyshe than to the latin, as Babazin, which made a latyn worde, is Babare. It maye be transferred to the noryce, that babeleth with her chylde whan she gyueth to it the dugge. Lamae, the raggydnes of rockes▪ Lambo, bere, to lycke with the tungue. also to touche, to flowe or runne softely. Lambrus, a riuer in Italy, which meteth with the ryuer of Po, callyd Padus. Lambrani, people dwellinge about the sayd ri∣uer of Lambrus. Lamentabilis, le, lamentable. Lamentarius, a, um, that causeth lamentation. Lamentatio, onis, lamentyng or waylyng. Lamentor, aris, ari, to lament or bewayle. Lamia, is a beast, whiche hath a womans face, and the feete of a horse. It was also the sur∣name of a noble Romayne, and also of a fa∣mous harlot. it is also a blynd nettle. Lamiae, be women, which beholdyng children, or gyuyng to them gyftes, do alter the ourm of them, whiche children be afterward callid elfes, or taken with the fayry. And some such women wyll sucke the bloud from chyldren. They be also those, whiche be callid ladies of the fayry, whiche do allure yong men to com∣pany carnally with them, and after that they be consumyd in the acte of lecherye, they co∣ueyt to deuoure them. Lamina, a plate of mettall. Lamirus, one of the sonnes of Hercules. Lampas, a leame of fyre, or bryghtenes of the sonne, moste vsed for a lampe. Lamperia, the doughter of the sonne by Neaera whiche with her syster Phaetusa, kept shepe in Sycile. Lampetra, a fyshe callyd a lamprey. Lampsacus, a towne on the sea syde callid Hel∣lespontus in the side of Asia, where Priapus was honoured. Lampsacenus, a, um, of Lampsacus. Lampyris, a gloo worme, or a wourme callyd a gloo berde. Lana, woulle. Lanaria, an herbe whiche fullers do vse, whan they scoure clothes. Some do saye it is that whiche apothecaries do call Condisi. Lanaris, re, that beareth or hath wolle. Lanare paecus, beastes hauyng woulle. Lanarius, a woulle man, or he that occupieth or selleth woulle. Lanatus, a, um, clad or wrapped in wolle. Lanatus lupus, fyshe so callyd for his whyte∣nes and softenes. Lancearius, he that beareth a iauelyn. Lanceatus, armyd with a iauelyn. also woun∣dyd with a iauelyn. Lancia, a spanyshe iauelyn with a brode heade. Lancino, are, to strike, to rent with the tethe. Lanerum, a garment made of vndyed woull. Laneus, a, um, woullen. Laneus, a fyshe. Langa, a beast whiche is founde about the ry∣uer of Po. Langia, a fountayne in Nemea a countreye of Arcadia, where the host of Argiues was re∣freshed, whan they went agaynst Thebes. Langueo, & languesco, ere, to languyshe, to be sycke, to be faynt, to be aferde, to be ydell. Languidus, da, dum, faynt, sycke, aferde, ydle. Languor, oris, languour, faylyng of strengthe and naturall moysture. Langurium, languettes of aumber, like to long
beadstones. Laruena, the flesh shambles, or shop where flesh is solde, somtyme it signifieth dismembryng. Lanifex, idem qui lanificus. Lanificium, cardyng and spynnyng of woull. Lanificus, he that dothe worke woll, to make it mete for the clothyer. it may be callyd also a wolle wynder. Lanio, are, to cut lyke a boucher. Lanionius, a, um, pertainyng to bouchers craft Lanista, he that had the rule ouer sworde play∣ers, and caused them to be taught, and after solde them. also that ordeyned byrdes to fight Lanitium, clothynge, or the crafte of makynge woullen clothe. Lanitius, a, um, woullen, or of woulle. Lanium carnarium, a slaughter house. Lanius, & Lanio, onis, a boucher. Lano, are, to put in woll, or to dresse with wull. Lanugo, the soft heares or mosynes in the visa∣ges of chyldren and women. also on fruytes callyd peaches, and som herbes as long wort, clary, and suche other. Also the down fethers in byrdes. it is alsoo the sawe duste or other poulder whiche commeth of wodde whan it is percyd. Lanx, cis, a dyshe, whiche of somme is callyd a potenger. also a balance. Laodicea, a citie in Asia. Laodomia, the wyfe of Prothesileus. Laomedon, ontis, the father of Priamus. Lapathum, uel Lapathus, callid also Rumex, is the generall name of all sorrell, as Oxylapa∣thum, or Lapathum acutum, sorrell as welle wylde as of the gardeyn. Hippolapathon, a great sorrell lyke a docke, but hauing the tast of sorrell, and is callyd pacience. Lapicida, a mason. Lapidarius, a, um, pertaynyng to stones. Lapidesco, scere, to be made or tourned into a stoone. Lapidicina, a quarye of stones. Lapido, are, to stryke with stones. also to strike sometyme without stones. Lapillus, a lyttell stone, also a pretious stone. Lapio, iui, ire, to make harde as a stone. Lapis, idis, a stone, but lesse than that, whiche is callyd Saxum. Sometyme it is taken for a myle. Ad tertium aut quartum lapidem, at the thyrde or the fourth myle. De lapide empti, were slaues or bōdmē sold. Lapithe, people of Thessaly, of whom Peritho¦us was kynge. Lappa, the general name of al burres growing on herbes, which wyll stycke to any thyng. Lapsana, after Dioscorides is a kynd of wylde nauewes hauynge but thre leaues. Plinius and Theophrastus doo write, that they were callyd of the Arcadians wyld colewortes, & of the phisitiōs, as Theophrastus sayth, Ce∣ra. With the rootes hereof boyled in mylke, all the hoste of Iulius Cesar lyued at Dyrra∣chiū a long tyme. wherof came the prouerbe, ❀Lapsana uiuere, where men do lyue nygard¦ly and wretchydly. Lapsio, a fall. Lapso, are, to fall often. Lapsus, us, a falle. also a smalle offence done by neglygence, an ouersyght. Lapythos, a citie in the yle of Cypres. Laqueare, Laquear, & Laquearium, the roufe of a chaumber, which is imbowid or fretted. also a playne beame in a roufe. Laqueatus, a, um, haltered snarled, tyed, or bounde fast. somtyme it signifyeth holowe or bowynge. Laqueus, an halter. Lara, uel Larunda, was a mayden whiche she∣wed to Iuno the wanton pastymes of Iupy∣ter with women. For the whyche Iupyter dyd cutte of her tungue, and cōmanded Mer¦curius to brynge her to helle. Who begat on her two sonnes, whiche were callyd Lares. Laranda, a citie Lycaonia. Lararium, a priuate chapell or closet in a mans howse. Larcus, a panne wherin coles be caryed. Larentia, a famous harlot, whiche bycause she made the people of Rome her heyre, they na∣med her a goddesse, and callyd her Flora. Lares, goddis, whiche the paynymes dyd sup∣pose euery person had belongynge vnto hym: they were also callyd Penates, both the whi∣che wordes be also taken for pryuate dwel∣lynges or houses. Mei lares, mei penates. My house or dwellynge place. Large, abundantly. Largior, iris, iri, to gyue liberally. also to graūt. Largitas, tatis, largenes, or lyberalitie. Largitio, lyberall expenses, to wynne a mans purpose. Largus, a, um, large or free of expenses. Laridum, uel Lardum, larde, or the fatte of an hogge. somtyme swynes fleshe salted. Larine, a fountayne in Attica. Larissa, the name of one citie in Thessalia, an other in Asia, the thyrde in Italy. Larius, a brooke by the citie of Comum. Larix, laricis, a great tree, whiche hath leaues lyke a pyneappull, the wodde longe and apte for buyldyng of inwarde warkes, it hath in it a thyn rosen of the colour of hony of Athe∣nes. it perysheth not neyther by rottyng, nor by eatyng of wormes, nor wylle bourne in a flame, nor be brought vnto coles, but by a lōg space of tyme be consumyd. also it wylle not swym on the water as other trees doo. And therfore be they eyther caryed in shyppes, or
els layde on fyrre trees pynned togither. The gumme which cometh from this tree, is cal∣lyd Laricearhesina, which is vsed in the stede of Terebinthine, ne that is discommended of Aetius. Larodij, people in Scithia. Larua, a spirite, whych appereth in the nyght tyme. some do call it a hegge, some a goblyn. also a masker, or he that weareth a vysour it is sometyme taken for the same vysour. Laruale, an ymage defourmed, pale, leane, and horrible to beholde. Laruatus, he that is feared with a spirite, and is become madde. it sommetyme sygnifyeth a masker. Larus, callyd in greke Cepphus, a lyttel byrde hauing many fethers, which at the time that she bryngeth forth yonge, she crieth out. She lyueth by eatynge the some of salt water: of her came the prouerbe: ❀Larus parturit, Larus dothe lay: applyed to theym, whiche promyse moche, and great thynges, and fy∣nally do gyue or brynge forthe nothynge, in regarde vnto that whiche they promysed. Lasanum, a chaumber potte or vrinall. Lasciuia, wantonnesse. Lasciuio, ire, to be wanton. Lasciuus, a, um, wanton. Laser, or Laseris, is a gumme or iuyce rnnyng out of a tree, whiche is taken of the best wri∣ters to be that which is callid of the apothe∣caries Asa foetida. Rede more in Sylphium. Laserpitium, is of Antonius Musa supposed to be the sweete rosen callyd Belsewine or Bugewin. some suppose it to be the tree, of the whiche commeth that rosen or gumme. Lasibus, olde writers vsed for Laribus. Lasseo, & lassesco, lassus, um, scere, to be wery. Lassi, an yle in the sea calllyd Egeum, it was also callyd Andros. Lassitudo, wearynesse. Lasso, are, to be wery. Lassus, a, um, wery. Laaurus, a great leechour. Latace, an herbe whiche the kynges of Persia were wont to gyue to ambassadours, wherin they had this superstitious beleue, that bering aboute them that herbe, where soo euer they were, they shulde haue plenty of all thynges, and shuld not perish for hunger or thirst The fygure of this herbe I coulde neuer fynde in any authour. Late, abrode in many places. Latebra, & , arum, a priuy place where men do hyde them. sometyme it signifieth an excuse. Latebro, are, to hyde. Latebrosus Iocus, where as be many priuy pla¦ces. Lateo, tui, tere, to be hydde. Later, a tyle. ❀Laterem lauas, thou washist a slate or a tile A prouerb signifieng thou labourest in vayn▪ ❀Laterem elixas, A prouerbe hauynge the same signification. Laterani, yomen of the garde. Lateranus, the name of a consule of Rome, of whose house was made a churche in the citie of Rome of saynt Iohn̄, whiche is nowe cal∣lyd Lateranensis. Laterculus, a lyttell tyle. Lateritius, a, um, made of tyles. Laterna, a lanterne. Latex, ticis, all maner of lycour: but it is moste commonly taken for water. Latheris, an herbe callyd spurge. Latialis, le, & Latiaris, re, of latyn, of that part of Italy, which was callyd Latium. Latibulo, are, to be hydde. Latibulum, a denne or bury, where beastes doo hyde theym. sometyme it is vsed for a secrete place or caue, wherin men be hyd. Laticlauium, the garment of a senatour. some∣tyme it sygnifieth the dignitie of a senatour. Latico, care, to lurke. Latifolium, that whyche hath brode leaues. Latifundium, a great or large fielde, great and large possessions. Latinae, narum, sacrifices to Iupiter, namyd of the latines; who fyrst dyd ordayne them. Latine, in the fourme of latyne. Latinitas, atis, latyne speche. Latinus, na, um, latyne, or of the people callyd latynes. Latinus, the proper name of the father in lawe to Aeneas. Latitudo, dinis, breadthe. Latium, a part of Italy betweene the ryuer of Tibris and Liris, wherein standeth the citie of Rome. Latius, a, um, of that countrey. Latinius, a mountayne in Ionia, where poete say the moone kyssed Endymion. Lato, latescare, to be rode. Latomia, at dungeon in the pryson at Rome. Latomiae, was a strayght prison in the cytie of Siracusis in Sicilia: an other in Spartha. It is also a quarry, out of the whiche stones are dygged. Latomus, a mason. Latona, was mother of Apollo and Diana. Latonia, callyd also Diana, and is alsoo taken for the moone. Latres, a seruaunt. Latria, the honour and seruyce, wherewith god onely is worshypped. Latrina, a siege or sakes. Latro, are, to barke as a dogge dothe. Latrocinium, thefte, robbery.
Latrocinor, nari, to rob. also to serue in warres Latrones, robbers by the high waye. also soul∣dyours retayned. Amonge the Romaynes it were those, which were alway about the kin¦ges or emperours person, as the garde is a∣bout the kynge. also Latrones seu latrunculi, be chessemen, with the whyche men do playe at the chesse. Latrunculator, a iustyce of gayle delyuerye, or any Iustyce, whiche dothe gyue sentence on theues. Latuniae, quarries where stones are dygged. Latus, ta, tum, brode. Lata culpa, a grosse neglygence, whan a man perceyueth not that thynge that euerye man vnderstandeth. Latus, lateris, a syde. Latus clauus, a senatours robe or garment. It is put sometyme for the dignitie of a senator. semblably Laticlauium. Lauacrum, a bathe or bayne. Lauatrina, a synk, wherinto soule water is cast or swept, wherby pauementes ar made clean. Lauce, an yle in the sea callyd Pontus. Laudabilis, le, laudable, commendable. Laudatio, a prayse or commendation. Laudo, are, to prayse. Laudo esem, I take to wytnesse. Lauer, an herbe growyng in the water, lyke to Alysaunder, but hauyng lesse leaues. some do call it bylders. Lauerna, a goddesse, vnder whose protection theues were in Rome. Lauinia, was doughter of kynge Latinus▪ for whom Aeneas and Turnus faught togither. Lauinium, a cytie in Italy callyd also Lauretū. Lauo, uaui, are, & lauo, ui, ere, to washe. Laurea, a leafe of laurell or bay tree. somtyme a garlande made of laurell. Laurens, tis, a mā of the town callid Laurentū. Laurentum, a citie in Italy callid also Lauiniū. Laureo, are, to put on a garlande of laurell. Laureola, a crowne or garlande that vyctours ware in theyr tryumph. Lauretum, a place wherein do growe laurelles or bay trees. Laureus, a, um, of laurell. Laurifer, & lauriger, is he that weareth a gar∣lande of laurell. Laurinum, oyle of laurell or ayes. Laurion, a place in Attica, where syluer was dygged. Laurus, a laurell or bay tree. Laus, laudis, prayse. Lautia, were presentes, whyche the Romaynes dyd send to ambassadours of other realmes. Lautitia, magnyficence and netenes in dyuers and bankettes. Lautrices, the wyues of two bretherne. Lautulae, weat baynes. Lautus, & lotus, ta, tum, wasshed, also nete or cleane, or elegant, ryche. Laxitas, tatis, & laxamentum, release, pardon, lousenes, lybertie. Laxo, are, to louse or set at lybertie, to release. Laxare manipulos, was in battaylle, whan the sundry bendes or cumpanies of footemen were set in araye, one man a conuenient di∣stance from an other, that they mough fight the more at theyr lybertie. Laxum, an aduerbe, signifieth wyde. Laxus, a, um, louse, large, wyde, soft, weake. L ANTE E. LAEA, laeae, a lyonesse. Leae, an ylande by Cyrenaica, a regyon of Affryke. Leaena, a lyonesse it was also the name of a cō∣mon woman at Athenes, who after that Har¦modius and Aristogiton had slayne Hyppar∣chum the tyrant, she being turmented in sun∣dry fascios, to the intent that she shuld dys∣couer the confederates of that murder, she spake not one worde, but bytynge in sunder her tungue, she spyt it in the face of Hyppias the tyrant, who caused her to be tourmented. Leander, the name of a man. Learchus, sonne of Athamas and Ino, whome the father beyng madde slewe in the stede of an harte. Lebadia, a citie in Boeotia. Lebes, lebetis, a caudron to boyle in. Lechia, a fysshe, whiche some haue taken to be Tuny, for the similitude of them. Leconomantia, was a kynde of diuination by water in a basyn, whiche the rusticall people in the olde tyme vsed amonge the Assyrians. They fylled a basyn sulle of water, into the whyche after certayne wordes spoken, spiri∣tes entred into the water, wherby was herd a lyttell sowne or whysperyng, by the whiche the inchantours perceyued thynges to come, and made answeres accordyng. Ioannes Ze∣ses in his comment on the Iliados of Homere maketh mention of two kyndes of Lecao∣mantia, one olde was, whyche Vlysses vsyd, an other newe founde, whych is by water in a depe basyn, into the whych was put gold, syluer, ambre, cop{per}, & stones, wherat mought be no women, or they whyche hadde oftended with women. But this vayne science is for∣boden amonge chrysten men, lyke as Necro∣mancy and Geomancy is. Lectica, a thynge lyke to a bed, wherein ryche men and noble men were borne by syx seruā∣tes, it may be taken for a lyghter. Lecticarij, they whiche bare Lecticam.
Lectio, onis, readynge. Lectipes, an herbe. Lectisterniator, oris, a chamberlayn, or he that maketh the beddes. Lectisterniū, a solemnitie amonge the paynims whan in the honour of their goddis Iupiter, Iuno, and Minerua, beddes were spradde in the temples, in the whyche fyrste the ydolles were laid, in the residue as many as mought lye and eate. Lectito, are, to reade often. Lecton, one of the toppes of the mountayn cal∣lyd Ida. Lectrum, a part of Asia, lyenge into the sea. Lecturio, ire, to desyre to reade. Lectus, a bedde. Lectulus, a lyttell bedde. Lecythus, a potte of erthe, whiche serued only for oyle. Leda, was wyfe of Tindarus kynge of Laco∣nia, with whom (as poetes do fable) Iupi∣ter in the fourme of a swanne dyd company, and she brought forthe two egges, of the one came Pollux & Helena, whyche was rauy∣shed by Paris: of the other came Castor & Clytemnestra. Pollux and Castor be callyd Ledaei. Lagatarius, ia, to whō any thing is bequethed. Legatio, an ambassade, or office of an ābassador Legatitius, pertaynyng to legacies. Legator, oris, he that bequetheth any thynge, the testatour. Legatum, a legacy or bequeste. Legatus, an ambassadour, that hath cōmission to treate of matters. He that is sent onely to salute or congratulate, is callyd Orator. it is also a lieutenaunt or generalle capytayne of an army. Legerda, a citie in great Armeny. Legio, onis, a company of men of warre, con∣taynyng commonly syx thousande foote men, seuen hūdred thyrty & two horsmen▪ it is also a town in Cornwall nowe callyd Leskarde. Legionarius, a, um, pertaynyng to a legion. Legirupa, a breaker of lawes. Legirupio, idem. Legislator, a maker or gyuer of lawes. Legifer, idem. Legiimus, a, um, accordyng to the lawe. Legitimi dies, dayes in banke before ordina∣rye iudges, whan the partie shulde appere or pleade, or elles it may be dayes of returne in the kynges benche or chauncery. Legitima iuditia, iudgementes confirmed by lawes written, or auncient custome. Legiuncula, a small legion. Lego, are, to sende as an ambassadour, or as a legate, or deputy, to commytte or appoynte, to bequeath. Lego, gi, gere, to gather, to reede, to passe by, to chouse, to stryke. Legula, a fyllette. Leguleius, a lawyer. Legulus, a gatherer of small thynges. Legumen, minis, all maner of pulse, as beanes, peason, vetches, tares. &c. Legumentum, & Legarium, the same. Leleges, seu Lelegae, people, whyche were al∣way wandrynge. Lema, a teare. Lemanus, a ryuer whiche runneth into the ry∣uer of Rone, callyd in frenche Lausane. Lembus, a swyfte lyttel shyppe, whiche may be callyd a barke. Lemnia terra, that whiche is now callyd Ter∣ra sigillata. Lemnisci, labelles hangynge downe from gar∣landes. also iesses belongyng to an hauke Lemnos, one of the yles callyd Cyclades, in this yle Vulcane was nourysshed. The wo∣menne thereof beynge in a furye, that theyr husbandes were longe absente in warres. Whan they came home, the women conspy∣rynge togyther, slewe them all in one nyght, sauyng that Hypsiphile the kinges daughter saued her father, and conueyed hym. Reade in Hypsiphile. Lemosi, they that wepe lyghtly. Lemouices, Lymosyn in Fraunce. Lemures, spirites whiche do walke by nyght, with horrible fygures. Lenaeus, one of the names of Bacchus. Lenas, a bawde. Lendiginos, a, um, full of nyttes. Lenio, iui, ire, to pacyfye, to appease, to treate gentyllye, to make playne, or smothe, to comforte. Lenis, ne, that whiche hath no roughnes, meke tractable, soft of conditions. Lenitas, & Lenitudo, mekenes, gentylnes, ea∣synesse to please, softnes, smothenesse. Leniter, softely, swetely, moderately. Leno, a baude, a marchant of hoores. Lenobates, a treader of grapes. Lenocinium, the practyse of baudry. somtyme immoderate and exquisite klenlynesse or ele∣gancy, to styre a man to vyce, a vitious plea∣sauntnesse. Lenocinor, ari, to practise baudry. also to speke fayre, or allure oone with wordes, and other pleasant thynges. Lenonius, a, um, pertaynyng to bawdes. Lens, lendis, a nytte. Lens, lentis, a kynde of pulse callyd lyntelles. Lens palustris, duckes meate, whiche in stan∣dyng waters lyeth houerynge. Lente, easyly, softely. Lentesco, scere, to be smothe or tender.
Lenticula, a pulse callyd chyttes. Lenticula, a maner of vessell, out of the whiche kynges and princis were annoynted, a chrys∣matory, a rounde redde thynge lyke a lyntell in mens vysages. Lenticularis, re, lyke a chyt or fatche. Lentiginosus, he that hath in his face or body many lyttell red markes, lyke lyntelles. Lentigo, ginis, a thynge lyke a lyttell warte in the face redde or blacke. Lentiscus, a lyttell tree, out of the which com∣meth a swete gumme callyd Mastix. Lento, tare, to do a thyng softly or easily, slowly Lentus, ta, tum, soft, gentyll, easy, slow, remisse, ydell, cleauyng, or clammy. Lenulus, a lyttell or yonge bawde. Lenunculus, idem. also a lytel fyshers bote. al∣so the whelpe of a lyon. Leo, onis, a lyon. also a shel fysh callid a lopster ❀Leonem ex unguibus aestimare, to esteme the lyon by his talons. A prouerbe signifieng to perceyue by a lyttell what the hole matter meaneth, or by a piece of a thynge what the holle is. ❀Leonē radere, spoken where one attēpteth a thyng dangerous and almost impossible. ❀Leo risit, a prouerbe touching them, which be soure of coūtenance, fierce, and vncurteys. Leocrates, the name of an excellent grauer. Leodamas, the proper name of a philosopher. Leon, a phylosopher. Leonides, was king of the Lacedemoniās, whi¦che did feates of warre against Xerxes kyng of Persia incredible, & finally was slayne in defendyng Grece, with foure thousande and eyght hundred Grekes onely, agaynste .xvii. hundred thousande of the hooste of Xerxes. There was also an nother Leonides, whiche was tutour to kyng Alexander, whan he was a chylde. Leonina, an herbe, whiche groweth on hylles, whose floures ar like to a lyons mouth whan he gapeth. Leontopetalon, an herbe, hauyng leaues lyke to colewortes, the stalke halfe a fote high, the seede in huskes as great as smalle peason, the roote like a rape roote, great and black, whi∣che helpeth agaynst the styngyng and bitynge of all maner of serpentes. Leontophon, a lytell worme, which if the lyon do byte, the lyon dieth incontinent. Leontophona, a lytel beast, whose head is tur∣ned into ashes, wherwith men do myxt flesh, & cast it in the wayes wherby lyons do passe, wherof if they do eate, they dye incontinent. Leontopodion, an herbe callyd Pee de lyon, whiche hath floures lyke roses vnsprad. Leontopodium, an herbe, which some do say is lyke to that whiche is callyd marygouldes, some do suppose it to be the herbe whyche is callyd Dent de lyon. Leopardus, a lybarde. Lepadusa, the yle of Sicile. Lepidè, pleasantly, pratily. Lepidium, is an herbe whiche Vergilius Mar¦cellus supposeth to be that which the apothe∣caries do cal Setrac. Ruellius describeth it to haue leaues whan they be yonge lyke to lau∣relle, but they be softer. Finallye it is lyke a sworde blade rebated, the stalke ryseth in heyght a cubite, and hath a great roote with a thyck rynde, and a pythe lyke to wood. Lepidus, a, um, nete, polyte, and plesant, aswell in speche as in gesture. Lepista, a lyttell potte or viole. Lepor, ôris, & lepos, is, purenes or netenes in speche. also the good grace and dilectable∣nes in speche and gesture. Leporarium, an inclosure, or place inclosed, wherin are kepte any beastes for pleasure or huntynge. Leporinus, na, num, of an hare. Leporis palatium, an herbe callid Southistell, in greke Sonchus. Lepra, lepry. Leprium, a citie in Achaia. Leptoludiae, blacke fygges. Leptus, the weight of a karat and an half. An∣dreas Alciatus in tres posteriores libros, A karate is the thyrde part of Obolus, whiche is halfe a serupyll. Lepus, poris, an hare. Lepusculus, a leuret or yonge hare. Lerna, a lake in Achaia aboute Argos, and a fenne in the whiche was the serpente Hydra with many heedes. In to this lake the peo∣ple of the cyties of Argus and Mycene dyd throwe all the ordure and sweapynges of theyr stretes and houses. Thereof came the prouerbe: ❀Lerna malorum, whereby was sygnified an heape of myschiefes, or any person in whō is all vyce and abhomination. Lernaeus, a, um, of Lerna. Leros, an ylande in she sea Icarie. Lesbos, an yle in the sea callid Egeum, where∣in was the citie callad Mytilene. Lesbius, a, um, of the yle of Lesbos. Lesbia regula, is spoken, where as rayson is applyed to the acte, and not the act to rea∣son: and where the lawe is accommodate to maners, and not maners to the lawe. Hereof speaketh Aristotle Moralium li .5. Of that whiche is infynite, the rule is infynite, lyke the leaden rule of Lesbos, whiche serueth for buyldyng, and is chaunged to the fascyon of the stone. Lessus, us, a lamentable voyce vsed in the bu∣ryeng
of men, as we do say, alas. Lestorum, a region of Indie. Lestrygones, a people in the extreme part of I∣taly, whiche dyd eate the companyons of V∣lysses, rostyng them on broches. Letalis, le, mortall. Letania, uel Litania, a supplication or common prayer. Letatus, slayne. Lethargus, or Letargia, whiche of som is callyd Veternus (is as Paulus Egineta writeth) a disease in that part of the head, in the whiche the power of reason is contayned, possedyng the same place that phrenesy dothe, that is to saye the brayne, but the cause and matter be contrary, for in this is continual necessitie of slepe, harde to be awaked, the matter beynge a moyst and very colde humour, washyng the brayne, and compellyng one to slepe. Alexan¦der Trallianus addeth therto, that therin is suche a forgetfulnesse, that he whiche is syrk can not remember what he wold speake. Cō∣stantinus saythe, that where sometyme they do gape, they do forgette to close theyr mou∣thes. It is sometyme callyd Vera, and than is it of a pure cold matter, and somtyme it is callyd Non uera, and than is it of a cold mat¦ter myxt with a lytell bloud or choler, seldom it happeth of melancholy. Sometyme it folo¦weth an other sycknes, as a fleumaticke fe∣uer, or the sycknes of the lungues callyd Pe∣ripneumoniîa, in these dyseases, by heate the fleume is made subtyll, and is plucked vp to the brayne, where a cotidiane feuer and that be togyther, sometyme the feuer departeth in the space of .vii. dayes, and leaueth behynde that syckenes. Lethargicus, he that hath the slepyng or forget∣full syckenes. Lethe, a ryuer of hel, the water wherof as sone as it is drunk, causeth a mā to forget al thing that is passed. it is also a ryuer in Affrica. Letifer, ra, rum, deadly, bryngyng or causynge deathe. Letificus, ca, cum, causyng deathe. Leto, are, to slea. Letum, or Lethum, deathe. Leua manus, the lefte hande. Leuca, a promontory or elbowe of lande, nyghe to Corinthus. Leucacantha, is (as Ioannes Agricola affyr∣meth) a thorny bushe commyng vp in hedges and diches, hauyng white floures, whiche ar soote: orels (sayth he) a kynde of thystelles, whyche be square and full of pryckes. Albeit Manardus supposed it to be that which the Arabians do calle Bedeguar. Ruellius affyr∣meth it to be that whiche Dioscorides dothe cal Rhamnus, the Romaynes Albam spinā, white thorne, growynge in hedges, hauynge straight vp braunches full of pryckes, lyttell leaues somwhat longe, fatty, & soft. Som is whiter than other, the darker coloured hath broder leaues, & somewhat ruddy, the twig∣ges be in length almost fiue cubites, the fruit therof is whyte, brode, thynne, and fascioned lyke a codde. Nowe haue ye the sundrye des∣criptions of the great lerned mē, of this time, diuine you what Leucacantha is, for to so dy¦uerse opinyons I can not fynde one englyshe, except I shulde call it white bryer. Leucanthemis, an herbe, whiche physitions of late dayes call camomyll. Leucates, a mountayne in Epiro. also an yle. Leuce, a lyttel towne not farre from Smirnia. Also an herbe lyke Mercury hauyng a whyte lyne in the myddle of the leafe. Leubia, is the generall name to all kyndes of vyolettes, not withstandynge it is proprelye taken for the yelowe violettes, whiche some doo calle hartes ease, the Arabians doo calle it Cheni. Leucola, an yle by Cypres. Leucoma, the webbe in the eie whan it is roted Leucomum, whyte cotton. Leucophaeus, a browne or a russet colour. Leucophaeatus, he that dothe weare a russette garment. Leucophlegmantia, a whyte dropsy. Leucophlegmatia, or Leucophlegmatias hyde¦ros, one kynde of dropsy, wherin al the bodye swelleth vnequally. Leucopū, & Leucopus, white of naturall color. Leucosia, an yle againste Pestanum, in the sea Thyrrenum. Leucosyria, a countrey, whyche is nowe callyd Cappadocia. Leucothaea, the goddesse which was callyd Ma¦tuta & Aurora. Leucothea, was doughter of Orcamus of Ba∣bylonia, whom beyng gotten with chylde by Phebus, her father dyd bury her alyue, but Phebus (as poetes fayne) dyd transfourme her vnto a tree, out of the whiche rounneth frankyncense. Leucrocuta, a beast in Inde, of the greatnes of an asse, hauing legges like an hart, the head, necke, tayle, & breast of a gray or badger, the feete clouen, a wide mouth vnto the eares, in the stede of tethe one hole bone, in his voyce he wyll resemble the speeche of a man. Note here, that Pliny sayth, that this beast in his heed is of the fascion of Meles, and Meles is the beast callyd Taxo, whiche is a graye or a badger And Solinus sayth, that he hath the head of a camell, which perchaunce was the faute of the wryter or prynter, whiche vnto Meli, added Ca, and made it Cameli.
Leuctra, a towne in Laconia in Grece. Leuctrum, a towne in Boeotia. Leui, one of the sonnes of Iacob the patriark. Leuiathan, a dragon of the sea: it is taken in holy scripture for the dyuell. Leuiculus, a, um, somwhat light. also wanton. Leuidensis, se, thynne wrought, and of smalle substaunce. Leuifidus, da, dum, of light credence or truste. Leuir, ri, the husbandes brother. Leuis, leue, lyght. Leuia uina, small wynes. Leuita, amonge the Iewes was a mynyster in their ceremonies vnder theyr priestes. Leuitas, tatis, lyghtnes. Leuiter, lyghtly. Leuo, are, to lyft vp. somtyme to take away, to abate or mynyshe, to mitigate, to make easy or lyght. Leuare aliquem onere, to dyscharge one of his bourdeyn. Leuare animum, to recreate the spirite. Leuare annonā, to minish the pce of vitailes Leuare facinus alicuius, to excuse oone of a mischeuous dede. Leuare ictum serpentis, to heale one stunge with an adder. Leuare laborem alicui, to ease hym of his la∣bour, or to put hym out of peyne. Leuare metum alicui, to put one out of feare Leuare morbum alicui, to make his sycknes more easy. Leuare populum frumento, to helpe the peo¦ple with corne in tyme of scarsitie. Leuare suam authoritatem, to minysshe his authoritie. Leuus, a, um, lyght. alsoo whan it is spoken of worldly thynges, it sygnifieth left, vnhappy, contrary. whan it is referred to celestial thin¦ges, it betokeneth ryght, fortunate, prospe∣rous. For that whiche to vs is the left hand, to them whiche are aboue vs, and doo loke towarde vs, is the ryght hande. Lex, legis, lawe, also a statute or decree. Lex municipalis, the peculyar lawe, whiche euery citie hath. Lex orchia, a lawe, whyche assygned howe many persons shulde be boden to souper, and that men shuld soupe at theyr doores, to hin¦tent that it mought appere, howe the lawe was obeyed. Lex plagiaria, wherby men were whipped. Leges Centuriatae, lawes made by the assem∣blies callyd Comitia Centuriata, Rede Co∣mitia. Leges Curiatae, lawes made in the assemblis callyd Curiata comitia, whiche were callyd by tribes. Leges Tribunitiae, lawes made by al the cō∣mon peple, which were also callid Plebiscita. Lege agere, to sue in the law. also to do exe∣cution. Legibus soluere, to dispence or graūnt a pla∣carde to one to do any thynge contrarye to a lawe made. Lexipyreti, medicines, whiche doo heale men of feuers. Lexouij, people in high France about Burbon ¶L ANTE I. LIA, one of the wyues of Iacob the pa∣tryarche. Liae, be holes in the top of a mast, whiche do receyue the cabuls or ropes. Liba, an yle in the Indian sea. Libadion, an herbe callyd the lesse centory. Libamen, minis, Libamentum, & libatio, a tast or say taken, proprely in sacrifice. Libanius, the name of a great rhetorician. Libanos, a tree growinge in Arabia, out of the whiche runneth frankyncense, which of Eu∣ripides is callid Libanos, and the tree Liba∣notos, contrary wise of Sophocles and Ga∣lenus, the tree is callid Libanos, and the gum Libantos. Libantis, tidis, an herbe callyd rosemary. Libanotus, a wynde, whiche doth blowe out of the northwest. Libanus, a mountayn betwene Araby and Phe¦nicia. it is also a tree, whiche bryngeth forth incense. Libella, the diminutiue of Libra. it was also a small coyn, and of them were two sortes, one was worthe the tenthe parte of Sestertius, the other the tenthe parte of Denarius: it is alsoo the lyne and plummette of a mason or carpentar. Libellio, a writer of bokes. Libelliones, caryers of letters. Libellorum praefecti, maysters of the requestes whiche do receyue bylles of supplication, be∣ing put in, to the kyng or prince. Libellulus, a very lyttell boke. Libellus, a lyttell boke. also somtyme an epistle, a supplication, a libelle or declaration in the lawe, of dette, trespas, couenaunt, and other lyke. Libens, wyllynge. Libenti animo, gladly. Libenter, willingly, gladly. Libentiae, dilectations, pleasures. Libentina, one of the names of Venus. Liber, liberi, the fynder of wyne, callid alsoo Bacchus & Dionysius. Liber, libri, a boke or warke writen, the inner rynde of a tree. Liber, ra, rum, free, at lybertie, not bounden,
large or great. Liberalia, orum, the festyual days of Bacchus. Liberalis, le, lyberall. Liberales artes, the lyberal sciences, or scien∣ces belongyng to a free man. Liberalis forma, a good fauour. Liberale ingenium, a free courage. Liberale iuditium, & liberalis causa, where a man contendeth for his lybertie. Liberalitas, tatis, lyberalitie. Liberalis causa, where a man contendeth for his libertie. Liberaliter, liberally. Exercitum quem in Asia ductauerat, luxuriose, nimis{que} liberaliter ha∣buerat, The armye whiche he had with hym in Asia, he lette theym haue to moche theyr pleasure. Liberaliter eruditus, well taught. Liberaliter uiuere, to lyue withoute vyle oc∣cupation. Libere, frankly, lyberally, without constraynt. Libere uiuere, to lyue at pleasure. Liberi, chyldren, as welle women as men. Liberides, conyes. Libero, are, to delyuer, to set at lybertie. Liberare creditorem, to contente, or satis∣fye hym, of whome moneye is borowed, to pay dettis. Libertas, tatis, libertie taken alway in the good parte. Libertinus, & Libertus, he that of a bondman is manumysed or infranchised. Liberum arbitrium, free wyll. Libet, it lyketh or contenteth. Libethra, a caue, wherin was a welle, callid Li∣bethros, where the Musis being conuersant, were therfore callyd Libethrides. Libethrides, the Muses, or ladyes of sciences. Libethrus, a mountayne in Macedonia, where the Muses dyd dwell. Libidinarius, a haunter of lechery. Libidinosus, lecherous, wylfull, pleasant. Libido, dinis, sensualite, vnleful apetite or lust. sometyme it signifieth only appetite or wyll. Libitina, a goddesse in whose temple were sold all thynges pertaynynge to sepulture or fu∣neralles. sommetyme for buryenge. Also for deathe, or the biere whereon deade bodyes are caryed. Libitinarius, he that hathe the surueyinge and charge about burienges. Libo, are, to tast any thyng, somtyme to touch. sometyme to sacrifyce, sometyme to take. Libra, a pounde, amonge the Romayns contei∣nyng .xii. ounces, whiche is callyd a pounde troyweyght. Somtyme a payre of balances. it is also one of the .xii. sygnes. Libra Attica, reade in Mina. Libralis, le, a pounde weyght. Libramentum, poyse or weyght. Libraria, a lybrary. Librarius, a seriuener, a bokebynder. Librarius, a, um, pertaynynge to bokes or of a pounde weyght. Librile, the hangynge equally of the balance. Librilla, a cougell or stone to throwe at one. Libripens, dis, a weyer. it was also amonge the Romans he, which bought a bōdmā or slaue, taking a pound weight of brasse in his hand, and saying: This man, which with this mo∣ney and brason poūd is bought to my vse, by the lawes of the Romans, I say is min own. Libro, are, to wey, to poyse, to make weyghty, to houer. Libs, a wynde, the whiche bloweth out of the southe. Libum, a chese cake. Liburni, people of the countrey callid Liburnia also common messangers. Liburnia, a part of Dalmatia or Slauony, now callyd Croatia. Liburnū, liburna, liburnas, & liburnica, a light shyp or foyst. Libya, was amonge the Greekes the generall name of all Aphrica: Not withstandyng it is of the Romayns taken onely for that part of Aphrica, whiche is from Egypt, to the weste occean, contaynyng Cyrenaicam, Aphricam minorem, Numidiam, & Mauritaniam. The Spaniardes do call them al cōmonly Mores Libycis, cidis, a town in Iudea, on the east part of the ryuer of Iordan. Libycontes, stones, which are not very clere. Libycus, ca, cum, of Libia. Libyophoenices, people in Affrica. Libys, & Libyssa, a man and woman of Libya Licenter, rashely. Licentia, licence, vnleful or immoderat libertie. Licentiosus, rashe, vsyng vnlefull libertie. Liceo, cere, to cheapen. Liceor, ceris, ceri, to set the pryce. Licet, it is lefull. sometyme it is vsed for maye. Mihi licet, I may. Tibi licet, thou mayst. som¦tyme be it soo, admytte it. Licuit esse ocioso Themistocli, Themistocles mought haue bē without trauayle. Nobis non licet esse tam disertis, We canne not be so well spoken. Per me uel stertas licet, thou mayst slepe for me vntyll thou routest, or I wylle gyue the leaue to route. Lichas, a measure, whiche excedeth not foure fyngers. Lichen, an herbe callyd Lyuerwort. Lichenes, ryngwormes or tetters. Lichenis, a foule breakyng out, whiche begyn∣neth about the chyn. Some do take it for the frenche pockes.
Lichnis agrestis, callyd also Tragonaton, and Anthirrhinos, an herbe lyke to lynseede, ha∣uynge almost no rote, and a blue floure with seedes lyke a caulfes snoute. It groweth a∣monge corne in some countrays. Licia, be thredes, whych sylk women do weaue in lyncelles or stooles. Liciatorium, a weauers shyttell, or a sylke wo∣mans tauell, whereon sylke or threde beynge wounden, is shot throught the webbe or lome. Licinia, a kynde of olyue trees. Licitator, toris, a cheapener, a chapman. some∣tyme it signifieth a broker. Licitè, lefully. Licitor, aris, ari, to bye and selle for gaynes, or to bargayne by exchaunge or cheuysaunce, to fyght, to deceyue a man by a crafty bargayn. Lictor, a sergeant, or other lyke minister to exe∣cute corporall punysshement. A Consule of Rome had .xii. Other head officers had syxe, whiche bare euery one in theyr handes rod∣des and axes bounden togyther, to doo with them execution, as they were commaunded. Lictorius, a, um, pertaynyng to sergeantes and other lyke officers. Lictus, ta, tum, lycked. Lidoron a tyle in length one foote and an half, in bredthe one foote. Lien, enis, the splene. Lienicus, & Lienosus, he that is sycke in the splene. Ligamen, minis, Ligamentum, a bonde. Ligellum, a cotage. Liger, eris, a ryuer in Fraunce callyd Loire. Lignarius faber, a carpentar. Lignator, a caryer of wood. Lignile, fuell, or a wood stacke. Lignor, aris, ari, to go to cary wood. Lignosus, a, um, as harde as wood. Lignum, wood. Ligo, are, to bynde. Ligo, onis, a spade. Ligula, a lyttell tungue. it is also a spoone cal∣lyd also Cochlear, which in measure contai∣neth .iii. dragmas, and one scruple. Ligur, a man or woman of Liguria. Liguria, a part of Italy from the hyl callyd A∣peninus, vnto the sea callyd Thuscum, also frome the ryuer of Varus vnto the ryuer cal∣lyd Macra. In it be the cities, Genua, Sauo∣na, Naulum, Albigena. Ligurio, ire, to eate lykorousely, or to deuoure swete or daynty meates. also to eate dayntily or curiousely. Liguritor, toris, a dayntye feeder, an eater of delycate meates. Ligus, gûris, of the countrey of Liguria, a Ia∣nuens of Ianeway. Ligusticum mare, the sea that is by Ieane. Ligusticus, ca, cum, of Liguria. Ligustrum, a tree hauyng leaues lyke an olyue tree, but they be broder and softer, and more grene of colour, whyche dothe beare whyte floures and sote, wherof is made an oyle cal∣lyd oleum Cyprinum. And this tree dothe growe in watry places, as wyllowes and sa∣lowes do, and bearith a blacke fruite lyke to an elder tree, they whiche doo take it for the bushe callyd Priuet, be moche deceyued. it is also an herbe, whiche some men do calle Ma∣ior, and groweth by hedges. Ligyes. are people of Asia, which with Xerxes warred agaynst the Grekes. Lilietum, a place where do grow many lylies. Lilinum, oyle of lylyes. Lilium, a lylye. Lilybeum, a towne in Sicile where one of the Sibilles lyeth buryed. Lima, a fyle. Limaria, the fyshe callyd Tuny, whan it dothe not excede one foote in length. Limatulus, a lyttell fyled. Limatura, pouder, whiche commeth of fylyng. Limax, cis, a snayle. also a man, whyche prieth or seketh for some thynge to consume. Limborarius, a maker of gardes or purfles. Limbus, a purfle of a womans garment, or a garde of a mans garment. Limen, minis, signifieth not only the thrashold of a doore, but also the haunse. somtyme it sy∣gnifieth the entree of the dore somtime frend¦shyp after the exposition of Seruius. Limenarcha, the wardeyn of the portes. Limes, mitis, sygnyfyeth a bounde or buttynge in fyeldes. Limetanei agri, fieldes lyenge in the extreme marches of a countrey. Limetanei milites, soudiors which were apoin¦ted to kepe & defēd the marches of thempire. Limitatus, ta, tum, bounded lymytted. Limito, are, to bounde or lymytte howe farre a thyng dothe extende. Limo, are, to fyle, to polyshe. Limones, fruite callyd lymons, wherof no men¦tion is made of ancient authors, except it be amonge them, whiche are callyd Citra. Limonium, an herbe growyng in medowes or moorysshe groundes, hauynge leaues lyke to beetes, but lesse and more weake, and hath a stalke lyke a lylye full of leaues, and hath a redde seede. Limuici, or Limouices, Lymosyn in Poyters. Limus, a vesture from the bealy downewarde. also mud or slyme, whiche is in the water. Limus, a, um, croked, awry, a skewe. Limis oculis spectare, to loke wātōly on the one syde, to cast a wanton eye, to loke a skew. Linamentum, lynnen.
Linarius, a warker of lynnen. Lindum, a citie in Englande, whiche some doo suppose to be Lyncolne, some Lynne. Linea, a carpentars lyne or corde. it signifyeth also euery line generally, either made or ima∣gyned to be. Lineamentum, the fascion of a body. Linearis, re, pertaynynge to a lyne. Lingo, xi, gere, to lycke with the tunge. also to sucke downe by lyttell and lyttell. Linctus, tus, lycking or suckynge downe. Lingones, people of Fraunce in the countreye callyd Langres. Lingua, a tunge. also a language. also an instru¦ment, wherwith men doo take medicines or salues out of a boxe. Lingua bula, an herbe callyd Langdebeofe. Linguax, acis, a great speaker, full of wordes. Lingula, a lytell tungue. also a lachet or lingell. also Lingua & lingula, doo sometyme sygni∣fye a spoone. Lingulaca, a woman ful of wordes. also a fishe callyd a soole. Linio, iui, ire, to annoynte. Lino, ni, ere, to annoynt or laye on some thynge that is sycke. also to lyne. Linostrophron, an herbe, whiche is also called Marubium, horehounde. Linozostis, an herbe callyd Mercury. Linquo, liqui, linquere, to leaue. Lintearius, a mercer of lynnen. Linteo, onis, a lynnen weauer. Linteolum, a piece of lynnen clothe. Linternum, a towne in Campania, where Sci∣pio Aphricanus dyed, and is buryed. Linternus, a ryuer in Campania. Linteum, a sheete. it is also taken for all lynnen clothes. sometyme for sayles. Lintres, lyttell botes made of holow trees. Linum, lynnen. Linus, the most ancient poet, a Theban, whom Vergilius callith the sonne  pollo and V∣tania one of the .ix. Muses. Linx, a beast, which hath the face  a lyon, the bodye spotted lyke a Panther,  is of the greatnes of a doo, whose vryne i sodaynely tourned into a stone. Lipara, an yle by Grece. It is alsoo a softe playster. Liparis, a ryuer in Cilicia. Lipopsichia, a sowndynge, where one seemeth to be deade. Lipopthymia, a traunse. Lippio, iui, ire, to be porreblynde, or sandblynd, or dymmeof syght. Lippitudo, the blearenes of the eyen. Lippus, bleare eyed, hauynge droppyng eyes. Lipsana, scrappes, or leauynge of vytayles, or other thynges. Liquamen, & liquatum, greace or talowe mol∣ten, sewet. Liquefacio, cere, to melte. Liquentia, a ryuer in Lumbardy. Liqueo, iui, ire, to be liquide or soft, as oyle. Liquesco, scere, to relente. Liquet, it appereth, it is sure. Liquidó, playnly, apparantly, purely. Liquido, are, to dyscouer, or make to appere. Liquidus, da, dum, lyquide, runnyng, and softe, somtyme pure, also prosperous. Liquo, are, to melt. Liquo, ere, to runne out, as lykour dothe. Lira, a rydge of lande, whiche is ouer the fur∣rowe. sometyme it signifieth an harpe: Lirae, be tryfles or iapes. Liratim, in rydges. Liris, a ryuer in Italye, by the towne callyd Minturnae. Liro, are, to make rydges. Lis, litis, debate, variance, controuersy. Litem aestimare, to assesse damages and co∣stes for the playntyfe in an action. Litem contestari, I suppose doth sygnify as moche as that whiche our lawyers doo saye, to enterpleade, whan one whyche is not par∣ty to the action, commeth in, or is callyd in, to pleade with the other, to the intent to saue his title or interest, whiche is supposed that he hath with them. Litem perdere, to lose his action. Litem suam facere, where one medleth in an other mans matter, as it were his owne. Lisus, a ryuer in Thracia, whyche Herodotus writeth was drunk vp by the army that Xet∣xes kyng of Persia ledde into Grece. Litera, a letter. Literae, a letter or letters that he sent. sometyme it signifieth sciences. Litera salutaris, was in the olde tyme, A, as betokenynge absoluynge. Litera tristis, B, as signifyenge condemnyng. Literae fugientes, blynde letters, whiche ey∣ther in defaut of the ynke, or of the parche∣ment, or for ancienty, may not be radde. Literarius, a, um, pertaynynge to letters or scyences. Literate, lyke a lerned man. Literator, oris, a grammaryan, or a mayster of grammer. Literatus, lernyd. Literatura, grammer, writyng, lernynge. Literosus, lettered. Lithargyrium, lytarge or whyte leade. Lithargyrus, a stone of syluer. Lithiasis, the griefe of the stone. Lithocolla, a cement, wherwith stones are ioy∣ned togither. Lithoglyphus, a grauer in stones. Lithologema, a heape of stones.
Lithospermon, an herbe which hath sedes like stones, and groweth amonge corne, whyche herbe cureth the stone of the bladder. some do suppose it to be grummell. Lithostratus, a place paued with square stones. Lithotomia, a masons warkehouse or quary. Liticen, a blower of a small trumpet. Litigator, oris, a stryuer. Liugiosus, a, um, full of stryfe. Litigium, a debate or varyance. Litigo, are, to varye, to stryue, to sue oone an nother. Lito, tare, to please god with sacrifyce, and to optayne my desyre. Littoreus, a, um, & littoralis, le, of the sea syde. Littus, toris, the bankes as welle of the sea, as of a great ryuer. somtyme lande buttynge on the sea callyd the sea syde. Lituania, a countrey, which is part of Sarma¦tia callyd Luten, and ioyneth to Polonia on the northe, and is vnder the kyng of Poole. Litura, a blottyng or stryke through that, whi∣che is written, cancellynge. Lituro, are, to blot or strike through, or cancell. Litus, ta, tum, enoynted. Lituus, a croked staffe, which the diuinours cal∣lyd Augures, helde in theyr handes, whanne they appoynted places in theyr diuination. also a scepter and a trumpet. Liueo, ere, to be blacke, to enuy. Liuesco, scere, to enuy. Liuidus, a, um, he that hathe his skynne blacke with beatyng also enuious. Liuius, the prince of latine hystoriens. Liuius Andronicus, was the fyrste latyn poete whiche wrate comedies or tragedies in latin about the seconde warres of Carthage. alsoo he wrate xxii. bookes of the yerely actes of the Romaynes, whiche bookes were callyd Annales. Liuonia, is also a parte of Sarmatia beyonde Luten northe, hauynge on the weste the sea callyd Germanicum. Liuor, the colour whiche is left on the skynne, after beatynge or whyppyng, callyd comon∣ly blacke and blue, sometyme it is taken for enuy. Liuor edax tibi cuncta negat. The gna∣wynge enuye denyeth the all thynges. Rabi∣em liuoris acerbi, Nulla potest placare qui∣es, No quyete can contente the ragynge of bytter enuy. Lix, ashes. Lixa, a skullyon, whyche caryeth wod or water in an hoste, or to the kytchen. Lixabundus, he that for a small rewarde dothe moste vile scruice. Lixinium, lye made of asshes to wasshe clothes cleane. Lixo, are, to whette. Lixos, a towne in Affrica. ¶L ANTE O. LOBA, a kynde of the grayn callyd Mil∣lium, whyche hathe greate stalkes syxe foote hyght. it is alsoo the leafe whiche groweth nexte the grounde in euery kynde of grayne. Lobus, the lappe of the eare. Locarium, the hyre of a house or lodging. Locatarius, he that letteth a howse or lande, a lessour. Locator, oris, idem. Locellus, a lyttell place. Locito, are, to let. Loco, are, to set or laye, as a house is sette in a place, a foundation is layd, also to lay vp, as a thynge is to be kepte. also to let a thinge to hire, or to rent, to make a lease. sometime to giue in mariage. Locarefiliam, to bestowe his doughter in mariage. Locrenses, & Locri, people of Locrus. There were also people so named in Greece. Locrus, a citie in the vttermost parte of Italy, whiche was named Magna Graecia. Loculamēta, places made with bourdes, wher¦in tame culuers, and other birdes or conies are kept to brede. Loculatus, ta, tum, diuided into sundry places. Loculus, a littell place. also a pourse, an almo∣rye, a littel coffer, a biere whereon deade bo∣dies are borne to be buried. Locûples, pletis, ryche, abundant, sufficient. Locuples fideiussor, a sufficient suretie. Locupleto, are, to make rich of yerely reuenues Locus, a place, somtime a familie or kinred. al∣so stede, as Loco patris te habeo, I take the in stede of my father. Locus obiurgandi, occasion to chyde. Loci, plural. numer. the secrete partes of a woman. Locusta, a fly with longe hinder legges, which bourneth corne with touchinge of it, and de∣uoureth the residewe. In India be of them thre fote of length, whiche the people of that countrey do eate. it is also a sea fishe, like to a creuis, callid a lopster. Locutor, & Loculeius, he that speaketh moche, a prater or a angler. Lodex, uel lodix, icis a shete. Loedoria, a taunt or reproche in scoffynge. Loelaps, a blast of wind tourned from the erth vpwarde. Log, is the same measure of the hebrues, that Sextarius atticus, is among the Grekes rede more in Sextarius. Logica, logike one of the liberall sciences, the
crafte of reasonyng or arguyng. Logion, a place where iuges gyue sentence, al∣so a gatherynge of rente, or other reuenues. Logodaedalus, a vayne talker, whyche vseth eloquent wordes without quyckenes of sen∣tence, or dothe more study for the aptenes of an oretion, than for the grauite of the sentēce Logographi, they whyche doo wryte bokes of accompt. Logomachia, a contention with wordes, or an vndyscrete altercation. Logos, vsed for a latyn word, is taken for try∣flynge wordes or vayne language. Loligo, ginis, a fyshe whiche hath his head be∣twene his feete and his bealy, and hath also two bones, oone lyke a knyfe, the other lyke apenne. Lolium, a vitious grayne, callid ray or darnel, whiche commonly groweth amonge wheate, and if it be eaten in hot bread, it maketh the head gyddy, as yf a man were drunke. Lombricus, a lamprey. Lomentum, beane meale. Longa Alba, a citie in Italy. Longaeuus, longe lyued. Longanimis, he that suffreth longe. Longanon, a gutte, out of the whyche ordure ysseweth. Longe, an aduerbe, sygnifyeth longe, farre, excedynge. Longinquus, a, um, farre of, farre, straunge. Longisco, scere, to be longe. Longitudo, dinis, length. Longobardi, Lumbardes. Longobardia, a regyon of Italy, callyd Lum∣bardy. Longum, a longe tyme. Longurius, a longe polle. Longus, a, um, longe. Lopades, a shell fyshe. Loquacitas, tatis, babblynge. Loquacito, are, to babble or speake moche. Loquax, acis, a babblar. Loquela, speeche. Loquitor, tari, to speake moche. Lora, siue Lorea, a drynke made of grapes af∣ter that they be pressed, callyd Seconde. Lorarij, seruantes whiche serued to bynd men, or to beate theym, whan they were by theyr maysters commaunded. Lorica, an haberion, a place made vpon walles lyke an open galery, with grates of tymber or hurdelles, to kepe men from fallyng▪ it is al∣so the wall plate, before that morter is layde on it. Loricatio, wallyng with morter. Loricatus, armyd with an haberion. Loricion, a mantell. Lorico, care, to put on a habergeon. Loricula, inwarfare is a muniment or fortifi∣cation, that the besyegers of cities do make. Loripes, edis, whose feete are as yf they were bounden or gyrte. Lorum, a thonge of lether, or a colar, or other lyke thyng, wherwith beastis are bounden or tyed. sometyme a whyp wherewith a man or beast is whypped. Lotaringia, a countrey beyonde Pycardy and Normandy. Lothoringia, a countrey called Lorayn. Lotium, vryne or pysse. Lotophagi, people in Affrike, whiche do lyue by eatyng onely of a fruite callyd Lotos. Lotos, & Lotis, tidis, is a notable trec in Af∣frike, or herbe, of whose fruite yf a straunger do eate, he doth incontinently forget his own countrey. Loxias, one of the names of Apollo. ¶L ANTE V. LVBENS, lubenter, lubenti animo, with a good wyll, gladly. Lubentia, & libentia, myrth, pleasantnes, most proprely in wordes. Lubido pro libido, sensualle appetite. Lubido est obseruare quid agat, I haue a desyre to espy what he dothe. Lubrico, care, to make slypper. Lubricus, ca, cum, slypper, waueryng, somtyme redy to slyppe or slyde. Luca, a citie in Italye, of whiche the inhaby∣tauntes are callyd Lucenses. Lucae boues, were taken of the olde latyns for elephantes. Lucani, people of the countrey of Lucania. Lucania, a countrey belongyng to the royalme of Naples, betwene Poyle and Calaber. Lucanica, a puddyng made of porke, a sausage. Lucanus, a famous poete, whiche wrate the ba¦tayle betwene Cesar and Pompey. Lucar, money bestowed in woodes, dedicate to goddis callyd Luci. Lucaria festa, feastes whyche the Romaynes made in holy woodes. Lucellum, a lyttell gayne, a small market. Lucens, that whiche hathe his lyght of an no∣ther thynge. Luceo, luxi, lucere, to shyne. Luceres, the thyrde part of the people of Rome distributed by Tatius and Romulus. Luceria, a citie of Apulia. Lucerius, a kynge of Ardea, whiche holpe Ro∣mulus agaynst Tatius. Lucerna, a lanterne. Lucernarius, the lanterne bearer. Lucernula, a sconse. Lucesco, cere, to be bryght or clere as day.
Lucetia, one of the names of Iuno. Lucetius, a name of Iupiter. Luci, by day. Lucibile, that whiche is lyght of it selfe. Lucido, are, to make clere or to gyue lyght. Lucidus, da, dum, clere. Lucifer, the day sterre. Lucifico, care, idem quod lucido. Lucifigus, ga, whyche fleeth frome lyghte, and delyteth in darkenes. Lucigena, ingendred of lyght. Lucilius, the name of an olde poete. Lucina, one of the names of the moone, callyd also the goddesse of byrthe. Lucini, they whyche haue lyttell eyen, and smal syght. Lucius, a mans name. Lucretilis, an hyl in the cuntrey of the Sabines Lucrifuga, he that fleeth from lucre or gaynes. Lucrinus, a mere or great water in Campania. Lucrio, onis, a couetous manne, an inordinate gayner. Lucror, aris, ari, to gayne or to wynne. Lucrum, lucre or gayne. Lucta, wrastlynge. Luctatius Catulus, a citesen of Rome. Luctiferum, cause of waylynge. Luctifieus, ca, cum, idem. Luctitor, tari, to wrastle ofte. Lucto, idem, quod Luctor. Luctor, aris, ari to wrastle. Luctuosus, a, um, lamentable. Luctus, tus, wepyng and waylynge, the habite of mournynge. Lucubro, are, to make any thīg by candel light. Luculentè, clerely. Luculente uendere, to sell at a high price. Luculenter, gentylly, proprely. Luculenter scribere, to write honestely and gentylly. Luculentus, ta, tum, full of lyght, clere. Luculenta foemina, a very fayre woman. Luculenta plaga, a great wounde. Luculentae diuitiae, abundant ryches. Luculentus author, he that writeth in a gen∣tyll styls. Luculentus homo, a famous man. Lucullus, the name of a noble Romayne. Lucus, a hygh and thycke woode. sometyme it sygnifieth lyght, whan it is of the fourth de∣clination. it is also a citie by Spayn by Co¦postella, whiche is nowe callyd Lucensis. Ludia, a daunsynge or mery wench full of sport. Ludibriū, a mock, or any thyng that is mocked. Ludibundus, a, um, playeng, or full of play. Ludicrum, any play or pastyme, or an enterlude Ludicrus, cra, crū, pertaynyng to play or myrth. Ludifico, care, to mocke. Ludij, & Ludiones, players in enterludes or stage playes. Ludius, & ludio, onis, a player. Ludo, si, dere, to playe, to mocke or deceyue in game. Ludere in numerum, to daunse measure. Ludere operam, to lose his labour. Ludere otium, to passe the tyme. Ludus, play in actes, myrth in wordes, alsoo a schole or place of exercyse. Ludos aliquem facere, to mocke one. Ludi, in the plurell noumber be taken for those thynges whiche we call syghtes, as the page∣antes at London on Mydsomer nyght. some∣tyme for suche triumphes as be made by kin∣ges with iustynge and turnayenge. Ludi Circenses, was runnynge with chary∣ottes in the great compassed place at Rome callyd Circus. Ludi compitālitij, callid also Ludi Liberales, were playes made in hyghe wayes to the ho∣nour of Bacchus callyd also Liber. Ludi Florales, were abhominable playes v∣sed at Rome in the presence of all the people, in the whiche played onely common women al naked in wanton wordes and motions, sa∣tisfienge the peoples detestable appetites. Ludi gladiatorij, were farre from all huma∣nitie, and a spectakle of crueltie, for in them men without quarell and harneys faughte in great numbers with weapon, eche couetyng to kyll other, and to shew al poyntes of beast¦ly crueltie dyuerse of theym hauynge nettes made of cordes to drawe vnto them theyr ad∣uersaries. Ludi gymnici, were exercises in rounnyng, leapyng, throwyng of the darte or stone, and wrastelynge. Ludi Lupercales, wherin gentylmens sonnes beyng naked, and hauynge lytle whyppes in theyr handes, ranne about beatynge euerye man that they met laughynge vpon them. Ludi Megalenses, were playes made to the honour of her whyche was callyd mother of goddis. Luentinum, Powes lande in wales. Lues, pestilence in men, murtayn in beastes. Lugdunum a citie iu Fraunce callyd Lyons. Lugeo, luxi, lugêre, to mourne, to lament. Lugodinum, a citie in Holland callyd Vtricht, in latyn also Traiectum. Lugûbris, bre, pertainyng to mourning. Vestis lugubris, a mourning garment. Luma, a bremble. Lumbago, ginis, feblenes of the loynes. Lumbare, breches of hosen. Lumbi, the loynes. Lumbrici, littell fysshes taken in smalle ryuers which ar like to lampurnes, but they be mo∣che lesse, and somewhat yelowe, and are cal∣lyd
in wyltshire, prides. Lumen, luminis, lyght. Lumina praeferre, to inspire. Luminibus obstruere, to stop vp the lyghte, to let that the lyght may not com into a hous Luminare, that whyche gyueth lyght. Luminosus, a, um, full of lyght. Luna, the moone. Lunaris, re, pertaynyng to the moone. Lunaticus, he that is made or syck at a certayn tyme of the moone. Lunatus, ta, tum, lyke the moone. Luo, ere, to suffer punyshement or deathe. Luere capite, to haue the head striken of. Lupa, a female wolfe. also an harlot. Lupanar, a brothell house. Lupanaris, re, pertayning to a brothell house. Lupanarium, a brothelhouse. Lupari, to meddle with common harlottes. Luparius, a hunter of wolfes. Lupatum, a harde bytte. Lupercal, a place dedicate to Pan, the god of shepeherdes. Lupercalia, sacrisices and plays made to Pan. Luperci, ministers of that solemnitie. Lupinus, a kynde of poulse corne hauynge one stalke, the leafe in fyue diuisions, the coddes creuesed about, hauyng in it fyue or syx grai∣nes harde brode and redde. They be cōmune in France and Italy, but here vneth knowē. Lupinus, na, num, of a wolfe. Lupulus, & Lupus salictarius, an herbe callyd hoppes, wherwith biere is brued. Lupus, a wolfe. also a bytte for a horse. alsoo a hoke to drawe vp thynges out of a pytte. also a kynde of spyders. also a fyshe whiche some men take to be a pyke. Lupus est in fabula, a prouerbe, whan he cōmeth whiche is spoken of. Lupum auribus tenere, a prouerbe in thin∣ges that be daungerouse, eyther to retayne or to lette go. Lura, the mouth of a bottell. Lurco, care, to eate rauenousely. Lurco, onis, a deuourer of his owne substance. Luridus, da, dum, pale of colour. Luscinia, a nyghtyngale. Lusciosus, porreblynde. Luscio, is the disease. Luscitus, he that seeth playnly by nyght. Luscus, porreblynde. sometyme a man hauynge but one eye. Lusitania, the realme callyd Portugall. Lusito, tare, to play often. Lusorius, a, um, pertaynyng to play. Lustralis, le, pertayning to ryotte and lecherye. sometyme a thynge done euery fyfth yere. Lustrici dies, the day whan a chylde is fyrst na∣med, whiche in men chyldren was the nynthe day, in women chyldren it was the .viii. day, It may nowe be vsed for the daye of christe∣nyng of chyldren. Lustro, are, to go about in circuite. It was al∣so amonge the olde Romayns, to leade about an army, a shepe, a sow, and thre bulles, thin kyng that therby the host was purged of su∣che greuous offence as had ben committed a∣gaynste their goddis. also to consyder in the mynde, to shadowe, to beholde about. Lustror, aris, ari, to serche out. Lustrum, a denne or caue of wylde beastes in woodes, an hyd place and vile, a hous where gluttony and lechery is haunted. also the han¦tyng of the same vices. somtyme it signifieth the space of fyue yeres. also the generall pur∣gation of the cite by sacrifyce euery fift yere. Luter, eris, a cup wherin wyne is delayde with water. Luteola, a lyttell floure of the colour of yelowe in greatnes and sauoure not moche vnlyke a violette. Lutesco, scere, to be clay. Lutetia, the citie of Parys in Fraunce. Luteum oui, the yolke of an egge. Luteus color, the colour of yelowe, approching toward red, of the colour of the yolke of an egge, or of waxe newe made. Luto, are, to clay. Lutra, siue Lytra, a beuar, or a beast moche lyke to it, whiche gnaweth trees asunder, and dothe haunte greate waters, and lyueth like an otter. Lutum, clay. Lux, lucis, light. Luxatus, whose bones are out of ioynt. Luxo, are, to louse or make louse. Luxurio, ire, to excede, to abounde more than is necessary in the body or personage. Luxurior, aris, ari, to abunde excessiuely in thin¦ges concernyng the mynde or goodes. also to be wanton with to moch welth or prosperitie Luxuriosus, to prosperous, or lyuyng in to mo∣che pleasure. Luxuriosus, a, um, excedyng in abundance. Luxus, Luxuria, & Luxuries, all superfluitie or excesse, as well in carnal plesure, as in sump∣tuous fare, apparell, or buyldyng. ¶L ANTE Y. LYAEVS, one of the names of Bacch{us}, callyd god of wynes. Lycaeus, a mountayne in the countrey of Archadia. Lycaeum, was the schole of Aristotle in Athens Lycaon, the kyng of Archadia, whom Iupiter tourned into a wolfe. Lycaones, people in Asia the lesse, nere to Lycia as wryteth Ptholome.
Lycaonia, a countrey in Asia: after some wry∣ters it is a part of Archadia. Lycastus, a citie of Candy. Lychnis, or Lychnitis, an herbe whose flowre shyneth by nyght, and fyrst springeth, and lon¦gest dureth: which in drynke helpeth theym that are stungen with the Scorpyon. Lychnites, whyte marble. Lychnobij, they whiche do tourne the day into nyght, and the nyght into day. Lychnus, a matche of a candell. sometyme the selfe candell. Lycia, a countreye in Asia the lasse, betweene Pamphiliam and Cariam, in the whiche ar greate cities Patara and Myra. sometyme there were .lxx. cities. Lycidas, the name of a Centaure, and of a she∣parde in Virgile. Lycion, a thynge made with the iuyce of an herbe, wherwith soore eyes be cured. Lycisca, a dogge comen of a wolfe and a dogge. Lycius, one of the names of Apollo. Lycoctones, a venemous herbe called alsoo Asconitum. Lycurgus, a kyng of the Lacedemonians, whi∣che gaue to them theyr fyrst lawes. Lycus, a ryuer in the countrey of Cesaria. Lydia, a countrey in Asia, on the east ioynynge to Phrigia, on the northe to Mysia, on the south vpon part of Caria. In this region is the hyl callyd Emolus, out of the which com¦meth the ryche ryuer callyd Pactolus▪ Reade of them in theyr owne places. Lydi mali post hos Aegyptij, A prouerbe applyed where two yll persons be comparyd togyther, and the one beynge founde verye vngracyouse, the other deserueth the lesse dysprayse. Lydius lapis, a touche stone wherewith the fynenes and coursenes of golde is tryed. it is alsoo vsed sometyme for a prouerbe, applyed to theym whyche haue a quycke and exacte iugement. Lydus, a, 3m, of the countrey of Lydia. Lyenteria, or Lienteria, for I fynde it wrytten sometyme with Y, somtyme with I, is a fle of meat vndigested sent forth in the same qua¦lities that they were receyued, without alte∣ration in coloure, lykour, or sauour. Of this syckenes be two kyndes, The one (as Paul{us} writeth) commeth of the exulceration of the bowels, that is to saye woundes or soores in them, or of other dystillations or reumes. The other kynde commeth of debilytie of the powers which shuld tetayn in the stomak that whyche shulde serue for nourysshement. Causes of this sickenes be twelue. The qua∣litie of the meate receyued, the quantitie of that which annoyeth oppressyng the stomak, and infeblinge his vertue retentiue, moch ef∣fusyon of melancoly to the mouth of the sto∣macke, moche and laborious sterynge imme∣diately after meales, the stomake being full, moche drynke with meate or after, causynge the meate to runne downe to hastily, lacke of order in catynge: reume descendyng into the stomacke, moche fleume gathered in the sto∣make and bowels, feblenes in digestion, and the vertue retentiue in the stomake, debylitie in the vertue attractiue in the lyuer by rea∣son of opylations, an inward sore by the tou∣chyng wherof, the meate slyppeth awaye, by closenes of the poores and passages of the bo¦dy, wherby al superfluites be turned inward Lygdamus, a Sicilian of the citie of Syracu∣sis, a puissaunt wrastlar, whose bones after his death were founde to haue no marrowe. Lympha, water. Lymphaticus, a madde man, whiche lyke to a wood dogge, runneth hyther and thyther. Lympidus, a, um, clere, smothe. Lynceus, was a man, who (as Varro writeth) coulde see shyppes on the sea .Cxxx. myles frō hym, and dyd number them. And som wrate that he coulde see through a wall, and there∣fore they whiche haue verye sharpe syghtes, be sayde to haue Lynceos oculos, the eyen of Lynceus. Lyndus, a citie at the Rhodes, where they dyd sacrifice to Hercules with reprochis & cursis Lynter, eris, a cockbote. Lynx, cis, a beast lyke to a wolfe, hauing many spottes, whose syght dothe perce all thinges. it is also a byrde whyche hath a tungue lyke a serpent. Lyra, a harpe. Lyricen, cinis, an harper. Lysander, kynge of Lacedemonia. Whan it was layde to hym for a reproche, that he dyd more by subtiltie than by prowes, He answe∣red in this wyse, where the lyons skyn dothe not profyte, a man muste sowe or tye a foxes skynne to it. Not withstandynge in any no∣ble man that practise is seldom cōmended. Lysanias, an oratour of Grece. Lysias, an oratour moste pleasaunt, of whome Quint▪ speaketh. Lysimachia, a citie in Ponto, whiche fel down with an erthquake. Lysimachium, is thought of Mainardus to be the herbe whiche we call marygouldes. Leo∣nicenus taketh it to be that whyche dyers do occupy, and is callyd also Lutea & Corneo∣la. Whervnto Ruellius accordeth and sayth, it is that wherwith clothes are dyed greene. By his description it is the wede callyd wod waxen growynge in pastures somewhat lyke vnto brome with small yelow floures, which
is so bytter that no beast wyll eate of it. Lysimachus, a noble man of Macedonye, the scholer of Calisthenes, and one of the moste valyant capitaynes of Alexander. Lysippus, an excellent karuer. Lysius, a ryuer of Archady. Lytra, a wourme in a doggues tungue. ¶M ANTE A. MACARIVS, THE name of a man. In latyn it sygnifieth blessed. Macedo, onis, a manne or woman of Macedony. Macedonia, a royalme in Grece, fyrst callyd Ema∣thia. On the north it boū¦deth (as Ptholomeus writeth) vpon the sy∣des of Dalmatia, Mesia superior, & Thra∣cia, on the west it stretcheth to the sea callyd Ionium. Pius describeth it to be ioyned on the south and weste to Thracia, and that the south syde lyeth on the backes of Thessalia and Magnesia: the north on Paeonia & Pa∣phlagonia, that it hath also on the south E∣pirus, on the northe Illiria, whiche varyeth not moche from Solinus, Who sayth more∣ouer, that it is diuided from Thracia with the ryuer callyd Strimon. Macedonicus, ca, cum, of Macedony. Macellarius, a vyttaylour or sellar of al maner of vyttayle. Mecellum, a place where all maner of vitayle to solde. Macellus, is sometyme taken for a leane man. Maceo, & Macesco, scere, to be leane. Macer, cra, crum, leane. Macer Aemilius, an olde poete whiche was in the time whā Ouidius was, who as he saith wrate of byrdes in verses, also of the vertues of herbes, but it was not that Macer, whose warkes we nowe haue of the vertues of her∣bes, but rather he, vnto whome the yonger Pliny prouoked to write some thyng lyke to his vnkle. Fynally that lytell boke of herbes is right profitable in diuers places to be kū∣ned by harte of a yonge scholer whiche dely∣teth in that matter, not withstāding the fyrst Macer wrate more eloquētly, & is comended therfore of Quintilianus. He wrate also of the batayl of Troy, & of venemous beastes. Macer, uel Macis, is nowe in doubte whither it be the spice commonly callyd macis, whi∣che is a rynde about the nutmyg, forasmoche as Dioscorides writeth of Macer, where he neuer made mention of nutmyg. And Plinye sayth, that Macer is the rynde of a certayne rote of a tree of the same name. And also Di∣oscorides sayth that it is a thycke rynd, and moche straynyng the tungue, whiche taste is not perceyued in our macis, and they are al∣so very thyn. And Galene calleth them dry in the thyrde degree, and equall in heate & cold, but we fynde them hot in taste. And Auicene affirmeth them to be hot and dry in the secō degree, which is confirmed by Constantine, who saith, that they be rīdes of the boughes of the trees that beare nutmygges. Maceresco, scere, to make soft with lyeng long in lycour. Maceries, & maceria, a wall of stone without morter, made in the steede of an hedge. alsoo leannesse. Macero, are, spoken of the bodye, sygnifieth to make leane or thynne, or soft by stepyng in li∣cour, referred to the mynde, it signifyeth to vexe or inquiete. Machabaeus, the fyrste of that name, was Iu∣das the thyrde sonne of Mathathias the Iewe, he was a valyant man in his faythe and of an inuincible courage. In so moch as with thre thousand men only he vanquyshed Lysias the lieutenāt of kyng Antiochus end his sonne, & with them forty thousand foote men, and .vii. thousande horsemen, and slewe of them fyue thousande. Afterwarde in Ga∣lilea he slewe of the host of Timotheus an o∣ther of the kynges capytayns fyrst thre thou¦sande, and afterward eyght thousand. After warde by a vyllage callyd Adassis, he with one thousande faught with Nycanor a capi∣tayn of kyng Demetrius and nyne thousand with hym, at the whyche battayle Nicanor was slayne, and of the nyne thousand almost none escaped. Fynally where to moche tru∣styng to his prosperytie in warres, in going agaynst Bacchis a capitayn of kyng Deme∣tri{us} hauyng a great host, & takyng with him but two thousande, of the whiche at the last remayned only with him but eight hundred, he faught vntyl it was night, & made a won∣derfull slaughter of enemies. But whyles he enforced hymself to come to Bacchis, which was on the right corner of the battayle, and there faughte so nobly, that he scattered that corner, sleinge many about hym. Fynally be∣ing enuyronned with theym that were in the left corner, he being stryken with many woū∣des, was slayne with moche difficultie, Afore thincarnation of Christ about .CCCv. yeres Machaera, a sworde. Macherophorus, a sworde bearer. Machaeropios, a cutlar, or a bladesmyth. Machaon, the sonne of Esculapius, an excellēt
Machina, a thyng craftily inuented, or a crafty inuention, an engyne. Machinor, aris, ari, to inuent craftyly, to diuise to imagyne. Macidatus, ta, tum, wette. Macies, & Macritudo, leannesse. Macilentus, leane. Macio, aui, are, to make leane. Macra, a ryuer whiche rounneth betwene the mountaynes of Liguria. Macreo, ere, to be leane. Macresco, scere, to waxe leane. Macrobii, people in Affrike, which of Pompo∣nius be also callyd Meroeni, whose countrey is inuyronned with the ryuer of Nilus lyke an yle. They lyue halfe as moche lenga as men do here, and be fayre and goodly perso∣nages, reuerend and louers of vertue. There is more golde than in Persia, & therfore that whiche is lesse precious they do more esteme, decking them selfes with ornamentes of cop∣per and brasse, and makyng gyues of golde. They lyue commonly .Cxx. yeres, & do washe theym selues in a fountayne, whyche causeth theyr bodyes to smelle lyke vnto violettes. Macrobius, the name of a great lerned man. Macrochera, a garment with longe sleues. Macrochie, he that hath longe handes. Macteae, precyous meates. Macticus, he whiche hath great chekes, and a gapynge mouthe. Macto, are, to slea or kylle also to beate. some∣tyme to honour. also to increase. Ferunt lau∣dibus, mactant honoribus, They extol with praysyng, they increase in honour. Mactare deos, for Mactare dijs. Macte animi, be of good courage. Macte uirtutis & uirtute, procede in vertue, goo forthe and doo well. Macti ingenio, men of excellent wyttes. Mactra, an hutche wherin breade is put, some do call it a brake wherwith dow is wrought. Macula, a spotte, a blemysh, also infamy or re∣proche. Sometyme the masshe of a nette or hole betwene the thredes. also a net, ymages wrought in marble. Maculo, are, to spotte or make fowle. Maculosus, spotty, vncleane or foule. Madagastar, an yle beyonde the furthest parte of Ethiope southe, and was founden by the Portugalles in the tyme of Emanuel kynge of Portugall. This yle is in circuite foure thousande myles, and is very ryche. Therin be great olyfantes, lyons, panthers, and such other beastes, the inhabitantes be of Macho metes secte. Madaura, a citie set in the boundes of Getulia and Numidia. Madefacio, cere, to weate, to washe, to bayne. Madefio, fieri, to be washed. Madeo, dere, to be wette or washed. Madesco, scere, to sweat or be through wette. Madian, a citie beyonde Arabia on the southe part in the desert of the Sarasins, agaynste the easte part of the redde sea. Madido, dare, to make wette. Madidus, da, dum, wete or washed with licour Madifico, facere, to make wette. Mador, oris, moysture, somtyme sweatte. Mados, a certayne kynde of whyte vynes. Madulsa, drunken. Maeander, a ryuer of the countrey of Phrigia, whiche hath many tournynges and wyndin∣ges, and of that all croked and subtylle tour∣nyng wayes, meanes, and diuyses, be callyd Maeandri. There is also of that name a moū¦tayne in India. Maedia, a citie in the realme of Thracia. Maee, a kynde of great crabbes of the sea. Maemacreticon, the moneth of September. Maenala uel Maenalus, a hyghe mountayne in Archadia. Maenalius, for Archadicus, therfore Maenaliū carmen is taken for an inchauntment. Mae∣nalius aper, for a bore of Archadia. Maenapij, Gellars, or people of Gellarlande. Maenas, adis, a fyshe. Loke after in Mena. Maenades, women whiche dyd alwaye folowe Bacchus, runnyng aboute with theyr heare scattered lyke madde women. Maenoles, one of the names of Bacchus. Maeonia, is a countrey in Asia the lesse, callyd also Lidia. Maeonius, a, um, of Maeonia. Homere the ex∣cellent poete was named Maeonius, eyther bycause that he was borne in that countrey, or els that his fathers name was Maeon. Maeotis, a greate mere in the countrey of Sci∣thia, whiche is alway frosen. Maeotidis paludes, fennes whervnto the sayd ryuer runneth. Maereo, es, loke after in Mereo & Mereor. Maero, are, to make heuy. Maeror, heuynes with wepynge. Maestitia, & Maestitudo, heuynesse. Maesto, & Maestifico, care, to make heuy. Maestus, ta, tum, sorowfull. Magalia, vyllages. Magi, among the Caldeys and Persians were men of excellent knowlege in philosophy na∣turall and Mathematicall, and knewe the hyd vertues and operations of thynges, and the sonnes of the kynges of Persia, were taught by them to gouern and minyster their publike weale, accordynge to the fourme of the vnyuersall order and gouernaunce of the celestiall worlde. Suche were Magi, or the thre kynges, which came and sought Christ,
and offred to hym golde, myrre, and frankin∣cense, adaptyng their present vnto the double nature of him, vnto whom they gaue it, who was bothe god and man, kynge, and prieste. Nowe is that name improperlye vsed for a wytche, an inchaunter, a worker with yl spi∣rites, whiche may be better callyd Venefica, Necromanticus, Incantatores, or other na∣mes, as before and after be rehersed. Magia, magike, whiche is in two sortes: one is the secrete knowledge of the naturall qua∣lities and hyd operations and causes of thin¦ges, and that is callyd Magia naturalis, na∣turall magike. An other is superstitious and dyuellishe, callyd wytchcraft, sorcery, or other lyke detestable names, whiche is vnlefull by the lawes of god and man. Magicus, ca, cum, pertaynyng to magike. Magida, a kynde of breade. Magidae, kytchen bourdes, or instrumentes per¦taynyng to the kytchen. Maginor, aris, ari, to tryfle. Magis, more. Magister, stri, a mayster or teacher of sciences. Magister populi, the chiefe ruler of the people, by the whyche name the Dictatour amonge the Romanes was callyd. Magister scriniorum, an officer lyke to the ma∣ster of the rolles. Magister scripturae, semeth to be a general sur∣ueyour. Magisterium, the dignitie or office of a maister Magistratus, tus, a great officer, a man hauing auctoritie in gouernaunce of people. all be it that some haue more authoritie by the lawes and some haue lesse. Magistro, are, to rule. Magmata, confections made of dyuers swete spices in paste onely for the sauour, as poman¦ders and washyng balles. sometyme it is ta∣ken for the dregges of swete oyles. Magna Graecia, that part of Italy from Lau∣rentum to Cumas. Magnalia, great thynges to be wondered at. Magnanimitas, tatis, valiantnes of courage or harte, magnanimitie. Magnarius, a great marchant. Magnas, atis, & Magnatus, a noble man, a mā of great estimation. Magnes, etis, the lode stone that hath the ver∣tue to drawe to hym yron, whiche vnproprely we vse to call Adamant, where Adamas is the dyamonde, as before is declared. Magnesia, a part of Macedonia. Magna, at a great price. Magnificentia, a dysposition and administra∣tion in doinge or makyng of greate thynges and sumptuous. Magnifico, are, to extolle. Magnificus, he that dothe great thynges. Magnus, a, um, great. Magog, the sonne of Iapheth. Maguderis, a kynde of colewortes. Mahumethes, or Mahumetha, was borne in A∣rabia (as the more part do write) of a poore house or family, and fyrst was a byer and sel∣lar of camelles, afterwarde felle in acquayn∣tance with a munke named Sergius, which was an heretike, by whose meanes he decla∣red him self to be a prophete, and toke on him to refourme as well the old lawe as the new lawe, and makynge other lawes, whyche for the pleasantnes of them allured to them mo∣che people, so that gatherynge to hym a great hoste, fyrste wasted Syria, and wan Dama∣scum the chief citie therof. And hauing in his ayde the Arabians callyd Scenitae, a valiant people (who had displeasure agaynste them∣perour Heraclius, bycause he payde not to them theyr wages) he wan other great roy∣almes. And at the age of .xl. yeres dyed, as some do suppose in the falling syckenes, whi∣che he longe tyme dydde dyssemble, faynynge that the angell Gabriell was than sent vnto hym in message, whose bryghtnes he mought not sustayne. He was buried at Medina, thre dayes iourneye from the redde sea, an .C. mi∣les from Mecha, wher as is the chief temple of his lawe. He was after the incarnation of Christ. Dv. yeres. Maia, the mother of Mercurius. Maialis, a barowe hogge. Maiestas, tatis, maiestie, the greatnes, dignitie, or excellent estimation or honour of a kynge. Amonge the olde Romans it was the power and authoritie of the people of Rome, vnto whom Appellation (callyd Prouocatio) was from all other dignities. The dignitie of the Senate was callyd the authoritie of the Se∣nate. Tantus autem consensus municipio∣rum, coloniarum{que} prouinciae Galliae, ut o∣mnes ad authoritatem huius ordinis maie∣statem{que} Pop. Ro. defendendā conspirasse uideantur. There is nowe such agrement of wylles of the townes confederat and subiect vnto vs in the partes of Fraunce gouerned by vs, that all menne there seme to conspyre, howe they may defend the authoritie of this Senate, and also the maiestie of the people of Rome. Maiestas imminuta, where any man goth a∣bout to derogate any thing of the kinges au∣thoritie royal, as also of the empire and high power of the people of Rome. It may be ta∣ken for treason. Si maiestas est amplitudo ac dignitas ciuitatis, is eam minuit, qui exerci∣tum hostibus Pop. Ro. tradidit, If maiesty be the honour and authoritie of this citie, he
goeth about to appayre it, whiche hath deli∣uered the hoste to the ennemies of the people of Rome. Also de partitione oratoria. Maie∣stas est in imperij at{que} Pop. Ro. dignitate, quam minuit is qui per uim multitudinē ad seditionem uocauit, Maiestye is in the au∣thoritie of the empyre and people of Rome, a∣gaynst whom he plainly committeth treason, who so euer he be that violentely prouoketh people to a sedition. For the worde Minuere maiestatem, the later writers vsyd Laedere maiestatem. Maiestatis crimen, is treason against a king, it was amonge the Romaynes conspiracy a∣gaynst the senate and people, whiche was al∣so callyd Perduellio, and of hystorians is na∣med Coniuratio, and it is more than Maie∣stas imminuta, for therin onely they do dero∣gate or take away some part of the royal au∣thoritie or honour due to the persone or citie, in the other they endeuour theym to distroye them vtterly, or to brynge them in subiection. Maiestatem conseruare, to haue or retein styl the dignite of an emperour or kyng, or people in one lyke honour and reuerence. Maiestatem constituere, to preserue authori∣tie that it decay not, but to retayne stylle the estimation therof. Maiestatem soluere, idem quod imminuere. Maior, oris, greatter. Maiorana, an herbe callyd Maioram. Maiores, auncetours, progenitours. Maiorina, a kynd of olyues whiche be not ripe before the syxt Idus of February. Maius, the moneth of May. Mala aurea, orenges. Malaca, a citie in Spayne an other in Inde. Malache, malaches, a kynde of malowes, the stalke wherof doth growe into the greatnes of a tree. Malachites, a stone of a darke grene colour. Malacisso, are, to knede or make softe. Malacia, caulme of the sea. alsoo the griefe of the stomacke, not sustaynynge meate, abhor∣rynge all thynges, as a woman with chylde. Somme doo call it the abhomination of the stomacke. Malacostracha, softe as fysshe without shelles. Malacus, ca, cum, softe. Malagma, tis, a mollifienge playster, wherby harde impostumes be made soft or rype. Malasso, are, to make softe or rype. alsoo to exercyse. Male, yll, vnhappyly, vncommodiousely, mis∣cheuousely. Male acceptus, ylle intreated, yll handeled, shrewdely welcome. Male accipere, to intreate one yll. Male accipere uerbis, to gyue ylle language to one. Male audire, to be yll reported of, to haue an yll name. Male cadere, to chaunce yll. Male cogitare de aliquo, to haue yll opiny∣on of one. Male conciliatus, he on whome a man hathe loste all that he hath bestowed. Fugitiue pro di, male conciliate, Come forthe my ther, on whom I haue loste all that thou costest me. Male formido, I am yll or sore aferde. Male maceror, I am yl vexid, I am yl at ese. Male me habeo, I am sycke. Male me haber haec res, I am sory or ylle a∣payde for that matter, or that matter greueth me soore. Male mereri, to dodispleasure to one, to de∣serue displeasure. Male meritus est de me, he hath yll intrea∣ted me, or hath done me displeasure. Male metuo, I am yll aferde. Male moratus, yll manerde. Male morigerus, disobedient, or frowarde Male odi, I hate deadly. Male optare, to curse. Male precare, to aske a vengeance. Male uada, she that gyueth shrewd counsell. Male uertar illi, god sende hym yuell lucke therof, yll may he broke it. Malea, a promontorye or hylle lyenge into the sea by Laconia, whyche is daungerouse for shyppes to passe by. Maledicentia, detraction, yll reporte. Maledico, xi, cere, to curse. Maledicus, yll tunged, or he that speaketh ylle of euery man. Malefica, a wytche, whiche with sorcery dothe hurte to men or beastes. Maleficus, a harme doer. Malefice, myscheuously, harmefully. Maleficium, & Maleficentia, damage, wrong, displeasure, hurt, a myscheuous dede. Maleloqui, & maledicere, to curse. Maleuolentia, walyce, yll wylle. Maleuolus, malycious. Maliacum mare, the sea about Thessalia. Malicorium, the rynde of a pomegranade. Malignè, enuiously, disdaynfully, maliciousely. Malignitas, tatis, wyckednes, malignitie, en∣uy, malyce, vnprofitablenes, the vice contra∣ry to liberalitie. Malignor, & maligno, to beare malyce, to be hatefull. Malignus, a, um, wycked, cruell, enuyous, and couetouse. Maligna uia, an yll way. Maligna lux, a dymme lyght. Malignus ager, grounde that is ylle to be brought to tylthe.
Malitia, contrary to vertue and goodnes. some tyme it signifyeth subtiltie with deceyte. Malitiosè, malitiousely. Malitious, malitiouse. Malleatus, a, um, hammered. Malleo, are, to warke with an hammer. Malleolus, a lyttell hammer. it is also a smalle bough or twygge of a vyne. Also Malleoli, be somtyme takē generally for smal styckes, they be somtime taken for the bones of the ancle. Malleus, an hammer. Malluuium, & Malluuiae, arū, a basyn, wherin men do washe theyr handes. Malo, I had leauer, or rather, mauis, mauult. Malobathron, whiche in latyn is callyd Foliū, is a swete herbe growing in India, vpon wa¦ters without any roote. Malobathrum, a swete oyntment, wherewith men were wonte to washe theyr heare. Malta, a clay, whiche touching any other mat∣ter or substance, setteth it on fyre. reade in As∣phaltum, & Bitumen. Malna, an herbe callyd malowes. Maluauiscus, reade in Althea. Malum, being an aduerb, signifieth with a mis¦chiefe or lyke thynge. Quid uos malum ergo me sic ludificamini? Than wherfore with a mischief do you thus mock me? Quid tua (ma¦lum) id refert? What with a mischief reckest thou therfore, or hast thou therwith to do? Malus, a, um, yll, contrary to good. somtyme la∣bour, vexation, sycknes, griefe, malyce. Malae fidei possessor, he that wetīgly possedeth an other mans landes or goodes wrongfully. Malus, in the masculine gēder, a mast of a ship. Malus, an appull tree, the feminyne gender. Malus Assyria uel Medica, an orenge tree. Malum punicum, a pomegranate. Malum terrae, reade Aristolochia. Mamertini, people in Campania. Mamilla, a lyttell dugge or . Mamma, a dugge or pappe. Mammare, to gyue the dug or brest to a chylde. Māmeata, a womā with gret duggis or brestis. Mammillare, a kerchiefe, wherwith women do couer theyr pappes. Mammona, in the language of Syria, worldly substance, rychesse. Mammosus, sa, & mammeatus, ta, tū, hauyng great dugges. Mammothreptus, the chyld that souketh long, so is it interpreted by saynt Augustine in his exposition of the psalmes. Not withstandyng Erasmus in ratione concionādi interpreteth it a chylde wantonly brought vp. Mamphula, a certain bread vsed in Syria, whi¦che ere it be through baken, fallith into coles. Mana, in the old time was takē for Bona, good Manapia, a towne in Irelād callyd waterford. Manceps, cipis, he that byeth or hyreth any thing of the people. Mancinati, persones condemned. Manciolae, lyttell handes. Mancipi, the interest or ryght of a thyng. Mancipatio, the assurāce by lyuery & possessiō. Mancipium, that which is solemnly bought be∣fore witnesses. also a mans proper goodes or cattall. somtyme a bondman. Mancipij sui esse, to be his own man, & none other mans subiect or seruant. Mancipio accipere, to take possession or lyue∣ry and saison. Mancipio dare, to deliuer possessiō, reseruing a rent. Mancipo, are, to delyuer in bondage, to deliuer possession, to make lyuery and season. Mancupi, the solemne forme or maner of bieng any thyng before wytnes, by liuery & season, or possession takyng, with other thynges exe∣cuted, requisite for the assurance of any bar∣gayne and sale. Mancupio accipere, to take a thynge with warāty of him, the which giueth or selleth it. Mancupio dare, to gyue or sell a thinge with warranty. Mancupes, the principall takers of lande, or o∣ther thyng, wherof groweth yerely reuenues. Also they, whiche do take on them to perform any worke in great. Mancus, lackyng one hand. also generally that whiche lacketh any thyng necessary. Mandatarius, he to whome commaundemente is gyuen. Mandatum, a commissyon. also a commande∣ment, a charge. Mandatus, ta, tum, gyuen in charge. Mandibula, a iawbone, wherin the teeth be set. Mando, onis, a great eater, or he that is alway eatynge. Mando, di, dere, to chewe meate, or grynde it with the teethe. Mando, are, to cōmyt. Memoriae mandare, to remember, to put in remembrance, to leaue in memory, or for a memoriall. Mandare aeternitari, to write a thing, to thin tent to be in perpetuall remembrance. Mandare curam, to leue the charge vnto one Mandare fidei alicuius, to put a man in trust with a thynge. Mandare literis, to put in writīg or memory. Mandare memoriae, to kunne by harte. Mandare monumentis, to put in perpetuall remembrance the act of any man. Mandare se fugae, to runne away. Mandare terrae semina, to put sede into the grounde, to sowe grayne. Mandra, an houell or other lyke place, wherin cattell doo saue theym selues from the heate
of the sonne or tempest. Mandragora, an herb whih Dioscoride saith was of somme callyd Circea, bycause that it was fayned, that Circe the greate sorceresse vsed the rote therof in her amorous drynkes. The iuyce of the roote, or wyne, wherein the roote is boyled, wyll cause one to slepe a dead slepe, wherfore surgions do gyue it to theym whom they wyll cut. It is also vsed for other purposes in phisyke. Manduces, images caried about in pageantes with great chekes and wyde monthes. Manduco, are, to chewe meate. Manduco, onis, a great eater. Manducus, idem. Manè, carely, also the mornynge. Maneo, mansi, manere, to abyde, to tarye, to persyst, to happen hereafter. Manere promissis, to kepe promys. Mane dum, tarye a whyle. Manes, the good and bad angel. somtyme they be taken for deuylles, somtyme for spirites or soules not purged of synne. sometyme for the peynes whiche soules do suffer. Mango, onis, was taken for a seller of chyldren to abhomynable vses. It is also taken for su∣che one as polisheth or paynteth a thing with a fals colour, to sell it the derer. it is somtime taken for sellers of horses. Mangonicus, ca, cū, pertayning to that crafte. Mangoniū, the craft to make thynges salable. Mangonizo, zare, to polyshe, paynt, or teymme a thynge, to make it more vendible, or to be better solde. Mania, madnesse. reade in Phrenitis. Mania, was also amonge Gentiles a goddesse, callyd the mother of theym, whiche were na∣med Lares or Larui, vnto the which goddesse they vsed a whyle to offer mens heades in sa∣crifyce. But afterwarde, by the meanes of Iunius Brutus whyche was consulle, they dyd chaunge that sacryfyce into garlike hea∣des and the knoppes of poppy. It was also that wherwith nouryces dyd put chyldren in feare whan they cried, whiche women vse to call the bugge, or the goblyn. Maniacus, a madde man. Maniae, arum, defourmed personages. Manicae, sleues of a garment. also manakles to tye the handes togyther. also gauntlettes and splyntes, and mittaynes or longe gloues. Manicata uestis, a garment with sleues. Manichaei, a sette of heretykes, soo callyd of an archcheretyke callyd Maniches. Manicula, a lyttell hande. Manifestarius, a, um, clere, euydent, openly kno¦wen, notorious. Manifestè, clerely, manyfestly. Manifestò, an aduerb, signifieth clerely, plainly Manifesto, tare, to manifest or make apparant. Manifestum, manyfest or clere. Manifestum habere, to knowe surely. Manifestus mendatii, proued a lyer. Manimoria, thynges whiche doo abyde in re∣membraunce. Maniolae, yles agaynst India, beyond the ryuer of Ganges, where as be rockes of Adamant stones, which do drawe to them shyppes that haue yron noyles. Maniolae, were also lyttell popettes made of dowe, gyuen to chyldren. Manipularis, & maniplaris, captayn of a bend of men. Manipulatim, by bendes. Manipulus, an handefull, a grype, a bende of men, proprely of .x. souldiours. Manliana imperia, cruell gouernaunce or rule, without any mercy. Manlius, a noble Romayne. Manna, in holy scripture was a certayne dely∣cate thyng, whych god rayned to the Iewes beynge in the wyldernes, whyche laye on the ground white, and lyke to the sede of colyan∣der, which was wonderful plesant in eatyng and by lykelyhode holsome as ingendryng no putrifaction. We nowe name it cōmonly an∣gelles foode. Manna, vsed in phisyke, is in two sortes, one is a dewe congeled on trees in certayne pla∣ces, and falleth as meldewe doth here in En∣gland, & is gathered and solde very dere for a medicyne to pourge choler easyly. Some sup∣posed it to be that whiche Dioscorides cal∣lyth Eleaeomeli, some that whiche he calleth Saccharum. But Manardus and Musa do affyrme the contrary. Not withstādyng that whyche Galene in his warke De alimento∣rum facultatibus calleth Mel roris, seemeth to be this Manna. But Auerroys putteth it amonge those thynges whyche were founde after Galenes tyme. An other Manna called Manna Turis, whyche is the crummes or fragmentes of frankincense, which with the rynde of the tree falleth in gatheryng of fran¦kincense. The fyrst is temperate betwene hot and colde without any degree: this other is of the temperature of incense, but that it is more byndyng. Mannor, aris, ari, to steale. Mannus, an amblyng hackeney. Mannulus, a nagge, a lyttell horse. Mano, are, to runne out as lycour doth also to drop out, to appere out, as sweate out of the pores. Alsoo to descende, to procede. Manat tota urbe rumor, the bruite thereof was sowen or sprad throughout the citie. Manantia ulcera, soores whych do wax more and more. Manobarbuli, were dartes wrought with lead.
also they whyche vsed to beare them. Mansio, sometyme sygnifieth a dayes iourney. but amonge ancient writers it sygnifyed the place where an host dyd rest in iourney. alsoo the places where currours or men rydynge in poste doth chaunge theyr horses or waggens were callyd Mansiones. The space of the first after the accompt of old capitayns was a hū¦dred and fyfty furlong, which is .xviii. myles a halfe myle and a quarter of a myle. Mansisterna, a pytcher potte. Mansito, tare, to abyde longe. Manstus, stollen. Mansuefacio, facere, to make gētyl or tractable Mansuefactus, made gentyll or tame. Mansues, for mansuetus. Mansuesco, scere, to waxe tame or gentyll. Mansuetarius, he that breaketh a horse, or ma∣keth any other beast tame. Mansuetudo, dinis, mekenes, gentylnes, a mo∣derate temperance betwixt pride & simplicite. Mansuetè, mekely, gentylly. Mansuetus, ta, tum, meke, gentyll, tame. Mansum, meate, whiche the nourices do chew, and after gyue it to the chylde, puttynge it into his mouthe. Manius, a, um, chewed. Mansutius, a gourmandour, or great eater. Mantaelum, & mantelium, & mantile, a towel wherwith men do wype theyr handes, whan they haue washed. also a cloke. Mantes, tis, a diuinour or coniecter of thinges to come. Manteum, a place where dyuelles in ydolles gaue answeres. Mantice, tices, the arte of diuination. Mantica, a bagge. sometyme a cloke, a wallet. Manticora, a beast whiche is in India, in body lyke to a lyon, but more rough, hauyng a face lyke to a man, and in his mouth .ii. rewes or sette of teethe, the tayle of a scorpion, & the voyce of a small trumpette, and is of colour redde, and wyll neuer be made tame. Manticula, a pourse. Manticularia, towelles or other lyke thynges, wherwith men do wype their handes. Manticularius, a stealer of napry. also a pycke∣pourse or cut purse. Manticulatio, slynesse, deceyte. Manticulor, aris ari, to do a thynge slyly, as to pycke a purse. Mantinea, a citie in Grece. Mantiscinor, aris, ari, to steale or pyke craftily. Mantissa, the addition in weyght. Manto, the sonne of Tiresias the Theban pro∣phet, who led his father, which was blynde. Manto, tare, the moste ancient writers vsyd for frequenter manere, to tary oftentymes. Mantua, a noble citie in Lumbardy, where Ver¦gyle the excellent poete was borne. Mantuanus, a, um, of Mantua. Mantuariae tunicae, sleued iackettes. Manuarius, a, um, manuall. Manubiae, the pray taken of ennemies. also mo∣ney for the whiche the pray was solde. Manubinarius, the partners of a pray. Manubrium, the hylte or handle of a weapon or instrument. Manui, among the olde Romayns in theyr son∣ges callid Saliares, signified good or honest mē. Manuleatus, ta, tum, hauyng longe sleues. Manumissio, an infrāchisement of a bondman. Manumissus, infraunchised, manumised. Manumitto, to manumise or infranchise a bond man. Manuor, idem quod furor. Manuria, acote with sleues. Manus, a hande, a grapul to fasten shippes to∣gither. somtyme it signifieth a multitude of men in the ayde of one. somtime power. some∣time writing. also the nose or snoute of an oly∣fant. Manus iniectio, attachment. also season or seisure of a thing, whervnto we make title Manum inicere, to sease or take possession. Manuconsertum ex iure uocare, to challenge right or property in a thing, and offer to trye it by the law. Rede Gell. li. ix. Cicero pro Mu¦rena, & De oratore lib. i. Manum conserere, to fyght hande to hande. Manum ferulae subducere, to suffer to be cor∣rected in lernyng, to be content to be taught. Manum non uerterim, I wil neuer go about it, I wyll not turne my hande for it. Manum habere sub pallio, to be ydell. Manibus pedibus{que}, with all might & mayne. Manibus pedibus{que} ire in sententiam, is in a parliament, great counsayle, or other greatte assembly, to haue the consent of many men, the greatter part consentynge to one mans o∣pinion or sentence, do go towarde hym, hol∣dyng vp theyr handes, in token that they be thervnto agreed. Manum de tabula, a prouerbe, signifyeng, Leaue whyles it is wel. Manum & mentum, was an old prouerbe, wherby men were warned of chances whiche hapned sodaynly, and in so short a tyme as a man mought bryng his hande to his chynne. Lyke to the same is an other prouerbe of the grekes. Multa quidem cadunt inter calicem suprema{que} labra. Rede that in M ante V. Mapalia, cotages buylded rounde lyke ouens. Mappa, a table clothe. Marasmus, is a kynd of the feuer callyd Hecti∣ca, in the which the moysture of the substanci¦al partes of the body is exhauste or dryed vp, and the flesshe resolued. wherefore Galenus exhorteth the physition not to go aboute to cure hym, whome this syckenesse hath atta∣ched.
For although hew extingushe the heat, yet wyl the drynesse that is left, like vnto age consume the pacient. The causes thereof be the same whiche are of Hectica, the one and the other is callyd in englyshe a consumption feuer. but this maye be callyd a mortall con∣sumption, bycause it is incurable. Marathon, a towne in the countrey of Athenes distant from thens .x. myles, where Theseus slewe a terrible bull, and Milciades vanqui∣shed the Persians. Marathusa, an yle wherin is abundance of fe∣nell, and it is also callyd Clazomenia. Maratrum, idem quod feniculus, fenell, which is hotte and dry in the seconde degree. Marceo, cui, cere, to be corrupte. Marcere uino, to be consumed with drunken¦nes. Marcet animus, his courage faileth him Marcesco, idem quod Marceo. Marcescere otio uel desidia, to be loste with ydelnesse and slouthe. Marcescente adhuc stomacho pridiani cibi onere, The stomak being yet oppressed with the meate of yesterday. Marcellus, a proper name. Marchia, a countrey in base Germany. Marcidus, da, dum, rotten. Marcidae aures, hangynge cares. Marcidus somno, vnlusty with to moche slepe Marcipor, oris, the seruant of Marcus. Marconiani, people in Germanye, whiche are nowe supposed to be either of Boheme, or of Morauia. Marcor, oris, corruption or putrifaction, slug∣gardy. Mardi, people adioynyng to Persia. Mare, the sea. Mare coelo miscere, to trouble al the worlde. Mare mediterraneum, is the sea which com∣meth from the west occean and entreth by the strates of Marrocke, and passeth betweene Spayn and Barbary, diuidyng Europā frō Affrica, & entreth into Asia, takyng not with∣standynge diuers particular names: as Ba∣learicum, Llgusticum, Tyrrhenum, Carpa∣thium, Aegêum▪ &c. Mareotis, otidis, a ryuer in Egypt. also a parte of Libia, a parte of Epius. Mariotides, grapes of that countrey. Marga, a kynde of erth callyd marle, which is a fat clay and chalke myngled. Margaridae, small dates rounde and white. Margarita, margaritum, margarites, Marga∣ris, ridis, a perle, a margarite. somtyme gene∣rally all precious stones ar callyd Margaritae. Margaritarius, a seller of perles. Margariteferus, ra, rum, that whiche bringeth forth or hath plenty of perles. Margina, a region in Asia. Margo, ginis, the brym or edge of euery thing, the margent. Margus, a ryuer in Asia. Maria, a proper name. Mariaba, the chiefe citie in Saba. Marituis, Luneburgh in Almayne. Marinus, na, num, of the sea. Mariscae, vnsauery fygges, wild figges, fygges whiche do open that the sedes do appere. also great piles or hemorroides in the fundement. Mariscus, a bull rushe. Marita, a wedded woman, a wyfe. Maritigenus, a, um, come of the kind of Mars. Maritimus, of the sea syde, or of the sea. Marito, are, to wedde. Maritus, a wedded man, husbande. Marius, a proper name of a man. Marmarica, a countrey in Affrike. Marmaritis, an herbe supposed of Dioscorides to be fumitory, of Pliny bearefoote. Marmor, oris, marble stone. Marmoratio, buyldynge with marble. Marmoratus, ta, tum, wrought with marble. Marmoreus, a, um, of marble. Marodunum, Caermerden in wales. Marpesus, an hyll in the yle callid Parus. Marpesius, of the same hylle. Marplacidae, shippes orb arges vsed in Media. Marra, a mattocke to pare away weedes. Marrubium, an herbe callyd horehounde, it is hotte and dry in the seconde degree. Marrucini, people in Italy. Mars, martis, callyd god of battayle. somtyme it is taken for battayle. Marte suo, of his owne proper wyt, without any counsayle. Marsi, a countrey in Italy callyd Aprutium. Marspiter, the father of Mars. Martia, a countrey in Italy. Marsupium, a pouche or a pourse. Martiaca, wages gyuen to souldiours. Martiacus, ca, cum, belongyng to warres. Martialis, borne vnder the planet of Mars. Martius, a, um, pertaynyng to Mars. Martius campus, a fielde at Rome dedicate to Mars, where the yonge men of Rome dydde exercyse them selfe. also there were their as∣semblies for the electiō of their great officers Martius, mensis, the moneth callyd Marche. Martyr, in greke, a wytnesse. Martyrium, martyrdome. Mas, maris, a man, or mankynde. Masculesco, sci, scere, to be manly, greatte, or wyse, to be comen of the male kynde. Masculo, are, to make manly or stronge. Masculus, a, um, manly, great, wyse. Masdoranus, a mountayne, whyche diuydeth Parthia from Armenia. Maspetum, the leafe of an herbe, of the whyche
commeth Beniowyne. Massa, paaste a lumpe of any thynge. Massa auri, a wedge of goulde. Massagetae, a people in Asia, whiche runnyng on horsebacke through desertes, doo drynke their horses bloud myxt with mylke, they al∣so do eate theyr parentes, if they dye for age, but if they be sycke, they caste them to wylde beastes to be deuoured. Massica, a countrey in the south part of Spain Massicus, a mountayne in Campania. Massilia, a cite in high France, callid Marsiles Massiliensis, se, of Marsiles. Masimissa, kyng of Numidia, and great frende to the Romaynes. Massylia, cum y, a countrey in Affrike, among the westerne Moores. Masticeos, reuerende, honourable. Mastiche, a soote gumme, callyd Mastix. Mastigia, & Mastigeus, a knaue worthy to be beaten. Mastigophorus, a felowe worthy to be whyp∣ped also certain ministers, which with whip∣pes, remoued the people, where there was moche prease. Mastix, cis, a whyppe. Mastos, a treate of a cestern wherby water doth runne out by a cocke or spoute. Mastruca, a garment, whiche men of Sardina vsed to weare. Mastrupari, to touche dishonestely the priuye membres of a man. Masurius, the name of a famous lawyer, whi∣che wrate on the lawes ciuile Matella, an vrynall or other vessell, seruyng to that purpose. Matula, idem. Matellio, onis, idem. Mateaeotechina, the vanitie whiche is in a sci∣ence or crafte. Mater, matris, a mother. Materfamilias, ae, an housewyfe, goodwyfe of the house, she that hath gouernance of other women, be she maryed or vnmaryed. Mater matrima, she that is a mother, and hath mother lyuynge. Materia, & materies, matter wherof any thing is made, be it mettall, wood, stone, erthe, or any thyng els. Materialis, le, that whiche is of some matter. Materiarius, a carpentar. Materiatus, ta, tum, tymbred. Materior, arîs, ari, to warke in tymber. Materis, a frenche speare, or a iauelyn. Matertera, an aunte or mothers syster. Mathematicus, he that is kūnyng in aulgrym, musyke, geometry, and astronomy. Mathesis, & Mathema, lernynge by a demon∣stration. Matralia, the solemne feastes of Maruta, cal∣lyd the mother of goddis. Matresco, scere, to be lyke a mother. Matricida, he that kylleth his mother. Matrimonium, wedlocke, matrimony. Matrinuis, whose mother yet lyueth. Matrix, cis, the mother or mattice in a woman, in the whyche the chylde is conceyued. alsoo matrix is any female kynde that conceyueth and beareth. also the city in a cuntrey, where as is the archebysshops sea, is callyd Matrix uibs, whiche in greke is callyd Metropolis. It is also the pythe of a tree. Matrona, a wyfe, also the name of a ryuer in Burbon. Matronalis, pertaynynge to a wyfe. Matruells, the sonne or doughter of my mo∣thers syster. Matta, a matte. Mattiacae pilae, sope balles. Mattiacum, a towne in Germany. Maturate, hastily, quyckely, Iube maturate Illā exire huc, Byd her coine forth quyckly. Mature, tymely, nor to soone, nor to late. Maturesco, scere, to be rype. Maturitas, tatis, rypenes in all thyng, and as it were perfection. Maturo, are, to make rype or perfecte, to doo a thyng perfectly in due tyme and mesure. som tyme to do a thing spedily or quyckely. Maturus, a, um, rype, perfect. somtyme it syg∣nyfieth aged. Matura aetas, full or perfect age. Maturus, liomo, an aged man. Matuta, the mornyng, or morowe. Matutinus, a, um, of the morowe. Mauors, ortis, Mars. Mauortius, a, um, pertaynyng to Mars. Mauri, people callyd Moores. Mauritania, the cuntrey now callid Morisco, or of Mores, lyeng on the west part of Affrica, betwene the sea callyd Mare Mediterraneū on the northe, and Libya on the south. Mar∣tianus sayth, that in length it is tenne tymes xxxviii. myles, whyche is .CCClxxx. myles, and in breadth towarde the south .CCCC. lxvii. myles. Mausoleum, a sepulchre or tombe, whiche Ar∣themisia made for her husbande Mausolus, whiche for the excellent workemanshyp was accompted to be one of the meruayles of the worlde, and for the famousnes therof, euerye greate and notable sepulchre is callyd Mau∣soleum. Mausolus, the kynge of a realem callyd Caria. Maxilla, the cheke done. Maximates, the greattest men in authoritie. Maximitas, tatis, auncient wryters vsed for greatnesse.
Maximus, a, um, greatest or most in estimation. Maza, a take made of floure and mylke. Mazaca, a citie in Cappadocia vnder the hylle callyd Argeus, nowe callyd Cesarea. Mazeras, a ryuer in the mouthe of the sea, cal∣lid Mare Hircanum. Mazonomiū, a platter wherin meate is caried. ¶M ANTE E. MEANDER, a riuer in Phrigia, whi¦che by sundry wyndynges, at the laste falleth into a creeke, whiche diuideth Miletum and Priena in Grece. Meapte, myne owne. Meatus, tus, a passage or waye. also the pores of the body, out of the whiche do come sweat and vapours. Mecastor, a fourme of sweryng, as who saith, so Castor helpe me. Mechanicus, a craftes man. Mechanica ars, a handy crafte. Mecoenas, atis, mynyon to Augustus the empe∣roure, and bycause he was the supporter of great lerned men, all fauourers and succou∣rers of lernyd men be so callyd. Mecon, in greke is popy in englyshe. Meconium, is the iuyce of the leaues & heddes of popy pressed out, whiche somme do vse in the stede of Opium. Mecum, with me. Mecum facit, it maketh for my purpose. Mecum sentit, he is of myne opinyon. Medea, wyfe vnto Iason, a wytche and cruelle woman, she was doughter of Oētes kynge of Colchos and Hipsea his wyfe, whose hy∣story is sufficiently knowen in all tungues. Medela, remedy by medicine. Mederga, for erga, toward me. Medeor, eris, eri, to heale or cure. Media, a countrey in Asia, hauyng on the north the sea callyd Hyrcanum, on the west Arme∣ny the more and Assyria, on the south Persia on the east Hircania and Parthia. Media uocabula, wordes whiche may be taken in a good or yll parte. as Tempestas whiche sygnifyeth tempest & tyme. Facinus, a nota∣ble dede good or yll. Valitudo, helth or sycke∣nes, and other lyke. Medianus, na, um, that whiche is in the mydle. Mediastinus, a, um, the myddelmoste. Mediastimus, a drudge or lubber, which dothe in the house al maner of vile seruice, as swepe or clense the house, cary wood to the kytchen and other lyke drudgery. Mediastrinus, the seruant, whiche hath the rule of the house vnder his maister. Medica, an herbe, whiche I suppose to be clo∣uer grasse, with purple rounde floures. Medica mala, orenges. Medica malus, an orenge tree. Medibile, in state to be healyd, curable. Medicabilis, le, curable. Medicamentarius, a phisition. Medicamentarius, a, um, {per}taining to medicine Medicina, medicamen, medicamentum, a me∣dicine. sometyme it signifieth poyson. Medicinalis, le, medicynable. Medico, & Medicor, aris, ari, to heale or cure. Medicus a phisitian. Medicus, ca, cum, pertaynyng to phisyke. Medimnus, was a mesure of the grekes, wher¦of were two sortes, one was callyd Atticus, and contaynyd of oure measure .vi. gallons, one pottell, and one quart. An other was cal∣lyd Georgicus, whiche was of our measure one bushell, a pecke, and one pynte, it recey∣ueth .xlviii. Choenices. Mediocris, diocre, measurable, in a mean, mo∣derate. Mediocritas, tatis, a meane. Mediolanium, the citie of Orleance in France. it was also a citie in Westphalia in Almayn callid Munster, which forasmoch as the peo∣ple therof were infected with the heresye of Anabaptistes, and other detestable errours. It was destroyed by the princis of Almayn, about the yere of our lorde god a thousande fyue hundred thirty and nyne. Mediolanum, the chief citie of Lumbardy, cal∣lyd Myllane. also a town in Lankashyre, cal∣lyd Manchester. Mediouratrices, Mastright in Brabant. Medioximus, a, um, meane, or in the myddes. Medipontus, an instrumente wherwith ropes are made. Meditabundus, carefull, studiouse. Meditate, studyously, perfectly on the fyngers endes. Meditatio, a thynkyng or diuisyng in thought. alsoo an exercyse as welle of mynde as of bodye. Meditatorius, a, um, whyche belongeth to me∣dytation. Mediterraneus, in the myddle of the lande, and furthest from the sea. Meditor, aris, ari, to thynke depely, and in thin∣kynge to fynde out, to purpose, to lay snares, to synge or play swetely. Meditari se, to exercyse hym selfe. Meditrina, the goddesse of physike. Meditrinalia, ceremonies vsed by them, which dranke muste or newe wyne. Meditullium, the myddell. Medius, a, um, the middes equally distant from the extremities. sometyme meane. Medium commune, amonge all. Medio, uel de medio tollere, to kyll.
Medius, a meane or mediatour betwene .ii. mē. Mediusfidius, an othe, whyche although some tyme it had an other signifycation, yet maye it nowe in a commune fourme of speakynge be vsed in this wyse, by the faythe of my bo∣dye. Sens Dius for Iupiter, and Fidius for filius, be nowe out of vse. Meduacus, a ryuer about Venyce, callyd nowe Brente. Medulla, marrowe, whiche is in bones. Medullitus, innerly into the marrowe. Medullo, are, to take out marrowe sometyme to expresse vtterly. Narra iam rem nobis o∣mnem, at{que} emedulla, Telle and expresse vt∣terly to vs all the hole matter. Medusa, a lady, of whome fables do reporte, that her heares by Minerua were tournyd into adders, and they whyche behelde her were tourned into stoones, whome Perseus afterwarde slewe. She is somtyme taken for one of the furies of helle. Mefansilium, a certayne weapon to throwe. Megabizi, priestes of Diana, whiche alwaye were gelded. Megaera, a fury or turmentour of hell, whyche Paynyms supposed dydde prouoke and styre men to woodnesse. Megalenses, & megalesia, playes to the honor of Cybele. Megalesia, the festiuall day dedicate to Cybele, callid the mother of goddis amōg Pyanims. Megalium, a swete oyntment. Megaloprepeia, an honourable facion in gy∣uynge or imployenge of great thynges, why∣che besemeth a man of great courage. Megaloprepes, he that dothe greate thynges, accordyng to his dignitie. Megara, a cytie belongyng to Athenes. it was also the name of one of Hercules wyues. Megaris, idis, a countrey in Achaia. Megistanes, whom we do call nobles or pieres of the realme. Me herclè, an othe sworne by Hercules. Meio, iere, to pysse. Mel, mellis, hony. Melamphyllon, an herbe. Melampus, a mans name. Melamirus, a fyshe hauyng a blacke tayle. Melancholia, melancholy. sometyme madnes. Melancoryphus, a byrde callyd a fynche. Melandria, the leane partes of the fysshe cal∣lyd Tunny. Melanthia, an herbe callyd also Nigella. Melanurus, a kynde of perches callyd ruffes. Melculum, a wanton worde spoken by louers vnto theyr paramours, my lyttell hony. Meleagrides, byrdes, whyche we do call hen∣nes of Genny. Melegina, an yle in the Venecian sea. Melenetus, a kynde of fawkons very lyttell of body, blacke and puyssaunt, whyche haun∣teth mountaynes, and feedeth her byrdes a∣lone, a merlyon as I suppose. Melibeus, a shepardes name. Meliboea, a citie in Thessaly. Meliceris, ridis, a soore or skale in the head like a hony combe, out of the which commeth an humour lyke hony. Melicerta, whome the gentyles dydde honour for one of the goddis of the sea, callyd alsoo Palaemon. Melicraton, wyne and hony sodden togither. Melicus, a musytion. Melilotos, an herbe callyd Melylote. Melimela, sweete appuls. Melina, a swete shaulme. Melinus, na, num, whyte russette, or a gynger colour. Melioresco, scere, to be better. Melipecta, meates made with hony. Melis, seu melius, a beast callid a gray, abrock or a badger. Melisigenes, was the fyrst name of Homerus the poete. Melisphillon, smallache. Melissa, a woman, who with her syster Amal∣thea nouryshed Iupyter. it is alsoo an herbe commonly callyd baulme. Melissus, the name of hym, whyche dyd fyrste sacrifice vnto ydols. also the name of an an∣cient phylosopher. Melita, siue Melite, an yle lyenge betwene Sy∣cile and Affryke, wherin is plenty of hony, and is now callyd Malta, where at this time the company of the knyghtes hospytilers do inhabyte, as they dyd at the Rhodes. Melitaei canes, & melitenses, were praty lytell houndes, in the whyche ladyes toke pleasure and delyte, whyche were brought out of the sayde yle of Melite. Melites, a precyous stoone of the colour of an orenge. Melitites, a drynke made of hony and must, or newe wyne. Mellarius, a hony man, or sellar of hony. Mellarius, a, um, of honye. Mellatio, the tyme of dryuyng of hyues, whan hony is taken out. Mellatium, newe must, wherin hony is sodden Mellene, a citie in Arcadia. Melleus, a, um, of hony. also swete. Vox mellea, a swete voyce. Mellica, a kynd of pulse, of the colour of redde, of the fourme of Myll. Mellificatio, makynge of hony. Mellifico, care, to make hony. Mellificum, idem. Mellifluus, a, um, swete as hony.
Melligo, ginis, a meile dewe, whyche falleth on leaues of trees, and somtyme on corne. Melilla, my hony, my swetyng, a word of wan∣ton dalyers. Melliloquus, a swete speaker. Mellisones, they whiche do practyse dressynge of hony. Mellitones, places where bees be nourished. Melliturgus, a warker or maker of hony. Mellitus, a, um, myxt with hony. Mellium, a dogges colar. Melitus, the name of hym whyche accused So¦crates. Melizonum, a confection made with honye claryfyed. Melo, a ryuer callyd also Geon. Melodes, he that syngeth kūnyngly & swetely. Melodia, melody. Meloessa, an yle by Sicile, in the whiche was great plenty of shepe. Melomeli, whan appuls verye ripe and fayre be conserued in hony. Melonia, uel Melona, callyd the goddesse of honye. Melos, odis, melody, armony. Melota, uel melote, a shepes fell or skynne. Melpomene, one of the nyne Muses. Membrana, parchement, or velume, wherein men do write. also the ouermooste skynne of any thynge. Membraneus, a, um, of parchement or velume. Membranulum, a smalle member. Membrare, to fourme membres. Membratim, by euery member. Membratura, the setting or order of membres. Membrosus, a, um, hauing a great membre. Membrum, a membre. Memerylus, a lyttell tree lyke a citron tree. Memet, my selfe. Memini, I remember. Memnon, the sonne of Thiton, whyche came to the ayde of the Troyans. Memnoniae aues, byrdes whiche were suppo∣sed to growe of the ashes of Memnon. Memor, oris, he that remembreth. Memorabilis, le, worthy remembraunce. Memoratus, tus, & Memoratio, a remēbryng. Memoria, memory, remembraunce. Memoriale, a thyng which shuld be remēbred. Memoriosus, he that hath a good memory. Memoriter, perfectly by hart, or with good re∣membraunce. Memoro, are, to remembre, somtyme to tell, or expounde, to recyte, or reherse. Memphis, a great and famous citie in Egypt. Memphiticus, of that citie. Memphe, idem. Mena, a lyttell fyshe blacke or blue in sommer, and whyte in wynter, whiche I suppose may be well callyd a menowe. all be it Theodo∣rus Gaza, dothe translate Maenides, callynge theym sometyme Aleces, whych we call her∣rynges, and Maenidia, he translateth paruas Aleculas, lytel hearynges, callyd pylchardes. Menaechmi, the name of a comedy of Plautus. Menalippa, quene of Amazon, whome Hercu∣les vanquyshed. Menapij, people of the countrey callyd Gellar∣lande, or Gylderlande and Cleue. Menander, a famous poete, a wryter of com∣medyes. Menaria, an yle in the sea betwene Carthage and Sicile. Menceps, he or she that is out of theyr wytte. Menda, & mendum, a faut or vice in writyng. Mendaculum, a lyttell faute or lye. Mendatium, a lye. Mendax, acis, a lyar. Mendaciloquus, a tellar of lyes. Mendicabulum, beggynge. Mendicitas, tatis, & Mendicimoniū, beggery. Mendico, care, to begge. Mendicula, a certayne vesture. Mendicus, a beggar. Mendix, an offyce amonge the olde Italyans callyd Osci. Mendosus, a, um, faulty. Menecrates, was an arrogant and proude phi¦sition, who bycause he chanced to heale sun∣dry persons, of whose helth mē dyd dispaire, and therfore in commendyng hym callyd him Iupyter. He afterwarde named hym self Me¦necrates Iupiter. Menelaus, was kyng of Lacedemonia brother to Agamemnon, & husbande to the fayre He∣lene, for whom Troy was destroyed. Meneletus, a byrde lyke to a smalle egle. Menestheus, was duke of Athenes, sonne of Thescus and Phedra. Meniana aedificia, buyldyng outwarde in pro∣spectes or galleryes. Meninges, the rysine wherin the brayne is in∣closyd. Menix, an yle agaynst the lesse Affrica. Mens, tis, the highest & chiefe part of the soule. somtyme it signifieth the mynde, wyl, intent, or memory. somtyme aduyse or counsayle. Mente captus, a madde man. Mentis compos, of hole mynde or perfecte re∣membraunce. Mensa, a table or bourde to eate on. sometyme dyner or supper. Mensarius, the banker or exchanger, of whom men do borowe money vpon gayne, callyd ex∣chaunge. Mensio, a measure. Mensis, a moneth. Mensôres, they whiche do lay out the boundes
of lande betweene man and man, or towne and towne. Menstrualis, pertaynyng to a moneth, or of the space of a monethe, or durynge the tyme of a moneth. Menstruatus, ta, tum, that which hath flowres lyke to women. Menstruum, a womans naturall pourgation, callyd floures. Menstruus, a, um, that whiche hapneth euerye moneth, or is done monethly. Mensura, a measure. Mensurnus, a, um, monethly. Menta, & Mentula, the priuy membres of a mā Mentagra, a disease, whiche couereth the face with a fowle scabbe, and it was callid of the grekes Lichen. Some do suppose, that it is the same disease, whyche is nowe callyd the frenche pockes. Mentastrum, wylde mynte. Mentha, an herbe callyd mynte. Mentibor, for mentiar, I shall make a lye. Mentigo, ginis, the scabbe whiche is amonge shepe callid the poxe. Mentior, iris, iri, to lye. Mentiri se esse aliquem, to fayne to be an o∣ther persone. Mentiri sexum muliebri motu, to fayne hym selfe to be a woman. Mentoas, the famous ryuer, whiche is nowe callyd Danubius. Mentor, an excellent grauer of vessell. Mentum, a chynne. Menus, a ryuer in Germany. Meo, are, to goo, to flowe. Meopte ingenio, by myne owne witte, of myn owne nature. Mephiticus, ca, cum, stynkynge. Mephitis, a stenche or yll sauour, which proce∣deth of corupt water or likor, mixt with erth. Meracus, ca, cum, & Merax, racis, pure with out any myxture. Vinum meracum, wyne without any water. Meraculum uinū, wyne but a lyttel alayde. Mercalis, le, vendyble, or that whiche may be bought. Mercator, oris, euery byer, a marchaunt. Mercatura, the feate of marchandyse. Mercatus tus, the acte of byenge. Mercatus, ti, a market or fayre. Mercatus, ta, tum, bought. Merceditius, an hyred seruant. Mercenarius, idem. Mercenarius, a, um, that whiche may be hired. Merces, cis, marchandise, ware, chaffare. Merces, cedis, wages, the rewarde of laboure or seruyce. Praediorum merces, reuenues of lande. Mercimonium, that whiche is tournyd in by∣enge and sellynge. Mercor, aris, ari, to bye for to selle for gaynes▪ sometyme to bye generally. Mercurialis, an herbe callyd Mercury. Mercurius, was of the paynyms callyd god of eloquēce, and messanger of Iupiter, it is the name of one of the .vii. planettes. Mercurij dies, wenysday. Merda, the excrement or ordure of a mā or beast Merdo, are, to expell ordure, to shite. Merenda, meate eaten at after noone, a colla∣tion, a noone meale. Mereo, ere, & Mereor, eri, to take wages, to deserue, to exercise a vile occupation also Me¦rere, to serue in warres. Merere stipendia, to take wages as a sowl∣dyour, or to be a sowldyour. Merêre alicui, to do seruyce to one. Merêre equo, to be a manne of armes, or to serue on horsebacke in warres. Merêre pedibus, to be a fote man in warres Mereor bene de te, I do somewhat for the, I deserue to haue the my frende, or to haue thy fauour. Male mereor de te, I do the displeasure, I do yll deserue thy fauour. Merè, purely. Meretriciè, hooryshely. Meretricium, hooredome, or brothelry. Meretricius, a, um, pertayngng to brothelry. Meretricor, aris, ari, to lyue in brothelrye, to playe the harlotte. Meretrix, icis, an harlot, or brothell. Mergae, pytcheforkes for to take vp sheues. Mergites, gripes of corne. Mergi, vynes or other smalle trees, whiche are bowed, and haue the toppes bowe wyse, tur∣ned and set in the erthe. Mergo, si, gere, to drowne in the water. Mergulus, an instrument where the matche of a lampe is conteyned. Mergus, goris, a bucket to drawe vp water. Mergus, gi, a foule of the sea lyke to a gul, whi¦che diueth vnder the water to take fyshe, and by often dyuynge perceyueth sygnes of tem∣pest comyng, and than sodainly with a great crye he fleeth out of the myddle of the water vnto the lande. Meribibulus, he that drinketh moch wyne with out water. Meridianus, a, um, pertayning to none. Meridiatio, noone reste. Meridies, noone tyde. Meridio, are, & meridior, ari, to dyne, to eate meate at noone, to slepe at noone. Meridionalis, le, of the southe. Merismos a fygure callyd alsoo Distributio, whereby the oration is distributed into sun∣dry sentences.
Meritò, worthily, with good cause. Merito, are, to be worthy. also to serue in war∣tes, sometyme to gayne. Meritoria, houses or shoppes let to hyre. Meritorius, a, um, that whiche is let or set for aduauntage. Meritoria taberna, a house wherinto a man is receyued for his money. Meritum, a benefytte or pleasure, a deserte good or ylle. Meritum est meum, it is in my defaute. Meritus, ta, tum, deserued, conuenient. Meritus, a mountayne in the thyrd part of Eu∣ropa, beyonde Grece. Mero, was in skorne the name of Nero, by∣cause he was so great a drynker of wyne. Meroe, an yle on the greate ryuer of Nilus in Egypte. Merobiba, she that drynketh wyne withoute water. Meroctes, a lyttell stone of the colour of lekes, whiche sweateth a lykour lyke to mylke. Meropes, men of dyuers languages. Merops, a byrde whiche dothe eate bees. Meropus, a mountayne in Grece by Thessaly. Meros, a hyll of Inde, at the foote whereof is the citie callyd Nisa. Merso, are, to drowne often. Merto, idem. Merula, a byrde callyd a blacke macke or ow∣syli, with a yelowe beke. also a fysshe callyd merlynge or whitynge. Merum, wyne vnlayde, without water. Merus, a, um, soole, mere, pure. Merx, cis, one kynde of marchandyse. Mes, in the Arabian tungue is a pease of the Grekes, as Manardus writeth li. 1. epist. 3. Serapio sayth, that it is a grayne hauyng in it a fygure of an eye with the appull thereof very blacke. Mesa, a ryuer whiche runneth by Brabande, and the lande of Luke and Gellar, callyd the Mase. Mesapia, a countrey callyd also Apulia. Mesauli, entrees betwene the halle & the pariar. Mesentericae uenae, are vaynes whiche lyke to rootes of trees, doo receyue nourysshement, from the stomake and bowelles, dysposyng it into all the body. Mesenterion, is a bowel ioyned with the mid∣resse, and vnto the backe, whyche letteth that the iuyce of meates be not sucked to hastylye or vnprofytablye by the other bowels. Alex. Benedictus. Iulius Pollux writith, that Me¦senterion is a skynne compact of vaines and synewes, ioynyng to the raynes and stomak, sendyng nouryshement vnto the lyuer. Gale∣nus in Anato. sayth, that it is set in the myd∣dell of the bowelles, and is also callyd Me∣sarchon, bycause he wrappeth and incloseth all the veynes, whiche do come from the ly∣uer vnto hym, with also the arteries adioy∣nynge vnto hym. It is alsoo callyd in latyne Medianum. Mesia, a countrey ioynyng to Hungry, Myse. Mesochorus, he that plaieth on a flute or other pype in the myddes of the daunsers. Mesoleucos, a precyous stone, blacke, hauyng a white strake in the niddes. Mesomelas, a kynd of that precious stone, whi¦che is callid Achates, whiche being white is diuided with a blacke lyne. Meson, was one which fyrst inuented to bring into comedies seruantes and cookes. wherof it is supposed, that the cookes of cities and townes were of old tyme callyd Mesones, as straunge cookes were callyd Tettiges. Coe∣lius antiq. lec. li. 3. Mesonauta, a drudge in a shyppe, or a shyppe page, which doth all vyle seruyce in the shyp Mesonyxion, mydnyght. Mesopotamia, a countrey in the orient, lienge betweene the two noble ryuers Tigris, and Euphrates, and hath on the southe Babylo∣niam, and on the north the great mountayne callyd Caucasus. Mespilus, a medlar tree. Mespilum, a fruite callyd a medlar. Messâla Coruinus, a noble senatour of Rome, of whom Tully in his boke of oratours cal∣lyd Brutus, writeth in this wyse, I may not omytte to speke of the excellency of Messala. Beware do not thynke that any is lyke vnto hym in constance care and studye aboute the weale publyke, also in eloquence, wherein he wonderfully dothe excell. And not withstan∣dyng beinge suche a manne, two yeres before that he dyed, he so lost his remembrance, that he forgate his owne name. Which hath hap¦ned to dyuerse other men of great wysedome and lernyng. He lyued in the tyme of Iulius Cesar and Augustus emperours. Messalina, wyfe to the emperour Claudius, a woman of vnsaciable lechery. Messana, a citie in Sicile. Messapia, a part of the countrey of Apulia. Messene, a citie in Grece. Messenij, the people of that citie. Messenia, a region in Achaia, hauynge .xviii. mountaynes, in the whiche was a citie callid lyd Messenae. Messias, Christe. Messis, haruest, somtyme it signifieth the corns or the grapes newe mowen or gathered. Messio, onis, a reapynge. Messor, oris, a reaper. Messorius, ria, rium, pertaynyng to reapyng. Meta, a butte or prycke to shoote at, sometyme
a marke or gowle in the field, whervnto men or horses do runne. somtyme a bounde in lan∣des. also a reyke of corne or heye. also the lo∣wer stone of a mylle. Meta lactis, a cheese. Metabasis, a passage. Metabole, chaunge. Metagonium, a promontory or mountayne ly∣enge into the sea, whyche diuydeth Affrica from Numidia. Metalepsis, a fygure, whereby a worde is put from his commune signification. Mettalli, hyred sowldyours. Metallici, they whiche do dygge & warke met∣tal out of the mynes, wherin mettal is found. Metallum, mettall. Metamorphosis, eos, a trāsformation or chan∣gynge of fygure. Metaphora, a translation of wordes frō theyr proper signification. Metaphraenum, that part of the backe whiche is agaynst the hart, the splene, the lungues, and the lyuer. Metaplasmus, a fygure callyd transformation. it is a translatyng of wordes being in prose, into a fourme of meter, eyther for necessitie, or for to augment the elegancy. Metapontum, a citie in the realme of Naples. Metapontini, people of that citie. Metempsichosis, the transposyng of soules af∣ter the opinyon of the Pythagoriens, out of one body, into an other body. Metathesis, where one letter is transposed frō one place in a word into an nother, as Tym∣ber Tymbre. Metaurus, & metaurum, a ryuer of Vmbria, whiche runneth into Flaminia. Metellus, the proper name of diuers noble Ro∣maynes. Meteora, ar bokes of Aristotle, wherin he tre∣teth of sterres, & such other celestiall thinges. Meteoria, speculation in hygh thynges. Meteorologus, he that is studyous in suche speculation. Meteoroscopus, a beholder of high thynges. Methodus, a compendious or redy waye, or a rule certayne to lerne by any science. Methymna, a citie in the yle of Lesbos. Meticulosus, rymerouse or fearefull. Metior, tiris, tiri, to meete or measure, to gyue by measure, to passe ouer. Metius Sufferius, was capitayne of the people callyd Albani, in the tyme of Tullus Ho∣stilius kynge of Romaynes. Who callynge hym to battayle agaynst the people callid Fi∣denates. He came, but abydyng whiche host shuld haue the victory, he abstayned to fight. Wherfore Tullus after that he had vanqui∣shed his enemies, caused Metius to be ryed to sundry horses, & to be drawen in pieces. Meto, messui, metere, to reape. Metoecus, was he which came out of one coū∣trey or citie, and dwellyd in an nother. suche were wont to pay certayn head syluer, which was named Metoecium, and was the value of .xii. Dragmas. Metona, a towne in Grece callyd Modon. Metonymia, a fygure callyd denomination, as Bacchus for wyne, Venus for lecherye, Cu∣pido for loue. Metor, aris, ari, to set boundes, to mesure land, to dyspose. Metopion, oyle of almondes. also a tree in Af∣frica, whyche dystylleth downe gumme lyke to roseyn. Metoposcopus, he that consydereth a mannes face, and thereby iudgeth his conditions or affectes. Metrêta, or Metrêtes, is a certayne measure, wherof be two sortes: the one is callyd At∣tica, and contayneth of wyne a hundred poū∣des, of oyle .xc. pounde, of hony a hundred & fyfty poundes, and is of our measure .vi. ga∣lons, one pottell, and one quarte. And soo it receyueth .xii. Choas atticas. The other is callyd Georgica, but it is of equall measure with Attica. Metropolis, the chiefe citie. Metropolitanus, a man of that citie. Metropolites, the byshop of the chiefe citie. Metrum, a verse. Metuo, tui, tuere, to fear or dread with trēbling Metus, rus, feare, dreade. Metys, the refuse of waxe. Meu, an herbe. Meuania, a citie in the parte of Italye, callyd Vmbria, wherin Propertius the poete was borne. Meneusa, a citie in Wales callid saint Dauid. Meus, a, um, myne. Mea quidem sententia, in myne opinyon. Meo nomine, for my cause, on my behalfe. Meum est, it is my duetie or my part, or myn inuention. Meus sum, I am myne owne man, or subiect to no man, or in no mans daunger. ¶M ANTE I. MI, to me. sommetyme it is the vocatiue case of meus. Mica, a very small portion of any thing as a crumme of breade, or of glasse, sande, or mettall beynge fyled. Mico, care, to glysten or shyne. Micant gladij, the swordes do brandyshe. Micant uenae, the veynes do beate. Dignus qui cum in tenebris mices, is ap∣applyed
to one, which is reputed to be an ho¦nest man and a trusty, whych wyll kepe tou∣che and deceyue no manne. It may be in this wyse translated in a commune forme of spea∣kyng. He is one, with whome thou mayst as∣suredly bargayne. also to holde vp nowe one fynger, nowe two, as men do whā they treat or bargayn togither by signes. Miconium, an herbe callyd popy. Microcosmus, a lyttel world. Micrologia, curiositie aboute thynges of noo valour. Micrologus, a lyttell communication. Micropsichia, feble courage, faynt harted. Micropsichi, they whiche haue faynt hartis. Micturio, ire, to pysse, or to haue wyll to pysse. Mictyris, poore folkes potage. Mida, a worme bredyng in beanes. Midas, a kynge of Phrigie, who excellyd all o∣ther in rychesse. Miaesia, a towne in Macedonia. Migratio, a remouyng in iourney. Migro, are, to remoue from one place, to dwell in an nother. Migrare in mucronem, to be poynted. Migrassit for migrauerit. Mihi, sometyme it sygnifieth to me, sometyme against me. Si quid peccat Demea mihi pec∣cat, What so euer it is that Demea hath don¦amys, it is agaynst me, it is my harme, and none others. sometyme it signifieth of me, or by me. Syrus est praehendendus, at{que} adhor∣tandus mihi. Syrus must be gotten and coū¦sayled by me. Mihipte, Cato vsed for mihi ipsi. Milciades, a noble capitayn of the Athenienses, who with a xi. thousand Grekes vanquished vi. hundred thousand Persians in the fieldes of Marathon. Afterwarde by the people of Athenes he was cōdemned and cast into pri∣son where he died, and mought not be suffred to be buried vntyll his sonne hadde taken on hym the gyues whiche his father did weare. Miles, militis, a man of warre, a souldiour. Miletus, a citie in Ionia, an other in Creta, an other in the yle of Lesbus. Milesius, a, um, of that citie. Miletum, a citie in the countrey of Athenes. Militaris uia, the hygh way. Militariter, warrely. Militia, warre, sometyme the exercise of warre. Milito, are, to go on warfare, or to be in warres Milium, a small grayn callyd myll. Mille, & millia, a thousand. Millearium, a myle also a cawdron. also a pyl∣ler in Rome, wherin was grauen al the ways of Italye. Millefolium, or Millefolia, an herbe callyd mil∣foyle or yarowe, or noseblede. Millepeda, a worme hauynge a great numine of feete. Millesies, a thousande tymes. Millesima pars, the thousande part. Milliarius, a, um, of a thousande weight. Millies, a thousande tymes. Millus, a mastyues colar, made of lether with nyles. Milo, onis, the name of one which at the game of Olympus, with his bare hand slew a bul, and after caried hym a furlong, and the same day eate hym euery morsel. It was also a no∣ble Romayn, for whom Tully made an ora∣tion contaynynge incomparable eloquence. Meluina ibia, a corner or smalle shaulme. Miluus & miluius, a kyte. there is also a fyshe and a sterre of the same name. Miluinus, na, num, of a kyte, or lyke a kyte. Mimallones, women dedicate to the foolysshe ceremonies of Bacchus. Mimas, a mountayne of Thracia. Mimus, a bourder or a rayler, whiche in moc∣kynge other men in gesture and countenance, dothe folowe them, faynynge to be the same persons whom they do reproue. Mimi be ver∣ses counterfaytinge moche wantonnes with∣out any reuerence, hauyng not withstandyng some wyse sentences myngled therwith. Mimicus, ca, cum, of suche wanton fascion. Mimographus, a writer of such wātē matters Mina, among the Greekes somtyme sygnifyed a poyse or weight. somtyme a coyn. The poise was of thre sortes, one was callyd Mina at∣tica, whiche wayed .xii. ounces and an halfe. Mina medica, wayed .xii. ounces. Mina Ale∣xandrina, weyed .xx. ounces. Whan it signi∣fyed coyne, there was of it alsoo two sortes: one callyd Mina or mna attica Solonis, whi∣the contayned a hundred Dragmas, of oure money nowe curraunt .xivii. s. xi. d. An nother was Mina or Mna uaetus, whiche was lxxv. Dragmas .xxxv. s. xi. d. q. Mina italica, as Diodorus sayth, was a poūde weyght, and .iiii drammes. Decem minae or mnae, be of our money .xxiii. pound xix. s. ii. d. Centum minae, or mnae, be .CCxxxix. pounde xi. s. viii. d. Minae, arum, thretenynges. also battylmentes of walles. Minax, acis, full of thretnynges. Minaciter, thretnyngly. Mincius, a ryuer of Italy whiche compasseth the citie of Mantua, and rounneth in to the great ryuer of Po callyd Padus. Minei, people of Arabia, nigh to the redde sea. Minera, & mineralia, ar of som usid for mines, out of the whiche mettall is dygged. Minerua, callyd goddesse of doctrine and wys∣dome,
whiche was also named Pallas. some tyme Minerua is vsed for nature, wytte, or crafte, Crassa Minerua, uel pingui miner∣ua, grosly, rudely. Inuita minerua, agaynste nature. Minerual, & Mineruale, a reward gyuen som∣tyme by scholers vnto theyr masters, in meat or drynke. Mingo, gere, to make water, to pysse. Miniacius, a, um, red, of synople colour. Miniatula, red waxe. Miniati libri, lymned bokes, hauyng letters of dyuers colours. Minime, & Minimum, lest. Minime gentium, least in all mennes opinions. somtyme mini∣me signifieth no, in noo wyse. Minime do∣ctus, vnlerned. Minime sapiens, vnwyse. Minime mirum, lyttell meruayle. Minio, are, to dye red. Minister, stri, a seruaunt. Ministerium, seruice. sometyme generallye all warke. sometyme ministeria be seruauntes. Ministro, are, to serue, to gyue a thynge in do∣inge seruice. Minitabundus, thretenynge soore. Minitans, thretnynge. Minitor, aris, ari, to thret sore. Minitari ferrum & flammam, to thretten to slea and to burne. Minium, synople or red leade, Minius, a riuer in Spayne. Minoa, the name of a citie in Sicyle, of an o∣ther in the yle called Amorgos by Sicile. Minor, aris, ari, to thretten. Minor natu, the yonger. Minoris dimidio, lesse by halfe. Minos, was the kynge of Crete, and gaue to them lawes, whome paynyms for his excel∣lente iustice, supposed to be chyefe iudge of Hell. Minotaurus, was a monster in Creta whome the poetes do fayne to be borne of Pasyphae the wyfe of kynge Minos, beynge parte lyke a man, parte lyke a bull, whiche beynge in∣closed in the place called Labyrinthus was fed with the fleshe of men. But after he was slayne by Theseus, with the helpe of Ariad∣na doughter of Minos. Minthos, dunge or ordure. Minturnae, a citie in Campania. Minuo, ere, to minyshe. Minuere aes alienum, to paye dettes. Minurizo, are, to synge small, or to feyne in syngynge. Minus, lesse. Minutal, a meate made with chopped herbes, a iussell. Minutarius, a seller of trifles or small haber∣dashe ware. Minutatim, piece meale, in gobbettes. Minutim, idem. Minutia, the smallest thynge that maye be sene. Minutum, idem quod Lepta. Minutus, a, um, minyshed Minutus animus, a feble courage. Minyae, a towne in Thessalia. Miniariae, mynes, they be also veynes of met∣tal, out of the whiche is taken sinope. Mira, wonders or meruayles. Mirabilis, le, meruaylous, wonderfull. Miraculum, a myracle, a thynge excedynge na∣ture or common reason. Mirifico, care, to make wonderfull. Mirificus, ca, cum, wonderfully done, mer∣uaylous. Miriones, men hauynge wry mouthes. Mirmeciae, wertes in the priuie partes. Mirmillones, chalengers at fyghtynge with swordes. Miror, aris, ari, to meruayle, to lyke a thynge. Mirum in modum, in a meruaylous fascion. Misanthropos, he that hateth the company of men. Miscellanea, a mixture of dyuerse thynges. Misceo, cui, scere, to myxe or meddle together, to confounde together, to trouble or to doo a thynge out of order or reason, sometyme it si∣gnifieth to serue one with drynke. Miscere tumultum, to set men in a rore, to make a commotion. Misellus, a lyttell wretche. Miser, eri, a wretche. sometyme innocent. Miserabilis, le, miserable, wretched, lamen∣table. Miserabiliter, miserably, lamentably. Miserandus, to be pitied. Miserator, he that dothe an acte of charitie on hym whom he pitieth. Misericors, dis, mercifull. Miserè, miserably. Misere amat, he loueth excedyngly. Miseresco, scere, to be moued with pitie. Miseret me, I haue pitie. Miseretur, I am moued with pitie. Misertum est, men haue compassion or pitie. Miseria, misery, infelicitie. Miseritudo, idem. Misericordia, pitie. Miseratio, idem. Misericorditer, pitifully. Miserior, eris, misereri, to haue pitie. Miseriter, misarably. Miseror, aris, ari, to haue pitie. Misogynia, an hater of women. Missenus, an hyll in Campania. Missiculo, are, to sende often. Missile, all thynges that are throwen. Missilia, thynges whiche the aunciente empe∣tours
were wonte to caste among the people as bread, cakes, swete oyntmente and suche lyke thynges whiche was done in the Thea∣tre, in the feastes called Saturnalia. Missio, a message. also leaue to departe. Missito, tare, to sende often. Missus, a, um, sent. Missus, us, a course, whan oone thynge cum∣meth in a distaunce after an other, a turne. Missum facere, to omit or passe ouer a thing. also to gyue leaue to departe. Misy, is that whiche the apothecaries do call vitriole. Mitellum, a lyttell miter. Mitesco, scere, to waxe tame or quiete. some¦tyme to waxe ripe. Mithra, the Persians do call the sunne, and al∣so the chiefe prieste of the sunne. Mithrax, a stone of the colour of a rose, but a∣gaynst the sunne he is chaungeable, Mithriaca sacra, ceremonies of the sunne. Mithridates, a puissant kynge of Ponthus in Asia. Mithridaticum, a medicine lyke to triacle, called Mitridate. Mithylenae, arum, a citie in the yle of Lesbos. Mitigo, are, to mitigate, to swage. Mitifico, to pacifie or make quiete. Mitis, re, meke, symple, quiete. Mitra, a myter. It was also a tyre of men and womens heades, amonge the Egiptians. Mitterin, an yle syxe dayes saylinge out of En∣glande, wherein is great plenty of tynne. Mitte sanguis, a bloud lettyng or a bloud shed. Mitto, misi, mittere, to sende, to leaue or lay a parte, to gyue. Mittere sanguinem, to let bloud. Mittere in consiliū, to let the iudes departe to gyue sentence, after that the oratour hath fynished his oration, or the lawier his plea. Mitte hanc noxiam, forgyue me that faute. Mitte hunc ire, let hym go. Mittas frenum affectibus, brydle thyne affections. Miua, is an Arabike worde, and sygnyfyeth the iuyce of fruites boyled vntyll it be as thycke as hony. It is now onely taken for a syrupe made with the iuyce of quinces, wine and sugar or hony, as in olde tyme it was made. Mixtarius, a cup, wherin wyne is alayed with water. ¶M ANTE N. MNA, idem quod mina. Mnemosyne, memory. Mnesterae, woars. Mnestheus, the name of a Troyan. ¶M ANTE O. MOAB, a citie of Araby. also the name of one of the sonnes of Loth, of whō the people are called Moabitae. Mobilis, le, moueable, sone moued. Mocontiacum, or Moguntia, the citie of Mētz in Almayne. Moderatio, moderation, temperaunce. Moderator, oris, a gouernour. Moderatus, ta, tum, moderate, temperate. Moderor, aris, ari, & Modero, are, to go∣uerne, to rule, to set a measure in thynges, to moderate. Modestia, modestie, temperaunce. Modestè, temperately, soberly, aduisedly. Modestus, temperate, well aduysed. Modialis, le, that whiche conteyneth a bushel. Modicus, ca, cum, whiche excedeth not, mea∣surable, sometyme lyttell or fewe. Modicus cultu, meanely apparayled. Modico graduire, to go a softe pace. Modice, meanely, measurably. Modificor, caris, cari, to take the measure of a thynge. Modiolus, a buckette, where with water is drawen out of a well: or a potte fastned to a whele, whiche bryngeth vp water, and pou∣reth it out. Modiparatores, men ordeyned to see measure kepte. Modius, a bushell: it was properlye a measure of drye thynges, whiche conteyned .xvi. Sex∣tarios, and conteyned of our measure one ga¦lon. one pottel and one quarte sauynge foure ounce measures. uide postea in sextario. Modius agri, grounde conteyninge euery waye .C. feete. Modo, nowe, nowe late, sometyme it signify∣eth so that. Non refert, modo id faciat, It maketh no matter, so that he do it. also only. Modo ne. G. Declinandū est de uia, modo ne summa turpitudo sequatur. A man maye leaue the highe waye, so that there folowe no dishonestie. Modô ne id demum sensisti Pamphile, Per∣ceyuedst thou it not vntyll nowe Pamphilus Modulor, aris, ari, to make or do a thynge by numbre and measure. also to synge. Modulus, & Modulamen, a songe, a modula∣tion, the tyme in syngynge. Modus, maner, measure, furme fascion, way, quantitie, ende. Etsi nihil scripsit, nisi de mo¦do agri, although he wrote nothynge but of the quantitie of the felde. Modo nostro, after our fascion. Modum habere, to kepe a rule or order in any thynge. Modum statuere, to gyue a rule.
Modum constituere, idem. Modum adhibere alicui rei. to set a thinge in a resonable order. Saltare ad tibicinis mo∣dos, to daunce after the minstrelles playinge or tunes. Modus agri, measure of lande. Moechor, aris, ari, to committe auoutry. Moechus, an auoutrer or lechour. Moechisso, are, to commit auoutry Moenia, walles of a towne or castell. Moenitus, ta, tum, walled. Moereo, ere, to be sorowfull. Moero, are, to make one sad and heuy. Moeror, oris, sorowe. Moestitia, idem. Moesia, a prouynce in Asia nygh to Pontus. Moestiter, heuyly, sorowfully. Moestus, a, um, sory or sorowfull. Moesto, are, Moesitifico, care, to make so∣rowfull. Moga, a countrey in Asia, called nowe Ce∣saria. Moguntia, a noble Citie in Germany, called Mense. Mola, a mylle, it is also a great pece of flesshe without shape, growen in a woman, whiche causeth theym sometyme to thynke that they be with chylde, it is also a cake made of mele and salte. Molaris, a cheke tothe. Molaris, re, & Molarius, ia, um, perteyninge to a myll. Molendinarius, ia, um, idem. Molarius equus, an horse, whiche dryueth a∣boute a malte myll. Molendinarius, a myllar. Moles, a thynge that is very great and weigh¦ty: somtyme it is taken for difficultie. Molestia, griefe. Molestè. greuousely. Molesto, are, to greue, to offende, to do dys∣pleasure to one. Molestus, a, um, that whiche greueth, offen∣deth, or discontenteth. Molesta tunica, a garment which was myxt with some matter, whiche gathered fyre, put on some persons that shulde suffre deathe. Moletrina, a morter or querne, wherin any thynge may be ground with the hande. Molimen, the force or indeuour in doinge a thynge. Molitio, & Molimentum, idem. Molior, iris, iri, to moue, to be moued, or stir∣red to doo a thynge. Moliri classem, to pre∣pare a nauye. Moliri iter, to perfourme a iourneye. Moliri habenas, to rule. Moliri in∣sidias, to laye snares, to laye in awayte Mo∣liri arcem, to buylde a fortresse. Moliri bel∣lum, to make warre. Moliri is sometyme to deuyse or inuent, also to go aboute to doo a thynge, to make, to be taried or let. Moliri moram, to tary. Molitor, oris, a myllar. Mollesco, scere, to waxe softe, to be pacyfyed from wrathe. Molestra, a shepes fell. Mollicies, & mollicia, softnesse, tendernesse. delicatenesse, womanlynesse. Mollicina, fyne clothe or sylke. Molliculus, la, tender, delycate. Mollifico, to make softe or tender. Mollio, ire, to make softe or tender, to pacifie or appease, to make wanton or tender. Mollis, softe, tender. molle ingenium, a wyt whiche lyghtelye taketh. Mollis homo, a man effemynate, or womanlye, not hardye or constante of wytte, inuolued in wanton plea∣sures and sensuall appetite. sometyme mollis sygnifieth rype, also remysse, somtyme plea∣saunte, also easy to be pleased. Molliter, gentylly, with good wyll, easely, de∣lycately, paciently. Mollitudo, inis, softnes and gentylnes. Mollusca, a nutte with a softe shale, a fylberd. Molluscum, the wenne of a tree. Molo, molui, lire, to grynde. Moloch, was an ydoll of the Ammonites, sy∣gnifienge in hebrew a gouernour or counsai∣lour. It was also called Molchom, somtyme Milchom. Molochinus color, a colour lyke to the floures of mallowes. Molochinarius, he that dyeth the sayde colour Molorthus, a plumrule, suche as masons and carpenters do occupye in squarynge of stone and tymber. Molossa gens, people in the parte of Grece cal¦led Epirus, they were also called Molossi. Molossus, a mastiue dogge. it is also a foote in meter. Molothros, a kynde of whyte vynes. Molucrum, a square piece of tymber, wheron the paynyms dydde sacrifyce. It is also the trendyll of a myll. Also the swellynge of a wo¦mans bealy, whiche doth hap as well to mai¦dens, as to wyues. Molybdena, also Plumbago, is the oore of leade or syluer, it is also one of the kyndes of the herbe called Persicaria. Molybditis, the spume or fome of leade. Momentaneus, a, um, that whiche dureth but a lyttell whyles, or shortely altereth. Momentatius, a, um, that whiche is done in a lyttell space. Momentum, the leaste parte of tyme, whiche can not be assigned, a momente, it is also a portion more or lesse, of any thynge or matter also the estimation or value of a thynge.
Nullius est momenti, it is of no value. Pari momento sors, it is one chaunce, of lyke value of effecte. Momordi, the preterperfect tense of mordeo. Momus, called the god of reprehencion. Momo satisfacere, to contente hym, whom al∣moste nothynge maye please. Momo iudice decertare, to contende afore a rigorous and extreme iudge. Mona, whiche the grekes do cal Monna, is an yle nyghe to Britannia, puissaunt of people in the tyme of Cornelius Tacitus, wher they that fled from the Romayns were socoured, I suppose it to be the yle nowe called Man, and not Anglesey, for as moche as that is ioy¦ned to Britayne. there is also an other yle of that name in the ryuer of Reene, nyghe to Friselande and not onely nyghe to Britayne: Monachus, a solytarie person, all be it that it is vsed for a monke. Monachris, a mountayne in Archadia. Monarcha, a prynce, whiche ruleth alone with¦out piere or companion, monarche. Monarchia, the rule of one monarchie. Monas, monadis, the number of one, vnitie. Monasterium, a place solytarie. Monedula, a byrde called a Choughe or Cadesse. Moneo, monere, to warne, to put in remem∣braunce. to beade one to dynner or supper. Monitor, toris, he that warneth a man, or put¦teth hym in remembraunce. Moneta, money. also the name of Iuno. Monetalis, le, perteynynge to money. Monetarius, a maker of money, a coyner. Monile, a colar or bee, whiche women vse to weare about theyr neckes. It is also a poy∣trell of a horse. Monimentum, reade after Monumentum. Monitio, warnynge. Monitus, tus, idem. Monitorius, a, um, that whiche dothe warne or exhorte. Monobeli, they whiche haue a longe thynge lyke to spyttes. Also they that be very hyghe in personage and aboue other. Lampridius in uita Alex. Monochordium, an instrumente, hauyng ma∣ny strynges of one sowne, sauynge that with smalle pieces of cloth, the sounes be distinct, as Clauycordes be. Monochromatos, a protrayture of one colour. Monoechus, a hauen of Liguria. Monoceros, otis, an Vnycorne. Monoculus, a man hauynge but one eye. Monodia, a lamentable or mournynge songe, suche as is songen in funeralles. Monodos, was a manne, whiche in stede of tethe, had but one bone, lyke as kynge Pir∣rhus had. Monogamus, he that neuer hadde but one wyfe. Monogammi, men leane and yuell coloured. Monogrammus, a picture onely drawen with a lyne. Monologium, a longe tale of one matter. Monomachia, a battayle, wherin onely two men do fyghte. Monomachus, he that fyghteth alone, with∣out helpe of any other man. Monomeri, people in the easte parte of the worlde which haue but one legge, wherwith they go by leapes more swyftlye thanne any beaste. Monophagia, a meale of one onely meate or dyshe. Monophthalmus, idem quod monocidus. Monopodium, a table sette on one foote or trestyll. Monopolium, where oone manne ingrosseth thynges, to haue all in his owne hande, that no manne maye gayne, but he onely. It maye be also one countreye or market, that taketh awaye the gaynes from other countreyes or markettes. Monoptaton, a worde hauynge but one case. Monosceli, men in India, whiche haue but one legge, so great, that therwith they co∣uer them selfes from the sonne. Monostelon, where as is but one pyller. Monotropos, solitarie, of one facion alwaye. Monoxylon, a bote made in oone piece of tymber. Mons, tis, a mountayne or hyll. also an hepe of thynges or any other thinge in the fourme of an hyll. Mons feratus, a countrey in Italye. Monstrificus, a, um, monstruous. Monstro, are, to shewe. Monstrum, a monster, that which excedeth or lacketh in naturall fourme or order. Monstrosus, monstrosa, strosum, monstruous Montanus, a, um, of a mountayne. Monticulus, a lyttell hylle. Montigena, borne on a hylle. Montiuagus, wandrynge by hylles. Montosus, a, um, full of hylles. Monumentum, a remembraunce of some nota¦ble acte, as sepulchres, images, pylars, gret stones, inscriptions, bokes, and other lyke: wherby any thynge excellente, concernynge great wyttes, kunnyng, enterprise in armes, puyssaunce, or rychesse is remembred. Monycha, chae, the name of sayncte Austens mother. Monychus, a gyant, one of the Centaures. Monyma, the wyfe of kynge Mithrydate, whiche after that her husbande was vayn∣quyshed,
kylled her selfe. Mopsopia, the countrey of Athenes. Mopsus, the name of a poete. Mora, taryenge, leysure. Moram creare, to prolonge the tyme, to de∣lay. Moram facere, idem. Per hunc nulla est mora, He letteth it not. Nec mora ulla est quin eam uxorem ducā, There is no let but that I may wedde her. Faxo haud quicquam sit morae, Loke that thou tary not, see that we tary not for the. Inijcere moram & relligionem iudicandi iudicibus, to make the iudges aferde or scru∣pulouse, and to deferre iudgement. Quid ergo erat morae & tergiuersationis? Than what was the let, and that he went no farther in the matter? Moralis, le, pertaynynge to maners. Moramentum, taryenge, or abode. Moratus, instructed in good maners. Moratoria cautio, gage to pay at a daye cer∣tayne whyche he hath in respyte. Morata oratio, an oration, whyche represen∣teth the maners and fasshyon of hym that speaketh. Morbidus, a, um, sycke or skabbed. Morbificus, ca, cum, that whiche causeth dys∣ease or syckenesse. Morbosus, a, um, full of syckenesse. Morbus, syckenesse, dysease, a sore. Morbo affici, to be sycke. In morbo esse, idem. In morbum delabi, to falle sycke. Morbo laborare, to be sycke. Ex morbo conualescere, to be recouered frō syckenesse. Morbus arcuatus, the iaundyse. Morbus animae, a vyce inueterate and harde to be cured, as ambition, auaryce. Morbus animi, trouble or vexation of spyryte. Morbus regius, the yelowe iaundyse. Mordacitas, a bytynge. Mordax, acis, he that dothe byte, be it with the tethe, or with language. Mordeo, momordi, dere, to byte, to detracte, or rebuke vehemently. Mordêre frenum, to gnawe on the brydelle, whyche is spoken where it sygnifyeth one to repugne agaynste seruitude or bondage. Mordicibus, with bytynges. Mordico, care, to hurte with bytynge. Mordicus, bytynge harde and faste, as a man holdeth a thynge faste with his teethe. Mordicus tenere, to holde faste, to persyste obstynately in an opynyon or sentence. Moria, in Greeke, is in englyshe foolysshenesse or folye. Moriar, a maner of an othe, sygnyfyenge I wolde I shoulde dye, or I pray god I dye. Moribundus, dyenge. Moribus, accordyng to the maner and custome. Moriger, geri, obedient. Morigeratus, idem. Morigeror, aris, ari, to obeye, to do as a man byddeth, to confourme one mans maners to an others. Morini, people in Fraunce, dwellynge aboute Turwan. Morio, onis, a foole. Morior, iris, & eri, moriri, & mori, to dye. Morologus, sygnifyeh hym, that speaketh fo∣lyshely, or vnsensybly. Moror, aris, ari, to tary, or abyde, to let, or cause to tary, to be madde. Non moror, I wyll not lette. Moros, a foole. Morosi, waywardly. Morositas, waywardnes. Morosus, waywarde, dyuerse in condytions, whome noo manne can please, more curyouse than nedeth. Morotis, & morosis, a madnesse or frenesye, where a man loseth his memorye. Mors, tis, deathe. Morsicatim, bytynge one an other. Morsiuncula, a lyttell bytte or snacke. Morsus, us, a bytte with the tethe, a taunte in speakynge. Morsus, a, um, bytten. Mortalis, le, mortall. Mortarium, a mortar, wherein thynges are brayed or grounden.Victruui{us}. it is also the place where lyme and sande be mynglyd to make morter. Morticina caro, moreyne flesshe, whiche dyeth by it selfe, carayne. Morticini, cornes whych be on mens fete. Morticinum, corrupt. Mortiferus, a, um, whyche causeth any thynge to dye. Mortuale, pertaynynge to deade men. Mortuum mare, a great mere in Syria, wher∣in no heuy thynge may synke. Morula, a lyttell taryenge. Morum, a mulbery, or blacke beary. Morus, a mulbery tree, and a bremble that bea¦reth blacke bearyes. Mos, moris, a maner, a condicion, also custome. Mos bonus, a good fashyon. Mosa fluuius, a ryuer whyche is callyd the Maze, and rounneth betwene the duchye of Brabant, and the lande of Luke. Morem gerere, to obey. Moscatulae, peaeis which do sauour lyke muske. Moscouia, a greatte countraye in the northe parte of the worlde, beyonde Polonia, whi∣che conteyneth in lengthe foure hundred my∣les, and aboue. The people therof be callyd
Moscouitae, in englysshe Moscouytes, they haue a greatte duke, who nameth hym selfe Emperoure of Russye: they be Chrystened, and doo obserue the ryghtes of the Greekes. And theyr language is the tungue of Sla∣uonye, whyche is alsoo vsyd in Boheme and Polle. Mosca, a ryuer in Moscouia. Moscna, is the chiefe citie of that countreye, through the whyche the sayde ryuer of Mos∣ca doth runne. Mosculus, a calfe, also an herbe. Moschum, muske. Moscus, a Regyon in Asia nygh to the ryuer of Phasis, deuyded into thre partes, in the one do dwell people callyd Colchi, in the seconde Hiberes, in the thyrde Armenij. Mosillus, a dyminutiue of Mos. Mosini, people in Asia towarde the northe. Motabilis, alwaye mouynge. Motacilla, a byrde callyd a wagtayle. Motiuus, a, um, mouynge, not abydynge. Moto, are, to moue often. Motus, ta, tum moued. Motus, tus, mouynge. Moueo, ere, to moue, to remoue or put away, to departe from a place, to stere or prouoke. Mouere calculos in utra{que} parte, to make dyffycultie on the one part or the other. Mouere animum, to styre or allure the mynd. Mouere tragoedias, to doo thynges to be la∣mented. Mouere camerinam, to styre thynges, whi∣che shall be to his owne dyspleasure, that be∣gynneth it. Mouere haeredes, to put the heyres oute of possession. Mouere nuptias, to trouble the weddynge. Mouere stomachum,  cause one to be ve∣ry angrye. Ego istaec moueo, I care moche therefore, or doo passe moche therevppon. spoken in mockage. Mouere aliquem à sententia, to make oone to chaunge his opinyon. Mouere Senatu, uel de Senatu, to put one out of the Senate, or to depryue hym of that authorytie. Mouere aluum, to make one to be soluble or dysposed to the stoole. Mox, anon, forthwith. Moyses, or Moses, sygnyfyeth drawen vp or taken vp from the water. It was the name of a noble prophete sonne of Amram, of the trybe of Leui, who brought the Israhelites frome the bondage of Pharao kynge of E∣gypte, with moste wonderfull myracles, and gouerned theym by an excedynge wysedome and pacyence. He dyed afore the incarnation of Christe .MCCCCLXII. beyng of the age of .Cxx yeres, his eyen being neuer dymmed nor his tethe louse. M ANTE V. MVceo, cui, to be fylthy or vynewed, pal∣lyd, or deade, as wyne, whyche hathe loste his verdure. Mucesco, scere, idem quod Muceo. Mucidus, da, dum, fylthy, vynewed. Mucor, oris, fylth, vinue, suche as is on breade or meate longe kepte. Mucro, onis, the poynte of a sworde or knyfe. sometyme it is taken for a sworde. Mucronatus, ta, tum, poynted. Mucus, the fylthe, whiche commeth out of the nose. Mugil, uel Mugilis, a fysshe of the sea, haun∣tynge the coostes amonge the skalyd fys∣shes mooste swyfte: Of colour whyte, they be of the Greekes callyd Cestrei & Plotae, and communely they be named Cephali Of theym be dyuerse and sundrye kyndes, dy∣uyded by the Greekes, as it shall appere in theyr places: It is an vnsacyable fysshe, and therfore hath a greatte bealye, and therfore excepte he be emptye, he abydeth stylle in a place, and beyng aferde, he hydeth his head, weenynge that all his bodye is alsoo hydde, they be soo desyrouse eche of the kyndes of the other, that whan fyshers haue taken the males, and tyed theym by a lyne, and lette theym downe into the sea, all the females whan they haue perceyued the males, doo gather togyther, and commynge to theym are taken in the nettes. Lykewyse the male kynde dothe gather togyther, and do folowe the female kynde. Muginor, ari, to murmure. Mugio, gire, to bellowe lyke a cowe or bulle: sometyme it sygnyfieth the noyse of thunder, or great wyndes. Mugonia, a gate at Rome, wherby cattell dyd enter into the citie. Mugitus, tus, bellowynge of kyne, or other noyse lyke. Mula, a Mule, whyche beaste sommetyme is gotten of an asse stalyon and a mare some∣tyme of a horse stalyon, and a female mare, as Columella wryteth. In Syria (as Ari∣stoteles wryteth) Mules doo bothe gette fo∣les, and brynge forthe foles. There hath ben founden of theym at Athenes, whyche were foure score yeeres olde, as that author wry∣teth. It is also the name of an herbe lyke to Scolopendriū, so translated by Theodorus Gaza.
Mularis, re, pertaynynge to a mule. Mulcedo, dinis, a gentyll and swete handlynge or intreatynge. Mulceo, si, cere, to pacifye, to appease, to my∣tygate, to make sweete, to annoynte, to polysshe. Mulciber, eris, one of the names of Vulcane, callyd god of fyre. Mulctor, ctaris, ctari, to punysshe, or be pu∣nysshed. Mulcta, a penaltie, a condempnation, a fyne sessed. Mulctam dicere, to gyue an iniunction, to sette a peyne. Mulctam irrogare, idem. Mulctam committere, to forfayte, to runne in the peyne. Mulctam remittere, to pardone. Mulctra, the mylkynge, the payle, wherinto it is mylked, whiche is also callyd Mulctrale. Mulctrum, the acte of mylkynge. Mulei, certayne showes of purple colour, why∣che the kynges of Alba ware, and afterward the noble men of Rome. Mulgeo, mulsi, mulgere, to mylke or stroke. Mulgo, are, to publyshe. Muli mariani, forkes, whereon fardelles were trussed and borne by men. ❀Muli mariani, a prouerbe referred vnto them, whyche be obedient to euery comman∣dement, be it neuer so greuouse. It may also be applyed vnto theym, whyche be inuolued in perpetuall and intollerable laboures and busynesse. ❀Muli mutuum scabunt, mules doo gnappe one an other, A prouerbe applyed to persons yll and defamed, whan one of them commen∣deth the other. Mulier, eris, a womanne, proprely she that is no vyrgyne. Muliebria, naturall euacuations, whiche wo∣men haue, callyd theyr floures. Muliebre folliculum, dicebant uuluam. Muliebris, bre, pertaynyng to women. Muliebritas, delicatenes, tendernesse. Muliebriter, womanly, delycately, tenderly. Mulierarius, a folower, or dotar on women. al∣so that which is done or prepared by women. Mulieraria manus, womans helpe. Muliero, rare, to essemynate or make lyke a woman. Mulierositas, tatis, the vyce of louynge many women. Mulierosus, a great louer of women. Mulio, onis, & mulius, a dryuer of Mules. a Mulettour. It is alsoo a certayne kynde of gnattes. Mullus, a fyshe of a meane quantitie, hauynge two barbes or wartes on the nether lyp, the colour towarde grene, with some yelowe ly∣nes, whyche I suppose is callyd a mullet, in greke it is callyd Triglē, amonge the ancient Romayns, it was in suche estimation, that in the tyme of Claudius the emperour. Asinius Celer one that had ben consule payde for one of the sayde fyshes .viii. thousande Sestertia, whiche after the rate of this present tyme, is of our money. Mulseus, a, um, swete as hony. Mulsum, wyne and hony sodden to gyther. Mulsus, a, um, any lycour myxt with hony. Multa, idem quod mulcta Multatitius, pertaynynge to a forsayt, or payne assessyd. Multesima, a parte representynge an infynite quantitie. Quam parunla pars, quam mul∣tesima constat, so lyttell a porcion, se of howe wonderfull greatnesse it is. Multibaibus, he that hath moche heare on his bearde. Multibibus, he that drynketh moche. Multicauatus, a, um, full of holes. Multicaulis, le, hauynge many stalkes. Multicolor, of dyuers colours. Multicolorius, a, um, of many colours. Multifacio, ere, to make moche of, to esteeme moche. Multifariam, many wayes, in many facions. Multifarius, dyuers maners or conditions. Mulifer, bearynge abundantly. Multifidus, da, dum, hauynge many slyttes, kleftes, or creuyses. Multiforatilis, le, with many holes. Multiformis, me, of many facions or fygures. Multiformiter, in dyuers facions. Multigeneris, re, of dyuers kyndes. Multi iugus, a, um, dyuerse, many dyuerse, manyfolde. Multiloquus, full of speche. Multimodus, da, dum, of dyuers sortes or maners. Multinummus, a, um, hauyng moche money. Multipartitus, ta, tum, beynge dyuyded into many partes. Multipes, hauynge many feete. Multiplex, plicis, manyfolde, dyuers. Multipliciter, dyuersely or manyfoldly. Multiplico, care, to multiplye, or to make mo∣che more. Multiplicatio, multiplyenge or augmentynge. Multipotens, puyssant. Multiscius, a, um, knowynge moche. Multisonus, hauyng a great sounde. Multitia, garmentes made of fyne threedes or sylke. Multiuagus, a great wanderer. Multitudo, tudinis, a multytude or greatte number.
Multiuidus, he that seeth moche. Multiuolus, desyrynge diuers thynges. Multo, & mulcto, are, to punishe, to condemne, to put fro, to intreate yll, or disorder. Multare matrimonio, to deuorce, or dyssolue matrymonye. Multopere, for magnopere. Multus, ta, tum, moche, many. Multus in opere, oftentymes in busynesse or very moche occupyed. Multus sermo ad multum diem, moche com∣munication all the day longe. Multa nocte, late in the nyght. Multo mane, in the mornynge betyme. Multum, an aduerbe sygnyfieth moche. some∣tyme a longe season. Multo, ioyned to aduerbes and prepositions do augment the vertue or vehemency of theym. Mulus, a mule. Mundanus, of the worlde. Mundanus, a, um, worldly. Munditer, klenly. Mundities, & Munditia, klenlynesse. Mundifico, are, to klense. Mundo, are, to wype, to make cleane. Mundus, the worlde, a womans attyre. Mundus, da, dum, cleane, nete. Muneralis, le, pertaynynge to gyftes. Munerarius, he that at his owne charge ma∣keth pastyme vnto the people, with menne taught of pourpose, to fyght hande to hande vnto the vtterance. Muneror, aris, ari, & Munero, are, to rewarde. Mungo, xi, gere, to make cleane, properly ones nose. Municipalis, le, priuately or particularly, be∣longynge to one citie. Municipale ius, the priuate law of euery par¦ticular citie. Municipalia magisteria, ciuile offyces in eue¦ry citie or towne. Municipatim, towne by towne. Municipium, a citie or towne incorporate, ha∣uyge their proper officers and lawes. Municeps, a citizen, or burgeyse, enioyeng the lyberties of the towne. Munificentia, liberalite in gyuing of rewardes. Munificus, lyberall. Munificentior, more lybe∣rall. Munificentissimus, most lyberall. In the olde tyme Munifici, were taken for theym, whyche consented to that, whyche theyr fren∣des dyd or spake. Munimen, & munimentum, a fortyfication of a towne or castell. Munia, commune dueties, offyces. Munio, iui, & ij, nire, to fortyfye, to prepare, to repayre. Munire à frigore, to arme hym, or make de∣fence agaynst the colde. Munire uiam, to make the way of such sorte, that no man may passe. sometyme to make a way that one may passe easyly. Munis, he that beareth the charges, whiche the people shulde do. Munitio, onis, a fortresse or stronge holde for the warres. Munito, tare, the frequentatiue of Munio. Munitor, toris, he that dothe fortify. Munitus, ta, tum, made stronge to defende, for∣tyfyed. Munus, neris, a gyfte, a charge, a duetye or offyce. Muner mmune playes and gaye syghtes for  ople to beholde, to reioyce theym, preparyd by offycers of cyties. As in Rome, sundrye playes, sworde players, callyd Gladiatores, huntynge of wylde bea∣stes. Alsoo nowe in the cytie of London, the watches and syghtes on mydsommer nygh∣tes. Munus uitae. Cicero. Omni in munere uitae, In all affayres wherewith a man in his lyfe dothe meddle. Munusculum, a small gyfte. Munychia, orum, the solemnities of Pallas. Muraena, a lampraye. Muraenulae, smalle chaynes, whyche womenne do weare. Muralis, le, pertaynyge to a walle or boul∣warke. Muralis corona, a garlande gyuen to hym, whiche in the syege of a citie fyrst skalyd the walles, and entred. Muralis herba, an herbe callyd perytorye, or pelytorye. Murani, were the kynges of Alba. Muratus, ta, tum, walled. Murcia, goddesse of slouthe. Murcidus, a man without aduysement. Murciolum, the seede of that whyche is called Lenticula. Murcus, a slouthfull or luskyshe person. Murex, icis, a shelle fyshe, of whome commeth the lykour, whyche maketh purple colour. sometyme it sygnyfieth the same colour. Also an herbe, whyche groweth in a pytte, where no sonne shyneth. Murginor, ari, to tarye, to be slouthfull. Murgitana regio, a countrey in the south par∣tes of Spayne. Murgizo, murgizonis, an ydell or slowthfulle persone. Muria, water, wherin salt is sodden, bryne. Muriaticus, ca, cum, beynge longe in bryne. Muricatus, salted in bryne. Murices, caltrappes, lyke three yron pryc∣kes, soo ioyned, that beynge throwen, oone standethe vpryghte, vsyd in battayle for horsemen.
Muricati gressus, where one gothe fearefully, as if he went on caltrappes or thornes. Muricidus, a mousekyller, a foole, a rat kyller. Muries, a bryne made with salte sodden in water. Murina, a wyne mixt with spyces. Murinus, a, um, belongynge to a mouse. Murmilonica scuta, targettes, wherewith men faught vppon walles. Murmur, the noyse of rounnynge water. Murmurillum, idem. Murmurabundus, & murmurator, he that mur¦mureth. Murmuratio, a grutchynge or bruylynge in the mynde with noyse. Murmuro, to murmoure, or make noyse lyke to water. Murmurillo, idem. Murmurillum, a murmurynge. Murrha, a stone of dyuers colours, cleere as crystall, hauyng spottes purple and whyte. Murrheus, & murrhinus, a, um, of that stone callyd murrha, wherof cuppes, pottes, tables, and other vesselles were made: there be of them dyuers sent from Venyce. Murrhina, seu murrhynia, was wyne made with dyuers spyces, as that whyche is cal∣lyd ypocras. Murtia, one of the names of Venus. Murtius, a hylle at Rome, callyd alsoo Auen∣tinus. Murus, a walle, a bulwarke. Mus, muris, a mouse or ratte. Mus Arancus, a kynde of myse called a shrew, whyche yf it goo ouer a beastes backe, he shall be lame in the chyne, yf he doo byte a∣ny thynge, it swelleth vp to the hart, and the beaste dyeth. Musa, a swete songe. Musae, Muses, were maydens, whome Po∣etes fayned to be the doughters of Iupyter, and Memorye, and that they were ladyes and gouernours of poetry and musyke, whi∣che were in numbre nyne. Some calle theym gyuers of eloquence, and doo name theym goddesses. It is sometyme taken for poetry, or studye of humanytie. Musae mansuetiores, studyes more gentylle or dylectable. Musis auersus, he that hath forsaken the stu∣dyes of eloquence. Musaea, Musaica, & Musiua, be warkes kun∣nyngly paynted, that they seme to be in some place imbocyd out, in some place grauen, al∣though it be all playne. Museus, an auncient poete, whyche was in the tyme of Orpheus, and was one of them whi∣che went with Iason to the wynnyng of the flee of golde. Musaeum, a howse, whervnto lerned menne in all scyences vsed to repayre and dyspute: it is also a howse dedycate to the Muses. Su∣che oone was fyrste made by the kynges of Aegypte, callyd Ptholomei in Alexandria. Musca, a flye. Muscula, a smalle flye. Muscari, to be couered with mosse. Muscarium, & muscaria, a flappe to dryue a∣waye flyes. It is alsoo the toppe of fenelle, dylle, and suche other lyke herbes, wherin be the seedes. Muscarius, a, um, pertaynynge to flyes. Muscenton, a certayn Rose, that spryngeth of a stalke with many small branches, and hath leaues lyke to an olyue tree. Muscerda, mouse dunge. Muschus, a beaste, whyche beareth muske, a muske catte. Muscinus, a, um, of a flye. Muscio, onis, a catte. Muscipula, a trappe, wherwith myse or rattes are taken. Musculus, a lyttelle mouse. Sommetyme an engyne of warre, whereby they are defen∣ded, whyche doo approche the walles of a place besyeged, to fylle the dyches. It is al∣so a lyttell fysshe, whyche guydeth the whale that he do not rune on rockes. Musculi, be certayne pieces of harde fleshe com¦pacte with synewes in the body, whyche doo inclose the spirituall membres. Muscus, mosse, whyche groweth in welles and moyste places, sometyme on trees, specyally in colde countreyes. Musica, & musicè, musyke. Musicè, dylectably or in an armony. Musicus, ca, cum, pertaynynge to musyke. Musicus, a musytian. Musicum studium, the studye in makynge of commedyes. Musimon, a lyttell nagge. Musmones, shepe with heary wolle. Mussitabundus, a manne speakynge to hym selfe pryuyly. Mussito, tare, to speake or talke alone. Musso, are, to talke softely and secretelye, to kepe sylence. Mustace, a tree, hayng leaues lyke to laurell, but greatter and weaker. Mustacula, a lyttell instrument made with two rules, betwene whiche the showe is put, whi∣les the sole is in sowynge. Mustaceus, & mustaceum, a cake or paste made to comfort the stomacke. Mustela, a beaste callyd a wesell, also a fysshe, lyke a lamprey. Mustelinus, a, um, of a wesyll.
Musteus, a, um, swete as muste, or musty. Mustulentus, ta, tum, idem. Mustricola, a cordwayners last, wherby he sha∣peth a showe. Mustum, newe wyne, newe al, newe beere. Mustus, ta, tum, newe, yonge, late made. Mutabilis, le, chaungeable, mutable. Mutatio, a chaunge. Mutatus, ta, tum, chaunged, altered. Mutae artes, pyctures or ymages. Muteo, mutui, tere, & mutesco, scere, to be muete or dumme. Mutica spica, a corne without a berde. Mutilatus, ta, tum, mynished in some thynge, or where any thynge is cut of. Mutili, horned beastes, of nature lackynge hor∣nes, as oxen, gotes. &c. Mutilus, la, lum, lackynge somme pryncypalle parte, mutilate. Mutilo, are, to cutte of, to mynysshe, to take awaye. Mutina, a cytie in Italye, callyd in the vul∣gare tungue Modona, whyche is nowe vn∣der the subiection of the Duke of Ferare, where as was the great bataile betwene Au∣gustus and Brutus. Mutinensis color, a naturall colour, as woulle or clothe neuer dyed. Mutio, tiui, tire, to speake softly, or with an vn∣perfyte voyce, to muttre. Mutito, tare, to feaste one an other. Mutius, was a noble familye of the aunciente Romaynes. In the whyche one was callyd Mutius Sceuola, who at the tyme that Por∣sena kyng of Thuscanes layd syege to Rome came in a beggers apparayle into the campe of Porsena, and intendynge to haue slayne the kynge, he slewe his Secretarye. Wher∣fore he was taken and broughte to a greatte fyre to be bourned, into the whyche wyllyng∣ly he thraste his hande, that hadde fayled to slea the kynge, and suffered it to be bourned to asshes, affyrmyng that besydes hym there were thre hundred whyche hadde auowed to make lyke attemptate, wherwith the kynge abasshed, and fearing the inuincible courage of them, he made peace with the Romaynes takynge pledges of theym, and raysynge his siege, departed without molestynge of them euer after. Mutuatio, a borowynge. Muto, tare, to chaunge, to translate, to barter one thynge for an other. Haud muto factum, I do not repent me. Muto, tonis, the pryuie member of a man. Mutuatitius, a, um, borowed. Mutuli, scaffolde holes, or places made on the walles for culuers to brede in. Mutunus, who was also callyd Priapus. Mutuò, togyther, or one an other. Mutuò dili∣gebant, They loued one an other. Mutuare, sygnifieth bothe to borowe & to lend. Mutuor, aris, ari, to borowe. Mutus, he that can not speake. Mutè, dumme. Mutuum, a lone, that whiche is borowed. Argētum nusquam inuenio mutuum, I can borowe money no where. Mutuo appendere, to lende. Mutuum rogare, to aske agayne that why∣che was lent. Mutuus, a, um, one for an other, mutuall. Mutuus amor, mutual loue, where one loueth an other equally. ¶M ANTE Y. MYA, a shell fyshe in the sea callyd Bos∣phorus, whiche bryngeth forth lyttell redde stones, and rounde. Myagrus, the god of flyes. Mycaene, & Mycaena, a cytie in the parte of Grecia, called Peloponesus, and a lyttell re∣gion, where Agamemnon reygned, the chiefe capytayne of the grekes ageynst Troy, called nowe Morea. Mycon, the name of a famous paynter. Mycone, nes, a lyttell yle. Mydia, an yle, named also Delos. Mydriasis, a syckenes of the eyes, where no co∣lour of the eyes are chaunged, but maketh them moche broder, albeit it taketh away the sight, or makith a mā to se the lesse, & the thin¦ges, whych be sene, to seme lesse thā they are. Mygala, a fielde mouse with a longe snowte, callyd a shrewe. Mygale, a ratte. Mygdonia, a parte of Macedonia on the sea syde, where Niobe was turned into a stone. Aristotle sayth, that it is a parte of Phrigia, ioynyng to Lidia. Solinus sayth, that it was called Bebrycia, and after Bythinia. Myloechos, a butterfly, whiche is in mylles. Myoparo, onis, a kynde of shyppes vsed in the sea called Mare Tirrhenum. Myophnos, a kyller of myse. Mymphur, a tourners pynne or spyndel, wher∣on he tourneth or warketh any thyng. Myra, a citie in Licia, wherof saynt Nycolas was byshoppe. Myriarches, a capitayne of ten thousand men. Myriades, many tymes ten thousande. Myrias, adis, the number of ten thousande. Myrica, a lytel bushe callid in Italy Tamarico. Myrinus, the male kynde of a lamprey, whiche hath a tothe out of his mouthe. Myrmus, the proper name of Apollo. Myriophillum, an herbe callyd mylfoyle.
Myristica nux, a nutmygge. Myrlea, a towne in Bythinia. Myrmecia, a lyttell warte. Myrmecites, a stone, wherin is the fygure of an emotte. Myrmetium, a kynd of spiders lyke an emote, hauyng a blacke bealy with white spottes. Mirmillones, were sworde players, where the one prouoked the other to battayle. Myrsenium, a kynde of fenell, hauyng greatter leaues and a sharper taste. Myrsum, a towne in the parte of Grece callyd Peloponesus. Myrmicoleo, a lyttell beaste, which deuoureth emotes. Myrobalanum, a fruite growynge in India, lyke vnto plummes or damsyns, whereof be dyuers kyndes, whyche easylye doo pourge all superfluouse humours, and also comfor∣teth nature, in soo moche as a manne, why∣che eateth theym, beynge condyte, shall not loke oldely. Myrobrecharij, they whyche do make sweete oyntmentes. Myron, onis, the name of an excellent karuer. also olde oyle. Myropola, a sellar of oyntmentes. Myropolium, a place where oyntmentes were solde. Myrothetium, a boxe of swete oyntmentes. Myrrha, a swete gumme callyd myrre. Myrrheus, & myrrhinus, a, um, of myrre. Myrtetum, a place, where Myrtelle trees be sette. Myrteus, & myrtinus, a, um, of myrtelles. Myrtopetalum, an herbe callyd bludwort. Myrtoum, a portion of the sea, whyche is be∣twene the seas callyd Aegeum & Ionium. Myrtus, a lyttelle tree, bearynge bearyes of swete odour. Mys, mios, the name of a kunnynge grauer: al∣so a shelle fyshe of the sea. Mysia, a countrey beyonde Hungary, towarde Greece. Ptholomeus wryteth of two coun∣treyes callyd Mysia, the more and the lasse, and bothe in Asia, beyonde Bythinia, not farre from Ida. Mysteria, mysteries, thynges secrete or hydde in wordes or ceremonies. Mysticus, ca, cum, mystycall. Mystris, a fysshe callyd a sea mouse. Mythologia, a declaration or exposytion of fables. Mythos, a fable. Myxa, the fylthe whyche commeth oute of a mannes nose. Myxus, a snuffe of a candell. ☞ ❀ ❀ ☞ ❀ ❀ ☞ N ANTE A. NABATHEI, ARE people inhabytauntes of the countraye callyd A∣rabia felix, whyche are verye contynent, and in preparynge and kepyng theyr commodities, also ryght prudent, as Stra¦bo wryteth, in whome ye maye reade more a∣bundantly of theyr maners, not moche expe∣dyent to be declared in this place. Nabathaea, a parte of Arabia callyd felix, ly∣eng betwene the Persian sea, and the red sea. Nabis, a beaste in Ethiope hauyng a head lyke a camell, a necke lyke an horse and feete lyke an oxe. Nablum, or Nablium, an Instrument callyd also Psalterium, reade there mor of the des∣cription therof. Nabuchodonosor, the nynth kyng of Babylon or the thyrde kyng of Caldeys, whiche is na∣med of Berosus, Nabogodrosus, of the he∣brues, Nabucadnasar. He by the occasyon of his great dominions and wonderfull, felle to suche pryde, that he wolde haue his ymage honoured for god. Wherfore he fynally was of almyghty god sodaynly transsourmed into an horrible monster, hauynge the heade of an oxe, the feete of a beare, and the tayle of a lyon, and dyd eate heye as a beaste, and after that he had in that forme done penaunce, by the continual praiers of Daniel the prophet, god beinge meued with mercy, restored hym to his prystinate forme: and afterward he ly∣ued well, and commanded, that the very god of heauen shoulde be onely honoured. he was before the incarnation of Christe, syxe hun∣dreth thyrty and thre yeres, he raigned .xliiii. yeres. Nacae, fullars of clothe. Nactus, the participle of Nanciscor, sygnify∣eth gotten or optayned. Inde nactus est lau∣dem incomparabilem, wherby he hath got∣ten prayse incomparable. Nae, truely, or nowe in good fayth. Nae illi ue∣hementer errant, Truely they be out of the way, or in a wronge opinion. Nae ego multo libentius emerim diuorsorium Tarracinae, Now in good feith, I had leuer haue bought at Tarracina an house to lodge in. Naeera, a womans name. Naeuia, sommetyme sygnyfyeth a lamentable songe. sometyme the songe whyche the nou∣tyce dothe wantonlye synge in dandelynge her chylde. Naides, elfes or fayryes hauntyng ryuers and fountayns.
Nain, a citie of Galile. Nais, a ryuer in the easte whiche runneth oute of the mountayne of Taurus into the sea cal¦led Pontus. Nam, a coniunction causall, set most common∣ly in the fyrste parte of a sentence. Nam{que} in the seconde or other place, it signifieth there∣fore. sometyme it is put for Autem. fyllyng onelye the sentence without any other sygni∣fycation. Nanciscor, nactus sum, nancisci, to get, to opteyne, to fynde. Nancitor, for Nactus erit. Nan{que}, set afore other wordes signifieth truly, put after betokeneth for. Nanum, a lyttell vessell and brode, called also Scitulus barbatus. Nanium, a lyttell woman. Nanus, a dwarfe or a very lyttell person. Nannetes, a towne in lyttel Britayne, called Nauntes. Napataei, people in Ethiope. Napeae, Goddesses of floures and woodes or rather elfes, hauntynge woodes. Napaei, people of the yle of Lesbos. Naptha, a certayne kynde of maunde or chal∣ky klay, somewhat liquide (as Strabo wry∣teth) whervnto if fyre be put it kyndleth in suche wyse, that if lyttell water be cast ther∣on it bourneth more feruentely. and maye be onely extincte with greatte aboundaunce of water, or with vynegre, alume, and byrde∣lyme, there is wonderful plenty therof found by Babylon in the countrey called Ecbata∣nis, as Plutarchus wryteth in the lyfe of great Alexander. Napina, a garden of Nauewes. Napitae, people of Scithia. Napus, a Nauew whiche is a kynde of rapes. it is sone boyled but it nourisheth lesse, the grekes do call it Bunias. Nar, a ryuer whiche runneth into Tiber. there is a nother ryuer of that name in Germany, whiche commeth out of the great ryuer of Danubius or Donowe. Narane, a ryuer in Dalmatia, about a hun∣dred myles from Epidaurus. Narbasis, a towne in Spayne. Narbonensis Prouincia, a parte of Gallia ha∣uynge on the easte the mountaynes, on the southe the sea called Mare gallicum, on the weste the mountaynes called Pirenei▪ on the northe the mountayne called Iura, it contey∣neth the countreys called Sauoy, Dophyny, Prouaunce and Languedock, it was in the olde tyme Gallica Brachata. Narcissus, an herbe and floure hauynge the leaues nexte the grounde lyke to daffadyll or broder lyke to a lylly, a bare stalke and grene in the toppe therof a floure, white or purple, the sede in a thynne skyn, blacke greatte and longe, the rote beynge rounde. Narcoticus, ca, cum, stupefactife or makynge a member insensible. Nardus, a plante wherof Plyny remembreth .ix. kyndes, but that whiche is called Spica∣nardi, is of Galen and Plinye supposed to come out of Inde, whiche some men do think that we do lacke, that whiche we haue com∣meth out of Siria, that whiche is Nardus gallica, some doo suppose it to be Lauander or that whiche is called Spike. Nardinus, na, um, of Nardus. Nares, Nosethrylles. Narica, a certayne lyttell fyshe whiche swym∣meth very swyfte. Narius, a ryuer in Vmbria. Naritia, an yle in the sea called Aegeum. Naruia, a towne in Italy. Naruiae, & Naruienses, people of Naruia. Narratio, a narration or reporte of a thynge. Narratiuncula, a lyttell narration. Narrare stomachum, to speake what he thin¦keth, to vtter his stomake. Narthecium, a place apte and conuenient to kepe spices or medicines in. Nasamonae, people dwellynge in the myddell of the sandes of Lybia, amonge whom is the preciouse stone founden called a Carbuncle. Nasamonites, a stone of colour sanguine with lyttell blacke veynes. Nascor, sci, to be borne, in herbes and trees it sygnifieth to sprynge or growe. Nascitus uentus, the wynde ryseth. Nasci in pedes, to be borne the fete forward. Nasica, the surname of a noble Romayne cal∣lyd Scipio. Nasiterna, a vessell with handelles and a wyde mouthe. Nassa, a weele or bownette wherwith fysshe is taken. Nasturtium, an herbe callyd Cresses, whyche was amonge the Persyans in suche estyma∣tion, that the yonge men whan they wente in huntynge dydde eate none other meate, sup∣posyng that therby theyr spyrites were made more quycke and lyuely. Nasus, a nose. sometyme it is put for sharpnesse or quycknesse in speche, wherefore we vse to say of hym, whiche can pratily taunt or mocke one. so that vneth it may be perceyued. Hic nasum habet. Naso suspendere, to mocke couertly. Nasutus, he that can taunte or mocke wyttylye. somtyme it sygnifieth hym, that hath a great instrument. Nasute, wyttyly, mockyngly. Nasutila, a shrewde wenche.
Natalis, le, & Natalitius, a, um, pertaynyng to byrthe, as Natalis dies, the day of the byrth or natiuitie. Natales, the stocke or family wherof one com∣meth. Natalibus clarus noble of bloode. Obscuri natales, base bloudde. Natalibus restitui, to make a gentylman and to gyue to hym armes. Natalitia dare, to make a feast at the day of ones byrthe. Natatilis, le, that whiche can swymme. Natatitius, a, um, that whiche doth swymme. Natator, toris, he that swymmeth. Natatorium, a place made to swymme in. Natabulum, idem. Natatio, swymmyng. Natatus, idem. Nates, the buttockes. Natex, naticis, of Plinius callyd Nerita, is a fyshe, hauyng a shell, great rounde & smothe, sauyng that there be on it lyke to redde sedes of popye. Natinatores, trauaylers aboute many thinges. Natio, the people of a countray (as Festus wri∣teth) which had theyr begynnyng in the same place, where they dwell, and came not out of other countrayes. it sometyme signifyeth a felowshyp or company beynge in an order. Natio candidatorum, the ordynarye felow∣shyp of them, whyche do sue for great offices. Natiuitas, tatis, byrth. Natiuus color, naturall colour. Natiuus sal, salt growen in the place where it is founden. Natiuum malum, naturall myschiefe. Natiua uerba, wordes not deryued from other. Nato, tare, to swymme often. sometyme it sy∣gnifieth to go, to sayl, to be rowed in a barge or galey. Natrix, tricis, a water snake. also an herbe, the roote wherof smelleth lyke a goote. Natura, Nature. it was of some Gentyles ta∣ken for god creatour of all thynges. Of Se∣neca lib. 4. de Beneficijs. what other thinge is Natura than god or reason dyuine sowen in all the worlde, and the partes therof. Ari∣stoteles Phisic. 1. Nature is the begynnynge and cause of mouyng and rest in that thynge where it is by it selfe, and not by any other thynge hapnynge. sometyme it sygnifieth ma¦ner and facion sometyme the priuy member of mankynde or beaste. Naturae satisfacere, to dye. Naturae cedere, idem. Naturae suae rationem habere, to haue re∣garde vnto his conditions. Naturalis, le, naturall. Naturalia, priuy members. Natus, ta, tum, borne, growen, brought forth. Natus animo leni, he that is of a softe and gentyll nature. Natus annos sedecim, syxtene yeres olde. Natus, & nata, substantyues, a sonne and a doughter. Natu maior, the elder. Natu maiores, the moste auncient. Natu grandis, olde or ancient. Naualis, le, pertaynyng to shyppes. Nauale, the docke where shyppes are layde vp or made, at Venyce the Arceuale. Nauarchus, the patron or maister of shyppes. Nauarchis, nauarchidis, the patrons shyppe. Nauci, a shale of a nutte, a thyng of naught. Nauci esse, to be worth nothynge. Nauci facere, to set nought by. Naucleriacus, & nauclerius, a, um, pertaynyng to the mayster of a shyppe. Nauclerus, & nauiclarius, a master of shyppis. Naucrates, a citie in Egypte. Naufragium, wrecke on the see, somtyme it sy∣gnifieth losse or detryment. Naufragium facere, to lose a shyp by tempest. Naufragus, ga, gum, pertaynyng to shyp wrek. Naufragus, he that escapeth on lyue after that the shyppe is loste. it is sometyme taken for one fallen in pouertie. Nauia, a holowe tree lyke a shyppe, occupyed whan grapes be gathered. Nauicularius, he that letteth shyppes to hyre. sometyme a pylote. Nauiculator, toris, idem. Nauiculor, lari, to gouerne a shyp. sometyme to go on the water in a shyppe or bote. Nauicularia, the arte of gouernynge a shyp or rowynge. Nauiculariam facere, to frayte a shyp, to set shyppes to hyre for carieng of marchandyse. Nauigabilis, le, where a shyp maye passe. Nauigatio, exercise in going on the water. Nauiger, gera, gerū, which wyl beare a vessel. Mare nauigerum, the sea that wyll beare a vessell. Nauigium, al sortes of vessel to sayle or row in. Nauigia speculatoria, brigantines or shyp∣pes of espiall. Nauigo, gare, to go or be caryed on the water in any vessell. Nauigare in portu, to be in suertie. Nauigiolum, a lyttell barke. Nauis, a shyppe. Nauem deprimere, to droune a shyppe. Nauis pompatica, a shippe made with cham¦bers and bankettynge parlours onely to so∣lace with, it is also called Nauithalmus. Nauiter, for gnauiter, diligently with dexteri∣tie, valyantly. Naulium, a towne in Lumbardy. Naulum, the frayte or fare payed for passage ouer the water.
Naumachia, battayle on water or the place where the battayle is. Naumachiarij, they whiche do battayle on the water. Naumachiarius, a, um, perteynynge to that fourme of battayle. Nauo, are, to employ with all his power. Nauare operam, to do all his endeuour. Nauare beneuolentiam, to declare or vse all the beneuolence that a man maye. Naupegus, a shyp wryght or carpenter. Nauplium, a fyshe lyke a Cuttell. Plin. li. 9. Naupontus, a ryuer in Slauony. Nausea, disposicion or wyll to vomyte, some∣tyme abhorynge of thynges. Nauseam discutere, to put awaye the dispo∣sition of vomitynge. Nauseam facere, to vomyte. Nauseosus, a, um, that whiche prouoketh one to vomyte. Nauseo, are, to haue an appetite to vomyte. sometyme to reiecte or abhorre a thynge. Nauseabundus, disposed to vomyte. Nausicaa, doughter of Alcinous kynge of Phe¦aces, who fyndynge Vlysses after that he es∣caped drownynge, broughte hym to her fa∣thers palayce. Nausio, ire, to open as a beane doth whan he spryngeth. Nausithous, sunne of Neptunus and father of Alcinous. Naustibulum, a hyue lyke a shyp. Nauta, or Nauita, a shyp man. Nautea, the ordure whiche issueth out of the pumpe of a shyp. also Curriours bleche. Nauticus, a shyppe mayster. Nautilus, a certayne shell fyshe of the fourme of a bote, and doth swym the bealy vpward. Nautilia, the crafte of shypmen. Nauus, quicke, actiue, valiant, he that doth a thynge sodenly without moche study. Naxos, an yle in the sea called Aegeum. Nazareus, a man dedicate onely to the seruice of god, or that hadde a speciall vowe for a tyme. Nazareth, a lyttle towne in Galilea. Nazara, a citie in Cappadocia, called also Caesaria. ¶N ANTE E. NE, an aduerbe signifienge forbedynge or dyssuadynge. Tu ne cede malis, giue thou no place to aduersitie. sometyme it is a coniunction copulatiue, and sygnifyeth no, or neyther. somtyme it is causall. as Vide ne pereas, take hede that thou do not lose thy selfe. Ne multa, to make shorte, without many wordes, or in fewe wordes. Ne plura, it suffiseth, or it is inoughe. Ne longum faciam, to make shorte. Ne sim saluus si aliter scribo ac sentio, I pray god I be dead, if I wryte otherwise thā I thynke. Ne uiuam, idem. Est ne hic Crito sobrinus Chrisidis? Is not this Crito cousen germayne to Chrisis? Honestum ne factu sit an turpe dubitant, They doubte whether it be honestie to do it or dishonestie. Ne ue hoc ne ue illud, neyther this nor that. Ne dicam, I wyll not say, or I dare not say. This clause Ne dicam, if it folowe a substan¦tyue, the adiectiue is put in the accusatyue case, but if it be putte betwene a substantyue and an adiectiue, the one and the other shall be the nominatiue case. Homo imprudens, ne dicam stultum, not stultus, bycause the substantyue homo goeth before Crudelis, ne dicam impius & scele∣ratus Castor, not sceleratum Castorē, for as moch as the substantiue Castor foloweth. in other cases is none ambiguitas, for alway the adiectiue and the substantiue must ac∣corde, as, Non faceres haec magistro con∣scio, ne dicam praesente, not praesentem. Ne, an aduerbe rational for Ergo, Verg. Me ne incepto desistere uictam? bycause I am vaynquished, shall I therfore cease of myne enterpryse? Ne amicis nihil tribuamus epulamur, To thyntente that our frendes shall not thynke that we wyll do nothynge for theyr sake, we do eate and banket. Ne, sometyme signyfyeth demaundynge, as, Datur ne illa hodie Pamphilo nuptum? but shall she be maryed to day vnto Panphilus? Ego ne, who? I. Nea, an yle betwene Lemnos and Helles∣pontus. Neapolis, a noble citie of Campania, sette on the borders of the sea called Mare mediter∣raneum, and was fyrste called Parthenope. Of this citie the countreys of Campania, A∣pulia, and Calabria, be nowe called Reg∣num Neapolitanum, the realme of Naples. Nebula, a lyttell whyte clowde. Nebulo, lonis, a knaue. Nebulosus, clowdy, Nebulosus ager, a countrey hauynge often tymes clowdes ouer it, where by it is tem∣perate. Nebrides, the skynnes of red dere and falowe. Nebrundes, the genitours of beastes. Nec, nor. Nec opinato, by aduenture. Necnon, also.
Necesse, & Necessum, of force, it muste nedes be, necessaryly. Necesse habere, to haue nede. Necessarius, a kynseman. Necessarius, a, um, necessary. Necessitas, tatis, nede, necessytie, an alyaunce or bonde of amitie. Necessitudo, dinis, idem. Necessario, necessaryly, of necessitie, nede∣fully. Necim, auncient wryters vsed for Nec cum. Nec ne, or not. Neco, care, to slea. Necatus, ta, tum, slayne. Neci datus, slayne without weapon. Necromantes, a Necromancer, he that calleth vp damned spirites. Necromanticus, idem. Necromantia, necromancy. Nectar, a pleasaunt lycour whiche the poetes fayned to be the drynke of goddes. sometyme it signifyeth immortalytie. Nectareus, a, um, immortall, dyuine. Nectarea herba, an herbe called also Inula cā∣pana, Elicampane. Nectarites, a drynke made with the same herbe. Necto, nexui, nectere, to knytte, to wynde or brayde lases or other lyke thynges. Nectere causas, to make excuses. Nectere aliud ex alio, to hange one thynge by an other. Nectere dolum alicui, to inuente a meane to deceyue or mocke one. Necti, whan the dettour was delyuered to his creditour in bondage. Necubi, in no place. Necunde, if from any place. Nedum, not onely, where the thynge of leaste estimation is put laste, as Funderem pro te sanguinem, ne dum pecuniam, I wolde spende for the not onely my moneye, but also my bloude. but where the thynge of moste e∣stimation is put laste, it signyfieth, nor yet, as. Ne crederem tibi obolum, ne dum ui∣tam meam. I wyll not commytte my lyfe vnto thy credence nor yet lende the one halfe-peny. Nefandus, da, dum, horrible, not to be named Nefarius, a, um, cursed, vnworthy to lyue. Nefas, a thynge detestable. Nefasci dies, dayes in the whiche it was not lefull to speake thre wordes. Nefrendes, pygges weyned, called shootes. Negabundus, he that denieth. Negatio, a denyenge, a naye. Negatiuus, a denyar. Negito, tare, to deny. Negligo, glexi, gligere, to neglecte or haue lyttell regarde to a thynge. Neglectus, tus, small regarde. Neglectus, ta, tum, not regarded. Negligentia, negligence. Negligens, tis, negligent. Negligenter, negligently. Nego, gare, to deny, to refuse, to say nay. Negato esse ituram, say she wyll not go. Negaris saepe esse domi, They saye that of∣tentymes thou arte not at home. Negotialis, le, perteynynge to marchaundyse, or occupation. Negotiator, a marchaunt man. Negotior, ari, to exercise marchaundyse in straunge countreys. also to be in busynesse. Negotiosus, hauynge moche busynesse, in bo∣dy or mynde. Negotium, busines, affayre, charge, care. Dare negotium, gyue in charge. Sui negotij bene gerens, he dothe well his busynes, or he exployteth well his affayres. Plurimum in eo negotij habui, I trauayled moche in it, I had moche a do with it. Negotium magnū est nauigare at{que} id mē∣se Quintili, it is moche a doo to sayle there, specially in the moneth of Iuly. Negotium facessere, to trouble or vexe one. Est mihi negotium, I haue somewhat to do Ita negotium est, The matter so requireth. Nullo negotio, without peyne, easyly, Nil est negotij it is lyghtly done. Sed quid negotij quamobrem succenses mi¦hi? what is the matter whye thou arte an∣gry with me? Obiectum est mihi negotium, I am in trouble. Negotiolum, a lyttell businesse, or matter. Negotiorum curator, a Solycitour, or a factour. Neleides patronimicum, of Neleius, as i where of the progeny of Neleus. Neleus, father of duke Nestor. Nem, sometyme, also excepte. Nemea, a woode in Greece, where Hercules slewe .iii. horrible lyons. Nemeaeus, a, um, of Nemea. Nemesis, the name of a goddesse, whome the paynyms supposed to be the punysher of gre∣uouse offendours, some called her Fortune. Suidas sayth that Nemesis, is Iustice, com¦playnt, reproche, enuy, fortune. Nemartes, fayryes of the sea. Ne my quidem, applyed to hym that dare not speake one worde. Nemeti, people of a citie in Germanye called Spyres. Nemo, no man, none. Nemo non, some man. Nemo homo, for nemo omnino, none at al.
Nemo unus, not one man. Nemorosus, a, um, full of woodes. Nempe, an aduerb of confyrming, for bycause truely, somtyme it signifieth for. Nemus, nemoris, a woode seruynge for pleasure. Nemoralis, le, perteinynge to a woode. Nemorensis, se, idem. Neemias, a iewe, and cupberar to Artaxarxes kynge of Persia, a manne of great lernynge and holynesse, whoo beinge in great fauour with the sayde kynge, opteyned bothe licence and ayde to reedifye the citie of Hierusalem, afore the incarnation of Chryste. CCCC. xlvii. yeres. Nemrod, is interpreted rebell, or gouernour sleapynge, he was the sonne of Chus, sonne of Cham, the second sonne of Noe. He is of some written Nimrod, of some Nembroth. He was also called Saturnus babylonicus. and was the fyrste that toke on hym to raign ouer men, and attempted to buylde the great toure of Babylon, intendynge to haue ray∣sed it aboue the clowdes, thinkynge thereby to haue escaped if any floude shulde eftsones haue hapned. He was before the incarnaty∣on of Chryste .MM.Clxx. yeres. after the creation of the worlde .M.DCClxxxviii. Nenum, was of olde tyme vsed for Non. Neo, neui, nere, to spynne. Neogamus, newely wedded. Neomagus, a towne in Fraunce called Ne∣mure. it was also a citie in Britannia, whi∣che some men do suppose to be Chester. Neomenia, the moone while she is in chaun∣gynge and lackynge lyght. Neophitus, a man newely entred into any pro∣fession, a newe man, also a tree or herbe new sprongen vp. Neoptholemus, sygnyfieth a knyghte newe made, it was the surname of Pirrhus, whi∣che was sonne of Achilles. Neotericus, one of late tyme. Nepa, & Nepes, a scorpion. Nepenthe, a drynke coectioned or made by Helene wyfe of Menelaus, whiche caused them that dranke therof to forget all sorowe. some do suppose it to be made with the herbe called Borage, in latyne Buglossa. wherfore that herbe is of some men so called. Nepeta, a citie in Tuscane, it is also an herbe called Calamynt, but thereof be two sortes, the oone more with leaues some what hore. which I suppose to be Nep. the other is lesse hauynge leaues lyke penye royall, but some∣what greatter, whiche of some men is called wylde peny royalle and groweth in plasshy groundes, Dioscorides seemeth to make thre kyndes of Nepeta. Nephalia,  feastes of sober men wher no wyne is vsed, but onely meathe. Nephele, a greeke worde signifieth a clowde. it was also the name of a woman, mother of Helles, whiche gaue the name to the sea cal∣led Hellespontus. Nephritis, a syckenesse and griefe in the raines Nepos, nepotis, the sonnes sonne, or dough∣ters sonne. it sometyme sygnifieth a ryotous person. Nepotes, sygnifieth al the succession folowing sonnes and daughters. Nepotor, tari, to lyue or spende riottously. Nepotulus, diminutiue of Nepos. Nepotatus, rus, ryote or superfluouse dys∣pences. Neptis, the sonnes daughter, or daughters daughter. Neptunus, called god of the sea. Nepus, sluttyshe. Nequa, no where. Nequalia, detrimentes. Nequam, an yll man. Nequando, at no tyme. Nequaquam, in no wyse. Nequior, warse. Nequissimus, warste of all. Nequiquam, in vayne. Ne quic{quam}, not. Ne quid nimis, no thynge excedynge, or no¦thynge, to to. Nerquino, are, to denye. also to be wanton. Nequinum, a citie in Italy nowe called Naeruia.. Nequinant, olde wryters vsed for Nequeunt, they maye not. Ne quis, leste that any man or that no man. Nequitia, vnthryftynesse, where one is gyuen to all voluptuousenesse. Nequiter, vnthryftyly. Nequitus, idem. Nereides, fayries of the sea. Nereus, a god of the sea, and somtyme it is put for the sea. Nerium, a tree whiche hath leaues lyke an al∣monde, whiche some do call oleander, some Rosagine. it is also promuntorye, or elbowe of lande in Galitia, lyinge into the west sea, not far from Compostella. Nero, called also Domitius an emperor son of Gn. Domitius Nero, adopted into thempyre by Claudius, who maried his mother Agrip¦pina. this man although he were brought vp by the reuerend and wyse Senera, yet by the ineuitable corruption of his nature he be∣came horrible viciouse, in so moche as he cau¦sed hym selfe to be gelded & cut in the fourme of a woman, and so to be abused, and by his crueltie made his owne mother to be slayne,
and the citie of Rome to be burned, he in the meane tyme playing on a harpe, and synging the destruction of Troye. Fynally he beinge hated of all men, was slayne in a caue wher∣into he fledde, whan he was but .xxxii. yeres olde, and had rained .xiiii. yeres, in the .lvii. yere after the incarnation of Chryste. Nerio, the wyfe of Mars. Nerites, is translated by Theodorus, Natix, reade before. Neruiae, harpe strynges, or lute strynges. Neruiceus, a, um, of synewes. Neruicus, he that hath griefe of the synewes. Neruij, people inhabytynge in Tournay and the countreye adioynynge. Nerulani, people nyghe to Rome. Nerulonenses, people in Campania. Nerulum, a towne in Lucania. Neruosus, a, um, hauynge great synewes, or many synewes. it also signifyeth strongely made in body. Neruus, a synewe, also a fetter or gyue, wher∣with the legges are tyed, also force or strēgth also the strynge of an instrument. Neruos intendere, to employ strength. Nerui reipublicae, prouision for defence of the countrey, that is to saye, stronge men, trea∣sure, shyppes. &c. Nerui belli, money and men of armes. Neruulus, a diminutiue of Neruus. Nerua, called also Cocceius, a good and noble emperour, who being a Gentile, in the begin¦nyng of his raigne dyd set at lybertie al chri∣sten men which were accused or banyshed. he so moche exceded in lyberalitie towarde pore men, that he therby lackynge treasure, cau∣sed his apparayle, plate and ryche stuffe to be sold, for his necessitie, and ordeyned that the chylderne of poore men shoulde be kept with the common treasure, and determyned no∣thinge by hym selfe, but onely by the consent of excellent wyse men. yet not withstandinge his synceritie & vertuouse lyfe, he lacked not traytours, whom he dyd tollerate wonder∣fully, and at the laste dyed, whan he was of the age of .lxxi. yeres, whan he had raygned one yere and .iiii. monthes after the incarna∣tion of Chryste .lxxxxix. yeres. Nesa, a countrey in the yle of Sicile ioynynge to Aethna. Nescio, nescire, not to knowe, to be ignorant. Nescitur, it is not knowen. Nescius, he that is not knowen, or dothe not knowe. Nesium, or Nesis, an yle by Campania. Nesia, a nymphe of the sea. Nessotrophion, a place where duckes be kept to be made fat. Nestor, a duke of Greece, whiche came to the siege of Troye, who in gyuynge counsayle was reputed most excellent, and lyued (as he hym selfe sayde) thre mennes ages. Nesus, a ryuer in Thracia. Nessus, a Centaure whiche rauished Deianira the wyfe of Hercules, who beinge wounded to deathe gaue to Deianira a poyson, wher∣with the shyrte of Hercules beynge wasshed and put on hym, his body dyd rot with most horrible peynes, whiche he not susteynynge, dyd enter into a great fyre and let hym self be burned. Nestorius, a greatte heretyke, byshop of Con∣stantinople, the yeare of our lorde. CCCC. xix. whoo denyed Chryste to be god, of hym the heretikes holdynge that opynion were called Nestoriani. Neu, for ne ue, or not. Neu lachrima soror, wepe not suster. some tyme it signifyeth nor, whan it is doubled. Neu se, neu Pompeium absentem imperatorem aduersariis ad sup∣plicium tradant, obsecrat. He desyred them that they wolde not betraye neyther hym nor Pompey theyr capitayn vnto theyr ennemies to be put vnto cruell deathe. Neuceria, a citie in Vmbrya, a parte of Italy. Neue, or not, nor yet. Ne unguam, in no wyse. Neuolo, I wyll not. Neuri, people in Scithia, of whom it is wryt∣ten, that in Sommer they were turned to wulfes. Neurobatae, walkers on cordes or ropes. Neustria, Normandy. Neuter, tra, trum, none of them. neyther the one nor the other. Neuterutri inuidet, the one dothe not enuy the other. Neutro aduerbium, neyther in the one parte nor in the other. Ti. Liuius. Neutrobi, idem. Neutiquam, in no wyse, in no condition. Neuus, a mole, or other lyke marke, in the bo∣dy or vysage. Nex, necis, violent deathe. Nexilis, le, any thynge that maye be knytte. Nexo, ui, nexere, to knyt often. Nexus, a, um, knyt or bounden. Nexus, us, a bonde, an oblygation. Nexi, were free men whiche bounde theym selfes to serue, to be therfore acquited of theyr dettes. Nexus inire, to be wrapped in bondes. Nexu solutus, discharged of bonde.
¶N ANTE I. NI, but if, excepte, leste that. Nicander, a famouse poete which wrate of poysons. Nicator, a vaynquishour. Nicea, a citie in Bithinia, where as was hol∣den the holy counsayle agaynste Arrius, in the which was presente the noble Emperour Constantinus magnus. Niceteria, rewardes for victory, as rynges co∣lars of golde, or garlandes, some do wryt it, Niceretia, Nicopolis, a citie in Egypte where Octauian vainguished Antony and Cleopatra. Nicepsus, a greeke phisition and a greate ma∣giciane, about the yere of our lorde .DC.l. Nicomedia, a noble citie in Bithinia, where dyed Constantine the Emperour, called Magnus. Nicolaitae, were heretykes whiche tooke that name of one Nicholas which was one of the vii. deacons in the time of the apostoles who being blamed of them for his ialosy, brought his wyfe that was fayre amonge all the dys∣ciples, sayinge that who so wolde shulde vse her. thynkynge therby to purge hym selfe of ialosy whiche was layde vnto hym, whereof other yll men takynge occasion belieued that euery man mought lefully vse euery woman that he lusted, which heresy (as reason wold) was condemned immediately, but it is to be feared that it is not klerely extincte. Nicostrata, called also Carmētis, was mother to Euander kyng of latines and a prophetis. Nicromantia, or more rather Necromantia, is arte magike in callynge vp damned spirytes, with supersticiouse ceremonyes. Nicto, tere, to vent as a hounde or spaynell. Nicto, tare, to wynke. Nictor, idem. Nidifico, care, to buylde a neste. Nidere, to shyne, to gyue a sauour. Nidor, doris, a sauour of a thynge burned or rosted. sometyme grynnynge or shewynge of the teethe. somtyme brightnesse. Nidus, a neste, sometyme the byrde whiche bre¦deth, also a vessell lyke a neste, also boxes or chestes wherin grocers, or mercers, doo put theyr wares be called Nidi. Nigella, an herbe which beareth a blacke sede of good sauour, whiche profyteth agaynste rewnes. Nigellus, a, um, broune of colour. Niger, gra, grum, blacke, sometyme it sygny∣fyeth purple. Nigidius figulus, an auncient Romayne whi∣che was a greatte philosopher of the secte of Pythagoras, and wrate wonderful subtylly. aboute the yere of our lorde .xlviii. he dyed in exyle. Nigredo, dinis, blackenesse. Nigrities, idem. Nigri facio, to make blacke. Nigreo, & Nigrico, care, to be blacke. Nigrifio, fieri, to become blacke. Nigris, a fountayne in Ethiope, whiche some do suppose to be the heade of the famouse ry∣uer Nilus. Nigro, are, to make blacke or to be blacke, Nigror, groris, blackenesse. Nihil, & Nihilum, no thynge, or nought. Nihil cum fidibus graculo, nihil cum ama¦racino sui. The daw hath naught to do with a lute, nor the sowe with oyle of maioram. A prouerbe applyed to hym whiche presu∣mynge of his wytte, medleth with thynges wherof he can not skyll. Nil, no thynge. Nilion, a stone lyke a topace but that it is more duskyshe. Nilus, a great and famouse Ryuer, runnynge throughe Aethiopia and Egypt, and is sup∣posed to be one of the three ryuers of Para∣dise, called in holy scripture Gehon, all be it to me it semeth vnlykely. for as moche as in Genes. it is wrytten that Gehon is he that enuyroneth all the lande of Ethyopia, and maketh no mention that it passeth throughe Egypt, all be it that Egypt and the ryuer of Nilus were more nyghe to Moses whan he wrate Genesim than Aethyopia was, and al¦so Nilus was famouse, for the vertue of the water therof whiche surroundynge or ouer flowynge the countrey of Egypte made the grounde wonderfull fertile many yeres after in so moche as without labourynge the erth, it broughte forthe abundance of sundry grat∣nes and plantes, dilectable and profytable to be eaten, also beastes of sundry kyndes with out other fourme of generation: specyallye whan the ryuer came to the depenesse of .xl. cubites, lyke wyse whan it exceded not .viii. cubittes, there succeded moche fayne or scarsitie. Strabo. Niliacus, & Niloticus, ca, cum, perteynge to the ryuer of Nilus. Nimbifer, feri, the brynger of stormes. Nimblis, an yle in the sea called Ionium. Nimbus, a great showre of rayne, a storme of rayne or hayle, a great blaste of wynde, a tem¦pest of wether, a certayne vessell out of the whiche wyne is drawen. Nimbosus, a, um, stormy. Nimirum, vndoubtedly, sometyme it signify∣eth Scilcet, sometyme At, sometyme it is ad¦ded to an aunswere Quintil, Vter melior di¦cetur Orator? nimirum qui homo quo{que}
melior, whiche shal be sayde to be the better oratour, euen he that is also the better man. Nimis, & Nimium, do signifie excesse in moch or lyttell. Nimis magnus, to great. Nimis paruus, to lyttell. Nimis bonus, to good. Ni¦mis malus, to yll. Nimietas, that excesse. Nimie, & Nimio, aduerbes sygnyfyenge to moche. Nimius, a, um, to moche. Nimius animi, he that hath to great a courage In dando nimius, to liberall, prodigall. Nimiopere, an aduerbe signifyenge exce∣dyngely. Ningo, ningere, to snowe. Ninguidus, a, um, where there is moch snowe Ninus, kynge of Assyria, and sonne of Belus, who was the fyrste that made warre and sub¦dued countreyes, he conquered vnto Inde, and vaynquished Zoroastes kynge of Bactri¦a, whiche fyrste inuented arte magike: and also caused fyrst money to be currant: he had to his wyfe Semiramis, of whome ye shall reade in the letter S. He rayned lii. yeres and was before the incarnation of Chryst .MM.lv. yeres. Niniue, seu Nisibis, a cytie in Assyria buyl∣ded by Ninus, whiche in compace conteyned thre dayes iourneye, there was an nother ci∣tie of that name in the corner of Iudea to∣warde Arabia. Ningulum, of old writers was vsed for nullū. Niobe, bes, daughter of Tamalus kynge of Phrigia & wyfe to Amphion, a womanne of moche wysedome, who brought furthe .vii. sonnes and as many daughters of excellente beautie, wherof she auauntynge and prefer∣rynge her selfe aboue Latona, mother of A∣pollo and Diana. Latona beinge therewith angrye, commaunded Apollo to slea all the sonnes, and Diana to slea all the daughters which being done, Niobe the mother of them vaynquished with discomforte and heuynes, loste her speche, and remayned without me∣uynge, wherfore the poetes fayned that she vpon the sepulchre of her chyldren was trans¦fourmed into a stone. Niphantes, a ryuer in Scithia. Niptrum, a lauer. Nis, of olde tyme was vsed for nobis. Nisaee, was a Nymphe or fayry. Niseus, a place in the countrey of Media, wher was a good brede of fayre horses. Nissa, a citie in Lydia. Nisi, excrepte, or but if. Nisus, a kynge of whome it is wrytten that he hadde one golden heare, whyche caused hym to be alway victoriouse: but his daugh∣ter called Myrrha at the requeste of oone with whose loue she was taken, stale awaye the sayd heare, wherby her father was vain∣quysshed and slayne. it is also a kynde of hawkes. Nisus, a, um, the participle of Nitor. Nisus, us, endeuour, inforcement. Nisyros, an yle nyghe to Grece. Nitedula, a glowe worme that shyneth in the nyght. Nitella, a tothe pykar. sometyme it sygnifyeth elegancy in speche. Niteo, tere, to be neate or cleane in body, gar∣mentes or other thynge. also to shyne. Niteico, scere, idem. Nitide, clenly gorgeousely. Nitido, dare, to make bryght or kleane. Nitidus, a, um, cleane, bryght. Nitere, somtyme sygnifieth to lyue pleasantly. Nitor, teris, nui, to indeuour, to inforce or la∣bour to do a thynge. Nititur hasta, he leaned to his speare. Niti alis, to flea. Consilio niti, to leaue to counsayle. Nititur in coniectura, it resteth in coniecture Niti pari iugo, to take as moche peyne the one as the other. Niti pro aliquo, to take ones part. Nitor, toris, clennesse, bryghtnesse, gaynesse. Nitrea, a countrey in Egypt, and the name of ii. cities aboue Memphis. Nitrum, some do suppose it to be that whiche is called salte peter, but I doubte thereof by¦cause Dioscorydes wryteth that Nitrum is lyghte of a ruddy colour or whyte, hauynge holes lyke vnto a sponge, and was put in to the pot with herbes wherby they were made more tend and apte to be eaten, and I had some gyuen to me which was of a carnation colour and not glistenyng lyke our salt peter. Niualis, le, perteynynge to snowe. Niuatus, ta, tum, made colde as snowe. Niueus, a, um, lyke snowe. Niuosus, a, um, full of snowe. Nix, niuis, snowe. Nixurio, ire, to attempte to do a thynge Nixus, borne or brought forthe into the world. Nixus, us, the byrthe of a chylde. ¶N ANTE O. NO, nare, to swymme. Nobilis, le, noble, famouse. Nobilitas, nobilitie, estimation. Nobilito, tare, to make noble, to promote to dignitie, to brynge into renoume. Nobiliter, nobly. Noceo, cui, cere, to hurte. Noctesco, scere, to waxe nyght or be darke. Noctes attice, the tytle of a boke whiche Au∣lus
Gelius made, soo called bycause it was wrytten at Athenes in the wynter tyme. Nocticorax, a crowe whiche cryeth by nyght. Noctifuga, the thynge whiche maye not su∣steine nighte. Noctiluca, a name wherby the mone is called. also a lyttell beaste whiche shyneth by nyght. Noctiuagus, a wanderer by nyght. Noctu, in the nyghte, or by nyght. Noctua, an oule. Noctuae Athenis, oules to Athenes. a pro∣uerbe, where one sendeth to a man any thyng wherof he that receyueth it hath plenty. Nocturnus, na, um, perteynynge to nyght. Nocuus, a, um, that whiche dothe hurte. Nodo, dare, to knytte. Nodus, a knot, a thronge of men in battayle. Nodosus, a, um, knotty. Nodus Herculis, Hercules knotte. A pro∣uerbe applyed to a thyng which by no menes maye be loused. Nodum in scirpo quaerere, to seke a knot in a rushe. a prouerbe where oone maketh a thynge difficult or doubtfull, whiche is very playne to be vnderstande or is scrupulouse in a thynge without cause. Noe,Berosus. signifieth rest, or ceasynge from laboure, it was the name of a holy patriarke, whiche was the sonne of Lamech, whom onelye god elected with his wyfe and .iii. sonnes to be preserued from the vniuerall floude, whiche for the horrible synnes of men than lyuynge, almyghty god sente ouer the worlde, whanne Noe was of the age of .DC. yeres, who by the commaundement of god made a greatte vessell, called in holy scripture an Arch; whi∣che conteyned in lengthe .CCC. cubites (as sayncte Augustine saythe) geometricall, eue∣ry cubite conteynynge vi. commune cubites whiche is .ix. feete, so it was in lengthe two thousande seuen hundred feete, in breade fif∣ty cubites whiche was .CCCC.l. feete in depenesse .xxx. cubites, whiche was .CClxx feete, wherin were also saued of al kyndes of beastes and foules male and female, and af∣ter that the floude ceased, the Arche remay∣ned on an hil in Armenia called Cordiei. and Noe lyued after the floud CCCl. yeres, and so he was .DCCCCL. yeres old whan he di¦ed, which was after the creatiō of the world MM.vii. yeres. and before the incarnation of Chryste. M.DCCC. lv. yeres, he was of the gentiles called Ianus. and somme tyme Vortumnus. Noegeum, a whyte napkyn. Noema, a sentence. Noenon, of olde tyme vsed for Non. Noelae, wertes whiche be in the chekes of swyne or gotes. Noes, a ryuer in Thracia, whiche runneth in∣to the ryuer called Danubius or Ister. Nolo, a towne in Italy. Nolani, people of that towne. Nolito, for Noli, do not. Nolo, I wyll not. Nomarcha, he that hath preemynence in the ministration of lawes, a mayre or other like. Nomades, people in Scithia which is in Eu∣ropa, whiche feedyng onely cattal haue none other habitation but where the cattel do ta∣rye. I suppose that they be the Tartarians nexte to Polonia and Russy. Nomae, paynefull sores. Nomen, inis, a name gyuen vnto chyldren, as Iohn or Thomas, Marcus or Lucius, sometyme it signifieth honour, authoritie or great bloude, sometyme bruyte or renoume. somtyme cause, as eo nomine, for that cause Multis nominibus, for manye causes. Hoc uno nomine, for that onely cause. Nomen soluere, to paye dettes. Nomen transferre, to borowe of one man for to paye an other. Nominibus honestis, for an honest consi∣deration. Nomenclatio, the numbrynge of names and surnames. Nomenclatura, idem. Nomendator, or Nomenculator, one whiche knowynge the name of euery persone serued amonge the Romayues, to instructe them of suche as they shulde solicite to graunt theyre voyces in election of officers. Nomina, dettes and dettours, also articles of accompte or summes. Nomina facere, to lende to many men. Nomina exigere, to aske dettes or sue det∣tours. Nomina idonea, sure dettours. Nomina expedire, to paye dette struely. Nomina explicare, to discharge dettes. Nomina expungere, idem. Nominare, to name or appoynte. Nominatim, by name. Nominatio, a namynge or appoyntment. Nomisma, coyne of money. Nomissis, nyne pounde weyght. Nomophylax, philacos, he whiche hath the custody of bookes wherin lawes are written. Nomus, a iurisdiction or mayraltie. Non, no nor not. Nonaginta, fourescore and ten. Nongenti, nyne hundred. Nonagesimus, a, um, the fourscore and tenth. Nonagecuplus, fourescore and tenne tymes more. Nonagecuplex, fourescore and ten double. Nonagenarius, he that is fourescore and ten
yeres olde. Nonagies, fourescore and ten tymes. Nonae, nonarum, in the myddes of Marche, May, Iune, and October, be the .vi. dayes, whiche do folowe the fyrste day. in other mo∣nethes, it be the .iiii. dayes whyche do folowe the fyrste day of the moneth. Nonacris, a place in the countray of Archadia. Nonus, ua, num, the nynthe. Non ita pridem, not longe agone. Non modo, not onely. Nonnullus, some man. Nonnunquam, sometyme. Non sobrius, drunke. Non tacenda, prayse worthy. Noricum, a countraye in Germania ioynynge to Bauiere. Norma, a rule or squyre. Normalis, ryght to the rule. Normatus, ta, tum, sette in rule. Normula, a lyttell rule. Noruegia, a countrey beyonde Denmarke. Noscito, tare, to knowe moche. Nosco, noui, noscere, to knowe. Noscomion, an hospytall for sycke men. Noster, stra, strum, our, or of our familye or house. Nostras, of our countrey or householde. Notae, notes, cyphers, markes, sygnes. Notae eximere, to acquite or dyscharge of re∣proche or dyshonour. Nota, defamation. Notam inurere, to defame. Ad coenam non ad notam te inuito, I bad the to souper, & not to reproue or defame me. Notabilis, le, notable. Notabiliter, notably, euydently. Notarius, a clerke whiche wryteth instrumen∣tes or plees. Notare, to note or marke, to reproue. somtyme to accuse. also to perceyue. Notare uitium, to reproue vyce. Notatio, consyderation, aduysement. Notatus, ta, tum, marked. Notesco, scere, to be knowen, or made knowen. Nothia, gyuen to bastardes. Nothus, a bastarde. Notificare, to notify or make to be knowen. Notio, & notitia, knowledge. Notus, ta, tum, knowen. Notus, ti, the southerne wynde. Nouacula, a barbours rasour. Noualis ager, lande sowen euery other yere. Noualia plur. idem. Verg. Nouantum Chersonesum, a place in the weste place in Scotlande, callyd Cokermouth. Nouatianus, a prieste of Rome, and sometyme chaplayne to saint Cyprian began an heresy, callyd Catharon. which was that they why∣che had renounced the faythe, shoulde not be receyued to penaunce. Nouelletum, a late growen vyne. Nouello, are, to tylle newe grounde, or set new vynes. Nouellus, a, um, very newe or yonge growen. Nouem, nyne. Nouenus, a, um, the nynthe. Nouenarius numerus, the number of nyne. Nouendium, the space of nyne dayes. Nouendiale sacrum, the terrement the nynthe day after the buryenge. Nouenniae plur. a citie in Thracia. Nouerca, a stepmother. Nouercale odium, the accustomed hate whi∣che stepmothers are wonte to beare to theyr husbandes chylderne. Nouercari, to do lyke a stepmother. Nouitius, a, um, newe begunne. Nouo, are, to make newe. Nouocomensis, a citesyn of Nouum comum. Nouum Comum, a cytie in Lumbardy. Nouuncium, a wayghte of nyne ounces, or a measure of nyne ynches. Nouus, a, um, newe, freshe commen. Noui homines, men late come to wourshyp or honour. Nouissime, at the laste. Nouissimus, a, um, the laste. Nouiter, newely, or lately. Nox, noctis, nyght. Noxa, peyne, sometyme offence or hurte. Noxae eximere, to acquyte one of trespasse. Noxis, uel noxijs solutus, acquyted of felo∣ny or trespasse. Penes te est noxa, the offence is in the. Noxam auertere ab aliquo, to discharge one of trespasse. Noxae dedere, to render a vyllayne or beast, whyche haue doone harme, in recompence thereof. Noxam contrahere, to falle into syckenesse, or to take harme. Noxam concipere, idem. Noxam facere, to do harme. Noxam nocere, idem. Noxia careo, I am not in the faulte. Noxalis actio, was an action agaynste the lorde for an offence done by his vyllayne: in the whiche if the playntyfe dydde recouer it, shuld be a sufficient discharge and recompēce of the lorde, yf he dyd delyuer his vyllayne to the playntyfe. Noctescit, it is nyght. Nox intempesta, the depe of the nyght, whan all thynge is in sylence. Nox concubia, the tyme of nyght whan euery man is layde to sleape.
Noxiae esse, to be blamed or reproued for any thynge. In noxia, idem. Noxijs uacuum esse, to be in no faulte. Noxius, a, um, harmefull, doynge dyspleasure. Noxitudo, amonge olde writers was vsed for Noxa. ¶N ANTE V. NVBES, a whyte clowde. Nubecula, a lyttell clowde. it sygnifieth also an heuy countenaunce. Nubilarium, an howse wherinto corne is cary∣ed for feare of rayne. Nubilare, to make clowdye. Nubilis, maryable. Nubilosus, a, um, full of clowdes. Nubilus, a, um, clowdy. Nubo, psi, bere, to be wedded. alsoo to be ioy∣ned vnto. Nucamenta, are hangynge downe of nut trees lyke rattes tayles. Nuceria, a towne in Campania. Nuceus, a, um, of a nutte. Nucifrangibula, a nutknacker. Nucleus, the kernell. Nucula, & Nucella, a lyttell nutte. Nudipedalia, ceremonyes done barefooted. Nuditas, nakydnesse, want of any thyng. some¦tyme playnnesse, without obscuritie or dyssi∣mulation. Nudius tertius, the day before yesterday. Nudius quartus, foure dayes agone. Nudata castra, the campe was lefte with∣out men. Nudatus defensoribus murus, The walle was abandoned, and without men to defende it. Nugae plur fables, tryfles. Nugalis, le, pertaynynge to tryfles. Nugamenta, tryfles. Nugator, a tryfler. Nugatorius, a, um, tryflynge. Nugax, a tryfler. Nugigerulus, a bearer out of fables. Nugiuendus, a fellar of tryfles and fables. Nugor, gari, to tryfle. Nullatenus, in no wyse. Nulli consilij, for Nullius consilij. Nullibi, no where. Nullo negotio, easyly. Nullorum hominum homo, lyke no man. Nullus, a, um, none▪ somtyme it sygnifieth non. Terent. Si non quaerit, nullus dixerit, If he do not inquyre, tell not. Nullus sum, I am vndone. Nullus dū, no man vntyll this day, neuer mā. Num, for An. Num ego te spoliaui? Dyd I robbe the? Num nam, for Num, or Vtrum. Numnam tu hic relictus custos? Art thou left here to watche vs. Numa, was kyng of Romayns next after Ro∣mulus, that is to say, the seconde kynge, and was chosen by the people & senate of Rome, of a poore gentylman, dwellynge in a towne of the Sabines callid Cures, for his excellēt vertues and lernynge, being of the discipline of Pythagoras, he beynge kynge by his po∣lycye and ceremonyes by hym inuented, he brought the Romaynes, whyche duryng the tyme of Romulus were continually occupy∣ed in warres, in suche a wonderfulle quyet∣nes and honeste fourme of lyuynge, that the countrayes enuyronnynge them by the space or xl. yeres, had them in suche reuerence, that they dyd neuer duryng that tyme, moue war agaynst them. Numao, the hauynge of money. Numella, or Numellae, a tumbrelle, whereinto men be sette, hauynge therein theyr handes and legges. Numen, the power or wylle of god. sometyme it sygnifieth god. sometyme apparayle. Numerabilis, le, that whiche may be numbred. Numeralis, le, pertaynyng to number. Numerarius, & numerator, he that reckeneth by numbre. Numeratus, ta, tum, numbred. Numerato, promptly, at hande. In numerato habere ingenium, to haue a wytte apte vnto euery thynge. In numerato, in redye money. Plin. li.xxxi. Claudius Isidorus testamento suo dixit, quā¦uis multa ciuili bello perdidisset, tamen re∣linquere eruorum quatuor millia, iuga boū¦tria millia sexcenta, reliqui poecoris ducenta quinquaginta millia in numerato pōdo sex∣centa millia, Claude Isidore rehersed in his testament, that not withstandyng that he had lost moche in the cyuile warres, yet dydde he leaue foure thousande bondemen, thre thou∣sande and syxe hundred yokes of oxen, of o∣ther cattel .CC. and fyfty thousande, and in redy money syxe hundred thousande pounde. Numerare, to numbre or tell, or accompt. Numerosus, a, um, great in numbre. Numerus, numbre. sometyme quantitie, speci∣ally in grayne or thynges measuryd. it is also harmony, or an order in syllables. sometyme company assemblyd, specyally of the warste sorte of people. Numeris omnibus absolutus, perfytte at all poyntes. Numeri, be sometyme taken for verses. Numida, a man or woman of Numidia. Numidia, a countreye betwene Carthago and Mauritania in Aphryke, and nowe is callyd Barbaria, where sommetyme raygned Ma∣sinissa. In that countraye is founden mooste
excellente marble. The chiefe citie there was named Cirta, whiche was very stronge, and so puissant of men, that in the tyme of Stra∣bo it mought arme ten thousande horsemen, and twenty thousande footemen. Numantia, a citie in Spayne aboute Biskaye, whyche was of suche valyantnesse, that be∣ynge besieged of the Romaynes .xiiii. yeres contynually, it not onely dyd resyst, hauynge but .iiii.M. men to defende it, but also van∣quyshed .xl. thousande Romaynes, at the last it was destroyed by the laste Scipio, whan he hadde besyeged it a longe tyme. for whan they had long sustayned famyne, and mought not issue forthe to fyght in batayle, they bur∣ned theym selfes and all theyr goodes. Numicus, a ryuer in Italye, by the Cytie Lauinium, in the whyche Aeneas was drowned. Nummarius, a, um, pertaynynge to money. Nummarius, a keper of money. Nummatus, ryche of money. Numisma, matis, money. Numitor, father vnto Rhea, whiche was the mother of Romulus. Nummularius, he that keepeth a banke of money. Nummulus, a lyttell piece of coyne. Numus, & numisma, money or coyne. some do write it with double m. Nummus argenteus, as Leonardus Portius writeth, was also that, whyche also was cal∣lyd Denarius Romanus, and weyed a dram and the thyrde parte of a dramme, whyche was .iiii. scriples. Nummus aureus, althoughe it were altered sundrye tymes, yet the same Portius dothe gather of the fyrste chapyter of the .xviii. boke of Pliny, and of Suetomus in the lyfe of Otho, and Plutarchus in the lyfe of Gal∣ba, that at that tyme Nummus aureus, was in valewe .xii. Nūmi argentei, and in that wyse it agreed with the Venetiane ducate, whyche was worth .xii. of our grotes, whan eyght of our grotes made one ounce. Nummus adulterinus, counterfayte or for∣ged money. Nunc, nowe, at the laste. Nunc temporis, nowe adayes. Nunc iam, euen nowe. Nunc primum, idem. Nuncubi pro nunquid & alicubi. Nuncupo, pare, to name or to calle a thynge by some name, to pronounce, to recyte. Nun cupare uotum, to make a solemne vow. Nundinae, fayres, martes, they were amonge the olde Romaynes kept euery nynthe daye, whervnto all people resorted. and than all la∣wes, whyche were newe made, were pro∣claymed. Nundinalis, pertaynynge to fayres. Nundinatio, byenge and sellynge. Nundinari, to bye or selle, as they doo in fay∣res openly. Nunquando, for num aliquando. Nuntiatio, a reporte. Nuncio, are, to shewe, to report, to telle. Nuntium, a message. Nuntius, a messager, or message. Nunquam, neuer, or it is impossible. Nunquā hoc uno die efficiatur opus, it is im¦possyble that this enterprise may be broughte to passe in one day. Nunquam non, alway. Nunquid, vsed in a questyon. Nunquid ego sum? Is it I? Nunquis, Nunque, Nunquid, is there any? Nunquid uis? Wyll ye any thynge with me? Wyll ye any thyng commande me? Nunquid praeterea, Is there any thing els? Nunquidnam amplius tibi cum illa fuit Cha¦rine? Haddest thou any thynge elles to do with her? Nuper, late, not longe agone. Nuper admodum, but a whyle agoo. Nuperrimus, he that was or came laste. Nuperus, a, um, late done or hapned. Nuptiae, plur. a weddynge. Nuptialis le, pertaynynge to weddynge. Nupturire, to coueyte mariage. Nuptus, ta, tum, wedded. Nuptus, Nupta, substan. husbande, wyfe. Nuptus, tus, maryage. Nursina, a citie of the Sabynes not farre from Rome, set on the hylles of Vmbria. Nursini, people of that citie. Nurus, the sonnes wyfe. Nusquam, an Aduerbe, in a place, and to a place. Teren. Ille autem bonus uir nusquam apparet, He is in no place an honeste man. Plaut. Te nusquam mittam, I wyll send the noo whyther. Nusquam pedem, he shall not goo one foote further. Nusquam gentium, no where. Nusquam non, euery where. Nuto, tare, to becken or shake the heade, or to make a sygne with the heade. sommetyme to leane and be readye to falle in dekay. some¦tyme to doubte, whyche parte to take or to leane vnto. Nutricatus, tus, nourture. Nutritius, the nourses husbande. Nutritius, tia, tium, pertaynynge to nourys∣shynge. Nutricula, a nouryce. Nutrimentum, nouryshement. Nutrix, tricis, a nouryce. alsoo a place where
men doo sowe trees or herbes, to the intente that whan they haue taken roote, they wylle remeue theym, and sette theym in a gardeyne or orcharde. Nutus, tus, the sygne that oone maketh with his eyes or heade, declaryng his intent some tyme it sygnifyeth the wyll or pleasure of one. Nutu, & renutu, with a becke towarde & from warde. Nux, nucis, a nutte. Nux auelana, a fylbert. Nux iuglans, a wall nutte. Nux muscata, uel Myristica, a nutmygge hotte and drye in the seconde degree. Nux pinea, a pyneappll. ¶N ANTE Y. NYCTERIS, a reremouse or backe. Nycticorax, a nyght crowe. Nyctileia, sacrifyces by nyght. Nyctilopes, they that do see nothynge toward nyghte. Nyctimene, the doughter of Nyctes, who af∣ter that she had lyen with her father, she was tournyd into an oule. Nymphae, maydens of the sea, elfes, somtyme the muses. alsoo yonge bees before that they do flye. Nympha, dothe sygnifye the spowse or bryde newe maryed. Nymphea, callyd also Nenuphar, an herbe and flowre callyd the water lyly, in the plurel nū∣ber it sygnyfieth baynes naturally warme. Nymphus, the bryde groome. Nysia, a certayne kynde of yuy. ¶O ANTE A. OAN INTERIEC∣tion vsed in wondrynge. sometyme with a voca∣tyue case. somtyme a no∣minatiue case. somtyme a vocatyue case. somme∣tyme in exclamation som¦time in lamenting. O me perditum, Alas I am vndone. sometyme in skorninge. O praeclarā sapientiā, O the good¦ly wysedom. somtime of reioycyng. O factum bene▪ O that is well done. sometyme it is the voyce of hym that is sodainly stryken, or spe∣keth to one that he sawe not before. Quis hic loquitur? Misis salue. O salue Pamphile. Who talketh here? Misis god saue you. O Pamphilus welcome. O, for utinam. Vergil. O tantum libeat mecū tbi sodida rura, I wolde to god the homely fieldes as well dyd lyke the as they do me. Oatarica, the spaume of fyshe salted. Oaxis, a ryuer in the yle of Crete or Candy. Oaxus, a cytie in Crete or Candy. ¶O ANTE B. OB for at, Ob rem, for my profytte. Oboculos, before myne eyes. Ob tacendum, for ut taceat, that he shoulde not telle. Obaeratus, bounden by ernest money. Obacero, are, to lette a man that he can not tel out his tale. Obambulo, are, to walke agaynst an other, al∣so to walke togyther, or with an nother. Obacerbo, are, to make one angry. Obaresco, scere, to drye all aboute. Obaro, are, to eae aboute. Obaudio, ire, to here hardly, or vnwyllyngely. sometyme to obey. Obba, a bottell. Obbibo, bere, to drynke all out. Obcaeco, care, to blynde. Obcaecare fossas, to couer dyches. Obdo, dere, to thruste agayne, or put to. Obdormio, ire, to slepe faste or soundly. Obdormire crapulam, to slepe vntylle he be eftsones sobre. Obduco, xi, cere, to lay ouer, or couer a thing, sometyme to vncouer or open also to brynge agaynst or ouerthwart a place. Obducere cicatricem, to couer a wounde with skynne. Obducere callum dolori, to cause one to su∣steyne or suffre peyne or griefe Obdulcesco, scere, to be swete about. Obdureo, rui, ere, & obduresco, scere, to be harde. Obduro, are, to make harde. Obedio, dire, to obey. Obediens dicto, he whyche dothe that he is commaunded to doo. Obedientia, obedyence. Obedienter, obedyently. Obedo, obedere, to consume or eate al about. Obeliscus, a great stoone, square lyke a butte. waxynge smaller and smaller, vntylle the toppe, of a great heyghte, made playne by a warkeman. There were of theym dyuerse in Rome. Obelus, a spytte or brooche, alsoo a longe stryke in wrytynge lyke a spytte, for a note or dyuersytie. Obeo, iui, ire, to go to, to goo aboute, to be at hande, to mete with one, to dye, to do. Obire mortem, obire diem, to dye. Obire uadimonium, to go to be suretie.
Obire le gationem, to go in ambassade. Obire prouinciam, to exercyse auctoritie. Obire bellū, to go to battayl, to make warre. Obire haereditatē, to take possession of lan∣des, wherin a mā hath a state of inheritāce. Obire coenam cum aliquo, to go to banket∣tes with one hyther and thyther. Obire oculis, to loke here and therabout. Obire pedibus regiones, to go into dyuerse countrayes on foote. Obedibo, was in the olde tyme vsed for obe∣diam, I shall obey. Obequito, tare, to ryde aboute. Oberro, are, to wander aboute. Obesco, care, to feede fatte. Obesitas, fatnesse. Obesus, a, um, in Virgile is fatte, in Neuio it sygnifyeth leane or lyttell, it is mooste com∣monly taken for fatte in the bodye. Obex, bicis, an obiecte or lette. Obfirmare animum, to be stubborne or ob∣stynate. Obfirmatus, stubborne or obstinate. Obfirmatè, obstinately. Obgannio, & oggannio, ire, to whyster in one eare. Also to tell a thynge often. Obherbesco, scere, to growe vppe as her∣bes doone. Obiaceo, cui, cere, to lye aboute. Obiectaculum, that whych is sette or throwen before one to make hym afrayde, or to let him that he shall not passe. Obiecto, rare, to obiect or often impute, or lay to ones charge. also to caste out. Corpora bello obiectant, They putte theyr bodyes in the daunger of warre. Obiectum, any thynge that is before a mans eyen, and may be sene. Obiectus, ta, tum, throwen or layde agaynst. Obiectus, tus, the layeng or settynge of a thing before ones eyes. Obijcio, ieci, ijcere, to lay or throwe agaynste, or to lay before one, to lay to ones charge. Obijcere mentē alicuius, to put into a mans head, or to brynge one in a fantasy. Obijcere moram, to make one to tary. Obijcere praeuaricationem, to laye a mattier to ones charge. Obijcere relligionem, to make one to be seru pulouse. Obijcere solicitudinem, to make one careful or pensyfe. Obijcere spem, to put one in hope. Obijcere terrorem, to make one aferde. Obigitare, to stere or moue before. Obinunt, they dye. Obiratus, ta, tum, very angry. Obiter, by the way, incidently, besyde the pur∣pose, in the meane tyme, precisely. Obitus, ta, tum, the acte or conclusyon. Obitus, tus, the dyeng or decesse of a man▪ som∣tyme the commynge of one. The ancient wri∣ters toke obitum for the accesse of one. Obiurgo, are, to chyde or rebuke. Obiurgatoriae literae, letters of rebuke. Obiurgatio, chydynge, rebukynge. Obiuro, rare, to bynde by an othe. Obiurgator, & obiurgatrix, he or she that chi∣deth or rebuketh. Oblaedo, laesi, dere, to hurt soore. Oblatio, offrynge. also an ayde or subsidy. Oblatus, ta, tum, offred. Oblatro, trare, to barke agaynst one. Oblatrator, he that barketh or maketh excla∣mation agaynst one. Oblecto, are, & oblector, ari, to delyte. to take pleasure in a thynge. Oblectatio, oblectamen, & oblectam entum, recreation. Oblicio, to take recreation or pleasure. Oblido, dere, to hurte. Obligo, are, to bynde. Obligare se furti, to commyt felony, somtime to confesse felony. Obligare aliquem sceleri, to charge oones conscience. Obligare scelere. Cicero pro domo sua. Po∣pulum{que} scelere obligasses, Thou haddest made the Romayns partners of thy mysche∣uouse acte. Obligare nexu. Cicero pro Murena. Is pe∣riculum iudicij praestare debet qui se nexu obligauerit, He that ioyneth hym selfe with an other in any bonde, muste abyde the ieo∣perdy of the iudgement or condemnation. Obligare sacramento, to charge oone with an othe. Obligari periculo iusiurandi, to be charged with an othe. Obligari sponsione, to be tyed by his pro∣myse or couenant. Obligatio, an obligation or bonde. Obligurio, ire, to eate delycate meates gredyly or rauenouselye, and to consume goodes in feastynge and bankettynge. Obliquitas, crokydnesse. Obliquus, a, um, contrary to straight, croked. Oblique perstringere, to taunte or checke. Oblimo, are, to couer with mudde or soft clay, sometyme to stoppe or daube. Oblimare rem, to spende his goodes. Oblino, ere, to imbrue or make foule. Obliteratus, ta, tum, scraped out, or blotted. Oblitero, are, to scrape out or putte out of re∣membraunce. Obliteratio, a scraping or blottīg out of a word Oblitescere, to be hydde. Oblitus, ta, tum, forgotten.
Oblitus, imbrued, defyled. Obliuiosus, a, um, forgetfull. Obliuiscor, sceri, sci, to forgette. Obliuioni dare, idem. Obliuium, forgetfulnesse. Obliuio, onis, idem. Oblocare, for locare. Oblocutio, yil reporte. Oblocuuio, are, olde wryters vsed for Mente errare, to be in an yll opinion, to erre. Oblongum, longe. Obloquor, eris, qui, to speake agaynste or con∣trarye, to reporte ylle, to curse. Obloquutor, an yll reporter or detracter. Oblucinass, to haue erred. Oblucinior, are, to erre. Obluctari, to wrastle or stryue agaynste. Obludere, to play with one. Obmanens, abydynge longe. Obmoliri, to sette some thynge with great la∣bour, agaynst the place wherby one muste ne∣des passe. Obmordeo, ere, to byte. Obmoueto, moue or put to. Obmutesco, as we commonly saye, I hold my peace, I speake not, I holde my tunge. Obnato, tare, to swymme agaynste. Obnecto, to knytte faste. Obnexio, a faste knyttynge. Obnexus, a, um, faste knytte. Obniger, gri, very blacke. Obnitor, teris, ti, to resyste. Obnixè, an aduerbe sygnifyenge with all his myght or power, or fyrmely. Obnixus opibus, he that kepeth hym selfe strongly for his rychesse. Obnoxius, a, um, bounden, subiecte, apte, in daunger. somtyme it sygnifieth gylty or fau∣tye. Sum tibi obnoxius, I am bounden vnto the. Obnoxius morbis, subiecte to syckenes. Periculis obnoxius, subiecte to perylles. &c. Minari interdum ferro, nisi sibi obnoxia fo∣ret, And thretened her sommetyme with his weapon; yf she wolde not be obedyent to his requestes. Obnoxium feris, Caste oute to wylde beastes. Obnoxiè, fearefully, lyke a subiect or slaue. Obnoxium ingenium, a dyshonest wytte. Obnoxia curae arua, fyeldes necessary to be thought on, or to be prouyded for. Obnoxia munera & officia, amonge the an∣cient wryters were taken for theym for offy∣ces, the mynistration of the whiche was vile and dyshonest, whyche also mynyshed lyberty or nobylitie of byrthe. Obnoxius gratiae iudex, the iuge whych re∣gardeth fauour or pleasyng of the one parte. Obnoxia corpora, bodyes dyseasyd or not in helthe. Obnubo, bere, to hyde. Obnubilo, are, to make darke. Obnubilus, a, um, clowdy or darke. Obnuere, to couer the head or body. Obnuntiare, to deny, to resyst agaynst a thing purposed. Obnuntiatio, was a declaration of the dyuy∣nours callyd Augures, to the chiefe officers of Rome that any thynge shulde not be enter prysed or done that was purposed, by reason of certayne sygnes or tokens, whych the said dyuynours perceyued by the flyght or voyce of byrdes, whyche was contrarye vnto the purpose that they went aboute. Oboleo, lêre, to stynke. Obolus, a wayght contaynynge thre Siliquas, or crettes, and is halfe a scruple. It was al∣soo a coyne of syluer, but that varyed accor∣dynge to the countraye where they were cur∣raun as Obolus, Atticus, Romanus, He∣brai. Obori oboriri, to begynne to spryng or come forth Obradrasi, dere, to shaue agaynst the heare. Obortus, a, um, begunne or sprong. as Rumor obortus, tydynges spronge. Ob rem, for the purpose. Obrepo, pere, to come priuylye or steale in, to come vnwares or vnloked for▪ sometyme to deceyue one. Obrepere ad honores, to comme or attayne to honour by crafty dissimulation. Obreptio, the gettyng or obteynyng of a thing in fourme aforesayde. Obreptitiae literae, letters obteyned by the said meanes. Obreptare for frequenter obripere. Obrideo, dere, to laugh agaynst one. Obrideo, si, dere, to laughe at one, or to mocke one. Obrigeo, gui, gere, & obrigesco, scere, to be or waxe styffe for colde. Obrion, one of the yles callyd fortunate. Obryzum, pure or fyne golde. Obripio, ripui, ripere, is in hydyng som thinge whiche shulde be spoken, to atteyn the thyng that we desyre. Obrisio, a mocks. Obrodo, rosi, dere, to gnawe aboute. Obrogo, are, to checke or interrupte a manne in his speche. Obrogare legem, to derogate one lawe by an nother. Obrumpere for rumpere. Obruo, ere, to ouerthrowe, to couer a thynge in castynge an other thynge ouer it. Obruere sale, to keuer with salte, or to poulder. Obruere uoluptatibus dolorē, to put awaye
sorowe with hauntynge moche pleasure and pastyme. Obrui aere alieno, to owe very moche or be in great dette. Obruere memoriam alicuius, to putte one cleane out of remembraunce. Obrui magnitudine negotij, to be ouerchar∣ged with the importaunce of the assayre or busynesse. Obruit eum obliuione uaetustas, ye it is soo longe time passed that it was, that it is clene out of his remembrance. Obliuione obruere facta sua, to cause his actes to be forgotten. risu testem, to make the wytnesse to be so laughed at, that he darste not speake any more. Obruitur uulgi sermo hominum interitus, The speeche  people is loste whan menne be deade. Obrutus, ta, tum, ouerthrowen, couered, perished. Obrutum situ uaetustatis, it is lost or perished for age, or it is so longe agoone that it was, that it is now out of remembraunce. Obrutus niuibus, keuered with snowe. Obruta itinera strage, the wayes were ful of menslayne or kylled. Obrutania fulmina, lyghtnynges, which so∣daynly happen, throwy downe, and bur∣nynge thynges, before they be procured or loked for. Obsaeuio, ire, to be wode angry agaynst one. Obsaturo, rare, to be fylled to moche with a thynge. Obsaluto, are, to offre my selfe to salute one. Obsatum, olde writers vsed for halowed. Obscoene, lyke a rybaulde without shame. Obscoenitas, villany in actes, rybauldrye. Obscoeno, are, to brynge or cause yll lucke. Obscoenus, na, num, abhomynable, all thynge which is to be eschewed, dishonest, vncleane, pernicious, also bryngyng yll lucke. Obscuritas, darkenesse, difficultie, vngentylnes of bloudde. Obscurè, darkely. Non obscure, playnly. Obscuro, are, to make darke, to shadowe, to hyde, to kepe in silence or from the knowlege of other, to make of no reputation. Obscurus, a, um, darke, hydde, dyffuse, vnkno∣wen, of no gentyll bloudde. Obsecratio, a speciall desyre. Obsecro, are, to beseche or hartily pray, Obse∣crare ab aliquo, to desyre of one. Obsecr, is sometyme an aduerbe. Hem, ob∣secro an is est? Howe I pray the, is that he? Obsecundo, are, to make prosperouse, alsoo to obey or do all thing at an other mans wylle, to make a thynge better than it semeth to be. Obsecundanter, obediently. Obsepio, iui, ire, to inclose about with an hedge Obsequela, dylygence, indeuour. Obsequia, thynges done to the pleasure or ap∣petite of hym that they be done for. Obsequens, obedyent. Obsequenter, obedyently. Obsequentissime, with great obedience. Obsequere animo, Take thy pleasure, make good chere. Obsequibilis, dylygent, redye to do that, why∣che is commaunded. Obsequiosus, idem. Obsequium, redynes to do al that is comman∣ded. sometyme it sygnifyeth flattery. Obsequor, eris, qui, to folowe an other mans pleasure. Obsequi animo, to make good chere. Obsero, seri, serere, to sowe, or sette aboute, to plante. Obsero, are, to locke or shutte a doore. Obseruabilis, le, mete to be obserued, worthye to be had in reuerence. Obseruantia, reuerence, obseruaunce. Obseruatio, idem. wayte as of espyall. Obseruo, are, to awayte dilygentely with the eyes, and also the mynde, to honoure, to take good hede, to haue in reuerence. Obseruare ianuam, to kepe the doore. Obses, idis, an hostage, or pledge in warres. Obsessi, they whyche are besyeged, that they may not issue out of the place where they ar. Obsessor, oris, he that layeth siege. Obsidiae, arum, lyenge in awayte, to take away any thynge craftily. Obsidianum nitrum, a glasse whyche is pure blacke. Obsidionalis corona, a garlande gyuen to theym, whyche delyuered a towne or for∣tresse besyeged with ennemyes, whyche was of grasse. Obsidior, aris, ari, to lye in awayt to take one. Obsidium, obsidio, obsessio, a syege aboute a towne or fortresse. Obsidio, onis, idem. Obsido, & obsideo, sessi, dere, to lay siege. Obsidere stuprum, to espy a tyme to defloure a woman. Obsigno, are, to close letters and seale theym, also to sygne theym. Obsignator, toris, he that putteth to his seale or sygne to a dede or instrument. Obsipo, are, to throwe or caste, as whan men of the countrey do say, Obsipa pullis escam, Caste meate to the chyckens. Obsisto, stiti, sistere, to resyste. Obsistere obuiam, to mete with one.
Obsitus, ta, tum, wrapped, sette aboute with herbes or trees. Obsitus annis & pannis, very olde & yll clad. Obsitus squalore uestis, yll & sluttyshly clad. Obsitus aeuo, very aged. Obsita tenebris loca, very darke plaes. Obsolesco, scere, to decay, to waxe olde, to be out of vse. Obsolere, idem. Obsoletus, ta, tum, decayd, old, out of vse, worn as a garment whan it is bare. Obsolote, porely apparayled. Obsonium, all meates except bread and potage. Obsonus, na, nū, that which hath an yll sowne. Obsono, & obsonor, ari, to feast or banket. Obsonito, tare, idem. Obsonatio, feastynge or bankettyng. Obsonator, & obsonatrix, he or she that ma∣keth feastes or bankettes. Obsono, are, to sowne yll. Obsorbeo, bui, bere, & obsorbo, psi, bere, to suppe vp all. Obsorbo, idem. Obsordeo, dui, sordére, to be fylthy, or vnclene, or sluttishe. Nonius declareth it to wax olde. Obstaculum, an obstacle or impedyment. Obstetrico, care, to do the office of a mydwife. Obstetrix, tricis, a mydwyfe. Obstinat, obstinately, or fyrmely. Obstinatus, ta, tum, obstinate, fyrme, or stable. Obstinatio, obstinacy, styffenes in opynion. Obstino, are, to be obstinate, or persyste, fyrme in one sentence or purpose. Obstipo, pare, to stoppe. Obstipus, crouped shouldred. Obstitum, croked, sometyme vyolated. Obstro, stiti, stare, to withstande, to lette. Obstragulum, a keuerynge of a bedde. Obstrepo, pere, to crye out on one, or make a noyse. Obstrictus, bounded, tied. Obstrigillo, are, to resyst or repugne agaynste. to speake in detraction of one. Obstringo, xi, gere, to bynd or tye. Obstringere fidē, to make a faithful promys Obstringere se scelere, to confesse the offēce. Obstrudo, si, dere, to hyde, to stop a mannes throte, that he can not eate meate. Obstrudulentum, a stoppynge. Obstruo, xi, struere, to shut, to stop. Obstruere luminibus, to lette that a man can not loke out of his wyndowes, or to stoppe his lyghtes. Obstructio, a stoppynge. Obstructus, stopped or shutte. Obstupidus, da, dum, astonyed. Obstupefacio, facere, to abasshe, or make a∣bashed. Obstupesco, scere, to be abashed. Obstupeo, idem. Obsum, obfui, obesse, to hurte or hynder, or indamage. Obsurdesco, obsurdescere, to be or wax deffe. Obtego, idem quod Tego. Obtempero, perare, to obeye, or be at com∣maundement. Obtendo, to laye an excuse, to keuer ouer. Obtendiculum, a coulourable aunswere. Obtentus, tus, a pretence. Obtero, triui, obterere, to treade or thruste downe, to suffocate, to bruyse. Obtestatio, an humble desyre. properly not to do a thynge. also to take god or some other thynge to wytnesse. Obtestor, aris, ari, humbly to beseche, to desire for goddes sake, or for the remembraunce of some thynge, whiche to hym that is desyred, is thankfully herde. Obtexo, ere, to wayue about. Obticeo, cui, cere, to kepe sylence, not to speake. Obtritus, ta, tum, worne out. Obtritus, tus, wearynge, foulynge. Obturamentum, the heade of a ponde. Obturo, are, to shutte. Obturatio, shuttynge. Obtineo, nere, to opteyne, to hold, to reteyne styll, to gete, sometyme to haue. Si istam ani∣mi firmitudinem obtines, salui sumus. If thou haste that fyrmenesse of courage, we be saulfe. Obtinere litem, to get the thing that he sued for, to recouer his suite by iudgement. Obtinere primum locum, to be chiefe or pryncipall. Obtinere ordinem, to kepe the order. Obtingere, to happe. Obtigit, it happened. Obtorpesco, obtorpui, pescere, to be verye slowe or dull. Obtorpere, idem. Obtorpet manus, my hande is on sleape. Obtorqueo, obtorsi, obtorquere, to wrynge or wrythe about. Obtrecto, tare, to yll reporte, to depraue, to haue in despite. Obtrectator, toris, an yll reporter, or backe∣byter. Obtrectatio, yll reporte, dispraysynge. Obtrigo, are, to bynde by an othe. Obtrudo, si, dere, to thruste downe, to put to with force. Obtrudit fores, he pulled to the doore. Also to set forthe. Aliquid prius, ob∣truclamus, Let vs fyrste set forthe somwhat. Obtrudere uxorem, to gyue to a man a wyfe agaynst his wylle or appetite. Obtrunco, uncare, to slea, also to stryke of a mannes heade. Obtueor, eri, to beholde stedfastly. Obtuor, idem.
Obtundo, dere, to stryke, to breake, to make dulle, to hurt a man with speakyng, to make wearye. Obturare, to stoppe. Obturbo, bare, to trouble all. Obtusus, a, um, dulle. Obtuse, dully. Obtutus, tus, & obtuitus, a looke or regarde. Obuagio, gire, to crye out, as a chylde. Obuallo, are to enuyronne of compasse aboute with a dyche or walle. Obuaricator, toris, he that tourneth one oute of the ryght way, or letteth hym that he may not passe. Obuaro, are, to peruerte. Obuaricio, care, to stop or let one of his passage Obuenio, nire, to come agaynste, to mete with. also to happen. Obuensio, onis, reuenues. Obuersor, aris, ari, to be presente, or before the eyes, to come in remembrance. Obuerto, & obuerso, tere, to tourne agayne, or backe. Sed mihi ante oculos obuersabatur reipub. dignitas, quae me ad se rapit, But be∣fore myne eyes came the estate of the publyke weale, whyche plucketh me vnto her. Obuiam, an aduerbe, whych sygnifyeth before in the way, agaynst one. Obuiam ire, to goo agaynst one, to preuent. Obuia urbs inimicis, the citie easy to be ta∣ken with ennemies. Obuiam mittere, to sende men to mete with one in the waye. Obuiam fit, he mette with me. Obuiam ire periculis, to preuent daunger. Si nihil obuiam est, If there be nothynge in the way to lette. Obuio, are, to mete with one. Obuius, a, um, that whiche meteth with one. Obumbro, brare, to make darke with a sha∣dowe. sometyme to defende. Obuncus, a, um, very crooked. Obuolo, are, to flee agaynste. Obuoluo, uere, to wrappe togyther. Obuos sacro, the auncient Romaynes vsed for obsecro, I beseche you. ¶O ANTE C. OCca, an harowe or dragge, whych hath yron teethe, wherewith cloddes are broken. Occatio, a breakyng of cloddes, or harrowing. Occator, he that harroweth. Occaeco, care, to make blynde. Occalleo, ere, to waxe or be harde flesshed, or brawned, lyke as a bore is. Occallesco, Idem. Occano, & occino, occanui, & occini, occa∣nere, & occinere, to synge agaynste one, to lay in rebuke. Occaso, sere, to be loste or vndone. Occasio, occasyon. Rara occasio, not redy at hande. Occasiuncula, a smalle occasyon. Occasus, us, deathe of man or beaste. also the goynge downe of the sonne, or sonneglade. Occatorium, an harrowynge. Occedo pro accedo. Occentassint for conuitia fecerint, They shall gyue rebukes or wordes of reproche. Occento, tare, to crye out agaynst one with re∣bukefull wordes. Occentus, tus, where one syngeth agaynste an nother, It maye be alsoo taken for a coun∣tertenour. Occepso, pro incepero, I shall begynne. Occidens, tis, the weste, or ponent. Occidens sol, the sunne goynge downe. Occidentalis, le, of the weste. Occidi, is a sygnifycation of sorowfulnes as it were, I am vndone, or vtterly loste. Occidi, I am deade, I am loue. Occidit memoria, the memorye or remem∣braunce is loste. Occido, di, dere, to slee or wounde to deathe, to fall greuousely, to torment or molest one. Occido, dere, to fall downe, to peryshe vtter∣ly, to dye, to go downe, as the sonne dothe, and other sterres. Occidit spes nostra, our hope is loste. Occiduum, the plac where the sonne gothe downe. Occiduus, a, um,  downe. Occilare, to beate uffet. Occino, nere, to  to an other. Occissimus, of all  moste lost or desperate Occisio, onis, a slhter or deathe of men or cattell. Occidio, onis, idem. Occipio, pere, to begynne. Occiput, & occipitium, the hynder parte of the heade. Occisus, a, um, kylled. Occisa res est, the matter is dasshed or marred. Occitantur, for frequenter occiduntur, they be slayne here and there, or in dyuerse places. Occlamito, tare, to crye out. Occludo, dere, to shytte faste. Occludere linguam, to stoppe a man frome speakynge. Occlusus, occlusior, occlusissimus, fast shutte. Occo, occare, to harrowe and breake cloddes and balkes in the corne fieldes. Also to couer with erthe. Occulo, lere, to hyde. Occultatio, an hydynge. Occulto, tare, idem.
Occultus, ta, tum, hyd, which is not knowen. Occulte, priuilie, vnknowen. Occumbo, cubui, cumbere, to be slayne, to be deadly wounded. Occupatitius ager, the fyelde whiche is ne∣glected of the owner, and laboured by other. Occupo, are, to occupie, to get or take before an other man, to vse in commune, to take or holde a thynge with force, to let or empeche, to possede, sometyme to lende for auauntage, to preuente, to let. Occupans, tis, he that dothe occupie or vse a thynge, the occupier. Occupatus, let, in busynesse, occupyed. Occupatio, a colour in rhetorike, where the playntyfe in preuentynge the wordes of the defendaunt, reherseth that whiche he wyll laye for excuse, and disproueth it. Occupare consilium, to fynde aduyse or counsayle. Occupare locum to take or kepe a place with force. Occurro, si, rére, to meete with, to come to re∣membraunce, to offre hym selfe. Also to re∣syste, to runne, to come to mynde, or remem∣braunce, also to be proffered. Occurrit peruionibus herba haec, this herbe healeth kybes on the heeles. Occurso, are, the frequentatiue of occurro, to come often to remembraunce, to mete oft, or runne agaynste one. Occursus, us, a runnynge agaynste one. Oceanius, a, um, of the occean sea. Oceanus, the brode sea called the Occeane sea, whiche compaceth the worlde and addeth to his name the name of the countreys by whi∣che it passeth. as Oceanus Britannicus, the sea nexte to Englande and Scotlande. Oce∣anus Indicus, the Indiane sea. Ocellatus, ta, tum, that whiche hath eyen, or holes lyke to eyen. Ocellus, a lyttell eye. Ocha, a goose. Ochus, a ryuer whiche passeth throughe Acar¦nania, a countrey in Grece. Ocquinisco, scere, to humble hym selfe or dis∣able hym selfe. Ochra, oker, whiche paynters do vse. Ocris, olde wryters called a broken hyll, harde to go vp to. Ocreae, legge harnes, botes. Ocreatus, booted or harnessed on the legges. Ocrinum promontorium, sayncte Micha∣elles mounte in Cornewall. Orior, aris, ari, to be vnoccupyed, or without busynesse. Otiosus, ydell, vnoccupyed, quyete. Otium, vacation from labour, leyser, quyetnes ydelnes, lacke of busynes. Octapitarum promontorium, a place in wa∣les, called sayncte Dauyds. Octauia, the syster of Augustus, and wyfe of Antonius, whome he afterwarde forsoke. A nother was daughter of Claudius the em¦perour, and wyfe to Nero who caused her to be slayne. Octauius, the father of the noble Emperour Augustus. Octauianus, the name of Augustus before that he toke on hym the monarchy. Octangulus, a, um, eyght cornered. Octauus, the eyght. Octauum, idem. Octies, eyght tymes. Octingentesimus, a, um, the eyght hundred. Octingenties, eyght hundred tymes. Octingenarius, eyght hundred yeres olde. Octingenti, eyght hundred. Octingeni, & Octingenteni, idem. Octingentuplus, eyght hundred folde. Octo, eyght. October, the monthe of October. Octoduri, Seyne and Valeif in Fraunce. Octogenarius, of foure score in number, or foure score yeres olde. Octogeni, foure score. Octogesimus, the laste of foure score. Octogies, foure score tymes. Octoginta, foure score. Octonus, a, um, the number of eyght, in son∣dry partes. Octopes, hauynge eyght fete. Octophorum, a lyghter borne with eyght mē. Octoplus, four tymes as moche. Octuplicatus, eyght tymes doubled. Oculatus, full of eyen, also quicke sighted cir∣cumspecte, espyenge a thynge shortely. Oculatus testis, a wytnesse whiche sawe the thynge. Oculeus, full of eyen, wyly. Oculus, an eye, also a yonge budde of a tree. Oculis captus, blynde. In oculis gestare, & In oculis esse & ferre, to loue one so moche that he can not be satis∣fyed with beholdynge of hym. In oculis habere, to attend vppon one, or to beholde intentifely or stedfastly. Vin hodie facere quo tuo uiro, oculi dole∣ant▪ wylt thou nowe do that whiche shall make thy husbande lothe to see the? Oculi eruditi, whan one knoweth whether a Oculitus eam amat, he loueth her as well as his owne eyen. Oculum exculpere, to crache out ones eyes. Oculos tollere, to begynne to be mery. thynge be well done or no. Intendere oculos, to set the eyes to beholde stedfastly. Oculos tenere, to make mē to wonder at the
excellent warkemanshyp of a thynge. Oculi, the blewe spottes in the fethers of a pe∣cockes tayle. Oculissimus, he that seethe moste clerely. Oculatio, the takynge awaye of superfluouse buddes from a tree or vyne. Oculus Christi,. an herbe whiche is also called filius ante patrem. Oculum adijcere, to be in loue with a thyng whiche is seene. Ocymum, an herbe called basyle. Ocyor, swyfter, ocyus, idem. Ocyssimus, a, um, moste swyfte. Ocyus, sooner, quicklyer. ¶O ANTE D. ODaea, places, wherin syngynge is exer∣cysed. Ode, a songe. Odfacio, for olfacio, cere, to smelle. Odi, I hate, or haue hated: Odisse, to hate or haue hated. Odinoliontes, a fyshe whiche cleueth to a shyp and maketh her to abyde as If she laye at an∣ker. uide Remora. Odiosus, he that is hated, displesant, trou∣blous, tediouse. Odiose, with hate, displeasantly. Odit eum cane peius, & angue, He hateth him wars thanne a dogge or a serpente: as who saythe, mortally without hope of recon∣cylynge. Odites, one of the sons of Ixion the Centaure. Odium, hate, displeasure, tediousenes, rācour. Odio esse, to be hated. Odium capere alicuius rei, to be offended or discontent with any thynge. Odium concitare, to procure hate or dys∣pleasure. Odoeporicon, an Itenerary, wherin is wryt∣ten the distaunce of one place from an other, or a lyke thynge, as the iestes of prynces are, assignynge theyr iourneys. Odoramen seu Odoramentum, a perfume. Odores, plur. is taken of Columella for swete gummes and spyces. Odor, oris, & odos, sauour, sente. Odoramentum, euery thynge that sauoureth well also sauour. Odorarius, a maker or seller of thynges that smell swete. Odora canum uis, the qualite or power whi¦che dogges haue, to take a sente. Odoratus, tus, the smellynge or sente. Odoratus, ta, tum, that which is perfourmed sometyme that whiche doth sauour, odoryfe∣rous, or smellynge swete. Odorator, a hounde made to the suite. Odoriferus, a, um, idem. Odorifer, ra, rum, odoryferouse or sweete in sauour. Odorisecus, a hounde or spanell, whiche hun∣teth by sente. Odorariuestigijs, to drawe as a hounde dothe. Odoro, & odoror, ari, to smell, to perceyue. Odorus, a, um, that whiche sendeth forthe sa∣uour, or hath a good sauour. ¶O ANTE E. OEAGRVS, a ryuer in the countrey of Thracia. Oeanthe, a Citie, also the floure of a vyne. Oebades, kynge Darius horsekepar, by whose polycy he atteyned to the kyngdome of Persya. Oebalia, the countrey in Greece, called also Laconia. Oebalus, a mannes name. Oechalia, a citie in Laconia. Oeconomia, the orderynge and prouydyng of thynges concernynge houshold, also an order in wrytynge, wherby euery thynge is sette in his proper place. Oeconomica, perteynynge to household. Oeconomicus, he that can order and gouerne a house. Oeconomus, a stewarde of housholde. Oeci, places, where women do syt and worke with woull or sylke. Oecumenicus, vniuersall, perteynynge to al the worlde. Oecumenicum consilium, a generall coun∣sayle, wherin thinges are vniuersally treated concernynge all countreys. Oedema, an impostume or botche commen of a fleumatike matter, in the which is no grief Oedipus, the sonne of Laius kyng of Thebes, whom his father delyuered to his shepherde to kyll, but he pityenge the chyld made holes in his feete and dyd hange hym on a boughe but he beynge so founde of the shepeherde of Phorbas kynge of Corinthe was broughte to the queene, who lackyng chyldren, brought hym vp for her sonne, afterwarde in a skyr∣myshe, vnwetynge he slewe his owne father, and assoylynge the subtylle ryddle or questi∣ons of Sphinx the monster, he opteyned the kyngedome of Thebes and the queene called Iocasta whiche was his mother, by whome he had two sonnes Polynices and Etheocles but whan he knewe that he had slayne his fa¦ther, and wedded his owne mother, for so∣rowe he cratched out his owne eyes. Odipodioniua, nia, um, belongynge to Oedipus.
Oenanthe, the flour of a wylde vyne growing in hedges called Labrusca, but Dioscorides. li. 3. sayth that it is an herbe whiche hathe a leafe lyke persenepes, a whyte floure, a big stalke, an hand breade highe, sede lyke orage, a great rote with many rounde heades li. 5. he sayeth that it is the floure of a wyld vine, sone after he sayth that it is the grape of the wylde vyne. Theodorus Gaza dothe trans∣late hym. Vitiflora. Oenanthinum, an oyntmente made of the sayde beary. Oeneus, the father of Deianira, the laste wife of Hercules. Oenōne, the concubine of Paris before that he rauished Helene. Oeneus, kynge of Archadia, father of Melea∣ger, wherof he is called Oenides. Oenomaus, the sonne of Mars, father of Hippodamia. Oenisteria, was a certayne sacrifice at Athe∣nes made by yonge men newely berded, whi∣che was done before that they dyd cut theyr heare that was longe, whiche sacrifyce was in this wyse, a certayn measure of wyne was brought into the temple of Hercules wherof the yonge men dranke a lyttell, and gaue the resydue to all other that were present. Oenophorus, a seruaunte, whiche bryngeth wyne to the table. Oenophorum, a pot wherin wyne is caryed, Oenopola, a vyntenar, or tauernar, Oenopolium, a wyne tauerne. Oenotria, Italy. Oenotrides, two yles nyghe to Calabria. Oesipum, the fylthy oyle, whiche is in wulle, that is in the flankes of a shepe, or about his necke, whiche oyle is sodden out, and vsed for medicyne. Oestrum, woodnesse, or madde fury: also a fly which maketh a great noyse, whan he flyeth some do suppose it to be a dor, lyke to a bee, but that he is blacke and greater. Oeta, a mountayne betwene Thessalia, and Macedonia. Oēta, the father of Medea, wyfe of Iason. ¶O ANTE F. OFFA, a puddynge, also a dyshe made with fatte brothe, harde cheese, pep∣per, and cynamom, or other lyke iun∣kat. somtyme it is taken for a morsel. Offa penita, a piece of fleshe cut of with the tayle. Offarius, & offaria, a maker of suche iun∣kettes. Offatim, in morselles. Offector, toris, a dyer. Offella, a lyttell morsell, as of fleshe mynced, al so a pottage made with pieces of flesshe, as stued brothe or forced gruell. Offendo, dere, to meete with, to fall into, to fynde by chaunce, to stryke or hyt any thyng vnware, to offende. Offendere apud aliquē, to do a thynge, whiche lyketh not them that do see it done. also to displease. Offendiculum, an impedimente or let, an ob∣stacle. Offendimentum, & offendix, the knotte of a rybon or lase, wherwith a bonet or hatte is knyt faste to the heade. Offensa, an offence or displeasure. Offensam subire, to be in displeasure of one. Offensatio, a metynge. Offensaculum, that whiche is layd in a mans way, wherat he stumbleth. Offensator, satoris, he that stackereth in rea∣dynge, as if he were not perfect in readynge, or readeth otherwyse than it is wrytten. Offensans, tis, that whiche hurteth or letteth. Offensio, onis, hurte or harme. somtyme dys∣pleasure or hatred. Offensiones belli, faultes in battayle. Offensiones, incumbraunces. Offensioni esse, to do displeasure or harme, betwene offensio and offensa, semeth to be this diuersitie, that Offensa is in hym that offendeth or greueth. Offensio, in hym that is greued or offended, Nam quod negas te dubitare quin magna in offensa sim apud Pompeium hoc tempore, non uideo causam cur ita sit hoc quidem tempore, where ye do not doubt but that nowe at this tyme I am in Pompeys great displeasure, I se no cause why it shuld be so at this presente tyme. Nec tantum intelligebam ei esse offensionis, quā tum literae tuae declarant Nor I vnderstand that he was so moche displeased as your let∣ters make mention. Offensionem subleuare, Cice. de Amicitia. Vna illa, subleuandum offensio est, that one offence or griefe is to be eased or holpen. Offensionem obliterare, to pardon or for∣get an offence or displeasure. Offensiones lenire. Cice. O multas, & gra¦ues offensiones, quas quidem tu das operā ut lenias. O howe manye and greuouse dis∣pleasures are done, whiche ye go about to mittigate or excuse. Offensionem deponere. Cice. fam. epist. li. 13. Cum tantum literae meae potuerunt ut his lectis, omnem offensionem suspitionis quam habueras de Lisone deponeres. Sens my letters mought do so moche, than whan ye had rad them, ye dyd laye aparte al disple∣sures whiche ye had agaynste Liso, ingen∣dred of suspition.
Offensum, idem quod offensio. Cic. ad Att. 2. Scito nihil unquam fuisse tam infame, tam turpe, tam deni{que} omnibus generibus, or∣dinibus, aetatibus offensum, quam hunc sta∣tum qui nunc est. Knowe this for a suertye, that there was neuer thynge so reprochefull, so dishonest, fynally so displeasaunt to all sor∣tes, degrees and men of euerye age, as this present state that nowe is. Offenso, are, to hyt ofte, or to let, to thraste a∣gaynste a thynge. Offensiuncula, a small offence or displesure. Offercio, cire, to stuffe or fyll. Offero, obtuli, obferre, to offer, or presente, to gyue wyllyngly, to promyse. Offerre auxilium, to promyse ayde. Offerre crimen, to put a complaynt against one. Offerre incendium, Cice. ad Pont. Domus ardebat in Palatio non fortuito, sed oblato incēdio, My house in the Palaice did burne not by any chaunce, but by fyre thraste in by some man. Offerre mendicitatem, to brynge one vnto pouertie. Offerre relligionem, to make a scrupule or doubt in conscience. Si se in uia obtulerit, occisum iri iam ab ipso Milone uideo, Cice. If he mete with Milo in the waye, I perceyue he wyll sle hym. Si nihil offeret se quod sit probabilitati illi contrarium, If he fynde no thynge contrary to that whiche maye appere to be trewe. Offerre se alicui, to present hym selfe to one or before one. Offerre spem, to put one in hope. Offerre stuprum, to assaye by meanes to de∣fyle a woman maryed or vnmaryed. Offerre moram, to let. Offerre se obuiam, to mete with one. Offerre stuprum, to commyt aduoutry. Offerre uitium uirgini, to defloure a virgin. Offerumentae, strypes. Ne offerumentas habe¦bis plureis in tergo tuo, {quam} vlla nauis longa clauos, tum ego ero mendacissimus, and if thou haue not mo strypes on the skyn of thy backe, than a galy hath nayles, I shall be the falsyst lyar that euer was. Offerumēta, offrynges, thynges offred to god. Officina, a werkehouse, a shop. Ex eadem officina uenit, it was of one man∣nes doinge. Officialis, ale, perteynyng to offices or duties. Officialis, an offycer. Officio, ficere, to hurte, sometyme to do, also to dye clothe. Officere luminibus, to stop the lyghtes. Officiosus, a frendly or seruisable manne, or he that is glad to please, or dothe wel his duty. Officiosus dolor, a griefe whiche procedeth of a good cause or reason. Officiose, diligently, seruisably. Officium, offyce, duetie, or a thynge, whiche ought to be done. It is somtyme taken fo ho¦nour done to one, and it may be vsed for that whiche we do call homage, doone in suche fourme as our lawe doth appoynt it, it is al∣so taken for benefyte, properly it is that that ought to be done, and is mete & conuenyent. Officium usurpare, to do his duetie. In officio esse, to do his duetie, to do his in∣deuour. Officia intercedere. Cic. fam. epist. 13. Mul∣ta{que} & magna inter nos officia paria & mu∣tua intercedunt, Betwene vs hath ben sun∣dry and great pleasures of lyke importance done one to an other. Officium promereri, to do pleasure. Cic. in oratione ante exiluim. Non conue∣nit enim cum ego ad promerendum offici∣um tam fuerim expedius, uos ad referen∣dam gratiam esse tardiores. It is not reason that sens I was so ready to do you pleasure ye shulde be so slacke to do lyke wyse for me. Officio fungi, to do his indeuour or duetie. Officium praestare, officium conferre, idem In officio continere, to kepe hym his frend. Officij causa prosequi aliquem, to kepe com¦pany with one to do hym honour or worship. Officia mutua, pleasures doone one to an other. Offirmo, are, to abyde in one purpose or opy∣nion, to be obstinate. Offlecto, xi, tere, to tourne a thynge contrary or about. Offoca, are, to powre water into the mouthe of a man or beaste. Offritiae, crafty or deceytfull taches. Offringo, ere, to breake with a ploughe, lande cared before. Offuciae, cawtelles, crafty wayes to deceyue. Offula, a lyttell morsell Offundo, fusi, dere, to powre about, to make darke or blynde, to stayne, to caste in, or brynge in. Offundere errorem alicui, to abuse or de∣ceyue one. Offusus terror oculis, auribus{que}, feare was bothe at his eyes and cares. Offusa animis caligo, theyr myndes were made blynde. Offuco, care, to put water or other lycour into a mannes mouth, to sowke done, as they vse to do to sycke men, which for feblenesse canne not by them selfes take any sustenaunce. Offusco, care, to make blacke, or darke.
¶O ANTE G. OGD OVS, a kynge of Egypt, which fyrste buylded the citie of Memphis. Ogdo, adis, the numbre of eyght. Ogdolapis, a ryuer whiche commeth oute of the hyls called Alpes, and runneth to Rome. Oggannio, ire, to prate, to braule, to speake with chydynge. Oggero, si, gerere, to caste in or set. Oculos oggerere, to caste or sette the eyes on one. Oggrassari, to go. Ogyges, he whiche fyrste buylded the citie of Thebes. Ogygeus, a, um, made or founde by Ogyges. Ogygea, an yle betwene Phenicea and Syria where Calypso dwelled, which deteined with her Vlysses. Ogigidae, The banes. Ogyris, an yle in Siria. ¶O ANTE H. OHE, an exclamation, sygnyfyeng that he, whiche speaketh that worde, is sa∣ciate or wery of that, whiche he seeth or hereth. Oh, an interiection signifienge a crye whanne one meteth with his frende, whom of a long tyme he hath not seene, somtyme it is vsed in meruaylynge with a contempte. sometyme in affyrmynge. sometyme in sorowynge. some∣tyme reioyeynge. ¶O ANTE I. ¶Oinomeli, wyne and hony sodden together. ¶O ANTE L. OLEA, is most properly the fruite of an olyue: yet sometyme it is vsed for an olyue tree. Oleaceus, a, um, oyly. Oleacum, a colour, whiche is myxt with grene blacke, yelowe, and whyte. Oleaginus, a, um, of an olyue tree. Oleagineus, idem. Olearis, re, & olearius, a, um, perteynynge to oyle. Olearia cella, a cellour for oyle. Olearius, a maker of oyle. Olearus, one of the yles called Ciclades, Oleaster, a wylde olyue. Oleastellus, uel Oleago, is that whiche Sera¦pio calleth Mezereon. Oleastrinum, oyle of wylde olyues, Oleatus, a, um, of oyle. Oleitas, the tyme of gatherynge of olyues. Olenus, a Citie of Archadia, where the goote with whose mylke Iupiter was nouryshed, was brought vppe, and therfore the signe of sterres whiche was supposed to be the same gote, is named Olenia. Oletare, to corrupt or make stynkynge. leg .xii. tabu. Ne quis aquam oletato dolo malo, ubi publice salit. Si quis oletarit, sestertiorum de cem millium mulcta  No man by crafte corrupte water where it pryngeth to a com∣mune vse, he that doth corrupt it shal forfait ten thousande sestertius, whiche do amount of our money .xxv. li. xiii. s. iiii. d. Olentica, thynges whiche haue an yll sauour. Oleo, eui, & olui, olere, to sauour, to haue sauour. Olent illa super cilia maliciam, that sturdye lookes do sygnifye that thou art maliciouse. Aurum huic olet, this felowe smelleth that I haue money. Iucunde olére, to haue a swete sauour. Bene olére, to haue a good sauour. Male olere, to stynke. Rosa recens a longinquo olet, a rose newe∣ly gathered is smelled ferre of. Oleosus, a, um, full of oyle. Olesco, lescere, to growe. Oletum, a place where olyues doo growe, also the dunge or ordure of a man, properlye it is a draught or iakes. Oleum & operam perdere, to lose laboure and coste. Oleum, oyle. Olfacio, feci, facere, to smell. Olfacto, are, to smell moche or often. Olfactus, tus, the sence of smellynge. Olibantum, a measure of wyne. Olidus, da, dum, that whiche hath greatte sa∣uour, eyther good or badde, moste commun∣ly stynkynge. Oligarchia, the state of a common weale wher a fewe persons be in aucthoritie. Olim, sometyme, as wel in the tyme passed as in the tyme to come, nowe late, longe tyme passed, ones. Olitor, a gardynar, or seller of herbes and rootes. Olitorius, a, um, perteyninge to a pot garden. Oliua, an olyue tree. Oliueta, the tyme of gatheryng of olyue beries Oliuetum, a place where do growe oliue trees. Oliuina, plenty of olyues, also reuenues, whi∣che do come of olyues. Oliuitas, & oleitas, the qualitie of olyues, the gatherynge tyme of olyues. Oliuo, are, to gather olyues. Oliuum, oyle olyue. Olla, a pot.
Ollares, grapes conserued in pottes. Olli, for illi. Ollula, a lyttell potte. Olophernes, chiefe constable to the great Na∣bugodonozer kynge of Assyrians, a valyaunt capitayne: not withstandynge beynge ouer∣charged with wyne and to moche trustynge in the beaulty and plesaunt speche of the He∣brewe ladye Iudith, he was by her slayne in his bedde, an ad his headde stryken of and brought to his ennemies, before the incarna∣tion of Chryste. yeres. Ololygones, crokynge frogges. Olor, oris, a wylde swanne Olôrinus, na, um, of a swanne, as, Cantus o∣lorinus, the syngynge of a swanne. Olus, leris, herbes whiche serue for pottage, pot herbes. Oluscula, small herbes. Olus atrum, an herbe called Alysander. Olympia, a citie betwene the hylles of Ossa and Olympus. Olympiacus, ca, cum, perteynynge to that playes or hyll. Olympias, piadis, the space of fyne yeres, whereby the olde Greekes dyd accompte, as we do nowe, by the yeres of our lorde, as the fyrste Olympias, the seconde, the thyrd, and so forthe. Olympicus, ca, cum, of Olympus. Olympicum certamen, was a game or pryce kepte on the hyll of Olympus by all the prin∣ces and cities of Greece euerye fyfth yere in the honour of Hercules, who fyrste began it. In the whiche were all these maystries pro∣ued. Runnynge on foote to a goll, also run∣nynge furthe and backe agayne two furlong also wrastlynge, fyghtynge with fystes, run∣nynge with horses, wrastlynge with handes and legges, runnynge and wrastlynge of chil¦dren, fyghtynge in harneyse, runnynge with ii. horses, and leapynge from the one to the o¦ther, coursynge with charyottes, runnynge with mares, but so as in the myddell of the course, he that dyd ryde shulde leape downe and holdynge faste the brydell shoulde make an end of his course. There was also conten¦tion and vyctory of poetes rhetoritiās musi∣cians and subtyle disputars. in the place did growe a wylde olyue tree wherof garlandes were made and gyuen to the victours, here∣to assembled out of all the Cities and coun∣treys of Greece, in the whiche tyme, was ey∣ther warre appoynted or leages concluded, these gret games were also called Olympia. Olympionices, he that hath had victory in the games at Olympus. Olympius, a, um, heuenly. Olympus, a mountayne or hyll in Grece, be∣twene Thessalia and Macedonia, aboue the whiche appereth no clowde: and therfore a∣monge the poetes it is vsurped for heauen. Plutarchus in uita Aemilij, sayth, that it is ten furfonge in heyght. Olynthus, a citie in Thracia. Olyras, a ryuer in Greece by the place called Thermopylas. Olysippum, a citie in portugall, nowe called Vlysbona, in englyshe Lusseborn. ¶O ANTE M. OMASVM, a fat gut or chitterlynge. Omen, minis, lucke, also a worde or sentence sodaynelye spoken, after the whiche some thynge hapneth to folowe accor¦dynge thervnto, aboue the expectation of thē whiche herde it. Omentum, the calle or sewet, wherein all the bowelles are lapped, also the thynne skynne in the head, wherin the brayne is conteyned: of some called the ryme of the brayne, and of surgeons Pia mater. Omentatus, ta, tum, myxte with sewet. Ominor, aris, ari, & omino, aui, are, to gesse what shall happen or folowe. Ominator, òris, he that telleth a mannes lucke or fortune. Ominosus, a, um, lucky. Omissus, a, um, lefte, not medled with. Omîs∣so animo.) Vbi te uidi animo esse omisso, whan I sawe that thou caryddest for no∣thynge. Omitto, omisi, omittere, to forbeare, to leaue, to neglecte. Omitte hunc, let hym alone, pardon hym. Omitte me, let be, let me alone. Omitte iracundiam, be angry no more. Omitte solicitudinem, care not for it. Omitte timorem, be not aferde. Omitte de ea re dicere, speake no more of the matter. Id omitto, I wyll not speake therof. Vt omittam de eo plus loqui, I wyll passe o¦uer to speake any more of hym. Omissis iocis credo, in ernest I doo beleue. ❀Omne tulit punctum, he touched euerye pointe, A prouerbe applyed to hym, whiche omytteth nothyng expedient or necesary, and is therfore of all men commended. Omnibus numeris, in al poyntes Res est ō∣nibus numeris absoluta, it is a thynge per∣fyte in all poyntes. Omnifariam, all maner of wayes, of euerye kynde. Omnifarius, a, um, sundry, dyuerse. Omnigenus, a, um, of euery kynde. Omnimodus, da, dum, all maner.
Omnino, holly, throughely, alwaye, fynallye, onely. Omnino in familia non erat, he in no maner of wyse was in the house. Miserrima est omnino ambitio, ambition in euery thynge is moste miserable. Omnibus partibus, al maner of wayes, to al intentes. Omni ratione, idem. Omnipotens, tis, almyghty. Omnis, ne, all. Omniparens terrae, the erthe bryngeth forth all thynges. Omophagi, they whiche do eate rawe fleshe. Omphax, acis, a grape not fully rype. Omphacium, lycour made of fruite that is not rype, as of grapes, and than it is called ver iuyce, it is also of other fruites and floures. Omphacium uinum, a grene wyne not plea∣saunte or swete. Omphacinum oleum, oyle made of olyues, not beinge rype. Omphacomêli, a syrupe made with the iuyce of grene grapes and hony,Paul. Egi. Meuse, A∣uicen. An∣to. Musa. Io. Agric. they make it now a dayes with the sayde iuyce and sugar, and do call it Syrupus de agresta. Omphale, a mayden whiche was Queene of Lidia, whom Hercules dydde serue, and she caused hym to spynne in a rocke. Omutesco, tescere, to be dome, and canne not speake. ¶O ANTE N. ONae, swete fygges. Onager, onagri, a wylde asse. Onerarius, a, um, that whiche serueth for bourden. Onero, are, to charge, bourden, or lade. Onerare populum, to put impositions or ta∣xes on the people. Oneratus, ta, tum, bourdayned, laded. Onerarius, raria, rarium, that wheron bour∣dayne is layde. Onerariae naues, shyppes whiche serue for bourdeyn, they maye be taken for hulkes. Onerosus, a, um, bourdeynous, chargeable. Onixes, a kynde of marble. Onyscus, a worme, whiche bendeth hym selfe lyke a bowe whan he goeth, whiche is red, and founde vnder trees, whiche haue lyen longe on the grounde. Onoba, a citie. Onocentaurus, a beaste halfe a man, halfe an asse. Onocrotalus, a byrde lyke to a swanne, which puttynge his heade in to the water, brayeth lyke an asse. Onomatopeia, a worde made of sowne or pro∣nouncynge, as bletynge of a shepe, lowynge of cowe, hissynge of an adder. Ononium, a blynde nettell. Onus, oneris, a bourden, a lode, a charge. Oneri esse, to be chargeouse to one. Onus deponere, to discharge one. Onus imponere, to gyue to one in charge. Oneri premi, to be to moche charged. Onere opprimi, to be ouer charged. Onus suscipere, to take charge. Onus tollere, to beare charge. Onus sustinere, idem. Onustus, ta, tum, loded, charged. Onyx, ychis, a whyte stone, lyke to a mannes nayle, also some be founde in Inde, whiche are of dyuerse colours, hauynge whyte spot∣tes lyke vnto eyen. it is supposed of some men to be also that whiche is called Conchula Indiae. Onychinus, na, um, made of the stone called Onyx. Oonae, yles in the northe occean where the in∣habitantes do lyue with egges of foules. ¶O ANTE P. OPACO, care, to shadowe. Opacus, ca, cum, shadowed, or in the shadowe. Opacitas, shadowe of trees or vmbrage. Opera, rae, warke, labour. Operae, plurali tantum, warkemen, labou∣rers, factours. Opera, warkes, buyldynges, pryuate or com∣mune. Operae est, it nedeth. Opera mea, by my meanes. Operam perdere, to labour in vayne. Operam Iudere, idem. Operam ponere, to take labour and peyne about a thynge. Operas reddere alicui, to paye to oone his hyre. Orestes, & Lycurgus, una opera mihi sunt sodales qua iste, Orestes and Lycurgus be as well my companyons as he. Haud censebam istarum esse operarum pa∣trem. I dyd not thynke that my father med∣led with these matters. Spero alicunde hodie me bona opera aut mala tibi inuenturum esse auxilium argenta¦rium. I truste that ones to daye I shall by good meanes or bad fynde some moneye to helpe the with. Operam do, operam impendo, operam na¦uo, I do mine indeuour, I put to my diligēce I spende my labour. Operam impendere & dependere, to take peyne about a thynge.
Operam Iudimus, we lose our labour. Operarius, a labourer. Operarius, a, um, that whiche is done with la∣bour, or pertayneth to labour or warke. Eadem opera, after one way. Operatus, ta, tum, wrought. Operatus. Liuius. Eo tempore quo corpus addictum at{que} operatum Reipu. esset, Du∣ryng the tyme that the body shalbe employed about seruyng the commune weale. Operculo, are, to keuer a vessell. Operculum, a keuerynge or lydde. Opere praecium, profytable, necessarye, a ioy∣full thynge, moche to be estemed. Operimentum, any thynge that keuereth. Operio, rui, to keuer, or hyde. Operior, riris, riri, to tary, to abyde. Operor, aris, ari, to warke. Operatio, the warke, or that whereaboute a man laboureth. Operositas, tatis, trauaylynge. Operosus, a, um, busy, dyligent in labourynge, laboryouse, peynefull. Opertorium, a couerynge. Opertus, ta, tum, keuered. Ophestes, the sonne of Lycurgus slayne by a serpente. Ophiaca, pertaynynge to serpentes, they were bokes, whyche Nicander, and Petridius wrate, of the nature of serpentes. Ophiophagi, people in Ethiope, whiche doo eate serpentes. Ophiucus, the name of Esculapius, bycause that he is ymagyned to holde a serpent in his hand. some wryte that it is a sygne in heuen, which som do cal Hercules, other Esculapius Ophites, a stone hauyng spottes lyke a serpent. Opthalmia, is a sycknes of the eyes, whych in∣flameth the bones of the heade, the knyttyn∣ges of the eyes, the thyn skynnes therof and synewes, and all the holowe part of the eye, with the forhead and balles of the chekes, it cometh eyther of smoke or heate of the sonne, or duste, or by a fall, or a stroke, or somtyme of an humour, sanguyne, choleryke, fleumatyk, or melancholy. Opici, they whych vsed abhominable ribaldry. Opicus, ca, cum, vncleane, dyshonest, shameles. Opifex, ficis, a warkman, a craftes man. Opificium, the warke. Opificina, idem. Opigena, Iuno. Iuno was soo callyd of wo∣men, bycause they supposed, that she holpe them whan they trauayled. Opilio, onis, a sheparde. Opima spolia, the spoyle, whiche by one chiefe Capitayne is taken from an other in batayle as his cote armure or harneys. Opima praedia, manours profitable of greate reuenues. Opimè, aboundantly, rychely. Opimo, are, to make fatte. Opimus, ma, mum, fatte. also ryche. Opimium, seu opimianum uinum, wine which mought endure good, two hundred yeres. Opinabilis, le, that may be cōceyued in opiniō. Opinio, onis, opinyon, sometyme hope, alsoo fame, estimation, iudgement. Opino, for opinor, I suppose. Opinor, aris, ari, to suppose, to haue opinion. Opinatus, ta, tum, supposed. Opinator, toris, a supposer. Opiparè, plentuousely. Opiparus, a, um, aboundant, freshe, or gaye. Coena opipara, a delycate souper. Opis, opem, ayde, Terent. Nisi eum quantum dij dant tibi opis seruas. Excepte thou kepe hym yf god be thy good lorde. Nihil opus est in ipsis, They can not helpe or succour the. Omni ope, with all his myght. Opis, opis, a ladye, companyon to Diana, she was alsoo wyfe to Saturnus, and by her is signified the erthe amonge the Poetes. Opistographus, a boke writen on the back side. Opisthotonicus, he that can not turne his neck Opisthotonos, the crycke or dysease, whyche letteth a man to tourne his necke. Opiter, itris, he whose father dyed before his graundfather. Opitulor, aris, ari, to helpe. Opitulator, toris, a helper. Opitulus Iupiter, Iupiter the helper at nede. Opium, the iuyce of an herbe callyd blacke po∣py, also Opius, is he that fighteth in armure. Opobalsamum, balme naturall, whyche in a parte of Iudea, callyd Hieraconthe, stylleth out of a lytell thorne. Opoponax, acis, the iuyce of an herbe callyd Panax. Oporice, a medicine made of fruites. Oporae, all fruites whiche do grow in the hast ende of sommer. Oporotheca, a place wherin fruite is kept. Oportet, it behoueth, it is expediēt or necessary Oppedo, dere, to fart against one. Oppeto, tere, to dye, also to be slayne. Oppedere febrem, to fall into the feuer. Oppidan{us}, a citisē or towns mā, Opidicus, idē. Oppidatim, towne by towne. Oppidò, an aduerbe, sygnifienge very moche, sometyme it sygnifieth forthwith, verily. Oppidulum, a lyttell towne. Oppidum, a wallyd towne or citie. Oppignero, are, to lay in pledge. Oppilo, are, to stoppe or shutte. Oppelo, ere, to fylle full. Opploro, are, to lament. Oppono, ere, to lay or put agaynst, to oppose. Opponere, to prepare a garyson to make de¦fence
agayne a siege. Opponere corpus pro patria, to put hym selfe in daunger for his countrey. Opponere, to lay in gage. Opponere causam, to lay an excuse. Opponere nomen alicuius, to thretten with one, or in ones name. Opportunus, na, num, that whyche is in dewe tyme, & as it ought to be, inclyned to a thing. Oportunus iniuriae, feete or apte to take wronge. Opportunè, opportunately, conueniently, as it ought to be, in due tyme and measure. Oppositus, ta, tum, the participle to Oppono. Oppositus, tus. Laterum nostrorū oppositus & corporum pollicemur, We promyse that we wyl put our bodies and lyues in ieoperdy for the defence therof. Oppositio, contrary settyng or puttyng. Oppressio, onis, an oppressyon or violatyng. Per oppressionē eripere, to take by violēce. Oppressor, oris, an oppressour, or he that dothe grieue or harme one. Oppressus, the participle of opprimo. Oppressus a praedonibus captus est, Being ouerlayde with theues, he was taken. Opprimo, ere, to oppresse, to kepe or shutte in, to take sodaynly, to rauysshe a womanne, to greue, to thruste harde. Opprimi aere alieno, to be moche in dette. Opprimere animos formidine, to make theym aferde. Opprimere mentionem, to putte a thynge to sylence. Opprimi inuidia, to be hated. Opprimere iuditio, to vndo one by suite. Opprimere orationem alicuius, to stoppe one in his tale. Oppressus graui somno, He was in a deade sleape. Nox certamina coepta oppressit, The nyght came on, and dyd let the contentions whiche were begunne. Opprimere occasionem, to cause the occasi∣on to be loste. Opprimere pede, to treade vnder foote. Opprimi ruina, to be slayne with the fallyng downe of some thynge. Opprimere bellum exortum, to ceasse the warre that is begunne. Os opprime, stoppe his mouthe. Opprimere aliquem, to take one vnwares. Opprimere aliquem consilio, to ouercome one by wysedome. Opprobrium, & opprobramentū, a reproche. Opprobro, are, to obiecte agaynste one, to re∣proche. Opprobratio, rebukefull speakynge. Oppugno, are, to assaulte. Oppugnare bona alicuius, to assay meanes to make one to lose his goodes. Oppugnare aliquem capite & fortunis, to cause one to lose his lyfe and goodes. Oppugnare uerbis commoda patriae, To speake agaynst the profyte of his countrey. Oppugnatio, an assiege or assaulte agaynste a fortresse. Oppugnator, toris, he that letteth the profyte of an other man, or gothe aboute to doo hym dyspleasure. Ops, opis, the syster and wyfe of Saturne: al∣so it sygnifyeth ayde or helpe. Opes, rychesse, puissance or power. Opsonator, atoris, a purueyour of vytayles, or Catar. Opsonatus, tus, & opsonatio, preparation for dyner or supper. Opsonito, tare, to prepare often for dyner or souper. Opsonium, all thynge belongynge to a meale, excepte breade and drynke. Opsono, nare, & obsonor, onari, to prepare thīges necessary for dyner, souper, or banket. Optabilis, le, that whiche is desyred. Optabiliter, pleasantly, dylectably. Optato, with desyre. Optato aduenis, ye be welcome. Optatum loquere, speake courteysly, speake not so rygorousely. Optice, the science wherby the reason of syght is knowen. Opticus, ca, cum, perspectife, pertaynynge to syghte. Optimates, the head men of a citie, alsoo they whyche defende the parte of nobylitie and ryche men. Optima fide, without fraude. Optimatus, tus, the state or condition of heade men of a towne or countray. Optime, very well. Optimo iure, with good ayd, or with good rea∣son. Optimus, beste or very good. Optio, the choyce, the request or desyre. it was also to a capytayne in warres, a mynyster to doo his commaundemente, and he assystent vnto hym. Optionem facere, to gyue the choyse to one. Optionem dare, idem. Si optio esset, if I, thou, or he mought chose. Optio, in the masculine gender, preaste money whyche souldyours doo receyue to prouyde theyr necessaries. Opto, tare, to desyre, to chouse, to require. Adopto, coopto, exopto, uide suis locis. Opulento, tare, to make ryche or plentuouse. Opulentus, ta, tum, ryche, abundant. Opulentia, & opulentitas, rychesse, abundance Opulenter, rychely, plentuousely.
Opulesco, scere, to be ryche. Opulus, a wyche hasyll tree. Opuncalo, he that syngethe lyke to a shepe∣herde. Opus, opuntis, a cytie in Locris. Opus, operis, a warke, a labour. Eius opere, by his meane or dylygence. Opus est, it is necessary, or nede. Si opus sit, if nede be. Opus intestinum, that which most common∣ly is callyd implementes of householde, pro∣perly of tymber, as fourmes, stooles, cup∣bourdes and other lyke thynges. Opus est conuento. Ita res subita est, celeri∣ter mihi hoc homine opus est, The chaunce is soo sodayne, or the matter requyreth suche haste, that I must nedes speke with the man shortly or quyckely. Opus est facto, it muste nedes be done, or ex∣ecuted. Opus est remissam. Vosmet uidete iam La∣ches & tu Pamphile, remissam opus sit no∣bis an reductam domum, Nowe Laches and Pamphile aduyse your selues well, whi∣ther it be necessary, that she be sente home, or fetched home. Opus sunt tibi, thou haste nede of theym. Vt cum desponderim, des qui aurum ac ue∣stem, at{que} alia quae opus sunt, That whan I haue affyaunced her, thou delyuer money and apparayl, and al other thinges nedefull. Opere maxumo, with all meanes possyble, in most harty wyse. Rex Seleucus me opere orauit maxumo, ut sibi latrones cogerem, Kynge Seleucus desyred me, as moche as he possyblye moughte, that I wolde geate hym souldyours to be aboute his persone. Thais maximo te orabat, opere ut cras re∣dires, Thais desyred the as hartyly as she canne, that thou woldeste comme agayne to morowe. Opusculum, a lyttell warke. ¶O ANTE R. ORA, the extreme parte of euery thyng, as the edge, the brym, the skyrtes, the hemme, the border, the cabull that tyeth the shyppe. It is also a clyme or partici∣on of the fyrmament. Ora uulneris, the ouer partes of the wound. Ora marittima, the sea syde. Oraculum, where aunsweres were gyuen by ydolles: somtyme the aunswere, sometyme the sayenge of some wyse man. Oraculum edidit Deus, god sayde. Orarium, the vestement, wherein the prieste dothe saye masse. Orata, a fyshe callyd a gylte head. Oratio, an oration, a prayer. Orator, toris, an oratour. Oratoria, Rhetorike. Oratoriae, lyke an oratour, or in fourme of Rhetorike. Oratorius, a, um, pertaynynge to an oratour. Oratus, tus, prayer. Orbelon, a place in Thracia where Orpheus dyd dwelle. Orbes, dyshes, the holes of the eyen. somme∣tyme the eyen. Orbem facere, where people do gather them rounde togyther in battayle. Orbi, they whyche haue loste theyr chylderne, also orphanes. Orbiculatus, ta, tum, made rounde. Orbiculus, a lyttell cerkle, also a pully. Orbicus, ca, cum, rounde. Orbile, lis, the circuite of a roufe. Orbis, a cerkle, also the worlde. Orbita, a wheele. sommetyme the tracke that wheles do make in the grounde. Orbitas, the lacke of chylderne: sometyme the lacke of a father. also any lacke. Orbitus, ta, tum, rounde as a cerkle. Orbo, are, to depryue. Orbus, proprely blynde. sometyme lackynge a∣ny thynge. Orca, a great monster of the sea, also a greatte vesselle, as a butte or vate, wherein Rn∣nyshe wyne is putte. Alsoo a boxe, wherein dyce be shaken, and after throwen on the ta∣bles, sometyme a coffer, wherein womennes payntynge is kepte. Orcas promontorium, the northe ende of Scotlande. Orchades, thyrtye Iles in the sea by Scot∣lande. Orchestra, a place, wherein the Senatours and honourable persons sat to beholde playes. Orchis, an herbe callyd also Satyrion, it is al∣so a certayne kynde of fyshe. Orchomenus, a mountayne in Thessaly. alsoo a citie in Euboea. Orcomana, a beere, whereon deade corses doo lye. Orcula, a rundelet. Orcus, a ryuer of helle. alsoo an nother in Thessaly. it is sometyme taken for helle. Ordeaceus, a, um, of barly. Ordinarius, a, um, wherein order is obserued ordinary, sometyme a skoffer or gester. Ordinare, to order or dispose. Ordior, iris, orsus, iri, to begynne to speake. Ordo, dinis, order, the dewe place, the astate of menne. In ordinem redigere, to kepe one within his boundes, that he do not excede his degree. Ordines, is in battayle that, whyche is callyd
the raye. Ordines seruare, to kepe the raye. Ordine ponere, to sette in a raye. Ordo longus, a great multitude. Ordines ducere, to be a capitayne. In ordinem cogere, to brynge vnder obey∣saunce, to correcte theym, whyche be oute of order. Ordines conturbare, to breake or skatter the raye. Ordinatim, in order. Ordinatio, ordynaunce. Ordoluci, hylles whiche do diuyde Scotlande and Englande, callyd nowe Cheuiet. Orea, the bytte for a horse. Oreus, a name of Bacchus. Orestes, the sonne of Agamemnon. Ore tenus, to the mouthe. Oreto, or Oria, A towne in Spayne callyd Calatraua. Orexis, is mooste taken for vomyte, all be it it sygnifieth appetite to eate. Organa, all instrumentes of musyke. Organum, an instrument pertaynyng to buyl∣dynge, also an ordynaunce of warres. Organarij, makers of instrumentes. Orgia, ceremonyes or songes, pertaynynge to infernall goddis, or to Bacchus. Orgyia, a measure contaynynge syxe foote, Suidas dothe write that it is the space, whi∣che is conteyned betweene the handes stret∣ched abrode, whyche I suppose is a spanne. Oria, a fysshers boote. Orichalcum, a mettalle, whyche as I suppose is lattyn. Oriculum, for auricula, a lyttell care. Oricos, a citie of Epire. Oriens, orientis, the Easte. Orificium, the mouthe of any thynge. Origanum, an herbe callyd organny. Origines, callyd also Adamantius borne at A∣lexandria in Egypte was sonne of one Leo∣nides the martyr, a man of mooste excellente kounnynge and vertue frome his chyldhode, wherein he soo wonderfully prosperyd, that beynge an infaunt he lyenge on sleape, his fa∣ther camme into the chaumber, and takynge awaye softely the clothes, he kyssed the chyl∣des breaste, as a Temple hauynge within it the holye gooste, gyuynge thankes to God, that hadde sente to hym suche a sonne. At the tyme that his father was martred. Ori∣gene beynge alsoo desyrouse of martyrdome, yet a yonge chylde, ranne in amonge other, whyche were led to be slayne, and by all mea∣nes proffered hym selfe to dye with theym. Whiche his mother perceyuyng, who moste entierly loued him, she fyrst lamentably intre∣ted hym to withdrawe hym, but he therwith was more inflamed towarde martyrdome than withdrawen. wherefore his mother vsed this crafte, at nyghte whan he was in his bedde, she stale awaye his clothes, so that in the mor∣nyng whā he wold haue gone forth, he mought not come by theym, wherfore he was constray∣ned to tary at home. Which deceipt of his mo∣ther he complayned to his father than being in pryson, desyrnge hym to persyst constantely in his good purpose. After the martyrdome of his father, he contynually gaue him selfe to the stu∣dye of holy Scripture, whyche he hadde tasted before, in readynge Gentyles warkes by his fathers instruction. All be it in Phylosophye and all other scyences, he dydde excelle all o∣ther menne of his tyme, before that he was twentye yeres olde. At eyghtene yeres olde, he expoundynge openly Gentile Authours, he soo interlaced holye doctrine, that he conuerted to the faythe of Christe many great lernyd menne whiche were his hearers. His lyuynge was alsoo so strayght and vertuouse, that he drewe many vntylle hym, and was amonge all menne hadde in a wonderfull reuerence. yet he neuer ceassed in all persecutions, to comforte and con∣fyrme men in the imbracynge of martyrdome, and dydde contynually reade openly, and alsoo wryte innumerable bokes in the expoundynge of holy scrypture. Not withstandynge that he alsoo lernyd the Hebrue toungue perfytely, he went into dyuerse countrayes preachynge. And for the greatte fame that was of hym, Mam∣mea, the mother of the Emperoure Alexander Seuerus sent for hym to Rome, and herd him, and as somme do suppose was by hym conuer∣ted. Whereof ye may reade in the boke whi∣che I translated out of Eucolpius, and called it the Image of Gouernance. He most straight∣ly obserued all the preceptes of the Gospell, in contynuall fastynges and watchynges, hauyng but oone garment, and goynge alwaye bare fo∣ted, and counsayllynge all his hearers to re∣nounce all that they hadde, and to gyue it in al∣messe. He also gelded hym selfe, not onely to be the more chaste, but alsoo for bycause that in the tyme of persecution he taught the worde of God, as well pryuilye as openly to menne and womenne, he mought lette that the Paynyms shoulde not speake dysshonestye of hym, and of those, whyche repayred to his Sermones and lessons, whyche although he dydde secrete∣lye, yet God wolde not haue it hydde, so that it camme to the eare of Demetrius the bys∣shoppe of Alexandria, who fyrste wonderynge ate the stomacke and vertue of the manne, praysyng the feruentnes of his faythe, he sayde vnto hym, Nowe stycke to thy doctryne and preachynge, sens thou haste not left vnto thyne
aduersaries any occasyon of suspycion: but afterwarde the same Demetrius styred with enuy agaynste Origene, layde it in reproche agaynste hym openly, fyndynge nothynge els wherwith to dysprayse hym. He that wylle knowe more of Origene, let hym rede the .vi. boke of Eusebius in historia ecclesiastica, and saynct Hierome De scriptoribus ecclesiastic. he was after the incarnation of Christe. 204. yeres. Originalis, le, that whyche one hath from his byrthe. Origo, ginis, a begynnynge, kynde. Orion, the sonne of Neptunus. somme fayned that he came of the vryne of Iupyter, Mer∣cury, and Neptune in this wyse. One Eno∣pius whan he had lodged those goddis, and had killed for them an oxe, he desired of them to graunt to hym a sonne, than those thre pys∣sed in the hyde of the oxe, which being layde in the ground, therof came Orion, as it were Vrion, For Ouros in greke, is vryne. Orîon beinge an hunter, whan he wold haue deflou¦red Diana, he was slayne with a scorpyon, and translated amonge the sterres, and there is the sygne callyd in latyne Iugula. Orior, eris, & oriris, riri, to be borne, to ryse, to appere. Oriundus, commen by auncetours out of some countrey or citie. sometyme borne. Nati Car∣thagine, sed oriundi à Syracusis, Borne at Carthage, but by ancetours descended from Syracuse in Sicile. Oriza, a grayne callyd Ryce, whyche is moste commonly eaten in Lent, with almond mylke. Orizon, is the furthermost parte of the fyrma∣ment, that mans eye can determyne. Orminium, an herbe lyke to horehounde. Ornamenta, sommetyme dothe sygnifye those whiche are worthy prayse. Ornamentum, apparayle, also honour, prayse or commendation. Ornithoboscion, a howse where poultrye is fedde, a cowpe. Ornithon, thonis, a place wherein byrdes are kepte. Orno, nare, to garnysshe, to decke or trymme, to make fayre, to prepare, to make meete, to honour with some auctoritie or dygnitie, al∣so to prayse. Ornare suffragio, to help one with his voyce or good report. Ornare fugam, to runne away. Ornate, trymly, gorgeousely. Ornatus, he that is in greate dygnytie or au∣thorytie. Ornatissimam de me sententiam dixit, He gaue me a very honorable reporte. Ornatus, ta, tum, apparayled, trymmed, garni∣shed, instructed, fournyshed. Ornatus, tus, apparayle, trymmyng, deckyng. Ornus, a wylde ashe with great leaues. Oro, orare, to praye, to demaunde, to speake openly and eloquentely, as Oratours doo, to pleade. Orobanche, an herbe growynge amonge bea∣nes or peasyn and destroyeth them. Orobia, a kynde of Frankyncense in lyttelle graynes. Orobitis, a greene colour lyke to the blaades of corne. Orobum, a kynde of poulse corne I suppose it is Tares, looke before in Eruum. Orontes, a ryuer by the citie of Antioche. Orphanus, he whyche lacketh his father and fatherly succour. Orpheus, borne in Thracia sonne of Oeagri∣us, or as some doo write of Apollo and Cal∣liope, and aunciente poete and moste excellente harper, who as the poetes surmysed, dyd de∣lyte beastes and infernalle spyrytes, and me∣yd stones with the swetenesse of his armo∣nye. whereby he recouered his wyfe Eury di∣ces out of helle, at the last he was slayn with lyghtnynge, or as some do wryte, was torne into pieces with women. Orrea, a towne in Englande callyd newe Castell. Orosius, a wourshypful priest borne in Spayn ryght eloquente and experte in hystoryes, he wrate seuen bokes agaynste theym, whyche sayde that the decaye of the commune weale of Rome, hapned by the doctrine of Christe. he was sent by saynte Augustyue vnto sayte Hierome, who was than in Iudea, to lerne of hym the raison of the state of the soule. Orsus, he beganne. Orsus, he that begynneth to do a thynge. Orsus, a, um, begunne. Orthodoxia, the ryght opynion or faythe. Orthodoxus, a man of the ryghte oppynyon or faythe. Orthogonus, a ryght corner. Orthographia, the ryght forme of writynge. it is also a platte for buyldynge, wherein is paynted or sette oute the fygure of the holle warke with the reasons of the same. Orthopnoea, a dysease, whanne a man ran not fetche his breathe, but holdynge his neck vpryght. Orthopnoeci, they whyche haue that sycke∣nesse. Orthostadios, a garment, whyche was alway worne vngyrte. Orto luce, as soone as it was day. Ortus, ti, uide Hortus. Orti pensiles, gardeynes made on howses, or
pyllours. Ortus, ta, tum, borne, sprunge, begunne. Ortus, tus, the byrthe or natiuitie. Also the ry∣synge of the sonne. Ortygia, the name of an yle. Ortyx, tygis, a byrde callyd a quayle. Oryx, gis, a beaste of the kynde of gotes. ¶O ANTE S. OS, oris, the mouth, also the visage, some tyme the proporcion of all the bodye. sometyme countenance, also presence, and language. In ore est omni populo, all the people spea∣keth of hym. Omnes uno ore authores fuêre, They were all of one accorde. Os ad male audiendum prebêre, to suffre hym to rebuke hym to his face. Per ora hominum ferri, to be publysshed or spoken abrode. Os distorquêre, to sette his mouthe a wrye, to mocke with the mouthe. Os ducere, idem. Os durum, a shamelesse persone. Os impudens, idem. Os alicui laedere, to saye ylle of oone to his face. Os hominis insignem{que} impudentiam co∣gnoscite, Consyder you the boldnes and pre∣sumption of this felowe. Duarum & uiginti gentium ore loquebatur, He spake xxii. languages. Os portus, the entrye of an hauen. Os sublinire, to mock or deceyue craftyly, with fayre promyses. Ossiculum, the diminutiue of Os. Os, ossis, a bone Ossum, idem. Osae, lawes concernynge deuotion. Osanna, I pray the saue vs. Osasum, for Odi, I hate. Oscedo, dinis, yanynge or gapynge. somme∣tyme stenche. Osci, people in Italy. Oscillo, are to bowe downe. Oscilla, lyttell ymages of waxe to be offred. Oscillum, a lyttell mouthe. sometyme a lyttell ymage or poppette. Oscines, byrdes, whyche by theyr voyces doo sygnyfie somewhat to come or happen. Oscinum, a general name of byrdes, whiche do synge, a syngynge byrde. Oscis, the abhomynable vse of carnall synne. Oscito, tare, to gape, as menne doo for lacke of sleape. Oscitor, tari, idem. Oscitatio, gapynge. Alsoo quyetenesse frome laboure. Oscitans, he that gapeth as it were for lacke of slepe. also he that careth for nothyng, sure, fearynge nothynge, neglygent. Oscitanter, softely, withoute any courage, as yf one were almooste on sleape. Alsoo negly∣gentely. Oscitabunde, idem. Osculana pugna, battayle, wherin they, why∣che were before vaynquysshed, haue the vy∣ctorye. Osculatio, kyssynge. Osculum, a lyttell mouthe. also a kysse. Osiris, the sonne of Iupyter and Niobe, the fyrste kynge of Argyues, and after leauyng that royalme to his brother, he went into E∣gypte, and there he raygned and maryed I∣sis, fynally he was slayne by Typho his bro∣ther, and was longe soughte for by Isis his wyfe, who at the laste fyndyng his body, she buryed it in an yle called Abatos, where the Egyptians afterwarde fyndyng an oxe, they supposed that Osiris was become a god, and takynge that oxe with theym to the cytie of Memphis, they honoured him for a god, and callyng hym Apis, they ordeyned to hym cer∣tayne ceremonyes, a lyttell whyle after, they drownynge hym in the ryuer, they sought for an nother lyke oxe with waylynge and wee∣pynge, whyche beynge founden, they cryed with moch gladnesse, and brought him to the citie, He was before the incarnatiō of Christ 2012. yeres. Osyris, is also an herbe, whiche some doo sup∣pose to be wylde lynne or wylde flaxe. Ossa, a hygh mountayne in Thessaly. Osseus, a, um, bony, or of a bone, as harde as a bone. Ossiculatim, oone boone frome an nother in pieces. Ossifragus, ga, gum, that whyche breakethe boones. Ossilegium, a gatherynge of boones. Ossiculum, a lyttell bone. Ossuaria, a shryne or lyke thynge, where the bones of dead men are put. Oftendo, di, dere, to shewe. Ostendere se, siue animum suum, to declare his courage, or what he intendeth to do. Ostendere se uirum, to proue him self a man, to do valiantly. Ostentatio, boostynge. Ostentare periculum capitis, to menace one to kyll hym, or to cause hym to dye as a trans∣gressour. Ostentare iugulum pro capite alterius, to of¦fer to dye, to saue the lyfe of an other man. Ostentata occasio, the occasyon present. Ostentare spem, to put in hope. Ostento, ostentare to shewe often. also to bost,
or aduaunt. Ostentui esse, to be poynted at. Ostentum, a thynge whyche hapneth seldome, and betokeneth, that some straunge thynge shall happen. As a blasyng sterre, thunder on a fayre day. Sometyme it sygnifieth a thing monstruouse. Osten tus, tus, a skorne. Ostia, ostiorum, the entrees of greate ryuers, sometyme hauens. Ostia, a towne nyght to Rome. Ostiarius, a porter. Ostiatim, from doore to doore. Ostiensis, a lyttell hauen at Rome. Ostigo, the skabbe whiche hapneth to shepe. Ostium, a doore or gate. Ostracismus, a maner of exylynge of menne at Athenes, whyche excellyd other in power or authorytie: whyche exyle was doone by delyuerynge of oyster shelles, wherein the name of hym, whyche shulde be exyled, was wrytten. Ostracum, a shelle. Ostrea, an oyster. Ostreum, idem. Ostrearius panis, Browne breade, the whyche men are wont to eate with oysters. Ostreatus, ta, tum, harde as an oyster. Ostrifer, the place in the sea, whyche is apte to ingender oysters. Ostrinae uestes, garmentes of purple colour. Ostrum, purple, or other lyke colour. Osus, osurus, participles of Odi. Osus sum, osus es, osus est, I hate, thou ha∣test, he hateth. ¶O ANTE T. OTHRIS, a mountayne of Thessalye, where dwellyd the peple callyd Lapithae. Otior, swyfter. Otior, ari, to be ydell or at reste. Otiosè, ydelly, at leysure, surely, without care. Otiosus, a, um, ydell, sure, without care. Otiosus dies, holy day, a playenge day. Otiosus animus. Terent. Animo iam nunc otioso esse impero, Nowe I charge the care for nothynge. Otiosa res, a thynge that requyreth noo care or studye. Otiosae sententiae, sentences whyche haue no vertue or power to moue the audience. Otiosus studiorum, he that studyeth nothing Otiose dormire, to slepe without care, or to slepe soundly. Otiose negotium gerere, to go neglygently about his busynes. Otiosè, care thou not. Otium, ydelnesse, vacation from labour. alsoo leysure, reste, quyetnesse, contrary to labour and busynesse. Tenêre otium, to maynteyne quyetnes. Suppeditare otium studio, to passe the tyme in study. In otio esse, to sytte at home and do nothing. Abundare otio, to haue moche leysure. Affluere otio, idem. Otium operis, whan they labour no more. Otij plurimi res, the matter requyreth leyser. Othryades, a mans name of Lacedemonia. Othrys, a hylle in Thessaly. Otides, byrdes lyke to partryches. Otus, a shryche oule. ¶O ANTE V. OValis corona, a garlande of myrtelles, gyuen vnto hym, whiche had victorye without effusion of bloudde. Ouatio, a small triumph of a prynce or capy∣tayne, whyche had vyctorye of his enemies without slaughter of men, or where batayle was not denounced: in the whyche triumph the capitayne wente on foote, or  ryde on a horse, with a garlande of  on his head, and his souldyours  a∣boute hym. Ouatus, ta, tum, whyche is in  of an egge. Ouans, ouantis, reioysynge, being ioyfull. Ouidius, surnamyd Naso, borne in a towne callyd Sulmo, and brought vp in Rome, and diligently instructed in latin letters, from his tender age, he gaue most diligent study to the makynge of verses, from the whiche he was withdrawen by his father, and put to lern re∣torike, wher in a whyle he moche profited and was in the noumbre of the beste oratours of that tyme, and was aduanced to sundry au∣thorities & made a senator. Not withstāding he chiefely dyd dedicate hym selfe vnto poe∣try, wherein by nature he was made excellent in facylitie and abundaunce of sentences, he was in good fauour with the emperour Au∣gustus. of whome at the laste he was exyled into Pontus, where he spent the reste of his lyfe in a towne callyd Tomos, amonge peo∣ple moste barbarouse, who not withstanding lamented his deathe, for his courtaysye and gentylnesse of maners. The cause of his ex∣yle is vncertayne, sauynge that some do sup∣pose that it was for abusynge Iulia dough∣ter of the emperour Augustus, although the pretence of the emperour was, for the ma∣kynge of the boke of the craft of loue, wher∣by yonge myndes mought be styrred to wan∣tonnesse. He was before the Incarnation of Christe. yeres.
Ouicula, a lyttell sheepe. Ouifera gallina, a broude henne. Ouile, a folde or shepe house. Ouillus, a, um, of a sheepe. Ouinus, a, um, idem. Ouis, a sheepe. Ouo, are, to reioyce with noyse or voyce in a multitude. Ouum, an egge. Ouum ouo simile, one egge lyke an nother, applyed vnto them, whyche be lyke of condi∣cions or persone. Ouo prognatus eodem, of one father & mo∣ther, or brought vp vnder one mayster, or in one schoole. ¶O ANTE X. OXacantha, a barbery tree, callid of some Berberis. Oxellū, a citie in Englād callid Chester. Oxycratum, water and vyneger sodden togy∣ther, callyd also Posca. Oxygala, sower mylke. Oxygarum, sharpe sawce. Oxylâpathon, sorrell. Oxalis, idem. Oxylla, greate sorrell. Oxymeli, hony and vynegre sodden togyther. Oxyphoenix, nicis, the tree whiche beareth the fruite callyd of the apothecaries Tamarindi. Oxypora, oyntementes and emplaysters myxt with vyneger, to the intent that the vertue of the other ingredic̄ce may the better penetrate Oxyporon, sharpe sawce. Oxyporopola, he that selleth meate in sharpe sawce or sowce. Oxyrinchus, a cytie in Aegypte, so named of a fyshe callyd Oxyrinchus, for as moch as the Egyptians worshypped two fysshes for god∣dis, that is to say, Lepidorū & Oxyrinchū, also two byrdes, a hawke, and the byrde cal∣lyd Ibis. also two beastes, an oxe, a dogge and a catte, and some honoured a crocodyle, and some Ichneumon, a lyttel beast, whiche kyl∣leth the crocodyle. in the sayde citie was the fysh callyd Oxyrinchus specially worshipped. Oxysaccharum, sugre and vynegre sodden to∣gyther, of some men callyd Syrupus aceto∣sus symplex. Oxytoca, medicines to make a womā to bryng forthe her byrthe quyckely. d Oxytriphillon, an herbe callyd Sorrel de boys or Alleluya. Oxys, idem. ¶O ANTE Z. OZE, stynkynge of the nose. Ozena, soores in the nose, whyche cau∣seth a stynkyng sauour in the nose. Ozinum, an herbe callyd basyll. ¶P ANTE A. PABVLARIS, pa∣bulare, perteynynge to forrage or meate for beastes. Pabulatio, forragynge. Pabulator, a forragiour. Pabulor, aris, ari, to go in forragynge. sometyme to fede, as a beaste dothe. Pabulum, forrage or meate for beastes. Pacatè, peasybly. Pace tua, pace uestra, by thy lycence, by your leaue, or lycence. Pachiri, hylles in the lesse Asia. Pachisos, a ryuer of Sicile. Pachynus, a mountayne in Sicile, on the sea syde, or an elbowe of the lande there, whiche nowe is called Cauo pascinio. Pacifer, feri, a brynger of peace. Pacificatorius, a, um, that whiche doth pa∣cifye. Pacifico, care, to pacifye. Paciscor, sceris, sci, to make couenaunte, to bargayne. Pacisci uitam ab hoste, to render hym to his ennemy his lyfe onely saued. Cum Xerxe nuptias, filiae eius paciscitur, I agreed to mary the doughter of Xerxes. Pactus est duo millia, he couenanted to giue two thousande. Paco, are, to mittigate, to apease, to accorde. Pactilis, le, platted. Pactilis corona, a platted garlande. Pactio, an accorde, agrement, a treatise. Pactitius, a, um, done vpon condition. Pactoliopes, excedynge rychesse. Pactolus, a ryuer in Lydia, hauynge golden grauell. Pactum, sometyme a participle sygnifyeng co∣uenaunted, promysed, sometyme a nowne, si∣gnifyenge a couenaunte. Pactum transitionis, a saulfe conduit, to passe from one countrey to an other, a pasporte. Has tibi nos pactus legibus dare iussit. He commaunded vs to gyue this money vpon a condition. Pactae induciae, truce accorded. Alio pacto, otherwyse Nullo pacto, in no wyse. Eo pacto, in this maner of wyse. Pacuuius, a famouse writer of Tragedies born at Brundusium in Calabria, was susters sonne of Ennius the poete, he is commended of Quintiliane for the grauitie of his senten∣ces, the ponderousenesse of his wordes, and the authoritie of the personages, which are in
whiche are in his tragedies and commedies that somewhere his stile semeth very rude, is to be ascribed to the tyme and not to his faut He lyued vntyll the age of lxxxx yeres before the commynge of Chryste yeres. Padus, a famouse ryuer in Italy whiche there is named Po. Cato in originibus, sayth that the Tuscanes called it Botigon, the Ligury∣ans. Botigum, Plinius calleth it Bodincum that is to saye hauynge no bottom, the Gre∣kes dyd call it Eridanus, it commeth oute of the hyll called Vesulus, whiche is the highest parte of the mountaynes called Alpes, and runneth by the marches of Liguria, and soo passeth vnder the grounde and ryseth efteso∣nes in the countrey callyd Vibonensis, & ca∣ryeth with hym .xxx. other ryuers in to the Veneciane se, named Adriaticum. Padusa, a ryuer which some saye is an arme of the Po. Paean, an hymne in the prayse of Apollo, some∣tyme the same Apollo. It is nowe taken for any hymne, made to the laude of God, or our Lady. Paegdaium, lodgynge for seruauntes and chyldren. Paedagogium, a bonde seruaunte. Paedagogus, he that is appointed to awayt on chyldren to se them well ordered. Paedaretus, a mannes name. Paederastes, a louer of chyldren in vnhoneste wyse. Paederastia, a viciouse loue of chyldren. Paederotes, a preciouse stone called also Opa∣lion, there appereth in it the fyry bryghtnes of the Carbuncle, the shynynge pourple cou∣lour of the Amatist, the grene sea of the eme∣raulde, all shynynge to gether with an incre∣dible mixture. Pli. li. 37. ca. 6. There is also a bremble and herbe, whereof Plinius ma∣keth mention. li. 19. ca. 8. and Dioscorides. li. 3. et 4. called Paedaeros, some suppose it to be a kynde of berefore. Paedia, erudition and institution in good artes as Gellius teacheth. Paedico, paedicaui, paedicare, to commytte buggery. Paedor, paedoris, sluttyshnesse, vncleannesse, fylthe. Paedotribes, & pedotriba, a scholemayster. Paeon, a fote in meter, whiche is of one longe syllable and thre shorte. Paeonia, an herbe called Pyonie. also a coun∣trey in Europa, and is a part of Macedony. Paestum, a citie in Lucania, where there is a∣bundaunce of roses. Paestanus, na, num, of that citie. Paetus, he that loketh as if his eyes were halfe closed. Paganalia, ploughmens holy day, as wakes be nowe adayes. Paganus, a man of the countrey, or of the vyl∣lage. it is also he that desyreth to be in the nū∣bre of souldiours, and is not yet admitted. Pagasa, a towne of Thessaly, whiche after was callyd Demetrias. Pagatim, vyllage by vyllage. Pagina, the syde of a leafe in a boke. it is also the place in the trayle of a vyne where euery braunche is fastnyd. Paginula, a lyttell syde of a leafe in a boke. Pago, gis, pepigi, gere, pactus, to make coue∣nant, or contracte. Pagus, a vyllage. Pagyris, the name of a ryuer and of a citie, of whiche the people are callyd Pagyritae. Pala, a spade. also a piele to putte in breadde in to the ouen. also a sanne to make wynde. also the brodest part of a rynge. Palae, wedges or pieces, or gaddes of mettalle whan it is fyned. Palaca, pieces of fyne golde. Palaemon, onis, was callyd a god of the sea. Palaestina, a countreye in Syrie, ioynynge to Araby, callyd in holy scripture Philistum. Palaestra, a wrastlynge place. also the exercyse of wrastlyng. It is also the comelynes of mo∣uynge and gesture, accordynge to the state or degree of the person, whyche sheweth it. Palaestricum, idem. Palaestricus, a wrastler. Palaestricus, ca, cum, pertaynynge to wrastlyng Palaestrita, he that vseth wrastlynge. Palam, openly before men, that al mē mayse it. Palam facere, to reuele or brynge to open knowledge. Res palam est, the matter is openly knowen. or the thynge is manifest. Palamêdes, the sonne of Nauplus kyng of the yle callyd Euboia, a valyant capytayn of the grekes, at the siege of Troye, where by the false surmyse of Vlysses, he was slayne of his people it is wryten of hym that he found cer¦tayne letters of greke by the order of a flyght of cranes. Palangae, leauers or porters, wherewith they lyft and beare tymber, and such lyke thynges of great weyght. Palango, are, to beare on leauers or porters. Palangari, men whyche do beare on leyuers or porters, thynges of great poyse or weyght. Palatiar, & Palatual, a sacrifyce done at Rome on the hyll callyd Palatinum. Palatio, onis, a foundation made in a maryse grounde with pyles of tymber. Palantes, they that wander aboute, and wote not whyther to go. Palanteum, a citie buylded on the hylle callyd
Palatinus. Palantia, the doughter of Euander. Palantia, a citie in Arragonia. Palatha, a tarte of fygges. Palatim, an aduerbe sygnifienge scattered and wandrynge here and there. Palatina officia, offices within a prynces pa¦layce or courte. Palatinus mons, an hyll at Rome. Palatium, a palaise of an Emperour or great kynge. Palatus, seu palatum, the roufe of the mouthe. Palea, chaffe of corne, also a grystell, whyche falleth downe frome the necke of a cocke or capon. Palearium, the Dewelappe of a rudder beaste, also a place, wherin chaffe is kepte. Paleatus, made or myxte with chaffe. Pales, called goddesse of shepeherdes and of pasture. Palene, a cytie, so called of Pallena, the daugh¦ter of Sython, and wyfe of Cletus. Palepaphos, a citie of Cypres. Palescamander, a ryuer in Troye. Palicenus, a fountayne in Sicilia. Palilia, shepeherdes holydayes kepte in the ho∣nour of Pales. Palimpsestus, parchemente rased. Palingenesia, a regeneration or seconde na∣tiuytie. Palinodia, a contrarye songe, or retractynge of that, whiche one hath spoken or wrytten: Nowe of some men called a recantynge. Palinodiam canere, to retracte that, whiche one hath spoken or wrytten. Palinurus, was the Mayster of the shyppe wherein Aeneas camme in to Italye. Also an elbowe of the lande of Sycile in to the sea. Paliurus, a bryer, whiche beareth a cod, wher∣in are thre or foure blacke seedes, I suppose by the description bothe of Theophrastus and Dioscorides, that is the fyrse or gorss, al¦thoughe in some place it may be greater than in an other place. Palla, a womannes gowne. Pallace, a concubine. Palladium, the ymage of Pallas. Palladius, a mannes name, whiche wrote of housbandry. Pallancana, a sharpe oynion, whiche causeth the eyen to water. Palladius, a, um, that longeth to Pallas. Pallas, antis, the sonne of Euander, sometyme kynge of Latynes, also a gyant, Pallas, adis, called goddesse of battayle, and also of wysedome. Pallax, acis, a concubine, suche as one kepeth in stede of his wyfe. Palleo, lui, lere, to be pale. Pallescere, idem. Palliastrium, a course mantell. Palliate fabulae, comedies or enterludes made in Grecia, and the personages therein were Grekes, as Togatae fabulae, were enterludes in Rome, and the personages Romaynes, so called bycause the ouermoste habyte of Gre∣kes was called Pallium, of the Romaynes Toga. Palliatus, cladde in a mantell. Pallio, are, to concele or hyde. Palliolatim amictus, cladde in a palle. Palliolatus, idem. Palliolum, a shorte mantelle. Pallium, a mantell, suche as knyghtes of the garter do were. Pallor, oris, a palenesse of colour. Paluster, stris, tre, & tra, trum, of the fenne. Palma, the palme of the hande. also a measure called a handebrede, sometyme an ore to row with. Also a palme tree or date tree. somtyme it sygnifyeth vyctorye. Palma christi, called also Buchaides, an herbe of the kynde of Satyrion, but hauyng rotes lyke the palme of ones hande. Palmam praeripere, to take the prayse or ho∣nour from an other. Palmare facinus, an acte worthy the palma or sygne of vyctorie. Palmarium, worthy the sygne or token of vy∣ctorye. Palmaria spacia, a handbrede space. Palmata, & palmaris uestis, a garmente of bawdekyn, whiche the consule dydde weare in tyme of peace, and the vyctour in tyme of warre. Palmes, itis, the smalle and tender braunches, moste properly of a vyne. Palmetum, the place, wherin date trees doo growe. Palmeus, a, um, of a palme tree. Palmifer, & palmiger, that beareth palme, or date trees. Palmipedalis, a measure of a foote and hande∣brede. Palmipedes aues, all byrdes, which haue hole fete, as commonly al water foules haue. Palmipes, splay footed. Palmyra, a great castell or fortresse in the myd¦dell of Syria. Palmyrena, a countrey in Syrie. Palmo, are, to bynde to gether: Also to do any thynge with the palme of the hande. Palmosus, full of palme trees. Palmula, a lyttell oore or sculle. also a date. Palmus, & palmeum, a measure. If it be pal∣mus maior, it is of fyue fyngers, or a hande dredth. if it be minor, it is but foure fingers Palo, are, to hedge or pale in: also to wander.
Palor, palaris, to go a sunder here and there scattered. Palpebrae, the heares whiche do growe on the cheekes. Palpitatio, quakynge of the fleshe. Palpito, tare, to quake or tremble. Palpator, toris, & palpo, ponis, a flatterer. Palpatio, flattery. Palpo, & palpor, ari, to fele, also to flatter. Paludamentum, a cote armure, it was also a womannes garment. Paludatus, clad in a cote armure. Palumbarius, a certayne hawke, whiche is longe and blacke, and flyeth the moste parte by nyghte. Palumbes palumbis, a wood culuer. Palumbina caro, the fleshe of a woode culuer Paluster, tris, tre, perteynynge to fenne or maryse. Palus, li, a stake or poste. Palûs, palûdis, a fenne or marise. Pamisus, one of the fyue pryncipall ryuers of Thessalia. Pamphylia, a region in the lesse Asia, lienge on the south syde of the mountayn Taurus and marcheth on the realmes of Phrigia and Caria. Pamphagi, people in Ethiopia, which do eate of all maner of thynges. Pampillum, a chariotte. Pampilona, a citie in the realme of Nauer. Pampinarium, a heape of grene braunches, it is also the tender braunche, whiche groweth out of the harde tree. Pampinarius, a, um, & pampineus, a, um, of grene braunches. Pampino, are, to cutte of the small braunches of a vyne, or to pull away the leaues that the sonne maye come to the rote. Pampinula, an herbe called also Pimpinella. Pampinus, a vyne leafe, or grene braunche. Panagron, a great swepe nette, which taketh all maner of fyshe. Pan, panis, called the god of shepeherds. Panagyris, a commune assembly of people, be it a fayre, marte, markette, hyghe feaste, or ceassions: also the place where those assem∣blyes be. Panagyrica oratio, & Panagyricum carmē that whiche was recited in prose or verse at suche an assembly. Panaria ebrietas, Coelius wryteth that he hath rad for Arrogantia, & licentia. Panax, acis, an herbe whiche hath a leafe lyke to the leaues of a fygge tree. Also a long stalk mosye, and on the top a knappe, wherin are swete sedes, with a sharpe sente, and hath a yelowe floure, and growith in diuers parties of Grecia. Panarium, a pantry, where breade is kepte. Panathenea, were among the Athenienses cer∣tayne solemne ceremonies, wherof some were great and kepte euery fyfth yere, some were lesse, & they were yerely celebrate, they were sometyme called Athenaea. Panchaia, a region in Arabie, called also Sabaea. Pancarpia, a garland made of dyuerse floures, or of all floures that may be founde. Pancraciastes, a man experte and excellente in all feastes of actiuitie. Pancratium, exercise in al feates, as wrastling, runnynge, leapynge, castynge of the bar, and other lyke exercyses of strengthe. Pancratius, he that dothe exercyse the sayde feates. Panchrestum, a saulue for euerye sore. Pancreum, is betwene fleshe and kernel lienge betwene the stomake and the lyuer. Panda, a citie in Inde, where the great Alex∣ander buylded the thyrde citie of his name, the vttermoste ende of his iournaye. Also in the same place were aulters builded by Bac∣chus, and after by Hercules, thanne by the queene Semiramis, laste by Cyrus. Pandana porta, a gate of the citie of Rome, whiche was fyrste and laste opened, for all thynges to be brought into the citie. Pandecta, comprehendynge all thynges: it is also the volume of the lawe ciuile, called the digestes. Pandiculatio, gapynge. Pandiculor, aris, to gape as they doo, whiche come from slepe. Pando, didi, dere, passum, & pansum, to opē Pando, aui, are, to bowe downe. Pandocheus, an inholder. Pandochium, an in, or commune lodginge. Pandus, a, um, open. Pandôra, the mother of Deucalion vnto whō sundry goddes gaue sundrye gyftes. Pallas gaue to her wysedom, Venus beaulty, Apol∣lo musike, Mercurius eloquence, and there∣fore she was called Pandora, whiche signy∣fyeth hauynge al gyftes. Hesyodus the poete wryteth that Iupiter sent her into the world to deceyue mankynde. Pangaeus, an elbowe of Thracia. Pango, pepegi, & panxi, pangere, to set, to plante, to ioyne one thynge to an other, to fa¦sten, to dryue in, to wryte, to synge, to tell, to make. Panhormus, a citie in Sicile. Panicum, a sodayne feare, whereby some tyme men be distraughte, or out of theyr wyttes. Panicula, that whiche on some herbes or trees doo hange downe, longe and rounde, as on great okes, also peache trees, and pyneaple
trees, rosiars, and reedes. Panicum, a grayne which groweth lyke to mit and hath at the leaste ten leaues, the stalke small with a red pendaunt full of corne, some purple, some red, some blacke or whyte, the Italyans do call it Melica. Panis porcinus, an herbe called also cyclami∣nus, rapum terrae, umbelicus terrae, & Ar∣tamita. Panifex, ficis, a baker. Panificium, the crafte of bakynge. Panis, breadde. Panis nauticus, byskette. Panis secundarius, raunged breade, or chete breade, or crybell breade. Paniscus, a god of the woodes. Pantacratiasta, he that fyghteth with handes and feete. Pantathlus, he that contendeth in all maner of games. Panneus, a, um, woullen. Pannicularia, thynges of small valure. Pannicularius, a draper that selleth cloth. Panniculus, a piece of clothe. Pannonia, the countreye nowe called Hunga∣ria whiche toke that name of an other Hun∣garia nowe named Iulira, a countreye in the northe parte of the world not fre from the ri∣uer called Tanais, and is trybutarye to the Moscouites. The boūdes of Hungry is now moche larger than it was of olde tyme, and hath on the weste Owstryke and Beme, on the southe the part of Slauony that lyeth on the sea called Adriaticum, on the cast Seruia on the northe Polonia, and Moscouia. The countrey is ryghte fertile of grayne, and rich of golde and syluer, and as the inhabytaun∣tes there do reporte, there is in that countrey a ryuer, in the whiche if iron be oftentymes deped, it wyll be tourned in to coper. That this noble realme is nowe destroyed and vn∣der captiuitie of Turkes, it is to be feared that all christendome shall sore repente, that beinge sometyme reputed the puissaunt bul∣warke to all Christen realmes, agaynste the intollerable violence of saryzons and turkes. Pannonia superior, the countraye nowe called Austria. Pannones, Hungarians called also Paeones. Panormum, a citie in Sicile, nowe called in Italion Palermo. Pannosus, he that weareth poore apparell. Pannuelium, a handkercher. Pannus, clothe. Panomphaeus, a name of Iupiter, signyfyeng that he hereth all mennes voyces. Pansa, playne foted. Panielmos, the full mone. Pantagia, a ryuer in Sicile. Pantasilea, a queene of Amazon. Pantheon, a temple of all the goddes. Panthera, a beaste hauyng on his skynne lyttel rounde spottes, some blewe and some whyte, it is sayde that herdes of cattell do meruay∣lously delyte in the swete sauour that cometh from them, and in beholdynge of them, and therfore felynge by the swete ayre where they haue theyr resorte, thyther wyll all beastes come, not beinge aferde but onelye of theyr fyerse looke, and therfore the Panthers hy∣dynge theyr heades do suffer the rest of theyr bodyes to be looked on, that they maye the more easylye take theyr proye of the cattaylle beinge dismayed. The people of Hircania, doth more often kyll them with a poyson cal∣led Aconitum, than with weapon, but the Panthers feelynge them selues poysoned, do seeke for the dunge of a man, whiche if they do fynde and eate, they be forthwith delyue∣red, they be so lyuely that they do lyue a gret while after that theyr bowelles be cleane out of theyr bodyes: it is also wrytten that he which is wasshed or euoynted with the broth wherin a cocke is boyled, the Panthere wyl not touche hym. In the west parte of Aethy∣opia towarde the sea, there is people called Agriophagi, whose kynge hath but one eye, whiche is in his forehed, that people do lyue with eatynge the fleshe of Pantheres and Lyons. Pantheron, a nette, wherwith all maner of foule is taken Pantices, a greatte bealy, also the fluxe. Pantomimus, a dyssard, which can fayne and counterfayte euery mannes gesture. Panurgia, subtyltie. Panus, panula, & panulla, a kernel in the share or gryne of a manne, or behynde the care. It is also a weuers roll, whereon the webbe of clothe is rolled or wounden. Papare, to call dad as a chylde dothe. Papas, a father, as chylderne do call dadde. Papaueralida, wylde popy. Papauerata uestis, a garment not pure white but of the colour of popye. Papauer, eris, an herbe called popy. Papè, an interiection of wonderynge, wyll y see, a wonderfull thynge. Papaeus, in the tongue of Scithia, sygnyfyeth Iupiter. Paphlagonia, a countrey in the lesse Asia, and it ioyneth to Galatia, where as dwelled the people called Heneti, of whom came the Ve∣netians. It is bounded on the caste with the ryuer called Halys, runnyng out of the south betwene Siria and Paphlagonia. Paphos, & Paphia, a citie in the ylande of Cy∣pres, whiche was dedicate to Venus, wher∣of
she was called Paphia. Papia, a citie in Lumbardy, called Pauia. Papilio, onis, a butterflye. Papylio, a pauillion for the warres. Papilla, a lyttel wheale or poushe in the skynne of a man. Also a cocke in a coundyte, where∣out water commeth. More ouer the nyppell or teate of a womanns breste. Pappa, pap made with milke and floure. Pappo, pappare, to eate. Pappus, a grandesyre or graundefather. It is also an herb called groundswel, also the flour of thystelles whiche lyke to fethers do flye a∣waye with the wynde. Papula, a whelke. Papyrus, seu papyrum, is a great rushe, whi∣che groweth in the fennes and marys groun∣des in Aegypt and Syria, ten cubites hyghe: wherof the fyrste paper was made, whereon men dydde wryte. we haue growynge in our fenny groundes lyke rushes with black knop¦pes, longe and rounde, whiche are called Nowe Papyrus is called paper, wher∣in men do vse to wryte or prynte bokes. Papyratius, of paper, or of the sayde rushe. Papyrius, the surname of a noble Romayne. Par, ris, lyke, equall, meete, euen, reasonable, a payre. Par est, it is lyke. Par aetate, of one age. Paribus animis, of lyke affection. Par ingenium nactus, he hath founde one of his owne fascion. Par sapientia ad formam, as wyse, as he is fayre or tall. Par praetium tanti laboris, the recompence or rewarde was suche, as was equiualent to so greate a laboure. Par, idem. all one. Pares esse nostro exercitui non potuerunt. they moughte not be so stronge as our hoste. Paradelos, the greatte daysy with the yelowe knoppe in the myddell. it is called of the apo¦thecaries Consolida media. Pares, two lyke one to the other in fourme or degree. Parem esse, to be sufficient, to do or susteyne a thynge. Paria, payres, two together of any thynge. Paria facere, to requite, to do one thynge for an other, lyke for lyke. Par referre, idem, Par, pari, to recompence one thynge with an o¦ther, of equall estimation. Par impar, a game that chyldren vsed, called euen or odde. Parabilis, le, that whiche maye be sone gotten, or wyll be sone redy. Parabola, a comparison, or resemblaunce. Paraclêtus, an exhortar, a comfortar, an ad∣uocate. Paraclytus, a man infamed, yll reported of. Paradiastole, a dilatinge of a matter by an in∣terpretation. Paradigma, an example. Paradisus, Paradise. it signifyeth a gardeyne. Paradoxa, a sentence, contrary to the opynion of the more parte. Paradromis, a galary, or walke. Paraenesis, a precepte conteynynge an exhor∣tation. Paraeneticus, ca, cum, conteynynge suche pre∣cepte or instruction. Paragoge, is a fygure, whan a letter or sylla∣ble is added to a worde, as Dicier for dici. Paragraphe, a thynge wryten before a sentence Paragraphus & paragraphum, a paragrafe. Paralipomenon, lefte oute, vnspoken, or vn∣wrytten, whiche ought to haue ben spoken or wrytten. Paralleli, lynes in the sphere of the worlde e∣quallye distaunte whereby the sonne, whan he passeth, causeth varyation in houres of the daye. Paralion, an herbe called also Esula. Paralysis, is a syckenesse called the palsy wher in eyther all the body or one member, or ma∣ny members be mollyfyed, and be depryued of felynge and meuynge. it hapneth eyther of an impostume so stoppynge the rootes of the synewes, that they being depryued of the spi∣rites annimall whiche serueth for them, they become loste, or elles of a flumatike humour grosse and vndygested whiche stoppeth the sayde places. Sometyme of a stroke or falle, whereby the ioyntes of the backe boone, are loused, and the synewes whiche come frome the nuke or nape of the heade are stopped, o∣therwhyle the synewes and the rotes of them be hurte with a bruse, and induceth the pal∣sy, specially in an olde man. Herba paralysis, the lyttel whyte daisy with red toppes. Paralyticus, he that is taken with the palsey. Paranymphus, he that is the mediatour in ma¦trymony betwene the man and the woman: she whiche is on the womannes parte is cal∣led Pronuba. Parapechium, a lyght cloke. Parapherna, that which is added vnto the wo¦mannes dower, called the ioynture. Paraphrasis, an imitation of wordes, settynge out the sence or meanynge of the autour more playnely. Paraphrastes, he that dothe not translate word by worde, but expresseth the sentence of the autour more openly. Pararium aes, was double wayges, gyuen to
horsemen for hauynge two horses. Parasanga, a myle in Persia, conteininge fifty furlonges, Herodotus sayth .xxx. Parasceue, a preparation, also good frydaye. Parasiopesis, a figure in speakynge, whan we fayne that we wyll not speake, and yet couert¦ly it is declared what we do meane. Paratus, a haunter of other mennes tables vn called for, alsoo he whiche to fylle his bealye with meate and drynke, speaketh alwaye to the appetite of hym, with whome he dyneth or soupeth. Parasitari, to holde vp a nother mannes tale for a diner or souper. Parasitaster, he that counterfayteth hym that is called Parasitus. Parastatae, certayne stones in pylars. Para∣stata, also one of the bones in the shanke of the legge. Parastates, stones, whiche do susteyne both sy∣des of a dore, called Iambes. Paratragoedio, are, to brag or crake, to speke great or hyghe wordes. Parcae, ladies of desteny, also it signifyeth the selfe destiny, or disposition in prolongynge or shortnynge lyfe, the names of the ladyes be Clotho, Lachesis, Atropos. Parco, peperci, parcere, to spare, to forgyue, or pardon, to let or prohibite, to leaue, to for beare or absteyne. Parcere pretio, to spare for coste. Sumptui ne parcas, Spare for no coste. Parcere ualetudini, take hede to thyn helth. Parcere uoci, not to speake loude. Parcitur, imper sonale, Ci Neque parcetur labori, they wyll stycke for no labour. Parcere metu, to put awaye feare. Parcé, scarcely, nyggardly, nyghely, fayre and softly. Parciter, idem. Parcitas, frugalitie, or moderation in liuynge. Parcimonia, nygardshyp, or scarsitie. Parcus, a nygarde. Parcus, ca, cum, nyghe, or nygarde, scarce in expences, sometyme it signifieth seelde. Parcus comitatu, he that hath a small trayne. Parcus opera, an easy warkeman, he that is more ydell than occupyed. Pardus, a lybarde. Pardalianches, the venoumouse herbe called also Aconîtum. Pardalus, a birde of dunne colour, whiche fle∣eth in flockes. Parectata, & parectatus, he that is newely is∣sued out of a chyldes yeres, and beginneth to haue the tokens of a man. Parectonia, the mother of Plato, the most no∣ble philosopher. Parens, father, mother, or any other aunce∣tour, sometyme it is vsed for hym whiche ca∣reth moche for a nothers welthe and defen∣deth it. Parentela, auncetry. Parentalia, feastes made at the burienge of auncetours. Parenthesis, is a sentence comprehended with in an other sentence, without any detrimente thervnto, beinge marked with one halfe cir∣cle at the begynnynge, and an other at the ende, as in this wyse. Nihil adeo principem decet, (quod omnes quidem fatentur) quā tum iustitia, prudentiae, at{que} liberalitati ae∣qualiter coniuncta, Nothyng so well becom∣meth a prynce (whiche al men do confesse) as Iustyce equally ioyned with wysedome and bounteousnes. Parento, rare, to celebrate the funeralles of auncetours or frendes. Paranomasia, a figure in speakyng, where one worde is lyke to an other, but of dyuerse sy∣gnyfycations. Nam inceptio est amentium, non amantium, this begynnynge is of mad men, not of louers. Paratus, ta, tum, redy. Paratè, redily. Pareo, rui, rêre, to appere, to be sene, to obey. Parergon, some thynge added to, beynge non parte of the matter, as whanne a payntour dothe make an image, he dothe adde to trees or townes. Parethonium, a whyte colour that peynters do laye, whiche is founde in Egypte. Paribit, for pariet, she shall brynge forthe a chylde. Parici, iuges assigned for capitall cause, as murder or felony that requireth dethe. Paries, etis, a wall of a house. Parieti loqueris, thou speakest to the wal, which may be sd of him that wil not eftso∣nes reherce that, whiche he hereth spoken. Parietaria, an herbe called Pelitory of the wal. Parietinae, olde watles. Parilia, festiuall dayes, whiche the Romaynes kept for preseruation of theyr cattell. Parilis, le, equall. Parilitas, equalitie, similitude in quantitie or qualitie. Pario, peperi, parere, to brynge forth children the lyke thinge in beastes, sometyme to bring forthe generally, or to geate. Parere sibi gratiam, to get fauour. Tibi mille passus peperit morae. He hathe caused the to tary whyles thou moughteste haue rydden or gone a myle. Pàrere perfugium pedibus, to saulfe hym¦selfe by runnynge away. Párere uerba, to speake wordes ot spoken before.
Paretonium, a citie with a greate hauen in Egypte. Paris, ridis, the sonne of Pryamus kynge of Troyanes, whose historye is soo commonlye knowen that I nede not to write it. Parrhasius, An excellent payntour who conten∣dinge with Zeusis, whiche of them had most kunnyng, Zeusis broughte forthe a table in the which he had so craftely paynted grapes that byrdes flewe to them and pecked on thē Parrhasi{us} brought forth a nother table, in the whiche was paynted onely a sheete so fynelye wrought that all men iuged it to be a verye shete, thā Zeusis required Parrhasius, that he shuld take away the sheete and shew forth his wark, wherat Parrhasius laughed, and iested on Zeusis meryly, than Zeusis percey∣uyng it, knowleged his errour, and granted to Parrhasius the victory, sayinge to hym: yesterday I deceyued birdes, but to day thou haste deceyued me beinge a craftes man. Parithmia, be kernelles in the innermoste par∣tes of the rotes of the toungue, called also Tonsillae. Parius, a, um, of the yle called Parus, frome whens is brought marble stone caled Pariū marmor. Parito, tare, to prepare. Pariter, in lykewyse, equally, semblably. Parma, a targat, whiche foote men dyd vse. Parmula, a buckelar, it is also a citie in Italy. Parnasides, the nyne muses, or ladyes of scy∣ences. Parnassidae uestes, apparayle belongynge to maydens. Parnassus, a mountayne in Greece, hauynge two toppes, vnder the whiche the nyne mu∣ses dyd inhabyte or dwell. Paro, are, to prepare, to get, to apparell. Paro, onis, a lyttell shyp or brigantine. Parochus, an offycer, whiche prouyded for wood and salte for ambassadours, also it is nowe vsed for a prieste, which is a curate, or paryshe prieste. Paroecia, a paryshe, Parodus, a passage. Paroemia, a prouerbe accommodate to the mat¦ter and tyme. Paroeci, paryshoners, or they whiche do dwell within one paryshe. Paropsis, idis, a potage dyshe, or potyngar. Paros, an yle in the sea called Aegeum. Parôtis, tidis, is an apostume behynde the care whiche commeth of a matter distillyng from the heade into the burres or kernelles of the eares ingendred of an inflammation of the body and bloude. Paropamisus, a mountayne ioynynge to Inde and the countrey called Bactrae, it is also the name of a great ryuer that runneth throughe Scithia not far from the northe Ocean, and some do name it the deade sea or frosen sea. Paroxismus, the fytte in a feuer. Parrhasia, a countrey in Grecia, called also Archadia. Parrhasius, an excellent payntour. Parricida, murderars of theyr parentes, betrai¦ours of theyr countraye, sumetyme murder generally. Parricidium, murder of kynsfolke, or treson to the proper countrey. Parricidium, Matricidium, murder of father and mother. Pars, partis, parte. Partes facere, to deuyde in porcions. Partes primas agere, to be the chyefe perso∣nage, properly in an enterlude. In parte aliqua haerêre, to be in som fauour. Priores partes habere apud aliquem, to be in great credence or fauour with one. Priores partes tribuere alicui, to gyue one the moste prayse, or prayse hym moste. Partes alicuius agere, to do an other mannes offyce. Partes meae sunt, it is myne offyce or charge Partes defendas tuas, defende thyne owne matter or cause. Non sunt meae partes id facere, it belongeth not to me to do it. Pars bona, the more parte. Magna ex parte, for the mnore parte. Ex parte, partely. In parte idem. In omnes partes, holy, in what maner so e∣uer it be. In optimam partē accipere, to take a thinge in worthe or in good parte. Pars, for Partim, partely. Milites pars uicto∣riae fidutia, pars ignominiae dolore, ad om∣nem laetitiam, audatiam{que} processeruut. The men of warre partely vpon truste of vi∣ctorye, partely for sorowe of the reproche that they had taken, became at the laste to be full of courage and mery. Pars, is taken of Plautus, for the wyfe. Satur de me loquitur et de parte mea, Nowe that his bealy is full, he talketh of me and of my wyfe. Partes prime, the chiefe parte. Parsimonia, moderate expenses. Parsi, the pretertence of parco, I haue spared Parthenium, an herbe whiche by Dioscorides description hath lyttell leaues lyke to Cory∣ander, a floure with whyte leaues, and is in the myddell somewhat yelowe hauyng a gret and yll sauour, also he gyueth the same name to the herbe called Helcine, whiche is Peri∣tory of the wall, the fyrste is of some apothe∣caries
called Matricaria. Ruellius reproueth them whiche do suppose that Parthenium is the herbe called Cotula fetida, whiche is ra∣ther Buththalmos, for Cotula hath leaues lyke to fenel, and so hath Buphthalmos, and not lyke to Coriander. Some do affyrme that one kynde of Parthenium is feuerfu, called also Matricaria, the second is tansy, the third camomyll, the fourth Cotula fetida, the fifth Bupthalmos, that is to saye oxeyes, whiche is lyke to Cotula, and stynketh not, the sixte mercury, the seuenth peritory, the eyght mo∣therworte, somme do put maioram for oone kynde. Partes, somtyme sygnifieth duetie. Parthenope, the olde name of the Cytie of Naples. Parthia, a countrey in Asia, which hath on the southe the redde sea, on the northe the sea cal¦led Hircanum, on the easte the people called Arij, on the west the realme called Media. Parthi, people of that countrey. Parthicus, a, um, of the countrey of Parthia. Partiarius, a partynge felowe, or copartner. Particeps, cipis, he that taketh parte. Participo, are, to gyue parte, or take parte, to make an other man partner, or of counsayle. Particula, a portion. Particularis, re, particular. Particulariter, particularly. Particulatim, idem. Particulones, coheyres, or comperceners, whi¦che haue inheritaunce to gether. Partim, partly, in parte, some tyme part. Par∣tim hominum uenerunt, parte of the menne dyd come. Partio, onis, a byrthe. Partior, iris, iri, partitum, & partio, ire, to parte to deuyde. Parthissus, a Riuer on the Northe parte of Germania. Partite aduerbium, diuided in pieces or partes Partitio, a particion, or diuision. Partitudo, for partus, the byrthe of a chylde. Partus, ta, tum, gotten with labour. Parturio, iui, & iri, to labour as women do in trauayle with chylde. Partus, tus, & parti, & partuis, the byrth of a chylde, sometyme the chylde selfe. Parulis, a swellynge of the gummes. Paruifacio, cere, to set lyttell by. Parui aestimo, idem. Parui duco, idem. Paruipendo, idem. Paruitas, the lyttelnesse. Parum, lyttell. Parum est, it is a small matter. Parumper, a lyttell whyle, or tyme, also erye lyttell: sometyme quickely. Paruus, a, um, lyttell or small. Parua sunt foris arma nisi est consiliū domi, Armour is a small matter abrode, if there be not good councell at home. Paruulus, a lyttell one. Paruulus, a, um, very lyttell. Parum habere, to set lyttell by. Paruulum aduerbium, paruulum differt, It is but a small diuersitie. Pasalli, pomanders. Pascales, shepe or pultrye, whiche doo fede at large. Pasca, Easter. Pascalis, le, perteynynge to Easter. Pasceolus, a lether bagge. Pascito, tare, to fede. Pasco, paui, pascere, & Pascito, are, to feede to gyue meate to a nother, to nouryshe or brynge vp, to augment. Pascere oculos, to contente or please the eien with the beholdynge of a thynge. Pascito, tare, to fede often. Pascor, sceris, pasci, to feede as beastes done. Pascua, & pascuum, pasture. Pascuus, a, um, that whiche serueth to feede cattell. Pasiphac̄, the wyfe of Minos the kynge of Crete, who hauynge companye with a bull, brought forthe the monster called Minotau∣rus, which was halfe a man and halfe a bul. Passales, be as well shepe as pultrye, whiche fede abrode. Passer, eris, a sparrowe, also a fysshe called a playce. Passerculus, a lyttell sparowe. Passili, a lyttel grayn called vatches or fitches. Passim, here and there, sometyme it signifyeth from all places, some tyme indyfferently, al∣so ouer all. Passio, a passion, griefe. Passiuus, a, um, that whiche sygnifieth passi∣on or causeth passion or griefe. Passiui amatores, they whiche do loe all women indifferently. Passum, a wyne made of grapes moche withe∣red in the sunne, it is also a licour made with great reasons steped long in very good wine vntyll they swelle, and than to be brused and the licoure pressed out, and sometyme they do put therto some water, and than isit called fecundarium. Passus, a, um, spred abrode, or open. Passus, us, a pace, whiche dothe conteyne fiue feete. Pastillus, uel pastillum, a pasty. Pastinaca, an herbe called parsnyppes, also a fishe. Pastino, are, to deue in a gardeyne: repasti∣no, uide in R.
Pastinatus, tus, deluynge. Pastinatio, idem. Pastinum, a debyll, or settynge stycke. Pastio, onis, pasturynge or feedynge of cattell. Pastomis, an instrument, which is sette on the nosethryls of horses, that wylle not be ruled, and is callyd of horsebreakers, barnakles. Pastophori, certayne priestis in Egypt pertay∣nynge to Isis. Pastophorium, the chaumber of the Sexten, or hym whiche kepeth the temple. Pastor, oris, a sheparde or herdman. Pastoralis, le, pertaynynge to the shepeherde or herdeman. Pastorius, a, um, idem. Pastoricius, a, um, of fedyng or grasing of catel. Pastus, a, um, he that hath eaten. Pastus, tus, meate, feedynge, pasture. Patagium, a cloke of cloth of golde, vsed to be worne on ryche garmentes. Patagiati, they whiche do weare ryche clokes. Patagiarij, the craftesmenne that maketh su∣che clokes. Patara, a citie in the countrey of Licia, where Apollo was chiefly honoured. Patauium, a citie in Italy callyd Padua, nygh vnto Venyce. Patauini, men of that citie. Patefacio, cere, to make open, to declare, to disclose. Patefio, fieri, to be disclosed or discouered. Patella, a lyttell panne or askyllet. Pateo, tui, tere, to be open. Patet locus tria stadia, the place is foure fur∣longe in breadth or length. Patent omnibus, al men may perceyue them. Acutis morbis adolescentia magis patet, youthe is more subiecte to sharpe or daunge∣rouse syckenesses. Patens, open. Patens uulneri, in daunger to be hurt. Pater, tris, a father. Patera, a brode pece or bolle of gold or syluer. Paterfamilias, the good man of the house. Paterpatratus, to whome it pertaynyd, whan trues shuld be taken, to receiue the othes and appoyntment of both partes, and was therin chiefe and principalle ambassadour. Pater patrimus, he that is a father and hathe his father lyuyng. Paternus, a, um, pertaynyng to a father. Patesco, scere, to be open. Pathe, troubles or vexations of mynd, passiōs. Pathetica oratio, an oration mouynge the hea∣ter to indignation or pitie. Pathmos, an yle in these callyd Aegeum. Patibulum, a woden locke of a doore, or a barre wherwith the doore is made fast, also a place of tourment, a gybbet, galowes, or crosse. Patillum, a payre of tongues or other lyke in∣strument, wherwith coles are taken vp. Patina, a dyshe wherin meate is caryed. Patinarium, meate whiche is stewed vppon a chaffynge dyshe. Patior, pateris, pati, to suffer, to endure. Pati a uita, to sustayne hunger. Pati aegre, to be yll content. Pati aequo animo, to be well content. Pati fortiter, to suffer pacyently. Pati iniquo animo, to be angry for a thynge. Indigne pati, to be discontent. Pati facile, not to be discontent. Patior non moleste, I am not dyscontent. Nullum patior esse diem quin in foro dicam I do lette noo daye passe, but that I pleade some matter. Pati aeuum, to haue duryd well. Grauius accusas  patiturtua consuetudo, ys do accuse more greuousely than ye be wont. Nec ulla segetū minus dilationem patitur, There is no corne that typeth more hastyly, or wolde sooner be reaped. Pati febrem, to haue the feuer. Pati iactiuras, to haue had losses. Pati impedimentum, to be lette. Pati imperium, to be vnder subiection. Pati supplicium, to be put to deathe. Pati solicitudinē pro aliquo, to take thought for one. Pati poterunt oculi me cum Gabino senten∣tiam dicere? May I indure to syt with Ga∣binius in iudgement. Patiens, tis, a participle sygnifyeth pacient, in∣durynge. Patiens, a nowne ioyned with a genitine case. Patiens nauium Tyberis, Tyber may beare a shyppe. Patiens operum, he that can indure to labor. Patiens uaetustatis, that whiche dureth long. Patienter, paciently, measurably. Patientia, pacyence. Patienter praestare, to suffer and let passe. Patibilis, le, sufferable. Patitor, suffer thou. Patrae, trarum, a citie in Achaia. Patrator, oris, he that dothe a thynge. Patres conscripti, senatours. Patria, a countrey. Patriarcha, a prynce or chiefe manne of the fa∣thers, It was also the name of dygnitie, of fyue chyefe Archebysshoppes, as of Rome, Antyoche, Alexandry, Ierusalem, and Con∣stantinople. Patriarchatus, the dygnitie of a patriarche. Patricida, he that kylleth his father. Patricidium, the murder of a mans father. Patricè, nobly, or lyke a noble man.
Patricius, a senatours sonne, or commen of se∣natours. Patrimonium, goodes commen by inheritance, patrymonye. Patrinus, & Patrimis, he whiche hath his fa∣ther lyuynge. Patrinus, a, um, of the father, or pertaynynge to the father. Patritus, ta, tum, that whiche happeneth to one by his father. Patrius, a, um, of the countrey also pertaynyng to a father. Patrizo, & patrisso, are, to be lyke a father. Patro, are, to persourme. Patrare facinus, to commytte a myscheuouse dede. Patrocynor, aris, ari, to defende them, whiche be poore, or be falsely accused. Patroclus, a noble greke, companiō to Achilles. Patrocinium, defence of menne beinge in trou∣ble or suyte. Patronymicū nomen, a name taken of an an∣cetor, as Priamides the childrē of Priamus. Patronus, he that is aduocate on the defendan¦tes parte. Patrueles, cousyn germayns, or ryght cousyns on the fathers syde. Patruus, the fathers brother. Patruus magnus, my fathers vncle. Patruus maximus, my grandfathers vncle. Pattagia, a ryuer in Sicile. Patulico, care, to be open. Parulus, a, um, wyde open. Patulus bos, an oxe or cowe, whose hornes do stande wyde open. Paucis, in fewe wordes. Paucus, ca, cum, fewe. Paucitas, tatis, fewnesse. Pauculus, a, um, very fewe. Paucies, seldome. Pauciens, idem. Paucitas, fewe in numbre. Pauens, tis, he that feareth for a tyme. Paueo, ere, to feare. Pauera, wheate whiche spryngeth not well out of the hose, whan it groweth ineare. Pauesco, scere, to be aferde. Pauicula, a pauynge bytell, wherwith stoones be dryuen into the grounde, in the makyng of a pauement. Pauidus, he that alway feareth. Pauide, fearefully. Pauimento, are, to make a pauement. Pauimentū, a pauement, or place paued, a flore Pauio, ire, to stryke. Pauito, are, to be soore aferde. Paulatim, lyttell and lyttell. Paulisper, a very lyttell whyle. Paulum, & paulo, a lyttell. Paulo, a lyttell. Paulominus, lyttell lasse. Paulo mox, by and by. Paulo prius, a lyttell erst. Paululum, very lyttell. Paululum modo, neuer so lyttell. Paululo tum erat contenta, she was than con∣tent with a very lyttell. Paulum, lyttell. Paulus, was a name mooste commonly of the Romaynes, of the whiche one was moste ex∣cellente, named Paulus Aemilius, sonne of Lucius Paulus. This man ascendyng by all dignities vnto Consul, was capitayne of the warres in Spayn, where he faught two bat∣tayles, wherein were slayne .xxx. thousande Spanyardes, and wan .CCl. wallyd townes and not withstandyng returned to Rome not one grote the rycher, for he was lyberall and sumptuouse, and not very ryche. Afterwarde he made warre against the Ligurians, which were about Ieane, where hauyng with hym but onely .viii. thousand, he put to flyght .xxx. thousande, and brought theym to subiection. Finally he faught agaynst Perseus kynge of Macedonia, and vanquished him, & brought hym and his chyldren prysoners to Rome in triumph, which was in this forme▪ The sena¦tours apparailed in white sylke, sat in stages made about the market place to beholde the triumph, all the temples were sette open, and fylled with floures and soote perfumes, the triumph was diuided into thre dais, the first day vneth suffysed to the beholdynge of ima∣ges, as wel paynted as wrought in stone and mettall, by moste excellent warkemen, why∣che were caried in .CCl. chariotes, the second day was brought forth the harneyse and ar∣tyllery of the Macedones, and the apparayle of horses, whyche was in suche sorte, that it was in a maner terryble to the vanquyshers to beholde it. After folowed three thousande menne, whyche dydde beare syluer coyne in CCCl. vesselles, of syluer euery vesselle be∣ing in weighte three talentes, whyche was CCxl .li .after .ixxx. li. to euery talente, euery vesselle was borne of foure men. Other dyd beare greatte cuppes and pottes of syluer. The thyrde daye the trompettes came before blowynge the blouddy soundes. After theym came an hundred and twenty oxen their hor∣nes gylt, and thervpon were set fyllettes and garlandes, and were led with yong men gyrt and prepared to sacryfyce theym, and chyl∣derne bare cuppes of goulde and syluer, to serue to the sacryfyce. After theym folowed they, whyche bare money of gould in golden vessels, euery of them waying thre talentes. also the number of the vesselles were .CCxl.
Than folowed they, whyche caryed the potte whyche Aemilius hadde lette make all of precy∣ouse stoones, wayenge tenne talentes, whyche was .DCCC. pounde▪ alsoo they that bare all the plate of the kynges Antigonus, Seleucus, Thericius, and Perseus, whych was innume∣rable. After came the charyotte, wherein was Perseus harneyse, with his dyademe set ther∣vppon. Soone after his two sonnes and oone doughter ledde, and with theym a greatte numbre of theyr nourices maysters and gouer∣nours, wepynge and holdynge vp theyr handes vnto the people. Wherof many were meuyd to teares, soo that the tryumphe semed to be myn∣gled with gladnesse for the vyctorye, and with heuynesse for compassyon. After his chylderne and seruauntes folowed forthwith Perseus in a blacke garment, tremblynge and troubled in spyryte, whome ensewed a greatte companye of his Counsayllours and offycers, beholdynge hym sorowfullye with teares, whyche moore constrayned dyuerse of the Romaynes to wepe for pytie that they hadde of theyr myserye. Af∣ter hym were borne foure hundred crownes of goulde, whyche were gyuen to Aemillus by the cyties of Greece for his vertue and pro∣wesse. Thanne folowed Aemilius hym selfe syttynge in a charyotte verye rychely apparay∣led, hauynge a robe of pourple tynsette, and bearynge in his hande a braunche of lawrelle, as a manne besyde that honour worthye to be looked on. Than after came the men of warre, whyche hadde bene with hym, in order of suche bendes and companyes as do belonge vnto ba∣tayle, euery of theym bearynge in his hande a braunche of lawrell, and syngynge versis myxt with mery tauntes. some syngynge the prayses of Aemilius, whome they behelde and wonde∣red at for his excellente qualyties. But nowe beholde Aemilius beinge in that state and con∣dytion, that nothynge lacked in hym that man coulde wysshe for, yet his lyfe was not vnmixt with aduersyties. He hauynge foure sonnes, of the whyche two he hadde gyuen in adopti∣on to Scipio Aphricanus, and Fabius Maxi∣mus, the other two he kept at home with him, the oone of theym dyed fyue dayes before the tryumphe, beynge syxtene yeres olde: The o∣ther beynge twelue yeres olde, dyed the thyrde daye after the tryumphe. Whyche crueltie of Fortune, all men lamented, that had broughte soo greatte heuynesse into the howse, repleate with gladnesse, reioycynge, and noble renoume and hadde meddlyd teares, sorowes, and la∣mentation with vyctorye ioye and tryumphe. But therfore Aemilius neuer abated his cou∣rage, but callynge the people togyther, made to theym a noble oration, declarynge to theym that he was nothyng deceyued by Fortune, for as moche as whan she seemyd to hym moste fa∣uourable, he thanne more fearyd her than anye thynge elles, and althoughe she hadde taken frome hym good sonnes, whome he appoynted to succede hym, yet sens she hadde shewed her extreme malyce to hym and his bloudde, he hadde good truste nowe, that the people of Rome shoulde remayne prosperouse withoute any perylle. O noble harte, O valyaunt cou∣rage wourthy to be lefte in remembraunce, he broughte soo moche goulde and syluer into the treasourye of the Romaynes, that there neded noo taske to be sette on the people, vntylle the fyrste battayle betwene Octauyane and Anto∣nye, whyche was foure score yeres and aboue. yet he lefte in patrymony vneth fyue hundred foure score and twelue pounde, and in treasour lyttell or nothynge. This hystory haue I bene meued to wryte for the dyuerse pleasaunt and notable thynges, whyche be therin conteyned, with the vnsuretie of prosperytie, wherein all men are blynded whiche doo desyre to haue it. One thynge wolde be remembred, althoughe Aemilius was a fauourer of the nobilitie. yet was he of the people better beloued than Sci∣pio who onely studied to serue theyr pourposes, for his humanytie equally myxte with grauitie and seueritie, he was brought to erth, not with sumptuouse preparation, but with loue and fauour not onely of his countreye menne, but alsoo of his ennemyes, for as many of Ligu∣ria, Spayne, and Macedonia as than were at Rome. They that were yonge and stronge dydde beare the corps, the olde menne folowed callynge hym benefactour and conseruatoure of theyr Cyties and countrayes. Plutarchus in Vitis. Paulus, the Apostelle of Christe was borne in Iudea, in a towne callyd Giscalis, and was of the Trybe of Beniamyn. And the towne beyng taken by the Romayns, he went with his parentes to Tharsum a cytie in Cilicia and dwellyd there. But afterwarde he was sent by theym to Hierusalem to lerne the la∣wes, and there was taught of one Gamaliel, a great lerned man, he beinge with other at the martyrdome of saynt Steuyn, receyued letters of the byshoppe, wyllynge hym to go to Damascum, there to persecute theym that beleued in Christe, and in the waye he was by reuelation chaunged frome a persecu∣tour to a vesselle of election. And afterward whanne he hadde conuerted Sergius Pau∣lus, than beynge Proconsule at Cypres to the faythe of Chryste, by hym he was callyd Paulus, where before he was named Sau∣lus. Fynally he sufferyd martyrdome by be∣headyng, after the passyon of Christe .xxxvii. yeres, and the fourtenth yere of the raigne of
Nero. Haec Hieronymus & Sophoronius. the resydue of his lyfe appereth in the Actes of the Apostles, his lernynge and mystycall wysedome is well shewed in his epistles, in the whyche as saynt Peter saythe, be somme thynges harde to be vnderstande, and that men vnlerned and inconstant do depraue, like as they do the other partes of scripture to their owne pardicion. These wordes I wold to god men wold consider in these dayes, and reade the sayd epistles with a reuerend feare and deuotion, not presumyng on theyr spirite onely, but conferryng it eyther with the coū∣sell of men very well studyed and catholyke, or els with the approuyd expositions of most holy doctours, or yf he may not come by the one or the other, rather to leaue of vntylle he maye be discretely satisfied, than to addicte hym selfe to any newe opinyon, that is to say contrary to that whych the catholyke church hath vertuousely vsyd. Paulus Samosaténus, an horryble herityke, by∣shop of Antioche a man of exceding pride and intollerable vanite, about the yere of our lord 267. his heresy was, that Christe beganne of our Lady, and toke his fyrst begynnynge of the erthe, and was a man onely of our com∣mune nature, which herifye was condemned by a generall counsayle holden at Antioche, and Paulus excommunicate by all the coun∣sayle, and an other byshop put into his place, and he by the commandement of the emperor Aurelianus was of the people pullyd out of the Churche. Pauo, onis, & pauus, a pecocke. Pauor, oris, extreme feare. Pauper, pauperis, a poore man. Pauper, peris, an adiectiue poore. Pauperies, & paupertas, tatis, pouertie. Pauper, ra, rum, poore. Pauperculus, & paupercula, a poore manne or poore woman. Paupero, are, to make poore. Paupertinus, na, num, poore. Pausa, a pawse, leysure. Pausanias, was the generall captayn of the La∣cedemons in the great batayl agaynst Xerxes and yet afterwarde was he condempned of treason. Pausias, a noble payntour. Pauso, are, to pawse. Pauxillatim, by lyttell and lyttell. Pauxillisper, idem. Pauxillus, a, um, very lyttell. Pax, pacis, peace, a quyete lybertie. Paxillus, a lyttell stake. Pax sequestra, a truce betwene two hostes. ¶P ANTE E. PECCATVM, a synne, an offence. Pecco, care, to offende or synne, to fayle in any thynge. Peccatur, there is a fault. Pecorarius, a herdemanne, also he that dothe hyre cattell. Pecorarius, a, um, pertaynynge to cattell. Pecorinus, na, num, of rother beastes. Pecten, inis, a weauers lowme. alsoo a combe. it is also the place about the priuy membres, where heare dothe growe. it is also the styc∣kes, wherewith a man stryketh doulcemers whanne he dothe play on theym, also a fyshe callyd Scaloppe. alsoo the longe grayne of a tree, by the whyche the wodde cleaueth. Pectinatim, in the facyon of a combe. Pectino, to kembe, also to harowe corne why∣les it is in grasse. Pectitus, ta, tum, kembed, or harowed. Pecto, xi, tere, to kembe or trymme heare, to carde woulle, to sette a harpe or other lyke instrument. Pectoralis, le, pertaynynge to the breast. Fascia pectoralis, a breast kerchiefe. Pectorium, a certayne carte sommetyme vsyd in Fraunce. Pectorosus, a, um, great breasted. Pectunculus, a lyttell Scalop. Pectus, pectoris, the breaste, sommetyme hart or courage. Pectusculum, a lyttell breaste. Pecuaria, store of cattelle. alsoo places where they be kept, also a multitude of cattell. also reuenues that commeth of cattell. Pecuariam rem facere, to brede cattell. Pecuarius, a breder of cattell. Pecuarius, a, um, belongynge to cattell. Pecu, indeclinabile. Pecua, in the plurell num∣ber, cattell, beastes. Peculator, & peculatrix, he and she that stea∣leth a commune treasour. Peculatus, robberye of the commune treasure, or of a prince. Peculiaris, re, proper or speciall. Peculiariter, properly, specyally. Peculio, are, to punyshe by the pourse. Peculiosus, ryche, of great substance. Peculium, substaunce, that rychesse, whyche is onely in money and cattall, a mannes pro∣per goodes. Peculor, aris, ari, to steale a commune treasour or any thynge from a prynce. Pecunia, money, it is taken of the olde Ciuilli∣ons, for all thynges whyche we calle cattell. Pecunious, ryche. Pecus, pecudis, seu pecus pecoris, all maner of cattell, sometyme the multitude or flock of
cattelle, sometyme it is taken onely for sheepe or gotes. Peda, & pedatura, the steppe or token of a man¦nes foote. Pedalis, of a foote. Pedamen, & pedamentum, a stake or forke, wherby a vyne, hoppes, or other lyke thynge is sustayned or borne vp. Pedaneum, idem. Pedaneus, a, um, of the quantitie of a foote, in length, or dystaunce. Pedanei iudices, interyour iuges, which went on foote. Pedare, to set proppes, or to proppe vp a vyne or tree, that it shall not fall or bowe downe. Pedarij, were Senatours, whyche dydde not shewe theyr opynions in wordes, but onely meuynge theym selues towardes those per∣sones, whiche had raysoned, whose sentences they dyd approue, lyke as they do in the par∣lyament house. Pedatim, where one foote goth with the other, foote by foote. Pedatio, the settynge vp of vynes. Pedatò, sodaynly. Pedatus, footed. Pedecosus, lousy, or full of lyce. Pedepressim, a foote pace, softly. Pedes, fecte in metre, sometyme lyse. Pedem struere, to take hym to his feete, to runne away. Pedem referre, to retreate or go backe. Pedem conferre, to come to a poynte of a matter in controuersy. Pedem ponere, to begynne a matter. Pedem reuocare, to retreate or rele back. Pedes, an aduerbe, signifieth on foote, see more herof in Pes. Pedes, ditis, a foote man in battayle. Pedester, he that gothe on foote, or is on foote. Pedestris oratio, a numerouse spekyng or wri∣tynge in the fourme of a verse, or metre, al∣though it be not a verse. Pedetentim, softly and fayre, by lytel and litel. Pedica, any thyng, wherwith the fote is tyed, as a fetter, a payre of gyues, or stockes. Pedicillus, a lyttell worme whiche bredeth be∣twene the skynne and the fleshe Pediculatus, ta, tum, any thynge whiche hath a stalke, as the mooste part of fruite. Pedicularis morbus, the lousy syckenes. Pedicosus, & pediculosus, lousy. Pediculus, a fysshe, the stalke of an apple or peare, or other fruite. also a louse. Pedio, dire, to stampe with the foote. Pediolus, a lyttell foote. Pedissequus, & pedissequa, a seruant, who fo∣loweth alway the mayster or maystresse. Peditatus, an hooste of footemen. Pedo, pepedi, pedere, to fart. Pedum, a shepecroke. Peganon, the herbe called Rue, or herbe grace. Pegasides, the Muses. Pegasus, a horse, whiche was fayned to haue wynges: it is also a sygne or numbre of ster∣res in heauen. Pegma, matis, a stage, wheron pageantes be sette, or whereon plate and iewelles do stande to be loked on. Peieratio, periury, a forswearynge. Peiero, are, to sweare falsely. Peior, peius, warse. Pelagus, the sea. Pelagicus, ca, cum, of the sea. Pelamis, midis, fyshe callyd Tuny. Pelargos, a byrde callyd a storke. Pelasgis, a countrey in Grece callid Archadia. Pelasgi, people whiche came out of Grece, and inhabyted Italy, they be also Arcadiens. Pelasgicus, ca, cum, of Arcadia. Pelias, a kynge of Thessalia, vncle to Iason. Pelicus, a prynce, of whome the people callyd Peligni, toke theyr name. Pelides, the surname of Achilles. Peligni, people in Italy, which cam out of Illi∣ria. Pelion, a hyll in Thessalia. Pella, a citie in Macedonia. also a payle, wher∣into kyne are mylked. Pellax, acis, he that deceiueth with fair wordis Pellacia, fayre speche to deceyue. Pellex, she that is a wedded mans harlot. Pellicator, a deceyuer with fayre wordes. Pellicatus, the yll companye whiche a wedded man leadeth with an other woman. Pellicio, pellexi, cere, to deceyue with fayre wordes, to moue a mā plesantly to do a thing. Pellectus, meuyd, tempted. Pelliceus, cea, ceum, of a skynne or hyde. Pellicula, the skynne. Pelliculo, are, to couer with a skynne. Pellio, onis, a skynner. Pellis, a skynne. Pellitus, cladde in skynnes. Pello, pepuli, pellere, pulsum, to put out, or ex∣pell. sometyme to brynge. Scipionis animum non mediocri cura pepulit, It brought Sci∣pio not in a lyttell care. Pelluceo, cere, to shine bright, to shine through Pellucidus, da, dum, very clere. Pellucidè, clerely. Pelluo, luere, to washe cleane. Pelluuiū, a bason, wherin mens fete ar washed. Peloponnesus, a countrey in Grece, callyd now Morea, and lyeth betwene the sea callyd Io∣nium, and the sea callyd Aegeum. Pelops, pelopidis, whyche vanquysshed on horsebacke in rounnynge Oenomaus, father of Hippodamia, and wedded her.
Peloris, a kynde of shell fysshe. Pelorus, a hyll in Sicile on the sea syde. Pelta, a tergat or bucklar, lyke an halfe moone. Peltati, they which do weare suche bucklars. Peluis, a bason. Pelusium, a cytie in Egypt. Peminosus, a, um, stynkynge. Penates, the gentyles callyd goddis of mannes lyfe: they be sometyme taken for the moste se∣crete partes of the howse. Penarius, & penarium, a cellar or storehowse. Pendeo, es, pependi, pendere, pensum, to hange, or be hanged, to depende, sometyme to be in peyne. Pendere promissis, to trust to promyses. Pendêre, sygnifyeth also to be in doubt. Pendêre animi, to be in doubt or feare. some tyme to longe or desyre to know. Plancus Ci∣ceroni. Ego animi pendeo quid illud sit ne¦gotij, I longe to knowe what the matter is. Pendere poenas, to be punyshed. Pendet dragmas decem, it wayeth tenne drammes. Pendet ab eius ore, he harkeneth dyligently what he saythe. Pendent opera interrupta, the wark remay∣neth imperfect for a whyle. Pendere rei, is sayde of theym that be suyd, and do tary a long time or they be dispached. Pendens, he that is hanged. Pendens uinum, wyne yet in the grape. Pendo, is, pependi, dere, to ponder or waye, to consyder, to esteme or value, to pay, to susteyn or suffer, loke for dependo, suspendo, expen∣in theyr fyrst letters. I endere poenas magistro, to be eten of the mayster. Pendere supplicia, to recompence an offence by deathe. Pendulus, la, lum, that hangeth. Pene, almooste. Penelope, the daughter of Iearus and wyfe of Vlysses, moste chaste wyse and constante aboue all the women of her tyme, who in the xx yeres in the whyche her husbond was ab∣sent, she beynge assaulted with dyuerse wo∣wers whyche wolde she or noo abode in her house, she mought neuer with fayre meanes nor menaces be inducyd to marye, or to con∣sent to commytte any foly. Penelopes, byrdes callyd also Meliagrides. Penelopes telam retexere, sygnifyeth to do and vndo, to take moche labour in vayne. Penes, with or at. Penes hunc, with hym, or in hym. Penes te, it is in the. Penetrabilis, trabile, that may yerce or be per∣ced. Penetrale, the inner part of the howse. Penetro, are, to perce or entre. Peneus, a ryuer in Grecia whyche dyuydeth the countrays of Elis and Achaia. Penicella, a paynters pencelle, wherewith he paynteth. Penicillus, peniculum, & penicillum, a payn∣ters pensell. Peniculamentum, the hemme of a garmente, the skyrtes. Peniculus, siue peniculum, any thynge whyche serueth to brushe or wype cleane any thyng. Peninsula, a place almooste enuyronned aboute with water. Penis, a tayl, also the secrete member of a man. Penitus, ta, tum, tayled, hauynge a tayle, alsoo penitus inwarde. Penitus, an aduerbe, vtterly, to the vttermost, farre of. Penna, a penne or quylle. Pennarium, a pennar. Penniculum, a fether. Penniger, pennigera, gerum, that which bea∣reth fethers. Pennula, a lyttell fether. Pensa, that whiche is payd for a thyng brought. the payement Pensa, in the plurell number, thredes of flaxe or woull, whan it is spunne, whyche may be callyd yarne. Pensator, a wayer. Pensiculatè, wayghtyly. Pensiculo, are, to ponder a thynge. Pensilis, le, that whyche hangeth or stondeth on hygh. Pensile horreū, a garnard wher corn is kept. Pensilis homo, a man hanged. Pensi nihil habere, to ponder or consyder no∣thynge, not to ponder or consyder any thyng, to care for nothynge, or not to care. Pensio, a pensyon or yerely rent. Pensito, tare, to way and consyder a thynge di∣lygently. Pensitare, to paye. Pensitatio, recompence. Pensitatus, ta, tum, thought on. Pensiculo, are, idem quod pensito. Pensitor, a ponderer or wayer Verborum pen¦sitatores subtilissimi, The moste subtyl pon∣derers of wordes. Penso, are, to way or ponder, alsoo to esteme a thynge, sometyme to bye. Pensare uicem alterius, to be in the steede of an other. Vaeteribus benefactis noua pensantes ma∣leficia, to recompence new displeasures with olde venefytes or pleasures. Pensare singula, to consyder euerye thynge dylygently. Pensare aliquid ex alio, to chaunge oone for an nother.
Pensior, & hoc pensius. Plaut. Altera utra sit conditio pensior, uirginem an uiduam hab e∣re? Whiche thynke you the better bargayne to haue the mayde or the wydowe? Pensiuncula, a lyttell pencyon. Pensor, oris, a wayer. Pensus, a, um, wayed, examyned. sometyme it sygnifieth good and wyse. Pensum, the flaxe, whyche is bounden on the distaffe, out of the whyche the threde is dra∣wen. sometyme it sygnyfyeth the threde that is spunne. It is alsoo the execution or myny∣stration of an offyce. also regarde that oone hath to a thynge. Pensilis hortus, a gardeyne made vppon the roufe of a house, or vpon pyllers. Pensilis urbs, a citie standyng on vaultes. Pentaphillon, seu Pentepatalon, an herbe cal∣lyd cynke foyle, whiche hath fyue leaues. The phisitions of late tyme doo suppose it to be Tormentyl, wherwith I am not satisfied. Pentacontarchus, a captayn of fyfty men. Pentadactilus, a broche or spyt in fyue partes with one handell. it is alsoo the herbe callyd Pentaphillon, cynquefoyle. Pentapharmacum conuiuium, a dyner or sup∣per, wherin are fyue sundry dyshes of meate, reade Spartianum in uita Hadriani. Pentapolis, a countrey betwene Palestina and Arabia, wherin were the cities of Sodome and Gomor, burned by the vengeance of god for synne agaynst nature. Pentarchus, he that is captayne of fyue men. Pentateuchus, the volume of the fyue bokes of Moyses, that is to say, Genesis, Exodi, Nu∣meri, Leuiticum, Deuteronomium. Pentathlus, he that exercyseth any of these fiue games, castynge of the balle, or tryndell, run∣nynge, leapynge, wrastlynge, and throwynge the darte. Pentecoste, Whytsontyde. Pentelici hermae, were lyttell images of Mer∣curius made of marble callyd Pendelicus, whiche was one of the most fayre stones that ymages mought be wrought of. Pentesilèa, a queene of Amazon, whiche was slayne at the syege of Troy. Pentimimeris, is a parte of a verse, where a sentence is fynyshed in the fyrst syllable of the thyrde foote. Pentorobon, an herbe callyd also peony. Penula, a cloke, worne whan it rayneth. Penularium, a cloke bagge. Penulatus, cloked. Penuria, extreme necessitie, penury. Penus, penoris, & penum, & penu, & penua∣rium, a storehouse, sometyme store or prouy∣sion of vytayles. Penussime, vtterly. Peonia, an herbe callyd Pyonye, whyche bea∣reth a redde floure, and great rounde seede wherin is meruaylous vertue agaynste the fallynge euyll. Peplis, an herbe lyke to pourselane, and is of some men callyd wylde Purslane. Peplos, an herbe, hauynge smalle leaues lyke rewe sommewhat broder, the toppe rounde, spredde, on the grounde, the lengthe of ones hande, the seede beynge vnder the leaues, ly∣tell and rounde, lesse than white popy, some apothecaries do name it Esaia rotunda. Peplus, uel peplum, a kerchiefe or other lyke couerynge of the heade. Peperci, I haue spared, or forborne, or par∣doned. Pepigi, & pupugi, the pretertence of pungo. Also pepigi, is the pretertence of pango. Pe∣pigit foedus, He made a league or alyance. Pepo, onis, a kynde of Melones, callyd Pom∣pones. Peptica, medycynes, whyche doo make good concoction in a manne, that the meate ea∣ten, maye dygeste welle. Alsoo saluts and oyntementes, whyche doo make impostu∣mes rype. Per, sygnyfyeth by, ioyned with an nother worde, it sygnyfyethe perfection. Perpul∣chrum, Verye fayre. Pergraue, Veray gre∣uouse. Per aetatem, for or by reson of his age. Per fidem, per fortunas, per dexteram te o∣ro, I praye the for the loue of god. Caesar mihi ignoscit per literas, Cesar wri∣teth to me that he hath pardoned me. Per maturitatem dehiscens, It is clouen by to moche rypenesse, or by reason that it was to rype. Per me licet, I am content. Per multas aetates, of a longe tyme. Per metum, for feare. Per nebulam scire, to knowe the one halfe or not certaynly. Per noctem, at nyght. Per omneis dies, euery daye, or day by day. Per otium, at leysure. Per potestatem, vnder colour of authoritie. Obsecro ut per pacem licet te alloqui, I praye you lette me talke with you, without dyspleasure, or I praye you heare me paci∣entely, Per se sibi quisque charus est, Euery man of his nature loueth best hym selfe. Per silentium adesse aeque animo, to heare without speakynge one worde. Per silentium, without noyse. Per stadia duo, the space of two furlonge. Per speciem uenādi urbē egressi, They wēt out of the towne, by makynge semblance to go on huntynge.
Per summum dedecus, with great shame. Per te stetit, it lay in the. Per tempus, all at a tyme, or in tyme. Pera, a scryppe or bagge. Peractio, accomplyshement or performance. Perago, egi, agere, to perform, to make perfit to cōsider, to draw or cause to be drawen with force. Peragere reum, to accuse one, and do sue him to a condemnation. Peragere oīa secū animo, to consyder euery thyng, or to dygest euery thyng in his mynd. Peragere cibum, to dygeste meate. Peragere mortem, to dye. Peragere res gestas, to wryte al that is done. Vbi sententiam meam uobis peregero, Af∣ter that I haue shewed you myne opinyon. Peragro, are, to walke or go about a place. Peragrare per animos hominum, to passe by mens hartes, or as the people do fauour. Peragrare latebras suspitionum, to seeke all coniectures, wherof suspition may happen. Peragratus, ta, tum, gone about. Peragratio, a goynge about. Perambulo, are, to go throughe, sometyme to ryde through or about a countrey or fielde. Peramo, are, to loue well. Peranno, annare, to continue or lyue ouer yere. Perardeo, dere, to bourne out or through. Perareo, ere, to drye vp, to be very dry. Peraresco, idem. Peraro, are, to tylle all through. Perbacchor, ari, to be oftentymes drunke. Perbellè, very well, ryght well. Perbibo, bibere, to quafte or drynke all out. Perbitere, for praeire, to go before. Per causam, for a cause. Perca, a fyshe callyd a perche. Percalleo, lêe, to be waxen harde. Percallere usum alicuius rei, to knowe per∣fytely the vse of any thynge. Percautus, ta, tum, very subtyll or wytty. Percelebro, are, to publyshe in all places. Perculit eum illud, that abateth his courage, or strake hym to the harte. Percellere pectus pauore, it troubled his spirite with feare. Perculsus animus et abiectus, his spirite was troubled, and his courage abated. Percenseo, sére, to recounte or reken. Percingo, gere, to gyrde about. Percedere, to departe. Percello, li, lere to stryke and ouerthrowe. Percino, nere, to synge styll, to continewe syngynge. Percipio, caepi, cipere, to perceyue, to take or receyue, to comprehende, to lerne. Neque agri, neque urbis odiū me unquam percipit. I am neuer wery to be eyther in the countrey or in the citie. Percipere usum alicuius rei, to vse a thinge. Percipere opinione, to doubt of a thynge. Perclam, very priuilie. Perduaxo, for perdo. Peredia, a meale, where men eate hungerly. Perceptio uerbale. Perceptio fructuum, the takynge of the pro∣fyte or reuenues. Perceptio animi, vnderstandynge. Percitus, styrred. Percitus insania, madde. Percoarcto, are, to brynge into a lyttell roume. Percolo, ui, ere, to worshyp moche. Percrebresco, bui, bescere, to be publyshed or sowen abrode in all places. Percrebuit, the bruyte or voyce of people was. Percolo, ui, ere, to worshyp moche. Percontor, aris, ari, to serche to enquire busily Percoquere, to boyle throughly. Percoctus, well boyled. Percudo, di, dere, to breake. Perculsus, & percussus, stryken. Percunctor, aris, ari, to enquire, to demande. Percuro, are, to heale perfytely. Percursum animo, playnly knowen. Percurro, rere, to runne apace, to runne by, to tell or reade a thynge quickely. Percurso, are, to ouerrunne. Percutio, cussi, tere, to stryke or smyte. Percutere fores, to knocke at the doore. Percutit animum, it brake his hart, it strake hym to the harte. Percuti sydere, to be taken, or haue the vse of his members taken from hym. Percussae de coelo turres, The towres were beaten downe with thunder. Percutere foedus, to make a league or aly∣aunce, one prynce with an other, or one coū∣trey or citie with an nother. Percutere fossam, to dyg a dyche or trenche. Percussor, a murderar. Perditè, extremely. Perditus, ta, tum, loste, peryshed, without reco∣uery, out of hope. Perdius, abydynge all the day, or watchyng al the daye, or he whyche dothe any thynge in the day tyme. Perditium, the herbe callyd pelytory of the wal, reade Helxine & Parietaria. Perdix, dicis, a partryche. Perdo, didi, dere, to lose, to slea. Perduco, duxi, ducere, to brynge to an ende, to brynge or leade by force or other meanes. Perduellio, onis, treason agaynst the kynge, or the countrey. also a traytour. Perduellis, an ennemy. Peredo, edi, edere, to eate all. Peregre, out of a mans proper countrey. Peregre uado, I go out of the countrey, or on
pylgremage. Peregre uenio, I come oute of straunge countreys, or from pylgremage. Peregrinor, aris, ari, to go into straunge coun∣treyes or on pylgremage. Peregrinus, a straunger or alyen. Peremptalia, amonge Augures, were those lightnynges, whiche dyd vtterly dystroy and put awaye the significations of other lyght∣nynges and tokens precedynge. Perendie, the day next after to morowe. Perendinus dies, idem. Perennis fluuius, a course of water, that com∣meth with rayne, or a brooke that is onely made with rayne. Perenniter, continually. Perennis, ne, perpetuall, euer durynge. Perennitas, tatis, continuance, long abydynge. Perenno, are, to dure or contynue. Per exiguum tempus, a very short while. Pereo, iui, uel ij, ire, to be loste or consumed. al∣so to dye. Perire ab aliquo, to be slayne by one. Perierunt aedes, the howses be downe, or in ruyne. Perijt illi pudor, he is not ashamed. Nullus otio perit dies, no day is loste with ydelnesse. Tua arte uiginti minae pro psaltria periêre, By thy craft I haue caste awaye twenty no∣bles on the syngynge wenche. Ne pueri pereant fame, that the chylderne dye nat for hunger. Quod si fit pereo funditus, yf it be so, I am vtterly vndone. Perire morbo, to dye in a syckenes. Peream, I wolde I shulde dye than. Perit ab animo, his courage fayleth hym. Perire mulierem, to dye for the loue of a woman. Pererro, are, to go or ryde all about. Perfacul, the auncient writers vsed for facile, lyghtly. Per fas & nefas, by ryght or wronge, by oone way and other. Perfectè, perfytely. Perfectus, a, um, perfytte, accomplysshed, opteyned. Perfector, oris, he that bryngeth a thynge to passe, or to a poynt. Perfero, ruli, ferre, to brynge in conclusyon. al∣so to brynge or telle tydynges sommetyme to suffer or indure. Perficio, cere, to accomplysshe, to brynge to a poynt, to opteyne. Perfidiosus, a, um, full of dysloyaltie. Perfidiosé, disloyally, trayterously. Perfido, dere, to truste moche. Perfidus, false of promyse, he that dothe any thynge agaynste the truste that is put in him dysloyall. Perfidia, falsehode againste promyse or truste, disloyaltie. Perfidus, very trusty. Perfines, for perstringas, strayne thou harde. Perflatus, a great blaste of wynde. Perflo, are, to blowe vehemently or strongly. Perfluo, xi, fluere, to runne out as water doth out of a broken vessell. Perfodio, dere, to bore or perce throughe, to stryke throughe, to dygge through, or to the bottome or depest of any thynge. Perfore, to come wel to passe. Perforare, to perce, or to make an hoole throughe. Perfortiter, myghtily. Perfossus, a, um, perced throughe, stryken or dygged throughe. Perfracté, obstinately. Perfrigefacio, perfrigefacere, to make verye colde. Perfrico, care, to rubbe moche. Perfricuit faciem, aut frontem, aut os, Is in a prouerbe as moche to saye, as he hathe layd apart shame, or he is shamelesse or with¦out abashement. Perfrictae frontis, without shame or honesty. Perfringere, to breake in pieces. Perfructus est, he hath taken the fruite or ple∣sure of a thynge, he hath vsed or exercysed a thynge, or hath left the vse or exercise therof. Perfruor, perfructus, perfretus, aut perfrui∣tus, perfrui, to take all the profyte or commo¦ditie, to take pleasure or recreation in any thynge. Perfuga, he that fleeth to the contrary part in battayle, or forsaketh his capitayne. Perfugio, gere, to run vnto one for succour. Perfugium, a place wherevnto a man runneth to haue succour, or to be kept from daunger. It is also taken for any thyng, wherby a mā maye be succoured. Perfunctoriè, passynge ouer lyghtly. Perfunctorius, a, um, that whiche passeth lyghtly away, or taryeth not longe. Perfunctus, he that hath done diligentlye his duetie or offyce. Perfundo, perfudi, fundere, to poure out or droppe out, or styll out, Perfundit{que} genas lachrimis, The teares dropped downe on his cheekes. Perfundere animum relligione, to be scru∣pulouse. Perga, a towne in Pamphilia, wherof Diana was called Pergaea. Pergama, orum, the towres of Troye. Pergamena charta, parchement. Pergama siue pergamus, a citie in Asia, whi∣che Silenus the ryuer passeth through, that
same citie is called Troy. Perge, go to, passe forthe. Perge in uirum, playe the man, go to lyke a man, go to hardely. Pergin? wylt thou not leaue? wylt thou not be gone. Pergrandis, de, very great. Pergo, perrexi, pergere, to go, to procede, to endeuour to do a thyng, to continue, to make hast, to assaye. Ire perrexi. I endeuoured to go. Suspenso gradu placide ire perrexi, I as¦sayed with a lyght pace to go softly. Pergunt domos eorum, they went to theyr howses. &c. Pergo praeterita, I wyll not speake of that whiche is passed. Domum ire pergam, I wyll make haste to go home. Pergraecor, aris, ari, to be ryotouse, in eating, drynkynge, and hauntynge harlottes. Pergrauè, very greuously. Pergula, a galery, properly where it is open on bothe sydes. It is also the place in a shyppe, wherin men do walke, also a vyne raysed in the fourme of an herber. sometyme the com∣pany of warkemen, obeyinge to the chiefe warkeman. Pergulana uitis, a vyne runnyng on a frame. Perhibeo, êre, to say, to gyue, to affyrme. Praetium perhibere, to sette a pryce. Perhibere testimonium, to beare wytnesse. Perhibere uerba, to saye. Perhorreo, rere, to be sore aferde. Perhorresco, idem. Perhumane, & perhumaniter, ryght gentilly. Perhyemo, are, to indure all the wynter. Periander. one of the seuen wise men of Greece Periclimenon, an herbe called wodbynde whi∣che beareth the honysucle. Pericles, a noble and valyaunte capytayne of the Atheniensis, excellent in wytte and natu∣rall eloquence, and was instructed in philoso¦phy by Anaxagoras, so that therby he attey∣ned to meruaylouse great knowledge, and no¦ble courage and pacience, in so moch as whā a lewde person folowed hym to his house re∣uylynge hym by all the waye, whan he was come to his dore, than beinge nyghte, Pery∣cles commaunded one of his seruauntes to take a torche and bryng hym which had rebu¦ked hym home to his house: Also he being in great estimation and auctoritie amonge the people of Athenes, wolde neuer be at any fea¦stes or bankettynges, nor receyue of any man anypresentes or gyftes, nor dyd go to euerye assembly or counsayle, or beinge there dydde speke or reason in euery matter, but reserued him self to thynges of very gret importance, & yet than semed he to be very tymerouse, but yet was his eloquence so excellent, his voyce and pronunciation soo pleasante, his senten∣ces so ponderouse and vehement, that he ne∣uer spake, but that therto all men consented, and therefore it is wrytten of him that he did fulminate his wordes, that is to saye, that they proceded from him as thūder and light∣nynge. He was of suche temperance, that al∣thoughe he semed to haue al the Athenyensis at his commaundement, yet he neuer increa∣sed his owne reuenewes the worthe of oone ferthynge, but augmented the commune tre∣sure excedyngelye, and suche spoyle as came to his parte in the warres, he dydde imploye vpon grayne and vittayle diuiding it among the people, in the tyme of necessitie, onely he was infortunate in his owne children, his el∣dest sone Xantippus, persecutinge hym with sondry displesures and openly mockyng him, Not withstandynge as it was reason, he dy∣ed miserably before his father▪ Fynally Peri¦cles beinge sycke vnto death, the noble men commen vnto him to comforte hym, speking softly they communed of his prowesse, where he had victorie in nyne greate battayles, he herynge what they spake, sayde vnto theym, that he moche maruayled that they extolled so moche that thynge, wherof the more parte perteyned to fortune, and had hapned to dy∣uerse other capitaines as well as to him, and that whiche was mooste to be praysed, they spake nothynge of it, for neuer man (said he) by mine occasion had cause to put murnynge garmentes vpon hym. Plutarchus in uitis. He was afore the incarnation of Christ. 441. yeres. Periclitor, aris, ari, to be in peryll, also to ex∣perience or proue a thinge. Periclitatio, experience or assaye. Periculose, daungerously. Periculosus, a, um, daungerouse. Pericuium, peryll or daunger, sometyme expe∣rience or profe. Periculum facere, to proue. Perhiodus, a clause, a circuite in wordes, or continuaunce in speakynge. Perhiodice febris, feuers, whiche come by course or fyttes. Perillus, was an artifycer, whiche made a bul of brasse wherinto (beinge glowynge hotte) men shulde be put, that in tourmentynge of them, by theyr ceienge, and noyse shoulde is∣sue out lyke the mowynge or belowynge of a bulle, the whiche engyne whanne Perillus had giuen to Phalaris, the cruell tyraunt, he caused the craftes man to be first put into it, to proue his owne experience. Perimo, emi, imere, to kyll. Perimere reditum alicui, to lette or stoppe one
of his waye. Perimere consilium alicuius, to breake or dis¦appoynt ones enterprise. Peremptus, ta, tum, kylled. Peridoneus, a, um, very mete. Periegesis, a compasse or cyrcuite. Perij, I am loste or distroyed. Perij animo, my harte or courage is gone. Perire mulierem, to loue a womā feruently. Periclymenum, an herbe called wodbynde or honysuckle. Perinde, so, inlyke wyse, euen lyke, very moch uen as, in this fascion. Perinde at{que} capta urbe, like as if the citie had ben wonne. Nulla re perinde motus quam responso, He was not so moche moued with any thinge as with the aunswere. Sed perinde erit ut accoeperis, but it shallbe euen as thou wylte take it. Aduentus non perinde gratus fuit, his com∣mynge was not verye pleasaunte, or accep∣table. Perinêphra, the grekes called those bestes whi∣che were fat about the kydneys. Perinthus, a citie of Thrace, whiche nowe is called Heraclia. Periodicus, ca, cum, that goeth and commeth by courses. Periodica febris, a feuer whiche cometh by courses, as tertians and quartanes. Perioeci, companions or dwellers to gether in one house. Peripatasma, the hangynge of a house, with tapesrye or other lyke thynge. Peripateticus, a philosopher of Aristotles seete or opinion. Peripheria, a circumference. Periphrasis, circumlocution, one worde expres¦sed by many. Periplorema, a fygure, whanne a parte of a sentence nothynge necessary, is added vnto a verse. Peripneumonia, an apostome in the lunges, procedynge of thycke humours, and common¦ly foloweth pleuresy. Peripneumonicus, he whiche hath that disese. Perîpsema, matis, the powder or dust that cō∣meth of fylynge or shauynge of mettall or wodde. Periscelis, idis, sloppes whiche women were wonte to weare. Perissologia, a superfluous speakynge. Peristerae, house culuers or doues. Peristereon, a culuer house. Peristerotrophium, idem. Peristrôma, tapesy, or couerlyddes of Aras or Verdure. Peristylium, a place set about with pyllers. Perite, aduer, wysely kunnyngly. Perito, rare, to peryshe or be loste. Perithous, the companyon of Theseus. Peritia, cunnynge in any science. Peritus, cunninge, perfite in a science. Periuro, rare, to sweare vntrewelye to be periured. Periuriosus, a man whiche is often forsworne. Periurus, forsworne, periured. Periurior, more forsworne. Periurium, periurie. Perizoma, matis, a breche. Perizonium, a corse or brode gyrthe, wherwith maydens were wonte to be gyrte vnder theyr pappes. Perlego, legere, to rede ouer all. Perlecebra, a thynge whiche pleasantly draw∣eth a man to fauour it. Perlepidus, perlepida, perlepidum, veraye fayre. Perlibenter, with a very good will. Perliberalis, very lyberall. Perlibro, to way diligently. Perligo, gare, to bynde harde or faste. Perlitus, ta, tum, anoynted harde. Perloquor, qui, to speake out all to an ende, to speake perfitely. Perlucidum, & pellucidum, cleere that a man may se throughe, as water, glasse, horne. Perluo, luere, to washe ouer or all. Perlustro, stare, to beholde all about. Permadesco, to be moche wette, or to be made very moyste. Permadefacio, cere, to make verye moyste or to wete moche. Permadeo, idem. Permagnus, a, um, very greate. Permano, & permanesco, are, & nescere, to be disclosed, knowen, or diuulgate. Permaneo, mansi, nere, to abyde. Permano, are, to runne all ouer, or to fall into to be declared openly. Per manus traditum, that, whiche is lefte frome one to an other, or is taught by one to an other. As the father telleth or leaueth to his sonne, and he to his sonne, and so conty∣nually by lyne. Permaturesco, scere, to be throughe rype. Permerdo, to defyle ouer all. Per me, aut te, aut illum, aut aliquid aliud sta∣re, Whanne we, or any other thynge is the cause, that a thynge is not done. Omnia iam parata erant, nisi per eum stetisset. Nowe al thynges were redy, if by his occasion it had not be lette. Permessus, aut permessis, ssidos, a ryuer in Greece, dedicate to the Muses. Permisceo, permiscui, miscere, to myxte all together.
Permissio, a sufferaunce. Permitto, misi, mittere, to suffer, to yelde or delyuer, to thraste in, to throwe downe, to commytte, to sende forthe, to lette downe, as to lette downe one by a rope, or other lyke thynge. Permittere equum, to gyue to the horse the brydell, or to let go at his pleasure. Permittere sese, to yelde hym selfe. Permittere, to gyue leaue. Permittere iracundiae alicuius, to gyue place to one whan he is angry. Permittere omnia iuditio alterius, to submit him selfe to the iudgement of one. Permissus, us, licence or leaue. Permulceo, cère, to appease, addoulce, or mit¦tigate a mans displeasure. Permulti, very many. Permuto, mutare, to chaunge one thynge for an other. Permutatio, an exchaunge. Permutator, he that exchaungeth. Perna, the pestyll and also the gammonde of bacon. Pernêgo, are, to deny stifly. Perniciabilis, pernicialis, & perniciosus, cau∣synge deathe mortall. Pernicies, death, great damage, destruction. Pernicitas, swyftenesse. Pernitior, tius, warse, more daungerous, more full of myschiefe. Pernicissimus, cissima, mum, warste, moste daungerouse. Perniciter, dangerously, mischeuously. Pernio, onis, a kybe on the heele. Perniunculus, a lyttell kybe. Pernix, cis, swyfte, flyghtye, sometime stub∣borne, also deedly. Pernocto, noctare, to tary all the nyghte, to watche, to praye, to rest, to walke, to stand, to dwell, to sleape, to lye oute of his owne house. Pernosco, scere, to knowe perfectely. Pernumero, are, to tell out money. Pernox, all night, durynge all the nyght. Pero, onis, a shoe of rawe lether, also a sacke. Per opus est, it is very necessary. Perogiganus, perogita, he that putteth a sta∣lyon to the mare, to season her. Peroleo, to sauour or stnke moche. Peronatus, he that weareth rawe lether shoen boteux or cokars lyke a ploughman. Perorior, iris, re, to begyn, sprynge, or growe by the occasion of some thynge. Peroro, are, to speake or reason to an ende, to reason perfectly, sometyme to moue the he∣rers to indignation. Perorare in aliquem, to pleade agaynst one. Perorati o, the laste parte of an oration, wher¦in the affectes of the hearers are chyefelye styrred. Peroriga, he that helpeth one to horsebacke. Perrori, a people of Aethiopia. Perosus, sa, sum, extremely hated. Perpaco, care, to set all thynge in peace. Perparum, very lyttell. Perparce, very scarsely, very nyghely, or ny∣gardely. Perpasco, perpaui, perpascere, to fede to the vttermoste. Perparuus, a, um, a very littell one. Parpaucus, ca, cum, very fewe. Perpauxillus, a, um, idem. Perpauefacio, pauefeci, facere, to make soore afrayde. Perpello, perpuli, perpellere, to constrayne, to moue or induce one to do a thynge. Perpendicularis, are, that is dyrectely downe ryghte. Perpendiculum, a plumlyne, suche as masons and carpenters haue, with leadde at the ende whereby they do proue the euennesse of theyr squares. Perpendo, dere, to examine, also to consyder. Perpensé, aduisedly, with a consideration. Perperam, amisse, ouerthwartely, vnhappyly wrongfully. Perperi, fooles, ideotes, shrewes, lycrs. Perperitudo, shrewdenes, foolyshenes. Perpero, are, to marre a thynge. Perpes, perpetis, perpetual. Noctem perpetem dormire, to sleape all nyght longe. Perpessus, he that suffereth with moche peyne. Perpetim, perpetually, without ceasynge. Perpetro, trare, properly to do or to commytte an acte good or yll. Perpetuo, are, to continue without ceassynge. Perpetuus, petua, petuum, perpetual, euerla∣stynge, continuall, holl, not in portions or diuyded. Perpetior, perpeti, to suffer pacientelye, to endure. Perpessio, endurynge. Perpeto, perpetere, to aske importunatelye, without cessynge, to perfourme. Perpetratio, an acte good or bad. Pepetuitas, eternitie, an euerlastynge conty∣nuaunce. Perpetuum, & perpetuô, aduerbes signifieng continually, alway, for euer. Perplaceo, perplacui, perplacere, to contente very moche. Perplector, perplecteris, plecti, to bynde or twyste harde or faste, to meddle so to gether, that a man can not knowe what the thynge meaneth. Perplexe loqui, to speake nowe one thyng,
nowe an other, that a man wotteth not what he meaneth. Perplexim, idem. Perplexor, aris, ari, to speake doubtfullye, as wordes, wherin are two intendementes. At scio, quo uos pacto soleatis, perplexarier, pactum, non pactum est. Non pactum, pa∣ctum est, quod uobis lubet. Well, I knowe well inoughe, in what fascion you are wonte to speake, that a manne can not tell howe to take you: it was promysed, it was not pro∣mysed, it was not promysed, it was promy∣sed, euen as it listeth you. Perplexabile, a worde spoken, whiche hathe two dyuerse vnderstandynges, or that which is one thynge in herynge, an other in vnder∣standynge. Perplexabiliter, doubtfully. Perplexus, plexa, plexum, perplexed, twysted to gether, or harde to be loused, intrycate, doubtefull. Perpluit, perpluere, to rayne in the myddel of a house. Perplus, moche more. Perpol, an othe, sygnifyenge by Pollux. some∣tyme the word Per, doth perteyne to the wor¦des folowynge. Perpol quam paucos repe∣rias meretricibus fideles euenire amatores. By God thou fyndeste verye fewe trewe lo∣uers happen to commune womenne. Where per belongethe to quam paucos, and not to Pol. Perpoto, perpotare, to drynke all daye, or to drynke styll, or continually, or vntyll one be drunke. Perpotatio, a contynuaunce in drynkynge, drunkerye. Perpulcher, perpulchra, perpulchrum, verye fayre. Perpulchre, very well done. Perprurisco, perpruriscere, to haue a greatte ytche, or desyre to clawe or scratche. Perpurgo, gare, to make all thynge cleane or neatte. Perputo, perputare, to declare all. Nunc ope¦ram date, ut ego argumentum hoc uobis plane perputem, Nowe take ye hede, that I maye playnely declare all this matter vn∣to you. Perquam, added to any nowne adiectiue, au∣gmenteth his power. Perquàm doctus, Ve∣rye well lerned. Perquàm stolidus, verye folyshe. Perquiro, quisiui, quirere, to make dyligente serche, to examyne. Perraro, very selde. Perrepto, tare, to go softelye, or with moche peyne. Perrideo, perrisi, perridere, to laugh hartily. Perrisio, sere, to scorne, to laughe at one, or to make an other to laughe. Perrogo, gare, to desyre hartely. Perrumpo, rupi, rumpere, to breake on sun∣der, or in the myddes. Persa, a man or womanne of the countreye of Persia. Persaepe, very often. Persanctè, very deuoutly, or solempnely. Perscribo, perscribere, to wryte a thynge throughe, or to an ende, to regyster or in∣roll a thynge. Perscriptio, a deede of a mannes owne wry∣tynge. Perscrutor, scrutari, to serche or inquire dyli∣gentlye. Persefacul, the olde and auncient wryters vsed for perfacile, very lightly, or very casily. Persenex, persenis, very olde. Persentisco, scere, to perceyue well. Persephone, the surname of Proserpina, and signifieth the vertue of sedes in springinge. Persepolis, a citie in the countrey of Persia. Persequor, eris, qui, to pursue, to contynue in that, whiche is begonne, to persecute, to be auenged. Persequi aliquem bello, to warre agaynste one. Persequi aliquem uestigijs, to folowe ones steppes. Persequi numeris cursus syderum, to calcu∣late the course of the sterres. Persequi iniurias, to aduenge. Persequi factis quod dicimus, to do as we speake. Persequi imperium patris, to do the fathers commaundement. Persequi ius suum, to defende his right. Persequi poenas alicuius, to reuenge ones deathe. Persequi promissa alicuius, to solicite one to kepe his prommyse. Persequi uita disciplinam recte uiuendi, To lyue accordynge to the doctryne of lyuynge honestely. Persequi uoluptates, to addicte or giue hym selfe to lyue pleasauntly. Persea, a tree whiche groweth very highe, the wood is blacke, the leaf and floure lyke to a peare the leafe neuer falleth, & beareth alway fruite, whiche is of the quantitie of a peare, in fourme long, and inclosed in an huske like an almonde, grene in coloure, and hath with in hym a nut like a damsyn but that it is lesse and softer, the fruite is swete and dilectable, lyghte of digestion, and althoughe it be exce∣dyngely eaten it hurteth not, and the rote is very great. Persero, perseui, perserere, To sowe aboute
or abrode. Perseuerantia, a stable abydynge in any thinge reasonable. Perseueranter, constantly. Perseuêro, rare, to continue with a stedfaste mynde. Perseus, a noble knyghte, whiche delyuered a fayre lady called Andromeda from a whale, and also slewe Medusa, which tourned men in to stones. Also it is a sygne amonge the sterres. Persia, a countrey in the easte part of the world which hath on the north Mediā, on the west Susianam, on the este Carmaniam, on the southe the persian sea called Sinus persicus. where nowe Sophy reigneth. Persica poma, a fruite called peaches. Persicus, ca, cum, of Persia. Persideo, dère, to sytte by, Persisto, stere, to abyde, also to tary. Persido, to perse vnto the botome. Persolata, an herbe called Clote leaues, which beareth great burtes. Persoluo, uere, to paye truely, to paye all, to accomplyshe. Persoluere grates, to gyue thankes. Persolus, alone, without company. Persona, a visour, lyke to a mannnes face, al∣so person or personage, amonge diuynes and late philosophers: sometyme the qualitie of a man. Personatus, a masker, or he that wearethe a vysour. Personata felicitas, a counterfayte felicitie. Personata uulnera, hydden woundes. Personata, an herbe, whiche growethe by the water syde, hauynge great brode leaues like gourdes, but that they be greatter and har∣der: I suppose it to be the herbe, whiche in some countrey is called Donye. Personatus, tus, a maske. Persono, personare, to sowne out, or sowne perfectly. Perspecto, tare, to loke well about. Perspectus, ta, tum, playnely perceyued or knowen. Perspicacitas, tatis, quickenesse of syghte consyderation. Perspicacè, aduisedly, with good consideratiō Perspicaciter, idem. Perspicientia, perfecte knowledge. Perspicuè, clerely, openly, euidently. Perspicax, acis, he that seeth quickely, & dothe all thynges with consideration. Perspiceo, spexi, spicere, to see or vnderstand playnely. Perspicuitas, ratis, clerenesse, properly in wor∣des or sentences, casynes. Perspicuus, a, um, clere, playne, easye. Perspissò, an aduerbe, very late. Perstino, are, to set a pryce on a thynge. Persto, as, stiti, stare, to abide firmely. Perstrepo, pui, ere, to make a great noyse. Perstrictores, iuglers. Perstringo, perstringere, to wringe harde, to towche a thynge shortely in speakynge or wri¦tynge, to dull or darke with to moche lighte. Perstringere aures, to fyll the eares with noyse. Perstringre nomen aut famā, to giue a man an yll name. Persuadeo, persuasi, persuadere, to induce one to beleue or truste, to aduyse, to styrre ve¦hementely. Persuasibile, & persuasibiliter, in such wyse as it maye perswade. Persuasor, oris, a perswader or inducer to do a thynge. Persuastrix, a woman, whiche induceth or mo∣ueth one to do an acte. Persuo, ere, to sowe vp all. Pertaedeo, dère & pertaedescere, to be verye werye. Pertego, tegere, to couer all. Per tempus, in tyme conuenient, in season. Pertendo, dere, to extende. Pertento, tare, to tempte, to assaye or proue moche. Pertero, triui, terere, to rub or frot a thynge. Perterreo, rui, perterrere, to make aferde. Perterrefacio, cere, idem. Pertesus, displeased, annoyed Sermonis per∣tesus, wery of the communcation. Pertesus ignauiam suam displeased for his slouthfulnes. Pertexo, texi, texere, to make an ende, to con∣clude, properly to wayue out, or to weaue perfectly. Pertica, a staffe, a rogel, a perche or poll, wher¦with grounde is met. Pertimeo, & pertimesco, pertimescere, to feare moche. Pertinatia, obstinacle, perseuerance, constance. Pertinaciter, obstinately. Pertinatius, more obstynately. Pertinas, acis, obstinate, he that holdeth fast. Pertinatior, pertinacissimus, more and mooste obstinate, sometyme constant. Pertineo, pertinêre, to extende to a thynge, to touche a thynge. In tuas pertinet aedes, ti commeth home to thy house, or toucheth thy house. Gratius mihi futurum, {quam} si ea tua liberalitas pertinuisset ad rem familiarem meam. It shall be to me more pleasure, than if ye hadde extended that your liberalitie towarde mine owne proper commoditie. Pertinet, a verbe impersonall. Pertinet ad te, it belongeth to the, it con∣cerneth
the. Pertinet ad rē, it apperteyneth or belongeth to the matter. Pertinet somnium ad hoc, it is euen as I dreamed. Eadem bonitas etiam ad multitudinem per tinet, it besemeth as well the people to haue that goodnesse as other men. Pertineo, pertinêre, to perteyne or belonge, to be ioyned to, Pertinax certamen. a soore batttayle where neyther parte wyll giue ouer. Pertinax fama, a fame or bruite whiche du∣reth euer. Pertingo, tingere, to touche moche, to ioyne harde vnto a thynge. Pertisum, olde wryters vsed for pertesum. Pertolero, are, to indure to the ende, to su∣steyne valiauntly. Pertondeo, dere, to clyppe or shere all. Pertractare, to touche or handell. Pertraho, xi, here, to drawe to with force. Pertranseo, siui, & sii, ire, to passe through. Per transennam inspicere, to loke on a thynge fer of, or on parte, and not on all. Pertranslucidus, so clere that one maye loke throughe it. Pertundo, tudi, tundere, to stryke harde, or breake a thynge in strykynge. Pertundo, tusi, tūdere, to beate with hammers Perturbo, are, to trouble moche, or vexe. Perturbatio, a trouble of minde. Pertubaté, with trouble of mynde, vnquietly. Pertusa uasa, vesselles cracked or broken in some parte. Peruadè, Peruado, peruasi, uadere, to go ouer all. Peruagor, ari, to wander about, to be pub∣lyshed. Peruello, elli, eliere, to plucke, sometyme to prycke. Peruellere aliquem, to plucke or pul at one. Peruellere ius, to dispraise the lawe. Peruelim scire, I wolde fayne knowe. Peruenor, ari, to hunt ouer all. Peruenio, nire, to come to a place or to an ende Peruenire ad nummos, to come by the mo∣ney that is owed. Si ad herū haecres peruenit peristi pulchre, If this thyng come to thy masters eare, thou hast spun a fayre threde. Sine me peruenire quo uolo, let me speake that whiche I intende to speake. Peruenire ad manus, to come to handstrokes Peruenire ad primos, to be set amonge the beste. Peruenire in potestatem, to be in subiection. Peruenire in tuelam, to be in warde. Peruersus, a, um, frowarde. Peruersé, malyciousely, myscheuousely, ouer∣thwattly. Peruerse uides, thou seest naughtily. Peruerto, to make yll, to peruerte, or depraue. Peruertere officium, to do contrary to his duetie. Peruertere aliquem, to destroye one. Peruestigo, gare, to fynde in sekynge. Peruestigator, oris, he that seketh or loketh for a thynge. Peruicax, acis, harde ouerthwarte, yll to in∣treate, stubburne, obstinate, somtime cōstant Peruicatia, obstinacy: but sumetyme it is vsed in a good part, and taken for a perseuerance and constancie in a good acte. Pertinacia, all waye in an yll parte. Peruicatior, oris, more obstinate, more stub∣bourne, sometyme more constaunt. Peruicaciter, obstynatly, stubburnly, constantly. Peruico, for peruicaci. Peruigil, lis, he that watcheth, also diligent and industriouse. Peruigilium, moche watche: also watchinges or vigiles before solemne dayes. Peruigilo, are, to watche all nyght. Peruinco, uici, uincere, to surmounte. Peruitere, the olde wrytars vsed, for perire, to be loste, to peryshe. Peruiuo, uixi, uiuere, to lyue longe, or vntylle the vttermoste. Et si peruiuo vs{que} ad summā aetatem, tamen breue spacium est perferun∣di, quae minitas mihi. Althoughe I lyue yet to the vttermoste age, yet is the tyme lyttelle to suffer all: wherwith thou thretnest me. Pêruius, uia, uium, that maye be gone in, pe∣netrable. Aedes fient peruiae, ye may come in to the house whan ye lyste. Peruia uentis domus, open to all wyndes or a wyndy house. Peruolo, are, to flee out, or to the ende. Peruoco, care, to call them all. Peruro, ussi, urere, to bourne all, or euerye where. Peruolo, peruelle, to desyre. Perula, a lyttell bagge or scrippe. Perusia, a citie in Italy. Peruulgatus, ta, tum, comonly vsed or knowen Pes, pedis, a foote, whiche nowe conteynethe xii. ynches, the olde foote conteyned .xvi. fin∣gers bredthe. Pedes aduerbium, on foote. Pedibus, idem. Pedibus stipendia facere, to be a foteman in warre. Pedem nus{quam}, I remoued not one fote. Pedem efferre, to go forthe. Per me pedibus ista trahantur, do what they wyll I care not.
Pedem referre, to retrayte. Pedibus ire in sententiam, to be of the opini∣on that other are. It was the fascion among the Romaynes, that the senate whan diuers had shewed theyr opinion, the residue looke whiche parte they leaned vnto, they wente from theyr places to those whiche had rayso∣ned accordyng to theyr myndes and opyniōs, and these were called Pedanij Senatores. Pede presso, fayre and soft, a soft pace. Pes corninus, reade in Batrachion, & Ra∣nunculus. Pes gallinaceus, is oone of the kyndes of fu∣mitorie, growynge in walles, and hedges, and hathe leaues not vnlyke in fascion, but grener, and hath a purple floure. Pestanae, certayne vallayes in Campania, where floures do sprynge twyse in the yere, wherof the moste perfyte roses be called Pe∣stanae rosae. Pessinus, nuntis, a towne in Phrigia. Pedes, & pedibus, put for an aduerbe, signy∣fieth on foote. Pedes agmen circuibat, the hoste wente about on foote. In agmine non nunquam equo, saepius pedibus, anteibat, In the hooste, he wente alwaye afore, some∣tyme on horsebacke, but more often on foote. Pes, a louse: also a corde, wherewith the sayle in a shyp ente. Pesnas, olde wrytars vsed for pennas. Pesestas, in olde tyme vsed for pestis Pestiēce Pessimus, the superlatiue degree of Malus. Pessime, very yll. Pestifer, Pestiferus, a, um, that whiche bryn∣geth in pestilence. Pestilens, tis, pestilent, vnholsome. Pessulus, a barre or bolt, wherwith doores or gates be made faste. Pessum, an aduerbe, whiche signifieth backe∣warde, downewarde, vnder fote. Pessum, ire, to come to naught. Pessum premere, to treade downe or vnder∣foote. Pessundo, didi, dare, to caste vnder foote, to put to the warse. Pessundare aliquē, to set at nought, to bring to naught. Pestis, Pestilentia, & Pestilitas, a pestilence, a mortalitie of men. Petalismus, a punishment in the citieof Syra cusis in Sicile, whiche was that the names of the rulars there beinge written in the lea∣ues of olyues, they diuidinge them selfe, the citizens whiche had offended were exiled for fyue yeres. Petalitis, an herbe called hartes tungue. Petalum, a leafe. Petasatus, he that weareth a hatte. Petasati, were the surnames of Castor and Pollux. Petaso onis, a flyche of bacon. Petasus a hatte, a rounde couerynge of a house. Petaurista, a iuglar, a tumbler. Petaurum, a corde, or a staffe, or a bourde, or other lyke thynge, wheron lyght personages do daunce and proue maystries, it is also a rouste, where pultry doth syt in the nyghte. Petesso, sere, to aske or require. Petigo, tiginis, a tettar that runneth ouer all a mannes face. Petilansura, the houfe of a whyte horse. Petilara, thynges that are dry. Petilus, la, lum, small. Petilius, a floure which groweth among brem billes, in the later ende of somer, and is lyke a wylde rose in colour, and hath fyue smalle leaues, the budde of diuerse colours, hauyng within it yelowe sedes. Petilia, a citie in Lucania. Petimen, a sore in the shulders of beastes, whi∣che I suppose is a fassion. Petitia, a certayne kynde of appulles. Petisso, sere, old wrytars vsed for Peto, to aske or demaunde. Peritor, toris, he that asketh or demaundethe: amonge lawyers he is called the demaun∣daunt, also it is a beggar, whiche asketh al∣mes from doore to doore. Petoritum, a chariot or wagon. Petiolus, a lyttell foote: also a perche wheron fruites or oynious be hanged. Petitio, onis, a petition. Peto, petij, perere, to aske, gette or atteyne. to desyre, to laye awayte, to abyde, to strike, to goo to a place, to seke. with a sworde. Petere gladio, to stryke with asworde. Petere ueneno, to poy∣son. Petere blandicijs, to flatter. Petere ta∣ctu, to feele. Petere mutuum, to borowe: also to remember. Petere iugulum, to kyll, to fo∣lowe, Petere auribus, to here. Petere nari∣bus, to smell. Petere oculis, to beholde. Pete¦re osculis, to kysse. Petere ui, to inforce. Pete¦re, is also to assayle or make assault on one. Petra, a great rocke growynge on the lande. Petrones, Carles of the countreye, also a we∣ther shepe. Petroselinum, an herbe called Persely. Petulans, tis, wanton, dishonest, reprochefull, proude, viciouse, redy to do wronge. Petulantia, wantonnesse, viciousnesse, pryde. Petreus, a, um, of a stone. Petreleon, an oyle, whiche naturally runneth out of a stone. Petrosus, a, um, stony or full of stones. Petulenter, wantonly, proudely, dishonestly. Petus, he that hath one eye lesse than the other. Petulcus, wanton. Peuxedarum, an herbe whiche hath a lyttelle stalke lyke to fenell, busshye by the grounde,
and hath a yelowe flowre, a black roote, and is full of iuyce, and hath a greate sauour, he that dothe gather it, feleth peyne and whyr∣lynge in his heade, excepte that his head and nosethrylles be annoynted with oyle of roses. Dioscorid. Ioan. Agricola supposeth it to be that, whych is callyd Foeniculum Porcinū, whyche I suppose we do calle dogge fenelle. Pexo, are, to kembe. Pexae uestes, some menne in expoundynge Pli∣nye, doo suppose Pexas uestes to be of suche thynge, as is shorne, as fyne woullen clothe, or veluette. Pexati, they whiche doo weare suche maner of clothe, or sylke. Pezitae, moussherons growynge at the rootes of trees. ¶P ANTE H. PHaeaces, people of the Ile of Corcira. Phaecasius, a showe. Phaedra, the wyfe of Theseus, and step∣mother to Hyppolytus doughter of Minois kynge of Creta. Phaēton, Phaētontis, a worde of three syl∣lables, the sonne of Phoebus and Clyme∣nes, who with longe desyre optayned atte the laste of his father, that he moughte oone daye gouerne or leade the charyotte of the sonne, but he being vnable to that offyce, the horses ouerthrewe the charyotte, and burned all the worlde. Whereof Iupyter beynge a∣ferde leste that he also shoulde be bourned, therefore strykynge Phaëton with lyghte∣nynge threwe hym into the ryuer callyd Pa∣dus and Erydanus. Phaētontides, the systers of Phaēton, looke Heliades. Phaētusa, doughter of the sonne, reade He∣liades. Phagedaena, a runnyng canker or pocke, why∣che shortly eateth the fleshe vnto the bones. Phagones, great eaters. Phalacron, bolde. Phalacrocorax, acis, a water crowe, it may sy∣gnyfye a coote. Phalango, gare, to moue or dryue a thyng vp∣pon rollers. Phalaris, a cruell tyraunt, whiche raygned in the citie of Agrigentum. Phagus, a beche tree. Phagineus, a, um, of beeche. Phalangae, staues, whereon men do carye pac∣kes, playne staues, also leauers, to lyft thyn∣ges that be heuy. Phalangarij, porters, whiche do cary packes. Phalangium, a spyder, whych styngyng one, he dyeth soone after. Phalanx, angis, an hoose of footemenne, sette in suche order, that they maye incountre with theyr ennemyes, foote to foote, man to man, shylde to shylde. it is also the beame of a balance. Phalanges, are the ioyntes or spaces in the fyngars: They be alsoo rollers, whereon shyps or great pieces of tymber be remoued. Phalarica, an instrumente of warre, wherein wylde fyre is inclosed, that whanne it is by shotte fastened to tymber, it bournethe all shortely. Phalerae, a trapper or bardes for a horse. Phaleratus, trapped or bardyd. Phalerata dicta, gay wordes, plesant speche. Phalerij, a cytie in Tuscane. Phalernus, rede before in Falernus. Phalisci, a certain people in Italy on the higher part of Tuscana. Phanaticus, frenetycke, he that hathe vayne vysyons. Phaneta, one of the names of Bacchus. Phanni, fantasyes, whyche happen to men in dreames. Phanias, is taken of Hyperides and Lysias for an vsurer. Phanio, saynct Augustine in his epystles sayth, was taken for oone, whiche broughte good lucke with his commynge. Phantasia, is dyuersely taken of phylosophers and physitions. Galenus interiorum. 3. The affection callyd Phantasia, is none other thīg but the corruption of vnderstandynge. Ari∣stoteles de animal. 2. Phantasia is an opera∣tion of the power phantastical, that is to say a meuynge from the actuall sence. Also Phan∣tasia is of the treasoure of power anymall, keper of the fourmes or fygures fyrste con∣ceyued in the commune sense or perceyuyng. Phantasma, matis, a vysyon. Phanum, a temple. Pharāo, was the name of all kynges of E∣gypte, vntylle the tyme of Salomon. In the Egyptiane toungue Pharao sygnyfyethe kynge. Iosephus. Pharetra, a quyuer for arrowes. Pharetratus, he that beareth a quyuer. Pharias, phariae, a serpente, whyche maketh a furrowe in the grounde with his tayle, as he crepeth, and so lyfteth hym selfe vp. Pharisaei, were amonge the Iewes certayne menne, whyche professed a fourme of ly∣uynge more strayghte and deuoute thanne other of that people, and therfore they were callyd by that name, for as moche as Pha∣res in the hebrewe tungue sygnyfyeth dyuy∣ded, they professed contynence, vyrgyny∣tie, faste or abstynence from meate twyse in the Sabbate dayes. They slepte only vppon
bourdes, somme vppon stoones, or elles on thornes, to kepe theym frome styrrynge of flesshely appetyte. They ware on theyr fore∣head scrowes of parchemynte, wherein were wrytten the tenne commaundementes gyuen by God vnto Moyses, whyche they callyd Philaterias. They hadde in great reuerence theyr elders,, in soo moche as they wold not with a worde dysplease them, not withstan∣dynge they beleuyd that all thyng happened by constellation, and yet toke they not away free wyll from man They affyrmed that sou∣les were immortall, and that god shuld come in iugement. Hereby they came in a wonder∣full credence with people, wherby they drewe to them great multitudes, and of them were dyuerse good men, amonge whom was saynt Paule, as he hym selfe confesseth, Nicode∣mus and other which were afterward Chri∣stis dysciples, althoughe the multitude, ta∣kyng that profession only for vaynglory, per∣uerted that honest forme of lyuynge into hy∣pocrysie, deceyuyng the people, whom Christ sharpely rebuked, and declared theyr folye, and yet with some of theym whiche by lyke∣lyhode were good men, he dyned, and other wyse vsed theym familyarlye. Euangelistae, Paulus, Iosephus, Hieronymus, Chrysosto∣mus &c. Phariseus, a Pharisey, whych was of a secte of Iewes, which lyued in a more strayter forme than the commune people dyd. Pharius, a, um, is put for Aegyptius. Pharmacentice, that parte of phisyke, whyche healeth with medycines. Pharmacopola, a potycary. Pharmacum, a medycine, sometyme it sygny∣fieth poyson. Pharos, a lyttelle yle in Egypte agaynste the mouthe of the ryuer of Nilus by the citie of Alexandria. In this yle was sette a verye hyghe towre, wherein were greatte lyghtes all the nyghte longe, for the comforte and suretie of theym, whyche were in vyage ey∣ther on the sea, or on the lande. Whereof all other towres made for that pourpose be cal∣lyd Phari. Pharusij, people of Lybia, whyche nowe are ex∣cedynge poore. Pharsalia, a countrey in Thessalia, where the battaylle was betweene Iulius Caesar and Pompey. Pharsâlos, a cytie in Thessalia, nyghe to the whiche was the great and sharp battayle be∣twene Iulius Cesar and Pompeius, where Pompeius was vanquyshed and fledde. it is also callyd of Lucanus, Pharsalia. Phasae, a worde of hebrewe, whyche sygny∣fieth a departynge. it is commonlye callyd Pascha. Phasellus, a lyttell shyp called a galyon. Phaseoli, are a sorte of poulse corne, whereof be dyuerse kyndes, one is named Dolichus, whiche groweth in gardeynes, with a longe stemme, and is succouryd with styckes sette about it, they be shortly corruptid with wete. Aetius saythe, that onely they amonge all o∣ther poulse were eaten with theyr huskes, But Ruellius affyrmeth, that it was not the commune Dolichi, but they whyche were of dyuerse colours, and facyoned lyke to lyttell kydneys. Looke of theym in Smilax. An no∣ther kynde is callyd also Phasillus, whyche is very smalle, some beinge whyte, and somme redde, with lyttell stalkes rounnynge on the grounde, and lyenge holow, hauynge leaues lyke in fascyon to yuy, but softer and full of veynes, coddes lyke to fengreke, the brothe of theym nouryssheth, and maketh indyffe∣rent iuyce. An nother is that whyche is also callyd Smilax, of whome reade in his place. An nother is callyd Isopyron, whose leafe is lyke to anyse, and hath on the toppe lyttelle heddes, full of sedes lyke to Nigella. I haue no certayne englysshe for this poulse, and I dare not coniecte what it is for feare of dys∣dayne. But by these descriptions menne of meane wyttes maye fynde what it is, in beholdynge at theyr eyes dyuers sortes of poulse. Phasianus, a fesaunt. Phasis, a great ryuer in the countreye of Col∣chos, it is also a citie there. Phasma, Phasmatis, an horryble vysyon or sight. Phauorinus, a famouse and eloquente phylo∣sopher borne at Orlyaunce in Fraunce, In hym were three thynges principallye to be meruayled at. The fyrste that beyng a fren∣che manne, he not withstandynge was so ex∣cellente in the Greeke tungue, that besydes his greatte lernynge, he lefte behynde hym a noble remembraunce of the greke eloquence. The seconde, that beynge Eunuchus, or an imperfecte manne, he was accused of adul∣terye. The laste was, that hauynge the em∣perour Adriane excedyngly dyspleased with hym, he not withstandynge ouerlyued hym, neuer hauynge any dammage by hym, why∣che was to the mooste hyghe commendation of that noble Emperour, hauynge this sen∣tence oftentymes in his mouth, but in greke. The kynge is thanne to be estemed mooste excellente whanne he beinge displeased with his inferioure, refraynethe his anger. On a tyme whanne the Emperoure dyspu∣ted with hym, and in the ende he semed to
suffer the Emperour to haue the vyctory. Af∣terwarde his frendes asked of hym, howe it happened that he whyche onely applyed him to studye of letters, and was reputed to be the greattest philosopher in Athenes, mought be vanquyshed of so great a prynce, who was occupyed in the great affayres of the empire, he answered that it was no shame to be van∣quyshed of hym, which hadde .xxx. legyons of men at his commaundement. Pherecydes, a famouse Phylosopher and wri∣ter of Tragoedies, whyche dyed of the lou∣sy sycknesse. Pheretra, thynges borne at great feastes or tri∣umphes, as pageauntes or iewels of golde or syluer, ymages and such lyke thynges. Pheretrius, Iupyter. Pheretrum, a thynge, whereon pageantes are borne, also dead corpsis. Phiala, the generall name to all plate, whych ser¦ueth for wyne. Phiala, a potte or cuppe of golde or syluer, whi∣che serueth for wyne. Phidias, an excellent warkeman, in makynge great ymages of golde or yuory. Phidiacus, ca, cum, of Phidias. Phiditia, the soupers, whyche the Lacedemo∣nyans vsyd, whyche were openly kepte with a meruaylous temperance, euery man bryn∣gynge his measurable porcyon of meate and wyne. Philadelphia, a cytie in Mysia, ioynynge to Lydia. Philadelphus, callyd Ptolomeus kynge of E∣gypte, who made a lybrarye in the whyche were fyfty thousande bookes. He also cau∣sed the .v. bookes of Moyses to be transla∣ted into greke by .lxxii. interpretours doctors of the Iewes. Philagathus, he that loueth goodnes. Philanthropos, a louer of mankynde also gen∣tyll and kynde. Philargyria, couetousnes, auaryce. Philargyrus, couetouse. Philema, a kysse. Phlieni, were two bretherne Carthaginenses, of whome it is wrytten, that where they of Carthage, and they of Cyrene, dydde stryue for theyr boundes, it was agreed, that of ech cytie two men shoulde issue, and where that they mette shulde be the boundes. Than the sayde bretherne being sent, they went a great waye into the boundes of the other, er they mought retourne. And whan they of Cyrene dyd se that they were preuented, they toke it displeasantly, and menacyd the two brethern that yf they wolde not go backe, they shoulde be put quyck into the erth, but they not with standyng wolde not departe. Wherfore they being buryed on lyue, theyr cuntrey mē made ouer them two aulters, whiche at this daye be callyd Arae Philenorum, whiche are nowe within the royalme of Tunyse. Philenus, he that loueth wyne. Philetes, a kysser. Phileteria, an herbe callyd wylde sauge, it was also a scrowe whiche the phariseys dyd were on theyr forheades, wherein were wryten the tenne commaundementes. Hieron. Io. Chri∣sost. In the decrees of Gregory they be taken for charmes or inchantmentes writen. also in Consilio Laodicensi, we do rede Phileteria facere. Philippus, kyng of Macedonia, son of Amyn∣tas, and father of the greatte Alexander, a prynce from his chyldhode of excellent wytte and prowes, of whom these notable thynges be remembred. After that he had vanquyshed the Athenienses at Cheroneam, he began to reioyce of his felicitie, but to the intente that he therfore shuld not be the more prone to in∣iuries towarde his subiectes, nor to haue in∣dignation at them whom he vanquyshed, he than and euer after causyd a chylde to come to his chamber doore in the mornyng and to saye alowde, Phylip thou art a man mortall, whiche he obserued so constantly, that he ne∣uer went out of his chamber, or receyued any counsaylours or suiters, vntyll the chyld had thryse spoken those wordes, notwithstādynge that he was a paynyme. On a tyme the A∣thenienfes sente an ambassade vnto hym, whyche after that he had paciently herde, he sayde to the ambassadours whan they shulde depart, Know you (sayd he) any thyng whi∣che may be pleasure vnto your citie, amonge them was Democrates, for yll tungue callyd Thersites, he forthwith answered the kyng, If thou sayde he, wylte hange vp thy selfe. Which answere troubled the resydue of the ambassadours, and dyd set all the other hea∣rers in an indignation with a great charme. But Philyp moste gentylly and coldely aun∣swered. Say you to the Atheniēses, that they whyche for anger can not absteyne frome su∣che wordes, be moche prowder of courage, than they that doo suffer it spoken withoute any punysshement, and do easyly dygeste soo prowde an iniurye. Alsoo where one namyd Machetas hadde a matter in varyaunce be∣fore hym. Phylyppe takynge lyttelle heed what was spoken, and sometyme sleapynge, at the laste he gaue iudgement agaynst Ma∣chetas, who cryenge out with a lowde voyce appealed, wherewith Phylyppe beynge fore moued, with a grieuouse looke, to whome I praye the (sayde he) doste thou appeale?
I appeale sayde Machaetas vnto your selfe, but beynge better awaked, and takyng hede what is spoken. Philyp being through wa∣ked, and herynge eftsones the matter, whan he perceyued that Machaetas had wronge, he wold not reuerse the iugement, but the sūme of money wherin Machaetas was condemned he hym selfe payde it of his owne treasure of his pacyence, subtiltie of wytte, and valyant courage, many haue written aboundauntly, whiche in the readynge are bothe pleasaunte and profytable. He was afore the incarnatiō of Christe. 358. yeres. Philippeus, pei, a certayne coyne of golde som∣tyme vsyd in Grecia. Philippi, a citie in Thracia. Philippenses, men of that citie. Phillyra, a nymph, on whom Saturnus begat Chiron, who therfore is sommetyme callyd Phillyrides. Phillitis, an herbe callyd hartis tungue. Philocalus, a good man, a kleanely manne, or elegant. Philocares, an herbe callyd horehounde. Philoctêtes, the sonne of Paean, was Hercu∣les companyon, and buryed hym, and hadde his arrowes. Philodolus, he that loueth his seruantes. Philoginos, he that doteth on women. Philologus, a louer of letters. also a greatte speaker. Philomela, a nyghtyngale. also a fayre may∣den, whiche was defloured by Thereus hus∣bande to her syster, whome poetes doo fayne was transfourmed to a nyghtyngale. Philomusus, amorous of the Musis. Philonicus, a brawler: sommetyme a louer of vyctorye. Philopaes, he that loueth chyldren. Philoponus, laboriouse, peynefull. Philosophaster, he that wolde be lyke a phy∣losopher. Philosophia, phylosophye, the loue or fauou∣rynge of wysedome. Philosophice, lyke a philosopher. Philosophicus, ca, cum, philosophicall. Philosophor, aris, ari, to study wysedome. Philosophus, a philosopher. Philothesia, a solemne feast among the Grekes Philoxenia, hospytalitie. Philoxenus, he that kepeth good hospitalitie. Philtrum, a drynke charmed, whyche causeth a man to be madde for loue. Philura, seu philyra, smalle thynges hangynge downe of trees or herbes lyke vnto heares. Phyma, matis, a sore on the fynger, whych may be callyd a whytblowe. Phineus, king of Arcadia who by the inticemēt of his secōd wyfe dyd put out the eyes of his sonnes which he had by his fyrst wyfe, but by the iust vengeaunce of god he was also made blynde, and the foule rauenouse byrdes callid Harpyiae, defyled & deuoured the meate that was preparid for him. but those byrdes at the last were dryuen away by Zetus and Calois, whom he had courtaysly intertayned. Phlebes, veynes. Phlebotomia, bloudlettynge. Phlebotomum, the instrumente, wherewith bloude is letten, a fleume. Phlegethon, ontis, a ryuer of helle, whiche al∣way bourneth. Phlegias, the sonne of Mars, a kyng in Thes∣saly, and father of Ixion. Phlegrei campi, be in Thracia where Iupy∣ter had battayle with gyantes. Phlius, a place in Grecia. Phlox, a yelowe flowre lyke a vyolet. Phlegma, matis, fleume. Phlegmon, onis, & phlegmone, nes, an infla∣mation of bloud, which groweth into an im∣postume in some part of the body or member. Phoca, a sea calfe, it maye be supposed to be a seale, which is fyshe, and bredeth on the land. Phocis, cidis, a lytel cuntrey in Grecia betwene Atticam & Boeotiā. in Phocide is the towne of Delphos. Phocenses, people of Phocis. Phoceus, & phocaicus, pertayning to Phocis. Phoebus, the sonne. Phoenices, people in Syria. Phoeniceus, a, um, ryght krymson. Phoenicia, a regyon in Syria, next to Iudea. Phoenicopterus, a great byrde, hauyng fethers of krymson colour. Phoenissa, a woman of Phenicia. Phoenix, nicis, a byrde, whyche lyueth aboue syx hundred yeres, and fynally caryeng swete spyces vp to a hygh mountayne, by the heate of the sunne, and labour of her wynges, kend leth fyre, wherby she beynge all bourned, of her axen ryseth an other lyke byrde. it is also a date tree, or paulme, also a lyttell ryuer in Grecia. it was also the brother of Cadmus, whyche raigned in Phenicia. also one which was tutour to Achilles. Pholoe, a mountayne in Archadia, ful of wod. Phonascus, he that teacheth one to pronounce and moderate his voyce. Phorbas, a sheparde that founde Oedippum, after that he was hanged vp by the feete. Phorcus, one of the sonnes of Neptunus, whi∣che was taken for a god of the sea. Phoroneus, the most ancient kyng of Grecia. Phosphorus, the day sterre. Photion, a noble Atheniense, which had ben di¦sciple to Plato & Xenocrates, afterward one of the chief gouernors of the citie of Athenes
was a man of suche wonderfulle grauitie and constāce, that he was not lyghtly sene to change his countenaunce, eyther to laugh or to morne, nor to haue his handes oute of his habyte, ex∣cepte in warre, and whan he was in the coun∣trey, he went alway bare footed, except it were in the colde wynter, wherof there was noo bet∣ter token than to see Phocion go shodde. His speche was short, graue, vehement, and full of quycke sentences, and therefore the moste elo∣quente oratour Demosthenes, callyd hym the hatchette that dyd cut of his wordes. He was of suche a constaunce, that where Apollo at Delphos made aunswere that one man in A∣thenes was of a contrary opinyon to all the ci∣tie. Whan that was reported, Phocion rose vp and sayde, Leaue (sayde he) countrey men, to searche whome poure god meaneth, for I am that oone manne, whome nothynge lyketh whyche is nowe doone in the commune weale of this citie, whan he hadde made an oration vnto the people, and they praysynge hym con∣sented vnto hym, he tourned hym to them that were nexte hym, and sayde, Alas what haue I doone, I feare me leaste somme foolyshe worde hath escaped vnwetynge me, sygnyfyeng that the people seldomme allowed any thynge that was good, or not foolyshe. On a tyme whan he raysoned contrarye to the mynde of the people. Wherfore they murmured and wolde haue let hym, It is at youre pleasure countrey menne sayde he, to compelle me to do that that I wold not, but to speake otherwyse than I thynke, that no man lyuyng can cause me, he was so re∣uerende a personage, that the great kynge Ale∣xander in the begynnynge of his letters after that he hadde vanquisshed Darius, he saluted no man but hym and Antipater. He refused in∣finite treasour sent vnto him by Alexander, and although he hadde bene the generall capytayne of the Athenienses in sundrye warres, and ho∣nourably achieuyd his enterpryses, yet was he best content to lyue poorely. Fynally he was of his vnkynde countreye menne condempned to deathe, whereto he wente with the same coun∣tenaunce, that he hadde in authorytie, whan oone whyche was condempned with hym, la∣mented and fearyd to dye. Phocion tournyng vnto hym sayde: Why arte thou not gladde, that thou shalte dye with Phocyon? And whan one of his frendes asked hym, yf he wolde any thynge to his sonne, I wolde sayde he, that suche wronge as the Athenienses doo to me, he shall not remember. What a wonderfulle worde of a Paynyme was this, who folowed Christis doctrine, er Chryste was borne. 333. yeres. Phrasis, The propre fourme, or maner of spe∣che, whyche in one countraye is oftentymes dyuerse, as Southerne, Northerne, De∣uenysshe, Kentyshe, Frenche, Pycarde, Ga∣coygne, Walon. some do set the negatiue be∣fore the affyrmatiue, some contrarye, somme speache is quycke, some graue, some floury∣shynge, some temperate. Phrene, the myddreffe, whyche dyuydeth the vmbles of a man or beast, from the bowelles. Phreneticus, he that is vexed with a frenesy. Phrenitis, seu Phrenisis, a syckenesse callyd frenesye. Phrine, a famouse harlotte at Athenes. Phrygia, a royalme in Asia the lesse, hauynge on the easte Cappadociam, on the southe Ly∣caoniam, on the west Troadem, on the north Galatiam. Phrygium melos, was a melody or tune in in∣strumentes, wherein semyd to be (as Lucia∣nus sayth) a maner of a dyuyne fury, allbeit Porphyrius callyth it barbarouse. Cassiodo∣rus sayth, that the melody callyd Dorius gi∣ueth wysedome, and gyueth chastitie. Phry∣gius styreth to battayle, and inflameth the desyre of furye. Aeolius appeaseth the tem∣pestes of the mynde, and bryngeth in slepe. Lydius quyckeneth vnderstandynge in them that be dulle, and induceth appetite of cele∣stiall thynges. Phrygio, onis, a browderer. Phrynos, a lysarde. Phryx, gis, a man of Phrigia. Phthia, a cytie in Thessalia. Phthiriasis, a syckenesse in the whyche lyse doo growe in suche multitudes, that they de∣uoure the bodye. Phthirophagi, people dwellynge nyghe to the greke sea, whyche lyued onely by fyshe. Phthisicos, he that hathe the consumption of the lunges. Physeter, a greate fisshe in the Frenche occean sea, which ryseth lyke to a pyllar aboue shyp∣pes, and spouteth out water. Phthisis, is a sore in the lunges with a consum∣ption of all the body commyng of a feuerouse heate consumyng or of a heate artificial and humors in the stomake. The cause is a reume sharpe and long contynuyng of choler or salte fleume, it hapnith of a squince or apostume in the vuula whan by the rupture of theym the putryfied matter descendeth to the lunges, or of a pleurisy or Peripneumonia, whan they being healyd, the putrified matter is not pur¦ged within the space of .xl. dayes, or by longe stoppyng of hemoroides or floures, or by the coldenes of the ayre receyued, straynynge the spiritual members, or by the heate of the aire dryeng & scorchynge the lunges, or by a great and longe cough, or by other inforcement, in syngynghygh, or bearyng a heuy burdeyn.
Phu, a plante or herbe, whiche some calle Va∣leriane. Phygeton, a lyttell swellynge or botche, harde and redde, burnynge and pryckynge. Phylira, a tree callyd also Tylia. Phyllis, a womanne, doughter of Lycurgus, kynge of Thrace, whyche hynge her selfe, despayrynge of the comynge of Demophon, whome poetes fayne to be turned into an al∣monde tree. Phyllitis, an herbe callyd hartis tungue. Physica, naturall causes. Physicus, a physitian. Physiologus, he that dysputethe of naturalle causes. Physionomia, seu physiognomia, a rule to knowe a mans naturall affections by his vi∣sage or fourme of his membres. Phyton, one of the names of Apollo. Phytonicus, & phytonica, he or she which hath a spirite within theym, that gyueth answere of thynges to come. ¶P ANTE I. PIabile, for the whyche satisfaction may be made and god pleased. Piacularis, are, that whyche is gyuen or offred to god for satisfaction. Piabilis, that whyche maye be pourged or sa∣tysfyed. Piacularia auspicia, tokens in sacrifyce of some heuy chaunce to come. Piaculum, any thynge done for satisfaction of some greuouse synne, sometyme a greate and haynouse offence. Piamen, seu piamentum, that whyche was gy∣uen or occupyed about satisfaction. Pica, a byrde callyd a pye. Picatus, picata, picatum, pytched or rasyd with pytche. Picea, a pytche tree. Picenum, a countraye in Italye callyd Marca Anconitana. Picens, tis, a man of that countray. Picentus, ta, tum, of the countrey of Picenum. Piceus, a, um, of pytche. Pico, care, to dresse with pytche. Picris, wylde lettuse. Pictarium, a table pertaynynge to Iudges or byshoppes. it is sometyme a playster for the stomake or heade. Pictes, a wrastler. Pictones, a cuntray in France callid Poyters. Pictor, toris, a peyntour. Pictura, an ymage peynted. Picturatae uestes, imbroudred apparayle, or ra∣ther of bawdekyn. Picturo, are, to make sundry pyctures. Picus, a lyttell byrde, whyche maketh a hole in trees, wherein he breedeth: it was alsoo the name of an olde kynge of Latynes. Picunnus, a pye. Pie, & pienter, mercyfully, deuoutely, louingly. Pieria, a mountayne in Grece, dedycate to the Musis. Pieria, was a mayden borne at Myos a cytie of Ionia, doughter of an honourable man, callyd Pythes, of whom is this hystory wor∣thy of remembrance. There happened to be warre betwene the inhabitantes of Miletū, and them of Myos, but in suche gentyll faci∣on, that the women of Myos were alwaye suffered on the solempne feaste of Diana, to come to Miletum, and doo sacrifyce to Dia∣na, whiche there was chiefly honoured. Pi∣eria commyng thyther in the company of her mother, one Phrigius the eldest son of Ne∣beus duke of Miletum, beholdyng her beau∣tie, beganne to loue her excedyngly, and af∣ter the maner of louers, desyrynge to do some thynge thankefull vnto the mayden, deman∣ded of her what he mought do, which mought be to her mooste pleasaunt and acceptable. The mayden being wytty, and also louynge to her countrey and frendes, answered hym, that to her it shoulde be the greattest plea∣sure, yf he wold endeuour hym selfe to bring to passe, that she moughte oftentymes with a greatte sorte of her compaynyons repayre to Miletum, without any dammage. Phri∣gius perceyuynge, that nothynge moughte soo moche contente the mayden as peace. He callynge the people togyther exhortyd theym to conclude a peace with theym of Myos to be with theym in alyaunce, wher∣vnto they accordyd, and the name of Pie∣ria was euer after in soo honourable a re∣membraunce, that all honeste womenne vsyd for a prouerbe, to wysshe so to be louyd, as Phrigius louyd Pieria. Pierides, were doughters of one Pierus, whi∣che dyd compare in syngynge with the Mu∣sis, but they beinge vanquyshed, and giuyng to the Muses reprochefull wordes, they were by theym tourned into pyes. Ouidius Meta∣morph. 5. they be sometyme taken for the mu¦sis of an hylle in Thessalia callyd Piēris or Piērius. Pierides, the Muses. Piens, tis, mercyfull. &c. Pientior, pientissimus, more and mooste mer∣cyfull, mooste louynge towarde his parentes or countrey. Pietas, tatis, the reuerende loue towarde a mannes propre countreye and parentes, of dyuynes it is taken for the loue and honoure dewe vnto god. Lactantius calleth it iustyce,
and deuoute wourshyppyng and knowledge of god. Pigeo, gui, gêre, sometyme it is a verbe imper∣sonalle. Piget, to be soorye to haue doone a thynge. Obsecro ne quid plus minus ue faxit quod nos postea pigeat, I requyre you lette hym not do any thynge more or lasse, whereof we may after repent vs. Id non piget, he repēteth not of that he hath doone. Piger, gri, slowe. Pigritia, pigrities, pigredo, pigritas, pigritu∣do, slownesse, ydelnesse. Pigmentum, payntynge, also false coloure in speakynge, dysceytefull wordes, plesant lyes. Pigmentarius, a maker or seller of payntynge. Pigne, slouthe. Pigneratio, a pledgynge or gagynge. Pigneratitius, a, um, that whyche is layde in pledge. Pignora, is sometyme taken for chyldren. Pignora capere, to take a dystresse. Pignero, pignerare, & pigneror, pignerari, to laye to pledge or guage, sommetyme to take pledge. Pignus, pignoris, a gage or pledge. Dare pignus cum aliquo, to laye gauge a∣gaynst one. Ponere pignori, to lay in gage or pledge. Pignori opponere, to be bounde for rente or any other payment. Pignora auferre, to take a dystresse. Pignus amoris, a token of loue. Beneuolentiae pignus, a token of fauour. Pignora, chyldren. Pignora capere, idem quod pignora auferre. Pignoris capio, a nowne sygnyfyeth a distresse. Mars ipse ex acie fortissimum quenque pi∣gnerari solebat, The mooste valyant men be they, whiche in battayle be sonest dispached, or Mars vseth to sease for him selfe the valy∣antest men. Pignerator, he that taketh a gage. Pigresco, scere, to be or waxeslowe. Pigrè, slowly. Pigredo, slouthfulnesse. Pigrefio, fieri, to be madeslowe. Pigritia, slownesse. Pigritudo, idem. Pigror, idem. Pigro, are, to holde backe, or tary one. Pila, a morter, wherein any thynge is beaten with a pestylle. also a pyllar, a balle, or any thynge rounde as a balle. Pila ludere, to play at tenyse. Pilades, a gentylman of Phocea, whyche was so faythfull a frende to Orestes (with whom he kepte companye whyles he was madde) that he wolde neuer forsake hym, but folo∣wed hym into the countreye callyd Taurica, where straungers were sacrifised vnto Dia∣na. Where Orestes being apprehended, whā he shulde be slayne, Pylades wold nedes dye for hym that he myght escape. Pilani, they whyche fyght with dartes. Pilates, a certayne stone that is white. Pilatim, one pylar by an other. Pilatus, armed with dartes. Pileatus seruus, a slaue that is solde with his cappe on his heed. Pilentum, a wagan. Pileolus, a lyttell bonette. Pileus, a cappe. sometyme lybertie, forasmoche as bondmen, whan they were infranchysed, ware copped cappes. Pilo, are, to begynne to be hearye, or growe in heare. Pilosella, an herbe callyd cōmonly mouse eare. Pilosus, a, um, heary. Pilula, a lyttell balle. also a pylle made for pur∣gations. Pilum, a barbours knyfe or rasour, also a dart of fyue foote longe and a halfe. Pilumnus, a man whiche founde the maner to dunge lande, and to grynde corne. Pilus, a heare. Pilus, idem quod pilum, it is also a pestell to bray or breake any thyng withal in a morter Pimpinella, an herbe callyd Pympernell. Pimpla, a place by the mountayne callyd Per∣nasus, of the whyche the Musis be callyd Pimpleides. Pinaster, a wylde pyne tree. Pina, a fyshe that hath two great shelles. Pinachidia, tables made in bookes. Pinachothêca, a case or place wherin tables at put or sette. Pinarij, an auncient house or family in Italye, of the whiche were the priestes that sacrify∣sed to Hercules. Pindarus, a Thebane poete, and chief of them which were callyd Lyrici. Wherfore Alexan∣der whan he distroyed the citie of Thebes, he caused the house of Pindarus to be preser∣ued with all his family. Pindo, dis, si, sere, to bray or grynde. Pindus, a mountayne in Thessalia, alsoo a ci∣tie there. Pinea nux, a pyne appull. Pinetum, a wodde of pyne trees. Pineus, a, um, of a pyne tree. Pingo, xi, pingere, to paynt, to deuyse and set in order. Pinguedo, & pinguitudo, tudinis, fatte or fattenesse. Pingue, inconuenyent, sommetyme fruitefull, commodyouse.
Pingues horti, gardeynes that brynge forthe good herbes. Pingui Minerua, grossely, rudely. Pinguefacio, cere, to make fatte. Pinguesco, scere, to be fatte. Pinguiarius, he that loueth that thyng whyche is fatte. Pinguitudo, fatnesse. Pinguiter, greacyly. Pinguis, gue, fatte, he that is fatte, corsye, vn∣weldye. Pingue, grease. Pingue otium, moche ease or reste. Pinguis toga, a gowne of course clothe. Pinna, a quyll or penne, the harder parte of a fether. Pinnae, imbatylmentes of a walle, a muskle, whiche is founden in muddy waters. Pinnae, the fynnes of a fyshe. Pinnaculum, a pynnakle of a towre. Pinnula, the ouer part of the eare, a lytell quyl. Pinsito, tare, to bray in a mortar. Pinso, sui, sere, to braye or grynde. Pinso, are, idem. Pinsor, he that grindeth in a quern, also a baker Pintia, a towne in Spayne callyd Valladolite. Pinus, pinus, a pyneappull. Pio, ij, ere, to honour god. Pipatio, a clockynge of a henne. Pinetum, a place where pynes do growe. Pinus, seu pinea, a pyne tree. Pipare, to clocke lyke a henne. Piper, eris, pepper. Piperitis, an herbe whiche by his description, semeth to me to be that whyche we do name costemary. Pipio, iui, ire, to peepe lyke a chycke. Pipio, onis, a pygeon. Pipilo, are, to chyrpe lyke a sparowe. Pipulum, a rebuke. Pirum, a peare. Pirata, a rouer or robber on the sea, a pyrate. Piratica, the practyse of pyrates or robbers on the sea. Pirrhica, a daunsynge in harneys. Pisa, a citie in Grece betweene the two moun∣taynes of Olympus and Ossa: alsoo a cytie in Arcadia. Pisae, arum, a citie in Italy callyd Pise. Pisani, people of the citie of Pise. Pisarurus, a ryuer in Italy. Pisaurum, a citie in Italy callyd Pesero. Piscor, aris, ari, to fyshe. Piscaria, the fyshe market. Piscarius, a, um, pertaynynge to fyshyng. Piscarius, a fyshemonger. Piscatorius, a, um, pertaynynge to a fysher. Piscator, oris, a fysher. Piscatus, tus, & piscatio, the acte of fyshyng. Piscina, a fyshe ponde, it is also generally euery ponde, although therin be no fyshe. Piscinalis, le, pertaynyng to fyshe. Piscinarius, he that nourysheth fyshe. Piscis, a fyshe. Pisces, also one of the twelue sygnes. Piscosus, a, um, that may be fysshed, or is fulle of fyshe. Pisculentus, idem. Pisciculus, a lyttell fyshe. Pisei, people of the citie Pisa in Grecia. Pisidae, people in Asia. Pistacia, a certayne kynde of nuttes. Pisistratus, a noble manne of Athenes, whyche changed the cōmune weale of that citie from the rule of the people, to the rule of one gouer¦nour: and therfore he was callyd a tyraunt, not withstandynge that (as he wrate vnto Solon, whyche maynteyned the popular a∣state) he rulyd by theyr owne lawes, and was ryghtwyse and gentyll vnto the people. Piso, sere, is proprely to braye, for in the olde tyme men vsed to bray or breake corne in mor¦ters, but after that they had querns to grynd with the hande, they vsed Pisere to grynde, and Pisor for a grynder. Piso, sonis, the name of a noble famyly or house in Rome. Pistillum, a pestyll. Pistor, oris, a baker. Pistoria, a citie in Italy. Pistoricus, ca, cum, & pistorius, a, am, pertay∣nynge to bakynge. Pistrilla, a mylle. Pistrinum, & pistrina, a bakehouse, or grinding house, sometyme it sygnifieth for peynefulle seruyce. Pistris, a shyppe. Pistrix, cis, a woman baker, also a monstruouse fyshe in the Indiane sea. Pistura, the crafte of bakynge. Pistus, ta, tum, grounden or brayed. Pisum, a pease. Pithacusae, yles in the sea agaynste Campania. Pithacua, a certayne tyle, sommetyme made in Spayne, whyche beinge cast into the water, wolde not synke. Pitheta, a comette or impression in the fyrma∣ment, whiche is lyke a tunne, and dothe ap∣piere as it were through a myste. Pithecium, a deformed or yl fauoured woman. Pithonoscomes, a place in Asia, where after the Idus of August, great flockes of storkes do assemble togyther. Pitpit, in the olde tungue of Oskes, sygnifyed quicquid, what so euer. Pittacus, one of the seuen sages of Grecia, and was of the citie of Mytelene. Pityocampe, a wourme which is in a pyneap∣pull
tree, whose bytynge is venymouse. Pitysma, spetryll. Pitho, the lady and presydent of eloquence, to perswade. Pitisso, are, to syppe or drynke lyttell. Pituita, fleume or rewme descendyng from the head, also the pyppe whyche chyckens haue. Pituitosus, fleumatyke. Pitylisma, matis, an exercise, where a man goth faste on his toes, and moueth his armes for∣warde and backewarde. Pitylisso, are, to exercyse in that fourme. Pityides, the innermost kernel of the pineapple. Pityusa, an yle by Grecia callyd also Myletus, It is also an herbe of the kynde of spourge, whiche the Apothecaries do calle Esula. Ac∣tuarius wryteth, that the barbarouse people do call the roote of Pityusa, Turbit. but it is the turbit whiche is white and thycke, and cometh from the hyl of Garganus, which is of the .ii .kynde of spurge, and is not that tur¦bit which apothecaries now haue, rede more in Turbit. Pius, a, um, religiouse, deuout, piteouse, gentyl, chast, he that loueth his parentes or countrey. Pix, picis, pytche. Pix liquida, tarre. ¶P ANTE L. PLacabilis, easy to be pleased. Placabilitas, the vertue therof. Placabiliter, thankfully, contentfully. Placator, toris, a pacyfier of debate. Placae, plates of golde or syluer. Placendus, a, um, that which ought to content. Placenta, any pleasant thynge made in pasry. Placentia, a cytie in Liguria. Placentini, people of the citie of Placentia. Placeo, cui, cere, to please, to lyke, to glory. Placet, it lyketh me or hym, or it is his plesure or aduyse. Senatui placet, the senate hath ordeyned. Placet sibi, he standeth well in his owne con∣ceypte. Placide, quyetly, paciently, peasybly. Placidus, da, dum, gentyll, meke, pacient. Placidus dies, a pleasant day. Placita, studies or exercyses. Ipse placita ma∣iorum colebat habitu seuaero, He in a sage garment, haunted the studyes of the aunci∣ent fathers. Placitum, a fyrme consent in an opynion, an or∣dynance. Placitus, ta, tum, that whyche lyketh or con∣tenteth. Placo, care, to pacyfie, to appease. Pladatores, a dysease, whereby the eye lyddes waxe feble, and wyll vneth be plucked vp. Plâga, the fyrste syllable beynge longe, sygnyfi∣eth a wounde, the fyrste syllable beinge short, it sygnifieth the armynge corde of a nette, al∣so a great space of heauen and earthe callyd also Clima. Plagae, the shetes of a bedde, or blankettes. Plagiaria lex, a lawe made agaynste them whi¦che were called Plagiarij, whiche for theyr offence were whypped. Plagiarius, he that whyppeth men. Also he that byeth a man for a slaue, knowynge hym to be free. Also he that intyseth a mans seruant to go from his master, also a stealer of bokes Plagiger, he that is borne to be whypped. Plagiosus, a schoole mayster, whiche is a gret beater. Plagium, the offence, for the whiche one is whypped. Plagosus, full of strypes, or he that beateth moche. Planaratrum, the culter of a ploughe. Plancae, plankes. Planci, they whiche be splaye footed. Planctus, tus, waylynge, sorowynge. Plancus, a noble man of Rome. Plane, truely, clerely, throughly. Planeta, a planette. Plango, xi, gere, to wepe or wayle, to stryke or hytte. Plangor, plangoris, a noyse made with the mouthe, as in laughinge, or wepynge. Planidus, plaine. Planidior, more playne. Planities, a playne or leuell grounde. Planior, playner, euenner. Planipes, he that goeth without showes. also a player in an enterlude. Planta, the foote with the toes. Sometyme on∣ly the sole of the foote. also a plante or tree newely sette: sometyme an herbe that grow∣weth lowe. Plantago, ginis, an herbe callyd Plantayne. Plantaria, settes or plantes, or the places where plantes be sette. Plantaris, re, pertaynynge to the foote. Plantarius, a, um, mete or redy to sette. Plantigerae arbores, trees whyche bryngeth forth settes. Planto, tare, to sette or plante. Planula, a playne, a ioyners instrument. Planus, na, num, playne, euen, clere, apparant. Planum facere, to declare or expounde. Planus, ni, a deceyuour or mocker. also a iug∣lar, whiche maketh thinges to seme in appa∣rance, where in dede noo suche thynge is, as water to comme into the howse, or trees to growe, or money of leaues or stones. Plani pisces, fishes which be flat and not roūd. Plasma, plasmatis, the warke of a potter, or of
hym, whyche worketh in erthe, also a plaister Plasmo, are, to make pottes, or any other thynge of erthe. Plastes, a warker of ymages or other like thing in erthe. Plastice, the crafte of warkynge in erthe. Platanus, a plane tree. Platanetum, a place where plane trees doo growe. Platanodes, a promontory or hyll in Italy. Platanonis, ne, of plane tree. Platêa, a hyghe waye or strete, also a courte in great places more ouer a see gull. Platalea, a byrde whiche foloweth water fou∣les that do take fyshes, and do pecke them so on the heade, that they let go theyr proy, whi¦che Platalea taketh and lyueth therwith. Plateae, a citie in Boeotia, not far frō Thebes Plateenses, people of the Citie of Platee in Greece. Plato, the prynce of all philosophers, in wise∣dome, knowlege, vertue and eloqence fer ex∣cedynge all other gentyles, was borne in A∣thenes, whose father was named Ariston of an auncient and honourable house, his mo∣ther was called Perictiona, descended frome Solon the maker of lawes to the Athenyen∣fis and one of the seuen wyse men of Greece: lyenge in his cradelle, bees were founden to brynge hony into his mouth without hurting the chylde, whiche diuinours dyd interprete, was a signification that frome hym shoulde flowe eloquence moste sweete and dylectable. The nyghte before that he was brought vn∣to Socrates to be instructed, Socrates dre∣med that he helde betwene his knees a white signet, who hauynge fethers quickelye gro∣wen, flewe vp toward heuen, and fylled the ayre with moste swete tunes, the daye after Plato beinge broughte by his father to So∣crates, he beholdyng the chylde: this is, said he, the byrde whose ymage I behelde the laste nyghte. His name fyrste was Aristocles, but after he was called Plato (as some do sup∣pose) bycause that he was brode in the shul∣ders, other do write, for as moch as he had a brode visage. In his youth he exercysed his body in wrastlynge and other feates of acty∣uitie: and vntyll he was .xx. yeres olde he gaue him selfe to make amerouse verses whi¦che after that he came to here Socrates, he threwe in to the fyre and bourned, and than moste ardently and attentifely he herde So∣crates doctrine durynge the tyme that he ly∣ued. And after that, he dyd not only here the moste famouse philosophers and Geometry∣tians in Grecia, but also he wente into Italy into Affrica and Egypt, to here the misticall sciences. and it is thought that he herd some of the prophetes, whiche at that tyme liued, sense there be founden in his warkes senten∣ces not aborrynge from our catholike faythe. he was not ignoraunte of marciall affayres, for he had fought in three great batayles, he chase a place by Athenes called Academia, wherin he taught, and therfore his disciples were called Academici, there was in hym a meruaylouse sharpenesse of wytte with an in comparable dexteritie in disputinge and ma∣kynge of aunsweres, his constaunce tempe∣raunce and grauitie, with courtaysye in lan∣guage were of al other incōparable, he was so desyrouse of knowlege that he was no lesse studiouse to lern, than he was to teche other. wherfore he beinge skorned of one, which as∣ked of hym howe longe he wold be a scholer, so longe (sayde he) as I shal not repent to be wyser and better. He is called Diuinus Pla∣to for his excellent doctrine, whiche contey∣neth manye thynges (as sayncte Augustine sayth) whiche dothe accorde with holy scrip∣ture, in so moche as therein is perceyued the fyrst parte of Genesis vnto Spiritus domini ferebatur super aquas, and the mistery of thre personnes in diuinitie is therin expressed. he dyed as he was wrytynge beinge of the age of foure score and one yeres, afore the incar∣nation of Chryste .CCC. xlii .yeres, reade more of hym in Dionisius. Plaudi, they which haue great hangyng eares Plaudo, plausi, plaudere, to reioyce with coū∣tenaunce, to clap the handes to gether. Plausibilis, plausibile, that whiche the people doth receiue with ioye, and clapping of their handes, acceptable. Plausus uel Applausus, the consente of people with voyce, or other noyse. Plautus, a poete of Comedies borne in Vmbri¦a, whā he had spent all his substance on plai∣ers garmentes, and therby was brought vn∣to extreme pouertie, he was fayne for his ly¦uynge to serue a baker in tourninge a querne or handemyll, and whan he was vacant seō that labour, he wrate most eloquent and ple∣saunte comedies, wherin he was reputed so excellent, that Epius Stolo sayde of hym, he doubted not but that the muses wold speake as Plautus dyd wryte, if they shulde speake latine. He was in the tyme of Cato called Censorius. Plaustrum, seu plostrum, a carte. Plausus, sus, a reioycynge with voyce and ge∣sture, clappynge of handes together for ioy. Plebecula, the poore people. Plebeius, a, um, of the people. Plebeius, plebeius, one of the comminalte, not beinge a gentilman. Plebeus, idem.
Plebicola, a fauourer of the comminaltie. Plebiscitum, a lawe which sometime was made by the onelye consente of the common people of Rome, without the auctoritie of the senat. Plebs, bis, seu plebes, plebei, the commune people. Plecto, plexi, plectere, to punisshe, to strike. Plecti capite, to be beheded. Plectrum, an instrumente, wherewith menne played on the harpe or dulcymers, for hur∣tynge of theyr fyngers. Also a spurre sette on a fyghtynge cocke, whan he lacketh natural spurres. Pleiades, the seuen sterres, whiche maryners do vse in trienge of costes. Plemmyrium, a citie in Sicilia. Plenè, largely, abundantly. Plenilunium, full mone. Plenitudo, dinis, fulnesse. Plenus, na, num, full. Plena manu, abundantly, liberally. Illum ingressum pleno gradu cohortari, nō intermittemus, we will not ceasse to exhorte hym with all our power, whan he is ones entred. Graue & plenum carmen, a verse which fil∣leth well the eares. Pleniore ore laudare, to gyue more aboun∣daunce of prayses. Plenissimum testimonium, a very large te∣stimonie or witnesse. Plenus animi, couragiouse. Plenus officij, redye to do pleasure to euerye man. Plenus uini, drunken. Plenus sanguinis, a great murder. Plenus somni, sleapy. Adolescentia plena spei maximae, youthe wherin men haue a speciall hope. In plenum dicere, to speake generallye or of all. Plerus, plera, plerum, of olde tyme was vsed for more, Plera pars, the more parte. Plaeri{que}, plerae{que}, plera{que}, many, a great sorte. Plerus{que}, plera{que}, plerun{que}, the more parte of any thynge. Pleri{que}, signifieth some. Pleri{que} omnes, for the more parte. Plerun{que}, oftentimes, somtimes. Pleonasmos, a figure, wherin is superfluitie of wordes. Plethrum, a measure of lande, conteynynge a hundred feete. Pleuritis, tidis, & pleuresis, a sickenesse in the syde, called the Pleurisie. Pleuriticus, pleuritica, he or she, whiche hath the Pleuresy. Pleuitas, vnnobilitie, basenesse of bloudde. Plexus, a, um, wounden or bounden. Plico, caui, uel plicui, care, to folde. Plicatilis, le, that whiche maye be folden. Plinius, the name of two noble lerned men, the one wrate the moste excellente warke, called the historie of Nature, the other wrate elo∣quent Epistles, and an oration to Traiane in his commendation, whiche oration is cal¦led Panegyricus. There is also a warke of the practise of phisyke in the name of Plini∣us, but whether it were of the fyrst Plinie or no, it is not very certayne. some calleth hym Valerianus. Plocum, a small reede. Plodo, si, dere, to make noyse with handes or feete. Ploro, are, to weepe. Ploratus, tus, wepynge. Plorabundus, he that wepeth moche. Plostrum, for plaustrum, a wayne or carte. Plostrarius, a, um, that whiche belongeth to a wayne or carte. Plostellum, a lyttel wayne. Plota, a lampraye. Ploti, they whiche haue playne feete withoute holownes in the soles of the feete. Ploxinum, a coffer or cheste. Plumo, mare, to be in fethers. Also to en∣browder. Pluma, a fether. Plumula, a lyttell fether. Plumarius, ria, rium, of fethers, a warker with fethers. Plumatilis, le, made of fethers. Plumbago, aginis, a vayne of mettall or oore, wherin is both syluer and leade, it is also an herbe, whiche hath leaues lyke sorrell, and a great rote and roughe. Plumbea ira, wrathe whiche longe continueth. Plumbatura, soulder of leade. Plumbata, a pellet of leade. Plumbatio, sowlderynge. Plumbarius, a plummer or worker in leade. Plumbatae, balles or clubbes of leade, wher∣with men faught. Plumbeus, bea, beum, of the colour of leadde leady, or heuy as leade. Plumbeus homo, a lumpyshe man without courage or spirite. Plumbo, are, to leadde, to sowlder or ioyne mettalle. Plumbum, leadde. Plumesco scere, to be or waxe penned. Plumare, idem. Plumeus, a, um, of fethers. Plumiger, that beareth fethers. Plumo, are, to be fethered, or haue fethers. Plumula, a lyttell fether or plume. Pluo, plui, ere, to rayne. Plura, many. Pluria, idem.
Plurifarius, a, um, of diuerse fascions. Plurifariam, many wayes, in many places. Plurimifacio, cere, to set moche by. Plurimum, very moche. Plurimus, very moche, many, longe. Plurisfacio, cere, to make more of. Plus, more. Pluris uendo, I selle for more or deerer. Plus decem millia capta, there were taken mo than ten thousande. Vt cum matre plus esset, that he moughte be the lenger with his mother. Plures, for multi. Plus ue minus ue, more or lesse, or about that number. Pluris authoritas, more auctoritie. Pluris aestimare, to set more by. Pluris aedificare, to buyld derar. Plurima stragula, good store of tapesrye. Hoc ego utor uno omnium plurimum, that do I vse more than any other man. Ibi plurimum est, he is moste often there. Plurimum aetatis, the more parte of my life. Plusculus, a, um, a lyttell more. Plutealis, le, that whiche is sette in a table or case. Plutealia sigilla, smalle Images in tables or cases. Plutus, called god of richesse who was payn∣ted blynde. Pluteum, a space or distaunce, whereby the lo∣wer pyllers were dyuided from the higher in the front or foreparte. Pluteus, an engyne of warre, made of hurdels keuered with lether or sacke clothe, whiche kept in the warre, men whyles they wrought out of daunger of ordynance, vnder the whi¦che men do approche to the walles of a town also hutches or greatte coffers, or other lyke places, wherin bokes, tables, or suche thyn∣ges ar kepte. Pluto, tonis, called god of hell, the sonne of Saturnus. Pluuia, rayne. Pluuialis, pluuiatilis, & pluuius, a, um, rayny or of rayne. Pluuia aqua, rayne water. Pluuiosus, full of rayne. Plyssima, auncient writers vsed for plurima, very many. ¶P ANTE N. PNEVMA, atis, spiryte or wynde or brethe. Pneumaticus, ca, cum, wherein wynde or brethe is vsed. Pneumonici, they whyche be sycke of the lounges. ¶P ANTE O. POCILLATOR, pocillatoris, He that bryngeth cuppes to the table, or a cuppe bearer. Pocillum, a lyttell cuppe. Poculum, a cuppe, sometyme a draught. Pocillum, a diminutiue of Poculum. Poculentus, ta, tum, all thynge good to be drunke. Podagricus, & podagrosus, sa, sum, fulle of goute. Podagra, a peynefull dysease in the legges or feete called the gowte, whiche commeth of a superfluouse humour, specially fleume rawe & viscouse, myxt with choler or sharpe blude, runnynge by the vaynes called Venae capilla res, and the fleshy partes of the membres, vn¦tyll he be commen betwene the bones of the ioyntes if the humoure be hote, the place is red and excedynge hotte, the peyne very gre∣uouse, with moche swellynge, the vrine red, if the matter be sanguine, if the humoure be colde, the rednesse of the place is lyttell: but more extendynge to whyte, moche swellynge and blewenesse of matter melancholye: Also more hardnesse, and the vrine more cleere. Podalyrius, one of the sonnes of Aesculapius and a great surgeon, he came to the siege of Troye with his brother Machaon. Padaris, a longe gowne to the fete. Poderis, a straite garmente of lynnen clothe, it maye nowe be called the Albe, whiche prie∣stes do weare whan they saye masse. Podex, dicis, the arse hole. Podia, the corde, wherwith the sayle is spred. Podium, a place made without a walle, for mē to stande and beholde thynges, also a stage, wheron is set candelles or bokes. Poëma, matis, & poësis, a poetes warke. Poenalis, le, penall, peynfull. Poena, peyne, tourment, execution. Poenam pendere, to suffer punishement. Poenas petere, to be aduenged, to punishe. Poenas reddere, to be punished. Poenas luere, idem. Afficere poena, to punishe. Committere poenam, to runne in the daun∣ger of a peyne, for doinge or not doynge a thynge. Consurgere in poenam, to aryse to punysshe one, or to se one tourmented. Dare poenas, to be punyshed. Exigere poenas, to cause one to be punished. Expendere poenas, to be punished. Persoluere poenas, idem. Persequi poenas, to be reuenged. Repetere poenas homicidij, to brynge an appele agaynste one for murder.
Sumere poenas, to punishe. Poenio, auncient writers vsed for punio. Poenitens, tis; penitent, repentaunt. Poenitendus, da, dum, to be asshamed of, to be lyttell estemed. Poenitentia, repentance, penaunce. Poeniteor, I am in peyne, I am greurd. Penitudo, repentaunce. Poenitet, têbat, têre, to repente. Me haud poenitet, I care not, I am not so∣ry therfore. Poenitet ambarum ornatae ut sumus, I am ashamed of vs bothe, that we be this appa∣rayled. Eum poenitet deformem esse natū, he is a∣shamed that he is so deformed. Nosmet nostri poenitet, we be not contente with our selfes, we be ashamed of our selfes. Senectutis eum suae poenitet, he taketh his age vnpaciently. Tam diu autē uelle debebis, quo ad te quan¦tum proficias non poenitebit. Thou shuldest haue wyll to tary so longe, vntyll thou shalte be well content and pleased with the profite that is in that study. Malo me fortunae poeniteat quam uictoriae, I had leuer be sory for my fortune, than asha¦med of the victory. Poenitet me uerbi tui, thy speakynge dothe not content me. Poenitet me hominis, I am ashamed of the man. Me quantum hic operis fiat, poenitet, I am not well content with that that is done. Poenitens, tis, he that repenteth hym Poenitendus, da, dum, that whereof a manne ought to be ashamed, or mislyketh. Poenitendum, a gerundife. Non est eius prae∣ceptoris, poenitendum. He nedeth not to be ashamed of that maister, or maye be content with suche a master. Poeniturus, he that shall repente. Poenitentia, repentaunce, it is also nowe called penaunce. Poenula, a cloke. Poeon, a man whom Homer calleth excellently lerned in phisike. Poeonia, an herbe called Pyonie. also a region or countrey in Macedonia. Poenicus, ca, cum, of Affrike, reade Punica. Poeninsula, a place, whiche for the more parte is inclosed with water. Poenus, a man of the citie of Carthage, or an Affricane. Poësis, the arte of poetes. Poëta, a poete. Poētice, ces, poetrye. Poēticè, after the maner of poetes. Poeticus, ca, cum, poeticall. Poetor, aris, ari, to exercyse poetrie. Poetria, & poetris, idis, a woman poete. Pogonia, a blasynge sterre, with a longe beam afore lyke a berde. Pol, an aduerbe of swearynge, as it were by Pollux. Polemonium, an herbe Leonicenus and Ma∣nardus do suppose it to be that which is cal¦led Ruta agrestis, wylde rue: some do call it woode sage, it hath a square stalke, on euery syde leaues lyke saulge hore and somewhat roughe, and a tufte on the toppe wherin is a blacke sede, a rote of the lengthe of a cubite, and somewhat whyte, some haue supposed it to be the gilofloure called the stok gilofloure. Ruellius sayth that it groweth on hyghe groundes and barayne. Polenta, was barleye ordered in this fourme. They steped barley in water one nyght, and dried it, and the nexte daye they fried it, and than grounde it, and so kepte it longe, which theyr slaues and pultry dyd eate. Polentarius, a, um, perteinyng to barley groūd as is afore sayde. Politè; freshely, gayly, klenly. Politia, ciuilitie, politike gouernaunce. Politicus, politica, liticum, ciuile or perteining to a citie. Politiones, they whiche are diligente in hus∣bandrye. Politius, more cleane or trimme. Polium, an herbe called poley. Pollen, linis, wheate floure, somtime poulder. Polleo, lêre, to maye. Plurimum mari pollent, they be very strong on the sea. Pollens medicina Hippocrates, Hippocra∣tes was excellently lerned in phisike. Pollêre moderatione & constantia, to be ve¦ry moderate and constante. Pollere questu, to yelde moche gayne or ad∣uauntage. Plus pollet, it is of more force or puissance, or vertue. Pollet eius authoritas, he is of great autho∣ritie, or great estimation. Pollent, they are very good. Pollens uini, he that drinketh moche wyne. Pollentia, puissance. Polliceor, polliceri, & polliceo, pollicere, to promyse. Pollicitatio, a promesse. Pollinaria cribra, a rangynge siue, wherewith the floure is sifted from the branne, it maye be called also a boulter. Pollinarius, a, um, perteynynge to flowre. Pollit, for pila ludit. Polimenta, the stones of boore pigges. Polio, poliui, polire, to polysshe, to garnysshe.
or decke. Politus, ta, tum, polyshed, decked, trimmed. Polities, cleanlynesse. Pollentia, power, also a citie. Polleo, êre, to may, to haue power, to shine. Pollex, licis, a thumbe of the hande, it is also an inche, whiche is a fynger bredthe and a halfe. Rosa metitur quae pollice primo, the rose cutte whiche is of the fyrste gatheryng. Pollicaris, re, of a thumbe. Pollincio, linxi, lincere, to dresse a dead body with swete oyntmentes, it maye be nowe ta∣ken for the chestynge of men, and dressynge them with swete gummes, that the dead bo∣dyes maye be the lengar without yll sauour. Pollinctor, he that dothe that maner of bu∣synesse. Pollinctura, the ministration in baulmynge or chestinge deade bodyes. Pollintor, toris, a baker thatsyfteth meale. Pollis, linis, & pollen, inis, meale. Pollubrum, a bason, wherin men do washe theyr handes. Pollûceo, cêre, to minister sacrifice, speciallye to Hercules. Pollucêre, to shyne bryght. Polluctum, idem. Pollucibiliter, costely, gorgiously. Pollucibilis coena, a costely supper. Polluo, luere, to polute or defyle. Pollutus, ta, tum, poluted, defyled. Polus, the pole, There be imagined to be two certayn poyntes in heuen, as it were the en∣des of an extree, wherabout heuen is meuyd, the one is in the northe, and is called Polus arcticus, The other in the Southe, called Polus antarcticus. Pollux, lucis, was brother to Castor, bothe be¦inge borne at one bourden, which Poetes do fayne to come of one egge, layde or broughte forthe by a woman, called Leda, with whom Iupiter companied in lykenes of a swanne. Polyarna, he that hath many lambes. Polybotes, a giant, whom Neptunus slewe. Polycarpus, he that hath many floures. Polycnemon, an herbe called wylde organum. Polycrates, a tyraunt, which was so fortunate that he neuer suffered any aduersite, or grief, wherfore he at the laste dredyng the chaunge of the fauour of Fortune, hauynge a rynge with a stone of an excellent valewe, dyd caste the same ringe into the sea, to the intent that he wolde suffer some displeasure, and so satis¦fye fortune: but a fyshe deuouringe the ring was the same daye taken of a fysher, and gi∣uen to the kynge, for the greattenesse of the fyshe, whiche beinge opened, there was the sayde ringe founde and brought to the king, wherat as well he, as all other aboute hym meruayled. Sone after the same kynge was oppressed by his people, and hanged. Polydamas, a Troyane, one of theym whiche betrayed the citie with Eneas and Anthenor Polydôrus, the sonne of kynge Priamus and Hecuba, who was by his father in the tyme of the warres at Troy sente to Polymnestor kyng of Thracia with a gret summe of gold, to be kepte out of the peryll of warres. But the citie of Troye beynge taken, Polymne∣stor to enioye the treasure slewe the chylde, wherfore afterwarde quene Hecuba crached out the eyes of Polymnestor. Polygonum, an herbe, whiche is also called Sanguinaria, and hath leaues lyke to Rewe, but it runneth on the grounde as grasse, the iuyce therof put into the nose, stoppeth ble∣dynge. It is supposed to be swynes grasse, or knote grasse. Polygonaton, an herbe which Ruellius saith is that whiche is called commonly Sigillum Salomonis. Manardus affirmeth it to be that whiche of the Arabians is called Seca∣cul, of some Genicula, or Sigillum sanctae Mariae, of Io. Agricola, it is supposed to be that whiche Italions do call Fraxinella. Polyhistor, oris, he that knoweth moche, or of many thynges done. Polilogus, he that hath many wordes. Polymitus, mita, mitum, of twyne or twisted thredes. Polymita, a garmente made of twysted threde or sylke. Polyhymnia, one of the Muses, whiche worde signifieth moche memory. Polymorphus, of many formes or fascions. Polymyxos, a candelstycke, whiche bearethe many lyghtes. Polyphagus, a great eater. Polyphemus, was a gyaunte that hadde one eye in his forehede, whiche was put oute by Vlyxes. Polypodium, an herbe lyke to ferne, growing on trees. Polyposus, he that hath a sore in the nose. Polypus, a fyshe hauynge many feete, whiche chaungeth his colour often: Also a piece of flesh, growynge in the ouermoste part of the nose, whiche causeth a stinkynge ayre out of the nose. Polyrizon, that whiche hath many rootes. Polysyntheton, a figure, where many articles come into a sentence, as Ille trahebat, Hic uo ciferabatur, He drewe, and he cried out. Polytes, one of kynge Priamus sonnes. Polytrichon, an herbe called maydenheare. Polyxena, the daughter of kynge Pryamus whom cruell Pirrhus slewe on the tombe
of Achylles. Pomarium, an orcharde, sometyme a place wherin fruites be kepte. Pomeridianus, & postmeridianus, a, um, any thynge done after none. Pomiferus, a, um, bearynge appuls, hauynge plenty of appulles. Pomilius, & pomilio, onis, a lyttel personage a dwarfe. Pomoerium, the grounde without the walles of the citie, whiche mought neyther be plow¦ed nor inhabyted, the territorie. Pompa, a pompe, or solemne sighte. Pompeius, called Magnus, for his sundry and incomparable victories, whose father was called Pōpeius Strabo, had so good a grace in his visage, that frome his chyldehode, he meued the people of Rome moste entierlye to fauour hym. for his singular beneuolence, cō∣tinence of lyuynge, marciall experyence and knowlege, pleasantnesse of speche, fidelytie of maners, and easinesse in speakynge to. He neuer required any thyng without shamefast¦nesse nor granted any thyng but with a glad countenaunce. In his visage appiered alway bothe nobilitie and gentilnesse so that whan he was in his flourishinge youthe, there shy∣ned in hym maners bothe princely and reue∣rende. Scilla the cruel and proude tirant had him in suche estimation, that where he wold not arise to any other man, were he neuer in so highe a dignitie, He met with Pompeius commynge towarde hym, and putting of his bonet saluted hym by the name of great capi¦tayne, called at that tyme in latine Impera∣tor. He triumphed for his victories in Affrik beinge almoste a chyld nor yet admitted into the senate, contrary to the auncient order of Rome. He vaynquished the valiaunt Capy∣tayne Sertorius, a man at that time mooste famous in prowesse, being an exile in Spain and before was inuincible. He also vainquy∣shed Mithridates the greate kynge of Pon∣tus, and where a great number of the concu¦bines of Mithridates, women of excellente beaultie were taken and brought vnto hym, he wolde not company with any of them, but sente theym vnto theyr frendes. He subdued these realmes: Armeniam, Cappadociam, Paphlagoniam, Mediam, Cholcidem, Ibe∣riam, Albaniam, Syriam, Ciliciam, Meso∣potamiam, Iudeam, and Arabiam, for the which he triumphed, after that he had twise before triumphed, for the winning of Spain and Affrike. In this triumphe he brought in to the commune treasure of golde and syluer in moneye and plate .xx. thousande talentes, whiche if they were commune talentes, it a∣mounted to .xx. hundred thousande poundes. if they were the great talentes .xxvii. hundred and .xxvi. thousande .DC.li.xli.xiii.s.iiii.d. in our money, besides that whiche was gyuen to the men of warre whiche had serued hym, & that was to euerye one, a thousande and fyue hundred brason pence, of our money .vi.li.v.s. whiche in so great an hoste as perteyned to the conquest of so many countrayes extended to a wonderfull sum of money, wherby may appere the ryches of the Romayns. Afterward by the mediation of the frendes of bothe partes, Pom¦peye toke to wife Iulia the doughter of Iulius Caesar, whiche liued not longe, and the amitie betwene Pompey and Caesar decresed, & at the last the insaciable ambition of them bothe brast out, the one not susteynynge the others honour, wherof came the warre ciuile betwene theym, wherin Caesar with a fewer number vainqui∣shed Pompey, who priuily fled by sea into E∣gypt, where vnder the saulfe conducte of the kynge Ptholomeus, he was slayne in a bote, his heade striken of and his bodye caste on the stronde, where it was poorely buried, whan he had liued .lx. yeres and aboue, and frome his youth in moste highe honour welthe and pros∣peritie, on whom it semed that fortune hadde moste prodigally powred all her treasure. Pomponius Atticus, an honourable Romayn of a gentill and auncient house, from his child hode amiable of visage with a swete voice and pronunciation, and therwith hauynge a sharpe witte and apte vnto lernynge, for the diuysion and partes taken at Rome, he went and dwel∣led at Athenes where he was of the peple most tenderlye beloued, as well for his honourable vertues, as for his benefites toward them, for beinge lefte riche by his fathers substance and great reuenues. He often tymes reliued the ne∣cessitie of the comune people, wherfore he was there had in a synguler reuerence, and for his abode in Athenes and excellencie in theyr elo∣quence he was called Atticus. He dyd not only with his treasure kepe the people out of vsery: but also in a time of scarsitie he gaue to euerye citezen seuen measures of wheate called Medi∣mui, whiche was of our measure .v. bushelles and dī, one pecke, one galon, and one quarte to euery one, he was loued of euerye man, and he was charitable to all men. Whan Cicero went in exile he gaue vnto hym CCl. thousande Se∣stertios, whiche amounteth of oure moneye to M.xli.li.xiii.s.iiii.d. Sylla not withstan∣dynge his great pryde, had hym in reuerence. He mooste loued Hortensium and Ciceronem, prynces of eloquence, and although he hym self were as wel in the latine tunge as in the greke as perfecte as any man, yet wolde he neuer pra¦ctise in matters, nor wolde aske or sue for au∣ctorie, he relyeued with his moneye contrarye
partes as Antonium and Brutum. one to the other mortall ennemies. He lente great sum∣mes of money without takynge of vsery, and holpe ladies whose husebandes were bany∣shed, as well with money as with his coun∣sayle and solicitation. Of Pompey and Cae∣sar he was equally loued whan they were en¦nemies together. Finally his quiete lyuynge was to no man anoyaunce, but to euery man thankefull: his house was pleasaunt and not magnifike, nete and not very sumptuouse, al his seruauntes, were verye well lerned, and redde well & wrate very fayre, nor there was so simple a boy in the house but that he could do bothe, the residue were artificers, suche as made thynges necessarye and conueniente for his house. Caesar Augustus whan he most flourished made alyaunce with him for his ex¦cellent temperance and honestie in liuing, for the which all noble men fauored him, also he maried his wifes sonne Tiberius, who was afterwarde emperour, to the doughter of At∣ticus doughter, and no day escaped that the emperour wrate not vnto him, semblably did Antonius the emperours enemy. Such grace had he to be fauoured of all men, to liue out of the danger of enuiouse authoritie, to passe his time in the mooste dilectable paradise of knowlege, and to haue as well therof abun∣dauntely, as also lyuynge sufficiente for the mayntenaunce of his estate beinge a knyght, and to ayde his frendes and countreymen in theyr necessite. Whan he hadde lyued .lxxvii. yeres, he died of a fistula with a wonderfull pacience and voluntary abstinence, and was buried at Rome, all good men folowyng the corps, and the people and al other lamenting He wrate dyuerse excellent warkes in Greke and latine, whiche are perished to the inesti∣mable detriment of them that be studiouse. Pompholix, is an herbe whiche (as Manar∣dus writeth, is that which the Apothecaries do call Nill. Pompeiopolis, a citie in Nauer called Pam∣pilona. Pompeianus, of Pompeius parte, or a fauou∣rer of Pompeius. Pomum, the generall name of all fruites, it is moste vsed for an appull. Ponderitas, hefte, poyse. Pondero, raui, rare, to way, to ponder, to con∣syder, to esteme. Pondo, indeclinabile, sometyme it signifiethe a pounde weyghte, Olei pondo octaginta, foure score pounde weyght of oyle. sometyme weyghte onely. Corona aurea librae pondo, A crowne of golde of a pounde weight. Som¦time it signifieth a value of moneye, whiche like as Mina amonge the Greekes conteined a hundred Dragmas so pondo amonge the Romaines conteined an hundred Denarios of siluer. Pondus, deris, poise or weight. Magna auri pondus, a great waighte or summe of golde. it dothe also signifie charge or bourden. Habere pōdus apud aliquem, to haue aucto¦ritie aboute some man, or to be in great esti∣mation with one. Eius filius eodem est apud me pondere quo fuit ille. His sonne is with me in the same, or as moche estimation as euer was he. Pondusculum, a littell or small waight. Ponderosus, a, um, waighty. Ponè, after, or behinde. Pone eum esse uictum, put the case that he be vainquished. Pono, posui, ponere, to put, to set, to cesse, to buylde, to laye aparte. Ponere spem, to hope. Accusatorem ponere, to suborne or hier one to accuse a man. Ponere ante oculos rem aliquam, to set be∣fore his eies, to cause hym to remember to make a thynge to appere clere. De rebus ante oculos positis disputare, to dispute of thynges clere and out of question. Quod erat ante oculos positū, that no man had any doubt in. Bene ponere beneficium apud aliquem, to do pleasure to one that will require it. Castra ponere, to pitche or sette a campe in warres. Posituū consilium in fortuna, Fortune hath therof the disposition, or it is at the wyl and pleasure of fortune. Ponere curam, to set a syde care. Ponere curam in re aliqua, to take care for a thinge. Custos in frumento publico est positus, He had the charge gyuen to hym of the common graynardes. Ponere dies multos in rem aliquam, to em∣ploye or spende moche tyme about a thynge. Est. n. positum in te totum, it is in the whe∣it shall be done or not. Ponere exemplum, to allege an exaumple. Ponere se extra culpam, to discharge hym selfe of that whiche is layde vnto hym. Ponere fundamenta, to laye the fundation. Poere in admirādis, to tel it for a meruaile. Ponere aliquid in admiratione, to meruayle at a thynge. Ponere aliquem in aequo duobus summis, to esteme one equallye as moche as two the greattest. Ponere in aequalitate, to esteme the oone as moche as the other.
Neque ego hoc in tua laude pono, alia sunt tua facta at{que} consilia summa laude digna, Nor I accoumpte this amonge thy prayses, there be other of thyn actes and procedynges that doo deserue as moche prayse as maye be gyuyn. Ponere in promptu, to dysclose to all men. Ponere in solem, to sette agaynst the sunne. In optima spe sibi ponere aliquid, to haue good hope in a thynge. Ponere in uitio, to take it in an ylle parte, to interprete is to the warste. Ponere mala initia, to begynne yll. Ponere loco contumeliae, to reproche one of any thynge. Ponere in beneficij loco, to take it for a frēd¦ly tourne or pleasure. Tantum in ea arte ponitis, ye set so moche by that arte. Munus bene positum, a gyft well bestowed. Ponere nomina rebus, to gyue names to thynges. Ponere omnia in uoluptate, to esteme noo∣thynge soo moche as voluptye or carnall ap∣peryte. Ponere operam, to bestowe labour. Bene opera posita, peynes well bestowed. Ponere operam alicui, to attend about ones busynesse. Ponere oua, to lay as a henne dothe. Ponere pro certo sum ueritus, I dare not affyrme it for trouthe, I dare not assure you that it is so. Bene ponere officiū apud aliquem, I haue not loste my labour in doynge hym pleasure. Sumptus nusquam melius potest poni, A man coulde neuer haue better bestowed his money. Ponere multum temporis in aliquo loco, to tary a great whyle in a place. Vbi cun{que} posuit uestigia, by all the way that he passyd, where so euer he went. Ponere iubebam de quo quis audire uellet, I bad hym purpose what soo euer they lysted to heare. Tum uenti posuere, than the wynde ceassed. Ponere consilium, to leaue his enterpryse. Ponere de manibus, to laye oute of his handes. Ponere dolorem, to ceasse to be sorowfull. Ponere feroces animos, to leaue his fierse∣nesse and crueltie. Ponere arma, to lay asyde theyr weapon, or harneyse. Ponere metum, to take a good harte. Ponere pudorem, to be shamelesse. Ponis mihi porcum, thou seruest me at the table with porke. Ponere pallium, to laye his garmente in pledge. Pone eum esse uictum, put the case that he is vaynquyshed. Ponunt philosophi, the phylosophers doo wryte. &c. Ponere in gratia uel gratiam, to brynge into fauour. Cic. ad At. Pons, pontis, a brydge. Pontia, an yle in the sea callyd Ligusticum, on the southe parte of Italy, wherein Pylatus was borne, and thereof was callyd Pontius Pylatus. Pontica nux, a kynde of fylberdes, whych camme frome the countreye callyd Pontus in Asia. Ponticum, is a taste, whyche hath noo sente to be dyscerned. Ponticulus, a lyttell brydge. Pontifex, ficis, an archebysshoppe. Pontificatus, tus, the dygnitie of a byshop. Pontificius, a, um, of a bysshoppe. Pontones, whyry bootes. Pontus, is the sea, whyche is betwene the fenne callyd Maeotis, and the yle callyd Tenedos. It is also a great cuntray ioyning to that sea, whyche conteyneth the royalmes of Colchū, Cappadociam, Armeniam, and other dy∣uerse countrays. it is sometyme put general∣ly for the sea. Popa, fatte, greace. Popana, fatte oyntementes. Popanum, a cake of breadde. Popellus, the lyttell or poore people. Popina, a tauerne or vyttaylynge house, where meate is eaten out of dewe tyme, a Cookes shoppe. Popinatio, ryotte. Popinalis, le, pertaynynge to ryotte, or places of ryotte. Popino, nonis, a commune hauntoure of vyt∣taylynge houses. Popinor, aris, ari, to eate out of dewe tyme, to be ryottouse. Poples, poplitis, the hamme of a mans legge behynde the knee. Poppisma, matis, the noyse made with the mouth and the hande, in rydynge, or wanton dalyaunce. Populabundus, wastynge the countreye, or he that gothe in fourragynge or robbynge of countrayes. Popularis, re, pertaynynge to the people, ac∣cepted or fauoured of the people. Alsoo it sy∣gnyfyeth a famylyar frende, or as we vse to call countrey man. Nihil tam populare quam bonitas, Nothing more pleaseth the people than goodnesse or vertue. Praestat diuitem esse ac popularem, quàm
nobilem ac mendicum, It were better to be of the commynaltie, and ryche, than of the nobylitie, and a beggar. Popularia loca, places where the comminal∣tie dothe assemble. Populari nomine a nobis appellantur, In the commune fourme of speakynge, they be callyd. &c. Populare ingenium, holdynge with the ly∣berty of the people. Popularitas, frendeshyp by occasyon that they be countreymen. also the fauour that one bea¦reth to the commune people. Populariter, & populare, homely, lyke the people, accordynge to the maners of the people. Populatus, ta, tum, wasted, distroyed. Populatia, boyes playes. Populatim, of all the people, also euerychone. Populatio, a wastynge of the countrey, a for∣ragynge. Populare, to gette the fauour of the people. Populator, a fourrageour or waster of coun∣trayes. Populeus, a, um, of a poplar tree. Populinus, idem. Populnus, & populneus, idem. Populetum, the place where poplar trees doo growe. Populifugia, was a day in the moneth of Iune at the whyche day by reason of a rumour, the people fledde. Populor, popularis, to waste or dystroye a countrey. Populosus, a, um, full of people, populouse. Populus, people, properlye it is all the states of the people besydes the soueraigne Gouer∣nour. All be it the Romaynes made a dy∣stynction betweene the Senate and the peo∣ple, wrytynge in theyr standerdes and coyne. Senatus populus{que} Romanus, The Senate and people of Rome. Populus, a tree callyd a popular, wherof one is callyd whyte poplar, whose stemme is long and playne, and the leaues alway shakynge, grene within and whyte on the backe, the o∣ther is callyd blacke poplar, whyche hathe the barke rough, and fewer leaues than the whyte. Porca, a sowe, a rydge of lande, a balke. Porcarius, a, um, of a swyne. Porcarius, a swyneherde. Porceo, cere, to prohybyte. Porcetra, a yonge sowe or yelte. Porcinus, na, num, of a hogge. Porcellus, a pygge. Porculus, idem. Porculatio, bryngynge vp of swyne. Porculator, a fatter of swyne. Porculetum, idem quod porca. Porculus, a shoote, a porcatte. Porcus, a hogge. Porcus troianus, a hogge rosted with ma∣nye other beastes and fowles within his bealye. Porgam, vsed of the auncient wryters for por¦rigam, I wyll delyuer or take to one. Pori, poores in the body, out of the whyche is∣sueth sweate. Porphyretes, a redde marble. Porphyreticus, ca, cum, of redde marble. Porphyriacus, ca, cum, of purple colour. Porphyrio, a byrde whyche drynketh as yf he dydde byte the water, he hathe longe redde legges and bylle. Porraceus, cea, ceum, of the coloure of leeke blades. Porrectè, streyght out. Porrectus, ta, tū, extended in length or bredthe, stretched. Porriginosus, a, um, lyke to leekes. Porrigo, porrexi, rigere, to spreade out, to of∣fer, to ouerthrowe. Herbam porrigere, to confesse to be vayn∣quyshed. Porrigere manum, to gyue aide or succours. Porraceus, a, um, of a leke. Porrò, surely, also longe before, farre of, af∣ter, in tyme commynge, beyonde, forsothe. Porrò. Si ire porro pergas, yf ye go further. Vt quiescant porro moneo, Fynally I ad∣uyse them to leaue or sytte stylle. Quid restat nisi, ut fiam miser? What re∣mayneth, but that in the ende I am vn∣doone. Etiam ne est quid porro? Is there any thynge elles? Quid deinde porro, What more folowed after. Porro, is sommetyme a coniunction, and is as moche as Sed. sometyme it is a coniunction expletyue, to fylle vp onely the number of the sentence. Porro autem, and that more is. Ne{que} porro, for ne{que} etiam. Se porro pueros à senibus audisse dicebant, That they beynge verye yonge, herde olde men say. &c. Porrus, & porrum, leekes. Porsena, the name of a kynge, that besyeged Rome, to haue brought in Tarquinus. Porta, a yate. Portendo, dere, to sygnyfye before a thynge happeneth. Portentiferus, tifera, tiferum, that whyche sygnyfyeth straunge or monstruouse thynges commynge. Portentificus, ca, cum, idem.
Portentosus, a, um, monstruouse, sygnyfyenge yll lucke or aduenture. Portentum, a thynge monstruouse, or very sel∣dome sene, whyche maye sygnifye somewhat to come. Porticus, cus, a porche. Portio, a portion. Portiuncula, a lyttell portion. Portiusculus, the pylate of a shyppe, whyche ruleth the maryners. Portitor, oris, the customer of a hauen▪ alsoo a porter, that dothe beare thynges that be bought, whyther as the byer wyll haue hym. Also he that beareth men fro the hauen to the shyppe. Porto, tare, to beare, to brynge. Portorium, the frayte payde for passage or ca∣ryage of marchaundyse. also custome or tal∣lage. Portulaca, an herbe callyd Purselan. Portuosus, full of hauens. Portus, tus, an hauen. Res est in portu, the matter or thyng is safe. In portu nauigare, to be out of daunger. Posca, a sawce made with vyneger and water. Poscinumius, mia, um, that whych requyreth money. Posco, poposci, poscere, to aske, to requyre, to prouoke, to assayle. Poscunt pugnam, they offer to fyght, or doo battayle. Poscere maioribus poculis, to quaft or drink depe one to an other. Poscere aliquem clamore, to crye after one. Vbi res poscit, where it is requisite. Cum usus poscit, whan nede is. Pos, a brydge. Positio, a settynge of a thynge. Positura, idem. Positus, ta, tum, put or sette. Positura, & positus, tus, a settyng or puttynge. Possessio, onis, possession. Possessio fidutiaria, a possession whyche oone gyueth to an other vppon condytion that he shall redelyuer possession vpon certayn thin∣ges perfourmed, or whan he were therto re∣quyred by hym, whyche gaue possessyon, it mought haue bene callyd a possessyon in vse, whanne feoffementes of truste were vsyd in Englande. Possessor, oris, he that hath the possession, the owner. Possideo, sedi, sidêre, to possede. Bona ex edicto possidêre, whan one hathe goodes gyuen hym by iudgement or decree. Bona publice possidêre, to haue goodes for∣fayted or confyscate. Possidêre palmam, to get the price. Breui tempore totum hominem, totam{que} eius praeturam possederat, In a lyttel while he had gotten into his handes both the man and his offyce holly. Possum, potui, posse, to maye. Non potuit quin suo semone aliquem fami∣liarium participauerit, He could not forbeare but with his talkynge he made some of his companyons priuy, or of his counsayle. Huc fac ad me ut uenias si quid poteris, Do what ye canne to come hyther to me, yf it be possyble. Potest plurimum ad Caesarem, he maye doo moche, or is in good credence with Cesar. Potin es ut desinas, Canste thou not lette aloone. Incende hominem amabo te quoad potest, On good felowshyp prycke forward the man as moche as is possyble. Post, after, afterwarde, behynde. Postea, afterwarde. Postergo, are, to leaue behynde, to caste backe. Posteri, they whyche do succede vs in bloode, as sonnes, theyr children, and their succession. Posterior, he that commeth after. Non posteriores feram subauditur partes, I wyll not be the laste. Paulo aetate posterior, a lyttell yonger. Omnia libertate posteriora ducere, To re∣garde nothynge or passe vppon nothynge but lybertie. Posteritas, taris, the worlde to come. Posterius, later, slower, vyler. Posterus, ra, rum, that whyche commeth after. Postera dies, the daye after. Posteri pedes, the hynder fete. Postfero, to sette after or behynde, to sette lesse by. Posthabeo, bêre, to put backe or set lesse by. Posthac, from hensforthe. Posthamus, ma, a chylde borne after that the father is deade. Posthumus, ma, mum, folowyng, or to come. Postîcum, & posticus, a backedoore, Postica, all that is behynde vs, lyke as An∣tica is all that is before vs, It is alsoo a lyne whych dyuydeth the fieldes from the East to the weste. Postilena, a crouper. Postis, a poste. Postliminium redire, is whan any manne hap∣peth to go from vs to our ennemyes, and af∣ter retourneth home. Postmitto, postmittere, to leaue behynde, to forgette. Postmodum, afterwarde. Postquam, after. Postremo, fynally. Postridie, the day after to morowe, the day fo∣lowynge the day before expressed.
Postomis, a brake, wherwith a horses mouthe is broken, and is made to beare his heade easyly. Postremus, a, um, the laste of all. Postremi homines, vngraciouse men. Postremum me uides, it is the last tyme that thou shalt see me. Postulo, are, to require, to demaunde a thynge whyche is dewe to the asker. also to accuse or sewe one in the lawe, or to complayne on one, sometyme to desyre. Postulare quaestionem, to desyre that the par¦ties mought be straytely examyned, properly by tortures or tourmentes. Postulare ius, to make a reasonable request. Budaeusin annot. Postulatio, a supplyeation made to a prynce. Postulationibus uacare, to dyspache suyters, to here complayntes. Postulationes, supplycations or bylles of com∣playnte. Potens, tis, myghty, puissaunt, hable. Potentia, power, puissance, habilite, great rule. it is also a place in Italy callyd Sancta Ma∣ria de Loretto. Potenter, myghtyly, puissantly. Potentatus, tus, power. Pote, for potis. Potestas, tatis, power, auctoritie, counsaylle, and reason. Potestatem sui facere, to suffremen to come to hym, or to speake with hym. Potestatem gerere, to exercise an authoritie or offyce. An erit haec optio & potestas tua? Shall it be at thy choyse. &c. Praesertim cum tota potestas huius rei tua sit, Specyally sens all the matter resteth in the, or is in thy power to brynge to passe. Quae tum erat potestas, accordynge as it was lefull at that tyme. Vix adipiscendi potestas modo fuit, Vneth or with great peyne I mought come by it. Potestas mittendi non fuit citius, I coulde no sooner sende. Quoties mihi certorum hominum potestas erit quibus recte dem, non praetermittā &c. Whan or as often as I may haue sure men, to whome I may delyuer my letters, I wyll not forgette to wryte vnto you. Cum potestate proficisci in prouinciam, to go into the countray appoynted hym, hauing authoritie to rule there. Potestatem dare, to lette or suffre, to gyue leaue. Potestatem facere, idem. Potestatem sui facere, to lette or suffer men to speake with hym. In potestate alicuius esse, to be vnder an no∣ther mans rule or obedyence, or to be at his commaundement. Peruenire in potestatē alicui{us}, to be brought in subiection. Ponere in potestate alicuius, to put hym vn∣to his mercy. Potestur, for potest, he may. Potio, onis, a drynke. Potiono, are, to gyue a medycine. Potior, potitus sum, potiri, to haue in possessi∣on, to optayne, to take pleasure of. Potiri urbis, to wynne the cytie. Potiri uoluptatum, to lyue in pleasure. Potiri rerum, to be kynge or maister of all the worlde. Potiri regni, to wynne the countrey. Potiri laborem, to endure peyne. Qui bello potiti sunt, whyche haue wonne it at the swordes poyne. Potior, for Fruor. Potior, potius, & potissimus, for Melior, Optimus. Potior sit qui prior ad dandum est, Let hym be in better condytion, or haue more aduaun∣tage, that fyrste gyueth. Iudicabit nulla ad legendum his esse potio∣ra, He shal iudge none more worthy to be rad than they. Nihil mihi potius fuit, quàm ut Masinissam conuenirem, There was noo thynge that I more longed than to mete with Masinissa. The fyrste thynge that I dydde I wente to Masinissa, I desyred nothynge more than to see Masinissam. Potissimus, a, um, the best of all other, or the chiefe or the pryncipall. Potius, rather. Potissimum, or potissime, moste rather, chief∣ly, pryncipally. Potitij, was an auncyent famylye or kynrede amonge the olde Latynes, whome Hercu∣les callyd to his bankette, after that he had slayne Cacus, And afterwarde they were constytute the priestes of Hercules, rede Fe∣nestellam. Potis sum, I may, potis est, it is possible. Potitius, Hercules prieste. Potito, tare, to vse to drynke. Poto, tare, to drynke: Alsoo to gyue drynke to oone. Potare totos dies, to sytte all day drynking, to be drunken. Potatum dare, to gyue drynke to one. Potator, & potor, a drunken knaue. Potorium, a cuppe. Potus, ta, tum, that whiche hathe drunke, and that whyche is drunken. Potus, tus, drynke.
¶P ANTE R. PRAE, before, in regarde, or in compary∣son, for. Prae amore, for loue. Also of. Prae studio, of studye. Praeur sygnifieth than. Modestior nunc quidem est de uebis praeut dudum fuit, He is more softe or gentyll of wordes, than he was wonte to be, or than he was late. Prae se ferre, to shewe semblaunt or by coun∣tenaunce. Sanus si sim, prae te medicum mihi expe∣ram, If I be wel aduised I wyl loke to haue a better phisition than thou art. Nihil hercle hoc quidem, prae ut alia dicam, This is nothynge in regarde of that that I wyll telle the. Prae formidine, for great feare that he had. Prae gaudio, for ioye. Prae manu, & prae manibus, before hande. Praeacutus, very sharpe. Praealtus, very depe. Praebitere, to passe by, or passe forthe in iour∣ney. somtyme perire, tolese, to caste away. Praebeo, bui, bere, to gyue, to shewe. Praebêre aurem, to harken. Praebêre aures conuitijs, to suffre paciently rebukes. Ceruices praebere, to offer his head to be stri∣ken of. Praebet errorem, it gyueth occasion of error. Praebêre indignationem, to be cause of in∣dygnation. Iusta praebere, to kepe tacke, to do that, that he hath taken vpon hym. Non possum satis narrare quos Iudos prae∣bueris intus, I can not well telle howe many mockes thou haste gotten amonge theym, or howe they laugh at the within in the house. Os praebêre, to take blowes or suffre to be bobbyd. Os praebêre ad male audiendum, to suffre one to speake yll to his face. Strenuum hominem praebuit, He played the man, he shewed hym selfe valyaunt, or dydde valyantely. Se aequum praebere, to be indifferent, to do iustyce without rygour. Se aequabilē praebere, to be alway of one sort Se attentum auditorem praebere, to be a di∣lygent hearer. Quo quomodo se in ea quaestione praebebat &c. Howe soo euer he behauyd hym selfe in that matter. Se credulum praebere, to giue hasty credence Se docilem praebere, to be easyly taught. Se alicui facilem praebere, to graunt gentylly to ones desyre. Se facilem praebere in hominibus audiendis admittendis{que}, to be wyllyng and gentyll to here men, and to be spoken with all. Gladij speciem praebet, it is lyke in fascyon to a sworde. Erroris speciem praebêre, to gyue occasyon of errour. Speciem triumpho praebêre, to set forth the tryumph to the best shewe. Tyrannum praebêre, to behaue hym lyke a tyraunt. Vim glutini praebet, it is as good as glewe, or it is of the same force that glewe is. Baculorum usum senectuti praebet, It ser∣ueth olde men in the stede of a staffe. Praebia, orum, thynges gyuen to syke men. Praecaluus, balde before. Praecarus, ra, rum, very dere. Praecaueo, uêre, to prouyde that a thynge hap∣pen not. Praecedo, cessi, dere, to go before. Praecello, lui, lere, to excelle. Praecentio, that whiche is songen or playde at the begynnyng of a songe or balade. Praecentor, toris, he that fyrst syngeth, it may be taken for the chaunter in a quyre. Praeceps, cipitis, a hygh place stepe downe. Praeceps, headlynge, sodaynly, hastily. Praeceps homo, he that is to hasty in his bu¦synesse, and dothe thynges vnaduysedly. Praeceps ingenio in iram, hotte or hastye in wrathe. Praeceps in auaritiam & crudelitatem ani∣mus, The mynde inclyned to couetousnesse and crueltie. Quo iure qua{que} iniuria praecipitem me in pi¦strinam dabit, Be it ryght, be it wronge, he wyll thruste me into the myll house. Praecipitem abire, to come to mysery. Praecipitem dare, to thrust one out hedlynge. Agunt eum praecipitem poenae ciuium Ro∣manorum quos securi percussit, The cruelle punyshement of the Romayns whom he had byheaded, caused hym to falle soo hastily. Praecipitem ferri, to rounne downe or falla downe from a hygh place. Praeceps in occasum sol, the sun was downe In praecipite esse, to be in great daunger. Praecipitem trahere, to pull hym downe from a hygh place, or astat. In praeceps, sodaynly, hastily. Bis patet in praeceps tantum, it is twyse or two tymes soo depe. Praeceps animi, stourdye or hastye in all his actes. Praeceps senectus, at the pyts brynk for age. Praeceptum, a precepte, a rule gyuen, a com∣maundement. Praecingo, ere, to gyrde about. Praecidanea porca, a swyne, whiche the pay∣nyms
dyd sacryfice before they dyd cut down theyr corne. Praecidaneus, a, um, that which is fyrst kylled. Praecido, dere, to speake or tell precisely, or cer∣taynly, to stryke, to cutte of, to beate, to de∣nye styffely. Plane sine uila exceptione prae∣cidit, Trewely he styffely denyed it withoute exception. Praecidere spem, to put out of all hope. Praecino, nui, nere, to synge before or fyrst, also to tell a thynge before it hapneth. Praecipio, coepi, cipere, to preuent or take first, to forsee, also to commaunde. Praecipitium, a downe ryghte place or steppe, daungerous to be gone on. Paercipito, tare, to throwe downe headlynge. Praecipitanter, headlynge, vnaduysedly. Praecipuus, a, um, chiefe, specyall, pryncipall, soueraygne. Praecipuè, chiefly, specially, principally. Praecisè, precisely, determynately. Praecisum, harde, intractable, cutted, verye shorte. Qui praecisis conclusionibus obscuri, Salustium at{que} Thucydidem superant, The whiche being harde to be vnderstand in their cutted sentences do excede bothe Saluste and Thucydides. Praeclamo, are, to crye before. Praeclarè, very excellently, very nobly, very wel Praeclarus, very noble. sometyme it sygnifieth good. Praecognitus, ta, tum, knowen before. Praeco, conis, a crier, a publisher of thynges. Praeco feralis, the belle man whiche in some town goth about declaring who is late dead. Praeconium, a solemne cry, sometyme it sygni∣fieth prayse or glory. Praecoquor, queris, qui, to be soone rype. Praecordia, the skynne, which dyuideth the o∣uer part of the body from the nether, it is al∣so taken for the place vnder the rybbes, some tyme all the numbles, as the hart, the splene, the lunges, and lyuer. Praecox, cocis, & praecoquus, a, um, sone rype, or tymely rype. Praeda, a proy, a thing goten or takē in warres. Praedabundus, goynge on forragynge in the tyme of warre. Praedaceus, a, um, of a proy. Praedatiuus, idem. Praedator, a seker for a proye. Praedator ex socijs, a robber of his company. Praedensus, a, um, very thycke. Praedestino, are, to purpose before. Praedes, uide praes. Praediator, oris, a man of lawe expert in acti∣ons reall, or matters concernynge landes. Praediatorius, a, um, pertaynyng to landes. Praedicatio, a publyshyng or open declaration. Praedico, care, to publyshe, to tel a thyng open∣ly, to prayse. Praedico, xi, cere, to tell before. Praediolum, a lyttell manour. Praedisco, didici, discere, to vnderstand before. Praeditus, ta, tum, adourned also Praeditus moe¦rore, replenyshed with heuynes. Praeditus la∣chrymis, washed with teares, or ful of teares Praeditus authoritate, in authoritie. Praeditus spe optima, to haue good hope. Praedium, a manour. Praedonulus, a lyttell robber. Praedo, donis, a robber of countreys. Praedor, aris, ari, to robbe a countrey, or to take prayes. Praedotiunt, they chiefly desyre. Praeduro, are, to be harder than it was wonte. Praeeo, iui, ire, to go before. Praefacio, feci, facere, to set more by. Praefanda, not honest to be spoken or rehersed. Praefari, to speake or say before. Praefari honorem, is where one sayth to his better. Sauyng your reuerence or honour. Praefari Diuos, to praye to god, before that one enterpryseth any thynge. Praefatio, onis, a preface. Praefecturae, may be called Sheryffewykes, a∣monge the Romayns it sygnified the prouyn∣ces, where the sayd offycers had iurisdictiō. Praefectus Praetorij, was with the emperours the principall officer in his court, as nowe in Fraunce the great mayster. Praefectus urbis, was a great offycer in Rome, to whome it belonged to see that the hyghe wayes to the citie were welle maynteyned, that the waters were kepte cleane, that the chanell of the ryuer of Tyberis, were skou∣red & kept from shelues▪ also to deliuer grayn out of the commune garners, and dyuyde it amonge the people. He was also callyd Prae∣fectus Latinarum, as Gellius wryteth. Praefecti prouinciarum, may be taken amōg vs for sheriffes, but more properly for suche as haue lyke iurisdiction as the chaumber-layne of Northwales, and the hygh stuarde of southewales were wonte to haue, that is to say peculiar authorite to determe matters within the compasse of theyr offyce. Praefecti aerarij, were they whyche hadde the charge of kepynge the commune treasure. Praefectus fisci, was he whyche kept them∣perours treasour. Praefectus scriniorum, was a lyke officer as now is the master of the rolles, and was also callyd Praefectus libellorum, in the whyche offyce was Papinianus the greatte lawyer in the tyme of Seuerus the emperour. Praefero, tuli, ferre, to preferre. Praefericulum, a great bason, whiche was ca∣ryed before hym that dyd sacrifyce.
Praefestino, are, to make to moche hast. Praefica, a woman, whiche is desyred to lament at the buryeng of men or women. Praeficio, faeci, ficere, to put in auctorytie, or to gyue rule. Praefectura, an auctoritie or rule. Praefectus, a rular. Praefigo, xi, gere, to shutte afore. Praefinio, mui, ire, to determyne before, to as∣sygne or appoynt. Praefinitus, ta, tum, prefyxed. Praefluere, to runne before a place. Praefoco, care, to strangle or choke. Praeformido, are, to be aferd er the stroke come. Praefractus, cta, ctum, harde & vnflexible, whi∣che wyll rather breake than bowe: also that whiche was before broken. Praefractè, obstinately. Praefrigidus, da, dum, very colde. Praefulcio, cire, to fortifye. Praefulgeo, fulsi, gere, to shyne moche. Praefurnium, the mouth of an ouen or furneys. Praegelidus, da, dum, excedynge colde. Praegestire, to leape for ioye. Praegigno, nere, to begynne, to bryng in fyrst. Nolebam ex me morem praegigni malum, I wolde not that an yll custome shoulde be brought vp by me. Praegestio, ire, to reioyce moche. Praegnans, antis, a woman with chylde. it is the same of any beast. Praegnans sus, a sowe with farrowe. Praegrandis, de, very great. Praegrauatio, a great grefe. Praegredio, gredi, to go before. Praegrauo, are, to greue moche. Praegustare, to take assay. Praehendo, di, dere, to take. Manum praehen∣dere, to take by the hande. Praehensatio, a sollycityng or labouryng for the attaynynge of some great offyce. Praehenso, are, to imbrace or sette hande on one to solycite. Praeiacio, ieci, iacere, to caste before a thynge. Praeiacio, cui, cere, to lye before. Praeire iuramentū, to minister or gyue an othe. Praeiuditium, a thynge whiche beinge ones de∣cyded and determyned, maketh a rule or ex∣ample to men that do folowe, to dyscusse sem¦blably in a lyke mattier. As those whiche we do call ruled cases or matters in the law, whi¦che be as examples to iuges. Praeiudico, to iuge before, sommetyme to iudge by example of an nother lyke mattier before iudged or discided. Praeiuro, are, to sweare before other. Praeiuratio, the othe that is taken by hym that fyrste sweareth. Praeiurator, toris, he which fyrst taketh an othe as the fore man of a Iurye, or the fyrst wyt∣nesse, or any other, after whom other men do swere, accordyng to the othe gyuen vnto him. Praelabor, beris, bi, to falle fyrst, to slyde. Praeliaris, are, pertaynynge to battayle. Praeliator, toris, a warryour. Praelicenter, very wantonly. Praelior, aris, ari, to fyght in battayle. Praeliganeum uinum, à praeligando, whyche I suppose to be soo callyd, eyther bycause it is fyrste tounned or putte into vesselles, or elles bycause it is put into a sacke, whyche is faste knytte afore. Praeligo, gare, to bynde afore. Praelium, battayle, also the fyght in battaylle. sometyme the acte of generation. Praelongus, a, um, very longe. Praeloquium, the begynnyng of a communica∣tion, or thynge spoken, as that whych in the toryke is namyd exordium. Praeloquor, queris, qui. to speake or tell before. Praeluceo, cere, to beare lyght before one, as a torche or candel, also to gyue more lyght than an nother. Praelucere alijs uirtute, to shyne in vertues before other. Praeludium, a proheme, or that whyche musy∣tians and mynstrelles do playe at the begyn∣nynge, er they come to the songe, whiche they purpose to playe. Praeludo, si, dere, to play before. Praelum, a presse. Praelumbo, are, to breake ones loynes. Praeluo, luere, to purge or washe cleane afore. Praemando, daui, to sende before. Praemanibus, redy at hande. Praemature, to soone, or before the iuste tyme. Praemature uita careo. I dye afore my tyme. Praemeditor, taris, tari, to aduyse before a man do a thynge. Prae me fero, prae me tuli, prae me ferre, to de∣clare by dede, worde, or gesture. Prae te fers iracundiam, Thou sheweste thy selfe to be angry, also to confesse, also to haue before hym a thynge (as it were) in remem∣braunce. Praemercor, caris, cari, to bye afore hande. Praemessum, a sacrifyce or offerynge to Ceres, of the eares of corne that was fyrst reapyd. Praemetium, the fyrste croppe. Praemiatores, theues which steale by nyght, as we mought say, whyche commytte burglary. Praemiator, is a rewarder. Praemineo, nui, ere, to be better than another or excell aboue an other in astate or vertue. Praemior, aris, ari, to gyue rewardes. Praemiosus, ryche of money. Praemissio, a sendynge afore. Praemitto, misi, tere, to sende afore.
Praemium, a rewarde gyuen to hym, whyche hath done any notable and laudable thyng. Premoderor, aris, ari, to playe before on an in∣strument. Praemodum, aboue measure. Praemolestia, feare of a thynge to come. Praemollis, le, very tender or delycate. Praemoneo, nui, nere, to forewarne. Praemonstrator, toris, he that tellethe or she∣weth a thynge before that it hapneth. Praemonstro, strare, to shewe before. Praemordeo, dere, to byte or rebuke before. Praemorior, riris, riri, to dye er the tyme come. Praemunio, iui, ire, to prepare, to fortify a place before that the ennemyes do come. Praenarro, rare, to telle before. Praenato, tare, to swymme afore. Praenestè, a citie in Italy. Praenestini, people of the cytie of Preneste in Italy. Praenestinus, a, um, of Preneste. Praenomen, the fyrst name, as Marcus, Quin∣tus, Lucius, and as we nowe haue the name at baptysme. Praenimis, too, too, farre to moche. Praenosco, noui, noscere, to knowe afore. Praenoto, tare, to make annotations or in∣scryptions. Praenuncio, are, to shewe afore. Praenuncius, the fyrst messanger, he that fyrste bryngeth tydynges. Praeoccupatio, a fygure in Rhetoricke, whan we wyll say that we wylle not telle a thynge, and yet therby couertely we wyll declare the matter, or make it suspected. Praeoccupo, pare, to take or posseede a thynge by preuencyon. Praeopto, tare, rather to desyre. Praeordinatio, the fyrste ordynaunce. Praeordinator, he that made the fyrst ordināce. Praeordino, are, to ordeyne afore. Praeparcus, ca, cum, very scarce or nygarde. Praeparo, are, to prepare, to make redy. Praepedimentum, a let before. Praepedio, diui, to lette moche. Praependo, dere, to hange afore. Praepes, praepetis, swyft, lyght in flyght. Praepetes aues, were the byrdes, whyche she∣wed them selues fyrst to the dyuinours called Augures, whereby they supposed to knowe what shulde ensue. Praepeto, tere, to begynne fyrste. Praepilatus, ta, tum, headded with yron, as a Iauelyn or darte, also sharpe afore lyke the head of a dart, though it hath none yron, as the hornes of a lopster, wherwith he swym∣meth. Praepinguis, very fatte. Praepondero, rare, to waye more, to be more worthe. Praepolleo, lere, to excede other. Praepono, sui, ponere, to put or set before. Praepositus, ta, tum, set or aduaunced aboue other, set in auctoritie. Praepositus, ti, he that is in auctoritie, or chiefe in any offyce. Praepotens, very puissaunt or mighty. Praepoto, tare, to drynke afore to drynge good lucke in drynkynge. Praeposterus, ra, rum, ouerthwart, out of order. Praeposteri homines, they that do that thing last, whyche they shulde haue done fyrst. Praeposteré fieri, to be done agaynste all good order. As whan the seruaunt commaundeth his mayster, the people their rulers, or a fole a wyse man. Praeproperus, ra, rum, very quycke or hasty. Praeputium, the skynne whyche couereth the head of a mans priuy member. Praerancidus, a, um, very vnsauery. Praeripio, pui, pere, to preuent, to catche. Praerideo, dere, to laughe before. Praerisor, oris, he that laugheth afore one. Praerodo, si, dere, to gnawe or eate very moch. Praerogo, gare, to employ or gyue afore. Praerogata beneficia, benefyttes afore em∣ployed. Praerogatiua, & praerogatiuum, a prerogatiue where one is preferred afore an other. Praerumpo, pere, to breake a sunder. Praeruptus, ta, tum, all to broken, it is some∣tyme taken, where a hyll is broken by the si∣des, and harde to go on. Praerupta loca, places broken here and there, that no man maye passe. Praes, praedis, he that vndertaketh for an o∣ther whiche hath bounden hym selfe for any thynge touchynge the comminaltie. Praesagium, & praesagatio, amonge the aun∣cient writers, a perceyuinge of a thynge be∣fore that it hapneth, somtyme a coniecture. Praesagio ire, to diuine or tell what shall happen. Praesagibat animus, frustra me ire cum exi∣ré domo, whan I went out of my house my harte gaue me that I shulde go in vayne. Nescio quid profecto mihi, animus praesagit mali, In good faythe my harte giueth me, that some yll shall happen I wote not what. Praesagus, a pronosticatour, or perceyuer of thynges er they happe. Praescientia, an vnderstandynge and perfytte knowlege of all that shall happen. Praescius, he that knoweth perfectly thynges er they happen. Praescio, scire, to knowe afore. Praescribo, psi, bere, to assigne, to note or inti¦tle, to put, to laye before, to tell before, to ap¦poynte
or determyne. Praescriptio, & praescriptum, a rule, a lawe, an order, a fourme. Praescriptum, a precepte, a fourme, a rule. Praeseco, care, to cutte before, sometyme to cut on sonder. Praesegmina, the paringes of a mans nayles. Praesens, tis, present. In praesentia, & in prae∣sentiarum, at this present tyme. Praesens animus, a stronge or good courage, also fauourable. Deum praesentem habet, he hath god fauourable vnto hym. Mihi tua domus te praesente absente pateat, let thy dores be open to me whether thou be at home or no, or lette me be welcome to thye house whether thou be there or abrode. Praesens Deus God gyueth to vs incontinēt that that we demaunde. Praesens medicina, the medicine that cureth forthewith. Praesentius, better. Praesentissimus, a, um, the best, the surest. Praesentissimum uenenum, the greatest and mooste feruent poyson: also stronge. Praesentissimum remedium the moste spedy or sure remedy. Prasentaneum argentum, money to be pay∣ed in hande. Praesentaneum remedium, a shorte or sodeyn remedye. Praesentia, presence. Praesentio, & praesentisco, cere, to fele or per∣ceyue before, to doubte of a thynge. Praesento, tare, to haue redy. Praesepe, & praesepium, & presepes, a stable, a stall, a shepehouse. Praesepio, pire, to hedge afore a thynge. Praesertim, specially. Praeseruatio, a preseruation. Praeseruare, to preserue. Praeses sidis, he that hath auctoritie in a pro∣uince nexte vnder the prynce, a lieuetenaunt or viceroy, somtyme it signifieth a defendour also sure. Locum praesidem, a sure place. Praesideo, dere, to be in more auctoritie, or of a more dignitie: also to haue auctoritie or rule. Praesideratio, tempest, whiche commeth at the begynnynge of wynter, soner than it is loked for, or is accustomed to happen. Praesidero, are, where tempeste commeth very sone, and before the tyme accustomed. Praesicco, care, to drye afore. Praesidiarius, a, um, that whiche is ordeyned to be ayde to an other thynge. Praesidium, a garrison of men with a capitayne set by the chiefe capitayne, to defende a for∣tresse. some tyme it is taken generally for all maner of ayde or defence: also for a fortifica¦tion of a thynge. Praesilio, silire, to lepe before, to sterte out. Praesisto, tere, to stande or be set afore. Praespeculor, ari, to loke afore. Praespicio, spexi, spicere, to see afore. Praestabilis, le, excellent. Praestabilius, better. Praestantia, excellency. Praestat, it is better. Praestans, tis, excellent. Praestanter, excellently. Praestega, a place open afore and couered be∣hynde lyke a porche, where men do sytte for recreation after theyr busynesse. Praester, a venymous serpente, of whome he that is stryken, dyeth for thyrste. Praestes, stitis, of the auncient wryters callyd a prelate. Praestigiator, toris, a iugglar. Praestigiae, thynges whyche do seme to be that, that they are not. Praestigium, a iugglynge caste, an inchaunte∣ment, a delusyon. Praestino, are, to prepare in byenge a thyng. Praestituo, ere, to determyn before, to prescribe or appoynt before, what shalbe done. Istam enim culpam, quam uereris, ego prae∣stabo, for the blame, whyche thou fearest, I wyll take vppon me. Praesto, stiti, stare, to be better than an nother thynge, wherwith it is comparyd, to excelle, also to vndertake, to warrante, sommetyme to graunt, also to do, to be benifyciall, to be∣ware, to eschewe, to feare, to do or perform, to gyue, to exhybyte, to represent or shewe, to lende, to assigne or appoynt, to do a thynge. Non modo facta sed etiam dicta omnia prae¦standa nobis sunt, we oughte to make aun∣swere not onely for our dedes, but also for all that we speke. Emptori damnum praestare, to recompence the byar for all his losses or damage. Praestare culpam, to take the charge of da∣mage vpon hym. Nihil est sapientis praestare nisi culpam, A wyse man shoulde take nothynge vppon hym but that whiche shall happen throughe his defaulte. Praestare fidem, to be faythfull Praestare fidem publicam, whan the consul or other great officer perfourmeth that whiche he promysed. Praestare nihil debeo, No man ought to laye that vnto me. Mussâlam Caesari praestabo, I wyll vnder∣take that Messala shall be Cesars frende. Praestat officium, to do his deuoyre. Praestare iusiurandum, to take an othe. Praestat, it were better, Prestat furi hic sus∣pendi
{que}, apud inferos ardere. It were better for a thefe to be hanged here, thanne to lye in the fyre of hell. Praesto, an aduerbe, redy, at hand. Praesto sis, helpe me. Praesto esse, to appiere, as men do in places of iudgementes, also to be redy to helpe. Praestolor, aris, ari, to tary, to be at hande, or redy to do seruice. Praestringo, xi, gere, to bynde faste, to shutte to dasell the eien, to touche quickely, or short¦ly, to shaue, to greue somewhat. Praestruo, struxi, struere, to ordeyne fyrste, to buylde. Praesul, lis, a prelate. Praesulatus, tus, the dignitie of a prelate. Praesulto, are, to leape or daunce afore. Praesultor, praesultoris, He that leadethe a daunce. Praesum, fui, praeesse, to be afore or aboue an other, to be of more dignitie, to be in aucto¦rytie. Praeesse negotio, to be chiefe in the busines. Praesumo, sumpsi, sumere, to take fyrste, to preuente. Praesumere animo, to coniecte. Praesumptio, a takynge or receyuynge before: it is also that, whiche is called preoccupati∣on, whan we declare firste what our aduer∣sarye wyll saye, or what is the iudges opyni∣on: and agaynste that we do argue, to dys∣solue it with reason. Praesuo, ere, to sowe afore. Praesurgo gere, to ryse afore or fyrste. Praetego, gere, to hyde or couer chiefly. Praetendo, ere, to laye for a thynge er it come: also to carye or beare afore, also to shewe or pretende, to allege, to set a thynge about for an inclosure. Praetendere auribus, to stop the eares. Praetendere retia, to lay nettes. Praetendere sepem, to make an hedge about Praetento, tare, to tempte or assaye afore. Praetenuis, e, very small. Praetenué, very sklenderly. Praeterduco, cere, to leade afore, to leade forth Praetergredior, di, to passe by, to go beyonde. Praeteritus, ta, tum, passed. Praeteriti, deade, departed, decessed, also they whiche in suynge for an offyce, dyd suffer re∣pulse, or were put backe. Praeter propter, for an other cause than that whiche is rehersed Praeter, excepte, also besyde, ouer and aboue, be¦fore. Praeter oculos, before the eyen, against or contrary. Praeter morem, agaynste the cu¦stome or fascion. Praeter spem, vnloked for. Praeter opinionem, other wise thā I thought Praeter caetera, more than the other. Praeter aequum, againste reason. Praeterbito, tare, to go by. Praeterea, moreouer, besyde, none els Mihi cre¦dis praeterea nemini, Thou beleuest me, and none els. also it signifieth afterwarde. Praetereo, iui, ire, to go ouer or passe, to leue out a thynge, whiche shoulde be spoken of, to passe ouer. Praeterire non potui quin & scriberem ad te I coulde not forbeare but that I must nedes write vnto you. Praeterijt me haec res, I had forgotten that matter. Et hoc te praeterit, non id solum spectare so lere. And doest not thou knowe, that not on∣ly the thynge is to be considered. Non me praeterit, I knowe well inoughe. Nos nobilitate Mago praeterijt. Mago was the beste borne of them all, or was of a great¦ter bloud than any of them Praeterfluere, is of a water to rūne by a place. Praetermitto, misi, mittere, to leaue vntouched to forget, to leaue out, to passe ouer a thyng, leauynge a thynge vndone or vnspoken. Praetermissio, forgettynge or leauynge oute of a thynge. Praeter quam, but onely, otherwyse than, more ouer, besyde. Praeter{quam} quod, but. Praeterueho, here, to cary throughe. Praeteruehere aliquid silentio, to leaue a thing vnspoken of. Praeteruerto, tere, to put one thynge, before an other, Cice. Si habes aliquid quod huic ser∣moni praeteruertendum putes, If ye haue any thynge, whiche ye thynke oughte to be spokē before that ye will speke of this matter Praeteruolo, are, to passe throughe quickely. Praetexo, ui, ere, to make or ordeyne firste, to couer or hyde, to speake colourably. raetexta, a longe garment mixte with purple silke, whiche was the vesture of noble mens sonnes, vntyll they came vnto .xvii. yeres of age, and therfore suche chyldren were called Praetextati, but they hadde also aboute theyr neckes, a lyttell rounde iewell of golde, faci∣oned lyke a harte, wherin was inclosed some thynge of great vertue. Praetexta, was also the robe of astate, whiche the kynge of Ro∣mayns, or the other chiefe officers did weare whan they sate in theyr maiestie. Praetexta comoedia, an enterlude, wherin at personages of highe dignitie. Praetextatus, ta, tum, dyshoneste, or vncleane in speche or actes. Festus taketh it in the con∣trary sence. Praetextati anni, youthe. Praetextata aetas, idem. Praetextati mores, honest conditions.
Praetextatus sermo, communication with∣out ribauldry. Praetextatus, he that dyd weare Praetextam. Praetextum, a pretence or colour. Praetiamitatores, officers whiche wente before the prelates called Flamines, proclayminge openlye, that all men shoulde ceasse of theyr warke, bycause it was not leful to those pre∣lates to beholde any man warkynge. Praetimeo, ere, to be sore aferde. Praetingo, gere, to touche afore. Praetondeo, to sheere or klyp, or rounde before Praetoritius, a, um, for Praetorius. Praetorium ius, lawe made by the Pretor. Praetor, tôris, in the olde tyme was euery offi∣cer whiche had the rule of any army. Asconi¦us. Afterwarde he had iuridicall auctoritie, beinge as it were the chiefe iudge, and had as it were other iudges sittinge vnder hym, wherof the full number in the citie of Rome was .lxxv. Cic. in Pisonem. But Asconius vpon the oration Pro Milone, sayth that the iudges appoynted were .lxxi. and after that as well the plaintife as the defendaunte had eche of them drawen out .v. there remayned but .li. Praetorianus, he that is attendant to him that is Pretor. Praetorium, the house or pauilion of hym that is Praetor. it is also a princes palaice or ma∣nour: it is sometyme the place, where iudge¦mentes are gyuen, sometyme the counsayle, whervnto Pretores are assembled. Praetorius, he that hath ben Praetor. Praetorius, a, um, belongynge to the office of Praetor. Praetura, the dignitie and ministration, of him that is Praetor. Praeualeo, lere, to preuayle, to be better or of more value. Praeualidus, da, dum, very stronge or mighty, sometime very great. Praeuaricatio, is a collusion: also it is where one toucheth a thynge lyghtely, whiche ought to be inculked with a more playne declaration, or elles repeted, as makynge moche to the purpose. Praeuaricor, aris, ari, to swarue frome truthe to go out of the right waye, to leaue vnsaide that, whiche shulde be spoken, to touche a thynge shortely in speakyng, to warke by col¦lusion, in suffringe his aduersary to opteyne, to hurte an other person. Praeuaricator, toris, he that leaueth the righte waye, or speake not that whiche ought to be spoken: also he that in speakyng for him self aydeth the cause of his aduersary, or doth a∣ny thynge by collusion. Praeueho, here, to brynge fyrste. Praeuelo, are, to couer or hyde afore. Praeuello, lere, to pull or plucke afore. Praeuenio, nire, to come before or preuente. Praeuentio, a preuention. Praeuideo, dere, to foresee, to beware. Praeuersus, a, um, that whiche is done or sped first, or before any other. Praeuerto, uertere, to sette more by, or to care more for. Nec me uxorē praeuortisse dicant, prae repub. Nor let them not say, that I set more by my wyfe, than by the weale publike Also to tourne or sette asyde. Ne{que} praeripio pulbamentum, ne{que} praeuorto poculum, Nor I take away thy meate, nor set or turne asyde thy drynke. Praeuertor, deponens, idem quod praeuerto, also to goo afore. Inde illico praeuertor do∣mum, from thens I wente home afore. also to be tourned forthe. Foreis enim clausit, ne praeuorteretur foras, he hath shytte faste the doore, leste he shulde be tourned forthe. Also to doo any thynge fyrste or before any other thynge. Praeuorti hoc certum est rebus alijs omnibus, Surely this shal be done before a∣ny other thynge. Praeuertere serio, to tourne it to ernest. Si quid dictum est per iocum, non aequum est id te serio praeuortier. If any thynge be spoken in iape, it is not reason to tourne it to erneste. Praeuerti pigritiae, to be takē with slouth. Ca¦ue pigritiae praeuortier, beware that thou be not taken with slouthe. Praeuertere aliquem prae republica, to sette more by one than by the weale publyke. Praeuerti rebus omnibus, to be more sette by than any other thynge, or to be fyrste done. Mandatis rebus praeuerti uolo, I wyll fyrst do that whiche I am commaunded. Nec aliam rem praeuerti censebat, Nor he wolde that any thynge shulde be done before that. Praeuertere animum alicuius, to opteyn ones fauour before any other man. Praeuertere serio, quod dictum est ioco, To take a thing ernestly that was spoken in iape Illud praeuertamur, let vs fyrste speake ther∣of or we come to the matter. Iusiurandi relligionem amori praeuertere. To esteme the othe more than the loue. Praeuersum fulgur, lyghtnyng whiche is not knowen, whether it be by daye or by nyghte. Praeuius, he that goeth before, or leadeth the waye. Praeustus, ta, tum, burned at the sore ende. Praeuolo, are, to flee before. Pragmaticus, a practiser in the lawe. Pragma, in Greke, is in latine negociatio, an acte or busynesse: also an exercise of mar∣chaundise.
Pragmatica sanctio, a determination of pra¦ctisians of the lawe. Prandeo, prandi, & pransus sum, prandere, to dine. Prandiculum, a brekefaste. Prandiolum, a lyttell dyner. Prandium, a dinar. Pransito, tare, to dine or eate often. Pransor, oris, he that is at diner, or he that is boden to dyner. Prasinus, na, num, greene like leekes. Prasius, a grene stone. Prasoides, a stone of the coloure of leekes. Prassium, an herbe called horehounde, Rede Marrubium. Pratensis, se, of the medowes. Pratense foenum, medowe haye. Pratulum, a lyttell medowe. Pratum, medowe. Praué, shrewedly, naughtly, vnhappely, ouer∣thwartly. Prauitas, shrewdenesse, vnhappynesse, ouer∣thwartnesse. Prauus, a, um, croked, shrewde. Praxiteles, an excellent caruar in stone. Precarius, a, um, that whiche is borowed, at the wyll of the lender, that whiche is occupi∣ed, at an other mannes pleasure. Precario, by desyre at another wans wyll. Preces, prayer. Precium, pryce, value. Preciosus, a, um, deere, preciouse. Precor, aris, ari, to praye. Prehendo, prehendi, dere, to take. Et manum prehendi, & osculum detuli tibi, I toke you by the hande, and also gaue you a kysse. Praehenso, uel prenso, are, to solicite or labour men to giue theyr voyces, to some man. Prelum, a presse, suche as printours haue. Premo, pressi, premere, to presse: sometyme to vexe, to dygge, to prese on, to thruste, to destroye, to thruste downe, to constrayne, to restrayne. Premere dolorem, to hyde heuynesse or so∣rowe. Premit alto corde dolorem, he hidde his sorowe in the secrete parte of his harte. Premere, to driue or put out. Premere, to shyt or close. Presi{que} oculos, ac vulnera laui, I closed his eyes, and wasshed his woundes. Premere, to cut awaye. Et ruris opaci, false premes umbram, and with a syth thou shalt cut away the shadowe of the darke fieldes. Premere, to treade downe. Veluti qui sentibus anguem, pressit humi nitens, lyke as he, whi¦che thrasting his fote to the grund, treadeth down the snake, that lieth in the brembles. Premere testimonio, to connicte a manne by witnesse. Prendo, loke Praehendo, Presa porca, a swyne whiche was offered in sa¦crifice to Ceres, in satisfaction for a hoole householde, for as moche as a parte of that sacrifice was made in the presēce of the corps whiche than was to be buried. Pressatus, ta, tum, oppressed, charged troden downe. Presbiter, biteri, an auncient, or father in ye∣res or dignitie. it is vsed for a prieste. Presso, are, to presse or thruste together. Pressus, ssa, ssum, subtylle, compacte, heuye, pressed. Pressura, oppression. Pressus, ssus, & pressura, pressynge, also op∣pression. Presse, in a fewe wordes, briefly. Prester, a venemouse worme called also Dipsas Pretiosus, a, um, preciouse, deere, of greatte estimation. Pretiosior, pretiosius, more preciouse or deere. Pretium, the pryce or value, also the rewarde: sometyme peryll or daunger. Pretio emptas meo, bought with my peryll or daunger. Pri, of olde tyme was vsed for Prae. Priamus, the noble kynge of Troye, whose hi∣story is to no man vnknowen. Priapismus, a sickenesse, wherin the priuy mem¦ber of a man alwaye standeth, withoute ha∣uynge any appetite to lechery. Priapus, an ydole, vnto whom the Painimes, committed theyr gardeynes to kepe. Pridem, late, sometime longe agone. Pridianus, a, um, that whiche is done the daye before. Pridiani cibi, meates dressed the daye before. Pridie, the daye before. Primaeuus, a, um, the elder. Primarius, a, um, chiefe. Primas, atis, in chiefe auctoritie, amonge the people. Primanus Tribunus, he that assigned trybute to the fyrste legion. Prima lux, the sprynge of daye. Prima uespera, the euenynge. Primae,  chiefe prayses. Cui primae sine cō∣trouersia deferebantur, to whome the chiefe prayses were giuen without any controursy. Primas tenere, to haue the preeminence, to be chiefe, to holde the better parte. Primas dare, to esteme aboue other. Primâtus, the chiefe auctoritie. Primitus, fyrste. Primetium, sacrifice of the eares of corne, whi¦che were first gathered after that they were reped. Primores, the toppes of any thynge. Digitulis primoribus, with the fyngar toppes.
Labris primoribus, with the fore parte of the lyppes. Primoribus labris gustare, to touche a thing scantely, to smatter of a thynge, and not to knowe it substanciallye or perfitely. Primicerius, chiefe ruler. Primigenus, gena, genum, fyrste borne or growen. Primigenius, a, um, that commeth naturallye of it selfe, and is vnmyxte. Primigenia, the title of the eldest chylde in in∣heritaunce. Primipara, she that hath her fyrste chylde. Primipes, he that in battayle fyghteth fyrste with a sworde, and after chaungynge his fourme of fyghtyng, vseth a Iauelin or dart. Primipilaris, is he that fighteth next to the stā¦darde. it is moste properly the capitayne of a company in the fowewarde. Primitium, the principall or chiefe. Primipilus, a Capitayne of a companye in the forewarde or vauntgarde, whiche had vnder hym foure hundred souldiours. Primiter, & primitus, fyrste. Primitiae, the firste fruites. Primitius, a, um, the fyrste or soremoste. Primitiuus, a, um, that whiche hath none o∣ther begynnynge. Primesius, a stake, wherto a cabell or rope of a shyppe is tyed. Primò, an aduerbe sygnifieth fyrste. Primodum, for Primo. Primogenia uerba, wordes whiche be not di¦riued from any other. Primogentius, ta, tum, fyrste begotten. Primordium, the fyrste begynnynge. Primores, the fyrste, the chiefe. Primores uiri aut foeminae, Noble men or women, or gentil men and gentyll women. Primulus, the diminutiue of primus. Primulum, forthwith. Primum, an aduerbe, whiche signifyeth fyrste er euer, at the begynninge. Primus, a, um, fyrste, beste, the chiefe. Primo quoque tempore, at the fyrste tyme. Prima qua{que} occasione, at the fyrste occasy∣on that shall happen. Primula uaeris, some do suppose it to be daysy∣es. Ruellius supposeth it to be a kynde of Verbascum. Princeps, cipis, a prynce, the fyrste or chyefe. Principalis, le, principall, also perteyninge to a prince. Principaliter, principally. Principatus, the soueraignetie. Principiò an aduerbe, fyrste, or at the be∣ginninge, Principia, the place in a Campe, where as are pighte the pauilions of the head capitaynes, but the more proper signifycation therof is, that it is the second ward in battayle, where in olde tyme were the prynces and noble men Also it was taken for the order of raye of no∣ble men. Principior, piari, to begynne. Principor, pari, to rule. Principium, the begynnynge. Prior, the firste, prius. Priora tempora, the olde tyme. Priscus, a, um, aunciente, or of the olde time. Pristinus, na, num, that whiche was many ye∣res passed. Sometyme it signifieth the first, aunciente. Pristis, a fyshe, of wonderfull length, and sclen∣der, whiche cutteth the wawes, as he swym¦meth. Priuatus, he that is in none auctorite or dignite Priuatus, ta, tum, that is properlye a mannes owne, that whiche perteyneth to one man or fewe, also particular. Sometyme it signify∣eth depriued. Priuatim, & priuatè, priuyly, aparte. Priuernum, a towne in Campania. Priuignus, na, the chylde by an other husband, or other wyfe, whiche is dead, son or dough∣ter in lawe to the husbande or wife. Priuilegium, a lawe concernynge priuate per∣sonnes, also a priuate or speciall lawe. Priuo, are, to take awaye, to depriue. Prius, an aduerbe, signifieth before. Priusquam, before that. Priuus, ua, uum, priuate, singular, euery mans owne or proper. Pro, for before. Pro rostris, at the bar or place of pleadynge. Pro tribunali, in the place of iudgement. also after or accordynge. Pro Pla¦onis sententia, accordynge to the sentence of Plato. Pro opere, in the warke, Pro meri∣to, accordynge to his deseruynge. Pro curia, before the courte. Pro uirili, to my power. Pro comperto, for a suertie. Pro explorato. idem. Pro indiuiso, without diuision. Pro nihilo ducere, to set naught by. Pro ridiculo putare aliquem, to laugh at one and make hym a foole. Nemo satis pro merito gratiam Regi refert No man dothe thanke the kynge, accordyng to his merites. Pro opibus nostris, according to our power. Pro mea consuetudine, accordynge to my custome. Pro spe nihil contigit, no thynge hapned ac∣cordynge as men hoped. Pro uirili parte, to my power or his power. Pro rata parte, accordinge to his rate or portion. Consilium pro tempore et pro re capere.
to take counsayle accordyng as the tyme and matter required. Pro horum temporum perturbatione, con∣siderynge this troublouse tyme. Pro mea authoritate uideor posse, men think that I maye do it hauynge regarde to myne auctoritie. Pro re nata, accordynge to the affayres that do happen. Pro meo iure dico, I tell you franckely. Pro meo iure, by myne auctoritie. Pro suo iure agere omnia, to do all thynges at his own pleasure or by his owne auctorite Pro caetera diligentia, accordynge to the di∣ligence wherto he hath ben accustomed. Excubare pro templis, to watche in the tem¦ple or churche. Laudati pro contione, praysed before all the people, or at a great assembly. Pro suggestu, in the pulpyt. Pro aede Iouis, before the temple of Iupiter. Pro se quis{que}, euery man to his pòwer. Pro testimonio dicere, to beare witnesse. Maior {quam} pro numero hominum editur pu∣gna, the battayle was greater than one wold haue thought shuld haue ben of that number of personnes. Pro eo ac debui grauiter moleste{que} tuli. I toke it greuousely, euen as I had cause. Prô sancte Iupiter, O blessed Iupiter. Prô deum at{que} hominum fidē, O the faithe of god and man. Proauus, my great graundfather. Proauia, my great grandame. Probabile, that whiche maye be proued. Probatica piscina, a ponde, where sheepe are washed. Probatio, a proufe. Probatus, ta, tum, proued. Probé, honestly, well, wysely, ioyned with an nowne adiectine, it sinifieth Valde. Probiter, idem. Probus, a vertuouse man, a good man. Probitas, goodnes. Problema, tis, a sentence purposed, hauyng a demaunde therto annexed. Probo, are, to proue, to prayse, to approue, to assaye, to shewe by reason, or example that a thynge is good. Probare se, to declare hym selfe an honest mā Tuo ex ingenio alienos mores probas. thou estemeste other men to be like the, or to be accordynge to thy condicions. Probabiliter. Illa cur e ueniant quis probabi∣liter dixerit. Howe that mought be who can tell by any reason. Probalitas, an apparaunce of trouthe. Proboisis, dis, a longe snowte, as an Oly∣phant or swyne hath. Probro, are, to reproche or rebuke. Probrosus, a, um, reprochefull. Probrum, a reprochefull acte. also a reproche or rebuke, an infamie. Procax, procacis, malaperte in askynge, or de¦syringe, shamelesse, wanton in crauynge, yll tounged. Procacitas, malapertnes, or wantonnes in as∣kynge or crauynge. Procare, to wowe, to craue, to be importunate Procapis, a progenie, whiche commeth of one heade. Procaciter, malapertely, wantonlye, without shame. Procalo, are, to call one to. Procatum, & procitum, voyde, or of none effecte. Procedo, cessi, cedere, to go forthe, to pre∣cede, to prosper. Procede tu huc, come forthe. Procedere, to go from his house with great pompe. Procedere obuiam, to go to met with one. Procedite in medium, go forthe. Procedere in philosophia, to profyte in phi∣losophy. Processit aetate, he is nowe olde. Processit eo insolentiae, he is woxen so wanton. Eo ira processit, the anger so inereaced. Totidem dies procedent emptori, the byar shall haue so many dayes profyte. Nihil procedit, the thing came not forward. Processus. Scripsit se in graecis literis magnū processum habere. He wrate that he had mo¦che profyted in greeke. Proci Penelopes, was a name gyuen to them whiche in wanton pastimes do consume both their owne goodes and also other mennes. Procella, a storme. Proceleumaticus, a fote in meter of foure fete shorte. Procello, ere, to streke, to tourne vp so down. Procellosus, a, um, stormye. Procensu, the company or felowshyp of yonge men in the citie, as we behold in London the Bachelers together, whan the Mayre taketh his othe. Proceres, the heade men of a towne. Procêrus, a, um, longe, talle. Proceritas, lengthe, talnesse. Proceriter, an aduerbe, which signifieth long, or of lengthe. Proceritus, rita, tum, incensed or prouoked with an yll spirite, madde or woode. Proceriti lapides, vengeable. Pro certó, surely. Procet, for prouocet, lette hym prouoke, lette hym appeale.
Processus, us, processe or successe. Procestrium, a galerye to go from one chaum∣ber to an other. also the ouermoste parte of the walles within the imbattilmentes, wher men may go: some do call it a trenche before the campe, in defence therof from artillery. Prochyta, an Ile in the sea, in the gulfe or rode of Puteolis, a citie in Campania. Procidentia, whan any thynge falleth oute of his place. Procidentia ani, whan the bone of the foun∣dement appereth out. Procido, dere, to fall downe prostrate. Procieo, ere, to prouoke or call from far of Procinctus, tus, the prouision before that any thynge is done also the state of an army whā they be redy to gyue battayle. Procingo, xi, gere, to prepare, to make redy. Procinctus, ta, tum, redy, prepared. Procincta classis, a nauye prepared redye to fyghte. Procino, cinui, nere, to pronounce in singinge to singe out. Procio, ciui, ire, to aske. Procito, rare, to prouoke. Proclamo, are, to crie out, to proclayme. Procliuè, redily, easily in doinge. Procliuis, ne, redy to fall, inclyned. Also redye or easy to be done. Procliuitas, tatis, inclynation to euyll, facilite. Procliuiter, easely. Proclus, a noble philosopher of the secte of Plato. Proco, & procor, ari, to aske malapertly. also to dalye with wanton language, to eye or be∣holde a woman wantonly. Proconsul, lis, he that was sent with an extra ordinarie power of Consull in to a prouynce of the Romaynes. Proconsularis, re, perteyning to the Procōsul. Procrastinatio, a delaye. Procrastino, nare, to prolonge the tyme, to deferre. Procreo, are, to begette chylderne. Procreatus, ta, tum, begotten. Procubitor, toris, he that kepeth watche and warde without the campe. Procubo, bare, to watche. Procudo, dere, to strike or beate a thynge, to make it lesse or thynner. Procul, farre of, from farre. Procul urbem, far from the citie. Procul muros, far from the walles. Proculco, care, to treade downe. Proculdubio, out of doubte, doubtlesse. Proculeio, ere, to extende, to promyse. Proculiunt, olde wryters vsed for promittunt, they promyse. Proculus, he that is borne whan his father is farre out of the countrey. Procumbo, cubui, cumbere, to lye flat or pro∣strate, to come narowe together. Procuro, rare, to do or solicite an other mans businesse, to increase diligentely, to helpe or susteyne, or succour. Procurare Prouinciam, to gouerne and rule the countrey. Procuratorius, ia, um, perteyninge to a pro∣ctour or factour. Procurare prodigia, to vse certayne ceremo∣nies and sacrifice, to the intent that thynges monstruouse shulde not take any yll effecte. Procurator, toris, a proctour or factour. Procuratio, ministration of thynges concer∣ninge an other man. Procurro, rere, to runne farre, or beyonde. Procuruus, ua, um, very croked. Procursatores, fore ridars in battayle. Procus, a wower, to haue a woman in mary∣age, but moste properly where there be two, whiche woweth euery one for him selfe. Procyon, a sterre called the dogsterre, whiche appereth in the canicular dayes. Prodeambulo, are, to walke forthe. Prodeo, diui, uel dii, to goo forthe or oute of a house, to come before one. Prodire in aciem, to fyghte in the vaugarde of an hoste. Prodire obuiam, to go against one, or to go to mete with one, whiche is commynge. Prodire in publicum, to go abrode, to go in the stretes. Prodigium, a thynge seldome seene, whiche si∣gnifieth, that some thynge shall happen very good or very yll, as blasynge sterres, fyres, or figures in the fyrmamente, thynges mon∣struouse or agaynste nature. Prodigiosa precia, vnreasonable pryces. Prodigo, digere, to lashe out money in vayne, or in thynges not necessary, sometyme to sy∣gnifie some strange thynge to happen. Prodico, dixi, dicere, to speake more or prate. Quamobrem excutiemus omnes istorum delitias, omnes ineptias, si prodixerint. Wherfore we wyll set forthe al these mennes pleasures and fantasyes, if they wyll prate any more. Prodigalitas, prodigalitye, or outragiouse ex∣penses. Prodige, excessiuelye, outragiousely, prody∣gally, wastefully. Prodigialis, digiale, that whiche perteynethe to the procuryng of strange tokens or signes Prodigiator, he that by straunge tokens or si∣gnes, telleth before what shall afterwarde happen. Prodigiosus, sa, sum, that whiche make the straunge signes or tokens.
Prodigitas, prodigalitie. Prodigus, prodigall, wastefull, an outragious expender. Prodimentum, a treason or betrayenge. Prodinunt, for prodiunt, vsed of Ennius, to issue or come forthe. Prodius, further in. Proditio, treason. Proditor, toris, a traytour. Prodo, didi, dere, to put of. Tibi nos prodimus ac confitemur te cistel∣lam habere. Thus we say and confesse vnto the, that thou hast the casket. Prodere conscios, to appeche his felowes. Prodere dogma, to disclose the secretes. Prodidisti et te, et illam miseram, et gnatū, Thou haste deceyued thy selfe, and also the poore woman and thy sonne. Antequam arcem proderent hostibus, be∣fore that they had rendred vp the castelle to theyr ennemies. Prodere posteris, to leaue to them that come after vs. Prodere patriam, to betraye his owne countreye. Prodere exemplum, to punishe men to the example of other. Prodere fidem, to falsefy his faythe, to doo contrary to his allegiaunce, or his solempne promyse. Prodere legem, to frustrate the intente of the lawe. Prodere officiū, to do contrary to his duete. Prodere gloriam et laudem posteris, to leue after hym example of prayse and renoume. Prodere uitam, to put his lyfe in ieoperdy. Prodere interregem, to name hym that shall be in that rome. Prodere, to put in writynge. Prodere uitam, to put his life in daunger. Prodidit memoria, it is written. Vt quidam poetae prodiderunt, as some poe∣tes haue written. Prodius, betrayed or deceyued. Prodromus, he that runneth before, as a lac∣key, or he that bryngeth ridinges of ones co∣mynge. Prodromi, be also sterres in heauen, the whiche do rise in the Northe easte .viii. dayes afore the canicular dayes. Produco, duxi, ducere, to prolonge, to brynge forthe, to consume or spende. Producere ali∣quem falsa spe, to hold or kepe one in a foo∣les paradyse, to put forwarde: also to folow Productilis, le, that whiche is made out at length with beatynge. Producere, to set forthe to hyre. Audientem di¦cto mater produxisti filiam. Thou being hir mother, and she beinge obediente vnto the, thou hast set her to hire. Producere filios, to beget chyldren. Productio, the makynge of a thynge longe. Productè, an aduerbe, signifieth longe. Productus, ta, tum, made longe or set out at lengthe, also brought or put out. Proaedifico, care, to buylde. Proaedificatum, that whiche beinge a priuate place, is made commune or publyke. Profanatum templum, the churche suspen∣ded, where any horrible cryme is therin com¦mytted. Profano, are, to conuerte thynges beinge ha∣lowed to a temporall vse. Profanum facere, idem. Profanus, na, num, that whiche is not halo∣wed, temporall, men vnlerned, and that doo hate lerned men. Also that whiche is ioyned or annexed vnto the temple. Profari, to pronounce, to speake abrode. Profectio, a passage or settynge forth toward a viage, a departinge from the place, where a man is. Profectò, in very dede, for sothe. Profectus sum, the pretertence of proficiscor, I wente. Profectus, tus profyte. Profectum facere, to profyte or goo forthe, properly in study and lernynge. Profero, tuli, ferre, to brynge forthe, to showe forthe, to pronounce, to inlarge, or dilate, or make greatter, to prolonge. Proferre dolum, to put a disceyt in experience. Proferre gradum, to aduaunce him selfe forwarde. Professio, an open confession, an open redinge or lecture. Professor, oris, a reder in open scholes. Profesti dies, warkedayes. Proficio, ficere, to profyte, to procede. Proficiscor, cisci, to go and to come, to depart from a place. Profiteor, to promyse openly, to tell frankelye or boldly. Also to tell or declare, how moch a man hath of money, cattell, corne, or any o∣ther thynge. Also to speake or auaunte. Also to discouer or confesse a thynge. also to rede openly a lesson. Proflare, to dryue downe with a blaste. Profligo, gare, to ouerthrowe, to dryue away to bringe to destruction, to put to flyght. Profligatus, ta, tū, ouerthrowen, driuen away put to flyghte, dystroyed. sometyme it signi∣fyeth finished, brought to a poynte. Profligati homines, men that haue in folye wasted theyr substaunce. Profligo, gis, gere, to striue moche. Proflubeo, ui, ere, to runne out. Profluens, tis, a riuer, beinge a participle, it signifieth flowynge.
Profluo, xi, ere, to rounne oute of a thynge, to runne from farre. Profluuium, a flyxe or laske. Profluus, a, um, that whyche floweth. Profore, to profyte. Quae nocere sequar, fu∣giam quae profore credam, That whyche hath done harme wyll I folowe, and eschewe wyll I those thynges whyche I beleue shulde profyte me. Profugio, gere, to flye farre. Profugium, a place wherto a manne flyeth for succour, also a thynge, wherevnto one resor∣teth for succour. Profugus, he that goth farre out of his owne countreye. Profunditas, depenesse. Profundo, fudi, fundere, to poore out largely, to spende excedyngly. Profundere palmites, is of a vyne, whanne she sendethe forthe a greatte noumber of braunches. Profundere clamorem, to crye out as loude as one may. Profundere in aliquem, to doo to one all the pleasure that lyeth in his power. Profundere uires animi at{que} ingenij, to em∣ploy all his power and wytte in bryngynge a thynge to passe. Profundere uitam pro patria, to spende his lyfe in defence of his countrey. Profunda auaritia, insaciable auaryce. Profun∣da cupido, insaciable couetyse. Profunda li∣bido, insacyable lechery. Profundus, da, dum, depe, sometyme hygh. Profusus, excedynge lyberall. Profusae epulae, excessiue bankettynges. Progener, ri, the housbande of my doughters doughter, or sonnes doughter. Progemmare, to bourgen. Progenies, progeny, succession in bloudde. Progigno, nere, to get a chylde. Prognare, openly. Prognariter, hardyly. Prognatus, ta, tum, borne. Prognosis, prescience, or knowlege afore that a thynge happeneth. Prognosticon, a pronostycation. Progredior, gressus sum, gredi, to goo forthe or before. Progressus, sa, sum, passed ouer. Progressus, us, a marchynge forthe, or passyng forthe. Progressio, idem. Progymnasma, an assay or profe in exercyse. Prohibeo, bi, bêre, to prohibyte, to forbyd, to tourne away. Prohibête a uobis uim meam, take hede that I do you not dyspleasure. Prohibête aditum matris à filij sanguine, tourne or lette ye the mother that she slea not her sonne. Prohibere potione, to kepe one from drynk. Prohibere itinere, to stoppe hym of his way. Proiecta, the ouer partes of a house, whiche do leaue outwarde from the nether part, as they be nowe in some townes towarde the stretes: some men do call them garrettes. Proiectare aliquem probris, to rebuke one. Proiectitius, a, um, a chylde cast forth and nou∣ryshed of a straunger. Proiectura, a penthowse to conuey rayne from the walles. Proiectus, ta, tum, throwen or caste ont afarre. Proiecta audatia, foole hardynesse. Proiectus puer, a chylde whiche is layde a∣brode in the strete, no man knowyng who is the father or mother. Proiectus ad audendum, foolehardy. Proijcio, ieci, ijcere, to throwe or caste, to sette forth, to leaue, to extend or holde out a thing at length. Proin, therfore. Proinde, therfore, wherfore, lyke as. Prolabor, beris, bi, to slyde or slyppe forth. Prolabi timore, to fall downe for feare. Prolabi longius, to wander farre of. Prolabi in misericordiam, to becom merciful Prolabi cupiditate, to be abused by his coue∣tousnesse. Prolapsa huc libido, his wylfulnesse is come to this. Prolambo, bere, to lycke. Prolatio, an extendynge forthe. also pronoun∣cynge, or pronunciation, somtyme bryngyng forthe or shewynge of a thynge. Prolatare, to deferre or put of, vntylle a lon∣ger tyme. Prolatus, ta, tum, set forthe, brought forthe. Prolectare, to prouoke pleasantly. Prolectibilis, le, that whiche tyckleth or plea∣santly mouyth one. Prolepsis, a fygure in speakyng, where we doo preuente, to dissolue by reason that, which we thynke to be in the opinion of our aduersary, or of the iudge. Proles, issue or fruite of a mannes body. also of a beaste. Proletarij, amonge the Romaynes were they, which for pouertie were not able to go to the warres, and therfore they were lefte at home to get chylderne. Prolibo, are, to tast, or to sacrifice afore. Prolicio, prolixi, prolicere, to induce or drawe. Eius amor cupidam huc me per tenebras prolicit, The loue of hym hathe drawen me hyther in the darke, beynge desyrous of his companye. Prolixè, lyberally, abundantly, at length.
Prolixo, prolixare, to make a thynge sharpe in lengthe. Quare magnopere mouendus pu∣rator est, ut prolixet aciē ferramenti, & quan tum possit, nouaculae similem reddat, wher¦fore the cutter of the vyne oughte to be war∣ned, that he make sharpe in lengthe the poynt of the instrument, and as moche as he maye, that he make it lyke to a raser. Prolixus, a, um, longe, large, sommetyme su∣perfluouse. Prolixitas, & prolixitudo, length, largenes. Prolocutio, the fyrste speche or fyrst entree into communication. Prologium, idem. Prologus, a prologue. Prolongo, are, to prolonge, to deferre. Proloquium, the begynnynge of an oration or sentence. Proloquor, queris, qui, to speake at lengthe, to tell a longe tale. Also to speake before, to speke that whyche we thynke, to declare our opy∣nyon. Proludo, dere, to flourysshe, as musytians do, before they come to the principal matter, and as fence men doo with the sworde, or the two handstaffe. Prolugeo, xi, gêre, to mourne longer than hath ben accustomed. Proluo, ere, to wasshe moche, to drowne or surrounde. Proluuies, the fylthe or ordur, whyche is wa∣shed of any thynge. Proluuium, idem. Also prodygalitie. Promellere, to promote or sette forthe suyte in the lawe. Promercalia, thynges set forthe to be sold, spe∣cially that whyche is solde by retayle. Promercale aurum, golde solde in suche wyse, that besydes the iuste value, soo moche golde remayneth to the sellar, as may serue to his proper vse, as oure nobles and royalles solde beyonde the sea, at a greatter price than they be valued at here in this realme. Promercor, caris, cari, to bye thynges good cheape, to the intent to sell them dere, to bye at the fyrste hande, to sell them at retayle. Promereo, rui, rere, to deserue, to do pleasure or seruyce to one. Promereor, reri, idem. Also to bynd one by his actes to do for hym▪ also to helpe, to profyte. Promereri de aliquo, to do a mā a good turn. Promerens, tis, he that dothe pleasure or ser∣uyce. Promerenti optime, hoccine praetij redditur, He that hath done verye good ser∣uyce, shall he haue this rewarde for his labour? Promeritum, desert, pleasure or seruyce done. Promeneruat, olde wryters vsed for monet, he exhorteth or warneth. Prometheus, the sonne of Iapetus, he fyrst in∣uented the makyng of ymages, wherfore the paynymes supposed that he made men. And fayned, that he wente vp into heuen, & there dyd steale fyre to make his ymage haue lyfe, wherwith Iupiter being wroth, caused him to be bounden on the hylle callyd Caucasus, and an egle standynge by hym, eatynge his harte, by the whych is sygnified that he was studyous and a great astronomer. Promico, are, to extende or set out at length. Prominenter, at length. Prominentia, the extendynge or settynge oute at length. Promineo, nui, nere, to appere farre of. Promiscā, olde wryters dyd vse for promiscuè. Promisceo, cui, cére, to myngle togyther. Promiscuè, one with an other, myxte. Promiscuus, scua, scuum, confused, myngled one with an nother. Promiscuam operam dare, one to do for an nother. Promissa barba, a longe bearde. Promissè, longe, in length. Promissio, a promyse. Promissor, he that promyseth. Promissum, a promyse. Promitto, misi, mittere, to promyse, to let grow in length, also to threten. Promo, prompsi, mere, to speake out, to tel, to take out of a coffer, or other lyke thyng. Promontorium, a mountayne or high place of a lande or countrey, whyche lyeth as it were an elbowe into the sea warde. Promoueo, uêre, to aduaunce or profyte, to in∣large, sometyme to go backe or deferre. Promptarius, a, um, that frō whens any thing is brought or taken. Promptaria cella, a pryson from whens men be brought to be whypped or hanged. Promptarium, & promptuarium, a storchous. Promptè, promptly, redyly. Promptior, more prompte or redy. Promptitudo, promptnesse. Prompto, tare, to brynge often forth. Promptus, ta, tum, prompte, redy to do a thing without taryenge. also redy. Promptum in∣genium, a redy wytte. Res est in promptu, The thynge is redy also manyfest. In prom∣ptu res est, The thynge is manyfest. Manu promptus, redy to stryke. Promptus ingenio, quycke spyrited or ha∣uynge a lyuely wytte. Nec promptū est dicere, it is not easy to tel. Promulco nauis agitur, the shyppe is drawen with a bote. Promulgator, & promulgatrix, he or she that dothe publyshe a thynge. Promulgo, are, to publyshe.
Promulgatio, a publycation. Promulsis, idis, Mede, made with water and hony. Promurale, a countermure, one wall withoute an nother. Promus, he that hath the kepynge of the store house or drye larder. Pronepos, potis, & proneptis, my sonnes or daughters sonne or daughter. Pronè, redyly. Pronis, olde wryters vsed for prona, prosteate or on the grounde. Pronomen, a pronowne. Pronuba, she that attendeth on the bryde, and is housewyfe durynge the feast. Pronubo, psi, bere, to haue a rule in weddyn∣ges or ioynynge of couples. Pronubus, he that leadeth the bryde hoome to her husbandes house, and hath the surueyeng of the howse, durynge the tyme of the solem∣nysation. Pronubus, he that dothe celebrate the solemni∣tie in mariage, it maye be nowe taken for the priest, whiche dothe mynyster the solempne wordes of matrymonye. Pronunciatio, a pronunciation or vtteraunce of speeche Pronuntiatum, a statute. Pronuntio, are, to pronounce, to declare open∣ly, to gyue sentence, to say. Pronuper, longe agoone. Pronurus, the wyfe of my sonnes sonne, or daughters sonne. Pronus, redye, inclyned, stowpynge downe, nygh hande. Pronus ad meridiem locus, the place lyeth towarde the southe. Prooemium, a proheme or begynnynge of a mattier. Propago, gare, to spreade as a tree doth on the toppe, to make to spreade, to sende farre of. Propagatio, a spreadynge. Propages, a longe rewe. Propago, ginis, an olde vyne spredde in many braunches. Sometyme it sygnyfyeth kynde or generation. Propalam, openly, clerely in the syghte of all menne. Propalo, lare, to tell abrode, to grow in length Propatruus, my great grandfathers brother. Propatulum, wyde open. Propè, nygh, almoste. Propè diem, nowe euery day, shortly. Propello, propuli, pellere, to dryue or putte a∣way, farre of. Propemodum, almoste. Propendêre, to hange vp. Also to examyne or consyder farre of. Propensus, inclyned. Propenso aīo facere, to do it with a good wyll. Propensior in neutram partem, indyfferent. Properê, quyckely, hastily. Properatim, quyckely. Properanter, & properiter, idem. Properantia, & properatio, an approchyng. Properitas, the same amonge olde writers. Properus, a, um, quycke, sodayne. Propero, rare; to go quyckely or hastily, to saye or do any thynge quyckely or hastily. Propertro, trare, to commaunde that a thynge be doone. Próphasis, an excuse. Prophetis, & prophetissa, a woman prophet. Propheto, tare, to prophesye, to synge prayses to god: sometyme it sygnifieth to preache or interprete. Propheta, a prophete, he that telleth thynges, whiche shall happen. Prophetia, a prophecye. Propilo, are, to make sharpe before. Propina, a place by the cōmune baynes, where after baynynge men toke theyr refection. Propino, nare, to drynke to an nother man, to quafte, to brynge to, sometyme to gyue. Propino tibi salutem, I salutethe. Propinator, a cupbearer. Propinquus, a neyghbour. Alsoo a kynsman, of alyaunce. Propinquitas, assynitie, alyaunce. Propinque, nygh. Propinquior, quius, nerer. Propitiabilis, le, that whiche is soone bowed or inclyned to desyres. Propitialis, idem. Propitiatio, sacrifyce to appease or pacyfy god∣dis displeasure. Propitium, sometyme sygnifieth very deuoute or louynge. Propitius, content, not dyspleased or angry. Propitij, peasyble men, or men soone appeased or satisfied. Propius, nerrer, or nerre. Proplastice, ces, the craft to make mouldes, in the which any thynge is cast or fourmed. Propingeon, the place in a bain or hot hous, in the which fire inclosed, sendeth forth heate. Propitiatorium, a table sette on the arke of the olde testament. Propitio, & propitior, ari, to appease, or to make mercyfull, or fauourable. Propitius, a, ū, appeased, fauorable, mercyfull. Propior, nerer. Propoma, a drynk made with hony and wyne. Propola, he that selleth any thynge at retayle, specially vyttayle, a hukster. Propolis, a subburbes of a towne. It is alsoo that whiche bees do make at the entrie of the hyue, whereby colde and other annoyaunce
is defended. Propono, proposui, ponere, to purpose, to be aduysed, to promyse a pryce or rewarde for a∣ny notable acte, to sette out to the shewe. Propontis, a sea betwene Grece and Asie. Proportio, a proporcyon. Propositio, a matter pourposed to be dysputed or reasoned. It is also that, wherby we shew generally, whereof we wyll speake. Propositum, a purpose. Propraetor, toris, he that was in the steede of Praetor, or mayre. Popriè, proprely, partycularly. Propritim, idem. Proprietarius, a, um, whervnto the propertye of a thynge belongeth. Proprietas, propertie. Proprius, propria, prium, propre, or particuler. Culpa mea propria, in myne owne defaut. sometyme it sygnifyeth perpetuall. Voluptates deorum propriae sunt, The ple∣sures of the goddes be perpetuall. Propter, for. Sometyme nygh also at or in. Propterea, therfore. Proptosis, a dysese where the eyen meued with inflamation, do fall out of theyr places Propudium, shame, dishonestie. Also the moste abhomynable vse of lecherye, in an inconue∣nyent fourme. Propugnaculum, a fortresse, a stronge holde. Propugnator, toris, a defendour. Propugno, are, to fyght farre of, to fyghte va∣lyantly, to defende. Propulsator, he that resysteth a thynge, or dry∣ueth any thynge away. Propulso, are, to put of, to dryue away. Propylaeum, a porche. Proquaestor, toris, he that exercyseth the office of Quaestor in his absence. Prora, the forepart of a shyppe. Prorepo, prorepsi, prorepere, to crepe further. Prorêta, he that hath the rule of the forshyppe or decke. Prorideo, ridere, to laughe afarre of. Proripio, pui, pere, to withdrawe or departe, ioyned with me or se, Domum se ex curia proripuit, He departed or withdrewe hym homewarde from the court. Prorito, tare, to prouoke. Prorogatio, a prolongynge or delayenge. Prorogo, gare, to prosonge. Prorsus, & prorsum, vtterly, alway, ī any wise, streyght towarde a place, surely. Prorsi, lymyttes in boundynge of landes dyre∣cted into the east. Prorumpo, rupi, rumpere, to breake forthe, to sende forthe with vyolence, to leape or go out of a place with vyolence, to brast out. Proruo, ruere, to dryue downe, or beat downe. Prosa, prose, that whiche is not meter. Prosapia, a progenye, a dyscente of bloudde, a petygree. Proscenia, the place wherein enterludes were played by the personages. Proscindo, scidi, scindere, to cut out or vnder, to infame, to rebuke shamefully. Proscribo, scripsi, scribere, to sell openly, to pro∣clayme any thynge to be solde, to banysshe, to condemne. Proscribere, is properly to cause by ordinance to be proclaymed, that who soo euer fyndeth one, he may lefully slea hym, and haue a re∣warde for his labour. Proscriptus, he that is so proclaymed. Proscriptio, that maner of condemnation, also an attaynder. Proscripturio, ire, to ymagyne a proscription. Proseco, are, to cut a sunder. Prosecta, bowels cut in sacrifice. Proseda, a strumpet or common harlot. Prosedanum, a dysease, whyche happeneth to rammes at blysomynge tyme. Proselytus, a stranger borne, conuerted to our fourme of lyuynge. Prosemino, are, to sowe forthe. Prosequium, an affection. Prosequor, qui, to folowe after, to pursue. Prosequor amore, I loue. Prosequor odio. I hate. Prosequor honore, I honoure. Pro∣sequor uerbis, I chafe hym with wordes. Prosequor officijs, I shewe to hym greatte kyndenesse, I do hym many pleasures. Pro∣sequi praemio, to rewarde. Prosequi dicto improbum uerbum alicuius, to rebuke sharpelye one for speakynge dysho∣nestly. Proserpere, to creape of slyde forthe lyke a serpente. Proserpi na the wyfe of Pluto, doughter to Iupyter and Ceres, she is taken sommetyme for the moone. Proserpinaca, an herbe callid also Polygonon. reade there. Proseuche, a prayer to god, also a beggyng. Proseucha, a beggar. Prosferari, to be opteyned. Prosicium, that whyche is cutte of frome any thynge, and caste away. Prosilio, lij, to leape forthe. Prosocer, ceri, the father of my wyues father. Prositum, olde wryters vsed for propositum, purposed. Prosodia, the crafte of accentyng. Prosonomasia, the lykenesse of oone worde or name to an nother: as locus and lucus, ora∣tor, and arator. Prosopis, the clote leafe or great burre. Prosopopoeia, where as personnages are sup∣posed
or fayned to speake, as one manne to an nother, a manne to a beast, one beast to an other &c. Prospectus, tus, a syght farre of, a prospecte. Prospectè, aduysedly. Prospecto, spectare, to beholde, properlye farre of. Prosperè, prosperousely. Prosperiter, idem. Prosperitas, prosperitie. Prospica, & Prospicus, he that beholdethea thynge farre of. Prospices, for prospice, beholde. Prospiro, are, to fetche breath or wynde. Prosper, & prosperus, prosperi, prospero, that whiche gyueth felicitie. Felix, he that recey∣ueth it. Prospicientia, prouidence, circumspection. Prospitio, spexi, spicere, to se farre, to foresee to prouide, to beware. Prospicuus, circumspecte. Prostasis, preemynence. Prosthesis, an addition of a letter, as gnatus, for natus. Prosterno, straui, sternere, to ouerthrowe, or to vanquyshe in battayle. Prostibulum, a commune brothelhouse, also a commune harlotte. Prostibula, idem. Prostituo, tuere, to be a commune harlot. Suam pudicitiam prostituere, to abandone her chastitie to any man that wyll companye with her. Prostituere pudicitiam, to be commune to all men or women in the acte of lechery. Prosto, stare, to stande farre of, or afore, also to stande to be solde or hyred. Prosubigo, gere, to dygge deepe. Prosum, fui, desse, to be profytable. Prosumia, a lyttell barke. Prosumirium, a place withoute the walles of Rome, where the byshoppes of the gentyles made their diuinations, or toke their signi∣fications of thynges to come. Prosupero, are, to exceede, or haue more than ynough. Protasis, a proposition. Protego, texi, tegere, to defende. Protectio, a defence. Protector, toris, a defendour. Protentus, ta, tum, stretched out. Protelo, lare, to deferre or tracte the tyme, to put out, to dryue away, to vexe. Protendo, dere, to sette forth, or put forthe, to stretche forthe. Protenus, a great way hens. Protero, triui, teere, to treade downe. Protermino, to incroche. Proterreo, rere, to make aferde farre of. Proteruia, wantonnesse, it was also a sacrifice, wherin the maner was, that as moch as was left vneaten, shoulde be consumed with fyre, wherof came the prouerbe next folowynge. ❀Proteruiam fecit, he hath consumed al that is lefte. Proteruio, ire, to play the wanton. Proteruè, proudely, immoderately, shamefully. Quis est, qui tam proteruè, foribus facit in∣iuriam, Who is he, that so proudely rappeth at the doore? Ecce autem tu quo{que} proter∣ue iracundus es, Lo and thou also art shame∣fully angry. Proteruiter, idem. Proteruitas, tatis, pryde, foly. Proteruus, he that is so proude and fierse, that nowe he stryketh and beateth down an other and treadeth hym vnder his feete. also lewde or knauyshe and malapert. Protesilâus, duke of the citie called Phylax in Thessalia, who went with other to the siege of Troy. And whan there was answere gy∣uen to the Troyanes, that who fyrste toke lande in the countray of Troy shuld be slayn. Protesilaus with a valiaunt courage, arri∣ued before any other, and was slayne by He∣ctor, whose wyfe wepte soo moche for hym, that she alsoo dyed, and wold neuer be com∣forted. Proteus, the sonne of Oceanus and Tethys callyd of the Paynymes a god of the sea, whome Homerus nameth to be the herdman of the fysshes callyd Phocae, and also a pro∣phete, not withstandynge he wolde not giue aunswere, but beynge constrayned by Vlys∣ses, he alsoo tourned hym selfe into sundrye fygures, sommetyme beynge lyke a flame of fyre, sometyme lyke a bulle, an nother tyme lyke to a terryble serpente. Homerus O∣dyss. Vergilius Georg. 4. In veray deede he was kynge of Egipt in the tyme of Pri∣amus kynge of Troy. Of hym camme this prouerbe. Proteo mutabilior, More chaun∣geable than Proteus, applyed to hym, whi∣che in his actes or wordes is vnstable. Protestor, staris, stari, to declare manifestely, what shulde be exchued and not done. Protestator, he that manifestly declareth what is to be exchued and not done. Protestatio, a protestation. Protina, for protinus, forthwith. Protinus, a farre of. also forthwith, without taryenge. Prothymia, promptitude, also gentyl entertain¦mente. Proh Di immortales quot ego o∣luptates fero, quot risiones, quot iocos, quot suauia, saltationes, blanditias, prothy∣mias? O lorde god, howe manye pleasures haue I, what lawghinges, what pastymes, what bassinges, daunsynges, dalyaunces, & sweete entertaynementes.
Prothyrum, a porch at the vtter dore of a hous Protipon opus, an ymage or fourme, whereof mouldes are made, in the whyche thynges be cast of mettall or erthe. Protocollum, that whyche is fyrste made or wryten, whych requyreth correction. Protogenes, of the fyrst kynred or famylye, it was also the name of an excellent paynter. Protogenia, the daughter of Deucalyon and Pirrha. Protogenus, the fyrst chylde. Protologia, a preface. Protollo, lere, to prolonge. Protomartyr, the fyrst martyr. Protomedicus, the chyefe physytion aboute a prince. Protomysta, the chiefe priest or deane. Protonatorius, a protonotary, or chiefe sccrybe or Secretary. Protopages▪ & protopagus, fyrste made or wrought, or late made. Protoplastes, & protoplastus, fyrste fourmed, so was Adam callyd. Protos, proton, fyrste. Prototocos, a woman late bryngynge forthe her fyrst chylde. Prototomus, the stalke whyche is fyrst cutte. Prototypus, & prototypon, the fyrst example, or paterne. Protraho, traxi, trahere, to differre or prolong. Protrepticus, a boke to instruct one, a doctrinal Protrimenta, meate mynced smalle. Prouectus, ta, tum, promoted. Prouectus ad dignitatem, promoted or ad∣uaunced to honour. Prouectum ingenium, a long proued wytte. Prouectus, aged. Prouectus aetate, aged, runne farre in yeres. Proueho, uexi, uehere, to bring or cary further. also to promote, aduaunce. Prouenio, ire, to come forthe, also to growe, or increase, to happen or chaunce. Nimis prouē∣tū est nequiter, It is vngraciously chaunced. Prouentus, tus, reuenues, yerely profytes. Prouerbè, dylygently. Prouerbium, a prouerbe. Prouidè, cyrcumspectly. Prouidens, dentis, foreseinge, prouident. Prouidentia, prouydence, foresyght, sometyme it is vsed for god. Prouidentior, prouidentissimus, more prouy∣dent, moste prouident or circumspect. Prouideo, dere, to prouyde, to foresee, to be∣ware. Prouidus, prouydent, cyrcumspect. Prouinciae, were countrayes, whyche the Ro∣mayns gatte farre from Rome, where onely theyr offycers dydde rule. Prouincia, is some tyme taken for the rule or auctoritie of an of∣fycer, also an offyce, also for a countray or re∣alme. also charge. Prouinciam suscipere, to take charge of a thynge. Prouinciam coepisti duram, thou haste taken a matter vppon the harde to bryng about. Prouincialis, he that dwelleth in a prouynce. Prouinciatim, from countray to countraye, or one countray with an other. Prouiso, sere, to see or beholde, to go to see. Prouocator, he that prouoketh one, or he that appealeth, the appellant. Prouocatio, an appeale to an hygher courte. Prouoco, care, to calle from a farre, to stere, to inuite, to prouoke, to exhorte also to appeale to an hygher iudge, to defye one in battayle. De Caesare transactum est ne{que} iam prouo∣cari in integrum potest, As touchynge Cesar that is at a poynte, nor it can in any wyse be callyd agayne, or that whiche is doone, can not be vndone. Prouolo, are, to flye awaye, or beyonde, also to runne from aferre. Prouoluo, uere, to rolle or tumble a great stone or other lyke thynge. sometyme to lye downe prostrate. Prout, for Sicut, as. Prox, of old writers was taken for proba uox, a good voyce or noyse. Proxeneta, a brokar. Proxime, next. Proximi, for proximo, Die proximi, the next day. Proximitas, nyghenesse, neyghbourhead. Proximior, more nere. Proximo, are, to approche or drawe nygh. Proximurium, a place without the walles, ioy∣nyng to the citie, where bishops dyd assemble in their conuocation. Proximus, a, um, nexte. Prouulgo, aui, are, to publishe, or declare open∣ly to the people. Prudens, prudentis, wyse, prudent, knowyng, experte. Prudenter, wysely. Prudentia, wysedome in desyrynge and esche∣wynge of thynges. Prugnum, old wryters vsed for pronum, prone or apte. Pruina, froste. Pruinosus, a, um, frostye. Pruna, a bournynge cole. Prunella, an herbe callyd commonly Brunella, burnette. Prunellus, the tree whyche bearythe wylde sloes. Prunetum, an orchyarde sette with damsyn trees, or plumme trees. Prunioli, smalle musherons.
Prunus, a damsyn tree or plumme tree. Prunum, a damsyn, prune, plum, slo, or bullase. Prurio, rij, rire, to ytche. Pruritus, tus, ytchynge. Prurigo, ginis, ytchynge with a delectation, as in the sterynge of lechery. Prusias, a kyng of Bythinia, vnto whom Han∣nyball fled, after that he was banyshed from Carthage. Prymnesius, a poste or stake, whervnto the ca∣bull of a shyppe is tyed. Prymnos, a nymph or mayden of the sea, one of the doughters of Oceanus. Prytaneia, a counsayle assemblyd of great offi∣cers and iudges. Prytaneium, a counsayle howse. Prytanis, the president or chief of the counsell. ¶P ANTE S. PSallo, li, lere, to synge. Psalmodia, a dyuerse or myxt songe. Psalmus, a songe proprelye to god, or of God. Psalterium, an instrument lyke to a harpe, also the Psalmes callyd the Psalter. Psaltes, a syngynge man. Psaltrix, tricis, & psaltria, a syngynge woman. Psecas, adis, a droppe. Psegma, the poulder or duste, whych commeth of the fylynge of brasse. Psellus, the name of an olde wryter, whyche wrote of dyete. Psephisma, atis, a decree. Psephopecta, an auditour or caster of accōpte. Pseudoadelphus, a counterfayte brother. Pseudoangelus, a false messager. Pseudolus, a false seruant. Pseudomartyr, a false wytnesse. Pseudopropheta, a false prophete. Pseudothyrum, a false posterne. Pseudo, faulse or counterfayt, and euery other nowne ioyned therwith, is therby made false or counterfayte, as Pseudopropheta, a false or counterfayte prophete. Psilotrum, an oyntment to take away heares. Psimmithium, that whyche we do calle Ceruse or whyte leade. Psitta, a fyshe whyche we call a playce. Psittacus, a popyniay. Psycolutres, he that delyteth to bathe in colde water. Psycomantium, a place where Nigromancers do calle vp spirytes. Psora, scab bydnesse. Psora, an herbe, whyche Ruellius doubteth whyther it be that whyche we cōmonly calle Scabiose, but that hath a long leafe, and be∣ynge broken on sunder hath in the breakynge lyttell thredes lyke to a copwebbe, and hath a fayre blewe flowre. it groweth commonlye in drye medowes. Psylli, people in Lybia, whose bodyes are ve∣nym to serpentes, and they also doo cure the styngynge and poysonnynge of serpentes by suckynge the place whyche is venymed. Psyllium, an herbe callyd also Pulicaris herba. ¶P ANTE T. PTE, a syllable ioyned oftentymes to the ablatiue case, as meapte, tuapte, suap∣te, myne own, thyne owne, his owne. Pterigium, a lyttelle skynne, whyche groweth frome the corner of the eye, and keuereth the syght: it is also a griefe vnder the foreparte of the nayle, whan the fleshe gothe from the nayle with peyne. Pteris, ferne. Pteromata, great arches ouer the roofes made lyke wynges. Pterna, the lower part of a sayle. Plithia, a parte of Thessalia where Achylles raygned. Prisana, the water, wherin barly is sodden, al∣so barley husked, or excorticate, also frumenty made of barley. Ptisanarium, a morter, wherin barley is brayd. Ptocotrophia, an hospytal for beggars, a spit∣tell howse. Ptolomeus, the name of dyuers kynges of Egypte. Ptosis, ruyne, also the case of a nowne. Ptolemais, maidis, the name of a citie in Phoe∣nicia, fyrst callyd Acha. Ptyas, adis, an adder hauyng the colour grene, drawyng towarde the colour of golde. Ptynge, a rauenous byrde, whiche taketh his pray by nyght, and sometyme fyghteth with the Egle soo valyantly, that in crabbyng to∣gyther, they fall bothe downe to the ground, and are taken by shepardes. Ptysis; is spettyll, it is alsoo an exulceration or soore in the lungues, with a consumption of all the body, and spettyng of bloudde. ¶P ANTE V. PVbens, he that is betweene a yonge man and a boye, of the age of .xiiii. yeres. Pubesco, scere, to growe as a chyld dothe toward mans state. it is also of herbis & trees Pubeo, es, & pubesco, ere, to begynne to haue a bearde benethe, sometyme to sprynge, as herbes done. Puber, beris, & Pubes, beris, a yonge mosye boarde, whiche spryngeth in the nether par∣tes of a man at fourtene yeres of aege, of a womanne at yonger yeres. Wherfore a man or womanne at those yeeres is callyd Pubes.
sometyme youthe, or a multytude of yonge men: also the priuy partes of the body. also be¦yng an adiectiue, it signifieth yong or tender. Pubertas, the yonge aege of men and women, whan they begyn to be apte vnto generation. it is also the fyrst commynge forthe of heares about the priuy members. Publicani, were they, whyche toke in ferme of the people of Rome the rentes and reuenues due to the citie at a rent certayne. Publicanus, a fermour. Publice, & publicitus, openly in the face of the worlde Sumptus publice dati, his expences borne of the citie or towne. Publice redimere, to bye it of the commune treasoure. Publice bona possidêre, to haue goodes con∣fyscate or forfayted. Publice uenire, to come before al the worlde. Publice dicere, to make an oration before the people. Publice propter duas causas nihil scripsi, for two causes I wrate neyther to the senate, nor to the people. Quae prohiberi publicitus interest, The whi¦che it shall be expedient for the people that it be forbodē, or it is the peples part to forbede. Publicola, a fauourer of the people, the which name was gyuen to Valerius, whyche was one of the fyrste consules of Rome. Publico, care, to publyshe, to manyfest, to make openly knowen. also idem quod edere, to a∣bandon in commune as harlottes done, some tyme to confyscate. Publicus, ca, cum, commune, but more proprely, publyke, that is to say, pertaynynge to eue∣ry state of the people ioyntely and seuerally. See the true definition thereof in my booke callyd the Gouernour. Publicum consilium, the commune counsayl. Carêre publico, not to come abrode, or amōg people. Publica sacra, sacrifyce done for the people. Publica fides, a saulfe conducte, a generall lycence. Publipor, poris, Publius boye, or seruant. Publius, the name of a Roman, as Marcus is. Pucinum uinum, wyne growynge nyghe to the gulfe of Venyce. Pudefio, fis, fieri, to be ashamed. Pudenda, the pryuy membres. Pudendus, a, um, a thynge to be ashamed of. Pudens, tis, shamefaste. Pudenter, with shamefastnes, bashefully. Pudeo, dui, dere, to be ashamed. Pudet, pudebat, puduit, puditum est, to be as∣shamed. Pudibundè, shamefastly. Pudibundus, da, dum, shamefast. Pudicè, chastely, honestly. Pudicitia, chastitie, cleannesse of lyuynge. Pudicitiam habere, to be vyolated in the acte of lechery. Puditum, ashamed. Nonne esset puditū, si hanc causam agerent seuere? Hadde it not bene a shame yf that they had pursewed that matter rigorousely? Pudicus, ca, cum, chaste. Pudor, doris, a moderatiō that lettith the mind that it do not any thyng wātonly, or dishonest¦ly, shamefastnesse, to saye or doo any thynge dyshonest. Puella, a wenche. Puellaris, re, chyldyshe. Puellascere, to wax yong ageyn, to be maidēly. Puellus, a lytell chylde, a babe. Puer, a chylde, a boy. also a seruant. Puera, a woman chylde, callyd in Cambrydge shyre, a modder. Puerilis, puerile, of a chylde, chyldysshe, or boyisshe. Puerilitas, a chyldes act, childyshnes, boyishnes Pueritia, chyldehode. Puerulus, an infant. Puerpera, a woman that lyeth in of chylde. Puerperium, the tyme of a woman to trauayle of chyld, somtyme the chyld, also the byrthe. Pugil, a champyon. Pugillaris, & pugillare, phiraliter Pugillares, a payre of tables to wryte in. Pugillatorius follis, a balle fylled onely with wynde, whyche is stryken with a mans fyste, and not with the palme. Pugiunculus, a short dagger. Pugillatus, wrastlynge with colars. Pugillus, a handfull, in gatheryng of herbes or other lyke thynge. Pugio, onis, a dagger. Pugna, battayle, the acte of lecherye. alsoo an assaulte, a dysceyte. Pugnaciter, valyantly in battayle. Pugnator, toris, a fyghter. Pugnax, acis, a great fyghter. Pugnatior, & pugnacissimus, more or mooste fyghtynge. Pugnicula, a skyrmyshe. Pugnitariola, idem. Pugnitus, in battayle. Pugno, are, to fyghte, sometyme to repougne, to stryue. Pugnus, a fyste. Pulcher, chra, chrum, fayre, stronge, good, tall. Pulcherrime, moste beautyfully. Pucherrimus, a, um, fayrest. Pulchralis, le, fayre. Pulchrè, an aduerbe, sygnifyeth fayre, beauty∣fully, welle fauouredly, sometyme valyantly. alsoo wysely. sometyme it is put for ualde.
Ac dum accubabam, quam uidebar mihi es∣se pulchrè sobrius, and whanne I layde me downe, I thought my selfe to be very sober. Pulchellus, a fayre lyttell one. Pulchellus puer, a fayre lyttell boye. Pulchrior, oris, & Pulchrius, fayrer. Pulchritas, beautie. Pulchresco, scere, to be fayre. Pulchritudo, dinis, beaultie, talnesse of per∣sonage. Pulegium, an herbe wherof there is male and female, the male hathe purple floures: the female whyte, it is taken for commune peny∣royall but Hermolaus Barbarus doubtethe whether Pulegium be penyroyall or a kynde of Calamint. Manardus writeth that there is no diuersite betwene our Pulegium, from the other hauynge in it the same qualities. Theophrastus and Plini{us} do write that the braunches therof hanged vp in the larder, in the depe of wynter, do brynge forthe floures whiche also nowe mought be easely proued. also beinge drounke with mellicrate, that is to saye honye and water boyled to gether, it purgeth melancoly excedyngely. Pulex, licis, a flea. Pulicinus, a, um, of a flea. Pulicosus, a, um, full of fleas. Pullarius, the keper of chykens. Pullarus, a wesyll or Stote, whiche kyllethe chyckens. Pullaster, a yonge chycken. Pullatio, hatchynge of chyckens. Pullatus, a mourner. Somtyme a man in pore apparayle, somtyme rude, vnlerned. Pullesco, scere, to sprynge or burgen. Pullicenus, a newe hatched chycken. Pullicies, a bryngynge forthe or hatchynge of chyckens, also the folynge of coltes. Pulligo, ginis, blackenesse Pullinus, na, num, of a colte. Pullini dentes, coltes tethe, whiche be fyrste caste. Pullulatio, a spryngynge forthe of a thynge in growynge. Pullulasco, scere, to bourgen. Pullulo, lare, to sprynge, to come vp yonge. Pullus, yonge, tender, in all kynde liuinge, also a colte or fole, also a chycken. Pullus, a, um, russet, sometyme blacke, but ra¦ther puke color, betwene russet and blacke. Pulmentarium, potage made with fleshe or fyshe, as forced gruell, or coleyse. Pulmentum, gruell. Pulmo, the lunges or lyghtes. Pulmonarius, he that is disesed in the lunges. Pulmonaria, an herbe called Lung worte. Pulmonia, be certayne apples, which be called in some place a hundred shyllinges. Pulpa, the woode of all trees whiche maye be diuided by stringes, it is also taken for car∣nositie or fleshy partes somtyme for the softe matter whiche is inclosed in an harde shell, as pulpa cassiae fistulae, for the inner parte therof whiche is called also Medulla. Pulpamentum, a delycate dyshe or meate. Pulpitum, a hault place or pulpyte. Puls, a meate made of meale, water, honye, cheese and egges. It maye be taken for potage. Puliatiles uenae, the poulses of a man or womanne. Pulsatus, ta, tum, stryken as a harpe or other instrument is, whiche hath stringes. Pulsim, as a thynge were striken. Pulso, are, to beate, to stryke, to hurt, to play on a harpe, or other lyke instrument. Pulsare hostium, to knocke at the dore. Pulsus, the wrest of the arme, wherto the hand is ioyned: but it is more properly the poulse or stroke that the arteryes or beating veynes do make, wherby the strength or debilitie of the sickenes is knowen in touchynge them. Pultarius, a potage dyshe. Pulto, rare, to beate at a dore. Pulticula, a lyttell potage. Pultiphagi, & pultiphagonides, great eaters of potage. Puluero, rare, to laye with douste, to de dusty. Pulueresco, scere, to be tourned in to poulder or duste. Puluerius, a, um, of poulder or duste. Puluerulentus, ta, tum, full of duste. Pulueratio, a layenge of fyne erth about vines. Puluinar, a bolstar of a bedde. also a bed whi∣che was wonte to be made in temples, as it were for the goddes. It is taken sometyme for a temple, also a tabernacle, wherin an y∣mage standeth. Puluinatus, ta, tum, softe as a pyllowe. Puluinus, a pyllowe, sometyme a fetherbed, al∣so a cushyn, also a bedde of herbes in a gar∣deyne, also grauel, also an engyne, wherwith shyppes are brought into the docke. Puluis, ueris, powlder, duste. Puluisculus, fyne pouder or duste. Pumex, micis, a pomeyse to make parchement smothe, also to take cleane oute spottes or letters. Pumico, care, to pomeyse. Pumicosus, a, um, lyke a pomeyse. Pumigatio, pomeysynge or polyshynge. Pumigatus, ta, tum, pomaysed, or polyshed. Pumilis, lyttell in stature. Pumilio, onis, & pumillus, a dwarfe, or any thynge lyttell in stature. Punctim, foynynge. Punctus, seu punctum, a poynte or title. Punctus temporis, a moment, the least part
of tyme, Pungo, pupugi, pungere, to prycke. Punicus, a, um, of Affrica. Bellum punicum, the warre that Romaynes had with Carthaginensis. Punicum malum, a pomegranate. Punicus, aut puniceus color, redde. Punio, iui, ire, to punishe. Punitio, punishement. Pupa, a yonge wenche, a gyrle, a modder, it is also a poppette, lyke a gyrle. Pupilla, the ball or apple of the eie. Pupillaris aetas, the noneage of hym that is in warde. Pupillus, he that is in warde, or within age, not able in yeres to occupie his proper lande. also he that hath no father alyue. Puppes, & puppis, the foreparte or decke of the shyppe. Pupus, a yonge chylde, a baby, also a poppet, or ymage like a chylde. Pupugi, the pretertence of pungo, I haue prie¦ked or punched. Pure, purely. Puriter, idem. Purgamen, seu purgamentum, filthe whiche commeth of any thynge that is clensed. Purgatio, a purgation or purgynge. Purgo, gare, to make cleane, to purge. also to excuse. Purifico, to purifie, or make pure. Purificatio, a purifyenge. Purime, olde writers vsed for purissime, most purely. Puritas, tatis, purenesse, cleannesse. Puro, rare, to make pure. Purpura, a purple, whiche is a shel fishe, wher∣of purple colour commeth. somtyme it signy∣fyeth a garment of purple. Purpurarius, a, um, perteyuynge to purple coloure. Purpurasco, scere, to be of purple colour. Purpurissum, idem quod purpurissa. Purpureus, a, um, of purple colour. Purpuratus, apparayled in purple. Purpurati, be the noble men of a realme called Peeres. Purpurissa, red payntyng, wherwith harlottes do paynte theyr visages. Purpurisso, are, to paynte the visage ruddy. Purulentus, ta, tū, full of matter or corruption Purus, ra, rum, cleane, pure, fyne. Pus, puris, matter, whiche commeth out of a soore. Pusillanimis, faynt harted, feble couraged. Pusillanimitas, faynt courage, cowardyse. Pusillanimiter, cowardely. Pusillus, a, um, lyttell. Pusio, a boye. Pustula, a pushe or lyttell wheale. Pusulae, blystars, which do ryse on bread whan it is baken. Pusum, & pusam, olde wrytars vsed for Pue∣rum & Puellam. a boye and a gyrle. Pustulatum argentum, roughe syluer whan it is newe molten. Putamen, minis, the shall of a nutte, or paring of an apple or peare. Puteal, the seate of a gret officer, also the cou¦rynge of a well. Putealis, & puteanus, a, um, of a pyt or well. Puteana aqua, well water. Putearius, he that diggeth a pytte or well. Puteo, tui, têre, to stynke. Puteoli, a citie in Capania. Puteus, a well. Puticuli, places where the commune people was buryed. Putidus, da, dum, stynkynge, vnsauerye, vn∣pleasaunte. Putilatum aurum, pure or fyne golde. Putisco, scere, to stinke. Putitius, a foole. Puto, taui, tare, to cut of or plucke away, that whiche is superfluouse, properly from trees. also to suppose, to consider, to discusse, to ga¦ther, or conferre, to esteme, to iuge. Putare rationem, to make accompte, or to take ac∣compte. Rem ipsam putasti, thou hast saide trouthe. Rationem secum putare, to consyder & way the matter. Putor, toris, stenche. Putrefacio, to make to stynke. Putreo, triui, trere, to waxe leaue, to be resol∣ued into stinkinge matter. Putresco, scere, to putrifie. Putris, tre, corrupte, rotten. Putridus, da, dum, idem. Putredo, dinis, corruption. Putulentum, stynkynge. Putus, ta, tum, pure, tried, fyne. Purm putum, fyned. ¶P ANTE Y. PYCNOSTYLON, a house or place buylded, where pyllars stande thycke together. Pycta, & Pyctes, a wrastler with a coler. Pyctatium, a table, wherin the names of Iu∣ges were wrytten. Pygargus, a beaste lyke to a falowe dere: it is also a byrde lyke to a hauke, hauyng a white tayle, I suppose hym to be that, whiche we call a ringetayle. Pygmachia, wrastlynge with colars. Pygmachus, a wrastler. Pygmaei, people betwene Iude and Cathay.
whiche are but one cubyte longe. Pympleides, the musis. Pyr, fyre. Pyra, a bonfyre, wherin deade bodies were burned. Pyralis, a flye, whiche commethe of the fyre, and as longe as he is therin, he lyueth: and whan he is farre from it, he dieth incōtinent. Pyragmon, one of the names of Vulcanus. it was also one of the gyauntes called Cyclo∣pes, who is also called Acmonides. Pyrama a certayne rosen. Pyramus, a yonge man, whiche slewe him self for the loue of a mayden called Thisbe: it is also a riuer in Cilicia. Pyramis, midis, a great thynge of stone or o∣ther matter, whiche is brode beneth, and vp¦warde is small and sharpe on the top. Pyratium, a kynde of sider, called Pery. Pyrausta, a worme lyuinge in the fyre, It is al∣so a kynde of spyders, whiche hurteth hony combes. Pyrenei montes, mountaynes, whiche do dy∣uyde Fraunce from Spayne. Pyretrū, & pyretra, an herbe called Pelitory. Pyrethi, certayne inchantours in Cappadota. Pyrethia septa, places inclosed whiche had in the myddell of them an aultar on the whiche was kepte fyre continually bournynge. Pyretus, a burnynge feuer. Pyraeus, an hauen at Athenes. Pyrgitis, the herbe called hartes tunge. Pyrgobaris, a house buylded lyke a tower. Pyrgoteles, was a cunninge grauer in stones. Pyrgus, in latyne a tower: also a boxe, out of the whiche men doo caste dyse, whanne they playe: it is also a certayne company of horse men in battayle. Pyriasis, a certayne playster to asswage the bur¦nynge of a feuer. Pyrim, a littell kernell. Pyrites, euery stone, out of the whiche fyre maye be stryken. Pyrobola, a smythes hammer, wherewith he beateth on hot yron. Pyroboli, arrowes or dartes whiche sende forthe fyre, whan they be shotte or caste, and do burne the thynge that they do touche. Pyrobolarij, they whiche do shote such dartes. Pyrocorax, a crowe with a redde byll. I sup∣pose it to be of the kynde, wherof cornyshe chowghes are. Pyrodes, he that fyrst strake fyre out of a flint also a stone of fyry colour. Pyromantia, a dyuination by fyre. Pyrrhica, uel Pyrrhiches, was a certain furme of daunsyng and was the fyrst exercise to the warres of the Lacedemonians, whiche they beganne whan they were but fyue yeres olde Pyrrhiadae, was the auncient name of the peo∣ple called Molossi. Pyrrhichistae, uel Pyrrhicharij, they that do ex¦ercyse the sayde daunce called Pyrrhica. Pyrrhichius, a foote in meter of two shorte syllables. Pyrrhus, in latine Flauius, siue Rufus, he that hath a ruddye or fyry visage, by the whiche name the sonne of Achylles was called, and a kynge of Epyre was so called, whiche dydde make warre to the Romaynes. Pyrum, a peare. Pyrus, a peare tree. Pythagoras, a man of excellente wytte, borne in an yle called Samos, whiche beinge sub∣dued by Polycrates the tyraunt. Pythago∣ras forsoke his countrey and wente in to E∣gypt and Babilonia, to lerne misticall scien∣ces, and afterwarde came into Italy, where he continued the residue of his lyfe. He was the fyrste that named hym selfe a philosopher where before men of great lernynge were cal¦led wyse men: and bycause he wolde exchue the note of arrogance, whan one demanded of hym what he was, he sayde Philosophus whiche signifyeth a louer of wysedome. He was in sharpnesse of wytte passynge al other and founde the subtyll conclusions and miste¦ries of Arthemetike Musike and geometrye. Plato wondereth at his wysedome: his do∣ctrine was dyuine, and commodyouse, the whiche he teachynge to other, inioyned them to kepe silence fyue yeres and here hym dily∣gentely, er they demaunded of hym any que∣stion. He neuer wolde do sacrifice with any bloude, he wolde eate nothynge that had life and lyued in a meruaylouse abstinence, and continence, and was in such auctorite among his disciples, that whan in dispucions they maynteyned theyr opinion, if one demāded of thē why it shuld be as they spake, they wold aunswere onely Ipse dixit, He sayde so, mea¦nynge Pythagoras, whiche aunswere was reputed as sufficient as if it had ben proued with an ineuitable reason, so moche in esty∣mation was he for his approued trouth and incomparable lernynge. He was noted to be experte in magike, and therfore it is written of hym, that nyghe to the citie of Tarentum he behelde an oxe bytynge the toppes of bea∣nes there growynge and treadynge it downe with his feete, wherfore he bade the herde man to aduyse his oxe that he shulde absteyn from grayne: the herde laughynge at hym, sayde, that he neuer lerned to speake as an oxe, but thou (sayde he) that semeste to haue had experience therin take myne offyce vpon the Forthwith Pythagoras went to the oxe and layinge his mouthe to his eare, whistred
some thynge of his arte, a meruaylous thing the ox as if he had ben taughte, lefte eatinge of the corne, nor euer after touched any, but many yeres after myldely walked in the citie & toke his meate only of them that wold giue it hym. Many lyke wonderfull thynges is written of hym. fynally his disciples, for their wysedome and temperaunce were alwayes had in great estimation. he was before the in¦carnation of Christe. 522. yeres. Pythagoricus, he that was of the secte of Py∣thagoras. Pythagorista, idem. Pytheum, was the place in the whiche Apollo gaue aunsweres. Pythius, one of the names of Apollo. Pythia, thiorum, playes made in the honour of Apollo. Pythius, a Lydian dwellyng at a town in Phri¦gia called Celaenae, who hadde suche aboun∣dance of gold, that he receyued Xerxes hinge of Persia with al his hole army which was innumerable, and that with great magnify∣cence, and offered moreouer to gyue tresoure as well for prouysion as also for wages, to haue had his sonne discharged of the warres whiche Xerxes takynge displeasauntly, cau∣sed the yonge man in his fathers syght to be cut in sunder. This man gaue also to Dari∣us, father to Xerxes, a plane tree of gold and a vyne of the same mettall. yet he takynge thought for his sonne inclosed hym selfe in a sepulchre whiche he lette make, and there fy∣nyshed his lyfe myserably, and in extreme sorowe. Pytho, a citie in the countrey called Phocis, the people wher of were named Delphi. Python, a dragon, whiche was slayne by Apollo. Pythopolis, a citie in Asye, in that parte, whi-whyche is called Mysia. Pytisma matis, a spyrtyng out of smal spyttell. Pyxacantha, & Pyxacanthos, a barberye tree. Pyxis, idis, a boxe. Pyxidicula, a lyttell boxe, properly wherin me∣dicines are put. Pyxidatus, ta, tum, made lyke a boxe. Q ante V. QVA, whiche waye, by what place. Qua, sometime is put for Tum, Qua dominus qua aduocati sibilis cō¦scissi, now the mayster and than the aduoca∣tes were hyssed at. Qua iteneris, qua de Bruto, what for the vyage, what for the affayres of Brutus. Non qua filius alicuius, sed qua homo aesti∣matur. Men haue not regarde whose son he is, but that he is a man. Quadantenus, vnto what parte. Quadi, people of Boeme, or Boemia, whiche dyd eate the fleshe of horses and wuifes. Quadra, a trencher, wheron meate is cut. som∣tyme a lof of breade, cutte square. Quadragenarius, naria, narium, of forty ye∣res olde. Quadragenus, a, um, forty. Quadragena scu¦ta, forty crownes. Quadragesima, Lente. Quadragesimus, a, um, the fortieth. Quadragies, sometyme signifieth forty times, but in computation, sometyme it signifyethe but his owne number, and that being added to an other number to multiply it, as quadra¦gies centena .xl. hundred, quadragies mil∣lena .xl. thousande, but beinge set by it selfe to signifye the quantitie of a thynge, it was multiplied by an hundred thousande. as qua∣dragies sestertium, forty hundred thousande pence. Like wyse all other aduerbes of that sorte, as Decies, duodecies, uicies, trities, centies, ten hundred thousande, twelue hun∣dred thousand. &c. L. Portius, supposeth that in the olde tyme was some dyfference as an N, or a titel added to the word whan it was multiplyed by an hundred thousand, as De∣ciens, whiche moughte be commytted in the defaulte of the wrytar or pryntour, and he putteth an example of Varro de Analogia, & an other of Pedianus in. 2. Act. in Verrem. This shulde I haue wrytten before in the de¦claration of Decies, whiche maye be done at the nexte edition of this warke. Quadrans, the fourthe part of As, also a quar¦terne of a pound. sometyme it signifyeth the accorde in reckenynge, where the receypt and allowaunce be equall. Quadrans operae, the fourth parte of the iourney or taske in labour, or warke. Quadrans pedis, a quarter of a fote. Quadrantalis, le, Plini. Crassitudine quadrā¦tali, foure fingers thicke. Quadrantal, a ineasure called also Amphora,
and is in fourme a fote square, as a dye, and cōteyneth in hym .xlviii. measures called Sex¦tarij, and .viii. of the measures called Congij Quadraginta, fortye. Quadrangulum, a fygure hauynge foure corners. Quadrangulus, a, um, foure cornered. Quadrantaria, a harlot that wil company with a man for a farthynge. Quadratura, a square. Quadratus, ta, tum, foure square. Quadrata statura, a meane or competente stature. Quadratiboues, great and stronge oxen. Quadratum corpus, a body well compacte and of a good stature. Quadricornium, hauynge foure hornes. Quadriduanus, a, um, of foure dayes conty∣nuaunce. Quadriennis, foure yeres olde. Quadriformiter, in a square. Quadringati, certayne coyne, hauynge in them the printe of a chariotte. Quadrilibris, foure pounde weyght. Quadrilinguis, he that speaketh foure sondry languages. Quadrimus & quadrimulus idem. Quadrilibris, bre, that whiche dothe waye foure poundes. Quadringentenus, a, um, the foure hundreth. Quadringentesimus, idem. Quadringenti, tae, ta, foure hundred tymes. Quadringenties, foure hundred tymes. Qudringentuplus, a, um, foure hundred ty∣mes so moche. Quadrigenus, idem, Liuius Vectigal iussus pendere denarios quadringenos quinqua∣genos, He was commaunded to paye for tri¦bute or pention .CCCCl. grotes. Quadripartito, in foure partes. Quadriennium, foure yeres. Quadrifariam, on foure partes. Quadrifidus, da, dum, that whiche maye be slytte in foure partes. Quadriformis, me, that is of foure dyuerse fourmes or facions. Quadriga, a carte drawen with foure horses. sommetyme a carte horse. Quadrigarius, a carter. Quadriiugi, foure beastes yoked to gether. Quadrilaterus, ra, rum, with foure sydes. Quadrimembris, of foure partes. Quadringenta, & Quadringenti, foure hundred. Quadrinoctium, foure nightes. Quadrinus, a, um, for quatuor. Quadripartitor, tiri, to diuide in foure. Quadriremis, a shyppe with foure rowes of oores, or with foure toppes. Quadrisyllabum, of foure syllables. Quadriuium, where as foure wayes do mete. Quadro, are, to brynge in square, to consente or agree. Quadrum, a fygure of foure square. Quadrupedantia, & quadrupedia, foure foo∣ted beastes. Quadrupedo, dare, to go on foure feete. Quadrupliciter, foure maner of wayes. Quadruplico, care, o double four tymes, or to make a thynge foure tymes as moche as it was. Quadrurbs, a citie, vnto the whiche do come, or are broughte all the people, beinge lefte in foure cities, by the whiche name the citie of Athenes was called of Actius the poete. Quadrus, a, um, square. Quadrupes, quadrupedis, a beaste hauynge foure feete. Quadruplatores, were they, whiche for accu∣synge of other, had the fourthe parte of the goodes of them, that were condempned. Quadruplex, foure double. Quadruplo maior, foure times greatter. Quadruplo, & quadruplor, ari, to appeache a man for to haue parte of his goodes. Quadruplum, foure tymes as moche. Quae, the whiche, womā or other female kynd. Quae malum, what a myschiefe. Quaecun{que}, all that, what so euer. Quaerceus, a, um, of oke. Quaercicus, ca, cum idem. Quaercus, cus, an oke. Quaercerus, ra, rum, colde, with a shakynge, as in a feuer. Quaeritabundus, studyouse or dyligente in sekynge. Querneus, & quernus, querna, quernum of an oke. Quaero, quaesiui, quaerere, to demaunde, to aske, to get, to serche, to examine. Quaerere liberos, to gette chylderne. Plaut. Liberorum quaerendorum causa ei credo ux or data est. I suppose he had a wyfe gyuen hym to the intente to get or haue chyldren. Quaerere locum iniuriq, to go about to doo harme. Quaerere sitim, to prouoke thirste. De pecunijs repetundis, quaerere, to gyue in formation against one of extortion or bribery Quaerere rem tormentis, uel per tormeta to examine a man by manacles or other lyke tourmentes to make hym to cōfesse the acte. Facile uictum quaerere, to gette his lyuynge easely. Quaeritur inter medicos, phisitions doo dispute. &c. Quaerquetum, & quaercetum, a groue of okes. Quaerito, ritare, to seeke, serche, or inquyre
diligentely. Quaesitor, a iustice or commissioner to inquyre of crymes, defaultes, or abuses agaynste the lawe. Quaesuio, an inquirie, an examination, a serch. Quaeso, siui, sere, to beseche. Quaesticulus, a lyttell gayne. Quaestio, a question. Tibi ne quaestioni essemus, to thintente that thou shuldest not seke for vs. Quaestionem afferre, to moue a question. Polliceri in quaestionem seruos, to offer his seruauntes for to be examined of the trouthe. Decernere quaestionem, to awarde processe in criminall causes. Postulare quaestionem, to require that infor∣mation maye be gyuen agaynste one. Quaestionem adhibere, to minister turmētes Exercere quaestionem inter sicarios, to syt in commission vpon murdrers. Quaestiuncula, a smalle or lyght question. Quaestionarius, an examynour. Quaestor, toris, the tresorer of the cōmon treso∣ry, a tresorer of the warres, a Lieuetenant to the chiefe capytayne in warres also a iustice by commyssion of Oyer and Determiner. Quaestores paricidij, iustices to inquyer of tre¦son, or murder. we maye calle the coroners by that name. Quaestores urbani, were as the chamberlayns of London be nowe. Quaestores aerarii, offycers of the receypte, as the chaumberlaynes and tellers be nowe. Quaestorius, quaestoria, storium, perteynynge to the receypte. Quaestorium, was suche a place as the esche∣quer is. Quaestor aerarii, a generall receyuour, but it semeth to be suche an offycer, as the esche∣coure is nowe in Englade. Quaestorius, torij, he that hadde ben in the of fyce of Questor. Quaestorius, a, um, that perteyneth to the of∣fice of Questor. Vir quaestorius, a man whi∣che hath ben in that office. Questuariae artes, craftes whereby men doo gayne money. Quaestuosus, a, um, of moche gayne, studious of great lucre. Quaestura, the office of Questor. Quaestus, tus, gayne, wynninge. Qualibet, where it lyketh the. Qualisqualis, what so euer. Qualiscun{que}, suche as it was. Qualiter, in the fascion or fourme. Qualis, le, what, of what qualitie. Qualitates, qualities, as fowle, fayre, wyse, foolysshe, stronge, weake, dylygent slow. &c. Qualius, a basket, out of the which wine run∣neth, whan it is pressed: also a basket or hā∣per, in the whiche women do put theyr spyn∣dels, theyr bottomes of threde, and suche like thynges. some do wryte it with a single .l. Quam, than, sometyme after that, sometyme before that. Pridiè quam occideretur, The daye before that he was slayne. Quam bene, howe well. Quam fortiter, howe valaintly. also it is often ioyned with the superlatyue degree, to make it more vehemente: as, Quampaticissimi, as fewe as may be. Quam doctissimus, excellently lerned. sometyme it importeth as moche as veray. Cum quo quā familiarissime uixerat, with whom he lyued very familiarly. Also it signifyeth as moche. Duplo accepit quam perdiderat, He recey∣ued double as moche as he loste. Quam uellem Menedêmum inuitatum, O I wolde fayne that Menedem{us} were boden. Quinto die quam sustuleris, condire opor∣tebit, the fyfthe daye after that ye haue ta∣ken them awaye. &c. Quampridem non edisti, Howe longe is it sens thou eatest any meate. Huc euasit, quampridem pater nihi & ma∣ter mortui essent. &c. To this it came, how longe it was agone that my father and mo∣ther dyed. &c. Quamlibet, quantumuis, quantumlibet, what so euer. Quammox, as sone, sodenly. Quamobrem? wherfore? for what cause? what to doo. Quam pené, almoste, it lacked but a lyttell. Quāplures, how many, very many, a great sort Quamplurimus, quamplurima, quampluri∣mum, very moche. Quampridem, longe before. Quamprimum, very shortely or sone. Quamuis, & quanquam, althoughe. somtime for Quantumuis. Quandiu, as longe, duringe the tyme. Quando, whan, also sens that. Quandogentium, whan. Quandudum, Howe late sens? howe longe agoo? Quanquam, all be it, althoughe. Quandoque, sometyme. Quandoquidem, for as moche as. Quanti, for howe moche, of what pryce or valewe. Quantillus, & quantulus, a, um, Howe lyttel or smalle. Quantillum, howe lyttell. Quantitas, quantitie. Quanto, howe moche. Quantisper, howe longe. Quantus, ta, tum, howe moche, whiche is re∣ferred to number, weight, and measure.
Quantus homo in dicendo, O that he is a man that can speake well. Quanta mea sapientia est, as fer as my wyt can perceyue. Quantum, howe moche, as to, as concerning. Quantum intelligo, as farre as I vnderstād Quantum suspicor, as farre as I suppose. Also accordynge as Id de imperatore Roma¦no, quantum euentus, postea praedictum pa¦ruit Iudaei ad se trahentes, rebellarunt, The iewes gatherynge that of the Emperour, ac∣cordynge as the thynge, whiche was afore shewed of that whiche shulde happen, appe∣red afterwarde, made rebellion. Quantum potes, in al spede that thou maist Quantuscun{que}, howe moche, or howe many so euer it be. Quantuslibet, idem. Quantusquantus, idem. Quantulum, as lyttell. Quantuluscun{que}, howe lyttell so euer it be. Quanuis, all be it, all thoughe. Quanuis, for ualdé. Quapropter, wherfore. Quaquauersus, & quaquauersum, on euerye syde. Quaqua, idem. Quare, wherfore. Quarto, & quartum the fourth tyme. all be it properlye Quarto signifieth the fourth in or¦der, as Quarto Consul, he that had three in the offyce afore hym. Quartum Consul, He that hath ben the fourth tyme Consul. Quartana, a feuer quartayne. Quartanarius, he that hath a quartayn feuer. Quartarius, a Mulettour or keper of mules, whiche taketh but the fourth part of the wa¦ges or gayne. Quartusdecimus, the fouretenthe. Quartus, ta, tum, the fourthe. Quasi, Lyke as. Amas me quasi filium, thou loueste me, as if I were thy sonne. also, as who saythe, as thoughe. Tu obijcis, quod uxorem repudiauerim, quasi tuidem non feceris. Thou imbraideste me, that I haue forsaken my wyfe, as who saythe, thou hast not done so to. Quasillum, a lyttell hamper. Quassabundus, he that shaketh or moueth his heade. Quasso, are, to shake moche or often, also to breake. Quassus, & quassatus, quassata, satum, sha∣ken, braste. Quatefacio, cere, to make or cause to shake or moue. Quatenus, how moch, to the intent. also for as moche, also howe, howe moch, or as moche▪ Quater, foure tymes. Quaterdecies, foureten imes. Quatergemini, foure childerne at one burden. Quaternarius numerus, the nuber of foure. Quaternio, quaternionis, a quayre, as in a boke, a leafe beyng folded into foure partes. Quaterni, foure. Quaternus, a, um, the fourthe. Quaternum denum, the foure tenth. Quatinus, a coniunction, whiche signifyeth for for as moche. Quatio, quassi, quatere, to shake a thynge, al∣so to vexe, to caste out. Quatriduum, foure dayes, the space of foure dayes. Quatuor, foure. Quartus, ta, tum, the fourthe. Quadruplus, pla, plum, foure double. Quae, for &, sygnifieth and. Also that is to say Quearah, a measure of the iewes, conteyninge two ounces and .ii. drammes. Quentia, olde wryters vsed for potentia, puis∣saunce, power. Queis, for quibus. Queiscum, for cum quibus, with whome. Quemadmodum, lyke as. Queo, quis, quiui quire, I maye. Quercus, cus, uel ci, an oke. Querceus, a, um, of an oke. Quercicus, ca, cum, idem quod quernus. Quercerus, a, rum, quyuerynge or shakynge for colde. somtyme it was taken for greatte and greuouse, as Festus sayth. Quercerum, a groue of okes. Querela, & querimonia, a complaynte. Queribundus, a, um, lamentable. Quaerimoniarius, a complaynant. Quernus, na, num, of an oke. Querna folia, oken leaues. Quaeror, quaestus sum, quaeri, to lamente or complayne. Querquedl, a waterfoule called a teale. Quaerulus, la, lum, that whiche complayneth, or is full of complayntes. It is put sometime of the Poetes for shrylle or lowde in synging. Cicadae querulae, grassehoppers, whiche do synge lowde, or with a shrill voyce. Quaesitah, amonge the iewes dydde sygnifye a coyne, sometyme a lambe, somtime a shepe. Quaestus, tus, a complaynte, a lamentation. Quari, people in Gallia Narbonensie. Qui, the whiche. Also sometyme it signyfieth howe. Efficite, qui detur tibi, Doo what ye can, howe or by what meanes thou mayste haue her. Qui uocâre▪ Howe arte thou cal∣led? Also it signifieth why. Dauo istuc de∣dam negoti. S. Non potest. P. Qui? S. Quia habet aliud magis ex sese. I wyll commytte this matter to Dauy. S. That may not be. P. why? S. For he hath an other greatter matter to do for hym selfe. Also it signyfyeth
from whens. Qui istaec tibi incidit suspectio From whens is this suspition happened vn∣to the? Also it signifieth wolde to God. Quî illum Di omnes perdiunt, I praye god that a vengeaunce lyght on hym. also it signifieth bycause. Nam in prologis scribundis, ope∣ram abuitur, non qui argumentum narrer, ed qui malenoli uaeteris Poetae maledictis respondeat, For he spendeth his laboure in writinge of Prologues, not bycause he wyll tell the argumente, but for as moche as he wolde make aunswere to the yuel reportes of the olde enuiouse Poete. Also it sygnifiethe wherfore. Qui enim beatior Epicurus, quod in patria uiuebat, quam Metrodorus, quod Athenis? Wherfore was Epycure more hap¦py that he did dye in his countrey, than Me∣trodorus that he died at Athenes. Quia, for, alsoo it signifieth that. Sed tamen recordatione nostrae amicitiae sic fruor, ut be atae uixisse uidear, quia cum Scipione uixe∣rim, All be it I take this pleasure in remem∣brynge our frendeshyp, that I maye sme to haue lyued moste fortunately, that I liued in Scipiones company. also it signifieth for as moche. Sed quia multis & magnis tempe∣statibus uos cognoui fortes, fidosque mihi, eo animus ausus est maximū atque pulcher∣rimum facinus incipere, But for as moche as in many gret stormes or dangiers I haue proued you to be valyaune, and faythefull vnto me, therfore my harte is bolde to begin an excellent and commendable enterpryse. Quia nam, wherfore. Quia ne, in dede. Quias, quiatis, for cuius, cuiatis. Quias, a, um, for cuius, a, um. Quibus in extremis, for quorum in extremo. Literae dantur mihi a te, quibus in extremis scriptum est? I receyued letters from you, in the laste ende of the whiche it is wrytten. Quicquid est, all that is, what so euer it be, what so euer. Quicquid pauxillum, neuer so lyttell. Qui cum, for cum quo. Qui cum loquitur fi∣lius? with whom dothe my sonne talke? Quiunque, who so euer. Quicquam, any thynge. Quid, What. Quid causae est? What is the cause? Quid aetatis? Howe old? of what age? Quid animi? What mynde? Quid animi est? What mynde is he of? Quid captiuorum? Howe many prysoners? Tum Captiuorum quid ducunt secum? Than howe many pry∣soners do they brynge with them? Quid id sit hominis, cui Lyco nomen siet? What man is he, whose name maye be Lyco? Quid mu∣lieris uxorem habes, What maner of wo∣man haste thou to thy wyfe? Quid rei est? What is the matter. Ibo intro ut quid hu∣us sit rei sciam: I wyll goo in, that I maye knowe what the matter is. Quid rei est tibi cum illa? What hast thou to do with her? Quid sententiae? What is his or thyne opy∣nion? Quid istuc uerbi est? What meaneste thou therby? also quid is taken for Aliquid, somewhat. Also ob quid, for what, or wher∣fore. Quid? senem quoad expectas uestrum But nowe? howe longe wyll ye tary for your master? Note here that after the dayly forme of speaking, quid is rehersed, whan we passe from one matter to an other. Quid mecum est tibi? what haue I to do with the? Quid faceret aliud? what shulde he do elles? Quid eo? what to do? Propere curre ad Pamphi∣lum. P. quid eo? D. Dic me orare ut ueniat. Runne quickely to Pamphius. P. what to do? D. Say that I prayd hym to com. Quid uerbis opus est? what nede many wordes? Quid multa uerba, idem. Quid multis mo∣ror? what shall I longe tary? Quid mea re∣fert? what care I? also quid signifieth wher¦in. Quid enim indigens Affricanus mei? wherin had Scipio any nede of me? Quid i∣stic? Si certum est facere, facias: uerum ne post conferas culpam in me? what woldest thou I shuld do? if thou be determined to do it, go to on goddes name: but afterward put not the faulte in me. Quidnam, what is it, or wherfore is it? Quidnam ille commotus uenit? what is it that he commeth so chaufed? Also it signify∣eth what. Reuiso quidnam Chaerea hic re∣rum gerat, I come to se what Cherea dothe here. Quid ni, why not? Quo ore appellabo patrem tenes, quid dicam? S. quidni, With what countenaunce shall I speake to my father? Wotest thou what I wyll say? S. wherfore shuldest thou not do so? Also it signifyeth ye. Archimedem nosti? P. quidni? Knoweste thou Archimedes? P. ye mary do I. Quidam, one, any man, in the plurell number it signifyeth same. Quid agimus, What shall we do? Quidem, an aduerbe, affyrmynge that, which to spoken. Sometyme it signifieth verylye. sometyme it hath no sygnification, but is on¦ly a distinction of thynges: as Ego quidem scribo, tu uero legis, Ille autem dormit. I do write, thou redest, he also slepeth. Quid ita, for Cur, wherfore. Quidpiam, any thynge, or any wyse. Quid quaeris, What wylte thou more? what nedeth any more wordes? Quid tum deni{que}, Quid ergo, quid tū postea, Quid ita{que}, quid interea, quid demum, All these do signifie, wherto speakest thou this?
what than, or what meanest thou hereby? Quiescas, uel quiesce, holde thy peace, leaue. Quiescas caetera, care not for the reste. Quies, & quietudo, reste, ease, slepe. Quiesco, eui, escere, to take reste, to ceasse. Quietalis, was a name of Pluto, callyd God of Helle. Quietus, ta, tum, quyete, peasyble, in reste. Quietus esto, care not. Quilibet, cuius libet, cuilibet, who thou wylt. also it sometyme sygnifyeth vyle or base in e∣stimation. Quidliber, what I, thou, or he wyll. Quin, but, why not? Quin uenis, why comest thou not? Quin pergis, why goest thou not? Quin dic quid est, go to telle me, what it is. Quin for etiam. allsoo. Pudet me. S. Cre∣do, neque id iniuria: quin mihi molestum, I am asshamed. S. I beleue, and not with∣out a cause: And I am also soory therefore. Quin taces? Wylt not thou holde thy peace. Also it sygnyfieth but yet, or but for all that. C. Perij, S. Quin tu animo bono es. C. I am vndoone. S. But for all that be thou of good chere. Alsoo therfore. Quin ru uno uerbo dic, quid est quod me uelis, Ther∣fore telle me at oone worde, what thou wol∣dest haue me do. Also more ouer, or that more is. Quin, ipsi pridem tonsor ungues dem∣pserat, collegit, omnia abstulit praesegmi∣na, And that more is, the other day, the bar∣bour paryd his nayles, he gathered the pa∣rynges togyther, and caryed theym al away with hym. Quin taces, holde thy peace, or care not for it. Qunarius, a, um, the numbre of fyue. Quina∣rius lapis, a stone of fyue pounde weyghte. Quinarius, narij, was amonge the olde Ro∣maynes theyr halfe peny, whyche was fyue pounde weyghte of brasse callyd As, It is two soulces of frenche moneye, whiche is of our money. Quincentum, of olde wryters was vsed for quingentum, fyue hundred. Quincunx, quincuncis, of fyue ounces. Also the gayne of fyue in oone hundrede by ex∣chaunge amongeste Marchauntes. It was alsoo an order of settynge of trees in a gar∣deyne or orchyarde verye exactely, that why∣che waye soo euer that a man dyd looke, the trees stode dyrectely one agaynste an nother, as in this fourme folowynge. Quincuntialis, le, of fyue ynches. Quincuplex, plicis, fyue double, or fyue folde. Quincuplus, a, um, fyue tymes so moche. Quindecies, fyftene tymes. Quindecim, fyftene. Quindeceremis, a barge with fyftene ores. Quinde cuplex, fyftene double or folde. Quinde cuplus, pla, plum, fyuetene tymes soo moche. Quindenus, a, um, the fyuetenthe. Quin ergo, wherfore than. Quin ergo quod iuuat, quod charum aestimant, id semper fa∣ciant, Wherfore than, what soo euer lyketh theym, that whyche seemeth pleasaunt vnto theym, let them doo it as longe as it pleaseth theym. Quingenarius, adiect. wayenge fyue hundred poundes. Quingeni, & quingenti, fyue hundred. Quingentarius numerus, the noumbre of fyue hundrede. Quingentenus, & quingentesimus, the fyue hundrethe. Quingenties, fyue hundred tymes. Quingentuplus, a, um, fyue hundred tymes so moche. Quinimo, but rather, but that more is. Quinquagenarius, a, um, of fyfty yeres olde. Quinquaginta, fyfty. Quinquagenus, a, um, of fyfty. Quinquagesimus, a, um, the fyftieth. Quinquagies, fyfty tymes. Quinquagesies, idem. Quinquangulus, a, um, fyue cornerde. Quinquatria, triorum, a feast dedicate to Pal∣las, whyche duryd fyue dayes. Quinquatrus dies, a feast so callyd, bycause it was after the fyfthe Idus of Marche. Quinque folium, an herbe callyd cynkfoyle, or fyue leaued grasse. Quinque, fyue. Quinquies, fyue tymes. Quinquemestris, tre, of fyue monethes. Quinquenalis, le, that whiche happeneth or is done euery fyfth yere. Quinquennis, ne, of fyue yeres. Quinquennium, the space of fyue yeeres. Quinquepartior, tiris, tiri, to diuide in .v {per}tes. Quincupertitus, in fyue partes dyuided. Quinquertium, the exercyse of fyue sundrye craftes. Quinquertiones, they whyche exercysed fyue sundry craftes. Quinqueremis, a galeye with fyue rewes of oores, it may be nowe taken for a shyp with fyue toppes. Quinqueuiratus, an offyce or auctorite, wherin fyue men were associate. Quinqueuir, one which is in the said authorite. Quintana porta, was a gaate in the Campe, where the armye was lodged, whyche was
the chyefe gate nexte to that whiche was cal∣lyd Praetoria, where the markette was wont to be kept. Quintus, ta, tum, the fyfthe. Quintia porta, & quintia prata, was a gaate and medowes at Rome, whych toke their na¦mes of one Quintius, a noble cōsul of Rome. Quintilis mensis, the moneth of Iuly. Quintipor, oris, the boy or seruant of Quintus. Quintius, & Quintus, the names of dyuerse Romaynes. Quintius, a, um, pertaynyng to Quintius. Quinus, a, um, fyue, Quini denarij, fyue pens. Quipotè, howe is it possible. Quippe, surely, for as moche, sommetyme ye trewely. Sol Democrito magnus uidetur, quippe ho¦mini erudito, in geometria{que} perfecto, The sunne semed greatte to Democritus, no mer∣tayle for he was a great lerned man, and per¦fite in geometry. Quippe quas. Plaut. Argenti minas se habe∣re quinquagita quippe ego quas nudius ter∣rius meis manibus numeraui, I saye that he had fifty poundes in money, that is to saye, that which I my selfe payde hym. Quippini, why not. Quire, for posse, to maye. Quirinalis collis, an hylle at Rome where the temple of Romulus was sette. Quirinalis porta, the gate next to that hyll. Quirinalia, orum, dayes, in the whych men did sacrifyce to Romulus, callyd Quirinus. Quirinus, a, um, the surname of Romulus. Quiris, quiritis, a Romayne. Quirîtes, was a name wherby the Romaynes were callyd of theyr fyrste kynge Romu∣lus, callyd Quirinus, as it were Quiri∣nus people. Quiritatus, tus, a crye of Romayne chylderne. Quirinus, was the name of Romulus, after that he was taken for a god. Quiritare, to crye out, to styre vp the Romay∣nes with a crye. Quisnam homo est, What man is that? Quisputas, idem. Quisquam, any man. it is sommetyme vsyd in the femynyne gender for any woman. Quisquam gentium, idem. Quisque, euery manne. Doctissimus quis{que}, Euerye well lernyd man. Decimus quis{que}, Euery tenthe. Suo quisque tempore, euery man in his tyme Tertio quoque uerbo, at euery thyrde worde. Quisquiliae, arum, pluraliter, be those thynges whyche in makynge cleane of a gardeyne or orcharde, be caryed out, as styckes, leaues, and weedes, it is vsyd of Cicero for noughty men, the refuse of all other. Quisquilium, a lyttell braunche of a kynde of holy, whiche beareth grayne, wherwith scar∣let and krymsyn colours be made. Quiuis, in the genitiue case cuius cuius, who so euer. Quiuis, in the genitiue case cuiusuis, any man: one of them. Quis, quae, quod, uel quid, who or what. Quis, is sometyme taken for some man. Quispiam, some man. Quisquis, who so euer. Quo, whyther. Quo abis, whither goste thou? Quo non. Perreptaui usque omne oppidum, ad portam, ad locum, quo non? I wente all the towne aboute, to the gate, to the laake, there is noo place but that I was in it. Alsoo it sygnifyeth frome whense and where. Il∣luc quaeso redi, quo coepisti, I beseeche the tourne backe agayne, where thou began∣nest. Also, bycause. Non pol quo quenquàm plus amem, aut plus diligam, eo feci, In good faythe I dyd it not bycause I more lo∣ued or fauoured any man. also, wherefore. Forma bona memini uidere, quo aequior sum Pamphilo, I remembre she is wel fauo∣red, wherfore I am the lesse dyspleased with Pamphilus. Quo gentium, whyther. also Quo, sygnifieth, that. Neque enim id feci, quo tibi molestus essem, Nor I dyd it not, that I wolde dys∣please you. also, to what purpose or vse. Quo mihi fortunam, si non conceditur uti, For what pourpose shall fortune serue, yf I maye not haue commoditie by it? Quoaxo, are, to cry lyke a frogge. Quoad, vntyll, as longe. Quoad eius, as moche as he may. Quoad quenque peruenit, aut peruenerit ex praeda, ex manubijs, ex auro coronario? Howe moch of the pray or spoyle, garlandes or crownis of victours is comen, or shal come to any of your handes? Quoad eius facere possum, as moche as I may do. Quoadusque, vntyll. Quocirca, wherfore. Quod, that, wherin. Sed si quid sit, quod mea opera opus sit, aut tu plus uides, quàm ego, manebo, But yf there be any thyng, where∣in ye shall haue nede of my seruyce, or that ye perceyue more than I doo, I wylle tarye. alsoo it is putte for Quem. Alienum homi∣nem intromittat neminem, quod illa aut a∣micum, aut patronum nominet, She maye let in no man, whome she wyll calle derlynge, or mayster. Nube grauida candicante, quod uocant tempestatem albam, grando immi∣nebit, Whan there dothe appiere a greatte clowde, that waxeth whyte, whyche they
calle a whyte tempeste, ye shall haue hayle shortly after: also it sygnifieth for as moche or bycause. Senatusconsulta duo facta sunt odiosa, quod inconsulem facta putantur, Ca¦tone & Domitio postulante, Two actes of counsayle were made very displeasant, for as moche as they were supposed to be made, at the desyre of Domitius and Cato: also it si∣gnifieth but. Quod si quiescem nihil euenis∣set mali, But if I had let it alone, there had none yll happened, or it hadde bene welle y∣nough. Also as moche. Tu uelim, quod cum commodo ualetudinis tuae fiat quam lon∣gissime poteris, obuiam nobis properes, I wolde that ye, as moche as may be with the health of your persone, make spede to meete with vs, as farre from home as ye can. Also it sygnyfieth why. Si ad uitulam spectes, ni∣hil est quod pocula laudes, If thou consyde∣rest the caulf wel, there is no cause why thou shuldest prayse so thy pottes. In uiam quod edes hoc tempore, nihil est, There is noo cause why thou shuldest take thy iourney at this tyme. Also it signifieth wherfore. Quod te per genium, dextram{que}, Deos{que} penates osecro & obtestor, uitae me redde priori, Wherfore I beseche & praye the for thy good aungelles sake, and for the loue betwene the and me, and for the sayntes whyche be thyne auouryes, restoore me eftsoones to my fyrste lyfe, or to the state that I was in erste. Alsoo it sygnyfieth, as to that. Sane quod tibi uir uideatur esse, hic nebulo magnus est, As to that, that thou thynkest him a man, surely he is a stourdy vacabounde. Quod abs{que} molestia fiat, so that it be no dy∣spleasure vnto you. Quare pergratum mihi feceris, si eum in amicitiam receperis, atque eum (quod absque molestia fiat) si qua in re opus ei fuerit, Wherfore ye shall do me syn∣gular pleasure, yf ye take hym into your fa∣uour, and (so that it be no dyspleasure vnto you) whan nede requyreth, be good lorde or mayster vnto hym. Quod quidem, no that. Non nouisti me? P. quod quidem ueniat in mentem. Dost thou not knowe me? P. No that I remembre me. Quodammodo, somewhat. Quamobrem ut hi, qui superiores sunt, summittere se debent in amicitia, sic quodammodo inferiores ex∣tollere, Wherfore lykewyse as they, whiche are superior in state or degree, shulde humble them selues in frendshyp, so they whyche are inferyour shoulde aduaunce and sette theym selues forewarde. Quodcun{que}, what so euer. Quodcun{que} militum, for quotcun{que} milites, Vos hortor, ut quodcun{que} militum contra∣here poteritis, contrahatis, I aduyse you, that as many souldyours as ye can gette, ye gather vnto you. Quominus, for Vt non. Si poterit fieri, ut ne pater per me stetisse credat, quo minus hae¦fierent nuptiae, uolo, If it may be brought to passe, that my father maye beleue, that it is not in my fault, that this maryage is not con¦cluded, I am content. Quomodo, howe, by what reasone, in what maner, by what meane? Quomodo tibi res se habet? Howe is the matter with the? Sed quomodo dissimulabat? But in what ma∣ner dyd he dyssemble? Primulo diluculo ab∣ijsti ad legiones, By tyme in the mornynge thou wentest to the armye. Amph. Quo∣modo? In what maner or fashyon? Alsoo it sygnyfyeth wherefore. Illa quidem nul∣lum sacrificabit. G. Quomodo? quid igi∣tur me uolt? She wyll doo noo sacryfyce. G. Wherfore? what thynge wolde she than with me? Quomodocunque, howe soo euer it be. Sed tamen quomodocunque, quanquam sumus pauperculi, est domi quod edimus, yet how soo euer it be, though we be poore folkes, we haue at home somewhat to eate. Quomodolibet, idem. Quondam, sommetyme, ones, sygnifyeng the tyme paste, or tyme to come. Quondam tua dicere facta Tempus erit, The tyme shalbe ones, whan thyne actes shall be declared. Al∣soo it is putte in the tyme present. Quondam etiam uictis redit in praecordia uirtus, Ye, and in theym that are vanquys∣shed, sommetyme good courage eftesoones imbraceth theyr stomackes. Sometyme it si∣gnyfyeth alwaye. Vt quondam in stipulis magnus sine uiribus ignis, Lyke as in stub∣byll or holme fyre is alway great without a∣ny puyssaunce. Quonam, whyther. Eamus intrò, sequere. S. Quo tute agis? C. quonam nisi domum. Let vs go in, folowe me. S. whyther wylt thou go? C Whyther shulde I go but home to my howse? Quoniam, for as moche as. Quo officio es? what is thyne offyce? Quopiam, any whyther. Ituràne Thais quo∣piam es? Thais, wylte thou goo any why∣ther? Quoquam, any whyther. Quoque, also. Quoquo, where so euer. Quoquopacto, In any maner of wyse. Tum si maxime fateatur, cum amet aliam, non est utile hanc illi dari, qua propter quoquo pa∣cto caelato est opus, Than if he vtterly con∣fesse it, for as moche as he loueth an nother,
it were not conuenyent, that he were maried to this woman, therfore in any maner of wise this thynge must be kept secrete. Quoquomodo, idem. Quo quouersum, seu quoquouersum, euerye waye, on euery parte. Eius imperio classem quo quouersum dimittunt, By his comman∣dement they dyspatched the nauye in euerye part. Rates duplices quoquouersum pedi∣bus triginta è regione solis collocabat, He sette shyppes double against the sonne, thirty feete euery way. Quorsum, seu quorsus apud Plinium, whither, to what place, or thynge. Quorsum istuc? to what purpose? or place. Quot, howe many. Quota pars, howe smalle a porcion? Quotannis, yere by yere, euery yere. Quotennis? of what age? howe olde? Quot annos natus, idem. Quotenus, a, um, howe many. Quotidiani sumptus, dayly expences. Quotidianus, Quotidiana, Quotidianum, a thynge that is or happeneth dayely, or daye by day. Quotidiana forma, a cōmune beautie or fa∣cion euery day sene. Quotidiè, dayly, euery day. Quoties, howe oftentymes. Quotiescun{que}, as often. Quotquot, as many. Quotuplex, howe many sortes. Quotuplus, howe moche in measure or weyght? Quotus, ta, tum, of what number, howe ma∣ny, Hora quota est, What is it a clocke? Dic quotus es? Telle howe many be of you? Quotas aedes dixerit, id ego admodum in∣certo scio, Howe many howses he spake of, I am not welle assertayned, or I remember not well. Quotusquisque, howe many. Quouis, whyther, or to what place ye wyll. Quouis gentium, idem. Quousque, howe longe, howe farre. Quousque tandem, howe longe yet. Qur, & Quor, wherfore. Quum, seu qum, whan, in the whyche. Quum primum, as soone. ☞ ❀❀ ☞ ❀❀ R ANTE A. RABIA, old wryters vsed for Rabies. Rabidus, da, dum, madde or wodde, as a mad dog. Rabidus dens, an akyng tothe. Rabies, madnes of a dogge Rabiosus, sa, sum, madde or very angry, woode angry. Rabio, ire, to be mad or woode as a dogge. Rabiosulus, a, um, somewhat madde. Rabula, one whiche is hasty or wylfull, in any cause, ianglynge, or full of wordes. Racemarius, a twygge of a vyne, oute of the whyche the grapes do sprynge. Racematio, the gatherynge of grapes after that the greate clusters be gathered to make wyne, the glenyng of grapes. Racematus, ta, tum, that hath grapes. Racemosus, full of grapes. Racemus, a grape or a cluster of grapes. Racha, a reprochefull worde of Hebrewe, whi∣che sygnyfieth thryftlesse, braynlesse. fynally it is a rebukefull worde, sygnyfyenge the ex∣treme yre of the person that speaketh it. Radicitus, from the roote, or vp by the roote, Radicitus euellere, to plucke vppe by the roote. Radico, care, to roote or take roote. Radicula, an herbe, the iuyce wherof is good to washe woulle, also a lyttell roote. Ruellius sayth, that the apothecaries do call it Sapo∣nariā, and some calle it Herbam fullonum, the Moores do name it Condisum. Radio, are, to sende forthe beames lyke the sunne. Radius, a beame of the sunne, or other bryghte sterre, sometyme of the eyes: also a rodde or yarde, that Geometricians haue to describe lynes, also a weauers shyttell, wherewith he throweth yarn into the webbe. also the spoke of a wheele, also an instrument, wherewith measures be shauen: alsoo longe olyues or oyle bearyes. Radix, dicis, a roote. Radices montis, the foote of an hyll. Rado, si, dere, to shaue, or make smothe, to cut or pull vp, to hurt, to rent, to offende, to fa∣tigate. Aures delicatas radere, to offende or fatigate delycate cares. Radula, an instrument to shaue with. Radulanus, a, um, that which is shauē of from any thynge. Rage, a towne and castelle in Englande called Notyngham. Raia, a sea fyshe called Raye or skeate. Ralla, a thynne garment. Rallum, the staffe, wherwith ploughmen in tyl¦lynge do put the erthe from theyr share.
Ramalis, le, a bowghe. Ramale, a searyd or dead bough. Ramentum, a lyttell piece of any thyng. Rameus, a, um, that whiche is of a bough. Ramex, micis, a kynde of rupture, whan the bowels do fal downe into a mans coddes▪ al∣so a rayle or barre, whiche gothe ouerthwart a pale or a gate. Ramicosus, he that is broken. Ramnus, a whyte thorne. Ramulus, & ramusculus, a lyttell bough. Ramus, a bowghe. ❀Rana, a frogge. also a syckenesse whiche dothe anoye cattelle. Rana Seriphia, is a prouerbe applyed to them that can not speke in tyme conuenyent. Ranceo, cere, to be mouldy or putrified. Rancidè, aduerbe, stynkyngly. Rancidus, da, dum, ranklyd, mouldy, or putry∣fyed. also vnsauery, or vnpleasant. Rancidulus, la, lum, a litle mouldy or putrified. Rancor, ôris, rankour, fylthe. Randus, in old tyme was taken for aes, brasse. Randuscula porta, the brason gate. Rantum, in the olde tyme was a quarterne of a pounde. Ranunculus, a lyttell frogge or froshe. Rapa, a plant and rote callid rape. Rapū idem. Rapacia, rape leaues. Rapatior, more rauenous or catchyng. Rapacissimus, a, um, moste rauenouse. Rapacitas, raueny. Rapaciter, rauenousely. Rapax, acis, rauenouse. Raphanus, a plante and roote callyd radyshe. Rapidè, quyckely. Rapidus, a, ū, very swift, as a streme of water. Rapina, robbery. Rapinator, a robber. Rapio, pui, pere, to take by vyolence, haste, or furye also to rauyshe a woman, to bryng one by violence before a iudge, or to pryson. Rapere aliquem in ius, to arreste one, or cause hym to be arrested to appere before iudges. Rapo, Raponis, for rapax. Raptim, hastily. Raptio, violent takynge of a persone. Raptus, rauysshynge or deflourynge of a wo∣man, or the violent takyng of a thynge. Raptito, tare, to take often violently. Rapto, to take or drawe violently. Raptor, toris, a rauysher or violent taker. Rapulum, a lyttell rape roote. Rapunculus, a lyttell roote whyche is eaten in salates. Rara auis, a byrde seldome sene, wherby is sy∣gnifyed any thynge that seldome hapneth. Rare, seldome, or not often. Rarefacio, cere, to make thynne or slender. Rarefio, fieri, to be thynne or slender. Rarenter, seldome. Raresco, scere, to waxe thynne or not thyck growen, to be or happen seldome. Rari, a sunder, here and there one, or a fewe. Raripilus, la, lum, thynne heared. Rarior, rarius, more selde. Rarissimus, a, um, seldest. Rarissimè, moste selde. Raritas, seldomnesse. Raritudo, idem. Raro, selde, rare. Rarenter, idem. Raro, aui, are, to make scant or selde. Rarus, ra, rum, selde or not ofte, thynne, not thycke growen or sette. Rasamentum, shauynge or shreddes. Rasilis, sile, that may be shauen or made smoth. Rasito, tare, to shaue ofte. Rasor, soris, a barber or shauer, also a fydlar. Rasorius, a, um, pertaynyng to shauyng. Rasta, a douche myle. Rastellus, a lyttell rake. Rastrum, & raster, a rake. Rasura, the shauynge. Ratariae naues, yghters or woode barges. Ratare, olde wryters vsed for ratificare, to ra∣tifye, to confyrme. Ratum habere, idem. Rates, ratis, are pieces of tymber pynned togi∣ther, wheron haye or other lyke thynge being layde, they are drawen on ryuers, as on the great streames of Germany and Fraunce is nowe sene, but they be commonly vsed and taken for shyppes, or the syde beames of a shyppe. Ratiastum, Limogois in Peyto. Ratiarius, the mayster of a shyppe. Ratifico, care, to ratifye or confyrme. Ratificatio, a ratification or confyrmation. Ratio, reason, counsayle, pourpose, care, res∣pecte, cause, the maner, the waye, the forme, proportion. Habenda est ratio rei familiaris, The affay∣res concernyng our householde muste be con∣sydered. Rationem habere cum aliquo, to haue to do with one. Neque illud rationis habuisti, Thou haddest therof no consyderation. Sine ratione officij, withoute hauynge re∣garde to his duetie. A quo mea longissime ratio, uoluntas{que} ab∣horrebat, The whyche was contrarye to my fantasy or mynde. Vestram nequeo mirari satis rationē, I can not meruayle ynough at your doynges. Mea est sic ratio, so is my fantasy. Cum ratione aliquid inire, to go aboue a thynge aduysedly, and foreseynge what may folowe.
Nun{quam}ita quisquā bene subducta ratione ad uitam fuit quin. &c. Neuer man was so welle aduysed in his lyfe but &c. Vt ego oculis rationem capio, as farre as I can decerne or see. Pro ratione fructuum, according to the fruit or profyte therof. Rationibus inferre, to put into his reckning. Rationes Galliae procurare, to minyster the affayres pertaynyng to Galliam. Multis rationibus prouisum, it is many ma∣ner of ways prouyded for. Rationem inire, to fynde the meanes. Vt rationem te dictare intelligo, at thyne accompte. Ratio, is also accompt. Ratio constat, the mattier apperethe, or is shewed. Rationes referre, to yelde accompt. Rationem dare, idem. Rationem dictare, to accompte. Ratio de integro ineunda est mihi, I muste fynde an other meane. Rationes putare, to summe ouer a booke of accompte. Rationes conferre, to trye an accompt. Ratiocinatio, reasonynge. Ratiocinator, oris, a caster of accompt. Ratiocinor, aris, to reasone, to gather in argu∣ment, to accompt. Rationabilis, le, reasonable. Rationale, that whiche hath the vse of reason, allsoo that whyche a prieste weareth at masse on his heade, and after putteth it backe lyke ahoode. Rationarius, a boke of accompt. also a booke belongynge to the counsaile of princis, wher∣in actes done and to be done are wrytten, also an auditour. Ratiuncula, a lyttell accompt or reckenynge. Ratispona, a cite in Almain callid Rentzpurgh Ratus, ta, tum, stablyshed, confirmed, supposed. Pro rata, accordyng to his porcion. Ratus, a participle, sygnifieng supposynge. Ratus sum, I supposed. Raua uox, a voyce that may not be wel harde. Raucae, wourmes beinge in the rootes of trees and eateth them. Raucè, hoorsely. Rauceo, raucio, cere, to be hoorse. Raucesco, scere, idem. Raucus, ca, cum, hoorse. Nisi ipse iam rumor raucus erit factus, Ex∣cept that tumour do ceasse. Raucedo, & raucitas, hoorsenesse. Raudus, a thynge vnwrought and vnpolished, it was also taken for aes, brasse. Rauenna, a cytie in Italy. Rauilia, purblynde or dull syghted. Rauio, are, to be hoorse. Rauis, hoorsenesse. Rauiscellus, a, um, lyttell browne of colour. Rauus, a, um, hoorse. also Rauus color, a dulle or sadde colour, a dunne. ¶R ANTE E. REalis actio, an action concernynge the goodes. Reapse, in the selfe or very thyng. Reate, a cytie in Italy. Reatus, a faute or offence. Rebellare, to rebelle. Rebellio, rebellyon. Rebellis, a rebelle. Rebito, tare, to returne. At unum hoc te quae∣so, si huc rebitet è Philocrate, ut eius mihi facis conueniendi copiam, But oone thynge I pray the, if he retourne from Philocrates, fynd the menes, that I may speke with him. Reboo, are, to sowne agayn. Recalcitro, are, to stryke with the hele, to kyck. Recalesco, scere, to waxe warme. Recaluaster, tri, he that is balde before. Recaluus, idem. Recalueo, ere, to be balde agayne. Recanto, tare, to charme away or charme out a thynge, whiche was brought in by inchant∣ment, as the wytches called wyse women are wont to do. Recapitulatio, a reherynge of thynges in cha∣pyters. Recedo, cessi, dere, to depart or go away. Recedere à conditione, à persona, à statu, is to chaunge or alter the condytion, person, or state. Quanquam id nomen durius efficit iāuetustas, à peregrino enim iam recessit, All thowghe auncyentye maketh that name dyffuse, yet is it nowe altered from beynge a straunge worde. Recello, lere, to plucke backe or withdrawe. Recens, tis, newe, late, soone after. Recens aduerbium, newely. Recentior, newer. Recentissimus, newest or latest. Recenti pede recurrere, to runne eftsoones after that he hath rested him, to make a fresh course. Postquam thermopotasti gutturem, recipe te, & recurre pede recenti, After that thou hast warmid thy throte with good drink take thy hart to the, & make a freshe course. Recenter, newely, freshely. Recentius, more newely. Recento, tare, to renewe. Recentor, taris, tari, to be renewed. Recenseo, ere, to number or tell, to recken. Recensus, us, & recensio, a tale or recknyng. Recensitus, ta, tum, tolde or reckned.
Receptaculum, the place, whyche receyuethe thynges, also a place of suretie or comfort. Recepti in ciuitatem, they whyche of straun∣gers be made citisens. Recepto, tare, to receyue often. Receptitius, a, um, that which is reseruid from other. Receptus, ta, tum, receyued. Receptio, a retourne backe, drawyng or bryn∣gynge agayne. Quid tibi huc receptio ad te est meum uirum? Why drawest thou my housbande eftsones backe vnto thy howse? Receptum, taken in custome. Receptus, tus, a place of succour, a retreate in battayle. Receptui canere, to blowe the retrayte. also it is a prouerbe, whiche signifieth to fynyshe or ende the contention. Recessim, an aduerbe, whiche sygnyfieth go∣ynge backe. Recessus, us, a goyng away or backe. Recido, dere, to fal eftsones, or to fal bakward Recident in te hae contumeliae, those rebu∣kes shall lyght on the. Recidit ad paucos, it is com to a few {per}sons. Recidit in cassum, it is come to nothynge. Recidipna, a garment to suppe in. Recidiuus, a, um, eftesones restored, sometyme eftsones decayde or fallen. Recîdo, di, dere, to cut agayne, to cut behynd. Recinium, a square garment, whiche they that dyd weare them, dyd cast the one part therof ouer theyr shulders at their back, lyke to fren∣che clokes. Reciniati, they that dyd weare suche clokes. Recino, ere, to synge agayne, to sowne. Recipie, Cato vseth for recipiam. Recipio, coepi, cipere, to receyue or take, to ad∣mytte, to call agayne, to brynge in saulfgard, to delyuer, to vndertake, to promyse. also re∣cipere, is to reserue to hym selfe, or to except a thyng in gyuyng or bargaynyng. Recipere se, to retourne or come agayne. Percunctatum ibo ad portum, quoad se re∣cipiat frater, I wyl go seke at the hauen, vn∣tyll my brother come agayne. Recipere se ad coenam, to come to suppar. Hic homo ad coenam recipit se ad me, This man wyll come to me to suppar. Recipe te ad me, come hyther to me. Recipere se ex opere, to retourne from his busynesse. Recipere se domum, to go home. Recipere in aures, to here Non aedepol istaec tua dicta nūc in aures recipio, In good sothe I do not here now what thou sayest. Recipere se in portū, to arriue at an hauen. Recipere se in principem, to take on him as a Prynce. Recipere anhelitum, to fetch breth or wynd. Priusquam recipias anhelitū, uno uerbo elo∣quere, ubi ego sum, Or euer thou fetcheste breth, tel me at a word, in what case I do stād Recipe animum, take breathe. Recipere, to recouer. Cum quidem me au∣diēte Salinatori, qui amisso oppido fugerat in arcem, glorianti at{que} dicenti, mea opera Quin. Fab. Tarētum recepisti: Certe, inquit ridens, nam nisi tu amisisses, nunquam rece∣pissem: For in my hearynge to Salinator, whiche (the towne of Tarentum beyng lost) fled into the castell, sayeng vnto hym, Thou hast recouered Tarentū Q. Fab. by my mea∣nes: That is true sayd he, laughynge, for yf thou haddest not lost it, I had not recouered it. also to reserue to a mans owne vse. Reciprocatio, a goinge backe, or retournynge to the place that he came fro. Reciproco, care, to tourne backe, to repete, to goo backe. Reciprocus, ca, cum, that whiche is repeted or eftsones rehersed. Recisamentum, a lyttell piece, a gobet. Racisus, a, um, newe cutte. Recito, tare, to reade that other may heare and vnderstande, to recite or tell eftsones. Reclamo, mare, to denye with a lowde voyce or crye. Recliuia, & recliuium, is whan the skynne of the fynger is loose from the nayle. Recludo, si, dere, to open. Infernas reserat se∣des & regna recludat pallida, Vndoo he the lockes of places infernall, and lette hym sette wyde open the pale regions of deathe. Iusti∣nus putteth Reclusus for clausus, shutte. Reclusus, a, um, opened. Recocta, seconde or course chese. Recogito, tare, to remembre. Recognitio, a knowlege. Recognosco, noui, noscere, to recognyse, to knowe perfectly, to ouerloke, to remember. Recolligo, legi, ligere, to assemble or gather togyther. also to reconcyle. Quod scribis, etiā si cuius animus esset in te offensior, a me re∣colligi oportere, quid dicas? Where thou wryteste, that more ouer yf any man be dys∣pleased with the, that he shulde be reconciled by my meanes, What sayste thou? Recolo, lere, to repute, to repete, to calle to re∣membraunce. Recomminiscor, sceris, recomminisci, to re∣member, or calle to remembraunce. Reconcilio, liare, to reconcyle, to restore vnto fauoure. Reconcilior, reconciliaris, reconciliari, to be reconcyled. Reconciliare in libertatem, to set at libertie. Reconciliatio, a reconcylynge.
Reconcinno, nare, to newe make, to make mete, properly a garmente. Recondo, dere, to hyde, to laye vp. Recordor, aris, ari, to remember. Recoquo, coxi, coquere, to boyle or sethe eft∣sones, to amende with study. Recordatio, remembraunce. Recreatio, a recreation, a restorynge. Recreo, aui, are, to recreate, to refreshe, to restore. Recresco, scere, to growe agayne. Recrudesco, scere, to renewe a fault made by princes to theyr familiars. Recta, a supper, where they sat al in a rewe. Rectangulus, is where lynes are soo ioyned, that no part is longer or shorter thā an other. Recta, an aduerbe signifienge strayghte. Cur non recta introibas? why wenteste thou not strayghte, or the strayghte waye in. Recté, wel ynough. Quid tu igitur lachrymas aut quid es tam tristis? Pamp. Recté mater. S. Quid fuit tumulti? Than wherfore doeste thou mourne? or why arte thou so heuy? P. It is well ynoughe mother. S. what was al this noyse? Recté parere, to brynge forthe a chylde of a right shape. Recté, of good right, with good reason. Recté dicis, thou sayest truely. Recté est, it is inoughe, or I haue inoughe. Tum quod idem ei, recté est, I haue also y∣noughe to gyue hym. Recté facere alicui, to do good to a man. Stultus & sine gratia es, tibi recté facere, quando quod facias perit. Thou arte a sole and without thanke, to doo him any good, whan all is loste that thou doest. Recté ferre, to take paciently, Si sapis, ne{que} praeterquam quas ipse amor molestias ha∣bet, addas: illas quas habet, rectè fearas. If thou be wyse, adde to no more griefe thanne loue bringeth with hym, and theym that he bringeth, suffer paciently. Recte, signifyeth sometyme nothynge, as Do∣nate saythe. Rogo num quid uelit, recte, in∣quit: abeo. I asked if he wolde any thynge. Nothynge, he sayde, I went than my waye. also ye, strayght waye. S. Tu rus hinc abis? D. rectè, Goest thou nowe into the cuntrey? D. ye strayght waye. Rectè ualet, he or she is in good helthe. Rectius, better. Rectitas, & Rectitudo, iustice or rightwisenes Rector, toris, a ruler. Rectus, the nominatiue case. Rectum intestinum, the gutte from whense the ordure passeth. Rectus, ta, tum, strayght, whiche is not cro∣ked, vpright, iuste. Recubitus, plyinge at reste. Recubo, are, to lye and reste. Recudo, cudi, dere, to newe hamer, or newe worke, as it were on an anduelde: also it is taken for, to make newe, or newe prynte. Recuperatores, iudges assigned, or commissi∣oners, for a priuate matter. Recumbo, to syt at a table, or at meales: some tyme to leane on one. Recumbebat, mecum¦uir egregius Fidius Rufinus, super eum mu∣niceps ipsius, There satte with me that wor¦shypfull manne Fidius Rufinus, and aboue hym his neyghbour. Recuperatio, & reciperatio, & reciperantia, was of olde wryters sayde, where there was a lawe made betwene the people of Rome, & other nations and cities, wherin they accor∣ded, that priuate thynges taken, shulde be re¦delyuered, whiche is now vsed in our leages and entercourse with straunge countres and prynces. Recupero, rare, to recouer. Recupio, cupiui, cupere, to desyre moche. Quin ira faciam, ut recupias facere sumptū, & si ego uetem: And yet wyll I so handle it, that thou shalte moche desyre to spende, al∣though I wolde forbyd the. Recurro, rere, to runne agayne, to go or come agayne quickely. Recursus, us, a runninge backe, a recourse. Recurso, are, to runne often backe or agayne. Recurué, an aduerbe signifienge downward, bowed backwarde, crokedly. Recuruitas, taris, a bowynge backe. Recuruo, are, to bowe backe. Recuruor, ari, to be bowed backe. Recuruus, a, um, bowed backe, or croked. Recusabile, that which is worthy to be refused Recusatio, a refusall. Recusator, a refuser. Recuso, are, to refuse, also to defende. Recutitus, he that is circumcised. sometyme exulcerate. Redabsoluo, uere, to dyscharge or dyspeche. Sequere hac, te redabsoluam, qua aduenisti gratia, Folowe me thyther, I wyl dispatche thy matter, for the whiche thou camst hither Redactus, ta, tum, brought. In id redactus sum loci, I am in that case. Redambulo, are, to returne. Cura {quam} optime potes. Er. bene ambula, & redambula, Do the beste that thou canste. Er. well gette the hense, and come agayne quickely. Redandruo, are, idem. Redamo, aui, are, to loue mutually. Redarguo, guere, to reproue. Reddo, di, dere, to render or yelde, to delyuer to restore, to gyue, to make. Reddere certiorem, to assertayne.
Reddere▪ rationem, to make accompte, or reckenynge. Reddere, to put in other. Tempestas uenit, confringit regulas imbrices{que}, ibi dominus indiligens reddere alias ne uult, The tem∣peste came, and brake the tyles, and the eue∣ses, where as the neglygent owner wold not put in other in theyr places. Reddere commorum, to cause one to make haste, to haste hym forwarde. Reddere dictum ac factum. Videre egisse iā nescio quid cū sene. S. De. illo quod dudū? dictum ac factum reddidi, It semeth thou haste done late I wote not what with the old man. S. Meanest thou that, the other daye? thou haddest not soo soone spoken, but it was done. Reddidi impetratum, I brought it to passe. Reddere operam, to requyte a good tourne or an ylle. Reddere aliquē, to resemble or be like to one. Redemptio, redemption. Redemptito, demptitare, to redeeme or bye a∣gayne often. Redempto, tare, to redeme. Redemptor, toris, a redemer, a warkmā whi∣che taketh any warke in greate. sometyme it sygnifieth hym which taketh rentes to ferme▪ Redeo, diui, dij, redire, to retourne. Redhibeo, hibui, bere, to cause the sellar to haue agayne that whiche he solde. Redhibitio, restitution. Redigo, degi, digere, to bryng by force or cun∣nynge. sometyme to restore. Redigere in ordinem, to compell men to liue accordyng to their estate or profession. Redis ad ingenium, thou doste after thyne olde facyon, or as thou art wont to do. Redire ad se. Sed paululum sine ad me ut re¦deam, But let me take breathe a lytell. Tan∣dem reprime iracundiam, atque ad te redi: Nowe leaue thy fume, & remember thy selfe. Redeam ad pauca, Vt ad pauca redeam, ac mittam illius ineptias To the intent that I wyll be shorte, and passe ouer his foly. Redi ad rem, goo to the pourpose, or to the matter. Redijt ad restim res, Opera tua ad restim mihi quidem res redijt, By thy meanes I am brought to the poynt to hange my selfe. Rediit ad rastros. Nam si illi pergam suppe ditare sumptibus Menedeme, mihi illae cue∣re ad rastros res rediit. Surely if I shoulde maynteyn his expenses Menedemus, it wold brynge me to rake corne or grasse for my ly∣uynge. Redit res in eum locum, the thynge is come so to passe. In cum iam res rediit locum, ut sit necesse, The matter is come soo to passe, that there is no remedy. Redit mihi animus, my courage is come vn∣to me. Redit animo, it commeth to my mynde. Redire in concordiam, to be agreed. Redire in gratiam, idem. also to be eftsoones in fauour. Redimicula, the ornamentes or apparaylle of a womannes heade: as a veluette bonette or frenche hoode. Redimio, iui, ire, to adourne or apparayle or trymme. Reditur, is retourned. Redhibitum, restored. Redico, cere, to tell or say agayne. Rediculi, a temple at Rome withoute the gate callyd Capena, where Hannyball beynge a∣ferde, retyred backe. Redimîtus, ta, apparayled on the head. Redimere, to take in charge. Redinunt, for redeunt, they retourne or come agayne. Redintegro, to begynne eftsoones, to renewe or refreshe. Redintegratio, a renewyng. Redipiscor, sceris, sci, to recouer or get agayne. Redimo,, dêmi, dimere, to redeme, to bye, to recouer, to recompence, to take in bargayne. Redemptores, they that hyre lande, or taketh any thynge in great or taske. Redintegrare, to begynne a freshe. Redintegrato animo, with courage reuyued, with a freshe courage. Redito, tare, to retourne by and by. Reditus, tus, a retourne. Reduuia, whan the skynne commeth from the nayles of the fyngers. also an adders skyn. Rediuiuum, that whiche retourneth eftesones to lyfe. Also that whyche of an olde thyng is made newe or yonge. Rediuius, a wourme called a tyke, whyche suc∣keth bloude from man or beast. Redoleo, ere, to smelle or sauour. Redonatio, a gyuynge agayne of the thynge that is taken. Redono, are, to gyue agayne. Redorior, redordior, iri, to begyn ageyne. Redormio, to awake. Redormitio, an awakynge out of slepe. Redostio, tire, of olde wryters was taken for to gyue thanke. Reducem, & reduces, they do call suche which are brought out of exyle or captiuitie. Reducere, to brynge saufe. Méque oppido in arcem reduco, And I conueyd my self quick∣ly into the castell. also to pacifye or appease. Numen{que} reducant, Let theym appease the wrathe or displeasure of god. Reduco, duxi, ducere, to bryng back, or pluck
backe, to delyuer or set out of peryll, to re∣concyle. Reducere ad planum cicatrices, to make that woundes maye not be perceyued or to make them withoute a seame. Reductus, a, um, broughte backe or safe. Redundo, are, to ouerflowe, to reflowe or re∣tourne backe, to redounde. Reduro, are, to stop or close. Reduplico, care, to double eftsones. Redulcero, rare, to impostume or make an im¦postume in some parte of the body. Refello, to proue fals, to repreue of falsehode, to deny that whiche is obiected. Referio, rire, to stryke agayne. Refercio, cire, to fyl. Refero, tuli, ferre, to brynge agayne, to resem¦ble, to reporte, to referre, to reuoke, to tell. Referebam me, I retourned. To adde, to or ascribe, to turne, to renewe, to brynge, to declare or expresse. Refero impensum, I make accompt of that whiche is bestowed. Referre rationem, to yeld or make accompt Referre ad aliquem, to aske one counsayle in any matter. Referre de re aliqua ad Senatum, was whā the Comsuls purposed a matter in the senate desyringe the Senatours to reason and con∣sulte therof. Referre pedem, to set forthe a fote, or goo. Eutyche hanc uolo rem prius agi, quā me∣um intro refero pedē, I wyl that this thing Eutyche be done, or I go one fote in. Retulit ad me pedem, he came towarde me. Referunt haec ad rem, these thynges pertein to the matter. Refero acceptum, Omnia quae uidimus, si recte rationabimus, uni accepta referemus Antonio. All that we see, if we recken well, we maye impute it onely to Antonie. Quod uiuit, mihi acceptum refert, He con∣fesseth to be longe of me, that he now lyueth. Verum omnem tranquillitatem & quietem senectutis refert acceptam clementiae tuae. But all the tranquillite and quietnesse of his age, he confesseth to procede or haue receiued of your mercy and goodnesse. Referre gratiam, to gyue thanke. Nunquā ego illi possum gratiam referre, ut meritus est de me, I can neuer gyue hym thanke suf∣ficient for that he hath done for me. Speroe go mihi quoque tempus tale euenturum, ut tibi gratiam referam parē. I truste the time shall come, that I shall do you as moche ple∣sure. Non enim sperasti mutuam tibi grati∣am relaturum, ut uicissim tuos compellarē. Thou dyddeste not thynke, that I wolde in this wyse haue requited the, in remembring thine auncetours, as thou haste done myne. Referri in acceptum, to be brought in a rec∣knynge. Posteaquam reus factus est, primo negabat opus in acceptum referri posse, af∣ter that he was accused, fyrst he denyed that the warke moughte be broughte vnto a rec∣kenynge. Referre in melius, to turne it to a better vse Referre mores, to expresse the conditions or maners of an other. Referre oculos, to caste the loke vpon one. Referre par, to requyte. Ille quem benefici¦o adiungas, ex animo facit, studet par refer¦re, whom thou gettest with benefyt, he doth all thynges with a good harte, and studiethe to requite the. Referre pedem, uel gradum, to step backe to retreate. At illa retulit, quaesiuit{que}, quidnam mihi ui∣deretur, she tolde me all, and asked what I thought therin. Refert, Cuius consilij magni referebat e in eresse, At the whiche counsayle, it had ben very necessary▪ that ye shulde haue ben. Par∣ui retulit non suscepisse, it made lyttell mat∣ter, that he tooke it not. Mea quid refert? What care I? Mea nihil refert? I haue naught to do with it. Tua refert, it is for thy profytte. Quid refert me fecisse regibus, ut mihi obedirent, si me hodie hic umbraticus deriserit? What auaylethe it, that I haue made kynges to obeye me, if nowe this lewd knaue shall laughe me to scorne. Refert, It is expediente or necessary. Neque enim nu∣mero comprehendere refert: it is not ne∣cessary, to reherse them in number. Refectus, ta, tum, restored, renewed, amen∣ded, made eftsones. Reficio, ficere, to recreate, or restore, to amend to make agayne. Reficior, ceris, ci, to be restored, recouered from sickenes, Also renewed or newe made. Refigo, xi, gere, to make fast or sure, to thrust in harde. Sometyme it signifieth the contra¦ry, to drawe out that whiche is fastened. Refigere tabulas, & leges, to vndo or destroy lawes. Acta Antonij rescidistis, leges refix istis: ye haue cancelled the actis of Antony, & vndone or dissolued his lawes. Fixit leges, pretioque refixit, He stablyshed lawes, and for money eftesones dissolued them. Refirmo, are to fasten or stablyshe agayne. Reflatio, a contrary wynde. Reflatus, tus, idem, Reflecto, xi, tere, to bowe backe, to tourne backe or agayne. Quem neque fides, ne{que} iusiurandum, ne{que} illum misericordia repres¦sit, ne{que} reflexit, whom neyther promyse, nor othe, nor yet pite withdrewe or pulled backe.
Reflo, are, to blowe agayne or contrarye. Refluo, xi, fluere, to flowe. Refluxus, us, the tyde, whan the water floweth Refocillatio, a comfortynge or refreshynge, or recreation. Refocillo, are, to recomforte, to refreshe, to re¦create, to fortifie. Reformo, mare, to refourme. Reformator, a refourmatour. Refoueo, foui, fotum, fouere, to nourisshe or comforte eftesones, to restore or set in his fyrste state. Refractarius, obstinate, in a wilfull oppinion. Refragor, aris, ari, to resiste with wordes, or clamour. Refrango, fregi, refrangere, aut refringere, to braste open. Refreno, nare, to pull backe one from a pur∣pose. Refrico, care, to renewe a sore or griefe, whi∣che was out of remembraunce. Animum memoria refricare, to touche one to the hart with the remembrance of a thing Refrigeratorius, a, um, that whiche coleth, or maketh colde. Refrigeratio, a coolynge. Refrigeratus, ta, tum, kooled: also refresshed or comforted. Refrigerium, a recreation or aduauncynge of the mynde. Refrigesco, scere, to make colde, to coole. Refrixit, it is cesed, or is more cooled. Refrigero, are, to coole, or make colde, to re∣freshe or recomforte. Refrina, a beane, whiche the olde Romaynes were wonte to brynge home out of the fielde to doo sacryfyce for the good lucke of theyr corne. Refuga, an vnrulie personne, whiche wyll not be ordered. Refugio, gere, to flee or runne away or backe. also to refuse. Refugiunt memoria nostra ista. These thyn∣ges ben out of remembraunce. Refugere ab admonendo, to leaue counsay∣lynge of one. Refugere a dicendo, to forbeare to speake, for displeasure. A consuetudine refugere, to leaue ones com¦pany, or to become straunge where one hath ben familiar. Refugium, refuge, succour, or place where one maye be succoured. Refugus, a, um, that whiche gothe awaye, or is layde aparte. Refulgeo, gêre, to shyne. Refundo, fudi, fundere, to restore that which lacketh. Quicquid de erit, ex meo refundam What so euer doth lacke, I wyll make it vp of myne owne. Also to paye home agayne, or to yelde. Id erat non tam accipere benefici∣um, quàm refundere, That was not so mo∣che, to receyue a good turne, as to do a good tourne. Also to caste vppe by vomyte. Quod hesterna crapula ingurgitauerat, pa∣lam refudit, That whiche in his yesterdayes ryotte he ingourged or deuoured, he openlye dyd parbrake or vomyte it vp. Refutatio, a denyenge, a replycation, an argu∣ment to the contrary. Refuto, tare, to denye, to replye. Regaliolus, a byrde, betwene whome and the Egle is contynuall hostilitie, and is yelowe of colour. Regaliter, royally. Regalis, le, royall. Regelo, are, to thawe, or resolue that, which is frosen. Regenero, rare, to regenerate or eftesones in∣gender. Regero, gessi, gerere, to put in wrytynge, to brynge backe, to vomite vp. Regestum, erthe caste vp. Regia, a kynges house. Regisco, scere, olde wryters vsed for cresce∣re,  growe. Regificus, ca, cum, that whereby a kynge is made. Regilla, a kynges robe. Regillus, a lyttell kynge. Also the name of a ri¦uer in Italy. Regimen, minis, a rule or gouernaunce. Regina, a queene. Regionatim, place by place, by euery region or coste. Regio, a region or countrey, also a coste, as easte, weste, northe, and southe. A recta regione deflectere, to go out of the strayte or right waye. Regium, a cytie beyonde the mountaynes to∣warde Italy, called Rezo. Regius, a, um, of a kynge. Regius morbus, the iaundyse. Regno, are, to reigne. Regnum, a realme, and the gouernaunce. Rego, xi, regere, to rule, to gouerne. Regor, geris, to be ruled or gouerned. Regrador, deri, di, to go backe. Regredior, regredi, idem. Regredo, dere, to reuoke, or call agayne. Regressio, & regressus, us, a returne backe, a resorte backe. Regula, a rule. Regularis, regulare, that whiche is vnder a rule. Regulo, are, to rule or directe. Regulus, a Prynce or lord of a lyttell countrey properly Reguli, be the chylderne of kynges.
also Regulus, is a lyttel byrd, called a Wren and a serpente called a Cockatryce, whiche sleeth a man with his syght. It was also the name of a Consule, whiche for kepyng of his promyse, was put to cruell death by the Car¦thaginensis. Also a great Rhetorician in the tyme of Plynie. Reieculae, uel reijculae oues, sheepe drawen out of the folde for age or sickenesse, kebbers, cro¦nes, or cullyars. Reiectanea, of philosophers be taken for thin¦ges to be abhorred, as syckenes, pouertie, and sorowe. Reiectio, parbrakynge. Reiectio sanguinis, the issuing out of bloud at the mouthe, the nose, or the vaynes. Reiectus, ta, tum, caste out, caste awaye, or put forthe. Reijcio, ieci, ijcere, to caste awaye, to dryue backe, Tityre pascentes a flumine reijce ca∣pellas, Tityre dryue thy gootes that do fede awaye from the riuer. also to refuse, to put awaye. Me uero tanquam inutilem reiece∣runt, As for me they refused, as a person vn∣profitable. Si altera illa magis instabit, for∣sitan nos reiiciat: If the other wyl be impor∣tunate, perchance they wyll put me awaye. Reiicere iudices aut testes, to refuse iudges or witnesses. Reiicere, to parbrake or vomyte. Senos sex∣tantes non excessit: aut si excessisset, reiicie∣bantur, He exceded not twelue ounces, if he passed that, they were caste vp agayne. Relatio, a reporte, a respecte: Amonge Logici¦ans, it is the effecte of the relatiue, as the fa∣ther, the sonne, the maister, the seruaunt, the husbande, the wyfe. For without the oone, the other can not reteyne his name, for a son maye not be withoute a father: nor a wyfe without a husebande, nor a seruant without a mayster. Relati in aerarios, were they, which for some defaute were by the maysters of maners cal∣led Censores, put out of the number of Cite¦sens, and dyd onely paye tribute, or heedsyl∣uer, as straungers. Relatiue, hauynge relation to a thynge. Relatiuum, a relatife, whiche hath relation to some thynge. Relaxo, are, to lowse. Relegatus, banyshed. Relegatio, a banyshement out of his countrey. Relego, relegare, to banyshe, to remoue, to se¦uer one from an other, to sende awaye. Religatus, ta, tum, faste bounde. Relego, legi, legere, to rede agayne. Relicinus, he that hath a good bushe of heare, well trymmed behynde. Relicina frons, a fayre large and hyghe for∣hede, without heare. Relictus, ta, tum, forsaken or lefte. Relictus sum mihi, I am lefte alone, or I am at my lybertie. Religio, onis, religion, a reuerend drede, doubt lest he shall offende, also conscience, or as a man mought saye, a scruple of conscience. In religionem uertere, to feare leaste god were displeased, to make conscience of a thynge. Religionem inducere, to brynge in feare of goddes displease. Religio est, it is not leful. Huc introiere, ni¦si necessario, & caste, religio est, To enter in there, but for necessitie and chastlie, it is not lefull. Religiōe obstrīgere, uel obligare, to charge ones conscience with a matter. Exoluere relligione▪ to discharge ones con∣science, or to remoue one from scrupulositie. Relligio est mihi, I haue conscience therof. Relligio mihi non est quo minus hoc faciā. I haue no conscience therof but that I maye doo it. Religionem alicui afferre, to cause one to be scrupulouse. Eximere religionem, to put hym oute of doubte in his conscience. Exemplarantique religionis, an exaumple of a good or strayte conscience. Testimoniorum religionem & fidem nun∣quam ista natio coluit, This people had ne∣uer regarde to theyr othe. Religiose, fearefully, doubtfully, daungerous∣ly, scrupulously, aduysedly, curiousely. Religiosus, deuout towarde god, and fearing to offende hym. Religiosus, a, um, timerouse. Dies relligiosi, dayes of heuynesse for some misaduenture whiche hath happened on those dayes. Delubrum religiosum, a deuoute place, or a churche or chapell whervnto men haue great deuotion to come. Religiosum est id facere, there is a consciēce in the doinge therof. In testimonio religiosi, scrupulouse in bea∣rynge wytnesse. Religo, are, to bynde faste. Religare relligionibus bona alicui{us}, to giue goodes to the honour and seruice of god. Relino, releui, relinre, to open that whiche is stopped. Releui omnia dolia, I haue broched all the vesselles. Nolo ego nos pro summo bibere: nulli relerimus postea, I wolde not that we dranke all out: for I wyl for no man set any a broche afterwarde. Relimino, to gyue lyghte. Relinquo, liqui, relinquere, to leaue. Relin∣quere
animam, to dye. Relinquit eum ani∣mus, His harte fayleth hym. Relinquere aes alienum, to dye in det. Arrabôni relinquere, to leaue a thynge vp∣pon a pledge. In medio relinquere, to leaue in doubte. Locum admonitionibus relinquere, to re∣ceyue the monitions whiche is giuen vs. Locum subtilitati nullum relinquere, to do a thyng so subtilly, that it can not be amended Locum uituperādi alicui relinquere, to giue occasion to one to saye yll. Memoriam alicuius rei relinquere, To do a thynge wherof shall be lefte a perpetuall re∣membraunce. Pecuniam in questu relinquere, to delyuer money to haue gayne therby. Scriptum relinquere, to leaue it in writyng. Spein relinquere, to hope or truste noo more on a thynge. Studium alicuius rei relinquere, to care noo more for a thynge. Suspitionem relinquere, to cause suspition. Relinquitur, it foloweth. Reliqua, that whiche remayneth vpon a rec∣kenynge. Reliqua contrahere, to be in arrerage of a terme. Reliquatores, they whiche ben in arrerage on theyr accompte. Also any other, whiche haue in theyr handes some parte of that, whiche they ought to haue payde. Spes nulla reliqua in te est, I haue no more hope of the. Reliquiae, that whiche is lefte. Reliquium facere, to leaue, to omytte. Reliquos facere, to leaue them. Reliquias persequi, to pursue that whiche is begun. Reliquor, ari, to be behynde in paymente of a certayne summe. Reliquus, a, um, the remenaunte, that which remaynethe. Reliquum est, the reste is. Reluceo, luxi, cere, to shyne or be bryght. Reluctor, tari, to contende or stryue agayne. Reluo, luere, to paye agayn that whiche is bo¦rowed, to fetche home a gage or pledge. Also to washe eftesones. Remancipo, are, to sell agayne a thynge to him whiche firste solde it. Remandere, to chewe the cudde. Remaneo, si, nêre, to abyde stylle. Remano, are, to tourne backe to a place. Remansio, an abydynge. Remeculi, lyttell shyppes, whiche men of Lemnos vsed. Remedium, remedy. Remeligo, a fyshe whiche cleauynge to the keale of a shyppe, causeth hym to tary. Remendo, are, to amende or correcte a faute. Remeo, are, to returne or go backe agayne. Remigatio, a rowynge or saylynge. Remex, remigis, whiche do rowe in a galeye or bote. Remigium, the rowynge of a shyp or bote. Remigo, are, to rowe. Remigro, are, to go backe, to returne. Remillum, a thynge croked and brode. Reminiscor, sceris, sci, to call agayne to re∣membraunce. Reminiscentia, a remembraunce of that, whi∣che was ones in the mynde. Remisse, fayntly, without courage, humblye: Sometyme merily. Remissio, remission, forgyuenesse, a recreating of mynd after study or labour, lacke or faint¦nesse of courage. Remitto, misi, mittere, to send to sende agayn, to sende backe, to release or forgiue, to grant, to lette downe, to commytte, or remytte, to relinquishe or leaue, to ceasse. Remittere animum, to put away care, to vn∣bende or louse. Annum remittere, to pardone hym for one yere. Ardorem remittere, not to be fierse as he was. Remittere aliquid adolescentiae, Pardone hym somewhat for his youth. Remittere nuntium, Gratiam habeo tibi, quum copiam istam mihi & potestatem fa∣cis, ut ego ad parentes remittam nuntium, I thanke the, that thou gyuest me this leaue and also authoritie, that I maye sende to thy frendes, to prouyde for the els where. Contentionem remittere. to leaue contētiō. De supplicio remittere, to pardon him part of his execution. De custodia remittere, not to be so carefull as he was. Frenos dolori remittere, to abandone hym to all sorow, or to let hym selfe to be posseded with heuynesse. Ius alicui remittere, to release all his title or righte vnto one. Librum remittere, whan the barke is louse or fallen from the tree. Memoriam remittere, to let passe out of re∣membraunce. Numeros in cantu remittere, to reste in syn∣gynge, as is the vse in prickesonge. Nuntium uxori remittere, to be deuorced. Repudium remittere idem. Officium remittere, to renounce his duetie. Remissus, a, um, dull, remitted, sente agayne, ceased, or deferred. Remissus animus, whiche hath no courage.
Remissum corpus, an vnlusty body. Remissius frigus, not very colde. Remissio, a release, a losynge, a withdrawe∣ynge. Oculorum remissio, a withdrawyng of the loke. Remissio morbi, whan the sickenes is aba∣ted or goynge away. Remollio, ire, to make very softe, or easy. Remollescere, to pacifie or mittigate. Rêmora, a lyttell fyshe, whiche reteyneth a great ship vnder sayle. also tarienge. Remorbesco, to fall eftesones into sickenes. Remordeo, dêre, to tourment the mynde, or make one heuy. Remores, byrdes, whiche by theyr flyghte or voyce signified, that the thynge purposed was not to be folowed. Remoria, a place on the toppe of the Hyll cal∣led Auentinus, where Remus stode, and by the flyghte of byrdes, aduysed the buyldyng of Rome. Remona, the dwellynge house of Remus. Remoror, aris, ari, to tary or make to abyde. Remorari gradum, to rest hym self in a place. Remotus, ta, tum, fer from, remeued. Remôtus homo à dialecicis, he that pas∣seth nothynge on logike. Remota res à memoria a thing not thought vpon. Remotus à culpa, he that is in no faute. Remoto ioco, in erneste. Remoto delectu, without hauynge regarde more to one than to an other. Remotus ab inani laude, he loueth no vaine glory. Remoueo, ere, to remoue, to take awaye. Remouete moram, make ye hast, spede you. Remouêre se à negotijs publicis, to meddel no more with commune affayres. Remouere aliquem à Republica, to put one out of the offyce whiche he hath in the weale publyke. Remouere ab oculis, to hyde. Remouere se arte sua, to leaue or forsake his crafte. Remouere de medio, to put a thynge cleane awaye. Remouere metum, to put awaye feare. Remouere moram, to make haste. Remouere operam suā à populari coetu, to take no more peyn about other mēs busynes. Repandirostrum pecus, a beaste hauyng his nose tourned vpwarde, a worde vsed of Pa∣cuuius and Lucilius auncient poetes. Reciprocicornes, was taken of Laberius for Rammes, for the tournynge backeward and eftsones forwarde of theyre hornes. Remugio, giui, gire, to belowe or lowe again, to render a great sowne. Remulco, care, & remulculo, is properlye to drawe a gret shyppe or barge with a lasse ves¦sell, by translation it signifyeth to drawe a thynge casely. Remulcus, a lyttell bote or barke. Remulinus ager, Remus fielde. Remuncopae, instrumentes, wherwith shyp∣pes be dryuen on lande. Remunero, are, & remuneror, ari, to reward to recompence a good tourne. Remuneratio, recompense. Remus, the brother of Romulus, whiche buil∣ded Rome. Renanciscor, sceris, sci, to get agayne. Ren, renis, a kydney. Renascor, sci, for denuo nasci. Renascens annus, the sprynge tyme. Renarro, are, to tell, to repete. Renato, tare, to swym backe, or swym agayn. Renes, the kydneys, or the reynes of the back. Renideo, dere, to shyne, to sauour or smell. Renitor, ti, to resiste. Renixus, us, resistence. Renodo, dare, to vnknytte, or vndo a knotte. Renoues, garmentes made of skynnes of wul∣fes or other beastes, wherin the auncient Al∣maynes were wonte to lye in the warres. Renouo, are, to renewe or make eftesones. Renouello, lare, to make newe agayne. Rentifolia, a kynd of wyld roses, whiche haue neyther good sauour nor fascion. Renumero, rare, to paye agayne moneye, whiche is receyued. Renuntiata, an Ile by Ethyope, so riche, that the inhabitauntes do giue for a horse by ex∣chaunge a talent of golde. Renuntio, are, to reporte, to signify, to shewe openly, to renounce, to refuse, to resigne, som¦tyme to restore. Renuntiare uitae, to refuse to lyue. Renuntiatur Consul, he is declared consule. Renuntiatio, a report, also a resignation of an office, also a summons by an officer. Renuntij, they whiche do cary tydynges from one to an other. Renno, nuere, to refuse, to despyse. Renutus, nutus, a refusal or denyar with coun¦tenaunce. Reor, reris, ratus sum, I suppose. Repagulum, a dore or wyndowe or other thing that shutteth or closeth. Repages, idem. Repandus, a, um, bente or bowed, and brode backewarde, as ores were in the olde time. Repando, dere, to bende backe. Reparo, rare, to repayre, to restore to the first astate, to renewe. Reparamen, & reparatio, a repayrynge or reparation.
Reparco, parsi, sere, to spare. Repastinatio, a newe dyggynge about vynes. Also a bryngynge of grounde to temper with moche labour and dyggynge. Repastinatus, ta, tum, newe digged or brought in temper. Repastino, are, to dygge agayne about vines, to alter lande or grounde, with ofte dygging or labourynge. Repastinor, nari, to be eftsones dygged, or brought into temper. Repauso, are, to take reste. Rèpedo, are, to go awaye, to go backe. Repello, puli, pellere, to put backe, to repel. Repellere sanguinem, to let one bloude. Repellere uim ui, to resyste force with force. Rependo, di, dere, to recompence. Rependebatur duplo argento, one paied for it the double wayte of syluer. Repens, tis, sodayne vnloked for. Repenso, are, to ponder, to ouersee, to iudge. Repentè, sodaynely. Repentim, idem. Repentinus, a, um, sodayne. Reperibitur, it shall be founde. Repertor, he that fyndeth. Repercutio, cussi, cutere, to stryke agayn, to reuerberate. Repercutere dicta, to take aduauntage of one in his wordes. Repercussus, sus, a reuerberation or strykyng often. Reperio, peri, rire, to fynde by auenture. som¦tyme otherwise. to perceyue. Reperire causam, to fynde an excuse. Reperire negotium in hac re, to haue moch to do with that matter. Reperire gloriam, to gette an honourable renoume. Reperit suos parentes, hath she founde that they be her father and mother. Reperies hoc non secus, they shal fynde it to be none other wise. Reperitur non ullo uestigio, there is no men¦tion made of hym. Repertitius, he that is founden. Repertorium, an inuentory. Repeto, tij, tere, to aske agayne, to aske often or eftesones, to reherse agayne, or repete, to reuolue, to begynne agayne, to resorte eftso∣nes to a thynge, to call agayne. Hem repudiatus repetor, Howe nowe, be∣inge ones refused, I am called agayne. Alta repetita, rehersed from the begynnyng, farre sought, or farre fette. Repetere poenas, ab aliquo, to be auenged on one. Repeto, I remember. Me quidem adolescen tulo, repeto quendam principem nomine alternis diebus declamare, alternis disputa∣re, I remember me, whan I was a boy, that one whiche was a Prynce of name, dyd one daye declame, an other daye dispute. Repetere reum, to accuse eftesones. Repetenti memoria, to call to remembrance Repetundarum accusari, is properly where a man sometime beinge in greatte auctoritie and hauynge the rule of a countrey, is accu∣sed and called to a reckenynge, for all that he hath receyued, being in his office, aboue that whiche is his ordynary allowaunce, also for all thynge that he toke wrongefully from a∣ny person or towne: whiche was the most ne∣cessary action for a publik wele, that mought be deuysed. Repignerator, he that redemeth or quiteth his gage or pledge. Repignero, are, to quite or redeme a pledge or gage. It maye be taken somtyme with vs, that whiche in our lawe is called to repleuy: and repignoratio, a repleuy: and repignora¦titia actio for the replegiare. Replaudo, dere, to make noyse with the han∣des beaten to gether. Repleo, plêre, to fyll. Replicatio, a replycation or vnfoldynge of a thynge. Replico, care, to vnfolde, also to replye, to displaye. Replumbo, are, to vnsoulder. Repo, repsi, pere, to crepe, to runne as rotes do in the grounde. Repleo, liui, lire, to polyshe agayne. Repolleo, lere, to be moche able, to be of po∣wer to do. Repollesco, scere, to be eftesones stronge or in force. Repono, sui, nere, to put or set agayne in his place, to laye vp, to recite agayne, to hyde, to redelyuer or restore, to reuoke, to represse, to laye to more, to exaggerate, to heape one on an other, to make to grow agayn, to bring agayne. also to put in by wrytynge. Et quantum longis carpent armenta diebus Exigua tantum gelidus ros nocte reponet: Loke howe moche the sheepe in the longe dayes shall byte. The colde dewe in one nyghte with grow∣inge shall requite. Reponere ceruicem, to wry ones necke now on one side and nowe in an other. Reponere aliquem in deos, to do honour to one as it were vnto god. Reponere in numero eloquentium, To e∣steme him eloquente. Reponere in optima spe, to haue good hope of a thynge. Reponere in suis, to take hym for his frende
Reponere fidem, to truste. Scriptor honoratum si forte reponis A chil∣lem, Thou that writest, if peraduēture thou puttest in Athilles. Reponere nummos, to paye agayne money whiche is lent vs. Reponere aliquid in uaetustatem, to laye vp a thynge for the tyme to come. Reponere remum, to rowe no more. Peto à re ne id à me quaeras, ne tibi idem re¦ponā cum ueneris. I praye the aske not that of me, leste I aske lykewise of the whanne thou commest. Semper ego auditor tantum, nun{quam} ne repo¦nam? shall I be alway an hearer and neuer a wryter. Reporto, are, to brynge backe or agayne. Reportare laudem ex hostibus, to be pray∣sed for his victory. Reportare victoriam, to haue the victory. Reposco, sci, scere, to aske agayne that which is myne owne, or is as it were due to me. Reposcere uicem, to aske one good tourne for an other. Repositorium, a store house. Repositus, & repostus, ta, tum, layde vp, to hyde. Manet alta mente repostum, Iudicium Paridis, Depe in his mynde remayned the iudgemente, that Paris gaue betwene the goddesses, of the whiche sprange the occasy∣on of the destruction of Troye. Repotium, whan the daye after the maryage frendes do come and drynke with the bryde. Reprehendo, dere, to plucke back, to reproue Reprehensio, caughte. Reprehensio, a rebuke, a, pullinge backe. Reprehenso, are, to rebuke sharpely. Repehendere manu, to take by the hande. Repraesento, tare, to represente, to render, to brynge in presence, or presente a thynge, to laye before one, to shewe or declare. Repraesentare se, to be presente. Si repraesentari morte in ea libertas ciuitatis potest. If the citie by my deathe moughte be restored to lybertie. Repraesentare supplicia, to punyshe sodayne¦ly or hastely. Repraesentare iuditia, to preuent iudgement. Repraesentare praetium, to paye the moneye in hande. Repraesentare diém promissorum, to per∣fourme that that he promysed. Reprimo, mere, to refrayne, to let, to appese. Reprimere sermones seu famam, to cause a great fame or reporte to cease. Impetum populi reprimere, to appease the fury of the people, or to cease. Reprimere itinera, to abbreuiate or make the waye shorter. Reprobo, are, to reproue. Reprobus, a man reproued. Reproces, sharpe. Reptile, all thynge that crepeth. Repto, tare, to crepe moche: also to go softely lyke a snayle. Repubescere, to waxe yonge agayne. Repudio, are, to forsake, as a man forsaketh his wyfe, also to refuse, to abandone, or leaue Repudio consilium, quod primum intende∣ram, I wyll now leaue the counsayle that I fyrste intended to folowe. Repudium, a deuorce. Repudium remittere, to be deuorced. Repudium renuntiare, to declare a deuorce. Is me nunc repudium renuntiare iussit tibi, He wylled me to declare to the, that he hath forsaken the. Repudiosae nuptiae, mariage, after the which foloweth soone after a deuorce, Necessitate me mala ut fiam facis, uerum uideto, me u∣bi uoles nuptum dare, ne hac fama faciat, re¦pudosas nuptias, Thou compellest me to be naught, but take hede, that where thou wilt mary me, by that reporte he shall make suche a weddynge as shall sone after be dissolued or broken. Repuerasco, scere, to be eftsones a chylde, or to waxe a chylde agayne. Repugno, are, to repugne or saye contrarye, to resiste. Repugnare inter se, to be contrary one to an other. Repugnanter, an aduerbe, whiche signyfiethe contrariously, displeasauntly. Vt igitur mo∣nere & moneri, proprium est uerae amicitiae, & alterum libere facere, non asperé: alterū pacienter accipere non repugnanter sic ha∣bendum est nullam in amicitijs pestem esse maiorem, quam adulationem, blanditias, assentationem, Lyke therfore as to gyue coū¦sayle, and to be counsayled, properlye belon∣geth to very frendeshyp, also the tone to doo euery thynge frankely, the tother to take all thynge patiently, not displeasauntly. Soo it is to be consydered, that in frendeshyp there is no more pestilence, thanne flatterye, fayre wordes, and consentynge to al thynges. Repugnantia, repugnancy, where one thynge agreeth not with an other. Repugnax, nacis, he that is in euerye thynge contrariouse. Repungo, gere, to prycke agayne, or mutual∣ly displease or offende. Repulsa, a puttyng back of hym, which eyther demandeth or loketh for authorite or offyce. Repullulo, & Repullulasco, scere, to bourgen eftsones or sprynge. Repulsor, oris, he that putteth an other man backe.
Repulsus, he that is put backe. Repumicare, to rayse with a pomayse. Reputo, tare, to thynke often, to consyder mo∣che, to reuolue in the mynde, to compte. Also to cut of eftsones. Requies, reste. Requiesco, scere, to reste or take reste. Requiescere in spe alicuius adolescentis, to be content with the hope whiche one hath in a yonge man. Requiescere in sermone alicuius, to be con∣tent with one communication. Requiescere in lectione poetarum, to take pleasure in the readynge of poetes. Non requiescere consilio cuius{quam}, not to cesse for any mans counsayle. Et mutata suos requierunt flumina cursus. Verg. the riuers being altered cessed to rūne. Requiro, siui, rere, to seke eftesones or often, to requyre, to inquyre or demaunde. In quo maiorum nostrorum saepe requiro prudentiam, I fynde that our auncetours or elders haue therein lacked oftentymes dis∣cretion. Vereor ne literarum officiū à me requiras, I feare that ye wyl blame me for writing no oftener vnto you. Requisitum est, one demaunded. Requisita naturae, natures necessitie. Res, a thynge, the thynge, the matter. somme∣tyme astate, condicion, busynesse, contention, cause, rychesse, substaunce, profytte, weale, experyence, occasyon. Res est, it is matter in dede. Res ad manticam redijt, it is all come to a bagge and a staffe, or a staffe and a walette. Res comperendinata, a mattier adiourned or deferred vntyll the thyrde day. Res iudicata, the matter or cause fynally de∣termined and adiudged. Res controuersa, the matter in suite. Res familiaris, a mans propre goodes. Res forensis, a matter in lawe. Respublica, a publyke weale. Ere nata melius fieri haud potuit quàm fa∣ctum est, Of the occasyon begunne it coulde not better haue ben doone, than it is. Alsoo it sygnifieth meane. I am repperi rem, quo pacto, nec fur, nec socius sies, I haue now founde the meane, howe thou shalte be ney∣ther a thefe, nor a companyon with hym. Rem facere, to gayne or wynne. Nunquàm rem facies: abi, nescis inescare homines, Thou shalt neuer gayne peny, Get the hens, thou canst no skylle to angle men. Rem habere cum aliquo, to haue to do with one, to meddell with one. Res gerere, to haue or make warres. Scipi∣one Aemiliano res in Affrica gerente, Po∣lybius annaliū conditor, ab eo accepta classe scrutādi orbis illius gratia circumuectus est, Scipio Aemilianus makynge warres in Af∣fryke, Polybius the wryter of histories with a certayne numbre of shyppes was conueyed about that coste, to inserche that parte of the worlde. Res semper aliquid apportat noui, expery∣ence bryngeth alway some newes. Ad rem redi, to the matter or purpose. Salua res est, the matter gothe well. Amicos res inuenit, rychesse fyndeth frēdes. Nun{quam} rem facies, thou shalt neuer wynne by it, or neuer thryue with it. Re iuuare, to help with dedes and not with wordes onely. Is amicus, qui in re dubia re iuuat, ubi re est opus, He is a frende, whiche in a case that is doutful, helpeth me with his dedes, where dedes are requyred. Quid isti credam? res ipsi indicat, what shal I truste hym, the dede selfe declareth. Verba ad rem conferre, to doo as he saythe. Vs{que} adeo ego illius ferre possum ineptias, & magnifica uerba, uerba dum sint, uerum enim, si ad rē conferentur, uapulabit, Hither to I can suffre his lewdenesse, and bragges, as longe as they are but wordes, but if he do as he sayth, he shall smart therfore. Rem augere, to waxe thryfty. Re uera, in deede, in very trouthe, matter in dede. Re ipsa, idem. Ere nata non melius fieri potuit {quam} factum est, consyderynge the chaunce or occasion, it coulde not be better done than it is. Pro re nata, the matter cōsydered, to the pur¦pose that happened. Res tua agitur, thy matter is on hande, or the matter toucheth the. Si in rem utri{que} est, yf it be for bothe their profyttes. Verba ad rem conferre, to do as he sayth. Res ipsa indicat, the dede showeth. Resalutatio, a courtayse speakyng to him that speaketh to you, a resalutynge. Resaluto, resalutare, to salute hym that salu∣teth you. Resarcio, si cire, to amende, to refourme. Resarcire damna, to recompence damages. Resarrio, iui, ire, to wede eftsones corne. Rescindo, scidi, scindere, to cutte or breake in sunder, to take awaye, to destroye, to make voyde or repell an acte or lawe, to breake vp. Coelum rescindere fratres, Ter sunt conati. Thryse the bretherne assayed to breake vp he¦uen for to enter. Rescio, sciui, scire, to knowe a thynge whyche is hydde and kepte secrete. alsoo to knowe a thynge after that it is done, whiche was not knowen before.
Rescisco, scere, idem quod Rescio. Rescribo, psi, bere, to wryte agayne, to redely∣uer, to repay money. Rescriptum, the letters of a prynce, makynge aunswere to other letters. Reseco, are, to cut away that which is su{per}fluo{us} Resecare ad uinum, to pare to the quycke, to touche the quycke in a matter. Resecro, crare, to pray or desyre eftsones. also to assoyle one of his auowe. Resedo, dare, to appease. Resegmen, the parynge of a mans nayles. Resero, are, to open a thynge that is closed. Resero, rere, to sowe or set agayne. Reseruatio, a reseruatō, a keping of som thing Reseruo, uare, to kepe a part from other thyn∣ges, to reserue. Reses, idis, ydel from accustomed labour or oc∣cupation. Resex, secis, that whiche is cut and spryngeth agayne, and beareth more fruite than it dyd before. Resideo, resedi, residêre, to reste, to sytte, to stande fast. Residet eius rei in te culpa, the faulte therof is in the. Resido, sedi, sidere, to sytte downe. also to a∣byde. Nam Viennensium uitia inter ipsos re∣sidunt, nostra late uagantur, For the fautes of men of Vienne, do abyde with them, ours runne abrode, and be euery where knowen. Residet in uultu, there dothe reste or appiere in the vysage. Quorum non in sententia so∣lum, sed etiam in nutu residebat autoritas, In whose sentence not onely, but also counte∣nance, auctoritie rested. Residuus, a, um, the reste or remnaunt. Resigno, are, to open that whiche is sealed: somtyme to seale fast, also to shyt, somtyme to restore agayne, also to resygne or surrendre. Resignatum aes, wages stopped for negligēt seruyce in warres. Resilio, lij, ire, to lepe back, or step away quikly Ab hoc crimen resilit, There is no blame to be layde to hym. Resimus, he that hath a camoyse nose, that is to say, tourned vpwarde. Resina, rosyn, all lyke gumme whyche runneth out of trees. Resinatius, a, um, lyke roseyn. Resinatus, ta, tum, rased or dressed with roseyn. Resinosus, full of roseyn. Resipio, pui, pere, idem quod Resipisco. Resipisco, resipui, resipiscere, to retourne to perfecte vnderstandynge, to be eftsones wise where before he erred. Resisto, resisti, resistere, to resist or withstande. Resistitur, the remedy is. Resoluo, uere, to resolue, to destroye, to paye dettes, to remoue, to vndo or vnlouse. Humū resoluere, to labour the erthe. In puluerem resoluere, to make in pouder. Resolutio neruorum, the palsey. Resono, are, to sown agayn, to make an eccho. Resorbeo, bui, & psi, bere, to poure out or dys∣gorge the lycour that was receyued. Respecto, are, to see often, to loue, to helpe. Respectus, ctus, a loke or syght, also respect or regard. Ne{que} eo respectu commotus disces∣serat, Hauynge no regarde therevnto he de∣parted. Respergo, si, gere, to caste water or other ly∣kour about, to sprynkle. Respergimen, a sprynklynge or castyng about of lycour. Respicio, exi, spicere, to loke backe, to haue re∣garde, to prouyde, to remedy, to kepe, to re∣srue, to loue. Respicere, to helpe or succour. Age, me in¦tuis secundis rebus respice, Let se, now in thy prosperitie succour me. Respicit nos deus, God hath pitie on vs. Tace modo, deus respiciet nos aliquis, peace nowe, some god wyll haue pytie on vs. Respicere se, to take hede or haue regarde of hym selfe. Non soles respicere te, cum dicas iniuste alteri? Art thou not wont to take hede of thy selfe, whan thou sayste wrong of an o∣ther man? Non tu te cohibes? non te respi∣cis? non tibi exempli satis sum? Wylt thou not beware? wylt thou not take hede of thy selfe? Am not I a good example vnto the? Respiratio, a breathe or vapour. Respiro, are, to take breathe. also to take com∣forte, to retourne to the fyrste state. Si armis aut conditione positis, aut fatigatione abie∣ctis, aut uictoria detractis, ciuitas respiraue∣rit: & dignitate tua tibi, & fortuna, uti licebit, If that harneyse, eyther by condytions of peace beinge layde away, or by wearynesse of bothe partes being throwen away, or pullyd away by vyctorye, the citie shall recouer her fyrste estimation, thou than shalte enioye thy possessyons and dygnitie. Resplendeo, dere, to shyne. Respondeo, di, dere, to aunswere, to appeere whan one is called, to agree, to consente or be lyke or equall, to be agaynst, as one thyng set or lyenge agaynst an other. Respondere criminibus, to purge vs of that that is layde to our charge. Respondere ad nomina, to appere whan he is callyd. Non respondere, to make defaute. Respondere ad diem, to pay at the day. Respondere superiori, to accorde to that whiche was afore. Respondere patri, to folowe his fathers condytions.
Respondere, sometyme doth signify satisfa∣cere. Hocproprium tuum munus est ut ita e∣rudiatur, ut & patri, & Scipioni nostro & tibi tam propinquo respondeat, It is your part specially, that he be so brought vp in ler∣nynge, that he maye satisfye his father, and our frende Scipio, and you, that are so nygh kynnesman vnto hym. Responsio, an aunswere. Responsito, tare, to make or gyue aunswere, it pertayned proprely to lawyers, and theym which had the interpretation of ceremonies. Responso, are, to aunswere. Responsum, an aunswere. Responsus, sus, sui, where one thing doth agree with an other, a consent, a conueniency. Respuo, ere, to refuse, or reiecte. Respuit hoc sapiētissimi cuius{que} fides, there is no wyse man wyll beleue hym. Respuere imperiū, not wyllyng to obey him. Respuit hoc ferri ictum, one coulde not enter into it with yron. Auribus hominem respuere, not wyllyng to here hym speake. Restagno, nare, to contayne or holde water. Restat, restare, to be or remayne of that thing, that is left, to stande backe, to resyste. Hoc me restat, that remayneth or abydethe for me. Restauro, rare, to restore, or make agayne. Restibilis, that whyche is renewed, or sowen agayne. Restibilis foecunditas, whan the fe∣male beareth euery yere. Restibilis ager, a fielde which is sowen two yeres togyther. Resticula, a smalle corde. Restinguo, xi, guere, to stynt or put out, or cesse, as fyre, lyght, and thyrste. Restio, onis, a roper. alsoo he that hangeth hym selfe. Restipulatio, a puttynge in of pledges, put in¦gage or pledge, for to make answer to an action Restipulor, aris, ari, to make answer in the law Restire, to be redye to be sowen, ploughed, or dygged. Restis, a halter or corde, a rope or bounche of garlyke or oynyons. Restem ducere, whan maydens and chyldren daunse togither hande in hand, or with nap∣kyns, leadyng one an other. Ad restim res re dijt, The matter is in despayre, or desperate. Restito, tare, to abyde or tarye. Restituo, ere, to restore, to yelde agayne, to re∣payre or make agayn. In integrum restituere, to restore hym vnto his fyrst astate. Pugnā restituere, to begin the batayl eftsones Reipub. restitui, to be remitted to the same a∣state that he was in before his banyshment: Restitutio, restitution. Resto, stare, to remayne, to tary. Hic nunc me credit aliquam sibi fallaciā portare, & ea me hic restitisse gratia, He wenetij that I worke hym some falshede, and that I tary styl ther∣fore. Nullā quaerentes uoluptatem Stoici re∣stant, The Stoike philosophers do resyste or sticke to their opinion, seking for no plesure. Restat mihi, it taryeth for me, it shal happen vnto me. Restrictè, & restrictim, straytly, or strayte. Restrictus, nygarde. Restringo, xi, gere, to bynd or strayn bakward to bynde agayne, to restrayne. somtyme it si∣gnifieth to louse. Apulei. Iumentū restrinxit, abire{que} stabulo liberum sinit, He lowsed his horse, and let hym out at lybertie. Restringit nauseam, it putteth away the de∣syre to vomyte. Resulto, tare, to leape agaynst a thynge, to re∣bounde, to rebell, to leape or steppe backe. Resumo, psi, ere, to take agayn, to resume. Resuo, ere, to sow agayn, or make a double sty∣che, also to ryp or vndo that which is sowen, to vnstitche. Sumēti uirilem togā, tunica lati claui resuta ex utra{que} {per}te, ad pedes decidit: Whan he came firste to mans aege, his Se∣natours cote beynge rypte on boothe sydes, felle downe to his fete. Resupino, are, to tourne vpwarde, or vpryght. to reuoke or call backe, to differ, to peruerte. Resupinus, a, um, vpryght, the bely vpwarde. Resurgo, rexi, gere, to aryse vp. Resurrectio, resurrection. Retae, trees growyng on the bankes of riuers, or in the ryuers. Retardatio, a taryenge. Retardo, dare, to make to tary. Rete, tis, a ntte. Retego, xi, gere, to dyscouer or dysclose. Retento, are, to retayn often, to empt eftsones. Retexo, ere, to vntwist or vntwine, or vnwind. somtime to twist or wind eftsones, to dissolue Penelopes telam retexere, to do and vndoo. Non potest nisi retexueris illa, he may not ex¦cept thou chaunge his purpose therin. Retiaculum, a lyttell nette. Retiarius, he that casteth a nette, proprely in fyghtynge to apprehende his aduersary. Retia, nettes, sometyme it sygnifieth one nette Reticeo, cui, cêre, to holde ones peace, to speake no worde, to kepe secrete, to say nothynge. Reticentia, silence, whan one holdeth his peace. Reticula, a lyttell net, wherin a mans heare or womens is trussed. Reticulatus, ta, tum, made lyke a nette. Reticulum, a caule or coyfe, also a bagge, when in meate is caryed. Retinaculum, what so euer holdeth any other thynge, a staye.
Retineo, nui, nere, to holde againe, to retayne, to kepe in remembraunce. Retinere, to holde vp, that a man falle not. Ah retine me obsecro. B. Obsecro quid tibi est? An. Disperij. B. Perij misera, quid stupes Antiphila? O holde me vp I pray the B. A∣lak what ayleth the? A. I am vndone. B. Alas that euer I was borne, why dothe thy harte fayle the Antiphila? Retinere, to restrayne or let one from doinge that, that he wolde. Pudore & liberalitate li∣beros retinere satius esse credo, quam me∣tu, I thynke it better to restrayne chylderne from their wanton wylles, by shame and ly∣beralitie, than with feare. Si ius suum retinet, yf he maynteyne his title. In officio retinere, to entertayne men to be euer redy to do theyr dueties. Inuidiam suam apud improbos retinere, to be alwayes hated of vnthrifty persons. Iudicem retinêre aliquem, to receyue one for a iudge. Iuditum suum retinêre, to perseuer in his opinyon. Iustitiam retinere, to maynteyne iustyce. Memoria retinêre, to remembre. Modum retinere, to kepe a measure. Morbo retineri, to be sycke. Morem retinere, to kepe alway one custome. Nummos retinere, to kepe backe moneye. whiche ought to be payde. Officium retinere, to do well his duety. Retinens, he that kepeth styll. Retiolum, a cawle, or coyfe. Retondeo, dere, to klyppe all ouer. Retorqueo, torsi, quere, to cast backeward, to throwe or shutte agayne. Retorresco, retorrescere, to be bourned with the sunne. Retorridus, da, dū, burned or sered, or parched. Retracto, ctare, to call back, or reuoke a thing that is done, to drawe backe, to excuse, to lay to an nother man, to drawe vp. Retractare largitiones, to ceasse from lybe∣rall gyuynge. Retractare aliquid, to repete that whiche is spoken. Retractare actionem, to begyn his action of newe. Retraho, traxi, trahere, to pull or drawe backe, or to drawe to. Retribuo, buere, to recompence. Retrica, olde wryters callyd the water, where∣with gardeynes are watered. Retrimentum, the dragges of a thynge, some∣tyme ordure or dunge. Retro, behynde. Retrocedo, cessi, cedere, to go backe. Retrorsum, backewarde. Retrorsus, a, um, tourned backewarde. Retrospicere, to loke backe. Retrudo, si, dere, to put backe. Retundo, dere, to make blunt or dul, that whi∣che is sharpe. also to beate often on a thyng. Retusus, a, um, dull, blunt, contrary to sharpe. Aliae agrorum partes, quae acuta ingenia gignant, aliae quae retusa, Some partes of countrays there be, whyche do brynge forthe sharpe wyttes, some brynge forth dulle. Reualesco, scere, to be recouered from syknes. Reueho, uexi, uehere, to brynge or cary backe, or agayne. Reuelatio, a reuelyng or a disclosing of a thing Reuello, reuellere, to pluck back, to pull again. Reuelo, are, to dyscouer. Reuenio, nire, to come agayne. Reuera, matter in dede, or for a trouthe. Reuerendus, worthy reuerence. Reuerens, rentior, rentissimus, he that dothe reuerence. Reuerenter, reuerently. Reuerentia, reuerence or honour done to one. Reuereor, reris, reri, to haue in reuerence. Reuersio, a retourne. Reuertor, teris, ti, to retourne. Reuerto, idem. Reuincio, uinxi, uincere, to bynde backe, or be∣hynde, as to bynd ones handes behynd hym. Reuincere paratus est, whiche the lawyers do saye, Paratus est uerificare, He is redye to auerre. Reuiresco, scere, to become eftesones grene. Reuiso, sere, to retourne to see. Reuiuisco, scere, to be reuyued. Reuoco, uocare, to calle backe, to reuoke, to brynge agayne, to drawe backe, to rayle from deathe, to tourne from an enterpryse. Reuocare pedem, to tourne back, to recule. Ad quae exempla reuocas? What examples puttest thou me for thy defence. Ad manus rem reuocare, to bryng the mat∣ter to that poynte that it comme to ioynynge of battayie. Reuocare, to restore or renewe. Item circa o∣mnium ordinum statum domi foris{que}, aut correxit, aut exoleta reuocauit, aut etiam no ua instituit, Moreouer concernynge the state of all degrees, as well within his howse as without, eyther he dyd amende them, or rene∣wed those thinges that were out of vse, or els ordayned newe. Reuocare testes, to reherse the depositions of wytnesses. Reuocare ad curam, to doo a thynge with moche dylygence. Rem ad sortem reuocare, to caste lottes for a thynge. In lucem reuocare, to bryng agayn in vse. Reuocatio, a reuocation or callyng backe.
Reuolo, are, to flee backe. Reuoluo, ui, uere, to tourne vp and downe, to reuolue, to tourne backe, to remoue. Reuolutus, ta, tum, to be tourned backe, to be remoued. Reuolutio, a tourninge backe to the fyrst place or poynte, a reuolution or tournynge of cele∣stiall bodyes or spheres. Reuorto, tere, olde wryters vsed for reuertor, to retourne. Reus, he that is sued or accused, sometyme he that is gylty. Reus facti, gyltie of an offence. Reus agitur, he is sued or accused. Reus peragitur, he is condemned. Reus stipulando, he that bargayneth. Reus uoti, he that hath auowed. Reus de ui, accused of breakyng the peace. Reum subdere, to accuse one of a great offēce Rex, regis, a kynge. Rex sacrificulus, was a chiefe minyster of sa∣crifices amonge the Romayns onely. ¶R ANTE H. RHabarbarum, Rubarbe, a preciouse rote medicinable to purge coler also to cor∣roborate the stomake and lyuer. Rhachinon, a spyder, hauynge a lyttell blacke heade, and is somewhat whyte, and hathe shorte fete, whose bytynge is as venymouse as the styngynge of a scorpyon. Rhadamanthus, was kynge of Lycia, whyche was a straight executour of Iustice, and ther¦fore was supposed of the Paynyms to be af∣terwarde one of the iudges in helle. Rhagusium, a citie in Dalmatia. Rhagardes, & Rhagadiae, certayne cleftes in some partes of the body. Rhamnus, a kynde of brembles, whyche is whyte, and beareth more fruite thanne other do, and also hath floures, and sendeth forthe braunches with straight prickes, not croked as other are, and hath brode leaues. Rhamnusia, was callyd goddesse of venge∣aunce. Rhamnusius, a man of a towne callyd Rham∣nus, by Athenes. Rhamponticum, the herbe and roote callid the more and greate Centory, it is named of Pli¦nius (as Ruellius wryteth) Rhacoma. Rhampsinithus, the proper name of a kynge of Egypt. Rhaphanus, an herbe callyd radyshe. Rhebanus, a ryuer in the mouthe of Bospho∣tus, a countray in Thracia. Rhea, was callyd the mother of goddes, callyd also Cybele. Rhea syluia, the mother of Romulus & Remus Rheda, a charyotte. Rhedarius, a charyot man. Rhedones, the cytie of Reynes in Fraunce. Rhegium, a cytie on the bordure of Italye to∣warde Sycile. also an nother cytie not farre from Parima. Rheginus, a man of the cytie of Rhegium in Calaber. Rhemi, people in Fraunce callyd alsoo Rhe∣menses. Rhenones, cotes made of the skynnes of bestis. Rhenus, a noble ryuer in Germania, callyd the Rheyne. Rhenense uinum, Rheynyshe wyne. Rhenenses, people dwellynge on the ryuer of Rheyne. Rheon, Reubarbe. Rhesus, kynge of Thracia, whiche camme to the ayde of the Troianes, and was slayne of Diomedes: of whome a ryuer about Troye was callyd Rhesus. Rheti, a people in Italy. Rhetia, a countray in Germanye, hauynge on the weste the hylle called Adula, on the north it marcheth vppon Danubium, on the easte vpon the ryuer callyd Aenus, on the southe it lyeth vppon the mountaynes called Alpes. Rhetor, oris, he that teacheth rhetoryke. Rhetorica, rhetorycke, or the crafte of elo∣quence. Rhetoricor, cari, to speake rhetorike. Rhetorice, lyke a rhetoritian. Rhetus, a gyant, whome Dionyse, being tour∣ned into a lyon slewe. Rhetoricus, an oratour, or a man cunnynge in the crafte of eloquence, Rhetorisso, are, to speake in the fourme of rhe∣toryke. Rheuma, a rewme or distillation of humours. Rheumatismus, the dysease of rewme. Rhibis, a bremble callyd Raspis. Rhinoceron, ontis, a beast that hath an horne in his nose, whyche naturally is ennemye to the Olyphaunt, it is also an oyle vessell, oute of the whyche oyle is dropped. Rhinocerotis nasum habere, is sayd of them that be wyttye. Iuuenes{que}, senes{que}, Et pueri nasum, Rhinocerotis habent, Yong men, old men, and chyldern, and all be wytty. Riphaei montes, mountaynes in the north part of the worlde, where as is contynually wyn∣ter, and snow with huge windes, and ioyneth vpon Scithia in Asia. Rhodanus, a ryuer in France, callid the Rone. Rhodia, a kynde of vynes. Rhodites, a certayne precyouse stoone, of the colour of a rose. Rhodius, of the Rhodes.
Rhodope, a mountayne in Thracia. Rhododaphne, & Rhododendros, a tree, ha∣uyng leaues lyke to an almond tree, but great¦ter and fatte seedes, open lyke a horne, whi∣che hath in theym woulle lyke purple sylke, a longe roote, salte in taste, it groweth in wa∣trye places. Rhodomêli, hony and the iuyce of roses boiled togyther, called cōmunely Mel rosatum. Rhodonia, a gardeyne of roses. Rhodophone, that parte of Syria that gothe ouer the mountayne of Taurus. Rhodopeius, a, um, pertaynyng to the moun∣tayne of Rhodope. Rhodos, a famouse yle in the sea callyd Capat¦thium, lyenge beyonde Candy, hauyng on the north, the countray callyd Lycia, on the south Egypte. In this yle were borne many excel∣lent philosophers and Rhetoricians, it was sometyme puyssant and ryche. Rhodostacti, idem quod rhodomeli, all be it some do put a dyfference betwene them, say∣ing that rhodomeli, hath thre partes of the iuyce of roses, and one parte of hony, & that rhodostacti hathe two partes of the iuyce, and one of hony. Rhombus, a fygure foure square, hauynge the sydes equall the corners crooked. it is alsoo a fyshe callyd a Byrt, also a spynnynge whele or tourne. Rhoeas, whan the corners of the eien are open, soo that there doo stylle from theym continu∣all droppes. Rhoeteus, & Rhoeteius, for Troianus. Rhoetus, a mountayne of Troye, where Aiax Thelamonius was buryed. Rhoeton, wyne made of pomegranates. Rhomphea, a sworde. Rhoncus, a rowtynge whan one doth slepe. Rhonchiso, are, to rowte. Rhopalon, a water lylye, callyd communely Nenuphar. Rhoxia, a countray by Polonia. Rhoxalani, people on the north parte of the ry∣uer of Danubius or Donowe. Rhus, is that whiche apothecaries do call Su∣mach. Manardus lib 1. epist iiii sayth that it is also callyd Ros syriacus. Rhuteni, a people in Fraunce callyd Rhodes. Rhymnus, a ryuer. Rhyndacus, a ryuer, whyche runneth into the sea callyd Pontus. Rhyparographus, a paynter of tryfles, a stayner. Rhytion, a vesselle lyke to a moone. Rhythmus, numbre or armony in speakyng, it is also callyd a ryme. ¶R ANTE I. RICA, a garment of purple, hemmed or purfled also a kerchief, which women do weare. Ricinus, & ricinum, euery garmente that is foure square. Ricinium, & ricinum, a cloke, whereof parte was caste ouer a mans shoulders. Ricinus, a dogge tyke, it is alsoo that whyche the apothecaries do calle Cherua, wherof is made an oyle that serueth to dyuerse vses, Io. Agricola. but Ruellius maketh no mencion of Cherua, but sayth, that the grekes dydde call it Cici, and some apothecaries do name it Cataputia maior, & that the apothecaries of Fraunce do call it Palma Christi. Ricula, a handkerchiefe. Rictus, & rictum, a grynnynge or skornefulle openynge of the mouthe: also the fourme of the vysage, whan a man grenneth, or a dogge brawleth. Rido, risi, ridère, to lawghe. alsoo to skorne or mocke, Ridibundus, da, dum, that laugheth moche. Ridica, a proppe, wherwith a vyne, or other lyke thynge is holden vp. Ridiculare, a thynge to laugh at. Ridiculum, idem, also a mocke. Ridiculus, a manne whome men doo mocke or laugh at. Ridicularius, a, um, idem quod ridiculum. Ridiculè, foolyshely, in mockage. Ridiculosus, a, um, idem quod ridiculus. Ridiculosè, foolyshely, to be laughed at. Rigatio, a watrynge. Rigeo, gui, gere, to be feruently colde, alsoo to be harde or styffe. Rigentes oculi, eyes whyche do neuer moue. Rigesco, scere, idem quod rigeo. Rigide, styffely, sharpely, cruelly. Rigidus, da, dum, colde, harde, styffe, sharpe, or cruell. Rigo, are, to make weate, or to water a gar∣deyne or fielde. Rigor, rigoris, colde, hardnes, styffenes. Riguus, a, um, that maye be easylye weate or watered. Rima, a chynke or clefte in wod or stone, where it is not close ioyned. Rimas agere, to be clouyn or chynked, as tymber or bourdes, are with lyenge in the wynde. Rimam inueuire, to fynde an excuse, or meane to escape. Rimor, aris, ari, to serche dylygently, alsoo to cleaue as tymber dothe. Rimula, a lyttell chynke or clefte.
Rimosus, a, um, full of kleftes or chynkes. Ringo, xi, gere, to grynne or shew the teth, as a dogge dothe whan he wyll barke or byte. also to be angry, to braule, to barke. Ripa, a water banke. Riparia, a birde which bredeth in water bākes Riparius, a, um, that abydeth on the water bankes. Ripae, seu Ripei, mountaynes in Archadia. Riphaer, mountaynes in Scithia. Riscus, a cofer couered with lether: also a lyt∣tel wyndowe. Risibilis, le, that whiche can laughe. Risum concitare, to make one to laughe. Risum captare, to do a thynge whiche cau∣seth men to laughe. Risum aedere, to laughe. Risus, laughter. Risus sardonius, a laughter without myrthe as of them that be madde or cruell. suche as Irishe men vse whan they be angry. Ritè, directly, truely, euen as it shulde be. Rituales, bookes, wherin the fourme of cere∣monies, and olde maners and customes are wrytten. Ritus, tus, an approued custome. Riuales, they whiche equally do loue one wo∣man, or be woars together, also they, whose landes be deuided by a ryuer or broke, also they whiche dwell vpon ryuers. Riualitas, tatis, enuy or obseruaunce betwyxte the louers of one woman. Riuinus, a wower, idem quod riualis. Riuus, a ryuer or borke. Riuulus, a littell broke. Riuo, are, is to go to watrynge, as beastes do. Rixa, a braulynge contention. Rixosè, brawlynge. Rixosus, a striuer or brawler. Rixor, aris, ari, & rixo, to contend with braw¦lynge. ¶R ANTE O. ROB & Robub, names barbarouse sig¦nifyenge iuyce of herbes or fruites de¦fecate, rede more in Sapa. Robigalia, the Ceremonyes pertaynynge to Robigus, the preseruatour of corne. Robigmosus, a, um, moche blasted. Robigo, was honored of the Romains for a goddesse, whom they supposed mought pre∣serue their corne from blasting. it is also that vice in corne called blastinge. Robigus, whom the olde Romaynes named the god, that preserued corne from blastyng. Roboraria, places, whiche are paled aboute. Roboreus, ea, eum, of oken tymber. Roboro, are, to fortifie. Roboses, the olde writers vsed for robur an ok Robur, oris, harde oke. It is also strength and hardenesse of the body. somtyme the strength or hardenes of any thynge generallye. also a stockes in prison. Robus, olde writers called red of colour. Also all maner of matter, whiche had many redde vaynes, was called Robus. It is also a kynd of wheate, that yeldeth fayre meale, whiche we nowe call red wheate. Roburneus, a, um, of an oke. Robusteus, a, um, idem. Robustus, ta, tum, stronge and harde. Rodo, si, dere, to gnawe as a mouse or other lyke beaste dothe. sometyme to detracte or backebite. Rodus, da, dum, a thynge vnperfecte or rude, vnpolyshed, vnwrought. Rogamen, minis, a desyre. Rogatarij, Notaries, which requyred the par¦ties, that eche of them shulde promyse. Rogator, rogatoris, a begger from dore to doore. Rogito, tare, to intreate or demaunde, to in∣quire often, to aske for a thynge. Rogo, are, to require, to praye, to inquyre, to aske of one, to inacte. Rogare plebem, to inquire of the commons if they be contente that a lawe shall passe, or as in our parliament, to go to the question. Rogare aliquem sententiam, to demaunde of one what his opinion is. Rogare sacramento, to sweare one, or to gyue to hym an othe. Rogatio, was amonge the Romaynes, whan the Tribunes, whiche were the heade offy∣cers of the people, were content that any act shulde passe, which was made by the senate, or by the same Tribunes deuysed. Rogatus, tus, a desyre. Rogus, a great fyre, wherin deade bodyes were bourned. Roma, the citie of Rome. Romanensis, he that commeth from an other countrey, and dwelleth at Rome. Romania, is a countrey called Thracia. Romanus, a Romayne. Romanus, na, num, of Rome. Romandui, Normandes. Romula, a tree, vnder the whiche Romulus and Remus were founde. Romuleus, a, um, & Romulidus, da, dum, of Romulus. Romulus, the fyrst kynge of Romaynes. Ronchisso, are, to route or snorte. Ronchus, a routynge, sometyme a scorne. Ronchisonus, he that routeth or snorteth. Rorarij milites, men whiche beinge lyghte ar∣med made the fyrst skyrmyshe in battayle.
Roratio, is a dysease in vynes, by the occasion wherof, the chiefe grapes do falle away. Roresco, scere, to be washed with dewe. Rores, dewes. Rorifacio, cere, to sprynkle. Roro, are, to dewe or drop downe lyke dewe. Rorulentus, ta, tum, full of dewe. Ros, roris, dewe. Ros syriacus, that whiche is callyd of the apo¦thecaries Sunach. Rosa, a rose. Rosaceus, a, um, of roses. Aqua rosacea, rosewater. Rosalia, garlandes of Roses. Rosarium, a gardeyne or bedde of Roses. Roscius, a Romayn, and a player in comedies, whome for his excellencye in pronunciation and gesture, the noble Cicero callyd his ie∣well, and so moch delited in him, that he con∣tended with hym, whither Roscius could set forthe one sentence in mo fascyons of gesture and countenaunce, or he expresse the same sen¦tence in a more diuersite of eloquent wordes. The excellency of this man in his arte, howe it was estemed and fauoured of all the Ro∣mayns, it appered well in that they gaue to hym for a contynuall stipende; one thousande of their grotes for euery day, whyche dydde amount of our money xvi. pound: xiii. s. iiii. d. And Lucius Sylla beinge dictatour gaue to hym a rynge of goulde, whyche was the to∣ken of a knyghte at that tyme, as a colar or chayne of golde is at this tyme. Rosetum, a gardeyne of roses. Roseus, a, um, of a rose, or of the coloure of a rose. Rosidus, da, dum, wette with dewe. Rosio, gnawynge. Rosmarinum, Rosemary, or a lyttell snowte. Rostellum, a lyttell beake or bylle of a byrde. Rostra, strorum, rostris, was a place in Rome afore the court callyd Hostilia, wherein was a pulpyte, in whyche the oratours of Rome were wont to stande, whan they preached to the people, or declared any matter, of the whi¦che proceded this worde, Pro rostris, in the pulpyt, or at the barre. Rostrati naues, shyppes hauing pikes of yron without the stemme. Rostrum, a beake of a byrde, a snoute of a beast or fyshe, also the stemme of a shyppe or bote. Rota, a whele, also a kynde of fyshe. Rothomagus, the cite of Roan in Normandy. Roto, tare, to tourne a thynge lyke a whele. Rotula, a lyttell whele. Rotella, idem. Rotundè, roundly, aptly, elegantly, handsom∣ly, proprely in wordes. Rotunditas, roundnesse. Rotundo, dare, to make rounde. Rotundus, da, dum, round. somtyme well com∣pact or facyoned. Ore rotundo loqui, to expresse moch in fewe wordes. ¶R ANTE V. RVBEA tinctorum, Mader. Rubefacio, cere, to make redde. Rubefio, fieri, to be made redde. Rubellae, redde grapes. Rubellio, a fyshe callyd a rochette. Rubellum uinum, clarette wyne. Rubeo, bere, to be redde. Ruber, bra, brum, redde. Rubeta, a tode. Rubetum, a busshy close. Rubeus, bea, beum, redde. Rubens, idem. Rueba minor, goselynge wede or clyuers. Rubesco, scere, to waxe redde. Rubi, borum, a towne in Campania. Rubicon, conis, a ryuer in Italy, whiche diui∣deth Galliam from the part of Italy, nowe callyd Romandiola, in olde tyme Flaminea. Rubicundus, da, dum, ruddy. Rubidus, da, dum, a swart redde. also rough or course, as bread hauynge moche branne. Rubigino, are, to ruste. Rubiginosus, a, um, rustye. Rubigo, ginis, ruste. Rubor, oris, rednesse. Rubrica, redde chalke, or ruddell, wherewith shepe are marked. Rubriceta, rosette colour. Rubrus, a, um, redde. Rubricatus, ta, tum, coloured with redde, or ruddelyd, as shepe are. Rubus, a bremble. Rubus caninus, the wylde Eglantyne bryar. Ructo, are, to belke or breake wynd vpwarde. Ructor, tari, idem. Ructare crapulam, to sauoure of to moche drynke. Ructiro, tare, to breake wynde often. Ructuatio, idem quod ructus. Ructus, belkynge or breakyng wynd vpward. Rudens, tis, a cabell of a shyppe. Ruderarium, a raungynge syue. Rudero, rare, to lay on olde stones and rubbel. also to daube or lay on morter. Ruderatus, ta, tum, where moch rubbish lyeth. Rudetum, a place where lyeth moche rubbyshe or rubbell. also lande, whyche hath lyen leye, and is newely put in tylthe. Rudiae, diarum, an old towne in Apulia, where the poete Ennius was borne. Rudiarij, they whyche are dyscharged of sigh∣tynge with swordes, as they whyche were
callyd Gladiatores, that openly faught, one with an nother, to anymate the Romaynes with sheddyng of theyr bloude. They be also bodgers or amenders of olde garmentes, and seuiars, or makers of syues. Rudicula, a potte stycke. Rudimentum, the fyrste teachyng of chyldern. Rudio, dire, to teache one, whiche is vnlerned. Rudis, a rodde or yarde whyche was gyuen to sworde players, whan they came to .lx. yeres olde, in token that they were set at lybertie. sometyme lybertie from labour. Rude donari, to be discharged of attendance, properly in warres. Rudem accipere, hath the same sygnification. Rudis, de, rude, vnperfect, newe, vnwrought, taught of late. Rudis, ruderis, shardes or pieces of stones bro∣ken and shattered, tubbell or rubbyshe of old houses. Ruditas, rudenesse, lacke of lernynge or wytte. Rudo, rudi, rudere, to braye lyke an asse. It is sometyme spoken of a man. sometyme of a woman. Rufeo, & rufesco, scere, to be somewhat redde. Rufo, fare, to make redde. Rufuli, certayne captayns made by the consule, who afterwarde were callyd Rutuli. Rufus, a, um, somewhat redde. Ruga, a wrynkle or playte. Rugio, giui, gire, to roore. Rugitus, a roorynge. Rugo, gare, to be playted or wrynkled. Rugo, xi, gere, to belke. Rugosus, a, um, full of playtes or wrynkles. Ruina, ruyne, extreme decay. Ruinosus, a, um, ruynouse, in decay. Rulla, the staffe, wherwith the plowghmanne clenseth his culter. Ruma, was of the olde wryters callyd a teate, also it is the throte bolle. Ruma, a goddesse, whome the paynyms dydde suppose to be beneficiall to womens brestes, and to suckynge chylderne. Rumen, the dew clap of a breaste, also a place in the bely, a panche. Rumentum, a brastynge out, an aposteme that brasteth out of the fleshe. Rumigare, to chewe the cudde. Rumigero, rare, to cary tydynges. Ruminatio, a chewyng of the cudde, as a beast dothe. also delyberation or aduysement. Ruminalis ficus, a fygge tree, vnder the which it is supposed that a wolfe gaue sucke to Ro∣mulus and Remus. Rumino, are, & Ruminor, ari, to chewe the cud. Also to call eftesones to remembraunce. Rumex, icis, sorrelle, also a weapon lyke to a speare. Rumifero, are, & rumigero, rare, to beare or brynge tydynges. Rumigerulus, a tellar of tydynges. Rumis, a teate. Rumito, to beare tydynges. Rumo, are, to gyue the teate to a chylde. Rumor, oris, tydynges, a rumour, a bruyte. Rumpi, porum, transomes. Rumpo, rupi, pere, to breake, to make weary. Rumpere moras, to make haste. Rumpere silentium, to kepe no longer silēce. Rumpotinus, a bousshe whyche growethe in Fraunce, of whom Columella wryteth, that no corne shulde be sowen within twenty fote thereof. Rumpotinetum, the place where suche bushes do growe. Rumusculus, a lyttell rumour or bruite. Rumula, a lyttell teate. Runa, a weapon, somtyme vsyd in Fraunce. Runca, a sawe wherwith tymber is sawen. Runcatio, weedynge. Runcina, a whypsawe, wherewith tymber is sawen, it is also a bushesythe or bylle, to cutte busshes. Runcino, are, to sawe tymber. Runco, care, to weede or pull vp. Runsor, oris, one of the names of Pluto called god of Helle. Ruo, rui, ruere, to falle, to powre out, to be de∣ceyued, to subuerte, to make playn, to pluck vp, to breake a sonder, to throwe downe. Ruere, is to ouerthrowe, to runne forth hed∣lynge. Quo moriture ruis maiora{que} uiribus audes? Whyther runnest thou headlynge to be slayne, and attemptest thynges aboue thy puyssaunce? Also to lyfte vp. Et ruit atram, ad coelum picea crassus caligine nubem, And beynge thycke, it lyfted vp to heauen a cloude, as blacke as pytche. sometyme it sy∣gnyfieth to make a great noyse. Ruit arduus aether, The hyght syrmamente rumbled, or made a great noyse. Ruit imbribus, it rayned soore. Rupes, be hylles, bankes or rockes, soo steepe downe, as no man may clymme them. Rupicapra, a wylde goote. Rupicias, for damnum dederis, thou shalt pay or yelde damages. Ruptus, ta, tum, broken or brast, weryed, torne, or rente. Ruralis, le, rusticall, or of the vyllage. Rurestris, stre, of the countrey, not of the cytie or towne. Ruricola, a husbande man. Rurigena, borne in the countrey, out of a cytie or great towne. Ruro, rare, to do after the countrey facion. Ruro, raris, rari, to dwelle in the countreye, or
out of the citie. Rursus, & Rursum, eftsones or backewarde, on the other parte. Rus, ruris, the countrey, out of the citie, where as husebandry is vsed and exercysed. Ruscum, reade Bruscum. Ruscinū, Russilion or Perpignian in Fraūce. Ruspor, ari, to serche diligently. it is properly to shrape, as an henne dothe, whan she sekith for meate. Russus, & Russeus, a, um, redde. Rustica, a byrde lyke a partriche, but he hath a longer byll. Rusticanus, na, num, rrusticall, of the countrey or vyllage. Rusticè, rustically, vncourteysly, rudely. Rusticane, idem. Rusticarius, a, um, perteynynge to husbandry. Rusticatim, for rustice, an aduerbe, churlyshly. Rusticitas, tatis, carlyshenes, sometyme feare∣fulnesse. Et si rusticitas non uetat, ipsa rogat, And if that folyshe bashefulnes lette her not, she maketh requeste. Rusticor, caris, cari, to dwell in the countreye or exercise husbandry. Rusticus, ca, cum, rusticall, vplandyshe, home¦ly, without curtesy. Rusticus, is also the proper name of a man. Rutheni, people beyonde Liuonia of whom the countrey is nowe called Russia, there be also people in Fraunce about Toures so called. Ruta, Rewe, called also herbe grace. It is a∣monge the lawyers all that is dygged out of the grounde, as stone, cole, leade and other mettall. Ruta & caesa, Albeit Mutius doth say, that in Rutis & caesis, are those thynges, that be not faste in the grounde, nor are any parte of the buyldynge or the couerynge of a house. Per∣chaunce we mought name them moueables. Rutabulum, a coole rake, to make cleane an ouen. Rutaceus, a, um, of rewe. Rutatus, ta, tum, made of Rewe. Rutatio, & rutus, for ructatio, belkynge. Rutellum, a lyttell mattocke. Rutilo, lare, to shyne. Ruto, tare, for ructo, to beke or breake winde vpwarde. Rutor, idem. Rutrum, a mattocke. Rutum, idem. Rutuba, trouble. Id postea uiderimus, nunc su¦mus in rutuba, We wyll afterward se, nowe we be in trouble. Rutuba, a riuer in Liguria, runnynge from the mountaygne callyd Apenninus. Rutubatri, men that dygge with mattockes. Rutuli, an auncient people in Italy, of whome Turnus was kynge, whome Aeneas vayn∣quysshed. Rutulus, la, lum, a bryghte redde lyke to coles that be kyndled. Rutupe, or Rutupiae, an hauen in Kente callyd Sandwyche. Rutupinum promontorium, a goore or elbow of lande in Englande, lyenge into the sea a∣bout Sandwyche. ¶S ANTE A. SABA a countrey in the myddell of Arabia to∣warde the easte, enuiro∣ned aboute with greatte rockes, wherin is a gret woode of preciouse trees some of sinamom and ca¦sia, some bringing forthe frankinsence and myrre. The lengthe of that woode is .xx. of theyr myles called Schoeni, which comprehendeth of Italyon myles one hundred and fyfty. Plin. li. 12. Theophrast{us} li. 9. de hist. plant. Solinus wryteth that the region brynging forthe frankensence is from a towne there named Atramitae, viii. man∣sions whiche in dede conteyneth .CCiiii. myles. Mansio or Stathmos beinge of .xxviii Italyon myles. The chiefe citie of that Re∣alme is called Sabota. Sabaei, people of the realme of Saba. Sabaoth, in the plurell number, in the Hebrew tongue, signifieth god of hostes, or armyes, or powers. Sabbatarius, & Sabbataria, he or shee that ke∣peth the Sabboth daye. Sabath, a propre name, wherof commeth Sa∣batheni, the name of a people. Sabbatismus, a vacation after labours. Sabbatizare, to kepe sabbat day. Sabbatum, was among the Iewes accompted the seuenth daye, in the whyche they fasted in remembraunce of the seauen dayes, in the whyche they were fatigate, goynge fastynge in the deserte of Arabia, or they came to the mount of Sinai. Saynt Augustine vpon the psalmes wryteth, sayeng, that Sabbatū is ta∣kē thre maner of ways, for the seuenth day is called by that name, in the whiche almyghty god rested after his warke of syx dayes. Sab∣batum is also eternall quietnesse. Moreouer Sabbatum is the conscience of a quiete mynd aduaunced by hope of the tyme to come, not beinge shaken or vexed with stormes of thin∣ges present. Sabe, in the tungue of Siria, is the moneth of February.
Sabelli, people, whiche dwelle in the moun∣taynes betwene the Sabines and Marsi, in Italy. Sabim, among the Arrabians doth signify god Sabina, a weapon lyke a bore speare, it is al∣so the herbe called Sauyne. Sabini, people in Italy, betwene Latini and Vmbry. Sabiusa a gate at Rome, out of the which men wente to the Sabines. Sabora, a citie of Araby. Sabrina, a great ryuer in Englande called Se∣uerne Ptholomeus calleth it Sabriana ae∣stuarium. Sabucus, an elder tree rede after Sambucus. Sabuletum, a grauell pytte. Sabulum, great grauell. Sabulosus, a, um, grauelly. Saburra, lastage, or balese, wherwith shyppes are euen poysed, to go vpryghte, whiche is commonly of grauell. Saburij, a kynde of sacrifice. Saburratus, loded with grauell or other lyke erthe. Saburro, rare, to balese a shyppe. Sacal, a kynde of amber founde in Egypte. Saccarius, he that beareth a sacke. Saccarum, or Saccharum, sugar. Saccaria, marchaundise of sackes or bagges. Saccellare, to apparayle or amende wynes put into sackes. Sacciperium, a powche. Sacconia, a clothe to wype a thynge with, a napkyn, also a territorie. Sacculus, & Saccellus, a lyttell sacke. Sacer mons, an hyl by Rome, an other by Gal¦latia, wherin golde is founde. Sacerdotalis, le, perteynynge to a prieste. Sacon, amonge the Indians, signifieth a bryghte purple coloure. Sacondion, a precious stone of a bryghte pur∣ple colour. Saccularius, a crafty deceyuour, whiche in sel∣lynge of grayne out of sackes, wyll conueye awaye parte. it is also a purse cutter. Saccus a sacke. Sacculus, a bagge. Sacellium, a purse. Sacellum, a chapelle. Sacer, cra, crum, holye: sommetyme cursed detestable. Sacer ignis, a sickenesse, wherin is vehemente inflammation and bournynge of the body. some do suppose it to be saynet Antonies sixe. Sacer locus, a place consecrate or dedicate. Sacer morbus, the fallynge syckenes. Sacer mons, an hyll dedycate to Iupiter iii myles from Rome beyonde the ryuer called Anienis. Sacerdos, dotis, a prieste. Sacerdotium, priesthode, sometyme a benefice or spirituall promotion. Sacra uia, a strete in Rome, where peace was made betwene Romulus and Tacius, and throughe the whiche the vanquishers passed with their triumph vnto the capitoll. Sacrare caput cum bonis, Amonge the Ro∣maynes were olde lawes, that for a certaine offence it was lefull for any man whiche dyd mete with the offendour, to slea hym as a sa∣crifyce vnto the infernall Iupyter, and his goodes were dedicate to the diuelles of hell, and this was called Sacrare caput cum bonis. Sacramenta, is taken for men of warre. Sacramentum, an oth, among vs chrysten men it signifyeth a holy sygne, or a sygne of an ho∣ly thynge, wherin is conteyned a diuyne my∣stery, and is called a sacrament Sacramentum, as Varro wryteth. li. 2. De lingua latina, was a gage in money layde by the parties which contented together, so that he which recouered in iudgement shuld take agayne his gage. he that was condemned shulde lose his gage, whiche was broughte to the commune treasour, and this was na∣med Sacramentum. Sacramento iusto contendere, to gage suite as is before wrytten. Sacramento rogati, Souldiours sworne not to departe vntyl the warres were al finished Sacro sancta potestas, was properly attry∣buted to the aucthoritie of the Tribunes, cal¦led Tribuni Plabis, it is nowe moste conue∣nient for the aucthoritie of the Catholyke churche. Sacamento teneri, to be sworne. Sacrarium, a sextrie or vestrie, wherin are kept thynges halowed, and relikes. Sacratae leges, lawes, in the whiche it is en¦acted, that whoo so dothe offende agaynste them, is accursed. Sacratio, a consecration. Sacratius, more holy. Sacrator, he that dothe consecrate. Sacrificium, sacrifyce. Sacrifico, care, to do sacrifyce, to consecrate, to aske forgyuenesse of god. Sacrificulus, a prieste. Sacrilegium, thefte, or takynge away of thyn∣ges halowed, called Sacrilege. Sacrilegissimus, an errant thefe in stelynge of thynges halowed. Sacrilegus, he that violently taketh awaye or stealeth thynges halowed, or thynges vnha∣lowed out of a holy place. Sacrimum, muste or newe wyne. Sacriscrinius, he that kepeth the kynges let∣ters or Recordes, concernynge the Crowne,
or bokes of great affayres. Sacrium, a kynde of aumber, whiche commeth out of Scithia. Sacro, crare, to dedicate or halowe. Sacrosanctus, ta, tum, consecrate or halowed, that whiche moughte not be touched but re∣uerently, or was sure from all iniurie. Sacrum, any thynge dedicate to god. Also sacri¦fice. somtyme a temple or churche. Paulus Iureconsultus. Sunt autem sacrilegi, qui publica sacra compilarint. also sacra do signifie holy wordes, also charmes. Sacrum promontorium, a great mountayne or rocke in the southweste parte of Spayne, lyenge on the sea, called nowe, Capesaynet Vincent. Saducaei, were men of a certayne secte amonge the Iewes. who helde opinion that the soule was mortall and that it dyed with the body, they were dyuerse in maners and cruell to straungers. Saeculum, is properlye the space of a hundred yeres: it is commonlye taken for a space of tyme, wherin one fascion of the worlde hath continued. Saepe, oftentymes. Saepenumero, saepiuscule, saepicule, idem. Saepius, more often. Saepissime, very often. Saeuio, uiui, ire, to be very angrye, to doo va∣lyauntly, to be cruell, or exercyse tyranny. Saeué, cruelly. Seuiuer, rudely. Magis cogito, saeuiter, blan∣diter ue alloquar, I thynke more, where I maye speake to hym rudely, or gentylly. Saeuitia, & saeuitudo, crueltie. Saeuns, a, um, cruell, horrible. sometyme angry valyant, myghty. Saeuissima, hyems, a meruayllous cold winter Saga, a wyse or subtyll woman, also a witche. Sagaperium, a gumme or rosyn, whiche run∣neth out of a kyxe or tree, called ferula. Sagaris, a riuer. Sagaria, the crafte to make clokes to weare vpon harneyse Sagarius, a seller of suche clokes. Sagatus, apparayled in a souldiours cloke. Sagax, acis, wytty, hauynge the sences sharpe Sagaces canes, houndes or spaynelles. Sagacitas, wyttynes or sharpnesse of wyt. Sagaciter, wyttyly. Sagda, a grene stone, whiche the Caldes haue made faste to theyr handes. Sagena, a great net to take fyshe. Sagimen, & Saginatio, nourishynge. Saginarius, a, um, that whiche is franked or mad fatte. Sagina, meate, wherewith al thynge is fatted sometyme superfluous fat or greace. Saginarium, a place wherin any thyng is fran¦ked or made fatte. Sagino, are, to make fatte. Sagio, ui, ire, to perceyue quickely or sharply. Sagitta, an arowe. also the toppe of a twygge or rodde. Sagittarius, an archer. it is also one of the .xii. signes amonge the sterres. Sagitto, tare, to shoote. Sagma, n packe saddell, or sumpter saddell. also an heape. Sagmen, minis, grasse, plucked vp with the erthe, whiche in the olde tyme the ambassa∣dours of the Romaynes dyd, whan they de∣nounced warres to other people. Sagona, A ryuer in Fraunce called the Sone. Sagum, a souldiours cloke. Sagulum, a lyttell cloke. Sagacuculla, the hode of a cloke. Saguntus, uel Saguntum, a Citie in Spayne beyonde the ryuer of Iberus, about one mile from the sea, the people therof beinge in ami¦tie with the Romaynes were of suche fayth∣fulnesse, that whan Hanniball had longe be∣sieged them, and brought them at the poynte to be famyshed, the chiefe of the Citie made great fyres, and let cast into it theyr treasure and many of theym entred in to the fyre and were wylfully burned. all the resydue fought and were slayn, so that none escaped. wherof came this prouerbe. Sagundina fames, ap∣plyed to a great and horrible famyne. Sais, a citie of Egypte, where is one of the en∣tres into the riuer of Nilus, the entrye or porte is called Saiticum. Sal, salis, salt, somtyme it is put for wisedome myrthe. Sales, quicke or sharpe sentences, ie∣stinges. sometyme it signifyeth the sea. Salindus, in Dioscorides is of some men taken for sugar. Sala, a riuer in Germany. Salaces, water that ryseth out of a quycke sprynge. Salacia, was called goddesse of water. Salacones, men that do lyue alway in exceding pleasures and do thynke that all men do de∣lyte in that whiche lyketh theyr appetires. Salamandra, a beast in fygure lyke to a lysard full of spottes, whiche being in the fyre, doth extinete it, and is not burned. Salamis, Salamis, mina, an Ilyeby Athenes. Salaminius, a, um, of that yle. Sal amoniacus, a kynde of salte founde vnder sande, which is lyke to alume, and is medi∣cynable, in dysslouynge and pourgynge of fleume. Salanga, a verye hyghe Hyll betwene greatte Brytayne and Irelande, nowe called our la∣dyes Hyll. Salapia, a towne in Apulia.
Salapusius, may be called a mery iestynge boye It was a name gyuen to Caluus an oratour whiche beinge of a chyldes personage, vsed moche iestynge and tauntynge meryly. Salarium, wages gyuen to seruauntes. Salarius, a salter, whiche selleth all thinge that is salte. Salarius, a, um, perteynynge to salte. Salaria um, an hygh waye, by the which salt was caryed to Rome. Salax, acis, lecherouse. Salebrae, places whiche are not playne. Salebrosus, a, um, vnplayne, where a man can not go, excepte he do leape. Salentinum, a countrey in Italy. Salentini, a people in Italy. Salgama, thynges condite or conserued, as pea¦res, figges, grapes, and other lyke. Sali, a kynde of byrdes, whiche be greatte bre∣ders: as partriches or hennes, I suppose them to be hethecockes. Saliaris, re, perteynyng to the priestes of Mars Saliares coena, a banket or supper made by the priestes of Mars. Saliares uirgines, maydens whiche were with the priestes of Mars, and dyd sacrifyce with the bysshoppes, wearynge on theym cote ar∣mures, and byshops myters on theyr heades Salicastrum, a kynde of wylde vyne, rounnyng vpon wyllowe trees. Salicetum, & salictum, a place where wyl∣lowes growe. Salientes, the cockes or pipes of cundytes, out of the whiche water spouteth. Salignus, na, num, of wyllowe or wythy. Salij, the priestes of Mars in Rome, whiche daunced about the citie bearynge targettes called Ancilia. Salillum, a lyttell salte seller. Salina, a place where salte is made. Salinum, idem. Salinae, narum, a citie in Sicile. Salinator, the name of a noble man of Rome. Salinacidus & salnacidus, a, um, that whiche is salte in taste. Salio, iui, ire, to salte or powder. Salio, iui, ij, ire, to leape. Salitura, powdringe or saltynge. Salitus, ta, tum, salted. Saliuo, are, to laye salue. Saliua, & saliuum, spettell. Saliua, is also taken for iuyce, also for the wine called Chium. Saliunca, an herb lyke to lauander called spike Salisi, people in the mountaynes of Alpes, con∣fynes, to the Swycers, and the people cal∣led Boij. Saliuarius, he that layeth salue. Salix, icis, a wyllowe or wythy. Salix amerina, in Dioscoride, is the tre cal∣led also Vitex and Agnus castus, a kynde of wyllowe, of some named parkleaues. Salinaris herba, reade Pyrerrum. Salinacis, a fountayn in Caria, where a nimph fyndynge Helmophroditus the sonne of Mer¦curius and Venus naked, she imbracyng him desyred of the goddes that of theym two mought be made one body and so it hapned. Also the people of Caria be sometyme called Salmatij. Salmaris, idem. Salmacia, a praye gotten without labour. Salmacidus, da, dum, that whiche sauoureth of salte. Salmo, onis, a fyshe called Samonde. Salmonius, the kynge of Elides, whiche ta∣kynge foolyshely vpon hym, to haue diuine honours done vnto hym, and wolde seme to caste lyghtenynges, lyke vnto Iupyter, be∣ynge ouerthrowen with lyghtnynge was cast into helle. Sal nitrum, salte peter, whiche is put in to gunne powder. Sallo, lere, to powder with salte. Salo, a ryuer called also Bibilis, wherwith y∣ron is tempred, and made stronger. Salomon, & Solomon, monis, is interpre∣ted peasyble, the name of a kynge of Iewes, the sonne of kynge Dauid, whoo exceded all men in wysedome and knowelege, and neuer the lesse was by dotage on women broughte to ydolatrie. Salomonius, a, um, of Salomon. Salon, a countrey of Bithinia, very commodi∣ouse for the fedynge of cattell. Salone, a citie in Liburnia betwene Dalmati∣am and Illiriam. Salopia, a towne and countrey in Englande called Shrewesbery. Salpa, a fysshe whiche wyll not be sodden, ex∣cepte it be beaten as stockefyshe is. Salpiga, a kynde of emotes or pysmeres. Salsamentarius, he that selleth sawee. Salsamentarius, a, um, perteyninge to sauce. Vas salsamentarium, a vesselle, wherinto sawce is put. Salsamentum, sawce. Salsedo, saltenesse. Salsicortex, a tree, that beareth maste, which nothynge wyll eate, except only swyne. Salsilago, & salsugo, ginis, a salte lycour. Salsura, meresauce or bryne. Salsus, a, um, salte in taste. Saltabundus, da, dum, that whiche leapeth or daunseth. Saltatio, daunsynge. Saltator, & saltatrix, a daunser. Saltatorius, a, um, perteynynge to daunsynge.
Ludus saltatorius, a schoole of daunsynge. Saltatrix, & saltatricula, a daunsynge wenche. Saltatus, tus, daunsynge. Saltem, at the leaste waye. Saltiae, people ioynynge to the sea called Pon∣tus Euxinus. Saltim, uel saltuatim, by leapes. Saltito, tare, to daunse, to leape often. Salto, tare, to daunse. Saltuarius, a keper of a wod, a wodwarde. Saltuosus, a, um, full of woodes. Saltus, a thycke wodde, also a leape. Saluator, toris, a sauiour, he that kepeth or sa¦ueth a thynge from distruction or losse. Saluber, bris, bre, holsome, hole. Salubrior, ius, Saluberrimus, a, um, more hol¦some, moste holsome. Salubriter, holsomely. Salubritas, helthe. Salue, & Salueto, & saluete, god spede you, ye be welcome, sometyme contrary, farewel, God be with you. Salueo, ère, to be saufe, or spede well, to be well at ease. Salue. S. satis est mihi tuae salutis, nihil moror non salueo, God spede. S. It suffyseth me that thou arte in helthe: but in fewe wordes I am not well at ease. Saluia, an herbe called sauge. Saluiatum, a drenche for a horse or other beast. Saluifico, care, to make safe, or to saue. Saluo, are, to saue. Saluebis à meo Cicerone, my sonne Cicero commendeth hym vnto you. Satin salue? is not all thynge well? Salum, the sea. Salus, lutis, helthe, sometyme remedy. Salutarius, the forefynger. Salutatio, a salutation. Salutator, toris, a saluter. Salutatorium cubiculum, a chamber, where men do stand and abyde to salute a prynce or noble man in auctoritie, called nowe a cham∣ber of presence. Salutem, in the olde tyme was vsed for saltem. Salutem dicere, to salute or to haue recom∣mendation to any man. Salutifer, ra, rum, holsome. Salutaris, re, idem. Salutaris digitus, the forefynger. Salutariter, in helthe. Salutiger, he that bryngeth recommendations from an other person. Saluto, tare, to salute, as well at commyng as at departynge, also to honour. Saluus, a, um, saulfe, hole, sounde, withoute damage or harme. Salua res est, the matter is come wel to passe Saluo capite, without daunger of lyfe. Sam, for Eam, her. Samara, an Hyll in the easte Oceane se, at the further ende of the mountayne called Cau∣casus. Samarobrinae, people in Fraunce, aboute Cambry. Samaria, a countrey and citie of Siria ioyning to Iudea, whiche was the chiefe Citie of the x tribes of Israell. who beinge taken priso∣ners by the kyng of Syria and led away pry¦soners. thyther were sente for them paynims to inhabite that countrey, whiche were after called Samaritani, and they myxte the lawe of Moyses with ydolatry. The citie was af∣terwarde called Sebasten. Sambuca, an instrument of mysyke, nowe cal∣led doulcymers, an engyne of warre, where∣with fortresses were assaulted. Sambucina, a womanne whiche playeth on doulcimers. Sambuceus, a, um, of Elder or alder tree. Sambucus, an elder or alder tree. Sambucistria, idem quod Sambucina. Samia, vessels made in the Iyle of Samos, Samius, a, um, of the yle of Samos: the olde wryters dyd vse it for sharpe, and Samiare, to whet or make sharpe. Samnîtes, people of Samnium a countrey in Italy called nowe Aprutium. Samium, a shell. Samiolum, a lyttell shell. Samos, the name of two yles in the sea called Aegeum, one by Thraciam, and therfore it is also called Samothracia, the other lyeth a∣gaynste Ephesus. Sampsuchinus, na, um, of maioram. Sampsuchus, & Sampsucum, an herbe called Maioram. Samsa, the stone of an olyue. Samsychon, idem quod Sampsuchus. Sanates, people dwellynge about Rome. Sancio, xi, cire, to consecrate, to make firme. Sancire leges, is to constitute lawes. Sancus, one of the names of Hercules. Sancté, firmely, holyly, deuoutly. Sanctificatio, halowynge. Sanctifico, care, to halowe. Sanctitas, holynesse. Sanctitudo, idem. Sanctio, a lawe, a thynge decreed and sta∣blysshed. Sanctus, ta, tum, holy, inuiolable by a lawe, pure and cleane, vncorrupted. Vir sanctus, a blessed man. Sanctimoniales, Nunnes. Sanctimonium, the profession of relygious personnes. Sanctimonia, & Sanctitas, holynes, perfectiō. Sanctuarium, a plae consecrate or halowyd.
Sandalium, a slypper. Sandalus, a spyce called saunders. Sandaraca, a colour founde in mynes of syl∣uer, or golde, yelowe ocker. Sandaliotis, an Iyle called nowe Sardinia. Sandaracinus, colour made with yelowe ocker Sandastros, & Sandaphorion, & Sandarison & Sandassites, a preciouse stone, hauynge in a bryghte colour yelowe speckes, and is cal∣led also Garamandita. Sandyx, is a poulder made of Cerussa burned tyll it waxe red, as Dioscor. Galen, and Ae∣tius do wryte. Other do saye that it is made with Ceruse and red chalke called Rubrica, myxte to gether, it was also called Siricon, or Syricon. Sandicinus color, idem. Sanè, an aduerbe, whiche signifieth ye, or cer∣taynely, on goddes name. Bellum sanè diffi∣cile gessit, he faught a verye daungerouse battayle. Sanè ut uis, be it as thou wylte. Sanè quam utile, surely very profytable. Sanè quidem, ye hardely Nempe ergo aper te uis, quae restant me loqui? D. Sanè qui∣dem. But wylte thou than that I shall telle playnely all the reste? D. ye hardely. Sanesco, scere, to be or waxe hole. Sanga, a ryuer in Portugall. Sangaris, a ryuer of Galatia, whiche running throughe Phrygia, falleth into Propontis, the sea. Sanguen, guinis, & Sanguis, guinis, bloude. also a tree, the barke wherof is of the colour of bloudde. Sanguineus, a, um, full of bloude, also cruell. sometyme of sanguine or blouddy colour. Sanguinolentus, idem. Sanguiculum, the bloude of a kyd or swyne. wherwith pouddynges are made. Sanguino, are, to blede. Sanguinaria, & Sanguinalis, an herbe that stoppeth bloudde. called also Polygonon, knot grasse. Sanguinarius, cruell, bluddy. Sanguinolentus, idem. Sanguis, guinis, bloude. Sanguisuga, a worme, whiche is in standynge waters, & doth sucke the bloud of men or bea¦stes that come into it: it is also called Hirudo Sanies, mater, corrupted bloude. Sanna, a scorne or mocke. Sannio, onis, a dysarde in a playe or dysguy∣synge: also he whiche in countenaunce, ge∣sture, and maners is a fole. Sanitas, tatis, helthe. Saniter, lyke a hole man. Sannaus, a ryuer in Asia. Sano, are, to heale. Sansa, the stone of an olyue. Sansucus, Maioram. Sancsucinus, a, um, of maioram. Santerna, soulder, wherwith golde is soudred Santones, people of a countrey in Fraunce cal¦led Xantongue. Santonicum, an herbe called Lauander cotton Santonum, Rochell in Fraunce. Sanus, na, num, hole holsome. Sanitas, tatis, helthe. Sapa, is new wyne boyled to the thyrde parte of the measure, if it be to the halfe deale it is named Defrutum, as Plinie writeth. li. 14. And if there be but one parte consumed it is than called Caloenum, as Anto. Musa affir¦meth. Sapa is also called sometyme Syreon, sometyme Hepsema, and Hepseton, of Ga∣lenus in Meth. and of Nonius Mellacum. Saperda, a dunge hyll. Sapidè, sauourely. Sapidius, more sauourely. Sapidus, da, dum, sauourly, wel seasoned. Sapiens, tis, wyse. Sapientia, the kunnyng of thynges diuine and humayne, wysedome. Sapio, pui, pere, to taste or sauour, to fele, to be wyse, to haue a ryght opinion. Sapio rem, I knowe what I haue to do. Sapiunt malè, they be yll aduysed. Sapit hic pleno pectore, he is meruaylouse wyse. Sapit plus, he hath more wytte. Sapit satis, he is wyse inoughe. Sapis multum ad genium, thou knoweste howe to make good chere. Sapo, ponis, Sope. Saponaria, reade Struthio. Sapor, ôris, a sauour, a taste. Sapphiratus, a Saphyr full of spottes. Sapphirinus, na, um, of a Saphire. Sapphirus, a stone called a Saphyre. Sappho, a woman of the yle of Lesbos, a great poetresse, who made versis called Lyrica, at the last she was taken with the loue of a yōg man called Phao, who runnynge away from her, she not susteynynge the anguishe of loue threwe her selue downe from an Hyll in to the sea. Sappinus, the lower parte of a fyrre tre, which is without knottes. Saprum, a drynke made with salte & the fruite called Sorba, whiche helpeth men that haue the colyke. Sapros, vynewed. Sapsa, of olde writers was vsed for ipsa. Sarcasmos, a maner of iestynge or scoffynge bytyngely. Sarcimen, a seame. Sarcina, a trusse or packe, or fardell. sometime
it is taken for an vnprofytable burden. Sarcinas colligere, is properly of menne of warre, whan they remoue or departe from theyr campe. Sarcinas, atis, for sarcina. Sarcinaria iumenta, pachorses. Sarcinatrix, tricis, a shepster, or seamester. Sarcinae, all stuffe that is closed or shutte vp in coffers. Sarcino, are, to lade. sometyme to sowe. Sarcinator, a botcher of garmentes. Sarcio, ciui, cire, to make hole agayne, to a∣mende a thyng decayed or appayred, to make amendes. Sarcion, a stone of carnation colour. Sarcito, pay the damages or costes. Sarctè, hole. Sartum tectum. idem. Sarcocilla, a gumme of a tree in Persia, lyke to the poulder of incense, somewhat red and bytter, somme is whyte of colour whiche is moche better than red. Sarcophagus, a sepulchre. Sarculo, are, to rake. Sarculum, a rake. Sarda, a red stone, wherin seales ar grauen. Sardanapalus, a kynge of Assiria, monstruous in all kyndes of lecherye, and therfore was slayne of one of his lordes as he satte spyn∣nynge amonge harlottes. Sardinia, an yle in the sea called Ligusticum, by Geane, not passynge .vii. myles frome Corsica. Sardis, a citie in Lidia. Sardo, for intelligo, I vnderstande. Sardoa, an herbe lyke to smallage, which gro∣weth in Sardinia, wherof if a man eate, he shal grenne and make countenance of laugh¦ynge, and so dye. Sardonius risus, a grennyng or laughyng with out cause, a longe laughter. Sardonycharus, hauynge apparayle garnished with the stone called Sardonix. Sardonychus, idem quod Sardonyx. Sardus, & Sardinensis, & Sardous, a, um, of Sardinia. Sardonyx, onychis, a stone of the colour of a mannes nayle. Sarepta, a towne in Siria, where Hely the pro¦phete was borne. Sargacae, people in the Northe parte of the worlde, ioynyng to the great mere of Meotis Sargus, a fyshe beinge in the sea of Egypte. Sari, an herbe, growynge in waters hauinge an harde rote, and wounden, necessarye for smythes. Sarissa, a longe speare. Saronicus, a boosome of the sea agaynste Isthmus. Sarmatia, all that great countrey, wherein is conteyned Russia, Liuonia, and Tartaria, and the Northe and caste parte of Polonia. Sarmata, a man of that countrey. Sarmenta, twygges or shroude of trees cut of. Sarmentitius, tia, um, made of twygges or small boughes. Sarnus, a ryuer in Campania. Sarpa, a vyne cut of, shradde. Sarpedon, the kynge of Lisia, which came to the ayd of the Troyans agaynst the Grekes. Sarpo, pere, to clense or make cleane. Sarra, an Ile called sometyme Tyrus: also the wyfe of Abraham. Sarra, a Citie in Phoenicia called also Tyrus, Sarranus, na, num, of that citie. Sarraballa, plurali numero, a worde of Cal∣dey, signifienge breches. Sarraca, the name of two cities, whereof the one is in Media, the other in Felici Arabia, or the riche Arrabie. Sarracum, a certayne carre, wherin woode or stones be caryed. Sarranae uestes, garmentes of purple. Sarrastes, people in Campania. Sarrio, rire, to wede corne. Sarritor, & sartor, toris, a weder of corne. Sarritio, Sarritura, & sartura, wedynge of corne. Sarsina, an olde citie in Italy, where Plautus the wryter of comedies was borne. Sarta tecta, houses letten to certayne persons to kepe them alway repayred sufficiently, for a certayne somme of money. Sarta tecta locare, to sette oute houses at a price certayne to be repayred. Sarta tecta exigere, to charge a man with reparations. Sartago, ginis, a fryenge panne. Sarte, hole. Sarticum, an entrie into the ryuer of Nilus. Sartor, & sarritor, an harower or weder of corne. Sartum tectum habere, to kepe hole & sound or vncorrupted or hurte. Sartutillus, the bealye of a swyne stuffed with meale. Sas, olde writers vsed for suas. Saso, an yle fyue myles from the citie of Brun¦dusium in the realme of Naples. Sason, a ryuer. Sat, for satis, inough. Quantum sat est, as mo¦che as is sufficient. Sat habet, it is sufficient Sat scio, I knowe well ynoughe. Satagitae, people in the countrey nowe called Tartarye. Satago, gi, gere, to be dilygent, to do with spede, to be busy about a thynge. Satanas, is interpreted an aduersarye, by the
whiche name the dyuell was callyd, bycause that he was aduersary to Christe. also what so euer is cōtrary to peace, is called Satanas Satarchae, people in Scithia, whiche excluded from them the vse of golde and syluer. Satellis, litis, one retayned to garde a mannes persone. also a catchepoll or bayliff, that doth attache men. Satellitium, a garde, the offyce of suche a per∣son or offycer. Saterona, a beaste, which dothe lyue, somtyme in water, sometyme on lande. Satias, sacierie, fulnesse or wearynesse in moche vsynge of a thynge. sommetyme it sygnifieth aboundance. Hi saltibus occupatis, externo∣rum agros inuasêre, frumenti{que} ex inopia graui, satias facta, After that they had got∣ten the woodes or forrestes, they inuaded the landes of them that were borderers, and from scarsitie of corne, they hapned to haue their fylle or abundance. Satiabilis, le, that whyche maye be easylye sa∣tisfied. Saties, for satietas. Satietas, tatis, a sacietie or fulnesse. Rerum omnium satietas, tedyousenesse of all thynges. Satin, for satisne, Satin sanaes? Arte thou not well at ease? Satin saluae? Be all thynges well? Satio, tionis, the acte of sowyng of corne. Satio, tiare, to saciate or fylle, whiche hath re∣lation not onely to the bodye and sences, but also to the mynde. Satis, ynough, as moch as doth nede, sufficient Satis acceptio, a couenaunt, wherby a man is bounden, and sureties with hym. Satisaccipere, to take ioynt sureties. Satis iam uerborū est, thou hast sayd inough. Satis habere, to be content. Satis habeas, ni∣hil me etiam tecum de tui fratris iniuria con¦queri, Be content, that I haue not also layd to your charge, the wronge that your brother hath done me. Satisdatio, & satisdatum, dati, the suretie or bonde, wherby men are bounden for an other, for perfourmance of couenaunt, or the coue∣naunter, and sureties with hym. Satisdator, he that is bounden for performance of couenant. Satisdo, dare, to putte in sureties for perfour∣mance of couenātes. also to be bounden with sureties for perfourming of couenantes. Satisfacio, cere, to satisfy, to excuse, to content. Satisfactio, satisfaction. Satispraestatio, idem. Satispraesto, tare, idem quod satis dare, to fynde suretie. Satis super{que}, ynough and to moche. Satius, the comparatiue degree of satis, it si∣gnyfieth better. Satiuus, a, um, that may be sowen, or is sowen. Satnois, a ryuer of Phrigia. Sator, toris, he that soweth corne. Satrapa, amonge the Persians were as dukes and erles be here. Satrapia, a prouynce, Duchy, or countie. Satullo, are, idem quod saturare, to saciate or fylle superfluousely. Satum, is a measure of the hebrues whiche re∣ceyueth of wyne .xxxiii.li. and .iiii. ounces. of oyle xxx.li. of hony .l. li. it is of our measure standerde .ii. galons and a quarte, and beyng a measure of dry thinges, it is our pecke, and the .iiii. part of a pecke. Satur, turis, full fedde, sometyme aboundaunt or plentuouse. Satureia, an herbe callyd Sauery. Saturio, onis, he that hath eaten ynoughe and to moche. Saturitas, fertilitie or plentuousnes, also abun∣dance in excesse. Saturnalia, fyue dayes assigned to Saturne in December, wherin menne vsed to feaste one an other, and to sende mutuall presentes. Saturnalitium, pertaynynge to the ceremonyes of Saturnus. Saturnia, was the name of a towne. also hyghe places were called Saturnia. Saturnius, a, um, of Saturnus. Saturninian, were sheritykes, which affyrmed, that only .vii. angels made the world agaynst the conscience of god the father. Saturninus, a mountayne at Rome, which was afterward callyd Tarpeius. Saturnus, one of the seuen planettes. also a god of the paynyms, sonne of Coelus and Vesta, and father of Iupyter. Saturo, are, to saturate or fyll with any thynge superfluousely, moche commonly in eatyng. Saturum, & Satyrum, a citie of Calabria, not farre from Tarentum. Satus, ta, tum, sowen or begotten. Satus, tus, the sowynge, also sede. Satyra, a poesy rebukynge vyces sharpely, not regardynge the persons. Satyricus, & satyrus, a maker of suche matters Satyria, a crowe. Satyriacum, an ymage of Priapus. Satyriasis, a sycknesse, wherby the member of a man standeth alwaye without appetite or dilectation. Satyrica, was a comedye, wherein Satyres were brought in. Satyricè, an aduerbe, whiche signifieth sharpe∣ly and with reproche. Satyrus, a beast hauyng the heed of a man and the bodye of a gote.
Satyrion, an herbe, hauyng leaues lyke a lyly, but smaller, a knappe with many smalle pur∣ple flowres, and a roote lyke the genytoures of a man. Saucio, are, to wounde. Saucius, a, um, wounded, sometyme wery. Sauior, aris, ari, to kysse swetely. Saura, a lysarde, whyche lyeth in hedges. Saurites, a stoone, whyche is found in the bea∣lye of a grene lysarde. Sauromatae, people called also Sarmatae, Rus∣ses, Tartariens, Moscouites. &c. Saxatilis, le, stonye. Pisces saxatili, fyshes bred amonge stones. Saxetum, a rocky place. Saxeus, a, um, stony, or of a stone. Saxiphagon, or Saxiphages, in greke, or Saxi∣fraga, in latyn, Dioscorides and Plinius do call it also Empetron, whyche in dede is the herbe callyd Sampiere, vsed for a sawce, and in salades, and therfore is boyled and kept in bryne. Anton. Musa denyeth, that Saxifraga and Empetron be oone. Ruellius describeth Saxifragon with lytel branches growing on stones, hauynge smalle stalkes, not vnlyke to Epithymus, but that they are blacke and short, and hath leaues lyke to maydenheare, but that they be greatter, or to Polypodi, on the toppe busshy, but out of order, hauynge neyther floure nor seede, and a superfluouse roote, he also saythe, that it is founde in olde buyldynges, in the ioyntes of the stones. In an other place he nameth that kynde of may∣denheare, whiche is callyd Adiantum Saxi∣fragon. Our Saxifrage I neede not to des∣criue, it is so cōmonly knowen, and groweth in suche abundance, which is not lyke to any of the other, nor yet to that which in France (as Ruellius writeth) is called Saxifragia maior, which he affyrmeth to be Sefeli mas∣siliense, nor to that which he supposeth to be a kynde of Napi. Saxonia, Saxony. Saxones, the people. Saxosus, a, um, full of great stones or rockes. Saxulum, a lyttell rocke. Saxum, a rocke. sometyme a stone. ❀Saxum uoluere, to tourne the stone, A pro∣uerbe applied to them that be fatigate or we∣ried with contynuall & vnprofitable labours. Saxumferratum, a citie in Italy. ¶S ANTE C. SCabellū, or scabile, a fote stole, or low settle. Scaber, bra, brum, rustye, roughe, some∣tyme fylthy. Scabies, scabiei, a scabbe. Scabiosa, an herbe. rede Psora. Scabiosus, a, um, scabbed. Scabo, bi, bere, to rubbe or scratche. Scabredo, dinis, a roughnesse of the skynne, as whan it dothe wrynkle. Scabrae, roughly, not playne, or smothe. Scabrities, & scabritia, rustynes, fylthynesse, roughnesse. Scabro, onis, a wourme, whyche is ingendred of the carrayne of a deade horse. Scaea, an hauen at Troy. Scaei, people in Thracia. Scaena, a place, whiche serueth only for enter∣ludes or comedyes to be playde in, whyche was in the fourme of halfe a cerkle. it is also where trees or bushes, are cut and layd ouer the heade, in suche fourme as men maye vn∣der theym walke or sytte in the shadowe. It is also where a vyce or offence is openly dete∣cted, in suche wyse as menne doo crye out, or wonder at it. Scaenaticus, uel scaenatilis, for a player in come∣dies or enterludes. Scaenicula, a diminutiue of scaena. Scaenicus, ca, cum, pertaynynge to Enter∣ludes. Scaenicus, a player in enterludes. Scaenitae, people of Arabye, whyche dwelle al∣waye in tentes, couered with the heares of gootes, amonge whome if a swyne or hogge be brought, it dyeth. Scaenoma, a tente also a bagge. Scaenopegia, the feast of the tabernacles, wher in the Iewes dyd set vp tabernacles or tentes in similitude of theym, wherein they dwellyd whan they came out of Egypte. Scaeua, the lefte hande. also he that vseth the lefte hande for the ryght. Scaeuus, a, um, yll. somtyme it signifieth good. as Scaeuum omen, good lucke or chaunce. Scala, & scalae, scalarum, a ladder. also a payre of stayres. Scalmus, a lyttell piece of woode, wherevnto shypmen doo bynde their oores, to rowe the more easyly. Scalpellum, a penknyfe. Scalpo, psi, pere, to scratche. alsoo to graue in mettall. Scalptura, & scalpellum, an instrument, wher∣with any thynge is scraped or rubbed, alsoo a surgeons instrument, wherewith he taketh corrupte fleshe from the bones. It is alsoo a grauynge yron. Scalptor, tôris, a grauer. Scalptura, grauynge in mettall. Scalpturatum, pauement made with stones, of dyuers colours, ioyned togyther. Scalpturio, riui, rire, to scrape as a cocke doth, or other fowles. Scalpurio, rire, to scrape as a henne doth.
Scamander, dr, a ryuer whiche diuydeth Eu∣ropa from Asia. it was also the name of one of the sonnes of Hector, callid also Astyanax. Scamandria, a towne by the hauen of Ilium, not farre from Troy. Scamnum, a benche or fourme. alsoo a steppe or grice, wherby a manne gothe vppe into a yg edde. Also a balke vutylled betweene two forowes. Scamonea, an herbe, the iuyce wherof is vsed in medicine to purge choler vehemently. Albe it that it is venemous, and leueth wars mat¦ter behynde, than it dothe expell. Scandalides, a kynde of dates. Scandalum, occasyon to synne, gyuen by an no∣ther to hym that synneth. Scandinauia, an yle in the north occean sea, the quantitie wherof was neuer founde. Scandix, dicis, an herbe lyke to cheruyll, but it is sweeter, and hath a whyte floure, and a lyttell roote. Scando, di, dere, to clymme. Scandulaca, an herbe, whiche rounneth vppon corne, as yuye dothe on trees. Scandulae, shyngle, whiche be tyles of wodde, wherwith dyuers churches be couered. Scandulum contectum, a house couered with shyngle or wodden tyles. Scansile, that whiche may be clymmed or gone vppon. Scansio, a clymmynge vp. Scapha, a bote made of a hole tree, or a shyppe boote. Scaphiarius, a boteman. Scaphium, a basyn or vessell to receyue vryne or ordure. Scapilium, the space betwene the shoulders. Scaprum, a knyfe, wherewith vynes and other lyke thynges are cutte. Scaptensula, a place in Macedonia, where syl∣uer was dygged. Scaptia, an olde citie in Italy, wherof came. Scaptia tribus. Scapulae, the hynder part of the shulders. Scapularis, a boye or wenche, which is oft bea∣ten about the shulders. Scapularis uestis, a garmente, whyche coue∣reth onely the shulders. Scapus, after Ruellius is a stalke, whyche ry∣seth bolte vpryght. some do adde to, hauynge a knoppe, wherin seedes are conteyned, as a popy, some do so name the huske of a grape. Scarabaeus, a flye with a blacke shelle or huske called a bytell, whiche bredeth in cowe shar∣des, and is black also there is a kynd of them whiche hath hornes lyke to an hart. ❀Scarabaeus aquilam, a prouerbe applyed to suche as endeuour them selfe to do displesure to those that be more puyssant than they are. Scarificatio, launcynge. Scarifico, caré, to launce or open a soore, that the matter corrupted may issue. Scarus, a fyshe, which doth chewe lyke a beast, some men do suppose it to be a gylte head, or Goldenye. Scatebrae, the bollynge or rysynge vp of water out of a sprynge or sourges of water. Scateo, tere, to run or brast out, as water doth out of a narowe or strayte place. Scaturigo, ginis, & scaturies, brastynge out of water of other thynge in lyke maner. Scaturio, ire, to rounne out or abrode, alsoo to sprynge or growe abroode, as somme herbes doone. Scaturitio, a runnynge as water dothe. Scauri, they whyche haue their toes swollen, or their ankley croked, that they may not go faste, it was also an honourable house of the Romaynes. Scazon, tis, is a kynde of meter. Sceleratè, myscheuousely. Scelerator, oris, he that polluteth or defyleth. Sceleratus, he vnto whom a myscheuous dede is done. somtyme it sygnifieth him that doth an yll dede. Sceleratus campus, a fielde at Rome, where the nunnes of Vesta were buryed quycke, yf they were founde to lyue incontynently. Scelerosè, vngracyousely, myscheuousely. Sceleste, idem. Scelero, rare, to pollute. Scelerosus, a, um, he that hath done an vngra∣ciouse or myscheuouse dede. Scelerosus, full of vngraciousnes. Scelestus, ta, tum, vngracious, ful of vnhappy∣nesse, myscheuous, vengeable. Scelus, sceleris, a myscheuous dede. also an vn∣gracious person. Scena, a pauyllion or haule. also a scaffolde. Scenographia, is an adumbration or lyght de∣scription of the front and sydes of a howse, where the lynes dothe aunswere to the com∣passe and centre of euery parte. Scenoma, a pauyllion, a sacke. Sceparnon, a couerynge. Scepsis, a citie in Phrigia. Sceptici, were a secte of phylosophers, whyche affyrmed nothyng, the chief of that sect was Pirrhus and Herillus. Sceptrum, a pryncis scepter. Scheda, a leafe of paper, a scrowe. Schedia, a thynge lyke to a brydge with trees pynned to gyther, whereon thynges are ca∣ryed in the water, in the steede of a barge, as it may be sene on dyuers great riuers in high Germany. Schedion, any thynge sodaynly made, & with∣out moche labour.
Schedula, a lyttell scrowe or leafe of paper. Schema, atîs, & schematum, a fygure, also an ornament, specially in speache. sommetyme a garment. Schesis, where a multytude of wordes are broughte in together vnioyned, as, Nubila, nix, grando, procellae, flumina, uēti, Cloudes, snowe, hayle, shoures, flouddes, wyndes. Schilschi, amonge the Iewes, was a weight of foure ounces. Schinos, the tree out of the whyche rounneth Mastyx, rede Lentiscus. Schisma, atis, a diuision, specially in the church Schiston, the mylke that remayneth after that the mylke is sodden, whyche is callyd welle courdes. Schoenobates, he that gothe on a corde. Scoeniculae, harlottes, whiche dresse theym sel∣ues with slynkynge oyntmentes. Schoenitae, people, whyche doo dwelle in pa∣uyllyons. Schoenoplocos, a roper. Schoenos, is that whiche is callid Iuncus odo∣ratus, Celsus calleth it Iuncus rotundus, the apothecaries calleth it Squinantum. Schoenus, nuntis, a riuer by Athenes, also an o∣ther in Arcadia, & also a tree called Lentiscus Schoenus, a space of grounde, contaynyng thre score furlonges, whyche is seuen myles, and a halfe. Schola, a schoole. Also a place in a bayn, where men dyd abyde, whyles other were bayned, lyke wyse in a porche, wherin men taryed for aunsweres. Scholae, are taken for dysputati∣ons betwene the mayster and his scholers. Scholaris, are, pertaynyng to schooles. Scholasticus, a scholar. Scholasticus, ca, cum, scholasticall. Scholium, a short or compendyouse exposition. Scibilis, le, that whyche may be easily knowen. Scibo, for sciam, I shall knowe. Sciens feci, I dyd it wetyngly. Scienter, idem. Scienter feci, I dyd it counnyngly. Scientia, counnynge. Scilicet, as who saythe. It is moche, surely, moreouer. Sommetyme it implyeth a ne∣gatyue. Id populus curat scilicet, Ye the people ca∣reth moche therfore, as who sayth, they care nothynge for it. Scilicet equidem istuc factum ignoscam, That is welle sayde, ye I wylle pardon the anon. Scilicet expectemus illud quin quennium, Ye, it is best that we tary yet vntyll the fiue yeres be passed, as who moughte say, I wyll not tary so longe. Scilicet grauiorem dolorem tibi patrui tui mors attulit, quàm C. Graccho frattis, May that be trewe, that the deathe of thyne vncle greued the more, than greued Graccho the deathe of his brother. Scilicet ita res est, Trewelye it is as I tell you. Non uides? Videam obsecro, quem? hunc scilicet, Seest thou not? See I praye the, whome? hym I tel the. Scilliticus, a, um, & Scillites, of Scilla. Scincus, a kynde of small cockodryls in the ry∣uer of Nilus. Scindo, scidi, scindere, to cutte. Scindere sententiam, to diuyde his opynion. Scinpodium, a lytell couche or benche. Scintilla, a sparke, Scintillo, are to sparkle. Scio, sciui, scire, to knowe. Scire fidibus, to be perfyte in playenge on in∣strumentes. Scire sciscere{que}, to ordeyne and inacte, as it is in our parlyament. Scire omnes linguas, to speke all languages Scit fidibus, he can playe on the harpe. Latine uel graece scire, he vnderstādeth greke or latyne. Sciens non faciam, I wylle not doo it wyt∣tyngly. Scio uti foro, I knowe what I haue to doo. also I can accomodate my self to other mens maners, and to the condytions of the tyme and place present. Sciolus, he that knoweth somewhat. Sciomantia, a part of nygromancye wrought by shadowes. Sciopodes, people, whiche lyenge vpryght, do shadowe them selues with theyr feete, al be it euery one manne hath but one legge, and yet be they wonderfull swyfte. Sciotericon, a dyalle sette vppon a walle, to knowe by the sonne what is a clocke. Scipiadae, & Scipionidae, they whyche were of the progenye of Scypions, the noble cap∣taynes of Romaynes. Scipio, the surname of dyuerse noble Romay∣nes, of the whyche three were the mooste ex∣cellente personnages of their tyme, as welle in marciall prowesse, as also in other mooste notable vertues. The one callyd Scipio Na∣sica, sonne of Gneius Scipio, who had bene bothe Consule and tryumphed, and beynge a verye yonge manne, was deemed of all the people of Rome to be the best manne in that Cytie. The other two were bretherne son∣nes of Publius Scipio. The one of theym for subdewynge Asia, was callid Scipio Asi∣aticus, the other for vaynquysshynge Han∣nyballe, and the people of Aphryca was na∣med Scypio Aphricanus. This Publius
Cornelius Scipio, frome his chyldehoode was of a wonderful towardnesse, for beinge but .xvii. yeres olde in a great batayle by Pa∣uia in Lumbardy, he reskued his father be∣ing enuironned with ennemyes, and in dan∣ger to be slayne. Also after the dyscomfyture at Cannas, where the more part of the floure of chyualry was slayn. Wherfore the resydue of the yong men concluded to haue forsaken Italy. This Scipio drewe out his sworde, & compelled them to sweare, that they shoulde not leaue the citie but defende it. After that his father and vncle were slayn, all men fea∣rynge to be captayns in so daungerous war∣res, he stepte forth with a noble courage, pro∣ferynge hym self to take that charge in hand, whervnto the senate and people consented, he beinge than but .xxii. yeres olde, they behol∣dyng in his personage and vysage a beaultye incomparable, his countenaunce merye and gentylle, and to be in his gesture and pase a wonderfull maiesty, whiche was had in such admiration, throughout all the worlde, that after he had dryuen Hanniball out of Affrik, subdued the citie of Carthage, and constrai∣ned the great kyng Antiochus to desyre peace of the Romans, the warres being cessed. mē came out of al countreys to Rome only to see him & honour hym, as one excedyng the state of mortalytie, wherby he styred such enuy to∣warde hym, that he was accused for detay∣nyng of certayne treasure, whiche shuld haue ben brought into the commune treasorye, but he with a noble and valiant courage, cam be∣fore the people, & remembrynge what he had done for the weale publyke, requyred them to go with hym vnto the capytole, to gyue than¦kes to god for his vyctorye, and so departed all the people folowyng him, and leauyng the Iudges alone. But not withstandyng he soo greuousely toke the ingratitude of the senate and people, that he abandoned all commune affayres, and went out of the citie of Rome to a manour place, whiche he hadde at Linter¦num, and there ended his lyfe, whan he had lyued .liiii. yeres, a notable remembraunce to theym that doo trust on fortune or fauour of people. Scipio, onis, is also a staffe to walke with. Scironia saxa, rockes in the sea by Athenes. Scirpea, a dounge potte or colne made with roddes. Scirpicula, a lyttell hooke, wherewith rous∣shes, or any thynge is cut of in byndynge of thynges. Scirpita, houped vesselles. Scirpo, are, to bynde Scirpus, a russhe, or an osyar. ❀Nodum in scirpo quaerere, To seeke for a knotte in a rushe, is a prouerbe, wherby is si∣gnyfied, to seke to dilygently for a thyng that may not be found, or to make dout of a thing whyche is playne. Scirpeus, a, um, of russhes. Scirpiculum, a baskette. Scirrus, or scirron, is an hardnesse growen in in the fleshe within the skynne, or in some o∣ther parte within the body. Scirophorion, the moneth of May. Scirrhosis, a dysease in the eyes commynge of a longe inflamation, fleshe growynge in them somwhat blewe. Scirta, is a kynd of oynyons, growyng in wyn∣ter, callyd scalyons. Sciscitor, taris, tari, & Scisco, sciscere, to de∣maunde. Also sciscere, is to ordeyn or inact, to inquyre. Sciscito, gyue thou sentence or iudgement, giue thy voyce or consent in election. Scisco, sciui, sciscere, to knowe. Also to decerne or gyue sentence. Scissilis, le, that whyche may be cutte. Scissio, scissura, & scissus, us, a cutte. Scita, ordynaunces made by the people. Scitamenta, pleasant meates. Scite, cunnyngly, craftily. Scitor, aris, ari, to demaunde or inquyre. Scitum, a decree, or statute. Scitus, ta, tum, wyse or wyttye, alsoo proper or feate. Scytae, people in the northe parte of Asia, whi∣che were cruell and harde to be vanquyshed, they be nowe callyd Russyans, Moscouytes, and Tartaryens. Sciurus, a squyrrell. Scius, he that knoweth a thynge. Scleriasis, a swellynge of the eye lyddes, with peyne and rednesse. Sclerophthalmia, where the eye lyddes bene harde, and waxe heuy with ache. Sclopus, a sowne, whiche is made with pouf∣fyng of the chekes. Scobina, an instrument, wherwith any thynge is shauen somtyme the shauyng selfe. Scobino, are, to wounde, to shaue of. Scobs, scobis, that whyche commeth of the shauynge or boorynge of woode or metralle: alsoo gryt of stoones, wherwith mettalle is scoured. Scoletia, a kynde of ruste or canker. Scolopendria, an herbe callyd also Asplenon, it groweth on flynt walles, where the sunne commeth neuer or seldome, and hath leaues lyke Polypodium, somewhat yelowe by the grounde and roughe, and aboue greene, ha∣uynge neyther staulke, flowre, nor seede. It is not Hartis toungue, whyche is com∣munely callyd Scolopendria, but it is that,
whyche the apothecaries do call Cetrac, rede before in Hemionîtis, & Phillitis. Scolopendria, or Scolopendra, is also a lytell worme with many legges, wherwith he goth lyke to a barge with many ores. Scolymos, the floure of a thystell. Scolymus, a thystell nowe callyd Arkechoke, of some men is taken for the thystell, whiche beastes do eate, callyd cowethystell. Scombrus, a fysshe, a certayn kynde of Tuny. Scomma, matis, a skoffe, or sentence spoken in myrthe, whiche sowneth otherwyse than is ment of hym that speaketh. Scopa, a broume or besome to swepe houses. Scopa regia, an herbe callyd Mylfoyle. Scopae, the croppes of herbes or trees. Scoparius, & scoparia, he or she that doothe sweepe. Scopei, men of lyttell stature. Scopae, dyssolute men without wytte or coun∣sayle. Scopas dissipare, to say or do a thyng without any purpose or reason. Scopo, pare, to swepe. Scopelon, an hygh place, where men stande to beholde or espy. Scopi, be grapes, after that the wyne is pres∣sed out. Scopula, a brushe, suche as payntours and par¦gettours do vse. Scopulosus, a, um, rocky, or full of rockes. Scopus, & scopulus, an hygh rocke, also it is a marke, wherat men do shote. sometyme it sygnifieth any thynge, whervnto that which is spoken, hath a principall respect. Scordion, hath leaues lyke to germander, but moche larger, and the stalke foure square, & hath some part of the sauour of garlike, whi∣che forme declareth it to be neyther ransoms nor yet saulce alone. Scordotis, idem. Scoria, the refuse of mettall tried out by fyre. sometyme it sygnifieth care or grefe. Scorodon, garlyke. Scorpena, a fysshe whyche keepeth her selfe to one make. Scorpiones, crossebowes as well to shoote ar∣rowes as stones. Scorpionarij, they whyche doo shote in crosse∣bowes. Scorpites, a stone of the colour of a scorpyon. Scorpiuros, an herbe, whyche hath ben suppo∣sed to be the herbe callyd ruddes or marygol∣des, but the curiositie of late phisytions wyl not suffre marigoldes to be so named, bicause some part of the colour of the floure agreeth not with the old description, not withstāding the resydue of the forme, propreties, and ver∣tues do not repugne, (as it hath ben proued) but that Scorpiuros, may be marygouldes. For the colours of floures in sundry cuntreis haue ben founde somewhat to vary, and like∣wyse the quantitie and fascion of the leafe, wherin there is no doubt, but many be decei∣ued with their superfluous curiositie in the iudgyng of herbes. Scrofularia, some thynketh it to be the blynde nettyll, other the herbe called of Dioscorides Chelidonium minus. Scorpius, & scorpio, onis, a venymous worme callyd a scorpyon, whyche stryketh with his tayle, and neuer ceasseth to searche, where he may haue occasion to stryke. Also a sygne in the fyrmament. It is also a crossebow. some men take it to be an arke bushe. Also a whyp, hauyng plummettes of leade at the endes of the cordes. It is also an herbe, whiche hath sedes lyke to scorpyons tayle. Scortea, that whyche is of lether, as Scortei nummi, lether money. Scortes, the codde of a man or beast. Scorteus, tea, teum, that whiche is made of skynnes. Scortor, aris, ari, to haunte or companye with harlottes. Scortum, an harlotte or strumpette, it is alsoo the hyde of a beaste. Scotia, Scotlande, the parte of Britania from the ryuer of Twede to Catanes. Scoti, Scottes, or Scottyshemen, of whome sayncte Hierome writeth in this wyse. Quid loquar de caeteris nationibus, quū ipse adu∣lescentulus, in Gallia uiderim Scotos, gen∣tem Britannicam, humanis uesci carnibus: & quum per syluas porcorum greges & ar∣mentorum, pecudum{que} reperiant, pastorum nates, & foeminarum papillas solere abscin∣dere, & has solas ciborum delitias arbitrari? What shall I speake of other nations, sens that whan I was a boy, I sawe in Fraunce, Scottes, a people of Brytayne, eate mennes fleshe, and whan they founde in the forestes herdes of swyne, beastes, and cattalle, they wolde cutte of the buttockes of the boyes, whyche kept them, and also the womens pap¦pes, and toke that to be the most deyntie and delycate meate. Scotos, in Greke, darkenes: it is more aptely callyd in the northerne tungue, myrke. Scotoma, & scotomia, dymnesse of syght. Scranteum, a skynne, wherin arowes are put: it may be called a sheafe. Scraptia, a worme, whiche is founden in lea∣ues. Also a vyle and stynkyng harlotte, a dri∣uelyng queane. Screabile, that whiche may be spette or retched out of the lungues or stomakes. Screator, he that reacheth or spytteth. Screatus, tus, spettynge or retching to spitte.
Screo, are, to reache in spettynge. Scriba, a Secretary, a notary, a scribe, a clerke of an offycer. Scribello, lare, the old wryters vsed for Scribo. Scriblita, a delycate meate made of paste stuf∣fed and wounden lyke a rope, I thynke it to be suche as fertes of Portyngal are. Scribligo, ginis, an vntrue fourme of speaking or writinge callyd also Soloecismus. Scribo, scripsi, scribere, to write, also to make, sometyme to paynte. Scribere nummos alicui, to deliuer money by exchaunge, or out of the banke. Supplimentum legionibus scribere, to per∣forme or make vp the legions in the number of souldiours. Scrinarius, the keper of secrete letters. Scriniolum, a casket or forsar. Scrinium, a coffer or other lyke place, wherin iewelles or secrete thynges are kepte, as eui∣dences and recordes of iudgementes or in∣rollementes. Scriptio, an inscription or any other wryting. Scriptor, toris, a wryter. Scriptorius, a, um, apt for wrytyng. Scriptum, that whiche is wrytten. Scriptura, wrytyng. somtyme style. also a reck∣nynge of a baylyffe, whyche byeth and selleth cattell, or of hym whyche ought to paye cer∣tayne reuenewes, for that whyche he hathe hyred. Scripturarius, he that writeth thynges whyche be commonly done, or bokes of recknynge for baylyffes and reues, a clerke. Scrobs, scrobis, a dyche or furrowe. Scrobulus, a lytell dyche or furrowe. Scropha, a sowe that hath pygges. Scrotum, the codde or skynne, wherein be the stones of a man. Scrota, be also lytell ymages made of paste, whyche are wonte to be giuen to chyldren. Scrupulosus, a, um, scrupulouse or doubtfull in lyghte thynges. sometyme it sygnyfieth dyf∣fuse or dyfficulte. Scrupulosa res, a thyng wherin there semeth to be some dyfficultie. Scrupulatim, by smalle pieces. Scrupulus, a lyttell sharpe stone, whiche some∣tyme hapneth to falle into a mannes showe, and hurte his hele. It is also taken for moch sollicitude, also for dyffycultie, or spyced con∣science. also a poyse, whyche is the thyrde parte of a dramme: and than is it also writ∣ten with y, as Scrypulus. Scrupulum inijcere, to bryng into a mannes mynde, doubte, carefulnes, or thought. Scrupulū eximere, to put away dout or care. Scrupus, a lyttell stone or piece of a stone. Scrupeus, a, um, stonye. Scruta, olde garmentes, horseshoen, and suche other baggage solde for necessitie. also lyttell ymages made in paste, solde to the people. Scrutarius, he that selleth old stuffe, or maketh suche ymages. Scrutinium, a serche. Scrutor, aris, ari, to serche. Scrutellus, the bely of a swyne farced or stuffed. Sculna, olde wryters vsed for sequester, an ar∣bytrour. Sculpo, psi, pere, to carue ymages in stone. som tyme to graue in mettall. Sculponeae, wollen sockes. Sculponeatus, he that dothe weare woullen sockes. Sculptile, that whiche is carued or grauen. Sculptor, a grauer, a caruer. Sculptrix, a woman of that occupation. Sculptura, ingrauynge or karuyng. Scurra, a rayler, a scoffer. Scurrilitas, rallynge. Scurrilis, le, pertaynyng to raylyng. Scurriliter, in raylynge or skoffynge facion. Scutarius, a bucklar maker, or a maker of ter∣gates. Scutarius, ria, rium, pertaynynge to shieldes or tergates. Scutatus, armed with a shielde or tergate. Scutella, a saweer. Scutigerulus, a custrell or page, which beareth his maysters shielde or bucklar. Scutriscum, a diminutiue of scutra, or scuttula. Scutuca, a skourge. Scutula, a rounde fygure, suche as spynners or spyders do warke, also a vessell, whyche con∣tayneth .viii. ounces. also a staffe, wherwith flaxe is beaten. Scutulatus, ta, tum, rounde and wrought in the fourme of a copwebbe. Scutulata uestis, a garment of sylk, wherin be wrought figures like to round copwebbes. Scutulatus, is a colour, I suppose wachet. Scutulum, a lyttell shielde. Scutum, a tergat or shielde, a bucklar. Scylace, a citie in Grecia. Scylla, a dangerouse rock in the sea by Sicile. Also a lady, daughter of Nisus, kyng of Me∣garensis, whiche for loue of Minois, hir fa∣thers ennemy, stale a pourple heare from her fathers head, whiche caused hym to be van∣quyshed. But she beyng forsaken of Minois, threwe her selfe into the sea, and was trans∣fourmed nto a byrde of her name. It is also a kynde of fyshe in the ryuer of Liris in Cam¦pania. It is also an herbe which hathe a rote lyke to an oynyon, and is of the apothecaries callyd Squilla. Scylliticus, a, um, of that herbe. Scyllaceum, a towne in the furthermooste parte of Italy, fyrste buylded and inhabyted
by men of Athenes. Scylleta, places wherin is taken the fyshe cal∣led Scilla. Scylleum, a promontorie or hyll in the parte of Grecia, nowe called Morea. Scyllis, the name of a Greke, whiche swym∣mynge vnder water, dyd cut in sunder the ca¦bles of the shyppes of the Persians. Scyllus, Iuntis, a towne in Achaia. Scylutus, the name of a man, whiche hauynge foure score sonnes, whan he dyed, he called them afore hym, and delyuered to eueriche of them a shefe of arrowes, comaundyng them to breake the sheafes incontinente: whiche whan they mought not do, he toke out of the sheafes one arrowe after an other, and brake them all lyghtely, declaryng therby vnto his sons, that if they continued and agreed well together, they shulde be puyssaunte: and if they varied and were disseuered, they shulde be feble and shortely distroyed. Scymnus, the whelpe of a lyon. Scynifes, bytynge gnattes. Scyphus, a great cruse or iugge. Scyricum, a blonket colour or lyght wachet. Scytala, a lyttell fielde mouse. some do suppose it to be an ermyne. Scyrus, an yle in the sea called Aegeum, where Achilles was hid by his mother in a womans apparayle, to the intent that he shoulde not go with the Greks agaynst Troy. Scyron, a thefe in the countrey of Attica, who wolde syt on a hyghe rocke, and compel them that came by to washe his fete, or elles to ho¦nour hym. and whan they hadde soo done, he threwe them downe into the sea. Fynally he was slayne by Theseus, and it was surmy∣sed, that his boones were tourned into roc∣kes, whiche of hym were named Scyronia, and they be betwene Atticam and Megarim, where by the passage is harde. Scyritae, people in India, whiche haue no no∣ses, but in the stede of a nose they haue two holes in theyr visage. Scythia, is a great countrey, whiche stretcheth in to the East from the ryuer of Tanais, and hath on the south parte Sacos, and Sogdi∣anos, people vnder the kynge of Persia, and on the northe parte be countreyes vnknowen and deserte, and is nowe vnder the dominion of the great Cane of Cataye. Scitha, a man or woman of Scithia. Scythicus, ca, cum, of Scithia. Scython, a countreye nowe called Thracia in Greece. ¶S ANTE E. SE is a pronowne, and signifieth hym or her. Sebasta, uel Sebastapolis, a citie in Siria called before Samaria. Sebemytum, a citie in Egypte. Sebesten, is that fruite whiche Dioscorides calleth Myxa. Sebethos, a fountayne at Naples, whiche ser¦ueth the citie, runnynge throughout the cite. Sebra, or Sebre minor, is as Antonius Mu∣sa saythe, our Esula, or Spourge. Secale, a certayne grayne, whiche serueth one∣ly to put awaye hunger. Scedo, secessi, secedere, to go backe, or to go out of company, to go awaye, to go to playe or sporte from labour. Secucul, is the herbe called Eringion. Secaniabin amonge the Arabianes is our Ox∣ymell, amonge the Latines it is called Ace∣tum mulsum. Secra, a kynde of Ambregryse. Secerno, secreui, secernere, to diuide, or laye oone from an other, to laye or put by it selfe. Secespita, a cuttynge knyfe, wherwith the pay¦nyms diuided theyr sacrifice. Scessus, us, & secessio, a departynge, a vaca∣tion from busynesse, a secrete place. Secinium, a cake of breade cut in sacrifyce. Secius, later. Nec eo secius, neuer the later. Secludo, si, dere, to shut out. Seclum, for seculum, the space of one hundred yeres. Seclusa sacra, ceremonies, that be secretely v∣sed, to be had in the more reuerence. Seco, cas, cui, care, to cutte. Viam secare, to leade the waye. Secarius, a panyer to cary that whiche is cut. Secare, is also to folowe. Secors, & socors, dis, hartlesse, apte to noo purpose, profytable neyther to hym selfe nor to any other. Secordes agni, lambes late ened or fallen. Secordia, & socordia, sluggardnes, vnaptnes, uskyshenes. Secreta, thynges secrete. A secretis, of the pri∣uye counsayle. Secretè, & secretò, priuyly. Secta, a dyuerse consent in sundry wylfull opy∣nions, a secte of phylosophers, a secte of he∣retykes. Sectacula, the sequele. Sectarius ueruex, the belle wether, that gothe before the flocke. Sectilis, le, that whiche may be cutte. Sectio, onis, a cuttynge, a dyuysyon, the par∣tyng of a pray in takyng of a towne. Sectio, al that is taken in pray at the wynnyng
and sackynge of a towne. Sectiuus, ua, uum, that is often cutte. Sectiuum porrum, vnsette lekes. Sector, aris, ari, to folowe, to runne after one. Also to folowe in maners or fourme of spea∣kynge or lyuynge. Alsoo to hunte or chase a beaste. Sectores, byers of forfayted goodes Also they that doo take profyte by the condempnation of other. Sectura, a cuttyng, caues vnder erth, or mines. Sectus, ta, tum, dyuyded. Secubo, bare, to lye aparte. Secula, a sythe, wherwith hey is mowen. Seculum, some do suppose it to be the space of one hundred yeres, some of one thousand ye∣res, other of thyrtye yere. sometyme it is ta∣ken for tyme. Seculum sterile, a barayn tyme. Secunda mensa, the laste course, wherin com∣meth fruite and conserues. Secundae darum, the after byrthe. Secundarius, a, um, of the seconde sorte. Secundo, the seconde tyme or place, alsoo efte∣soones. Secundo, are, to prosper or make prosperous. Secundo lumine, the next day. Caesaris inter∣dicta, si te secundo lumine hic offendero, re∣spuentur, If I fynde the here the next day, I wyll set lyttell by Cesars commandementes. Secundus panis, browne breadde. Pasti siliquis, & pane secundo, Fedde with beane huskes, and browne breadde. Secundum, an aduerbe, sygnifieth nye, or by. Secundum aurem, by the eare. Also next af∣ter. Secundum patrem, next after my father. sometyme for. Secundum te litem do, I iuge the matter for the. alsoo in. Secundum quie∣tem, in reste. also vpon. Secundum ea, ther∣vpon. Secundum Platonem, After the say∣enge of Plato. Secundum Pythagoram ui∣uo, I lyue lyke to Pythagoras Secundum flumen, A longe by the ryuers syde. Secundus, da, dum, seconde or next to the fyrst. Also prosperous. Secunda fortuna, Good or prosperous fortune. Res secundae, that whi∣che dothe folowe our desyre or appetite, good fortune. Secundo flumine nauigat, He goth, or sayleth, or roweth with the streame. Secun¦dus uentus, a good wynde. Secundum prae∣sentem, as yf he were present. Et post edi∣ctum secundum praesentem iudicabitur, And after the decree, iudgement shall be gyuen, as yf he were present. Secundo populo, with the peoples good will Secundum eum fieri, to be done for his profit Securis, an axe. sometyme it is taken for an of∣fycer, whyche hath auctoritie to commyt men to the execution of deathe. Securè, quyetely, surely, in saufegarde. Securus, ra, rum, sure, quyete, without care, assured. Securum reddere, to assure. Securitas, quyetnesse, lacke of care, suretie. Secus, by, or nygh to. Secus flumen, seruntur salices, nygh to the ryuer, wyllowes are sette. Also it sygnifyeth otherwyse, or other. Non dixi secus, ac sen∣tiebam, I said none otherwise thā I thought Quid diximus tibi secus {quam} uelles? What said we vnto the, other than thou woldest haue vs to saye? Sed, but. Sed autem, ye but. Sedate, without trouble. Sedatio, a mytigation. Sedenim, all be it. Sedentarius, a, um, that which is done sitting. Sedeo, sedi, sedêre, to syt, to be ydel, to content, to tary or abyde, to take councell. Si sedet hoc animo, yf it please you so to do. Sedent niues, the snowe abydeth. Sedes, a seate or place to sytte on. also a mansi∣on house. sometyme a sepulchre. Sedicula, a settle. Sedile, idem. Seditio, a sedition or discord among the people. Seditionarius, a seditious person. Sedo, are, to mitigate, to pacyfy, to assuage, to restrayne, to extincte. Seduc, xi, cere, to leade asyde, or leade away. sometyme to deceyue: Seducere arrogantiam, to lay apart pryde. Seductilis, he whiche may be deceyued. Sedulò, in dede, diligently, without faynynge. Sedulitas, diligence, with moche care. Sedulus, diligente, he that playnely withoute crafte dothe a thynge dilygently. Sedum, an herbe callyd syngrene or houseleke. Seges, segetis, corne whan it standeth. somme tyme the grounde falowed, and redye to re∣ceyue corne. Segesta, a towne in Italy. Segestria, was the strawe that was layde in a lyghter, wherin greate menne were borne by their seruantes. Segmenta, be certayn lynes ymagyned, by the whiche Cosmographers do deuide the world into porcions, whiche be called also Paralleli, wherby the distance of places are founden. Segmenta, the cuttynges of, of any thyng. som tyme the partes of the worlde diuided by the sonne. also gardes, or other lyke thynges so∣wed to garmentes. Segmentarius, he that maketh clothe of golde Segmentum, a piece cut of from any thynge, be it mettall or stone. It is also a bee or colar whiche is about womennes neckes. Some do take it for the purfyll of a womans gown It maye as well be taken for a garde or bor∣der about any garment. Segmen, idem.
Segmentatus, ta, tum, maye be sayde of anye thynge, whiche hath borders or trayles fyne∣ly wroughte, with smaule peces fastned ther¦on, be it of mettall or tymber. Segmentatae uestes, garded or pourfled gar¦mentes. Segnis, slowe and dull wytted, barayne. Segnitas pro segnitia, slouthfulnes. Segniter, slowely. Segnities, slownesse, dulnesse, baraynnesse. Segodunum, Rodes in Fraunce. Segodunum, is also a noble citie in Almayne, nowe called Nurenberg. Segobriga, a towne in the parte of Spayne, whiche is nowe called Byskay. Segrego, are, to seuer or separate. Segregare suspitiones, to put away suspition. Segregare sermonem to speake no wordes. Si quis ibi est odiosus abeo domum, sermo∣nem segrego, If any man be there, whome I loue not, I gette me home, and speake ne∣uer a worde. Segrega sermonem, taedet, Holde thy peace, I am wery, or it irketh me to here the. Segullum, is a vayne of erthe in mynes, whi∣che declareth, that therein golde maye be founde. Segor, a citie, which was preserued by the prai¦er of Lothe, whan Sodoma was dystroyed by the vengeaunce of god. Segusiani or Segutiati, Bresse in Fraunce. Segusium, the parte of the Alpes called mount Sion. Seir, a mountayne in the countreye of Edon, where Esau the brother of Iacob the patri∣arche dwelled. Seiugi & seiuges, a tme of syxe horses. Seiungo, xi, gere, to separate. Selectio, a chesynge oute. Selectus, ta, tum, chosen amonge other, also chiefe amonge other. Selecti Iudices, amonge the Romaynes were iudges appoynted of the state of gentylmen, called ordo equestris. Selenetes, a stone, wherin is a whyte, whiche decreaseth and increasethe, as the moone dothe. Seleucia, the principall citie of Siria, which is xxx. furlonges from Babylonia. Seleucus, kynge of Siria, nexte after Alexan∣der the great. Selibra, halfe a pounde. Seligo, legi, seligere, to gather a parte, or the chiefe thynges amonge many. Selinus, a ryuer. Selinon, an herbe called also Apium, whereof be diuers kyndes, as Hipposelinon, Petro∣selinon, Seke for them in theyr places. Seliquastra, a stole to sytte on. Sella curulis, a chayre, wheron the chiefe offi∣cers of Rome sate in a chariote, and were so caryed, whan they came from theyr houses. some do suppose that it was called curulis, bycause the fete were croked, the iudgement therof, I remit to the reders. Sellaria, places, wherin were fourmes and sto∣les for men to sytte on. Sellularij, artificers, whiche wrought sittyng. Semel, ones, also at one tyme, shortely, briefe∣ly, summarily. Semele, the daughter of Cadmus, and mother to Bacchus. Semen, seminis, sede, somtyme settes of yong trees, or nursegardeynes, sometyme the kind Sementicus, ca, cum, that maye be sowen. Sementis, the acte of sowynge, somtyme sede, sedetyme. Sementa facere, to sowe corne. Sementinae feriae, holye dayes ordeyned to praye, that corne beinge sowen, mought come forthe and increace. Semento, tare, to bryng forth sede. Semestris, tre, of syxe monethes. Semesus, a, um, halfe eaten. Semet, him selfe. Semetra, halfe a measure. Semianimis, halfe deade. Semianimus, halfe quicke. Semicadium, halfe a barell. Semicaecus, halfe blynde. Semicinctum, a ierkyn or shorte iackette. Semicirculus, halfe a cirkle. Semicoctus, ta, tum, halfe sodden. Semicommestus, ta, tum, halfe eaten. Semiconsumptus, ta, tum, halfe consumed or wasted. Semideus, halfe a god. Semidoctus, meanely lerned. Semifera animalia, beastes ingendred be∣twene a wylde beast and a tame, as betwene a wulfe and a dogge, or betwene a wyld bore and a tame swyne. Semiferus, somewhat wylde. Semigro grare, to go to dwelle in an other place. Semihomo, halfe a man. Semihora, an halfe howre. Semilissula, & semilixula, a lyttell cake made with meale, chese, and water. Semimadidus, da, dum, halfe wete. Semimares, they whiche are not perfyte men, as those, whiche are gelded. Semimortuus, a, um, halfe deade. Seminatio, sowynge. Seminarium, a place from whense settes & plā∣tes be translated or remoued. also a tree of the whiche settes are taken. Seminex, necis, halfe slayne.
Seminium, sede, also the gayne of sede. Semino, are, to sowe. Seminudus, da, dum, halfe naked. Semiobolus, the xii. parte of a greke dramme Semipes, pedis, halfe a foote. Semipaganus, halfe an husbandeman, halfe a carle of the countrey. Semipedalis, le, halfe a foote in quantitie or heyghte. Semipedaneus, a, um, idem. Semiplageum, a lyttell nette. Semiplenus, not full. Semiplotia, were showes, whiche couered but halfe the fote, whiche the Romaynes dydde weare on, whan they went in huntyngge. Semiquinarius, a, um, that whiche is halfe fyue in number. Semiramis, midis, the wyfe of kynge Ninus, whiche made the citie of Babylon, and con∣quered many Countreys. Semirutus, partly decayed. Semi, halfe. Semisenex, uel semiseneus, halfe olde. Semisomnis, & semisomnus, halfe a slepe. Semisopitus, he that is halfe sleapynge, halfe wakynge. Semisoporatus, idem. Semispathium, a shorte sworde. Semissis, halfe a cubite. It is also the halfe pounde weyghte, or .vi. ounces. Semissis homo, a vile person. Semissis usura, the gayne of sixe in a hūdred. Semita, a pathe, also a fote waye. Semitatus, ta, tum, diuided in pathes. Semitogium, a shorte gowne Semitogatus, & semitogatulus, he that wea∣reth a shorte gowne. Semitritaeon, uel hemitritaeon, a feuer which is a tercian and a halfe, and of .xlviii. houres and vexeth one .xxxvi. houres. Semiuir, an vnperfecte man. Semiuiuus, halfe a lyue. Semiuncia, halfe an ounce. Semuntialis, le, of halfe an ounce. Semiustus, a, um, halfe burned. Semimodius, halfe a busshell. Semoueo, uere, to moue or go awaye. Semper, euer, alwaye. Semperlenitas, the accustomed gentylnesse or myldnesse. Semperuiuum, an herbe called Singrene. Sempiterné, euerlastyngely. Sempiternitas, the tyme euerlastynge. Sempiternus, a, um, euerlastynge. Sena, a citie in Tuskane called Senes whiche is a hundred myles from Rome. sometyme it is written Senae, in the plurell number. Senaculum, a councyll house. Also a lyttell Senate. Senarius, a, um, that whiche is of the number of syxe. Senarij uersus, & senarioli, verses hauynge syxe fete, properlye Iambici, or Trochaici. Senator, toris, a Senatour. Senatorius, a, um, perteynynge to Senatours Senatus, us, a senate or councyll. Senatusconsultum, an acte of councel, or an or∣dynaunce made by the senate. Senecio, onis, an herbe, which groweth on wal¦les, and tiles, and is hore in sommer, and hath redde stalkes, called grounswell. Senectus, senecta, senium, age. Seneo, & senesco, scere, to be olde. Senex, senis, an olde man or woman. Senio, onis, a syce, or number of syxe marked in the dyse. Seni, nae, na, syxe. Sennaar, the fielde, where the towre of Baby∣lon was buylded. Senogallia, a citie in Italy. Senones, people in Fraunce. Sensa, the senses, or those thynges whiche we do meane. Sensibilis, le, that whiche maye be felte. Sensiculi, the diminutiue of sensa. Sensificus, ca, cum, that whiche causeth fee∣lynge. Sensilis, le, that maye be felte. Sensim, lyttell and lyttell. Sensus, us, sense, or felynge, or perceyuynge. Senta, was called Fauna, or Bona dea, the good goddesse. Sententia, sentence, iudgemente, opinion, or councell spoken or wrytten concernynge the lyfe of man. Sententiam dicere, to shewe his opinion. Sententiam facere, to gyue sentence or iuge∣mente. Sententiola, a lyttell or shorte sentence. Senticetum, a place full of bryers. Sentina, the pumpe of a shyp, a place where al fylthe is receyued. Sentinatia, a countrey in Italy. Sentino, are, to auoyde peryll: also to pumpe vp water out of a shyppe. Sentinum, a towne in Italy called nowe Sax∣oferratum. Sentio, sensi, sentire, to perceyue, to vnderstād to fele, to iuge, to suppose, to knowe. Sentio tecum, I am of thyne opinion. Sentis, a bryar or bremble. Senticosus, a, um, sharpe as a bryer. Sentus, heary, roughe. Senum, the syxte. Senumdenum, the syxtenth. Seorsum, a parte, also namely, or specially. Omnibus gratiam habeo, & seorsum tibi praeterea Demea, I thanke you all, but
namely thē Demea. Seorsum a te sentio, I am of an nother opi∣nion than thou arte. Seoisus, idem. Separatio, separation. Separatus, ta, tum, separate or diuided frome an other thynge. Separo rare, to put apart, or departe one frō an nother. Separatim, aparte. Sepedes, emotes. Sepelio, sepeliui, lire, to bury. Sepes, sepis an hedge Sepia, a fyshe called a Cuttell. Sepimentum, an inclosure Sepio, sepiui, sepire, to hedge or inclose. Sepius, piuntis, & Sipus, puntis, & Sipon∣tum, a citie in the realme of Naples. Seplasiarius, a maker of soote oyntmentes. Seplasium, uel seplasia, a shop, where sweete oyntmentes are solde. It was a strete in the citie of Capua, wherin were dyuers delicate oyntmentes. Sepono, posui, ponere, to put or laye aparte. Seps, a venemous worme, of whose stroke or bytynge the fleshe rotteth. Septa, the generall name of all places inclosed. Septangulus, a figure, hauynge foure corners Septem, the number of seuen. September, bris, the viii. moneth. Septemdecim, seuentene. Septempedalis, le, of seuen feete. Septimus, ma, mum, the seuenthe. Septenus, na, num, idem. Septemuir, an officer, hauynge equall auctori∣tie with seuen other. Septempeda, a place in Italy called Sayncte Seuerine. Septennis, of seuen yeres. Septentrio, the northe coste. Septentriones, the seuen sterres, whiche are sene by Charles wayne, or Vrsa maior. Septemuiratus, the offyce, wherin be seuen ioyntely. Septennium, the space of seuen yeres. Septicollis, by that name Rome was called. by cause of the seuen hylles, whiche were in it, Palatinus, Quirinalis, Auentinus, Coelius, Viminalis, Exquilium, & Ianiculum. Septicus, ca, cum, putrifactife or corrosife. Septies, seuen tymes. Septifariam, seun maner of facions or wayes Septifarius, a, um, seuen dyuers. Septimarus, was a holyday kept the day fo∣lowynge the syxt Idus of euery monthe. Septimana, a wicke. Septimontium, a place hauynge seuen hylles. Sepringeni, & septingenti, seuen hundred. Septingenties, seuen hundred tymes. Septingentenus, & septingentesimus, the se∣uenth hundred. Septingentuplus, seuen hundred folde. Septuagenarius, thre score and ten yeres olde. Septuagies, thre score and ten tymes. Septuaginta, thre score and ten. Septuosè, darkely. Septum transuersum, the maydrefe, whiche deuydeth the stomacke frome the lower bowelles. Septunx, uncis, a poyse of seuen ounces. Septus, ta, tum, inclosed. Sepulchrum, a sepulchre or tombe. Sepultura, sepulture or burienge. Sepultus, ta, tum, buried or hyd. also lyke as it were deade. Sepum, talowe. Sepatius, a, um, as it were of talowe. Sequana, a ryuer in Fraunce called Sein. Sequani, Burgonions of highe Burgoyne. Sequā{que}, for seorsū quan{que}, euery womā apart. Sequax, acis, that whiche foloweth. Sequela, the acte of folowynge, sequele. Sequester, tris, tre, indifferent to both partes. Sequester, he, with whom moneye is left. also a solicitour in a matter. Sequestres, were they which at the election of officers receiued money to make frendes and solicite the people to gyue theyr voyces. Sequestro, are, to laye or set a thynge indiffe∣rentely, or in the kepynge of an indyfferente personne. Sequi lites, to sue at the lawe. Sequor, eris, sequi, to folowe to go after. Sera, a locke. Serapis, idis, a god of the Egiptians. Serenitas, fayrenesse of wether drythe. Serenissimus, is a terme appropried nowe a∣dayes to kynges onely, and is vsurped for moste famous, or moste renoumed. Sereno, are, to make fayre and clere. Serenus, a, um, fayre, clere, without cloudes. Seres, a people in Asia, hauynge great plentye of sylke. Sericae uestes, sylken garmentes. Seresco, scere, to be fayre and drie. also to be tourned into whay. Seria, erneste wordes, and graue or sad. Seria, an erthen vessell, whiche is longe. Sericarius, a weauer of sylke. Sericatus, apparayled in sylke, or he that wea∣reth a garment of sylke. Sericeus, a, um, of sylke. Sericum, sylke. Sericus, ca, cum, of sylke. Series, order. Serilla, botes or shippes calked with towe. Seriola, a diminutiue of seria. Seriò, in erneste.
Seris, is the generall name of all Cichory and endiue. rede Intybus. Seriphus, an yle by Grecia in the sea called Aegeum. Serius, a, um, ernest, graue of importaunce. Sermo, monis, a speche, a fourme of speking: sometyme an oration, also communication. Sermocinor, aris, ari, to talke, to commune. Sero, are, to shutte or locke. Sero, seui, serere, satum, to sowe, to plante, to ingender. Serò, an aduerbe, signifieth late, to late, af∣ter the tyme that it oughte to be, Also in the euenynge. Seropta, a citie in Phoenicia. Serotinus, a, um, that whiche is in the euen∣nynge. sometyme late, or latewarde. Seroti∣ni fructus, lateward fruites. Serpentaria, an herbe called dragons. Serpens, pentis, a serpente. Serperasta, a swathynge or swadlynge bonde. Serpillum, an herbe whiche groweth on olde walles, about welles or pondes, and in some places it smelleth lyke tyme, and in some pla∣ces lyke to sauery, some do take it for the cō∣mon sauery. Serpo, psi, pere, to crepe. Serpula, of olde wryters was vsed for serpens a serpent. Serra, a sawe. Serra praeliari, is to fyghte in battayle, some tyme marchynge forwarde, sometyme recu∣lynge, as a sawe gothe, whan it is drawen. Serrata, an herbe whiche is called Germander Serratula, Betayne. Serratus, ta, tum, lyke a sawe, also sawed. Serro, are, to sawe. Serrula, a lyttell sawe. Sertor, he that soweth sedes, or setteth herbes. Sertum, a garlande of floures. Sertus, ta, tum, set with flowres, as in a gar∣lande. Sertula compana, an herbe called Melylote. Seruo, are, to kepe, to preserus, to possede, or dwelle in a place. Seruare fidem, to kepe towche, to be fayth∣fulle. Seruare de caelo, to awayte what wether shall come. to obserue tokens or sygnes in the heauen or fyrmament. Omnia integra principi seruare, to reserue the hole matter vnto the prynce. Modum seruare, to kepe a meane. Seruator, toris, he that preserueth or delyuereth one from harme. Seruaueris, take good hede what thou doste. Seruilis, le, perteynynge to seruice. Bellum seruile, warre, whiche the seruantes of the Romaynes made agayne theyr lordes. Seruiliter, lyke a bondman or slaue. Seruio, uiui, uire, to serue. Seruire auribus, to flatter. Seruire alicui rei, to intende vpon one thyng. Aetati seruire, to accommodare hym selfe to the age of one. Petitioni seruire, to do nothynge elles but to attende to satisfie his desyre. Scoenae seruire, to do accordyng as the tyme requireth. Romori seruire, to go about to gette a great name. Valitudini seruire, to prouyde for his helthe. Seruitium, seruyce. Seruitia, bondemen. Seruitus, bondage. Serum, the laste parte of the day, the euenlide. It is also whay of mylke. Serus, a, um, late, sometyme great. Sera arbor, a tree whiche bryngeth forth lea¦ues very late. Serum lumen, almoste nyghte. Serae frondes, leaues whiche doo fall verye late. Sera omnia, all full of sorowe or heuynesse. Serum bellum, great warre. Seruus, a seruant, properly whiche is compel∣led to serue, as bondmen or apprentyses done ❀Seruum poecus, is a prouerbe applyed to hym whiche in speakynge or wrytynge, dare not digresse from an other mannes steppes or fourme of wrytynge. Sesama, & sesamum, a whyte grayne, whiche groweth in Inde, wherof oyle is made whi∣che is called oleum Sesaminum. Sescuntialis, le, of an ounce and a halfe. Sescunx, cuncis, an ounce and a halfe. Sescuplum, the hole and the halfe parte. Seselis, an herbe called also Siler. Sesqui, as moche and halfe as moche, ioyned to an other worde, signifyeth halfe as moche more. Sesquialtera, so moche and halfe soo moche, a proportion in musyke. Sesquihora, an houre and an halfe. Sesquilibra, a pounde and a halfe. Sesquimensis, a moneth and halfe. Sesquimodus, a busshell and a halfe. Sesquiopera, one iourney in tyllage and a half. Sesquipes, a fote and a halfe. Sesquipedalia uerba, great & stoute wordes, as some noble men do speake to theyr inferi∣ours whan they are displeased. Sesquiplex, idem quod Sesquialia. Sessio, a syttynge. Sestans, & sexstans, that whiche is also called obolus, the syxte parte of a dramme. Sestertius, seu sestertius nummus, was a syluer coyne of the Romayns, wherof Denarius con¦tayned
foure soo that whan .vii. grotes en∣glyshe made an ounce, than was Sestertius our englyshe peny, and it was called Sester∣tius, as it were Semitertius, for it conteyned ii. and a halfe of the brason coyne called As, and therfore it is wrytten with this fygure US. whiche signifieth .ii. li. and di. Sester∣tium in the neure gender, signifieth a thou∣sande Sestertij. Seta, amonge the auntient wryters was taken for sylke. Setae, brystell heares. Setia, a citie in Campania. Setigerum, a beaste whiche hath bristels. Setinum uinum, wyne made aboute the Citie of Setia. Setim, a tre, lyke to whyte thorne, which doth neuer rotte: wherof was moche of the tym∣ber in the temple of Salomon. Setosus, sa, sum, full of brystelles. Setuosus, a, um, olde wryters vsed for obscu∣rus, darke. Setuose, darkely. Seu, for siue, eyther, or. Seuere, sharpely, cruelly. Seueriter, idem. Seueritas, tatis, grauitie, constantnesse, pro∣perly in ministringe iustice. Seueritudo, idem. Seuerus, ra, rum, greue, constant, cruel, sharpe daungerous to meddel with. Seuoco, care, to call aparte or awaye, to cal a∣syde from other. Seuosus, a, um, lyke to talowe. Seuo, are, to make candels of talowe. Seuum, talowe of beastes. Sex, syxe in number. Sexageni dies, thre score dayes. Sexagies, thre score tymes. Sexangulus, hauynge syxe corners. Sexcenus, syxe hundred. Sexcenti, idem. Sexcentoplagus, he that receyueth a hundred strypes. Sexcuplus, a, um, syxe double, or syxe tymes so moche. Sexennis, of syxe yeres olde. Sexies, syxe tymes. Sextans, tis, the syxe parte of a pounde. Sextarius, is a measure wherby all other mea∣sures may be made for it conteyneth two measures callyd Heminie, and vi. Sextarij, do make one Congium, and .viii. Congij do make Amphoram. xx. Amphorae, oone Culeum. Notwithstandynge there is Sex∣tarius Romanus, and Sextarius atticus. Ro∣manus conteyneth the weyght of oyle .xviii. ounces: of wyne .xx ounces. of hony .xxx. oun∣ces. Atticus receyueth the wayght of oyle . xv ounces, of wyne a pounde .iii. ounces .v. dra¦mas and one scruple, of hony two pound and one ounce. Sextilis, is the monthe nowe called Auguste. Sextula, the syxte part of an ounce, whiche is a dramme and a scruple. Sextus, ta, tum, the syxte. Sextum Consul, the syxte tyme Consull. Sexus, us, a kynd. sexus uirilis, the male kind, sexus muliebris, the woman kynde. ¶S ANTE I. SI, if although, I wolde god. Si dijs placet, If god wyl, or on goddis name: a word spoken eyther in dysdaine or in mockage, for any thynge not well done. Etiam latini, si dijs placet, hoc biennio, ma∣gistri dicendi extiterunt▪ yea and also the la∣tines, on goddis name, haue ben these two ye¦res maysters of eloquence. Quinetiam, si dijs placet, nephas aiunt, con∣sulem plebeium fie, They saye also, on god∣des name, that it is vnlefull for a communes to be made consul. Si sapis, if thou be wyse. Siambis, an yle in the Brytyshe occean sea, on the northe parte. Sibatis, an olde towne .xii. miles from Rome. also a citie in Calabria. sometyme it is taken for delycate and wanton lyuynge. Sibariticus, ca, cum, wanton or delycate. Sibi, to hym. Sibilo, are, to whystell. Sibilus, a whistelynge. Sibylla, was a general name to all women whi¦che had the spirite of prophecy. of theym as Varro and Lactantius do wryte were tenne, the fyrste called Persica, the seconde Libyca, the thyrde Delphica, the fourthe Cumaea, the fyfthe, Erythrea, the syxt Samia, the seuenth Cumana, the eyght Hellespontia, the nynth Phrigia, the tenthe Tyburtina, euery one of these (as Lactantius saythe) wrate of the in∣carnation of Chryste. Sibus, a sharpe wytted felowe. Sic, so, in lykewyse, accordyngely, so lyghtlye. Mirabar hoc, si sic, abiret, I wolde haue mer¦uayled, if that it shuld haue passed to lightly Sic ago, so am I wonte to do. Sic sum, suche a one am I. Sica, a shorte sworde, Sicambri, the people of Nassaw, and Hessen in Germany. Sicani, people of Sicile. Sicania, the yle of Sicile. Sicarius, a murderer. Sicaneus, a, um, drye of nature. Siccesco, scere, to drye.
Siccine, of that fascion, in suche facion. Siccine tu illam? Siccine nos habes Iudibrio omnes? Wylte thou handell her of that fas∣cion? Wylte thou in suche fascion moche vs all. Siccitas, & Siccitudo, drythe. Sicco, care, to drye or be dryed. Siccus, ca, cum, drye, wythered. Sicera, all maner of drynke made of corne or fruites. Sicileo, cilui, cilire, to cut agayn that whiche was not well cutte afore, properly grasse in a medowe. Sicilia, a noble Ile, fyrste called Trinacria, af∣terwarde Sicania, and at the laste Sicilia, It is in fourme thre cornerd, and therof had the name of Trinacria, the one corner called Pa∣chynus, extēdeth toward that part of Grece whiche was called Peloponêsus, nowe Mo∣rêa. the seconde corner called Pelórus, lyeth towarde Italy, the thyrde called Lilybaeus, is extended towarde Affricam, of the whiche Pelorus excedeth in the temperaunce of the erthe, for with no weate there maye be anye myre, nor by any drythe duste. This yle con∣teyneth in circuite as Solinus wryteth three thousande furlonge, whiche is of Italion mi∣les. CCC.lxxv. as Diodorus Siculus wry∣teth foure thousand thre hundred and .lx. mi∣les. But Plinius sayth that the said thre cor∣ners be distant from Pelorus to Pachinū by lande .Clxvi. myles. from thense to Lilybaeū .CC. myles. from thense to Pelorum .Clxx. myles, and sayth also that Agrippa affirmed it to be in circute .DCxviii. myles. which do not agre with Solinus nor Diodorus, whi∣che may happen to be by the diuersitie of fur¦longes. rede therof in Stadiū. The fertilitie of this yle in al grayn, beaultie of medowes, delicatenesse of waters colde and hot, moun∣taynes and caues myraculouse, and other thynges there excedynge notable, manye au∣tours haue wrytten and woundred at dothe Grekes and Latines. Siciliences, people dwellynge in Sicile, which were borne elles where. Sicilis, lidis, of Sicile. Sicilides Musae, the Musis of Sicile. Sicilisso, are, to speake the language of Sicile. Siciliqua, uel Sicilicus, a poyse or weyght wai∣inge two drammes: and is the fourthe parte of an ounce. Sicilites, the heade of a iauelyn. Siclus, called also Tetradragmum, and Stater argenteus, is as well a coyne as a weyghte, beinge halfe an ounce in poyse. Sicinnium, a kynde of daunsynge, wherin they that daunced dyd syng, as they do in Christ∣mas, whan they synge carolles: and as mai∣dens do nowe vse to do in the stretes. Sicubi, wheresoeuer. Siculi, men of Sicile. Siculum mare, the sea by Sicile. Sicunde, of any place. Sicut & Sicuti, as, lyke as. Sicyonia, an yle in the sea of Aegeum. Sideratio, a sickenesse, which in suche wyse ta∣keth some parte of a mannes body, that it so daynely becommeth drye, so that he feleth it not, women do call it takynge, or benūming. Sideratus, he that is taken in any member or parte of his body, that he canne not fele it or stere it, the homely people calleth benummed Siderites, an herbe, whiche groweth on tyles and olde walles. Sidereus, a, um, of the sterres. Sideror, ari, to be blasted, or taken, that a man maye not stere or moue his membres. Sido, dis, sedi, sidere, to settyll. Sidon, a citie in Phoenicia, vpon the sea syde, so called for the plenty of fyshe there beinge taken. There was glasse fyrste made. Sidonius, a, um, of that citie. Sidus, a number of sterres gathered, which do make a sygne or celestiall figure: sometyme it is taken for one sterre. Sifilare, to whystell. Sifilator, oris, a whystler. Sigaeum, a gret mountayn in the sea by Troy. Sigillaria opera, warkes wherin were sette small ymages. Sigillatim, one after an other. Sigillo, are, to seale, sometyme to close or shut. Sigillum, a lyttell ymage. Sigillum Salomonis, an herbe. Reade Cor∣rigiola. Sigma, tis, a lyttell table. Signaculum, a seale. Signatorius anulus, a signet. Signatus, ta, tum, notable. Signa infesta, Standardes and baners ad∣uaunced in battayle, in marchynge agaynste ennemies. Signa coelestia, the twelue sygnes, by the whiche the sonne and other planets do passe. Signia, a citie in Campania. Signifer, he that beareth standarde or baner in a fielde. it is somtyme taken for the cerkle in the firmament called also Zodiacus, wherin ben the .xii. signes. Significo, care, to sygnifye or gyue knowlege. Signinum opus, a warke made with shelles and morter, or tyles and morter. Signo, are, to make a signe, to signe or seale, to signifie or shewe by a signe or token, to write Signum, a signe, token, or marke, a miracle. Signa dare militibus, to cause the trumpets to blowe, that the souldiours maye prepare
them to battayle or to assemble them selues to gether. Signa, be also ymages of mettal, stone, or wod standardes in warre or baners. Silanius, an hyghe hyll in Irelande. Sil, silis, certayne erthe yelowe of colour found in the mynes of golde or syluer. Sillago, an herbe whiche Brunfelsius suppo∣poseth to be the common crowe fote. Silatum, brekefaste. Sila, an helmet. Silenta loca, quiete places, wherein is noo noyse. Silentium, sylence, quietnesse. Silenus, the foster father of Bacchus. Sileo, lui, lere, to kepe sylence, to speake no∣thynge. Siler, a kynde of wythy growynge in water: it is also a ryuer in the realme of Naples. Silesco, scere, to be in silence, or quiete. Silex, silicis, a flynte stone. Silicatus, ta, tum, made with flynte stones. Silicernius, & Silicernium, a certayn pudding eaten only at the tyme of funeralles, some do take it for a feaste or dyner made at the fune∣ralles or termente of a man or woman. Senex silicernius, is named of Terence for an olde Cryppell, redy to haue suche a dyuer made for hym. Siliceus, a, um, of a flynte stone. Silitia, siue Silicula, an herbe called Fengreke. Silugo, liginis, a kynde of wheate hauynge an vpryghte stalke, and the corne verye whyte, and therof is made the fynest breade & moste pryncipall, as Galenus wryteth, De alimen¦tis. li. 26. It was also called Olyra, of some Typha. Siliqua, the huske or codde of any thynge. also a certayne fruite in Italy, which is in length of a mans fynger, and brode, and somewhat hoked, the wayte of syxe of theym made the poyse called Scrupulus, a scruple, whereof three do make a dramme. It is now called a Characte, and is vsed among fyners of gold and syluer, and also coyners in the fynynge and alayinge therof. Siliqua, is sometyme taken for foenugraecum. Siliqua aegiptia, is Cassia fistula. Siliquastrum, an herbe. Siliquor, quaris, quari, to growe in huske or rodde. Silura, a countrey in the more Britayne. Silo, onis, he whiche hath great browes. ❀Silosontis chlamis, is spoken in a prouerb of hym, whiche bosteth hym selfe of ryche garmentes. Silus, a camoised nose, or a nose whiche is tour¦ned vpwarde. Silphion, an herbe, wherof commeth the gum called Beuicyn. Silurus, a fyshe called a sturgeon. Simiolus. a lyttell ape. Simia, & Simius, an ape. Simila, fyne meale of corne. Similago, ginis, idem. Simillimus, a, um, moste lyke. Similitas, lykenesse. Similiter, lykewyse, also. Similis, le, lyke. ❀Simileis habent labra lactucas, a prouerb applyed to them, which being of lyke yll con∣ditions, be matched together, as a lewde ser∣uant with an yll mayster, an vnruly people to a neglygent gouernour, a shrewde wyfe to a frowarde husband. &c. Like master like man Lyke wyll to lyke. Similitudo, dinis, lykenesse. Similo, are, to be lyke. Simitu, pro simul, together. Simois, oentos, a ryuer by Troye. Simonia, Symony. Simonides, a Poete of Greece, borne in the ile called Coea, who was the fyrste that inuen∣ted the verses called Lyrici, and was excel∣lent in prouoking of teares, and in that kind of wrytynge there was in hym a wonderfull grace. It is written that Pausanias kynge of Lacedemonians, at a banket desyred instant∣ly of hym, that he wolde thanne speake some thynge notable, and that sauoured of wyse∣dome▪ Simonides therat smylinge, Remem∣bre sayde he, that thou arte a man. Pausani as tooke that scornefullye, and estemed it no∣thynge. Afterwarde Pausanias beinge put in prison in Chalcioeco, and there being fami¦shed er that he dyed. He remembred the say∣inge of Simonides, and with a lowd and la∣mentable voyce sayde. O my frende of Coe∣us, thy wordes were of a great importance, but I for mad pryde estemed theym nothing. This lyttell historye is not vnworthye to be had in remembraunce. Simplariae, symple thynges or of lyttell value. Simplares, they whiche doo weare hostynge harneyse. Simplex, plicis, that is not double, syncere or playne, withoute deceypte, of one sorte, vn∣myxte. Simplicitas, playnenesse. Simpliciter, playnely. Simplicitus, for simpliciter. Simplus, a, um, sengle in number, one onely. Simpulum, a chalyce or cuppe of erthe, wher∣with they sacrifyced in the olde tyme before that golde and syluer were in great estimati∣on. It is of Varro taken for a cruete with a pype, out of the which wyne came dropping by lyttell and lyttel.
Simpuuium, a vessell of tree. Simul, togyther with other, moreouer, also. Simul ac, simul at{que}, as sone as, incontinent as. Simulachrum, an ymage of a man or woman. Simulo, are, to indeuour, to be lyke to one, al∣so to fayne. Simultas, atis, priuy dysplesure or hatred with dyssemblynge countenaunce. Simulatio, fantasy, also dyssimulation. Simulator, he that dyssembleth. Simulter, for similiter. Simulto, tare, to be at varyance with one, to hate one priuyly. Simus, a, um, flatte. Sin, or els, yf not, but yf. Sina, or Sinai, a mountayne in the deserte of A∣raby, called also Oreb. it is of Solinus callid Casius. Iustinus callyth it Synaeus, on that hylle god appered to Moses, and delyuered to hym the tables of the lawe, reade hereof a∣bundantly in the olde testament. Sinapi, & sinapis, senuye seede, whereof mu∣starde is made. Sinapium, mustarde. Sinapodes, people in Affrike, whiche do go as they crepte. Sinarum Regio, a countraye beyonde the lyne equinoctiall. Sinciput, the foreparte of the heade. Sindo, donis, a fyne lynnen clothe. Sine, without. Sine ut ueniat, let hym come. Sine fraude mea, my ryght saued. Singillatim, to euery one, or of euery one, one after an nother. Singularis, re, syngular, excellente, one with∣out any mo. Singulariter, syngularly, onely. Singulatim, euery thynge by it selfe. Singultio, tire, to yexe. Singultiens, he that hath the yexe. Singultiens gallina, a clockynge henne. Singultus, tus, yexynge. Singulus, a, um, eueryche. Sinistra, the lefthande. Sinister, stra, strum, pertayning to the left hand. sometyme it sygnifieth contrarye, vnprospe∣rous, or vnhappy. Sino, sini, sinere, to suffre. Sinope, pes, a citie in the countray of Pontus. Sinopis, pidis, a redde stone, commonly callyd Sinoper. Sinistre, vnhappily, vnfortunately. Sinistrorsum, on the left hande. Sinuessa, a citie in Campania. Sinuo, are, to tourne or wynde in the fourme of a serpent, makynge holowe bosomes or fo∣rowes. it is also applyed to garmentes that ar pleyghted or gathered vp. also to streames of ryuers, whyche do in rounnynge make di∣uers tournynges. also to bankes, which haue holowe crekes or bosomes. Sinuosus, a, um, that whiche hathe many tour∣nynges and wyndynges. Sinus, us, a bosome. also the tournynges or ho∣lownesse of water bankes. sometyme the ho∣lownesse of eyen. sometyme a sayle. also a cup for wyne, also nettes, sometyme a sayle, whan the wynde fylleth it. Sinus urbis, the myddell of a citie. In sinu habere, to haue secretely in his hart. In sinu gaudere, to be mery or gladde, with∣out shewyng it openly. Soluto sinu, with all lyberalitie. Sion, an herbe growynge in the water, hauing leaues lyke Alysanders, but somewhat lesse and soote in smellynge. Siparium, a courtayne. Siphones, the pypes of a cundyte. Siphnus, an yle in the sea of Aegeum, wherin was found somtyme plenty of golde & siluer. Sipus, sipuntis, or Sipontum, a citie in Apulia, by the mountayne callyd Garganus. Sipontinus, of that citie. Siqua, for si aliqua, yf any. Siquide, for bycause, also yf. Siquis, quae, quod, yf any. Sir, a citie in Illiria, or Slauony. Siremps, for similis res ipsa. Siren, & Sirena, a mermayden. Sirenes, were thre doughters of Achelo{us} & Cal¦lipe, which dwellyd in an yle betwene Italy & Sicile, who with theyr swete synging drew suche vnto them, as passed that sea, and than they slewe theym. As it happened to Vlysses to sayle that way, he stopped the eares of all his company, to the intente they shoulde not heare the songes of Sirenes, and caused him selfe to be bounde to the mast of a shippe, and so escaped. Syrenes, sorowed so moche, that they were dysapoynted, that they threw them selfe into the sea, whome poetes fayned to be meremaydens. Sireus, a sterre in the myddel of the fyrmament vnto the which whan the sonne commeth, the feruetnes of heate is doubled, whereby the bodyes of me become syck with heates. this sterre is also callyd Canicula, and the dayes wherein it appereth be callyd Caniculares, whiche do begyn the .vi. day of Iuly. Siri, pyttes, wherein corne was layde to be preserued. Siriasis, a syckenesse of trees, where about the tyme of the Canycular days by the excedyng heate of the Sunne, the trees be brente, and doo sterue. it is alsoo a syckenesse in the hea∣des of chylderne, procedyng of the inflama∣tions of the brayne.
Sirius, a sterre, whyche ryseth the .viii. Calen∣des of Iune Sirpea, mattes, or other thynges made of russhes. Sirpices, were instrumentes made with teethe lyke to a sawe, whyche beynge drawen with oxen, plucked vp by the rootes flagges and great wedes, whyche grewe in medowes. Sirpiculae falces, hookes, wherewith vynes are cutte. Sirpiculum, a lyttell baskette. Sirpo, are, to bynde or wynde with russhes or osyars, or other lyke thynge. Sirpus, a russhe. Nodum in sirpo quaeris, thou fyndest dyfficultie or doubte, where there is none. Sirpi, be also warkes or verses, whi∣che be very harde to be vnderstande. Sirrus, a caue vnder grounde, in the whyche men kept wheate. Sisacthea, ae, a rayenge syue. Sisachthea, a lawe of the Athenienses made by Solon, for the mitigation of dettes or money owed. Sisamum, a maner of pulse or corne. alsoo it is that whyche the apothecaryes doo calle Se∣samum. Sisara, after Varro is a tree, whereof the bees doo gather lyquyde honye. Plinius callyth it Sisarum, it is supposed to be that, whyche Dioscorides callyth Ericem, not moche vn∣lyke to Tamarix, the Athenienses (as Plyny writeth) calleth it Tetradicem. Siser, a delycate to be eaten, whiche some men do suppose to be yelowe carettes. Sisymbrium, an herbe, wherof be two kyndes, the one is callyd Sisymbrium alone, whyche is also callyd Thymbrea, in englysshe water mynte, the other is callyd Sisymbrium Car∣damine, whyche in englyshe is watercresses. Sisto, sistere, to make to tary or stande stylle, to retayne or kepe backe, to appere, as a manne dothe beinge sued in the lawe. Sistas te, appere thou. Ore sistere. Eminor, interminor{que}, ne quis mihi obstiterit obuiam, nam qui obstiterit ore sistet, I thretten, and I menace, that no man let me of my way, for who so euer letteth me, shall kysse the grounde. Sistere nadimonium, to brynge in surctie. Sistrum, an Instrumente lyke a horne, why∣che was vsed in battaylle, in the stede of a trumpette. Sisyphus, was a greatte theefe, whyche was slayne by Theseus, of whome it is fayned, that in helle he tourneth a stoone vppe to a greatte hylle, but whan it is at the toppe, it fallethe downe agayne, and renewethe his laboure. Sitanius panis, breade of newe wheate. Sitarchia, a bagge, or gardeuyandes, wherein meate is putte. Sithonia, a countrey in Macedonia vppon the sea syde. Siticen, he that dyd blowe in a trumpet whan men were buryed. Sitio, tire, to thyrst or be a thyrste. Sitiens, he that is a thyrste. Situlus barbatus, a lyttell skyllette. Sitella, a lytell potte, wherinto lottes were put. Sitibundus, a, um, very thyrsty. Siticulosus, he that is alway a thyrst. Sitis, thyrst, or desyre to drynke. Situla, & sitella, a lyttell coffer, wherein lottes were put, at the chosynge of offycers, also a bucket to drawe water. Situs, ta, tum, put or sette. Situs, tus, fylthynesse gathered of moysture, by lacke of klensynge. also of sluttyshenes, also the settynge or standynge of a place, whyche is nowe callyd the syte or sytuation of a ma∣ner or countray. ¶S ANTE M. SMaragdus, a precyous stone callyd an E∣meraude. Smegma, sope, and all other thynge that dothe put away spottes or vncleannes. Smigticus, ca, cum, the eficacy of clensyng, Smilax, acis, a tree, whyche hathe leaues lyke an yuye, with bearyes, and a whyte flowre, and smelleth lyke a lylly, and runneth vp vp∣pon trees. Ouidius fayneth to be a wenche, whyche dyenge for the loue of a yonge manne called Crocus, was transfourmed into the sayde herbe. Smyntheus, one of the names of Apollo. Smyrna, a citie of Ionia in the lesse Asia, whi∣che was supposed of some to be the countrey of Homerus. Smyrnium, an herbe whiche Eritius Cordus supposeth to be the commune Angelica. Ma∣nardus epist . li. xii. epist iiii. interpreteth it to be Olus atrum, in englyshe Alysander. Ruel∣lius affirmeth it to be that herbe, whiche in Fraunce is called Leneche, I suppose in en∣glyshe Louage. which sayth mooste truely, I referre to the reader. ¶S ANTE O. SOANA, a ryuer of Asia. Soanes, people of Asia, dwellynge aboute the extreme parte of the mountayne cal∣lyd Caucaus. Soboles, issue or succession of chyldren. Sobolescere, to increace people. Sobriè, sobrely, aduysedly, prudently. Sobrini, systers chyldren.
Sobrius, a, um, sobre, well aduysed. Soccus, & socculus, a socke, whiche womenne and players in comedies onely ware. Socer, cri, the wyues father. Sociale bellum, that warre whyche is made with confederates or alies. Socienus, a companyon or felowe. Societas, tatis, felowshyppe. Socio, are, to ioyne or confederate. Sociare sermonem, to haue familyar cōmu∣nication with one. Socius, a felowe or companyon. also Socij, be confederates, they whiche in all counsayles and actes do particypate one with an other. Looke for Comites, and Sodales, in theyr places. Socors, for secors, luskyshe, apt to no goodnes. Socordia, for secordia, luskyshenes, sometyme it signifieth ydelnesse. Socrates, an excellente phylosopher sonne of Sophroniscus the mason, and Phaneretae a mydwyfe, who beyng fyrst studyouse in na∣turalle philosophye, fynallye gaue hym selfe to morall phylosophy, teachynge openly vea∣tue, and soo dylygently ensewed it in his ly∣uynge, and in dysputynge was so sharpe and assured agaynste theym that were callyd So∣phistae, that Apollo, the questyon beyng de∣maunded who was the wysest man lyuynge, he aunswered Socrates, he was mayster to Plato, Xenophon, Xenocrates, and other the greattest phylosophers at that tyme lyuynge. besydes his excellencye in vertue and know∣ledge, he was of a rare and meruaylous na∣ture. For he moughte sustayne heate, colde, labour, hunger, and thyrste, aboue any man of that tyme, as Alcibiades declareth in Plato. He affyrmed, that there was alwaye with hym a spyryte or spirytuall power cal∣lyd Daemonium, the whyche as often as he was meuyd to doo any thynge not conueny∣ent or necessarye, that spyryte towched hym and dydde prohybyte hym to doo it. Vnder sharpe and mery tauntes, in the fourme of ar¦gument called induction, he caused menne to perceyue theyr ignoraunce, where before they thoughte theym selues to be wyse. Fynallye beynge enuyed of theym, whyche than dydde beare chyefe rule in Athenes, he was accu∣sed of Anytus Melyssus the poete and Ly∣con the oratour, that he spake agaynst theyr goddis, and corrupted their chylderne with peruerse doctryne, but he contemnyng deth, wolde suffer no man to speake for hym, and soo drynkynge poyson with a ioyouse coun∣tenaunce, and saynge to Anytus, I brynge the good lucke, dyed incontynent. But soone after the people were so soory for his death, that of his accusers somme they slewe, and some exyled, and dydde sette vp openly the y∣mage of Socrates made of copper. He was before the Incarnation of Christ .CCClxvii. yeres. Socraticus, he that foloweth the doctryne of Socrates. Socrus, my wyues mother. Sodales, they that keepe companye togyther at meales or passetyme. They be alsoo they, whyrhe be of oone fraternytie or company or guylde. Sodalitas, tatis, a fraternytie or brotherhoode. Alsoo a company incorporate of any mysterye or crafte, generally all felowshyppes priuate∣ly assemblyng amonge the people. Sodalitium, idem. Sodes, yf thou dare. Sodoma, orum, & Sodomum, a cytie in Iu∣dea, whyche for synne doone agaynste na∣ture, was by almyghtye god consumed by celestyall fyre. Sodomito, tare, to commyt or vse the synne of Sodoma, agaynst nature. Sogdiana, a countrey in Asia, extendyng to the northe parte of Scithia. Sol, solis, the sonne. Soles, sygnifieth sometyme the day, sometyme the beames of the sonne. Soles longi, longe dayes. Sole nouo, at the sonne rysyng. Solamen, minis, solace. Solanum, an herbe callyd myghtshade. Solanum soporiferum, an herb callyd dwale. Solaris, re, of the sunne. Solarium, a place where by the sunne, houres are knowen. Also a solar of a house. also a pen¦cyon payde to the prynce, to lyue out of com∣mune busynesse. Solati, they whiche be diseased or sycke by the heate of the sunne. Solatium, solace or comforte. Soldum, for solidum. Solea, a shoe, callyd a galage or paten, whiche hathe nothynge on the fete, but onely lachet∣tes. Also a fyshe callyd a soole. also a ground∣soyle, wheron standeth the walle of a house. It is also a shoe, wherewith horses and oxen be shodde. Solearius, a paten maker. Soleatus, ta, tum, shodde. Solemne, accustomyd. Solemnia, feastes or holy dayes. Solemnier, solemnely. Solennis, ne, annuall or yerely, that whych is done euery yere. Soleo, solitus sum, uel solui, solêre, to be wonte. Solere, to kepe company. Soliferū, a weapon al of yron to cast in batayle.
Solet, it was wont, or the vse hath ben. Solens, for ut soleo, Ego abscessi solens pau∣lum ab illis, I went a lyttell from theym, as I was wont. Solers, tis, wytty. Solerter, wyttyly, cunnyngly, craftily. Solertia, sharpenesse or quyckenesse of wytte, craftynesse or subtylitie in practysynge, or wyttynesse. Solicito, tare, to shewe bothe hope and feare. alsoo to inquiete or make soory, to solycite or procure by meanes. sommetyme to labour the earthe. Solicitudo, dinis, care. Solicitus, ta, tum, carefull. Solidago maior, wall wort. Solidarij, they whyche do selle in grosse. Solidè, holle, perfytely. Solidesco, scere, to close togyther, as a wounde dothe, whan it healeth. Solidipes, that hath fete hole without toes. Soliditas, massiuenes. Solido, dare, to make fyrme, to consolydate. Solidurij, were menne of warre in Fraunce, in the tyme of Iulius Cesar, which being ones retayned with any people or capitayne, were so addicted vnto them, that in theyr quarels they wolde dye, or yf vyctory inclyned on the other part, they wolde slea them selues. Solidus, da, dum, holle, contynuall, not holow, not broken or cutte, massy. Solidus, was amonge the Romaynes dyuersly taken sometyme for a coygne of brasse, con∣taynyng .xii. small coygnes. sometyme it was taken for dragma in syluer, as primo Esdrae, cap. 8. & secundo eiusdem cap. vii. in Para∣lypo. cap. 29. Somme were of the valour of dragma, as in the tyme of Alexander the em∣perour. Solidus aureus, was in the tyme of the same emperour two dragmas of goulde, after in the tyme of Iustinianus .vi. of theym made one ounce, they beinge the weyghte of ours olde nobles. Solifuga, he that kepeth hym out of the sonne, or fleeth from the heate of the sonne. Solipunga, a flye, whyche in the heate of the sonne prycketh moste sharply. Soliloquus, he that talketh beinge alone. Soliloquium, communication, which a man be∣inge alone, hath with god in contemplation. Solinunt, for solent, they are wont. Solitarius, solytary, alone, without company. Solitas, solytarynesse. Solitaurilia, an offryng of thre thynges of sun∣dry kyndes, as a bulle, a ramme, and a boore. Solito, tare, to be wont often. Solitudo, desert, where no man dwelleth. Solitudo puerorum, whan they haue neither father nor mother. Solitus sum, I was wonte. Soliuagus, he that wandreth alone. Solium, a place of astate, where a kyng sitteth, it is also a great vessell, whiche serueth to di∣uers vses, as to translate lykour from one to an other, to washe lynnen clothes, & for men and women to be bathed in. It sygnifieth al∣so a coffyn, where dcade bodies are put. Soloecismns, a vyce in speakynge, wherein the true congruitie & ryght speche is peruerted. Solo, all, in the oske tungue. Solon, a noble man of Athenes, whyche by his mother lynially descended from Codrus the laste kynge of Athenes, he was a man of ex∣cellent wytte, and callyd one of the seuen wise men of Grece And was in suche auctoritie in that cytie, that he made and gaue to theym lawes, whyche were neuer repelled, not with standynge whan Pisistratus his kynnesman went about to chaunge the fourme of that commune weale, whiche was popular into a monarchy, he wyllyngly wente in exyle, and so dyed. rede of hym in Croesus. whā he was wrytynge of his lawes. Anacharsis the phy∣losopher sayd, that Solons lawes shoulde be lyke to copwebbes, that lyttel flyes shuld be fast tyed with theym, but great flyes should make holes and breake through them. Solor, aris, ari, to recreate, to comfort, to solace to make pastyme. Solox, course wolle, or lockes. Solsequium, an herbe, whiche hath bene longe taken for marygouldes. But Ruellius nowe dothe deny it, not withstandyng I am not so scrupulous, but that I am contente with the olde opynion. The description of Heliotro∣pium, not moch abhorryng it, as me semeth. Solstitialis herba, an herbe, whych doth beare floures onely at the tyme, whan the sonne is at the hyghest, or as some menne suppose but one day. Solstitialis uita, a lyfe whyche dureth but a lyttell space. Solsti alis morbus, a syckenesse whyche kyl∣leth men shortly. Solstitialis aegritudo, is of some men taken for the burnynge feuer, whyche happeneth a∣bout the canycular dayes, of excedynge heate of the ayre. Solstitium, the stay of the sonne, whan he can not be eyther hygher or lower, whyche is twyse in the yere, that is in wynter, the eight calendes of Ianuarye, and is callyd Solsti∣tium hyemale, and in Sommer the eyghte Calendes of Iulye, and is callyd Solstitium aestiuale. Soluendo non est, he is not able to pay. Solum, the soyle or grounde, generally it sygni∣feth
all thynge which dothe susteyn or beare any other thyng on it. it is also the sole of the fote. also the soole of a shoe. Natale solum, a mans naturall countrey. Solum uertere, to make bankroute, to for∣sake his owne countrey. Soluo, ui, uere, to louse, to pay, to recompence, to put awaye, to delyuer, to resolue or melte. Soluere fidem, to breake promyse. Soluere uenas, to open the veynes. Soluere uotum, to perfourme an auowe. Aluum soluere, to make one laske. Soluere uita, to slea one. Soluere ebritatem, to make one sobre. Soluere legibus, to dyspence with oone, to gyue hym a placarde. Obsidione soluere, to rayse the siege. Fidem soluere, to breake promyse or saythe. Soluere morem, to breake a custome. Morbo solutus, deade. Soluere, to make satisfaction. Solummodo, onely. Solutè, wantonly, incontinently. Solutilis, le, that whyche wyll be soone loused or vndone. Solus, alone, one onely, solytary. Solutus, ta, tum, loused or louse, also payde. Solutus risus, a great laughter. Solymae, plur. the citie of Hierusalem, an other citie in Cilicia. Somniator, a dreamer. Somnorinum, a dreame. Somniculosè, dreamyngly. Somniculosus, sleapy, a sluggarde. Somniculous, a, um, that whiche causeth one to sleape. Somnifer, feri, that whyche induceth or bryn∣geth sleape. Somnificus, idem. Somnio, somniare, to dreame. Somnolentus, disposed to sleape. Somnus, sleape. Sonchos, an herbe, whiche Cordus taketh for Cicerbita, which is our sowthystel. But Hie∣ronymus Tragus taketh it to be the iaggyd letuse, whiche commeth vp in the begynnyng of the yere. Sonere, to sounde or make a sounde. Sonito, to sounde often. Sonipes, pedis, a lyght or swyft horse. Sonitus, tus, a sounde. Soniuit, for sonuit. Sono, are, to sounde or make a noyse. Sonor, oris, a great sounde or noyse. Sonorè, shyll or loude. Sonoritas, a shyllenesse or loudenesse. Sonorus, nora, norum, lowde, or makynge a great sownde. Sons, tis, gylty. Sonticus, ca, cum, noyfull. Sonticus morbus, in the Pandectes of the cy∣uyle lawe, is taken of Cassius and Venulei{us} for any contynuall syckenesse, wherby one is lette to doo his necessarye busynesse▪ and ther ffore in the tyme of warre, they whyche were in that maner syck, were dyscharged of their othes. Sextus and other Interpretoures of the twelue Tables, toke it for a vehemente and very great syckenesse. Sontica causa, was expowned in Neuio, for a iuste and laufull cause. Sonus, all that may be herde. Sophaci, people of Affrica. Sophia, wysedome. Sophistice, ces, the parte of logyke, whiche is captious and subtyll. Sophisma, Sophismatis, a craftye and dys∣ceytefulle sentence, an Oracyon or inuency∣on, whyche seemeth to be trewe, whanne it is false. Sophista, & sophistes, a dyssembler of wyse∣dome, a deceyuer vnder an eloquent or craf∣ty speakynge, he that professeth phylosophye for lucre or vaynglory. Sophocles, a wryter of Tragedies. Sophron, in Greeke, is Temperaunce in En∣glyshe, whereby carnall appetites and lustes be refrayned. Sophos, aut sophus, a wyse man. Sopio, piui, pire, & sopior, to sette at reste, to brynge asleape. Sopitus, brought asleape, or to reste, or into a sowne with a sodayne stroke. Ignis sopitus, fyre couered with asshes, or o∣ther thynge that it shewe not. Sopor, oris, deade sleape. Soporifer, soporiferi, & soporiferū, that brin∣geth sleape. Soporo, rare, to brynge or induce sleape. Soporatus, faste asleape. Sora, an hylle in Italy. Soracte, an hylle twenty myles from Rome. Sorbeo, bui, bêre, & Sorbo, psi, bere, to suppe as one suppeth potage. Sorbêre animo, to put away care or sorowe. Odia sorbere, to sustayne displeasure pa∣cientlye. Sorbiciuncula, a thynne brothe. Sorbitio, onis, suppynge. Sorbities, idem. Sorbillo, lare, to syppe. Sorbillum, potage or other lyquyde meates ordeyned to suppe, whyche women be wont to calle a lyttell souppynge, whanne they do exhorte a sycke manne to eate, whan some∣tyme it were better, that he shoulde eate nothynge. Sorbum, an harryshe peare.
Sorbus, a tree whiche is long, and hath a strait stemme, and a thyn bark, somwhat fatty, and fyrst yelow, afterward whytish, a leaf like to a laurell, but that it is thynner and lesse, and creuid by the edges, which hangeth by a long stalke▪ also white floures in a cluster, and be∣teth fruite, whiche is in the forme of an egge, and in a cluster. I suppose that there be none of theym in Englande, and therefore to my knowledge it lacketh an englysshe name, In frenche it is callyd Cormier. Sorbum, the fruite of Sorbus, whiche hath no stones, and they which do growe in woddes, haue a more sauoure than those whiche be in gardeynes. in Fraunce it is callyd Corme. Sordeo, & sordesco, dui, dêre, to be fowle or vnkleanly. Sordes, fylthe or vncleannes, the swepynges of houses and canelles. sometyme vylenes. Sordesco, scere, to be vncleane or sluttyshe. Sordidatus, vyly apparaylled for heuynesse of mynde. Sordidè, vnkleanly, sluttyshly. Sordidior, dius, vncleanlyer. Sordidissimè, moste vncleanly. Sordidissimus, ma, mum, vncleanlyest. Sordido, dare, to make fowle. Sordidus, da, dum, fylthy, vncleane, sluttyshe. Sorditudo, fylthynes, sluttyshnes. Sorex, ricis, a ratte, or a fielde mouse. Sorech, the Iewes do call vynes, whiche con∣tynually do brynge forthe moste pleasant and dylectable fruite. Soriantes, sworne bretherne. Soriceus, a, um, of a ratte. Soricinus, a, um, of a mouse. Soriculata uestis, a garmēt of changeable sylke▪ Sorita, a subtyll & captious forme of arguyng. Soritae, people whiche are diuyded from Inde by the ryuer called Arabis. Sorilla, shyppes whyche are calked or stopped with hempe or flaxe. Sororiari, is properlye of maydens breastes, whan they begyn to be imbosed. Soror, ris, a syster. Sororiae, maydens pappes. Sororiantes māmulae, maydens pappes round and harde, set out to the shewe. Sororius, my systers husbande. Sorracus, a coffer or basket, wherin are caried the instrumentes or apparaile seruyng for co∣medies or enterludes. Sors, sortis, chaunce, lotte, portion in inhery∣taunce, the holle summe in a commune banke or sto ke, wherein many haue parte. it is al∣so the princypall summe of money borowed. it is also destiny, iudgement. Sortes, were also the aunsweres of ydols. Sorticula, the scrowe, wherein the lotte is wryten. Sortilegi, be they whiche doo telle mennes de∣stenies by takyng of lottes or verses of holy scrypture. Sortilegium, dyuination by lottes. Sortior, tiris, tiri, & sortio, tire, to make lottes, to take or haue any thynge by lotte or chance Also to dispose or order. Sortire prouinciam, to receyue the rule of a countray by lottes. It is vsurped to haue au∣ctoritie by election. Sortitò, an Aduerbe, sygnyfyenge by lotte or chaunce. Sortitus, ta, tum, taken by lotte. also changyng to haue a thynge. Sospes, hole or saufe. also he that gyueth helth. Sospitalis, le, cause of helthe. Sospito, tare, to kepe in healthe. Sos, olde writers vsed for eos. Sosia, a mannes name. Sostratus, a mannes name. Sotadicum carmen, meter hauyng .vii. feete. Soticena, one of the names of Iuno. Soter, a saluyour. ¶S ANTE P. SPadicus, ca, cum, of skarlet colour. Spadix, dicis, a date with the braunche plucked frome the palme tree. it is alsoo skarlet coloure. it is sometyme, taken for the colour of an horse, callyd a bryght bay. Spado, donis, a geldynge be it man or beaste. Spadonia, a kynde of laurell. Sparganon, the roote of an herbe callyd Cyn∣quefoyle. Spargapises, the sonne of Chomiris, the quene of Massagetes. Spargo, si, gere, to scatter or caste abrode. Spargere bellum, to make warre in sundrye partes of a countrey. Sparta, the chief citie of Lacedemonia, it was also callyd Lacedaemon & Theramne. Spartacus, was a famouse sworde player, whi∣che gathered an host of slaues, and made ba¦tayle agaynste the Romaynes, and was van∣quyshed by Crassus. Spartam nactus, es, hanc orna, a prouerb, sygnifyenge the astate or offyce, whyche thou haste, order or applye it well. Spartarium, a place where brome groweth. Sparteum, a money bagge. Sparteus, a, um, of broume. Spartiata, & Spartanus, na, num, of Sparta. Spartum, & spartus, a bushe callyd brome. Spara, be callyd caltroppes, sowen in tyme of battayle, to wounde the fete of men & horses. Sparum, a lyttell darte. Sparus, a clubbe.
Spasmus, a syknes of the synewes and muskles callid also Conuulsio, it hapneth somtyme of epletion, sometyme of inanicion or lacke of nourishment. somtyme of grief, as in the pric∣kyng of a synewe: otherwhile of colde, as by very colde ayre or colde water. it is namyd in englyshe the crampe. Spastici, out of the which any thyng is pluckid▪ Spatha, a two handed or bastarde sworde it is also an instrument of the kytchen, to tourne meate that is fryed. Spathalion, an ornament pertaynynge to wo∣men. it is also a branche of palme with dates hangynge on it. Spaticus, vexed with an yll spirite. Spatiator, a wanderer. Spatiosus, a, um, large, spacious. Spatiosè, & spatiosius, largely, more large. Spatior, aris, ari, to walke. Spatium, a space as well in tyme, as in place. Specere, amonge olde wryters was taken for Inspicere, to loke in. Specialis, le, speciall, peculyar, propre. Speciatim, specially, peculyarly, proprely. Species, ei, a fygure, or image▪ a forme, kynde, beautie, fauour. It is defyned by Logyciens, to be that, whiche is sayde of many thynges varienge in nombre: as Homo, which is spo¦ken of Plato, Socrates, Cicero, whyche doo not vary in fygure, but in noumbre. some tyme species, do sygnyfye spyces also it is ap∣parance▪ also a syght or thynge sene. Per speciem legationis in Asiam ablegatus est, Vnder the colour of ambassade, he was banyshed into Asia▪ In speciem esse, to be to the honour. Specificè, partycularly. Specificus, ca, cum, partycular. Specillum, a smalle Instrumente, wherewith surgeons do serche the depenesse of woundes and soores. Alsoo to annoynte soore eyes. It is also a spectakle to looke with. also an eare pycker. Specimen, speciminis, an example, a profe, al∣so beaultie. Specimen aedere, to shewe a profe of a mans counnynge. Speciosus, a, um, beautyfull. Spectabilis, le, worthy to be sene. Spectaculum, a thynge to be sene or looked on. Sommetyme the selfe beholdynge. alsoo the place, frome whense menne doo beholde thynges. Spectamen, a signe or token. Spectamen bo∣no seruo, id est qui rem herilem procurat, ui¦det, collocat, It is a token of a good seruant that is to say, which attendeth about his ma¦sters busynesse, and dothe suruey all thynge, and sette it in order. Spectatores, beholders, triers of money. Spectatus, ta, tum, approued. Specto, tare, to beholde, to approue, to tend to some conclusion, to compare. Qua spectat Affricā, on the side toward Affrik Spectatio, a triall or profe of money. Spectrum, an ymage or fygure in a mannes y∣magynation. Specula, an hygh hyll or towre, wheron thyn∣ges be espied farre of. also lyttell hope, a dy∣mynutiue of spes. Specularia, spectakles. Specularis, re, any thynge, wherby a man may see the better. Speculatio, a beholdynge. Speculator, an espyall in warres. Speculor, aris, ari, to see farre, to consyder, to espye, to serche out. Speculum, a lookynge glasse. Specus, cus, & specoris, a denne. Spelta, rede Zea. Speluncha, idem. Spelaeum, idem. Spepondi, for spopondi, I haue promysed. Sperchius, a ryuer of Thessalia. Speres, olde wryters vsed for spes, hope. Sperma, spermatis, sede, most commonly vsed for the naturall humour, whereof all lyuynge thynges be ingendred and fourmed. Sperno, spreui, spernere, to despyse. Spero, rare, to hope. Sperata uirgo, a mayden asked in mariage. Spes, spei, hope. Spem abijcere, to despayre. Spem alere, to contynue in hope. Spem fallere, to dysapoynt one. Speutici panes, loues of breade made in haste. Speusippus, a noble phylosopher cousyne to Plato. Sphaeca, a waspe. Sphaera, a fygure in all partes equally rounde, a speare. Sphaericus, ca, cum, in the forme of a sphere. Sphaeristerium, a rounde place in a bayn, where men are exercysed, a tenyse play. Sphaeromachia, playenge at tennyse. Sphennida, a ball made of lether or cloth, grea∣ter than a tennyse balle. Sphragide, a stone whiche printeth perfitly. Sphinx, gis, a monster, whiche had the heade and handes of a maiden, the body of a dogge, wynges lyke a byrde, naylles lyke a lyon, a tayle lyke a dragon, the voyce of a man, whi∣che purposed to men subtyl questions. it is al∣so a beaste lyke an ape, but more roughe, and with a longer tayle, I suppose it to be a mon∣kay or babyon. Sphondilium, a ioint or knotte of the bakbone, xii. of them do make the chyne, and the fyue resydue do make the loynes.
Spîca, & spicus, the eare of corne. also a spyce callyd Spikenarde. Spica mantica, an eare of corne, hauyng noo bearde. Spica Nardi, a spyce callyd spykenarde. Spica celtica, an herbe callyd Spyke, lyke to Lauander. Spicatus, ta, tum, ared, or in care as corne is. Spiceus, cea, ceum, that whiche hathe eares lyke to corne. Spicifera, the surname of Ceres callyd goddesse of corne. Spicilegium, glemynge of corne. Spicilegium facere, to gleme. Spicio, cire, to shote out in eare. Spiculatores, they whyche be callyd of the kyn∣ges garde▪ Some menne doo take Spicula∣tor, to be a hangeman, or other persone, whi∣che putteth men to deathe by execution of the lawes. Spiculo, culare, to make any thynge sharpe at the poynte. Spiculum, a arte. alsoo an arrowe, it is more properly an arrowhead. Spilumenes, a sluttyshe drabbe. Spina, a thorne. also the backbone. Spina Aegyptia, is of Ioan. Agricola suppo∣sed to be that, which of some apothecaries, is called Sucalia, or Bedegnar. alsoo that it is the tree whereof commeth the fruite callyd Acacia. Spineus, a, um, of thorne. Spineoli, a wylde fruite, callyd Sloes. Spinosus, a, um, full of thornes. Spinther, a pynne. also a tache, sommetyme a bracelette. Spinturnix, a byrde, which was wont to come to the aulters, and cary away a burnyng cole whiche was taken for an vnlucky byrde. Spinus, a plumme tree, or damsyn tree. Spio, onis, idem quod Nimpha. Spirabilis, le, lyuely, or that wherby we lyue. Spiritabile, idem. Spiraculum, & spiramentum, out of the whi∣che the ayre or breth passeth. Spirarchus, a captayn in the forewarde. Spirae, thynges whyche doo tourne and wynde in dyuers cerkles lyke a trendell, or an adder lyenge rounde. Alsoo spira is an ornament of a womans heade, alsoo the tournynge of ca∣bles or ropes, whan they be wounde vp. also the bande or lace wherwith a cappe or hat is made fast vnder a mans chynne. also the base of a pyllar. also a cake made lyke a trendell. also a multitude of people. Spirillum, a gotes berde. Spirituale, & spiritale, idem quod spiritus. Spiritus, spirite, brethe, wynde. Angustus spiritus, a shorte brethe. Ducere spiritum, to fetche breth, also to liue. Communi spiritu frui, to lyue. Extremū spiritum alicuius excipere, to kisse one whan he is dyinge. Patriae reddere spiritum, to dy for his cūtrey. Spiritum trahere, to lyue. Vno spiritu, at one brethe. Spiritus, is sometyme courage or commforte. Spiro, spirare, to blowe as wynde dothe, to sende forthe odoure. Spisse, an aduerbe signifyenge thycke, somtime slowe. Spissigradior, gradi, to go thycke, or make ma¦ny feete. Spissigradus, he that goeth thycke. Spissitas, thickenesse. Spisso, are, to make thycke. Splssus, a, um, thicke, slowe. Spissum uerbum, a longe worde. Spissum opus, a warke longe in doinge, or whiche requireth longe tyme. Spissus tactus, whan one feeleth a thynge massiue. Spissitudo, thyckenesse. Spithame, called also Dodrans, is the measure betwene the thumb and the lyttel fynger they bothe beinge stretched forthe, and conteyneth ix. ynches, or .xii. fingers brede. Splen, splenis, the splene. Splendeo, dui, dere, to shyne. Splendesco, scere, to shyne ofte. Splendide, an aduerb signifieng clere or bright also rychely, honourably. Splendidus, da, dum, bryghte, clere. Also he whiche vseth to haue his house rychelye dec∣ked with abundance of all thynges, is called Splendidus contrary to Sordidus & auarus. Splendor, oris, lyght, brightnesse, sometyme honour or noblenesse in lyuynge. Spleneticus, he that is sycke in the splene. Splenium, a playster of cloth or lether made to laye to the body of hym whiche is sicke. Spoletum, a citie in Italy. Spolerini, people of the citie Spoletum. Spolio, are, to robbe or dyspoyle. Spolior, ari, to be robbed. Spoliarius, ria, um, that which receyueth spoile or thynges taken by robbery. Sponda, the syde of a bedde. Spondeo, spopondi, spondere, to promyse. Spondêus, a fote in meter of .ii. long syllables Spondylus, a wherue, which is a round thing of stone or wodde, or leade, put on a spyndel, to make it runne rounde. It is also a whyte harde thynge in an oyster, whiche is couered with the fyshe. Spondium, that whiche cometh of leade lyke to soute, whiche is aboue vesselles of brasse, that do hange ouer the fyer.
Spongia, a sponge, or that wherwith any thing is wyped. Spongiare, to wype cleane a sponge. Spongioli, mousherons. Spongiosus, a, um, lyghte, and full of holes lyke a sponge. Spongites, a stone lyke a sponge. Sponsa, a woman despoused or affyaunced. Sponsalis, le, perteynynge to spousage. Sponsalia, the spousage, or betrothynge of a man and womā, before that they be wedded. Sponsio, onis, a promyse, a bargayne. Sponsus, us, idem. Sponso, sare, to affyaunce or betrothe. Sponsor, oris, he that promyseth or bargay∣neth Sometyme a suertie, whiche vnderta∣keth an other mannes acte. Sponius, sa, sum, promysed. Sponté, naturally, willingely, of his fre wyll. Spontalis, le, voluntarily. Spontaneus, ea, eum, that whiche dothe, or is done wyllyngly, naturally, without cōstraint or helpe. Spopondi, I haue promysed. Sporades, yles in the sea called Aegeum. Sporta, & sportula, a basket or maunde, some∣tyme money or meate distributed by prynces vnto the people. Sportula, & sportella, a lyttell gyfte or almes, also lyuery of courte, called bowge of courte was called Sportule. Spretus, refused. Spuma, the fome or froth of any thyng liquide. Spumeus, a, um, fomy or frothy. Spumo, are, to fome or gather vnto fome. Spumosus, a, um, that wherof cometh a fome. Spuo, spui, spuere, to spytte. Spurce, vncleanly, fylthyly. Spurcidicus, ca, cum, that which speaketh dis¦honestly, or vncleanely. Spurcificus, ca, cum, that maketh thynges vn cleane or fylthy. Spurcitia, & spurcities, vncleannesse. Spurco, care, to defyle or make vncleane. Spurcus, ca, cum, vncleane, fylthye, vnpure, stynkinge, blouddy. Spurcum uinum, wyne myngled with water. Spurij uersus, verses fayned, the authore be∣ing false named or vnknowen. Spurius, a bastard, also it was the surname of dyuerse Romaynes. Sputo, tare, to spytte. Sputor, tari, to be spytte on. Sputum, spyttell. ¶S ANTE Q. SQualla, olde wryters vsed for squalida. Squalleo, lui, lêre, to be fylthye, sluttisshe, soyled or stayned with som vnclene thing▪ Squallent arua, the fieldes are full of wedes. Squallide, yll fauouredly. Squallidae res, thynges vnpleasaunt. Squallidus, da, dum, sluttyshe, fylthy, causyng one to abhorre the syght therof sometyme it sygnifieth spotted also carrayn leane. Squallidus ager, grounde out of tylthe. also shynynge. Squallor, loris, sluttyshnes, fylthynes. Squalido, dinis, & squalliditas, the same. Squalus, a fysshe. Squama, the skale of a fyshe. Squamatim, in the facion of shales. Squammosus, skaly. Squatina, a soole fysshe with a roughe skynne, wherwith fletchers doo make theyr arrowes smoothe. Squarosus, a, um, rough and sharpe, lyke to a thynge whiche is skaly. Squilla, a fyshe callyd a shrympe. also an herbe, rede Scylla. Squinitij, people in Italye callyd Sabelli and Samnites. ¶S ANTE T. ST, a voyce of hym that commaundeth sy∣lence, as we say in englyshe, husht, whan we wolde haue one to holde his peace. Stabilimentum, that whyche kepeth a thynge stedfaste. Stabilio, liui, lire, to make stedfast or stable. Stabilis, le, stable or stedfast. Stabulariae mulieres, women, whyche keepe vyttaylynge howses, for to refresshe wayfa∣rynge men. Stabularius, an inholder. Also he that hath the charge of the house, where cattall is kept. Stabulari damas aut ceruos, falowe deere or redde dere to be lodged or harborowed. Stabulo, bulare, to stande as cattalle dothe in a stable. Stabulatio, standynge or lyenge of cattell, alsoo harbourynge or lodgynge of dere. Stabulum, an ynne, where men do lodge or bait. also it is the general name of the place, where cattell doo abyde, whan they come from their pasture. also a stable wherin horses or mules are kepte. Stactis, & stacte, is that whiche is called com∣monly Storax liquida. Stacteus, a, um, gummy. Stadiodromos, the place ordeyned to runne in. Stadiodromus, he that rounneth in a course of runnynge. Stadium, a place, wherin runnyng is exercysed, as well of men as of horses. Stadium, is alsoo a quantytie or measure of grounde, whereof (as Censorinus writeth)
were three sortes, the one was of Italye and that conteyned .DCxxv. fete which is .Cxxv pasis. The seconde was called Olympicum. and that was of .DC. fete, that is Cxx. pa∣sis. the thyrde was called Pythicum, whiche conteyned a thousande feete, whiche is two hundred pasis, which peraduenture was for gotten of Plinius and Solinus, whan they wrate the description of Sicilia, which ma∣keth the variaunce betwene them and Dio∣dorus Siculus. Of the Stadia called Italica or of Italy .viii. doo make an Italion myle, conteynynge a thousande pase, euery pase be∣inge fyue fete, we haue none other name to gyue it but a furlonge. Stagma, an oyntemente. Stagno, are, properly of water is to stande and not to flowe. Stagnum, a standynge water, a poole, also a certayne mettall called tynne. Staloginum, a thyng to hange at ones eare, as Egyptians haue. Sta men, cloth, whan it is in the lome or frame, also it is a threde. Stanneus, a, um, of tynne. Stannum, mettall called tynne. Stapedes, styroppes. Staphyle, a vyne. Staphylus, he that dyd fyrste myngle water with wyne. Staphis, a kynde of vynes, which hath a black stemme and straight, and hath a fruite more lyke to a lyttel bladder, than to a grape, whi¦che be grene, within the whiche is a kernell thre cornered. Staphilinus, wylde parsenepe. Staphis agria, Stafsagre. Stata sacrificia, sacrifyce customably done at certayne dayes of an olde ordinance. Statae matris simulachrum, an ymage, whi∣che was sette vp by the people in euery strete at Rome. Status, ta, tum, fyrme or stable. also ordeyned or decreed. Statarius, a, um, ordinarie. Stater, teris, a certayne coygne whiche was in value foure drammes, or foure grotes .viii. to an ounce. Statera, a beame to way without the balances. Staticulum, a certayn wanton meuyng in dan∣synge, sometyme a lyttell carte. Stati dies, dayes ordinarie, dayes in banke, for apparaunce, or for the parties to plede. Statilinus, was called a priuate god, whiche men supposed to be alwaye with them. Statina, an yle. Staticulum, a lyttell ymage. Statiuncula, idem, or a lyttell restynge place. Statius, a noble poete. Statim, anon, constantly, continually. Statio, onis, a place, where eyther menne of warre or shyppes do abyde or reste for a cer∣tayne tyme. Stationalis, le, that whiche standeth faste or abydeth. Stationarii milites, souldyours, whiche are assygned to abyde styl in one place, or to kepe a towne or fortresse, or the marches of a countreye. Statiua, & statiuum, a certayne place fortyfy∣ed, where men of warre laye at the siege of a fortresse. Stator, toris, a seruaunte, whiche is alwayes redye attendynge aboute an officer, to be at commaundement. wherfore in that worde be included purseuauntes, postes, sergeauntes, baylyffes, and catchepols. also Iupiter was called Iupiter stator of Romulus, bycause he supposed that he made the Romayns to tary whan they fledde, the Samnites pursuynge theym. Statua, an ymage of mettall, yuorye, stone, or tymber. Statuaria, the crafte of grauynge or yettyng of ymages. Statuarius, he that carueth or yetteth images. Statuarius, a, um, perteynynge to ymages. Statuere ex aequo & bono, to iudge or deter∣myne, accordynge to equitie, lesse than the ri∣gour of the lawe wolde require. Statuere pretium, to sette a pryce on thinges vendible. Statumen, minis, that whiche is set vp to su∣steyne, or beare a thynge, a proppe. Statumino, are, to proppe vp, to vnderset, to make sure. Statuo, tui, tuere, to ordeyne, to determyne, to iudge or esteme to set faste, to stable a thynge to dedicate, to beate one thynge to an other. Sublimen illum, arriperem, & caput primū in terram statuerem, ut cerebro dispergam uiam, I wolde lyfte hym on hyghe, and beat his heade to the ground, that I mought scat¦ter his brayne abrode in the hyghe waye. Apud animum statuere, to determine in his mynde. Exemplum statuere in aliquo, to punishe one in suche wyse that other may take ensaumple therby. Statuere in aliquem exemplum, idem. Statuere in aliquem, to make an ordynaunce agaynste one. Mercedem statuere, to assigne to one what wages he shall haue. Modum statuere, to appoynte a rule. Statuere quanti hoc putetis, & quam multo redemisse. Thynke you, what it is worthe, and howe moche it coste.
Statuam statuere alicui, to set vp ones ymage Statura, the stature of a man. Staturus, a, um, the participle future of sto, stas, stare, to stande. Status, tus, state, it is among oratours and la∣wyers the case, whiche riseth in contention, wherin the matter resteth, whiche muste be replyed vnto, and eyther be denyed, confes∣sed, or trauersed: of Tullie it is called Con∣stitutio causae. Status, stata, statum, fyrme. Stati dies, dayes appoynted. Stati redditus, rentes certayne. Steatoma, a gatherynge of greace or fatte in some place agaynste nature. Stechades, thre lyttell yle by Marsiles. Stega, a cabyn of a ship. also a cote or cotage. Stegnae febres, feuers in the whiche a manne may haue neyther siege, nor vrine, nor sweat nor none other euacuation. Stelae, lyttell pyllars. Stella, a sterre, also a sterrcfyshe, also the name of a poete. Stella crinita, a blasynge sterre. Stellatus, ta, tum, full of sterres. Stellatura, was an extortion of Capitaynes in takynge from the souldiours the portions of vyttayle apoynted vnto thē by the emperour Stellio, a beaste lyke a lysarde, hauynge on his backe spottes lyke sterres. Stellionatus crimen, a dysceypte in dyssem∣blynge a thynge, to take profytte of an other iniustely. Stellis, a kynde of byrdlyme made in Euboea. Stello, are, to shyne or glysten lyke sterres, or be made lyke sterres. Stemma, matis, a garland of floures, also the stocke or bloudde of a gentyll house. somtime the degrees in kynrede. also an inscription grauen in a stone. Stemo, was syster to Medusa. Stenoboea, the wyfe of Pretus kynge of Ephy¦ry, whiche loued Bellorophon, that vanqui∣shed the monster called Chimaera. Sentor, toris, was a man, whiche had a voice as loude as .xx. men. Stephanoma, euery herbe that serueth for gar∣landes. Stephanoplocus, a maker of garlandes. Stephanus, in greke is a crowne. Stercoratio, dungynge. Stercorarius, ria, um, perteynynge to dounge or mucke. Stercoratus, ta, tum, dounged or mucked, or compassed. Stercoro, are, to dunge or compasse. Stercus, stercoris, dunge, mucke, compasse. Stercutius, the surname of Saturnus, bycause he fyrst founde and vsed dunging of ground. Steresis, priuation. Sterila, olde wryters vsed for sterilis. Sterilesco, rilescere, to be barrayne or waxe barrayne. Sterilia, for sterilitas. Sterilis, le, barrayne. Sterilis amator, a louer which lacketh money. Sterilitas, barraynes, sterilitie. Steriliter, barraynely. Sternax, nacis, a stering or ploungynge horse. Sterno, straui, sternere, to throwe downe, to spreade, to couer, to laye the table, to make playne or smothe, to lye downe to reste. Sternere lectum, to make a bead redy. Sternunt se somno, They layde them downe to sleape. Sternuto, tare, to snese often. Sternuo, nuere, to snese. Sternutamentum, snesynge. Sternutatio, idem. Sterquilinium, a dungehyll or myxen. Sterogonia, a kynde of Frankyncense called communely Olibanum, or in latyne, Thus masculus. Sterto, tui, tere, to route whan one sleapeth. Stesichorites, is the noumber of eyght in dyse. so called of the sepulchre of Stesichorus the poete, whiche was made in fygure lyke to eyghte dyse. Stesichorus, a famouse poete, of whome it is wrytten, that whan he was an infaunt in his cradell, a Nyghtyngale satte on his mouthe, and dyd singe, signifienge that he shoulde be the sweteste poete, that euer was afore hym. Also he ounde fyrste singinge of sounges in a daunse. Stibadium, a chayre or couche made of herbes wounde together: some do calle it an herber or sommer parler. Stibium, a whyte stone founde in syluer mines whiche stoppeth the runnynge of eies, and dothe make them seme very fayre. Stibon, idem quod Antimonium. Stichos, a verse or an order in a thynge. Stigo, are, to pricke forthe. Stigma, matis, a marke made with fyre, or with a hotte yron. Somtyme it signifieth in∣famy and reproche obiected openly. Stigmatici, persones infamed. Stilla, a droppe. Stilbo was a philosopher. Vide stilpo. Stilbon, the sterre of Mercuri. Stillicidium, the droppynge of a house. Stillo, are, to droppe. Stilpo, a philosopher borne in the citie of Me∣gara in Greece, whiche his counireye beinge bourned, and his wyfe and chyldren loste in the fyre, escaped, and departing alone, whan the kynge Demetrius asked of him, if he had
loste any thynge, he aunswered, I haue loste nothyng, for al that is myne I carie with me meanynge therby, that vertue, which is on∣ly the proper goodes of a wyse man, and may not be taken from hym, he toke a waye with hym. Stilpones, dwarfes. Stimulo, are, to pricke. Stimulatio, a prickinge or feruente mouinge to do a thynge. Stimulator, he that pricketh. Stimuleus, a, um, that whiche is done with pryckynge. Stimulus, a gode, wherwith oxen are dryuen. Stingo, & stinguo, guere, to put out lyghte. Stipa, for stupa, towe. Stiparius, a, um, perteynynge to stoppynge or beatynge harde together. Stipatores, they whiche doo frayte a shyp, or laye in such fardelles or burdeynes as are to be caryed. Also they whiche be of the kynges garde, alwaye about his person. Stipatus, enuyroned with men, to be defended as princes are with theyr garde. Stipendialis, le, perteyninge to wages. Stipendiarius, a, um, whiche payeth tribute, of some called contributary, to the fyndynge of an army, or defence of a countrey. Stipendiatus, he that taketh wages. Stipendiosus, he that hath ben oftentymes hy∣red or retayned in warres. Confectis stipendijs, whan the tyme of their seruise was out. Stipendior, diari, to be hyred or retayned in warres. Stipendijs duobus, two the fyrst yeres. Stipendium, wages properly gyuen to souldy∣ours, also subsidie paide to princis. Stipendia facere, to serue in warres, as a souldioure. Stipes, pitis, a stake, also a sticke. Stipo, are, to stop chynkes or clyftes, properly in shyppes or botes, with towe and pitche. also to enuirone to the intent to defende one. Stips, uel stipis, pis, wages to men hyred: also money gyuen to beggars. Stipem confert, it bringeth in gayn. Stipem pergere, to sowe money amonge the people, to giue a largesse. Stiptica medicamenta, medicines that doo bynde or restrayne. Stipula, holme, erige, or strawe, apt to thatch houses, it is of some taken for the huske that closeth in the strawe. Stipulatus, tus, & stipulatio, a bargayn or pro¦myse, or obligation to pay moneye, or to per∣fourme a thynge, whiche is required. Stipulor, aris, ari, to make a bargayne, to pro¦myse effectually that which he is required to do. It hath bothe the actiue and passiue sy∣gnification Stipulor abs te, I require of the or I am required of the. Stiria, an ysikle or droppe of yse. Stiria, A countrey ioynynge to Austria and Ca¦rinthia in the este parte of Germanye, full of mountaynes sauinge a littell parte bordryng on Hungary, the people be rude, and the wo∣men haue so great throtes by the corruption of the water and ayre, that not onelye theyr speche is let therby, but (as some do wryte) whan they giue sucke to theyr chyldren, some be fayne to caste the bagges which do hange vnder theyr chynne, ouer theyr shulders. there is in that countrey plenty of yron and syluer if the negligence of people dyd not let the fin¦dynge therof. Stiricidium, & stillicidium, the droppynge of a house. Stirpices, weders in gardeynes. Stirpitus, vp by the rote. Stirpo, are, to pull vp by the rote. Stirps, stirpis, in the feminine gender signify∣eth a stocke in kinrede, beinge the masculine gender it signyfyeth the stemme of a tree or herbe. Stitisse uadimonium, to haue brought forth su∣ertie or pledges. Stiua, is that in a ploughe, which the ploughe man holdeth, whan he doth eare, the plough tayle. Stlata, a brode shyp or bote, called an hulke. Stlembus, slowe and heuy. Stlatarium, any thynge that is borne on the sea. Stlatarius, a maker of hulkes or botes. Stlitem, olde wryters vsed for litem, variance. Stlitibus iudicandis, for litibus iudicandis. Stlopus, a sowne made with the mouth, whan the chekes are blowen. Stlotium, for lotium. Sto, steti, stare, to stande, to indure or abyde. Stare promisso, to abyde by his promise. To be full. Stat ager sentibus, the fielde is ful of brembles. Iam puluere coelum stare uident, Nowe sawe they the skye full of duste. To bose out. Hic corpus solidum inuenies, hic stare papillas Pictor marmoreo, Here in this marble stone shalte thou fynde paynted, the body founde, and the pappes imbosed. Also to be immouable or alwaye certayne. Sic stat sententia, so the sentence abydeth immo∣uable, or is determined. Also Stat, my minde is. Stat conferre manum Aeneae, my mynde is to fyght with Aeneas Stat, is sette. Om∣nis in Ascanio, chari stat cura parentis, All the care of the tender louynge father was set on Ascanius. Also stare, to coste, Neque ipse hoc periculum ignoro, expertus nō leui do∣cumento, quanti steterit mihi, quod semel
imperata nō feci, Nor I am ignorāt of that daunger, hauyng experience of no lyght war¦nynge, howe moch it cost me, that I dyd not those thynges, that I was commaunded. Promissis stare, to abyde by his promyse. Stare firmum, to stande faste. Stat per me, per te, per illum, whanne I or any other is the cause, that a thynge is not done. Si poterit fieri, ut ne pater per me ste∣tisse credat, quo minus hae fierent nuptiae, uo lo, I wold if it may be, that my father shuld thinke, that it was not long of me, that this mariage toke none effecte. Stat a me, he is of myne opinion. Stat apud te fides parum, Thou arte of a smalle credence. In acie stare, to be in the fielde durynge the battayle. Statur, I stande here. Stoecades, foure Iles in the french sea against Languedocke. Stoecas, cados, an herbe and floure common∣ly called Sticados. Stoecas Arabica, commonly called of apothe∣caries Sticades Arabica, the one and the o∣ther preserueth clothes from mothes if it be layde amonge them. Stoici, a secte of philosophers, which affyrmed that no griefe mought happen to a wise man and that felicitie was onely in vertue. Stola, a womans gowne. It was also a longe garmēt, which the princes of Persia did vse, and was the onely garment of honour, as we do call suche apparayle a robe. Stolatus, he that weareth suche a robe, also it maye be called honourable. Stolidè, folyshely, lewdely. Stoliditas, folyshenesse, lewdenes. Stolidius, more folyshely. Stolidus, da, dum, foolyshe, lewde of conditi∣ons, odiouse. Stolones, braunches whiche do sprynge out of the stemmes or rotes of trees. Stomachichus, he that is sicke in his stomake. Stomachor, aris, ari, to haue indignation, to be vexed in mynde. Stomachosè, angerly, hatefully, disdainously. Stomachosus, disdaynous. Stomachus, is the pipe whereby meate gothe downe. It is also that whiche is called Ven¦triculus, whervnto we haue none other name but the stomake. sometyme it signifieth indi∣gnation, vehement wrathe, hatrede, and ab∣horrynge of a thyng that lyketh not vs, some tyme facilitie, or gentylnesse. Stomatichus, he that hath a sore in his mouth. Storax, racis, a swete incense or gumme, which is also called styrax, wherof be two kyndes, the one is called Storax calamita, the other is called storax liquida. Storea, any thynge that is spred on the ground it is also a matte. Strabo, he that looketh a squynt, or gogle cied. Strages, a slaughter of men, or a discomfiture. Stragulum, euery ouermoste garmente. also a counterpoynte or couerled. Stramen, minis, strawe, litter. Stramentum, idem. Stramentitius, a, um, that whiche is made of strawe. Stramineus, a, um, of strawe. Strangulo, are, to strangle. Stranguria, dyfficultie to pysse. Stratagema, a polycie or wyse coūcil in warres. Strategus, a generall captayne of an army. Stratia, an hoste or army. Stratiotes, a man of warre. also an herbe, whi∣che Io. Agricola saythe is our mylfoyle or yarowe. Stratioticus, ca, cum, warlyke, perteynyng to warres. Stratius, idem. also the name of one of the sonnes of Nestor. Stratumino, are, to paue. Strator, toris, he that helpeth his maister to horsebacke. yeman of the stirope. Stratum, any thinge that is strawed also a bed. Strata, al that is layd on the bed. also a horse harneyse, a strete or caulsay, paued with stone. Strebula, in the olde tungue of Vmbri was a piece of the flesh that was offered in sacrifice. Strena, a newe yeres gyfte, or presente. Strenué, valyantly, quickly, boldely. Strenuitas, tatis, actiuitie. Strenuus, a, um, valiaunt, prompt actife, bold. Strepito, tare, to make a noyse often. Strepitus, tus, a noyse made with the handes or fete. Strepo, pui, pere, to make a great noyse, pro∣perly in goinge or clappynge of handes, some tyme generally. Strepsiceroti, certayne beastes in Affrike, ha∣uynge croked hornes. Stria, a rabat or small furrowe made in stone or tymber, chamferynge. Striata, be also creuises or small lines, whiche are sene in herbes. Stribligo, ginis, a viciouse fourme in speaking where the wordes agree not, and the partes of speche be out of order. Striblita, breade made lyke to ropes or cordes wounden. Stricte, straightly. Strictim, shortely towched one after an other. Strictim referre, to reporte moche in fewe wordes. Strictim attondere, to clyppe all at once. Strictior, tius, more straight.
Strictissimus, a, um, moste straite. Strictiuella, a foule ill fauoured harlot. Strictiuae, oliues gathered with mans hande. Stricturae, sparkes whiche do issue frome met∣tall whan it is taken out of the fyre, and bea∣ten with hammers. Strideo, dui, dére, & strido, dis, dere, to crashe or make a noyse lyke to cordes, whan they be drawen. Stridon, a towne in Dalmatia, where saincte Hierome was borne. Striga, a rewe of thynges whan they be layde in lengthe. Also a ridge of lande, wherof com¦meth strigatus ager. Striges, shrycheoules, also women whiche are supposed to come by nyghte into houses, and sucke the bloudde of chylderne, some calle them hegges. Strigia, wyde garmentes made of lether vsed in warres. Strigil, gilis, an horsecombe, also a thyng wher¦with wrastlers bounde theyr bodyes, whan they had wrastled. also a certayne vessell. Strigiles, were rubbing combes made of swete wod, wherwith in India the men were rub∣bed for an exercise. Also kerchifes, wherwith wrastlers after theyr labours wyped theyr bo¦dies. also certayne vessels, also pieces of fyne golde founde in mynes, vnmyxte with any o∣ther matter. also lyttell fyshes moste common¦ly taken in wynter tyme. Strigilecula, a diminutiue of strigil. Strigillo, are, to straine harde. Strigium, a spaynyshe garment. Strigmenta, fylthynesse, whiche commeth frō a mannes body, whan he is wasshed, also the corruption of oyle. Strigo, gonis, a well pight man, or well com∣pacte or stronge. Strigosus, a, um, cartayn leane, it is properly spoken of horses or routher beastes. Strimon, onis, a riuer in Thracia. Stringo, xi, gere, to strayne or wringe. also to stryke, to make thynne in cuttynge, to gather to shaue, to wounde. Stringere ensem, to drawe a sworde. Strio, striare, to make rabattes in stone or tim∣ber. also to make furrowes. It is properlye whan beastes in earynge at the ende of a fur¦rowe tourneth to make a newe furrowe. some do call it, to wynde. Striare, is also to plant or to polyshe. Stritare, to abyde or tarye with an yll wyll, or with moche peyne. Stritauum, olde writers vsed for Tritauo, my grandfathers grandefather. Stritomellus, a sparrowe, whiche haunteth the sea coste. Strix, strigis, a shriche oule, a wytch that chan¦geth the fauour of chylderne. Striges, grosse herbes or wortes. Strobilum, a pyne apple. sometyme the kernels or fruite. Strobus, a tree, wherof perfumes were made. myxt with the wyne of dates, which perfume was swete, but it made the head heuy, all be it without any peyne. Stroma, tis, tapesry. Strombon, a kynde of Labdanum. Strombus, a shell fishe of the sea, whiche hath a kyng, whom they folowe. It was thought sometyme that he whiche had sene that fyshe shulde haue good lucke in his affayres. Strongyle, & Strongylos, an yle in the sea, called Aegeum, now called Axos, sometime it was called Dia. Stropha, subtiltie in arguinge. Strophas, a whirlynge or sodeyne turninge. Strophades, two Iles in the grekishe sea. Strophia, garlandes, which priestes were wōt to weare. Strophiolum, a lyttell garlarde. Strophos, freatynge in the bowelles. Strophium, a maydens neckerchefe or lynnen partlette. Structilis, le, made of many pieces, or of dy∣uerse thynges. Structiles columnae, pyllars made of diuerse pieces. Structor, toris, a caruer of meate at a table. Structura, buyldynge settynge of thynges in good order. Strues, a pile of wodde. also a cake. Struices, an ordynaunce of many thynges to∣gether. Strufectarij, they whiche did cary cakes to the temple to be offered, as they do now cary the holy lofe on the sonday. Struferarij, they whiche dydde sacrifice at the trees that were burned with lyghtnyng. Strufetani, they whiche brought meale to be offered. Struma, a swellynge within the throte, whiche is gathered matter and bloudde. some thinke it to be that, which is called the kynges euil. Strumosus, he that hath the kynges iuyll. Struo, struxi, struere, to sette in order. Ageres struere, to make rawseyes. Fercula luxuriose struere, to make sumptu∣ouse feastes. Mendatium struere, to forge a lye or leasing. Orationē solutam struere, to wryte in profe. Verba struere, to set his wordes in order. Strumum, a medicine or plaister for the kinges yuell. Strupearia, holydayes amonge the people cal∣led falisci, at the whiche daye, the people doo go with garlandes on theyr heades.
Struppum, is a lyke holydaye amonge the peo¦ple called Tusculani. Struppi, were lyttell wrethes made of leaues put on the heades of ymages in the temples, as now superstitious foles do set on ymages heades in the churches. Strutheus, the priuie member of a man. Struthia, a certayne kynde of quynces. Struthiocamelus, an ostriche. Struthio, idem. Struthion, an herbe and rote called of Apothe∣caries Condisi. Struthopus, a rounde foote lyke a sparowe. Struthopedes, they whiche haue lyttell round feete. Strychius, an herbe, whiche maketh hym mad that eateth of it. Strychium bibit, a prouerbe signifyeng the man is madde. Strychnon, an herbe called Nyghtshade. rede Solanum, & Solatrum. Studeo, dui, dere, to studye, or to applye the minde, or care for a thynge, to endeuour, to fauour, to desyre. Studuit Catilinae, he fauoured Catiline. Studiosus, studiouse, diligent, constant, addict or feruently disposed. also fauoring a nother. Studiosè, studiously, desprousely. Studium, study, sometyme exercise, wyll, or ap¦petite, desyre, diligence, fauour, loue. Scinditur incertum studia in contraria uulgus, The vnstedfaste people was diuyded in dy∣uerse opinions. Stultitia, foly, it is knowen by foure thynges, or if he hath not in remēbrance that he shulde haue, or if he hath, he dothe not retayn it, or doth not folowe good councell, or dothe ap∣proue yll councell or affections. Stultior moricho, he that neglecteth his owne busynesse at home, and applieth other mens abrode. It is also a prouerbe touchyng them whiche do thynges, that cause theym to be laughed to scorne. Stultior Choroebo, a prouerbe applyed to foles, which wyll assaye to do a thynge that is aboue theyr wyt or lernynge: for Choroe∣bus, was a felowe, that assayed to nūber the wawes of the sea, whan he hym selfe coulde not tell any number aboue fyue. Stultè, folyshely. Stultiloquentia, & stultiloquium, a foolysshe babblynge. Stultiloquus, he that talketh or speaketh foo∣lyshely. Stultior, stultius, more folyshe. Stultissimus, ma, mum, moste folyshely. Stultius, more folyshely. Stultorum feriae, was a tyme in the moneth of Februarie, that fooles kepte holye, fooles. holyedaye. Stultus, he that dothe a thynge vnabuisedly or without discretion. Stupa, towe, the course parte of flaxe. Stuparius malleus, the hammer, wherwith cal¦kers do beate towe in to shyps or bootes. Stupefactus, astonyed. Stupefio, I am astonyed or abashed. Stupeo, & stupesco, pui, pere, to be astonyed or dismayde sometyme to meruayle at. Stupefacio, cere, to make astoned, or to cause to meruayle or be abashed. Stupentia, uel stupida membra, the membres whiche haue loste all theyr sence or felinge. Stupiditas, an abashemente. Stupidus, dismayed, abasshed. also he that fe∣leth nothynge, or lacketh his sences. Stupor, poris, abashement, the sodayne priua¦tion of sence or felynge. Stuprè, dishonestly, shamefully. Stupro, are, to commytte aduoultrie or rape or to defloure a virgin. Stuprum, auoutrie, or defloration of a virgin. Stura, an yle agayne the mouthe of Tyber. Styga, a fenne in Egypte not far from the citie of Memphis. Stygeus, ea, um, perteynynge to Styx, the great fenne, which is fayned of poetes to be by the fielde called Elysius, whiche the pay∣nyms did suppose to be a place of pleasure, wherein rested the soules of good men. Stylobata, a trough of tymber, wherin water runneth, or is conuayed into a cesterne. Stylus, a stile, whiche is qualitie of wordes in speakynge, sometyme harde, sometyme easy, sometyme in a meane, also an elegant fourme or order in writinge or speakynge. Stymphalus, a ryuer in Arcadia. Stymphalide, a coppe of fethers, whiche stan∣deth on the heade of a byrde, as of a larke, an heron, a peacocke, and other. Stipticus, ca, cum, that which stoppeth or bin∣deth, or straineth, if it be eaten or drounken. Also that whiche in tastyng semeth to straine the tunge, as a quince or red wyne. Styrax, racis, a soote gumme called storax, wherof be two kyndes, the one is called sto∣rax calamita, the other storax liquida, whi∣che is Stacte. Styx, sygnifieth sorowe or heuynesse, poetes do fayne, that it is a fenne, whiche is in helle. ¶S ANTE V. SVada, called in greke Pitho, was called the goddesse of eloquence or dylectable speche. Suadela, persuasion, fayre speche. Suadeo, si, dêre, to speake fayre, to intreate
with fayre wordes, to indeuour, to induce a man into our opinyon, or to beleue vs. Suadibilis, le, that whiche maye be persuaded. Suasibilis, idem. Suanernicum, a kynde of amber, whiche is ye lowe, wherof beades be made, and is called Laumbre. Suapté, of his owne nature. Suarius, a swyne herde. Suasibiliter, an aduerbe signifienge, in maner to perswade. Suasio, an exhortation, a mocion or persuasiō. Suasor, soris, he that doth exhorte. Suasum, euery colour that maye tourne into an other colour. Suauiatio, a swete kyssynge. Suauiator, he that kysseth swetely. Suauiloquium, a swete speche. Suauiloquus, he that speaketh swetely. Suasorius, a, um, that wherwith a man is or may be perswaded. Suatim, lyke a sowe. Suauior, aris, ari, & suauio, to kysse swetelye, or for ioye. Suauis, suaue, sweete in taste, soote in odour or smell, in a man it signifieth gentyll or cour∣tayse. Suauitas, & suauitudo, swetenesse. Suauiter, swetely. Suauium sumere, to kysse. Suauium facere, idem. Suauium, & sauium, swete harte. Sub, vnder, by, or aboute. Sub lucem, by daye lyght. sub idem tempus, in the same tyme, or about the same time. Sub horam pugnae, a∣boute the tyme of the battayle. Sub eas au∣tem redditae sunt, For they were delyuered after them. Sub sarcinis, with the trusses or cariage. Sub uesperum, in the twye lyght. Subuespe∣rum Caesar portas claudi, milites{que} ex oppi¦do exire iussit, In the twye lyght Caesar com¦maunded the gates to be shutte, and the men of warre to departe out of the citie. Sub Alexandro, in the tyme of Alexander. Sub aduentu, or aduentum, at the tyme, or at the poynte of his arriuayle, or commynge. Sub exitu uitae, at his dethe. Sub manu, at hande. Sub oculis, in his presence. Sub urbe, harde by the citie. Sub lucem, at the breake of daye. Sub finem, at the ende. Postes sub ipsos, afore the postes. Subacidus, cida, cidum, somewhat cygre or sowre. Subacidulus, a, um, a lyttell soure. Subactus, ta, tum, constrayned, subdewed, dri¦uen vnder, kneaded or wrought with handes as dowe is, laboured, exercised. Subaeratus, ta, tum, that whiche is brasse with in, and other mettal without. Subaero, rare, to myngle with brasse. Subagito, tare, to solycite. Subagito blandis, & benedicis uerbis, I solicyted with fayre and well spoken wordes. it is also to compa∣ny with a woman carnally. Subalaris, subalare, that whiche is vnder the wynges. Subalpini, people vnder the Mountaines cal∣led Alpes, called Peemountaynes. Subalternatio, a succession by tourne. Subalterno, nare, to succede by tourne. Subaquaneus, a, um, & subaqueus, a, um, that whiche lyeth vnder the water. Subaquilus, la, lum, broune of colour. Subare, is spoken of women, whiche are as fil∣thy as swyne in the acte of lechery. Subire, idem. Subareo, & subaresco, rescere, to be or waxe somewhat drye. Subasper, somewhat sharpe. Subaudio, dire, to here or perceyue a lyttell. Subausculto, tare, to harken a lyttell. Subbasilicanus, he that walketh vnder the place where iugementes are practised. Subbibo, bibere, to drynke a lyttell. Subblandior, diri, to flatter. Subcalidus, da, dum, somewhat hote, warme Subcernicula, a fyne bulter, wherewith the floure is seuered from the branne. Subcerniculum, a rangynge sieue. Subcingulum, a bracynge gyrdell. Subcineritius, a, um, rosted or baken vnder the ashes, or axen. Subcisiua tempora, tymes borowed or spared from serious busynes. Subcisiua opera, warkes done at tymes stolen from ordinarie busines or labours necessary. Subcollo, lare, to lay a thynge on ones necke. Subcrispus, he that hath a curled heade. Subcustos, an vnder keper. Subcutancus, a, um, that which is within the skynne, betwene the skynne and the fleshe. Subdelego, gare, to commytte to an other any matter, whiche is committed vnto vs, by the kynge or prince. Subdialia, places to walke in without any co∣uerynge. Subdialis, le, abrode in the ayre, without the house. Sub dio, that is not in a house, or vnder a co∣uerynge. Subdititius, ia, ium, whiche is not properly his or hers, whose it is fayned to be. Partus sub∣dititius, a byrthe fayned of an other mannes childe. Libri subdititij, bookes with false ty∣tles or counterfayte auctours.
Subditiuus, a counterfayte chylde. Subditus, a subiecte. Subditus, ta, tum, idem quod subdititius. alsoo put in the place of an nother. Subditus iudex, a iudge whyche is set in the place of a iudge departed. Sub diu, in the day tyme. Subdo, didi, dere, to put vnder, to adde, to put in the place of an nother, to put in daungier or ieoperdy. Subdere in locum alterius, to remoue one, & put an other in his place. Calcaria subdere, to thruste to the spurre. Puerum subdere, to chaunge a chyld, whiche chyldren be commonly callyd changelynges. Subdere spiritus, to gyue one courage, or to make one proude or stately. Subdolus, he that deceiueth craftily, cautelous Subdolè, craftyly, cautelousely. Subdubiè, somewhat doubtefully. Subdubitanter, idem. Subdubito, tare, I doubte somewhat. Subdubius, somwhat in doubte. Subdubitatio, a lyttell doubte. Subduco, xi, cere, to take away, to remoue, to lyfte vp, or drawe vp, to goo or steale awaye priuyly, to put vnder, to pull backe, to draw backe, to deceyue, to steale. Etiam nunc me subducere istis dictis postu∣las? And yet nowe wylt thou go about with these wordes to deceyue me? Proximo magnum poculum ille bibit, caput ponit, cum dormiscit, ei subduco anulum, At the laste he dranke a great draught, and layd downe his heade, whyles he slept, I stale his rynge from hym. Tempus est subducere hinc me, It is tyme to get me hense. Lac agnis subducere, to weane lambes. Cibum subducere, to kepe one frome meate or to take ones meate away from hym. Subducere copias in collem, to brynge the hoste vp to the hylle. Naues subducere, to drawe shyppes to land. Aliquem subducere, to deceyue one. Subductum oibus uentis aedificium, The house is sette for all maner of wyndes. Subducere rationes, to examine the charges with the alowances in accompte. Subducere summam, to make a reckenynge, or to caste the summe in accompte or recke∣nynge. Subductio, a drawynge vp of a shyppe oute of the water, deduction or allowance. Subdulcis, ce, somewhat sweete. Subduro, rare, to make somewhat harde. Subduror, subdurari, to be made sommewhat harde. Subeo, iui, ire, to enter, to suffer or sustayne, to enterpryse, to goo vnder or in, to take Also to succede, to resyste, to clymme or mounte vp. Also to take charge of any thynge. alsoo to growe or sprynge vp, to comme to remem∣braunce, to put vnder, to succede or come in a place, to aunswere or resyste. Qui retinendi officij causa, cruciatus subierit ultro, He that wyll for the accomplyshement of his duetie suffre tormentes wyllyngly. Quis enim curae tuae molem sponte subeat? Who wold wyllyngly take on hym the great weyght of thy charge? Sera poenitentia subijt Regem, Late repen∣taunce came to the kynges remembraunce. Aeneas subijt inucronem, ipsum{que}, moran∣do sustinuit, Aeneas put vnder his sworde, and taryenge lyfted hym vp. In quarum locum subierunt inquilinae, impi¦etas, perfidia, impudicitia, In whose place succeded new inhabitantes, contempt of ver∣tue, dysloyaltie, lechery. Poteris ne orationem eius subire? Mough∣test not thou make answere to his oration? Hemi excelcitas, sex millibus passuum subi∣tur, The heyghte of the mountaygne of He∣mus is clymmed or mounted in syxe thow∣sande paces. Tectum subire, to enter or comme into the howse. Subire ad montes, to go frome the valey vp to the hylle. Vultum alicuius subire, to come before one. Spes animum subibat, I or he trusted or hoped. Subeunt morbi, sycknes dothe come. Subire aliquid, to take charge of any thyng. Conditiones pacis subire, to accorde vnto peace. Deditionem subire, to render vp a garryson besyeged. Fortunam subire, to abyde the aduenture, or put all in a hasarde. Labores subire, to take peyne. Per uices subire, now one, and than an other, by tourne. Cruciatus subire, to suffer or indure tour∣mentes. Aleam subire, to put hym selfe in daunger. Subire crimen, to sustayne blame. Incommoda subire, to be indamaged. Subire infamiam, to be dyshonoured. Iudicium alicuius subire, to abyde the iudge∣ment of one. Nomen exulis subire, to be a banyshed man. Subire poenam, to be punyshed. Supplicia subire, idem. Tela subire, to receyue strokes. Verbera subire, to be beaten. Ne subeant herbae, that the weedes ouer∣growe
not. Cogitationi nostrae nun{quam} subijt, it neuer cam in our thoughte. Subit antiquitatem mirari, it cometh to my remembraunce to wonder at menne of the olde tyme. Subit recordatio, I remember well. Subit cogitatio, I haue bethght me. Subit animum. I do remember▪ Calamitatem subire, to haue a great losse. Subire mortem, to receyue deathe. Periculum subire, to putte hym selfe in ieo∣perdy. Sermonem subire, to cause hym-selfe to be spoken of. Tempestates subire, to putit hym selfe in daunger. Turpitudinem subire, to runne in selaunder. Subire uim, to put hym selfe in ieoperdye to be slayne. Subeunt in hac reputatione, nowe commeth to remembraunce, &c. Subijt regem uere cundia, the kynge was as∣shamed &c. Fallendus est iudex & uarijs artibus subeun∣dus, The Iudge muste be wonne by pratye meanes that he may not perceyue. Suber, corke. Subeth, is a barbarous worde, pertaynynge to physyke, and sygnifieth a depe stepe, not na∣turall, procedynge of grosse vapours, ingen∣dred of fleume, beyng in the pryncypal mem∣bers, resolued, and ascendynge into the for∣parte of the heade, and causynge oppylations in the celles of the brayne. Subsibulum, was a whyte ornamente, fowre square, and longe, whyche the nunnes, callyd Vestales ware on theyr heades, whan they dyd sacrifyce. Subhasto, tare, to selle any thynge in tyme of warres that was praysed. Hasta, a yerde, whyche was delyuered to hym that was appoynted to selfe anye thynge taken in warres. Subiaceo, cere, to lye vnder also to be subiect. Subiacto, tare, & subiecto, to caste vp, as corne whan it is fanned. Subices, subiectes. Subiecto, tare, to cast vnder often. Subiector, toris, a forger of testamentes, or he that bringeth forth one testamēt for an other. Subicito, tare, to company often with a womā. Subiculum flagri, a beatynge stocke. Subigo, egi, igere, to constrayn, to subdewe, to dryue vnder, to whet, to beate or stampe, som tyme to eare or tylle truly, to digge, to meddle with a woman, somtyme to lyft vp. Subijcio, ieci, ij cere, to put vnder, to make sub∣iecte, sommetyme to caste vp, to reherse. Simeministi quod olim dictum est, subijce, If thou doest remembre, what was ones spoken, reherse it. Oua gallinis subijcere, to sette egges vnder a henne to be hatched. Spem subijcere, to put one in comforte. Aliquid oculis subijcere, to make a thynge so playne as a man may perceyue it as welle as yf he dydde see it. Exemplum subijcere, to put an exaumple. Subijcere, to bryng to remembrance, to make aunswere. Subijcere ferro terram, to tylle lande. Subijcere oculis, to report a thynge, as yf a man sawe it. Subijcere sensibus, to purpose a thynge euy∣dentyle. Crimini subijci, to put in faute. Faces inuidiae subijcere, to brynge one into hatrede. Testamentum subijcere, to brynge forthe a false testament. Vis subiecta uoci, the sygnification and im∣portaunce of a worde. In equum subiecit, he sette hym on hors back. Subinde, moreouer, forthwith or anone, often∣tymes. Subin, idem. Subingerere arietem, to delyuer a sheepe to be kylled for hym that dothe sacryfyce. Subinnanis, ne, somewhat vaynglorious. Subitò, sodaynly. Subitaneus, & subitarius, a, um, & subitus, ta, tum, sodayne. Subiugalis, le, vsed to the yoke. Subiugis, ge, a beast vsed to drawe in an yoke. Subiugo, gare, to make subiecte. Sub iugum mitti, to be subdued. It was proper¦ly whan a battayle was vanquyshed, the van¦quyshers caused thre speares to be set vp lyke a galowes, and constrayned theym that were vanquyshed to go vnderneth it, in token that they were subdued, whiche was the greattest reproche that mought be diuised. Subiungo, gere, to adde or ioyne to. Sublabor, beris, lapsus sum, labi, to slyp away. Sublabro, brare, to put into the mouthe. Sublatè, haultly. Sublatior, tius, hygher. Sublatus, ta, tum, lifted vp, mounted, aduanced Sublego, are, to substitute. Sublego, legi, legere, to steale. also to chese an nother into the place of hym that is deade. In locum demortui sublegere, idem. Sublegere sermonem, Clam nostrum hunc illae sublegerunt sermonem, Priuylye they harkened, & bare away all that we cōmuned. Sublegere, to passe ouer in readynge quyck∣ly, to steale a thynge that is hydde, to gather eftsones.
Sublestus, ta, tum, feble, faynt, lyghte, of nod force or value. Subleuo, are, to helpe, or ayde, to defende, to lyft vp, to sustayne. Sublica, a proppe, a shore, a poste, or other like thynge, to sustayne or kepe a thynge vp, pyle dryuen into the ground for buyldyng or other lyke purpose. Sublicius, a brydge at Rome. Subligaculum, a nether coyfe or breche. Subligar, garis, idem. Subligo, gare, to vnderbynde. Sublime, on hygh. Sublimis, me, hygh, that which is aboue vs. Sublimitas, heyght. Sublimiter, hyghly, on heyght. Sublimo, mare, to sette on hygh. Sublino, liniui, nire, to annoynte or touche, to paynte or stayne. Os sublinire, to deceyue. Sublinitio, the fyrst colour that is layd or dyed. also staynynge with colours. Sublitio, onis, the grounde colour, wheron the perfyte colour is layde, in clothe dyed, it is callyd grasynge. Subluceo, cere, to shyne somewhat, or to gyue a lyttell lyght. Sublucidè, somewhat lyght. Sublucidus, da, dum, idem. Subluco, care, to vndershreade boughes, that the lyght may come vnder the tree. Sublucanum tempus, the sprynge of day. Subluere, to vnderwasshe, as water, whyche runneth lowe vnder a banke or hille, and wa∣sheth the foote thereof. Also to wasshe some∣what cleane. Sublustris, tre, that hath some lyght. Subluuies, a dysease of cattelle, whiche is be∣twyxte the cleys of their feete. Sub manu habere, to haue at hande. Sub manu esse, to be at hande or redy. Sub manu, after hande, forthewith. Sub manus, easily, handsomly. Bono animo es, negotium omne iam succedit sub manus Be of good chere, all the matter is come to passe handsomely. Lepidè hoc succedit sub∣manus negotium, This matter cometh well and easily to passe. Sub merum, almoste pure. Subminia, a womās garmēt, I suppose a kirtel. Subministro, are, to do seruice vnder oone, to gyue or delyuer any thynge that is asked for. Subministrator, he that serueth vnder an other man, he that delyuereth any thynge that is callyd for. Submissim, & submissè, softely, proprely in spe∣kynge. also humbly. Submissus,a, um, humble. Submitto, tere, to sende priuyly or by stealth. Submittere, to sende or brynge in the meane tyme. Also to putte or set vnder proprely, as a calfe, a lambe, or a fole, is sette vnder the damme to sucke. Submittere se, to humble hym selfe. Submittere capillum, to let heare to growe. Pretium sdbmittere, to inhaunce theprice. Submoneo, nére, to warne one priuyly. Submordeo, dere, to byte softely, or priuily. Submoueo, uere, to remoue or carye a thynge far of also to dryue out of a place also to dy∣scharge a man of his offyce. Subnecto, tere, to bynde to, or hange to. alsoo to subscribe. Subnego, gare, to denye somewhat. Subneruo, are, to cut synewes. Subnexio, a byndynge or hangynge to. Subniger, gra, grum, somewhat blacke. Subnitor, nixus, niti, to leane agaynst a thynge, to be sustayned vp. Subnodo, are, to make a knot vnder a thynge. Subnoto, tare, to note or marke. Subo, are to brymme as a boore doth whan he getteth pygges. Suboffendo, dere, to offende sommewhat, or a lyttell. Suboleo, lère, to sauour or smell a lyttell. Subopto, tare, to desyre a lyttell. Subordior, dire, to begynne. Suborno, nare, to prayse or honour. alsoo to suborne or brynge in a false wytnesse or mes∣sanger, or fayne one persone for an nother, to deceyue with. Suborior, riris, riri, to begyn to sprynge or arise as the sun dothe, to prayse or honour oone with wordes also to deceyue priuily. Suppedito, tare, to be sufficient to serue, not to lacke any thynge, to brynge sufficiently. Suppudeo, dere, to be somewhat ashamed. Subremigo, are, to rowe vnder. Subrepo, psi, pere, to steale awaye or rounne a∣way pryuily. Subrepere animo, to enter sodaynly or priuy¦ly into the mynde. Subreptio, thefte, or a false suggestion. Subreptitiae literae, letters stollen out by a fals suggestyon. Subreptitius, a, um, stollen, or falsely come by. Subrideo, risi, dêre,, to smyle or laugh priuyly. Subripeo, to steale, to take away secretely. som¦tyme to lyfte vp hastily. Subrisio, & subrisus, a smylynge. Subrogo, gare, to substitute or subrogate, to make a deputie in an offyce, to put in an no∣ther mans roume. Subrufus, a, ū, & subrubeus, a, ū somwhat red. Subrumi, lambes that do sucke. Subrumor, ari, to be suckeled, or put to suck, as calues, lambes. &c.
Subruo, ere, to enter with force, or priuyly by lyttell and lyttell also to dygge the erthe. Subsano, are, to skorne or mocke. Subsannatio, a mocke with bendynge the bro∣wes, and snuffynge vp of the nose. Subsannator, to mocker. Subsarcinis, with trusses or burdeyns. Subscribo, scripsi, scribere, to wryte vnder, to subscrybe, to fauour a mattier, to assygne a cause why, to affyrme. Subscriptores, they whyche in causes iudicial do fauour the part of the accuser or plaintif. Subscudes, the vtter table, whervnto other ta∣bles are fastned. Subsco, care, to cutte vnder or cut a lyttell. Subsellia, benches, whiche were vnder hygher seates, they were also benches, on the whiche Iudges dyd sytte. Subsentio, sensi, sentire, to perceyue somewhat. Subsequor, queris, sequi, to folowe forthwith. Subsero, serere, to sowe or set vnder a thyng. Subseruio, uire, to serue, to accorde, or agree. Subsessae, scoutwatches, wherby hoostes of men are intrapped as they passe. Subsideo, sedi, subsedêre, to sytte vnder, to lay in awaye for one. Subsidium, ayde in an extreme poynt. Subsido, dere, to falle downe, to auale. Subsigno, nare, to subscribe or write vnder. Subsilio, liui, lire, & subsulto, sultare, to leape a lyttell. Subsilles, lyttell plates belongynge to sacrifice. Subsimus, he that hath a camoyse nose. Subsipere, to sauour somewhat. Subsisiuum, that whiche foloweth or is next. Subsisto, stiti, sistere, to resyste, to abyde, to be by hym selfe. Subsolanus, the easte wynd. Subsono, are, to sowne a lyttell, to make a lyt∣tell noyse. Subsortitio, a deputation, whan one maketh an nother his deputie. Subsortitus, a substitute. Substantia, substance, alsoo matter. sometyme goodes, which is also cōmonly called substāce Substerno, straui, sternere, to strawe or lay vn∣der any thynge, as russhes, carpettes, and flowres. Substillum, a ryme or fallynge myste, or a drop∣pynge before and after rayne, it is also a syk∣nes, whan a man may not pysse well. Substituo, tui, tuere, to substytute in the place of an nother. Substo, stiti, are, to sustayn or abyde constantly. Substratus, a, um, strawed vnder, or layd vnder. Substresto, pere, to make a lyttell noyse. Substringo, xi, gere, to shrynke vndernethe. Substruo, truere, to vnderpynne a house Substructio, vnderpynnyng or groundynge of a howse. Substupeo, & substupesco, scere, to be somme∣what dysmayde. Substupidus, somewhat dysmayde or abashed. Subsulto, tare, to ioumpe. Subsultim, by iumpes. Subsuo, suere, to sowe vndernethe. Subsum, subesse, to be vnder, or within. Subtal, the holownes of the fote. also the palme of the hande. Subtegmen, minis, the threede, whych in wea∣uynge is callyd the woufe. Subtegulanea, places vnder the eueis of houses Subtendo, tendere, to pourpose or diuyse any thynge, to deceyue an other manne, or to laye any thynge in a mannes waye for the same purpose. Subtento, tare, to espye. Subtepeo, pere, to be somewhat warme. Subtepidus, da, dum, somewhat warme. Subter, vnder. Subterraneus, nea, neum, that whyche is vn∣der the grounde. Subtercludo, dere, to shutte vnder. Subterduco, cere, to withdraw, to scape away. Subterfluo, xi, fluere, to rounne or flowe vnder a thynge, as water vnder a brydge. Subterfugio, gere, to escape. Subtergredior, di, to go vndernethe. Subtero, riui, terere, to broyse, or weare. Subticeo, cui, cére, to answere nothyng to that whyche is spoken. Subticesco, scere, idem. Subtondeo, dere, to clyppe vnder. Subtraho, xi, trahere, to take away, to steale. Subtrahere se, to drawe vnto quyetnes. Subtrahere famae, to withdraw from bruite. Subtrahere inuidiae, to eschewe enuy. Subtristis, ste, somewhat heuy or sory. Subturpis, pe, somewhat foule, in part foule or dyshoneste, the matter or thynge dyshoneste, couered with cleane wordes. Subucula, a shyrte also a cake. Subueho, uexi, uehere, to beare. Subuecto, tare, to beare or cary often. Subuenio, ueni, uenire, to helpe. Subuerbusta, meate burned on the spytte. Subuerto, tere, to tourne vp so downe. alsoo to distroy, to subuert. Subuerso, sare, to subuerte often. Subueteribus, was a place in Rome. Subula, an awlle, that cordyners doo vse for a bodkynne. Subulcus, a swyneherde. Subulo, an harte hauynge hornes without ry∣nes, called as I suppose, a spyttarde. Subuolo, lare, to flee away. Suburbanum, a manour or farme without the walles of a citie.
Suburbia, the suburbes of a citie or towne. Suburrana regio, the strete in Rome where the brothell houses were. Subuulturius, a, um, that whyche apprehendeth men lyke as rauynes do carrayne. Succedaneus, a, um, that whyche succedeth. Succedo, cessi, cedere, to succede. Muris succedere, to approch vnto the walles Succedere, to enter. Et nostris succede pe∣natibus hospes, And enter thou my frende into my house. Also to goo vnder a thyng. al∣so to spede welle, to be at a good poynte. Hac non, successit, alia aggrediamur uia, This waye it speedeth not, lette vs goo to an nother way. Succendo, dere, to inflame, to bourne. Succenseo, ui, ere, to be angry for a good cause. Succento, tonis, was a certayne garment, whi∣che onely hoores dyd weare. Succento, tare, to synge a base. Succentor, toris, he that syngeth a base. Succenturiatus, he that made vp the number of the bende of men that lacked. Succenturio, are, to make vp the numbre of a hundred souldyours, or of that companye, that was callyd Centuria. Succerda, swynes dunge. Succemo, creui, cernere, to raunge meale in a sieue. Successio, successyon. Successor, soris, a successour. Successorē dare, to depose a mā of his office. Successus, a, um, that whiche prosperousely hap¦peneth, or spedeth well. Successus, us, successe, be it good or yll. Succida, woulle vnwashed. Succidaneae hostiae, beastes for sacrifice, why∣che were kylled in the seconde place, or nexte to the fyrste. Succidaneus, a, um, that whyche foloweth the fyrste. Succidia, a pyece or flyche of bakon salted. al∣so larde. Succido, cidi, cidere, to felle or cutte downe, also to falle vnder. Succiduus, a, um, that whyche dothe succede or folowe. also lowe, redy to fall downe. Succidus, da, dum, moyst, or full of iuyse. Succingo, xi, gere, to gyrde. Also to enuyronne or compasse. Frustra se terrore succinxerit, qui septus charitate non fuerit, armis. n. ar∣ma irritantur, In vayne shall he enuyron him¦selfe with terriblenesse, whiche is not wallyd about with the loue of his cuntrey. For with vyolence, vyolence is styred. Succingulum, a swordegyrdell. Succino, cinere, to make a softe noyse, to synge a base or tenour. Succincta oratio, a compendyouse or shorte Oracyon. Succinctè, compendiousely. Succinctorium, a short iackette or ierkyn. Succinctus, ta, tum, gyrte. Succinum, aumbre, wherof some beade stones are made. Succinus, na, num, of aumbre. Succisiuum tempus, tyme of leysure, vacante from busynesse. Succlamo, are, to crye softely. Succollo, are, to put vnder the necke or shoul∣ders, to beare a thynge. Succortrila, a smalle voyce and a shrylle. Succresco, scere, to growe vnder, or lowe, or a lyttell and lyttell. Succubo, bare, to lye vnder. Succubonium, idem quod succuba, she that ly∣eth vnder. Succubi, dyuelles, whiche in the fourme of wo∣men, do company with men. Succulentus, ta, tum, full of iuyse. Succiplenus, idem. Succumbo, cubui, cumbere, to be subdued, to be ioyned to, to falle downe vnder an heuye burdeyne, to fayle for feblenes. Succurro, ere, to helpe, to come to remembrance Suctus, tus, suckynge. Succus, cus, cui, the suckynge of mylke. Succus, iuyce or humour, whiche the bodye re∣ceyueth of meate and drynke. also generallye all maner of iuyse. Succussarius, & succussor, a trottynge horse. Succuso, nis, idem. Succussatio, succussura, & succussatura, the trot¦tynge or shakynge of a horse. Succusso, are, to shake as a horse dothe whan he trotteth also a trotte. Succutio, cussi, tere, to shake a thynge. Succula, a sowe pygge, alsoo a certayne inner garment. also a certayne company of sterres, callyd the .vii sterres, whiche doo appere the xii. calendes of Iune, and be callyd Succulae & Hiades. Sudarium, a napkynne. Sudes, a certayne speare, whyche is burned at the ende. Sudo, dare, to sweate, to labour soore, to haue moche to do. Sudor, doris, sweate. Sudum, the clere parte of the fyrmamente be∣twene cloudes. Also the clere fyrmament with out cloudes. Suefacio, suefio, fieri, to be wonte. Suere aliquid capiti, to gette a shrewde tourne. Metuo lenonem, ne quid suo suat capiti, I am aferde of the bawde, lest he get a shrewde tourne, Suesco, sueui, suescere, to be wonte. Sueui, a people in hygh Germany.
Sueuia, the chiefe countrey of Germany in fer∣tilitie holsomnes and beautyfull personages, it hath on the east Bauiere, on the west Hal∣sate, and the ryuer of Rhene, on the south the mountaynes of Alpes: on the north Franke∣lande. It was sometyme called Alemania, wherof all Germany was callyd Almayn, in Duche it is nowe callyd Swaue. Suffarcinatus, ta, tum, laded, trussed. Suffarcino, nare, to laade or bourdeyne, to trusse vp. Suffarraneus, he that caryeth meale or flowre to any place to selle in lyttell quantitie. Suffectus, is he, whiche an offycer beyng dead, or remoued, is sette in his place. Suffes, was amonge the Carthaginenses, as the Consule was at Rome. Suffibulum, was an artyre, whyche the nunnes of Vesta dydde weare on theyr heades, whan they dyd sacrifyce. Suffero, sufferre, to sustayne, to putte vnder, to suffer. Sufficio, feci, ficere, to suffyse, to indure, to my∣nyster, to substitute, to stayne. Sufficit, it suffyseth. Suffimentum, perfume, or fumigation. Suffio, fiui, fire, to perfume. Suffiscus, the codde of a ramme, whyche was made for a purse to conteyne money. Suffitio, & suffitus, tus a perfume or fumigatiō Suffitor, toris, he that bloweth the fyre. Suffitus, ta, tum, perfumed. Sufflamen, that wherwith a whele is retayned or stopped of his course. Sufflatio, a blowynge. Sufflator, oris, he that bloweth. Sufflatus, ta, tum, blowen. Sufflo, are, to blowe. Suffocatio, a stranglynge. Suffocator, he that strangleth. Suffoco, care, to stoppe the breath, to strangle. Suffodio, fossi, dere, to dygge vnder. Suffossus equus, a stumblynge horse. Suffragatio, a declaration of a consent or fauor. Suffragator, toris, a supporter or maynteyner. Suffragium, the voyce of people assemblyd in gyuing their consent. also helpe or succour, al∣so a wrecke in the sea. Suffragines, the ioyntes of the hynder legge of a beaste, callyd the howx, sometyme it dothe sygnifie the pasternes, they be also the yonge sprynges of vynes. Suffraginosi equi, horses, whych haue the pey∣nes or scratches. Suffragor, garis, gari, to beare fauour. Suffrutex, ticis, that thynge whyche groweth, hauynge the forme meane betwene an herbe, and that whiche is Frutex. Suffulcio, cij, cire, to proppe vp. Suffulcior, cire, to be propped vp or vnderset. Suffundatum, vnderlayde. Suffundo, dere, to cast downe, or powre lykour on a thynge, to caste abrode. Suffundo, dare, to buylde or sette vppon a foundation. Suffuror, rari, to steale pryuyly. Suffusio, a webbe in the eye. Suffusus, a, um, sprynkled, indewed. Suggero, gessi, gerere, to mynyster or gyue a thynge, to sende forthe thynges, whereof are plenty. Suggerere sumptus, to allowe expenses. Suggestus, uel suggestum, a pulpytte or hyghe place, out of the whiche oratours or capytai∣nes made propositions vnto the people. Suggrundia, the euys of a howse, whyche de∣sendeth the walles from rayne. Suggrundaria, buryals of yonge infantes. Suggrundatio, the eueysynge of a house. Suggillo, lare, to make a blacke spotte in the skynne with beatynge. It is alsoo to skorne, to detracte, or infame, to reproue, to con∣dempne. Suggillatio, is a marke in the vysage, blacke or blewe, made by somme stroke: a mocke, a detraction, an infamation behynde oone, a condemnation. Suggillatus, spotted, mocked, detracted, infa∣med, condemned. Sugo, & sugeo, suxi, sugere, to souke. Suinus, a, um, & suillus, a, um, of a sowe. Sulcatim, in furrowes. Sulco, care, to falowe. Sulcus, cus, a furrowe. Serere tertio quarto quinto sulco, To sow in the thyrd, the fourth the fyfthe falowe. Sommetyme it is put for a dyche. Alsoo any maner of cuttynge of the earthe. proprely it sygnifyeth any thyng that is longe and sharpe edged. Bisulum animal, A beaste that hath the feete clouen with two talons. Sulla, was a cruell tyrant of the Romanyns cal∣lyd also Sylla. Sulmo, monis, a towne in the countrey of Pe∣ligna, where Ouidius the poete was borne. Sulmonensis, a man or woman of the citie of Sulmo. Sulphuraria, a place where brymstone is boyled Sulphur, phuris, brymstone. Sulphureus, ea, eum, of brymstone. Sulphuratus, ta, tum, dressed with brymstone. Sultanus, a sowdane, whiche was the name of a kynge of Egypte and Siria. Sumach, in the Arabyke tungue is that which Dioscorides calleth Rhus. it is alsoo callyd Ros syriacus. Manardus lib. i. epist. 4. Sumanus, he that alway taketh. Sum, I am, es, thou art, est, he is.
Sū Amphytrionis, I am Amphitriōs seruāt Sunt mihi bis septē praestanti corpore nym∣phae, I haue fouretene maydens of excellent beaultie. Sum in mora illi, I make hym to tary. Sum in moetu, I am aferde. Sum in noxia, I am put in the blame. Sum, olde wryters vsed for eum, hym. Sit uestra benignitas ad audiendum? Plea∣seth you to here? Sunt septem dies, it is seuen dayes agone. Sumanalia, a great cake made lyke a whele, su∣che as is made at bridales & church goinges. Sumen, minis, is made of the pappes of a sow, cut from her the daye after that she hath va∣rowed, and powdred with salt. Sumo, sumpsi, sumere, to take vppon oone, to take generally, to hyre, to consume, to borow. also to spende or bestowe on one. Quod enim peruentum, quo sumpta na∣uis est, non domini nauis est, sed nauiganti∣um, Vntylle they comme to the place why∣ther the shyppe was hyred, the shyppe is not the owners but theyrs, whyche are pas∣sagers. In mala uxore at{que} inimico, si quid sumas, sumptus est, On a shrewd wyfe, and an enne∣mye, what so euer thou bestowest, is wast. Sumere aquamè puteo, to drawe water out of the welle. Sumere confidentiā, to trust, to take corage. Sumere mutuum, to borowe. Sumere obsequium animo, to reioyce, to take comfort. Sumere operam frustra, to labour in vayne. Sumere optionem, to chuse. Sumere personam, to counterfayt an other. Sumere supplicium, to punyshe. Summa, is a collection of thynges or wordes. also the princypall poynt of a matter, the con∣clusyon of a thynge. Summa aetas, the later age. Sūmates, the chief persons of a realme or citie. Summatim, & summatè, compendiousely by euerye parte of the matter, summarily. Ad summum duo, two at the moste. Summè, excellently, chyefly. Summenianae uxores, hores kepte in the stede of wyues. Summenium, a place where baudry was kepte without the walles of a towne. Summissi, murmurers. Summissim, & summisse, softly, not lowde. Summissus, a, um, base, lowe. Summitas, heyght, or hyghenes. Summitudo, dinis, the heyght of a thynge. Summitto, misi, mittere, to conuey in priuyly, also to suffre to growe. Summittere barbam, to let the bearde grow, to let to departe. Summoenius, nia, nium, that whyche is vnder the walles. Summo, are, to make hyghest. Summus, a, um, hyghest, extreme, greattest, or very commendable, excellent. Summum, at the moste. Summo iure agere, to take the rygour or ex∣tremitie of the lawe in suite. Summum fastigium imponere, to fynyshe a thyng perfitly, to bring a matter to a poynt, Summam manum addere, idem significat. Sumptifacio, cere, to spende. Sumpti, for sumptus, plurali numero. Sumptuarius, a, um, that whiche doth pertayn to expenses. Sumptuariae leges, lawes made for restray∣nyng of outragious expences. Sumptuosè, sumptuousely, chargeably. Sumptuosus, a, um, sumptuouse. Sumptus, ta, tum, taken, or chosen. Sumptus, tus, expense. Sunium, a promontory or elbowe of the coun∣trey of Attica. Suo, sui, suere, to sowe, to ioyne or make faste togyther. Suopte ingenio, of his owne propre wytte. Sup, for super, aboue. Supellectilis, le, & supellex, householde stuffe, all thynges mouable within the house. Supellecticarius, a bondeman or slaue, whiche is accompted for chatell. Super, & supra, vppon, aboue. Super Garamantas & Indos proferet impe¦rium, He shall aduaunce his empyre beyonde the Garamantians and Indians. Super coenam, at supper. Super haec, moreouer. Super Euclionis filiā, of Euclions doughter. Super Priamo, super Hectore, of Priamus, of Hector. Hac super te scribā ad te Rhegio, Of that matter I write vnto you frō Regiū. Super, for propter. Nec super ipse sua moli∣tur laude laborem, Nor he taketh the peyne for his prayse. Super, for ualdè. His accensa super, with those wordes she beyng kendlyd or styred. Superaddo, dere, to putte or adde to. Superbè, prowdely. Superbiter, idem. Superbia, pryde. Superbio, ire, to be prowde. Superbiloquens, & superbiloquus, he that spe∣keth proudely, or hautely. Superbiloquentia, proude or haute wordes. Superbos, old writers vsed for mortuos, dead, bycause of the pompe, whyche was at the buryenge. Faciam ego hodie te superbum, nisi hinc abis, I wyll kyll the, yf thou get the not hense.
Superbus, proude, somtyme magnifyke or no∣ble, also hyghe, ornate, or garnysshed, ryche, wycked. Superbum bellum, vniust or vnhappy warre. Supercido, dere, to falle on. Superciliosus, sowre in countenaunce. Supercilium, the ouerbrowe. sometyme it syg∣nifyeth pryde, grauitie. It is also the haunce, whyche is ouer the doore. Supercilium attollere, to be stately or proude. Supercilium ponere, to laye aparte pryde or stately countenaunce. Supercresco, scere, to ouergrowe. Supercubo, bare, to lye ouer. Superduco, cere, to put or lay on. Superedo, dere, to eate after a thynge. Superessit, for supererit, shall lyue, or be left on lyue. Superest, he lyueth, or is on lyue. Superest, there is plenty or more thā inough. Alijs quia defit, quod amant, aegre est, tibi quia superest, dolet, Some bycause they lack the thynge that they loue, be dyscontent, and thou arte soory that thou haste more thanne thou nedest. Superesse, to be the reste or resydue. Porro au∣sculta quod superest fallatiae, But yet heare what was the resydewe of that crafte or des∣ceyte. To defende or pleade for one. Cuncta∣ri se, ne si superesset, eriperet legibus reum, He wolde tary, leste yf he came and spake for hym, he shulde delyuer an offender. Superexto, tare, to remayne ouer. Superficiarius, he that hath a house of his own buylded on an other mans ground, and pay∣eth therfore a quyte rent. Superficiariae aedes, howses buylded on the lande of an nother man than buylded them. Superficies, the ouermost part of any thyng. Superfoetatio, one conception of a chylde after an nother. Superfluo, fluxi, fluere, to abounde, or be su∣perfluouse. Superfluè, superfluousely. Superfluo, idem. Superfluus, a, um, superfluous. Superforaneus, a, um, idem. Superfundo, dere, to powre vppon. Supergredior, gredi, to go aboue. Supera, for supra. Superiacio, ieci, iacere, to caste on, or lay on. Superijcio, ieci, ijcere, to caste vppon, to laye vppon. Superi, they whyche ben in heauen. Superincido, dere, to falle on. Superior, hygher. Superior aetas, the tyme or age passed. Superlachrimo, to wepe or droppe vpon. Supermeo, are, to go ouer, or slyppe ouer. Supernato, natare, to swymme ouer. Supernati, they whych haue the hynder part of the thyghes next the buttockes cut away. Supernè, a hygh, aboue. Supernia, the inward parte & hindermost part of the thyghes next the buttockes cut of. Supernus, na, num, highe or ouer. Superna re∣gio, the hygh countrey. Supernumerarius, that which is in surplusage aboue the true number. Supero, rare, to go ouer. Also to vanquyshe or ouercome. also to ouerlyue. sometyme to kyll. Quod superat, whiche is more, or is lefte in a surplusage. Superpondium, ouerweyght, that whyche is added to the iust weyght. Supersedeo, dêre, to omyt or leue to do a thing Supersedeas hoc labore itineris, take not the peyne to come nowe, or forbeare the peyn takyng in this iourney. Supersede istis rebus, let these thynges alone Supersede istis uerbis, let these wordis passe, holde thy tungue. Supersedi scribere, I forbare to wryte, I left vnwrytten. Superstes, stitis, he that ouerlyueth or remay∣neth aliue after that other be dead, also aliue sometyme presente. Olde wryters callyd Su∣perstites, wytnesses. Superstes, he that is saufe. Deos quaeso, ut sis superstes, I besech god saue you, lōg mought you lyue. also presente. Superstitem utrun{que} monui, ne inuisi abeant, I aduysed theym bothe, that they shoulde not departe with di∣spleasure. Superstitio, a superfluous or vayne relygion or deuotion, an honouring of that which ought not to be honoured, a vayn reuerence or feare toward that thynge, wherin is no efficacye or power, but by the illusyon of the dyuell, as dyuination by the crieng or flyeng of byrdes, obseruation of tymes, and dreames, and o∣ther lyke vanities. Superstitiosi, they whiche be tymorous with∣out cause, fearynge that God is dyspleased, where there is none offence done. They were at the fyrst soo callyd, bycause they contynu∣ally prayed and offered to the goddis, to pre∣serue theyr chylderne, that they mought ouer lyue them. Fynally euery vndyscrete or vnre∣sonable deuocion or religion, maye be callyd superstytion. Superstito, stitare, to make hoole or recouer from deathe. Supersto, stare, to stande vppon. Superstruo, struxi, struere, to buylde on. Supersum, superesse, to abounde, to remayne, vanquyshe, to be superfluous, to indure. Superuacaneus, a, um, superfluous. Superuacuus, a, um, not necessary. Superuagnea auis, was of the dyuynoures or
southsayers called that byrde, whiche cryed from the toppe of any thynge. Superuenio, nire, to come vnloked for, to come vpon or after an other thynge. Superuiuo, uixi, uiuere, to recouer from peryll of deathe, or whan a man semeth to be dead. Superus, a, um, the hyghest or ouermoste. Superum mare, the sea, which is called Ma∣re Hadriaticum, wherin standeth the citie of Venyce. Supinus, na, num, vpright, the bealy vpward sometyme it signifieth on an hyll or hyghe place▪ also ydell. Supina aure audire, to gyue a dull eare. Suppar, almoste euen. Supparasitor, taris, tari, to folowe or flater for a mannes dyner. Supparium, a clothe or curtayne hanged vppe where enterludes were playde. Supparus, uel supparum, a smocke. it is also a topsayle of a shyppe. Suppedaneum, a fote stole. Suppedito, tare, to subdue, to minister suffici∣ently, also to oppresse to endure. Ac stomachonon queo labori suppeditare, My stomake wyll not lette me indure the la∣boure. Also to furnyshe expenses, to gyue as moche as a man wolde haue. Nam si illi per¦gam, suppeditare sumptibus Menedeme, mihi illaec uero ad rastros res redit, Surely Menedemus, if I wolde gyue hym as moche as he wolde spende, that thynge wolde bring me to the poynte to rake for my lyuynge. Suppeditare, to subdue or treade vnder. Nunc uideo, in iudicio mecum contendere non uis, ubi suppeditari turpissimum, sup∣perare pulcherrimum est, Nowe I perceiue thou wylte not contende with me before iud∣ges, where it were a great shame to be sub∣dued, and verye moche honestie to haue the better. Suppetiae, & suppetias, ayde or succours. Suppetias ire, to go to the succour or ayde of one. Suppetias uenire, to come to succour. Suppetias occurrit, he came forthwith to the succours. Suppeto, tij, tere, to aske priuily or craftely. Suppetit, it is in a redynesse. Suppetior, ari, to succour or ayde. Suppetunt dictis, data, aut facta. Non sup∣petunt dictis data, He perfourmeth not that that he promysed. Vtinam quae dicis dictis fa¦cta suppetant, wold god thou woldest do as thou sayest, or wold god thy dedes did agree with thy wordes. Suppetit lucrum, there is gayne sufficiente. Res ita suppetit, the matter so requireth. Suppetias mihi, Brynge to me succoures, ayde me. Suppetias adueni, come and helpe me. Suppetias ferre, to ayde or succour. Suppilo, are, to steale vnderhande or craftely. Supplanto, tare, to put vnder the fote, to ouer throwe, to supplante or deceyue, in preuen∣tynge one to his hynderance or dammage, to vnderplante or set a tree or vyne. Supplaudo, si, dere, to reioyse priuily. Supplementum, that whiche supplieth or ma∣keth vp that whiche lacketh in quantitye or number. Suppleo, plere, to make vp that whiche lac∣keth, to make euyn. Supplex, plicis, he that desyreth any thynge knelynge or prostrate. Supplicatio, a prayer, a requeste. Supplicassis pro supplicaueris. Supplicans, tis, he that desyreth a thynge. Suppliciter, humbly knelynge. Supplicium, peyne, tourment, or erecution of deathe. sometime supplicia, are prayers. Supplitia pendere, to be put to execution. Supplico, care, to beseche humbly. Supplimentum, a makynge vp of a number, whiche lacketh or is minished. Supplodo, si, dere, to stampe or make noyse with the fete. also to reiecte or cast away. Supplosio, a stampynge or noyse made with the feete. Suppono, sui, nere, to put vnder, to put into the place of an other, to sette a false or fayned thynge in the place of that whiche is the ve∣ry true thynge. Supportare, to brynge or cary priuily. Suppositio, the puttynge or settynge of a fay∣ned or false thynge in the place of the thynge selfe, as one chylde for an other. Suppostrix, she that committeth that falsehod. Suppositus partus, whan the chylde of one wo¦manne is laide with an other woman, which is not the very mother, as thoughe she hadde borne it. Suppraedes, countersuerties, they whiche are bounden to the sureties, to saue thē harmles Suppressus, a, um, drowned, beaten vnder. Victi Persi in naues confugerunt, ex quibus multae suppressae, multae captae. The Persi∣ans fledde vnto theyr shyppes, whereof ma∣ny were drowned, and many taken. Also hyd or conceled. Supprimo, pressi, primere, to kepe downe, to kepe secrete, to kepe in silence. Supprimere iter, to staye or omyt a iourney. Suppromo, psi, mere, to drawe out drynke. Suppromus, a butlar. Bono cella suppromo credita, The seller or buttrie was commyt∣ted to a good butlar. Suppudet, I am halfe ashamed, thou arte half
ashamed, or he is halfe ashamed. Suppurantia, & suppuratio, matterynge of a soore. Suppuratorius, a, um, that whiche perteyneth to impostumes, or to make a sore to matter. Suppuro, rare, to matter or be an impostume Suppuratio, an impostume or sore that hathe matter. Supra, aboue, or ouer. Supra {quam}, for supra id quod. Supremè, hyghest of all, or aboue all. Supremus, a, um, the hyghest or greatteste of all other. Supus, olde wryters vsed for supinus. Sura, the caufe of the legge. sometyme the hole shanke or legge frome the kne downe. Surculaceus, & surcularis, re, that which brin¦geth forth yonge settes or sprynges of trces. Surculus, a yonge set or slyppe, a nursegarden, also a slyp of a trec or yonge graffe. Surcus, a stake. Surculosus, a, um, full of slyppes. Surdaster, he that is somewhae deafe and can not here. Surdé, deafely. Surdeo, dui, dêre, to be deafe. Surdesco, scere, to waxe deafe or be deafe. Surditas, deafenesse. Surdo, dare, to make deafe. Surdus, da, dum, deafe, also that which hath no sauour. Surrentum, a towne in Campania. Surrentinus, na, num, of that towne. Surregit, olde writers vsed for surgit, whereof commeth surrectio, a rysynge. Surrepo, pere, to crepe vnder. Surreptitius, a, um, that whiche is doone by stelthe that none other man knoweth it. Surgo, surrexi, surgere, to rise, also to growe or sprynge. Surrigo, xi, gere, to lyfte vp. Surrigere aures, to laye his eare to a thynge to harken. Surripio, pui, pere, to steale or take away pri∣uilie, also to lift vp on hye, to preuente. Surripere operam, Clanculum abij a legio∣ne, operam hanc surripui tibi, I departed pri¦uyly from the hoste, this tyme haue I borow¦ed to do you pleasure. Surripere se, to stele his away. Vt surripuisti¦te mihi dudum de foro? O, howe dyddeste thou steale awaye from me late out of the market? Surpiculus, a basket or hamper. Surrogo, gare, to substitute, or put in an no∣ther mannes place. Surrogatio, a substitution. Sursum, aboue. Sursum uersum, vpwarde. Sursum deorsum, vp and downe. Sus, for sursum. Suscio, scire, for scio, scire, to knowe. Suscipio, pere, to take. Suscipere liberos, to get children on a womā Suscipere fidem, to promyse. Quas partes im¦pleturum te, secundum susceptam fidem confido, Whiche parte I truste thou wylte perfourme, accordynge to the promise that thou madest. Consilium suscipere, to enterprise. Poenam dignam sceleri suscipere, to be pu∣nished accordinge to his merites, Simultates suscipere, to hate one priuilie. Vota suscipere, to make a vowe. Suscito, tare, to awake one out of his slepe, to call one to his warke. Sus, suis, a sowe. Sus Mineruam, a prouerbe applyed vnto hym, whiche presumeth to teache or correcte one, of whom he rather oughte to be taught or corrected. Suillus, la, lum, of a sowe. Sus{que} de{que} fero, & sus{que} de{que} habeo, I force not I recke not, I care not. Susae, arum, a great citie in Persia. Suscitabulum, a prouocation or sterynge. Suscito, tare, to stirre or prouoke. Suspecto, tare, to beholde aboue, sometyme to se benethe, or to loke downe. Suspendeo, dere, to be hanged ouer or an hye. also to appere a lyttell. Suspendiosus, he that is hanged. Suspensus, he that douteth to speake or do. Suspensus, a, um, hanged vp. Suspensa manu, timerously, doubtefully. Suspenso gradu, Haec ubi ego audiui, ad fo∣res, suspēso gradu, placidè ire perrexi, whan I harde those wordes, I wente to the doore fayre and softely. Suspendium, hangynge. Suspensio idem. Suspendo, dere, to hange vp, to be doubteful or sorowefull. Suspensus animo, hauynge doubte, or beinge adrad. Suspicio, spexi, spicere, to loke vp, also to ho∣nour, to answere. Suspicans, he that hath suspicion, suspectinge. Suspicor, cari, to haue suspicion, to suspec, al¦so to suppose. Suspectus, ta, tum, suspected. Suspicio, onis, suspicion. Suspiciosus, suspeciouse. Suspiratus, tus, ayghe. Suspirium, idem. Suspiriosus, shorte wynded, or he whiche fet∣cheth his brethe paynefully. Suspiro, are, to sighe. also to desyre feruently. Sussilio, lire, for subfilio. Sustendere insidias, to lay watche. Sustentaculum, that whiche susteyneth or
beareth vp a thynge. Sustento, tare, to susteyne or beare vp, to ayde or helpe. Sustineo, nui, nere, to holde vppe, to suffer, to forbeare, to fede, to refrayne. Sustollo, tuli, tollere, to lyfte vp. Sustollere animos, to be proude, or to haue an hyghe courage. Sustollere aes alienum, to paye dettes. Sustollere puerum, to bringe vp a chylde. Sustulit, is properly of the father, as peperir, is of the mother. Sustuli, I haue had, I haue brought vppe, I haue lyfte vp. Susurrario, a whysterynge. Susurro, are, to whyster. Susurro, ronis, a whysterer. also he which with false and secrete report maketh dissention be¦twene men. Susurrus, & susurrium, a whysterynge, or softe murmuringe, or such noyse as trees do make with the wynde, or a ryuer whan it runneth, or byrdes whan they chatter. Sutatis, a seamster or shepster. Sutela, a subtiltie or crafty warkynge. Suterna, shewemakers crafte. Sutilis, le, that whiche is sowen. Sutor, toris, a showemaker. Sutorius, a, um, perteynyng to a shoemaker. Sutorium atramentum, soutars bleche. Sutrina, a showemakers shoppe. Sutura, a seame. Suturnium, an ewer or lauour. Suum, his owne, his proper goodes. Suus, a, um, his or hers. But howe this word shall be moste aptely and conuenientely vsed, rede Valla or Calepines vocabularie. For it is more abundantly and properly declared of them, than can be expressed in englyshe. ¶S ANTE Y. SYADES, sterres called also Hyades, seuen in number. Syagros, a wylde bore. Sybaris, a citie in Grecia. Sybarita, a man of that citie. Sybaritica mensa, a prouerbe applyed to feastes and bankettes, whiche do excede in delycatenesse. Sybaritici libelli, wanton bokes. Sybaritici ludi, plays whiche ar wanton and rostely. Sybariticum carmen, a verse or poeme con∣teynynge wanton matter. Syboti, people in the north parte of the worlde Sycaminus, a mulbery tree. Sychaeus, a mannes name. Sycion, he that fyrste founde garlandes. Sycomorus, a great tree lyke a fyg tree, which hath abundaunce of mylke, whose fruite co∣meth not out of the toppes of the bowghes, as fygges do, but oute of the same boughes, and swete lyke to a wylde fygge: the graynes therof be lesse than the graynes of fygges, & they be neuer rype, excepte they be scraped with an instrument of yron. Sycophanta, he that falsely accuseth an inno∣cent. also a bearer of tales, or a complayner. Sycophantia, a false accusation, deceyte. Sycophantias struere, to deuyse, or inuent falsehode. Sycophantor, tari, idem. Sycophantisso, are, idem. Sycophantiose, deceytefully by crafte. Sycon, olde writers called a fygge. Sycosis, a disease in the fundement, which ma¦keth a warte lyke to a fygge. Sycosis, where within the eye lydde groweth a lyttell warte or other lyke thynge. Sydera, the plurell number of sydus. Syderatio, a spyce of the fallynge euyll in men, but in trees it is taken for blastynge. Sydiae, the rindes of pomegranades. Sydus, syderis, a sterre. Syene, a citie in the confynes of Egypte and Ethiope. Sygeum, a promontorye of Troye. Syla, a mountayne in Lucania, and a wod in it Sylla, a great tyraunte of Rome, whiche was of an vnsaciable crueltie. Syllaba, a syllable. Syllabatim, by syllables. Syllabicus, ca, cum, perteynynge to syllables. Syllanion, a famouse maker of images, whi∣che was neuer taughte. Syllepsis, a fygure, where the plurell number and the synguler are ioyned together, as, Socijs & rege recepto. Syllogismus, a perfyte argument, which hath a necessary conclusion. Sylphium, reade Laserpitium. Sylua, a woode or place ouergrowen with wo∣des, also any matter hastely wrytten with∣out study. Syluanus, was called god of woodes. Syluaticus, ca, cum, perteynynge to woodes. Syluecula, & syluula, a lyttel foreste or wodde. Syluesco, scere, to waxe or growe into woodes or bushes. Syluester, syluestris, tre, of wodde or foreste, woddy, wylde. Syluicola, he that dwelleth in a foreste or wod. Syluius, a mannes name whiche was borne in a foreste. Syma, a citie in Asia. Symbolum, a collation. also a token gyuen by one to an other vpon certayne appoyntmen∣tes,
generally a signe or marke to knowe a thinge by. Symbolus, a signet or seale, or a signe manuell Symbulus, a wyse and good counsaylour. Symmachia, ayde in battayle, or leage made a∣monge men of sondry countreys, to fighte a∣gaynste the other parte. Symmachus, a mannes name. Symmetria, is a conuenient agremente of the members or partes of any thynge, aunswe∣rynge in euerye parte separate vnto the pro∣portion of the hole figure, as in the arme the hande the legge the fynger and the foote, and other membres hauynge respecte to the hoole body, and semblably in all other thynges. Sympathia, a mutual combination of thynges natural in the operation of their powers and qualyties. as water in coldenesse doth parti∣cipate with erthe, in moysture with the ayre, the ayre with the fyre in heate, with water in moysture. Symphiton petraeum, an herbe called Bugle. Symphitum, reade Consolida maior. Symphitum magnum, comfrey. Symphonia, a consent in tunc, also armony. Symphoniaca, or Symphonia, an herbe, whi∣che as Apuleius saithe, is Henbane, called Hyosciamus Symphoniaci serui, were they whiche in the shyppe played on drounslades and fyfes to styrre the souldiours to fyght more aigrelye. Symphonio, are, to agree or accorde in one. Symphonesis, colysion of vowelles. Sympinatice, womenne addicte to ceremonies or deuotion. Sympinium, a cuppe seruynge for wyne in sacrifice. Symplator, a frende of hym that is maryed whiche accompanieth hym to feastes. Symplega, warkes, in the whiche wrastlers, and they whiche contende in fyghtynge, are beholden. Symplegades, two yles in the grekysh sea. Symplegma, an imbracynge together. Sympoiastes, he that maketh a feast or bāket Symposium, a banket, or assembly at drynking Sympotria, a woman whiche kepeth compa∣ny at drynkynge. Symnista, a secretarye, or oone of the pryuye councell. Sympsalma, a concorde in syngynge. Symptoma, tis, a greeke worde vsed amonge phisitions, for lacke of a latine worde conue∣nient for the thynge, whiche it signifieth, it is a certayne affecte folowyng sycknesse lyke as cause dothe procede or is before sickenesse it is a sensible griefe ioyned with the sicknes. Sympudearia, funeralles or playes, wherein playes were made. Synada, a citie in Asia. Synaeresis, a contraction of two wordes as Bigae, for brjugae. Synagoga, a congregation, specially of iewes Synalephe, a collision of vowelles. Synanche, a sickenesse in the throte, called the squynce, of Barbarouse men, squinantia. Syncere, purely, vncorruptly. Syncerus, a, um, sincere, pure, vncorrupted symple without dissimulation. Synchronos, of one tyme. Synciput, syncipitis, the foreparte of the head also a swines heade sowsed. Syncopa, or Syncope, a fygure, where a let∣ter or syllable is taken awaye, as compostus for compositus. it is also a soundynge for de¦bilitie of the vitall spirites Synecdoche, a fygure, where part is vsed for the hole, or the hole for parte. Syndicus, an aduocate. Syndipnium, a suppynge to gether. Synechon, continent. Synephites, a stoone, whiche is called also Leucongra. Syngrapha, syngraphus, & syngraphum, the wrytynge or deede, made or sygned with the hande of hym that maketh a bargayne or co∣uenaunte. Synochitides, a stone wherwith nigromancers do call vp diuelles. Synodus, an assemblye of menne, or generall councill. Synonimum, whiche in diuerse wordes sygni∣fieth on thinge, as Ensis, Gladius, bothe do signifie a sword. Occidit, interfecit, necauit, do signifie, he kylled. Synopis, sinoper or red leade. Synstratiotes, companions together in warre. Syntagma, a treatise, an ordinaunce. Syntaxis, order in construction. it is also a tri∣bute or summe of money to be distributed in∣to sundry companies. it is also a volume ga∣thered of diuerse warkes. Erasmus vseth it for the sacrament of the aultare. {quod} recte aut apposite alij uiderint. Syntexis, lacke, or weakenesse, whiche hap∣neth by longe sickenesse. Synteresis, the pure parte of conscience. Synthema, a token gyuen to souldiours. Synthesis, a shorte cote or ierkyn, also a vessell made of many vesselles. Syntomon, for circumcisum. Sypharium, a curtayne hanged before myn∣strelles whan they synge. Syphax, was the kynge of Numidia. Syracusae, a citie in Sicile, nowe called Sarra∣gosa, in the olde tyme of a meruaylouse re∣noume in strength and riches. moreouer it is scituate that all the daye longe the sunne is
neuer out of syghte, by no clowde that ke∣uereth it, Syracusius, & syracusanus, of that citie. Syria, a great realme in Asia, whiche hath on the easte the ryuer of Euphrates, on the west the myddell sea, and the realme of Egypt, on the northe Cilicia and Cappadocia, on the southe Arabia. Syria, called also Assyria, a great countrey in the East, hauynge on the Northe, parte of Armenia, on the west Mesopotamiā, on the southe Susianam, on the este Mediam. it al∣so conteyneth Phoeniciam. Palestinam, and Babyloniam. Syriacum, a kynde of swete radishe. Syriacus, ca, cum, of Syria. Syriasis, an inflammation in the partes about the brayne and the pannicles, whiche happe∣neth to infantes. Syrictae, people whiche receyue theyr meate in oten redes. Syricum, a colour myxte with sinoper & ruddel Syrium, wyne boyled to the thyrde parte. Syrinx, a pype or recorder. Syris, corne kepte in holes in the grounde, and couered with chaffe. Syrisca, a woman of Syria. Syrissus, a, um, of Siria. Syrma, tis, the traine of a womannes gowne. Syrnia, a shriche oule. Syrophoenix, the sea coste of Syria. Syrtes, quycke sandes or shelpes in the water made by the dryfte of sande or grauell. Syrtites, a lyttell stone founde in the bladder of a wulfe. Syrupus, a syrupe. Syrus, a man of Siria, also an Ilande belon∣gynge to Grece. Syssitia, feastes, and companyes assembled at feastes. Sysimbrium, I suppose to be horesmynte. Sysimbrium cardamine, water cresses. Syzigiae, synewes, whiche do come frome the brayne to the eyes, so that he, which cometh frome the lyfte syde, gothe to the ryghte eye, and that which commeth from the right side gothe to the lyfte eye, so that the synewes do crosse eche other. ¶T ANTE A. TABANVS, a fly, whi∣che hath foure wynges, and byteth a man or best that the bloud foloweth. Tabefacio, ere, to corrupt. Tabella, a lyttell table. Tabellarius, a caryer of letters, an auditour. Tabellio, lionis, a scriuener that writeth com¦mune instrumentes and dedes. Taberna, euery vyle habitation, also a shop or tauerne, where wares be solde, and al thinge that is vendible, as wyne, oyle, or any other thynge. Taberna meritoria, an ynne. Tabernaria fabula, a comedy or ēterlude, wher¦in are base personages, and no persons of dy∣gnitie or state. Tabernaculum, a pauyllion or halle. Tabernarius, he that selleth any maner of wa∣res. also a tauerner. Tabes, bis, corruption in the bodye. alsoo ex∣treme leannesse, by a longe consumynge sick∣nesse. It is also matter and corrupt bloudde myxte together. also the impostume of the lunges, procedinge of humoures descendyng frome the head into the stomake, and so won∣dynge and corruptynge the lounges. Tabesco, bui, scere, to languishe or consume, to be extremely leane, to be corrupted. Tabidus, da, dum, corrupted, consumed. Tabificabilis, le, that whiche maye be corrup∣ted, or fall into a consumption. Tabificus, ca, cum, that whiche maketh o one corrupted, or consumeth the body. Tablinū, was a wynter parlour, wherin were painted tables and bokes of stories. Tabo, a consumption, wastyng, or putrifaction of thynges. Tabor, a mountayne in the countreye of Gali∣lea, where Christe was transfigurate. Tabula, a table, in the plurell number tabulae, doth signifie a testamente, or any commune instrument or writinge Also tabula, is a ta∣ble to playe on with dise or chesse men. Tabulae nouae, were whā detters were not con¦strayned to paye theyr dettes, that they dyd owe, and the olde obligations were dissolued and newe were to be made for that whiche shulde newely be borowed. Tabularia, are places, where euidences and writynges be layde. Tabularium, a cheste, in the whiche euydences and recordes are put. Tabulata, walles made of square stones, as if they were burded They be also the boughes
of trees and bushes, which do grow streight forthe and not not vpwarde. Tabulatus, ta, tum, made of bourdes. Tabulo, are, to make a thynge with bourdes, or to ioyne bourdes together. Tabulatio, a ioynynge or closynge of bourdes together. Taburnus, an hyll in Campania, wherein doo growe many olyue trees. Tace, egomet conueniam iam ipsum, Let a∣lone, I my selfe wyll cōmune now with him. Tacenda, those thynges whiche are not to be spoken. Taceo, cui, cêre, to kepe silence, to be in rest, to be quiete, to be sure. Taciturnitas, tatis, sylence. Tacitus, he that holdeth his peace, and is se∣crete. Tacito pede, softely, by stelthe. Tacitum est, not a worde is spoken of it. Tacitus, citius audies, be styll, thou shalte here the soner. Tacitè, with out speakynge one worde. Tactus, tus, feelynge. Tactus fulmine, burned or blasted with lyghtnynge. Taedet, it weryeth me, it yrketh me, I am we∣ry of it. Taedium, werynes, or heuynes of mynde. Taedulus, an olde dotarde, of whom all men are wery. Taenarus, a darke place at the foote of the hill called Malea, by the citie of sparta, whiche was supposed to be an entry into hell. Taenia, the edge of a fyllette. also a womannes fyllet, or that whiche nowe they call rolles, properly it is a kerchefe, which maydens do weare on theyr heades. Also a whyte stoone, whiche in the water sheweth long lyke a ker¦chiefe. It is also a village betwene Micenas & Corinthum. Taenon, a citie in Laconia, an other in Arcadia Tagasta, a citie in Affrike. Tagax, acis, a felon, whiche happeneth on a manns fynger. Tages, was he, whiche taughte fyrste the Thuscanes the crafte of diuination, called Aruspicium. Tago, gere, olde writers vsed for tango. Tagrus, an Hyll in Portyngale, where as it is wrytten, that mares doo conceyue of the wynde. Tagus, a riuer in Spayne, whiche diuydethe Castile from Portugall, wherein hath bene founde grauell of golde. Taigete, is the name of one of the seuen sterres whiche so appiereth, as it maye scantelye be perceyued, whiche sterre is also callyd Maia, & Electra. Talaria, were showes, whiche Mercurius did weare, wheron were set whynges. Talaris, re, that whiche commeth downe to the ancley, as Toga talaris, a longe gowne, to the ancley. Talarius, ria, rium, perteynynge to dyse, as Lex talaria, a lawe agaynste dyse plaienge. Talassio, was a songe contryned in certayne verses, sungen at weddynges. It was also a certayne exclamation or erie vsed at marya∣ges, the begynnynge wherof beganne, whan Romulus and the Romaynes rauysshed the maidens of the Sabines, among whom was one of excellent beauitie, whom whan many of the Sabines wold haue rescued, they whi¦che caried her toward Romulus, to thintent that she shulde not be taken from them, cried Talassio, whiche was the name of a noble prynce of the Sabines, as if they wold haue broughte her to hym, and by that meane they escaped, and broughte her to Romulus. and afterwarde they vsed at mariages to crye Talassio. Talea, a stocke sette in the erthe, wheron men do graffe. also a truncheon, a staffe, a byllet. Talentum, was accompted sommetyme for a poyse or weyght, and therof were sundry sor∣tes. one was called Atticum minus, or Com¦mune, whiche conteyned .lx. poundes of A∣thenes weyght called Minae, or Mnae, which is of Troye weygh .lxii. pound, and a halfe An other was called Talentum atticum ma∣ius, whiche conteyneth .lxxx. Mnas, of troye weyghte .lxxxiii .li. and foure ounces. And that was also called Euboicū. An other was called Talentum Haebraicum, whiche con∣teyned an hundred Mnas, whiche is of Troy weyghte .C.iiii.li. and two ounces. An other was Talentum Syrum, whiche was but of xv. Mnas, of troye weyght .xv. pounde .vii. ounces and a halfe. Diodôrus writeth, that the commune Talent was but .xl.li. and na∣meth thre sortes, The one called Ptholom ai∣cum, whiche conteyneth .CC.lxxii.li. The seconde conteynynge .C.xxv.li. The thyrde a hundred pound. Talentum was also accō∣ted in valuation. Atticum minus uel com∣mune, to the value of .lx. Minae, whiche of our money accomptynge an hundred grotes to euerye Mina, to an hundred pounde ster∣lynge. euery pounde beinge of thre score gro∣tes. not withstandynge the iuste value of Ta¦lentum, is more or lesse after the fynesse, base¦nesse or weyght of the englyshe grote. Talen∣rum atticum maius, was accompted to lxxx. Minas, whiche of our sterlynge money is .C.xxxiii.li.vi.s.viii. pens. Talentum Haebrai cum sanctuarij, conteyned an hundred Mnas Hebraicas, wherof euery one was .lx. Sicli,
euery Siclus, beinge .iiii. sterlynge grotes, so that Talentum was of our money sterlynge .CCCC.li. Talentum Haebraicum uulgare, was halfe so moche, videlicet. CC. li. Talia, the blade of an onyon or chiboll. Talio, onis, an equall peyne in recompence of a hurte, as for the cuttynge of a mans hand, to lose a hande, or for puttinge out of an eye, to lose an eye. Talior, ari, to be cut: it is properly spoken of wodde, whiche we nowe cal talling of wood. Talipedo, dare, to go on the pasternes. Talis, tale, suche. Taliter, in suche wyse. Talitrum, a fylyppe gyuen with ones fynger or nayle. Talpa, a molle or want. Talpa caecior, blynder than a molle, a pro∣uerbe applyed to them, whiche lacke iudge∣mente in thinges that are playne. Talum reponere, to refourme that, whiche was negligently done, with more diligence. Talus, the ancle aboue the foote. It is also the pastern bone of a beast, Also a dye or dice. Tam, as well, also, as, so. Tam bonus, as good Tam sum amicus republicae, {quam} qui maximè, I am so frendely, or as moche frende to the publike weale, as he that is moste. Tama, whan with moche trauaile the bloude commeth downe to the legge, and causeth it to swell. Tam magis, for tanto magis. Tamerindi, a fruite growynge in India, the tree whereof is lyke to a palme or date tree, the fruite sower, lyke grene damsyns, whi∣che is medicynable in asswagynge the heate of cholere. Tamaritae, people in Asia, not sarre frome the sea called Caspium. Tamarix, ricis, a tree vulgarly called Tama∣riscus, reade Myrice, some cal it whitbeame. Tamen, not withstandynge. also yet. Tamen à malicia non discedis, yet wylte thou not de∣part from thy malyce? somtyme it signifyeth forthwith, at the laste, so that. Quod pote∣ro, faciam, tamen ut pietatem colam, I wil do that I maye: so that not withstandyng I omytte not my duetie to my father. Tamesis, the noble ryuer of Tamyse in Eng∣lande. Tametsi, albeit, alwaye. Taminea Vua, Dioscor. li. 4. saythe that it is the herbe whiche is called Bryonia nigra, Cornelius Celsus. li. 3. sayth, it is that whi∣che of the grekes is called Stauis agria, whi∣che is thought to be false, for Plinius. li. 26. ca. i. supposeth, that it is the wyld vyne called Labrusca, the same is affyrmed by Ruellius. Tam ne, olde writers vsed for eous{que}, vntyll that. Tanager, a riuer in Lucania, betwene Cam∣pania and Calabria. Tanagra, a towne in Perside. Tanais, a greatte ryuer in the northe parte of the worlde, whiche diuideth Europa frome Asia. Tanaquil, was wyfe to Tarquinius Priscus the kynge of Romaynes. Tanaus, was kynge of Siria. Tandem, at the last, sometyme at the leastway also vneth, not withstandynge. Tandiu, so longe. Tango, tetigi, gere, to touche, to meue, to vn¦derstande, or perceyue, to come to to deceyue. Tangere ulcus, to rub on the galde place, to speake to one of a thynge, whiche greueth hym to here of. Tetigit aures meas, It came to myne cares. Tanis, the principall citie of Egypte, where Moyses dyd shewe meruayles. Tanos, a stone of the kynd of Emeralde grene and blacke. Tanquam, as it were, lyke. Tantalides, the progeny of Tantalus. Tantali horti, a prouerbe signifieng good thynges to be at hande, whiche not withstan¦dynge a man maye not vse. Tantalus, the son of Iupiter and Plota, was kynge of Phrygia. of whom the poetes doo write that bicause he discouered the counsail of the goddes, he is in hel tourmented in this wyse. He standeth by a fayre ryuer, hauynge before hym a tree laded with pleasaunte ap∣ples, and yet he is alwaye thursty and hun∣gry, for as often as he stoupeth to drynke. he holdeth vp his handes to gather the appuls, but both the water and the tre do withdraw them soo frome hym, that he can not touche them. Tanti, for so moche. This worde doth perteine to byenge and sellynge. Tantidem, at that price. Tanti aestimo, tantifacio, tanti pendo, I set so moche by, or I so moche esteme it. Tantillus, la, lum, & tantulus, a, um, the dy∣minutiue of tantus. Tantisper, so longe. Tantopere, so moche, so vehemently. Tantum, onely. Tantum non, almoste. Tantum sat habes? arte thou content? Tantummodo, all onely. Tantundem periculum, so great daungier. Tantò, an aduerbe, signifienge so moche, as tanto magis, so moche more, tanto peior, so moche worse. Tantum abest, it is so farre frome, or soo moche vnlyke. Tantundem, euen so moche.
Tantumnum, also, ye also. Tantus, ta, tum, suche, sometyme so moche, or so great. Taos, a stone of the colour of a peacoke. Tapetia, hangynges of houses, or clothes wher¦with pauementes are couered. Tapetum, tapes, tapis, tapesrye, or clothes wherin are wrought diuerse pictures, with thredes of sondry colours. Taphiae, & taphus, an e by Grecia, where dwelled the people called Telebois. Taphius, a citie in Egypt, the people whereof were called Taphnii. Taphos, in greke, is a sepulchre or tumbe. Tapinosis, a figure, wherby a great thynge is basely described. Taposiris, a citie in Egipte. Taprobanē, an yle in the Indian sea, and was of some old writers supposed to be in the con¦trarye parte of the worlde agaynste vs, and therfore they called it an other worlde. It ly∣eth in the poynte betwene easte and west, the quantitie thereof is dyuerselye described by sundry authors. For Strabo writeth that it is in lengthe viii. thousande furlonge, whi∣che is a .M. myles. Plinius, Martianus, and Solinus, doo affirme it to be in lengthe vii. M. furlonge, whiche is .viii.C.lxxv. myles, in breadeth .v. M. furlonge, whiche is .DC.xxv. myles. parte of it extendeth be∣yonde the equinoctiall lyne, more south, and hath on the northest, the lasse Inde, it is now called Samotra, and is vnder the subiection of the great Cam, and is gouerned by foure kynges in an exquisite fourme of iustice: not withstandyng that the people be idolatours. They hunt Tygers Olyphantes and Pan∣theres, of the whiche there is great plentye. also there be founden carbuncles saphires isrinctes topaces rubies and granates, in gret numbers. There groweth cinamome, cauell, benioyme, and other swete trees in great a∣boundaunce, and they haue moneye of golde syluer and brasse, of the same waight and va¦lue, that the auncient coyne of the Romains were. There is also founden plenty of greate and orient perles. Tapsus barbaus, an herbe, reade Phlomos & Verbascus. Tapsus, an yle by Sicile not far frō Siracuse. Tapulla, a lawe made for feastes. Tapyri, people in Parthia, whiche vse to giue theyr wyues in maryage to other men, after that they haue hadde foure or fyue chyldren by them. Taraconia, a countrey called nowe Aragon. Taracon, the chiefe citie therof. Tarandrus, a beaste in body lyke to a great oxe hauynge a heade lyke to a harte, and hornes full of branches, the heare roughe, of the co∣loure of a beare, I suppose it to be a rayne deere. Tarandulus, the beaste called a Buffe, whiche is lyke an oxe, but that he hath a berde lyke a gote. Tarantula, a kynde of the beastes called Stel∣liones, lyke to a lysarde, of whose bytynge no man dieth, onely it stonyeth hym that is bytten. Taras, the sonne of Neptunus, who buylded Tarentum. Taraxacon, an herbe called Sousistell. reade Cicerbita & Sonchus, Taraxis, whan the eyen do bolne out moch, and be redde. Tarbeli, the citie of Tarbes in Gascoyne. Tarchesius, was a myscheuouse kynge of the people called Albani. Tarchon, a duke in Hethruria, whiche was al¦so a great diuinour or southsayer. Tardatio, a tarienge. Tarde, slowe, late. Tardigradus, that whiche hath a slowe pase, or gothe slowely. Tardiloquentia, a slowe speche. Tardiloquus, he that draweth his speche in lengthe. Tardior, slower. Tardissimus, moste slowe, or slowest. Tarditas, & tarditudo, & tardicies, slownesse Tardius, more slowely. Tardiusculè, somewhat slowely. Tardiusculus, somewhat slowe. Tardo, dare, to tary, to beslowe. Tardus, slowe, rude, somtyme well durynge. also thycke or grosse. Tarentinus, a, um, of the Citie of Tarento in Calabria. Tarentum, a noble citie in Calabria, called Taranto. Tarmes, a wourme, whiche eateth flesshe, a magotte. Tarpeius, an hyll at Rome. Tarquinus superbus, was the laste kynge of Romayns, which was expelled out of Rome for his pryde and crueltie. Taracina, a towne in Campania called also Anxur. Tarsus, the chiefe citie in Cilicia, where saynct Paule was borne. Tarsis, a region in India, it is sometyme takē for Carthage. Tartaria, is a countrey of incomparable great¦nesse, it boundeth on the west vppon Russia, and extendeth into the easte, after the descri∣ption of the laste Card, aboue .MDC. duch myles, whiche is of Italion myles .vi. thou∣sande and .iiii. hundred miles and more, the
bredth from the southe into the north is more vncertayne, it marcheth on the south vppon Persiam and Indiam. the northe is moche parte desert for the coldenesse and barennesse therof. The people haue no cities or townes, or elles very fewe, but they lye in pauillions, and vnder their cartes, whiche they doo re∣meue into sundry partes, as the tyme of the yere dothe requyre, dryuyng theyr cattel with theym, of whome they do eate the fleshe mo∣che parte rawe, and do drynke the mylke and bloude of them. The people be fierce and cru¦ell, and therwith vyle and beastly in theyr ly∣uyng. They be all vnder the subiection of the great Chaam, yet haue they many puissaunt pryncis, whiche do vse a wonderfulle obedy∣ence towarde theyr emperour. They beleue in one god, creatour of all thynges, but they be not chrystened. They ar so populouse har∣dy and fierce, that the great kynges, whiche do marche vpon them, haue moche to doo to resyste them, as the great kyng of Russi, and the kynge of Persia Sophias. Also one of theyr prynces toke in playne battayl Pazaie∣tes the great Turke, whom beynge bounden with chaynes and gyues of golde, and inclo∣sed in a cage of yron, he caryed aboute with hym vntyl he dyed, and in that battaile there were slayne two hundred thousande Turkes the captayne of the Tartariens was named Tamberlane. Theyr emperour Chaam be∣sydes Tartariam hath also subiect vnto hym the lesse Inde, and all the royalmes and yles in the easte and southeaste part of the worlde and he nameth hym self in his style, the sonne of god, rede more in Chaam. Moche of Tar∣taria was that countray whyche was some∣tyme callyd Scythia. Tartareus, ea, eum, of helle. Tartarum, the lees of wyne. Tartarus, the depest place in helle. it is alsoo a Tartaryan. Tartarinus, rina, rinum, olde wryters vsed for horryble or terrible. Tartesij, people in Iberia, amonge whome be cattes of excedynge greatnesse. Tartessus, a citie in the vttermooste parte of Spayne, on the sea syde by Gades, now cal∣lyd Cales, where Columella the most eloquēt and perfyt husband was borne. it was called also Gadir & Cartheia. Tascaneum, a whyte clay or marle. Tasimenes, seu tasmenes, one of the sonnes of duke Nestor. Tata, dady, whyche children call theyr father. Tatae, a wanton worde, wherwith one answe∣reth to an nother. Tateus, a kynde of salte, whiche cometh out of Phrigia, and is medicinable for the eyes. Taua, Tynmouth in Englande. Taura, a barrayne cowe. Tatianus, a mans name. Tatius, a mans name. Taurarij, people in Scithia. Tauria, a scourge made of netes lether. Taurica Chersonesus, a countray in the northe part of Europa. Taurici, people of cruelle maners that offered straungers in sacrifice to Diana. Taurilia, were playes made in the honoure of internall goddis. Taurinus, na, num, of a bulle. Taurius, one of the goddis of the sea. Taurominium, a mountayne in Sicile, so cal∣lyd for the plenty of neate, whych fed theron. also there was by it a citie of the same name. Taurominitanus, na, num, of the citie of Tau¦minium. Tauroscythae, people of Scithia, dwellyng by the mountayne callyd Taurus. Taurus, a bulle, sometyme a stronge oxe. It is also one of the xii. celestyall sygnes. Taurus, a great and famous mountayne, whi∣che begynneth at the Indian sea, and rysyng into the north, passeth by Asia vnto the fenne or mere called Maeotis, and bordereth vpon a great numbre of royalmes. also the hyll cal∣lyd Caucasus is parte therof. Tautologia, a fygure where oone thynge is twyse spoken. Tax, the sounde of a stroke with a whyp. Taxa, a kynde of bayes or laurell, wherewith herbars are made. Taxatio, a settynge of a taxe or subsydy. Taxatores, they whych do rebuke one another. Taxim, softely, scantly touched. Taxis, olde wryters vsed for tetigeris, thou shalt touche. Taxilli, smalle dyse. Taxo, nis, a gray or brocke, or badger. Taxo, are, to touche often. alsoo to taxe or cesse a thynge at a certayne value. also to reproue one an nother. Taxus, a tree lyke to fyrre, whych beareth bea∣ryes, wherin is mortall poyson. It is also the tree callyd yew. Taygetus, a hyll, vnder the whiche is sette the cities of Sparta and Amycle. ¶T ANTE E. TEARVS, a ryuer of Thracia, at the head wherof Darius kyng of Persia, whan he went into Scithia, pyght his pauillions, and there abode thre dayes. And delytyng at the moste pleasant water of that ryuer, he sette in the same place a pyllar gra∣uen with letters of greeke, declarynge his being there, with cōmendation of the water.
Techna, a crafte, also a wyle or subtyll meane. Techines, were they, whyche also were callyd Corybantes, and were fayned to be the son∣nes of Minerua and Sol. Technicus, ca, cum, artificiall, inuentine. Technides, a craftes man. Technophyon, a settynge forthe of crafte. Tector, toris, a pargettour. Tectorius, a, um, pertaynynge to coueryng. Tectorium, the playstrynge or pargettynge of a howse. Tectorium opus, pargettynge or plastrynge warke. Tectum, the roufe of a howse. sommetyme all the howse. Tectosagae, Tholose in Fraunce. Tectosages, Languedocke in Fraunce. Tecum, with the. Tecum oro & quaeso, I pray and besech the. Tecum sentio, I am of thyne opinyon. Teda, a tree out of the whiche issueth a lykour more thynne than pytche, improperly it is ta∣ken for all wod, whych beyng dressed withro sen or wax, wyl burne bryght lyke to a torche. Taedulus, of whome all men be wearye. some∣tyme it sygnifyeth hym, whiche is wearye of some thynge. Tegaeum, a cytie in Archadia. Tegaeates, men of that citie. Teges, gitis, a course blankette or couerlydde, whyche lyeth on poore mens beddes. It is al∣soo a matte. Tegericula, the diminutiue of teges. Tegillum, a lyttell couerynge. Tegmen, & tegimen, & tegmentum, a coue∣rynge or couer. Tego, texi, tegere, to couer, to hyde, to defende or kepe. Tegula, a tyle. Tegulum, a couerynge. Teum, a citie in Paphlaconia, where Anacre∣on the poete was borne. Tela, the clothe, whyche is spoken as welle of sylke as of lynnen clothe or wollen. Telam exordiri, to begynne any busynesse. Tellanae, a certayne kynde of fygges. Telamones, ymages, whyche do beare vppe pyllars or postes. Teleboae, people in Grece. Telegonus, the sonne of Vlysses by Circe the wytche, who folowyng his father into Itha∣cam, slewe hym vnwetyngly. Telemachus, the sonne of Vlisses & Penelope. Telephion, an herbe which Leonicenus suppo∣seth to be that, whiche the Arabians do calle Cali, but Ant. Musa supposeth it to be rather a kynde of Anthyllis, but where Dioscorides dothe describe it to haue a stalke, and leaues lyke to purslan, euery leafe hauinge lyke two wynges .vii. or .viii. branches, cōmynge from one rote full of blue leaues, which are thycke and tender, and hath flowres yelow or white. and therfore Ruellius supposeth it to be that herbe, which some do name Fabam inuersam some Crassulam minorem. Telephus, the sonne of Hercules, whiche was nouryshed with an hynde. Telepnium, an herbe in Aetolia callyd Orpyn. Telina, a certayne garment. Telo, lonis, is an instrument for warre, which is in this wyse, a great poste and hygh is set faste, than ouer it cometh a longe beam, whi∣che runneth on a pyn, so that the one ende ha∣uynge more poise than the other, causeth the lyghter ende to ryse. With such bere brewers in London do drawe vp water. Telonarius, & relo, lonis, a collectour or ga∣therer of tributes. Teloniū, the place where taskes or tributes ar payde. Telos, in greke is an ende, honour, a legyon, a tribute or pēcion, it is also the name of an ile, where the oyntment callyd telina is made. Telpussa, a cytie in Arcadia. Tellus, li, a mans name whom the wyse Solon iudged to be more fortunate than the ryche kynge Cresus. Tellus, luris, the earthe. Telum, all thynge whiche maye be throwen or cast with the hande, be it stone, wod, or yron, it is also the generall name of all that, wher∣with a man doth fyght, called weapon. some∣tyme it is taken for a sworde. Telyphonon, idem quod Aconitum. Temerarius, a, um, more hardye than nede, or wysedome requireth, foolchardye. sometyme dredefull, or to be dradde. Temeritas, tatis, & temeritudo, folehardines. Temere, vnaduysedly, foolysshely, aduentu∣rousely. sometyme it sygnifieth almoste. alsoo without cause. Temerius, more foolyshe, or vnaduisedly. Temero, rare, to vyolate. Temetum, wyne. Temulentus, ta, tum, drunke of wyne. Temulentia, drunkennesse. Temno, tempsi, temnere, to sette lyttell by. Temo, monis, the beame, whyche contayneth the yoke. Tempe, a place in Thessalia wonderfull plea∣saunt, hauynge trees and medowes meruay∣lous delectable, wher in byrdes of dyuers kyndes, do synge contynually with excellent melody. Therof all pleasaunt woodes haue the name of Tempe. Temperamentum, a moderation. Temperanter, temperatly. Temperantia, temperance, which is a firme & moderate gouernance of reson against sensua¦litie and other vicious affections of the mind
Temperantior, temperantius, more tempe∣rate. Temperatura, a temperance or moderation in the mynglynge of thynges togyther. Temperies, temperatenes, proprely in heate or colde. sometyme it is vsurped for tempera∣mentum, and for temperantia. Temperior, oris, more tymely. Tempero, are, to temper or moderate in order or measure. Temperamus stylum, calamum, appetitum, whan we kepe in our wryting a mean forme, or do eate no more than is nedefull. Temperare alicui, to spare oone, or forbeare hym. Temperare animis, to moderate affections, to refrayne the doinge of a thynge Caedibus temperare, to refrayne from man∣slaughter. Victoriae temperare, to be neuer the prow∣der for his victory. Tempsa, a cytie in the countraye callyd nowe Calabria. Tepestas, tatis, sygnyfieth sometyme the same tyme, sometyme tempeste, sometyme wether, sometyme a fayre wether. Tempestiuus, ua, uum, that whiche is done in conuenyent tyme. Tempestiuitas, tatis, season or tyme conueny∣ent, oportunitie. Tempestiuè, in season or tyme conuenient. Tempestum, olde wryters vsed for tempestiuū. Tempestuosum, tempestuous or stormy. Templum, a temple or churche. sometyme it sygnifyeth heauen. also the principall became of a house. also a sepulchre. Temporalis, le, that whyche dureth vntylle a certayne tyme. Temporaneus, a, um, that whiche is done so∣daynly, and at a tyme. Temporarie, temporanie, & temporaliter, vn¦tyll a tyme. Temporarius, ria, rium, that whiche dureth or contynueth for a tyme also that whyche per∣tayneth to tyme. Temporius, an aduerbe sygnifieth in tyme, or by tyme. Tempus, poris, tyme, alsoo the state of tyme. sometyme the temples of the head. Tenacia, & tenacitas, hardenes in sparynge of expenses, nygardshyp, perseueraunce, retay∣nynge, or kepynge Tenatior, & tenacissimus, the comparatiue and superlatiue degree of tenax. Tenacissimae memoriae, of moste sure remem∣braunce. Tenaciter, fastely, surely. Tenasmus, & tenesmus, a desyre to go often to the stoole, and may do nothynge, with a bur∣nynge, and sometyme a blouddy syege. Tenax, nacis, that whyche holdeth faste, as glewe, sometyme sparynge or nygarde, to mo∣che constant, harde to be moued. Tendicula, a nette or snare to take byrdes or beastes. Tendines, or tendones, the greate synewes or edrdes of the bodye. Tendo, tetendi, tendere, to extende or stretche, to lay a snare, to dwell, to go. also to lyft vp, to pretende, to pytche pauylyons. also to as∣say, to holde vp. Paruum{que} patri tendebat Iulum, He held vp lyttell Iulus vnto his father. also to prepare, to go towarde a place. Tendere alicui insidias, to lye in awayte to hurte one. Tendere plagas, to pytche hayes or nettes. Tendere ad aluora, to assaye to clymme higher. Tendere aduersus, to repugne. Tendunt in diuersum sententiae, the opyny∣ons be repugnant one to an nother. Tendutes, olde wryters callyd theym, whyche had great tethe. Tenebrae, the lacke of lyght, darkenes. Tenebresco, scere, to be darke. Tenebricor, aris, ari, to make darke. Tenebricosus, a, um, that maketh darke. Tenebriones, lyars and crafty knaues. Alsoo they whyche wylle not be seene abroode by day tyme. Tenebrosus, a, um, darke. Tenedos, an yle in the sea callyd Aegeum, be∣twene Mitelene and Hellespontum, not farre from Troy. ❀Tenedia bipennis, aut securis, a quycke or sharpe axe. A prouerbe applyed to Iud∣ges, whyche be hastye and cruelle in theyr sentences. Tenellus, a, um, tender. Teneo, tenui, tenere, to holde, to appre∣hende, to possede, to holde or keepe in, to co∣uer, to vnderstande, to keepe backe, to per∣fourme. Tenes quid dicam? vnderstandest what I saye. Tene tibi, take thou that. Per duas noctes ac diem unum tenuit, It dured two dayes and one nyght. Verecundia teneri, to be ashamed. Tenere se loco, not to departe oute of that place. Argumentis & testibus teneri, to be vanqui∣shed bothe with reasons and wytnesses. Tenere consilium, to do by council. Praecipe, ut teneat consilia nostra, Gyue hym aduyse that he may do by our counsayle.
Tene, tene, tarye, tarye. Redi, quo fugis nunc? tene, tene, Tourne agayne, whyther runnest thou nowe? tary, tary. Tenre consensum, to agree or consente vn∣to other. Tenet me amor, loue meueth me moche. Tenêre insaniam. Sed hoc primum expur∣gare tibi uolo, me insaniam ne{que} tenere, ne∣que mi esse ullum morbum, nisi quod seruio, But first I wyl declare my self vnto the, that I am neyther out of my wytte, nor haue any speknes, but that I am bonde. Tenêre ius, to knowe the lawe. Tenere legem, to be vnder a lawe. Tenere memoria, to remembre. Tenere medium, to kepe a meane. Tenere modum, to kepe a measure. Tenere se, to take hede of hym selfe. Tenere aliquem mendatij, to take one with a lye. Tene tibi, take it as thyne owne. Tenere causam, to vanquysshe or recouer a∣gaynste one in a matter. Teneri desyderio, to desyre moch or feruētly Teneri ludo, to take pleasure in game. Teneri furti, to be gyltie of felony. Tenera aetas, youthe. Teneris annis, yonge yeres. Teneor, neris, neri, to be bounden, to be behol∣den to one. Tener, ra, rum, tender, mercyfulle, alsoo a gel∣dyd man. Tenerasco, scere, to be tender or mercyfull. Teneritas, & tenerrtudo, tendernes. Tenere, & teneriter, tenderly, louyngly. Tenni, olde writers vsed for tenui. Tenitae, were called goddesses of lottes. Tenontes, the great and stronge synewes, whi¦che do kepe the necke vpryght. also a broode synewe, whiche goth from the hamme down to the heele. Tenor, noris, an order, a contynuaunce of a thynge. Tenos, an yle in the greke sea, one of theym, whyche is callyd Cyclades. Tenta, stretched. Tentamentum, temptation. Tentigo, tiginis, a styffenes. Tentipellium, a shoe with an yron soole, wher∣on the ouer lether is stretched. Tento, tare, to attempte, to assay or proue, to tempte one to do euyll. Morbo tentari, to be vexed with sicknes. Caput tentare, to trouble the head. Tentorium, a tent or pauylyon. Tentum, a mans priuy member. Tentyra, a citie in Egypte. Tentyri, uel tynteritae, a venymous beast in an yle on the ryuer of Nilus, whose voyce the ockodryll dothe feare. Tenuè, & tenuiter, poorely, symply. Tenunculus, la, lum, very symple, or lyttell in estymation. Tenuis, nue, lyttell or symple in estymation, smalle in quantitie, poore, thynne, leane. Tenui filo, with a smalle threede, applyed to style in wrytynge, whyche is not elegaunte, but playne. Tenuitas, tatis, smallenesse, pouertie. Tenuiter, scantely, poorely, barely. Tenuo, are, to make smalle, to make leane, or feeble. Tenus, ni, a snare. Beynge an Aduerbe, hit sy∣gnyfyeth vnto. Tenus urbem tendit, It ex∣tendeth vnto the citie, or noo further thanne the citie. Tenus, a preposition, sygnifieth nyghnesse, or vntyll a thynge. Titulo tenus, in a tytle oonely, or in wordes without effecte. Tepifacio, cere, to make warme. Tepefio, fieri, to be warme. Tepeo, & tepesco, tepui, pescere, to be warme or hotte. Tepidarium, a vessell, wherein water is made temperate. also a chamber, wherinto men do go out of a bayne. Tepidus, da, dum, meane betweene hotte and colde, warme. Also koolid frome heate. some¦tyme noysull or vnprofytable. Tephrites, a stoone, whiche hathe the fygure of a newe moone, in colour blacke, or asshe colour. Tepidior, colder. Tepidissimus, a, um, mooste warme. Tepidulus, tepidula, tepidulum, a dyminu∣tiue of tepidus. Tepocon, a fourme of wrytynge downwarde. Tepor, oris, & tepiditas, tatis, warmthe, or warmenesse. Ter, thryse. Terapne, a countrey in Lacedemonia, where the fayre Helene was borne. alsoo an Ilande nowe callyd Corsica. Terebinthus, a tree, the woode wherof is blak and harde lyke boxe, oute of this tree roun∣neth a gumme, callyd communely Turpen∣tyne. All be it the common Turpentyne is not it, but an nother, whyche is as cleere as glasse, and is a soueraygne medicine to clense the stomacke of putrified humours. Terebinthina rhesina, the ryght turpentyne. Tereniabin, is Manna, whyche commeth out of Arabia. Ternarius, & ternus, terna, num, the thyrde innumbre. Terdenus, na, num, the thyrtenthe. Terebellum, a wymble or percer.
Terebratio, a booryng with a wymble. Terebrae, siue terebrum, an augour, wherwith holes are bored. Terebro, brare, to bore or make an hole. Teredo, dinis, a litell worme that eateth wod. Terentius, the mooste eloquent wryter of com∣medyes. Terentianus, of Terence. Terentum, a place in the fielde by Rome, called Campus Martius, wherin was an aultar of Pluto and Proserpine. Teres, teretis, longe and rounde, lyke a tree or a pyllar. Teretrum, an instrument, wherwith a thynge is made rounde. Tergemini, three chyldren borne at one burden Tergestes, a citie in Italy. Tergestum, a towne in Slauony nowe called Trieste. Terginus, na, num, that whiche is made of a beastes hyde. Tergiuersatio, a nonsuite in the lawe, whan the pleyntife gyueth ouer his suite. Tergiuersor, aris, ari, to tourne backe, to deny, in the lawe it sygnifieth to be nonsuite. Tergo, & tergeo, tersi, tergere, to wype or make cleane. Tergum, the backe of man or beaste, or of any other thynge. somtyme it signifieth a hyde of a beaste. Terga dare, to rune away, proprely in batayle. Tergus, tergoris, a hyde of a beaste. Terma, matis, the extremitie, the ende of a thynge, also the sole of the foote. Termentarium, a lynnen clothe, wherwith the body is couered. Termentum, for detrimentum. Termes, a braunche plucked of a tree with the fruite on it. also a worme, whiche eateth flesh. Termile, a mountaygne in Lycia, callyd also Chimaera. Ter milies, thre thousande tymes. Termillum, a potte for wyne, whiche was al∣way set on the table, that euery man mought take as moche wyne as he wolde. Terminalia, was a certayne holy day, at the la∣ter ende of the yere. Terminalis lapis, a mere stone, laide or pyghte at the ende of sundry mens landes. Termino, nare, to ende or fynyshe. Terminus, a sygne, whych declareth one mans lande from an other, or one countrey or ter∣ritorie frome an nother. also it signyfieth the buttynge. Terminus deus, was an ydolle, whyche was supposed to haue preeminence ouer the boun∣des of lande, whose temple had euer an hole in the roufe, for as moche as they thoughte it to be vnlefull that boundes of lande shulde be couered or hydde. Termo, onis, olde writers vsed for terminus. Ternarius numerus, the numbre of thre. Ternus, na, num, the thyrde. Ternundenum, the thyrtenthe. Tero, triui, terere, to rubbe, to breake or broise. Terere iter, to go his way. Terere tempus, to consume tyme. Terere otium, to lyue ydelly. Terpander, dri, an olde musitian, whyche ad∣ded .vii. strynges to the harpe. Terpsichore, one of the nyne muses. Terra, erthe. sometyme all the worlde, alsoo a prouynce, a territorie, a countrey, lande. Terraceus, a, um, of erthe. Terraneola, a byrde lyke to a larke, whych we call a buntyng. Terrefacio, facere, to make aferde. Terraefilius, he that is come vp of nought, and no man knoweth his kynrede. Terraemotus, erthequake. Terrenum, a fielde. Terrenus, na, num, on erthe, or lyuyng on erth, erthely. Terreo, rui, rere, to make aferde. Terrestris, tre, erthely. Terreus, rea, reum, of earthe. Vas terreum, a vessell of erthe. Terribilis, bile, terrible, that whyche is to be feared. Terricola, he that dwelleth in the lande. Terricrepus, he that rebuketh one terribly. Terriculamentum, a feare, or a feareful thyng. Terrificus, ca, cum, terryble, or that whyche in duceth feare. Terrigena, begotten on the erthe. Terriones, ploughmen. Terripauium, & terripudium, for tripudium, daunsynge. Territo, tare, to make aferde. Territorium, the fyeldes or counteaye lyenge within the iurysdiction and boundes of a ci∣tie, a territory. Terror, roris, feare. Tersus, sa, sum, cleane, pure. Tersus dies, of olde wryters was taken for a fayre day. Tertiata uerba, wordes not perfytly pronoun∣ced, as whan one is in feare or dreade of him to whom he speaketh, he tremblyng in speche vneth pronounceth the thyrde worde that he wolde say. Tertiarum, is a myxt mettall, wherin are two partes of leade, and one of tynne. Tertio, are, to do a thynge the thyrde tyme, or to make the thyrde tylthe in earynge. Tertio Consul, where two haue bene Consu∣les before hym. Tertium Consul, he that hath ben thryse consul. So that Tertio signi∣fieth
the thyrd in order and place, two going afore. Tertium sygnifieth the tyme, where twyse gothe afore. The lyke is of Secundo, quarto, and other numbres. Tertio pedato, at the thyrde retourne or co∣mynge agayne. Tertius, a, um, the thyrde. Tertius decimus, the thyrtenthe. Tertullianus, was a great lerned man of Car∣thage, the sonne of a capytayne of the Ro∣maynes, was in his tyme a verye excellente man in wytte and lernynge, and wrate many noble warkes in defence of chrystendome, but beynge in his myddel age made a priest, vexed with sundrye wronges and dyspleasures, by the enuy of the clergye of Rome, he as it were inforced at the laste felle into the heresye of Montanus, whiche heresye he dyd interlace with his bookes whiche he wrate. And lyued vntyll he came to extreme age. He flourished about the yere of our lord .CCx. yeres. Saynt Cyprian whan he lysted to reade the warkes of Tertulliane, he wolde bydde his seruant brynge to hym his mayster. Teruncium, a poyse or coyne of thre onces. Tesca, a place where mistical ceremonies were exercysed. Tesqua, places harde or difficile to come vp to, where the Romayns dyd practise theyr dyui∣nations by flieng of byrdes callyd auguria. Tessellatus, ta, tum, that whyche is wroughte with smalle pieces of stone, wodde, or bone, as in playenge tables or counterbourdes. Tessella, a graffe. Tessera, that whiche is in euery part square as a dye. also it is a dye, moreouer a watchword or priuy token gyuen to souldiours also a to∣ken gyuen to people to receyue corne of the kynges almes. also a tayle, whereon is scored or marked the number of thynges receyued, whiche is also callyd Tesserula. Tesseradecas, fouretene. Tesserarius, he that gyueth the watcheworde. Tesserulae, lyttell pauynge tyles. Tesso, tessi, tessere, to dispoyle or pull of a gar∣ment or harneys by vyolence. Testa, a sharde of a potte or tyle. also an erthen pot. also all maner of shell fyshe. Testaceus, a, um, that whiche hath a shell. Testeus, idem. ❀Testaceum flagellum, a prouerbe applyed to sodayn alteration of thynges, or of banish∣ment vnlooked for. Testamentarius, a forger of testamentes. Testamentarius, ria, rium, pertaynynge to te∣stamentes. Testamentum, a testament. Testatim, in pieces or shardes. Testatio, & testimonium, wytnesse. Testator, toris, he that maketh a testament. Testatus, he that is dead, and hath made a wyl also openly knowen of all men or proued. Testiculor, aris, ari, to putte the male to the fe∣male. Testillor, idem. Testiculus, of a knowen sygnification. Testificatio, a wyenes bearynge. Testificator, & testificatrix, he or she that bea∣reth wytnesse. Testificor, caris, cari, o beare wytnesse. Testimonium, & testatio, wytnesse borne of a thynge done. Testis, he that beareth wytnesse. Sine teste dolere, to be sorowfulle withoute semblaunt. Testes, be also a mans genytours. Testor, aris, ari, to beare wytnesse, to calle to wytnesse, to pray god. Testu, olde wryters vsed for testa. Testuaceum, that whiche is boyled in an ear∣then potte. Testudinatum tectum, a roufe, which is holow in foure partes, vaulted. Testudo, dinis, a snayl. also an engyn of warre to beate downe walles, whiche was made of bourdes, and couered with lether, or other thynges, whyche wolde not bourne. Within it was a piece of tymber, that hadde a great hoke of yron at the end, which piece mought be plucked backe, and putte forthe with the strength of men, and therwith plucke stones out of the walles of townes besyeged. It is also the roufe or vaulte of a house. Testus, stus, is a panne, wherein tartes, and o∣ther lyke thynges of paste are baken. Tetanicus morbus, idem quod Tetanos. Tetanothra, a medycine, wherwith the face of a man or woman is made smothe withoute wrynkles. Tetanos, whan the synites are styffe, soo that a man can not bowe some part of his body. Tetarmorion, the fourthe part of the zodiake cirkle, wherin are the .xii. sygnes. It is alsoo that, which astronomers do cal the quadrate aspect of planettes. Te te, thy selfe. Teter, tetra, tetrum, foule, stynkyng, cruell. Teterrimus, a, um, mooste fowle or stynkynge, or cruell. Teterrimè, moste abhomynably. Tethys, the wyfe of Neptun{us}, callyd goddesse of the sea. sometyme it is taken for the sea. Tetinierit, for tenuerit. Tetinus, for tenus. Tettigoniae, lyttell grassehoppes. Tettigometrae, the mother of grassehoppes. Tetracinus, a coygne, whyche was in valewe foure dragmas, or olde poyse grotes, of .viii. to an ounce.
Tetracolon, a sentence hauynge .iiii. membres. Tetradoron, of foure handbredthe. Tetragonus, a, um, a thynge hauynge fore cor∣ners. Tetragrammaton, the name of god, whyche the Iewes do calle Ineffabile, that is to say, vnspeakable. Tetragrammaton, in greeke, sygnifieth of foure letters. Tetrametrum, a kynde of meter, hauyng but foure feete. Tetrarcha, the rule of the fourthe parte of a royalme. Tetrasyllabum, of fowre syllables, as Im pe ra tor. Tetr, sharply, cruelly, wyckedly. Tetrices, water, wherewith gardeynes are watered. Tetricus, a sowre felow, and alway vnplesant. Tetrinno, are, to swymme lyke a ducke. Tetritudo, crueltie or sharpenes. Tetrius, more sharpe or cruell. Tetro, trare, to make foule, to pollute, to make bytter. Tetulit, for tulit. Teucer, & Teucrus, the name of a kynge of Troyanes. alsoo of the sonne of Telamone the valyant greke. Teucer, Teucra, crum, idem quod Troianus, of Troy. Teucrium, an herbe, whiche Anto. Musa, sup∣posethe to be that whyche is callyd Pim∣pinella. Teumesus, a lyttell hylle in Boeotia. Teumesus leo, a lyon, whyche Hercules dydde slea whan he was a chylde, and of his skynne made hym a cote. Teurion, the herb which is also called tripoliū. Teuta, a quene of Illiria, whyche lyued euer chaste, and vanquished many noble capitay∣nes, and dyuers hostes of the Romayns. Teutates, was in olde tyme amonge the french men taken for Mercurius. Teuthania, a piece of the countrey of Troy. Teutones, people nowe callyd Almaynes. Texo, texui, texere, to weaue a wynde threde. Alsoo to make, to buylde, to write, to gather, to ornate. Texta, an hearelace, wherewith the heare is bounden vp. Textilis, le, that which is weaued or wounden. Textim, an aduerbe, sygnifyenge in weauyng or wyndyng vp. Textor, toris, & textrix, tricis, he or she that weaueth or wyndeth. Textrina, & textrinum, the place where thyn∣ges be weaued or wounden. also the crafte of weauynge. Textrix, & textricula, a woman whyche wor∣keth in a frame or stoole. Textura, the weauynge. Textus, & textum, the texte. ¶T ANTE H. THalamus, a chaumber where the hous∣bande and the wyfe do lye togyther. Thalasicus, chamblette. Thalassio, uide Talassio. ❀Thalassus bonorum, a prouerbe applyed to them that promyse greate thynges, as a man wolde say, a worlde, a countray of welthe. In Cambrydgeshyre the vulgarword is, a mynd of good. Thalassomeli, is a lykour made of honye, salte water, and rayne water, and is putte into a vessell rased with pytche. Thales, a phylosopher, whiche was one of the seuen wyse men of Grecia. Thalestris, was a quene of Amasones, whyche came to kynge Alexander with thre hundrede women with her, to the intent to haue yssue by hym and his men: and whan she percei∣ued, that she and her ladyes were sped, they departed home agayne. Thala, one of the graces, whyche the auncient poetes dyd suppose to be oone of the dough∣ters of Iupiter, and gyuers of dilectable spe∣che, and pleasant pronunciation. Thallia, the pyllynge of an oynyon or garlike. Thamyras, was he whyche fyrste playde on a harpe, without syngynge therto. Thamnos, in latyne arbustum. Thanatos, mors in latyn. Thapsus, an yle by Sicile. Thapsia, an herbe lyke to fenell, and hath a ye∣lowe flowre, and a flatte rounde sede. Tharia, pyckelle, wherein fysshe is salted and kepte. Tharsos, a cytie in Cilicia. Thasia, an almonde. Thasia, nux, called also graeca. Thasij, men of the yle callyd Thasus in Egypt Thasium, a certayne wyne, which is in Egypt. Thaa, in greke is a meruayle or myracle. Theatralis, le, & theatricus, ca, cum, that whi∣che pertayneth to theatrum. Theatridium, a diminutiue of theatrum. Theatrum, a place made halfe rounde, wherein the people assembled to beholde playes and sundrye exercyses. sometyme it sygnifieth the multitude that beholdeth. Thebae, arū, Theba, bae, & Thebe, bes, the name of cities, wherof one was in Egypt, builded by Busirides, an other in Boeotia, builded by Cadmus, an nother in Cilicia, where An∣dromaches, the wyfe of Hector was borne. Thebaice, & thebaides, dates of the best sorte.
Thebais, idis, & idos, a countray of Egypt. It is also the name of a boke made by Statius the poete. Thebanus, na, num, a man of Thebes. Theca, a case, a shethe or scaberde, a boxe. Theleboae, people of an yle callyd Capreae, whyche lyeth agaynst Naples. Theleboij, idem. Thelephus, a kynge, whyche camme in the ayde of the Troyanes, and was slayne by Achilles. Theligonium, an herbe, whyche hath bearies lyke to an olyue. Thelphusa, a citie in Arcadia. Thelphussium, uel Thelphossion, a citie in Boeotia, where Pyndarus praysed Bacchus Thelypteris, sheferne, or the female ferne. Thema, matis, a thynge purposed to be dyspu∣ted or reasoned, it is also a fygure, wherin a∣stronomers doo wryte the state of heauen, in placynge or settynge the planettes in suche sy∣gnes and degrees, as they be in at the tyme of a mans natiuitie, or whan any thyng shall happen that they serche for. Thembinacha, a countray callyd also Nemia. Themes, an olde towne in the yle of Cypres, where brasse was fyrst founde? Themis, one of the systers of Iupyter, she was callyd the goddesse, whiche commanded men to aske that whyche was lefulle. There was an other woman called Themis, which was callyd also Carmentis, it was sometyme ta∣ken for fas, lefull. Themiscyra, a cytie in Capadocia, afterward callyd Caesaria. Themisones, people by Licia. Themistius, a phylosopher whiche wrate com∣mentaries on Aristotles warkes. Themistocles, a noble capytayn of the Atheni∣enses, whiche being expellyd out of his coun∣trey, and commen to Xerxes kyng of Persia, was sent by hym with a great army agaynst the Athenienses, but whan he perceyued his countrey in peryll to be dystroyed, he dranke poyson, and chase rather to dye, than eyther to be vnfaythfull to Xerxes, or els to dystroye his countrey, although it were vnkynde to∣warde hym. Thensa, a halowed carte or charyot. Theocritus, a poete of Grecia, whyche wrate Bucolica, or the contention of herdmen. Theologia, dyuinitie. Theomenia, the wrath of god. Theonino dente rodere, to rebuke a manne shamefully. Theophrastus, a noble phylosopher, and of ex∣cellent eoquence. Theos, in greke is god. Theotocos, the mother of god. Theorema, speculation. Theoria, speculation, vnderstandynge. Theopolis, the chiefe citie of Syria, callyd al∣so Antiochia. Thera, a cytie by Athenes. Theramnum, a cytie in Thessalia. Theriace, ces seu theriaca, tryakle. Thereotrophion, a place where wylde beastes are kepte, as a forest or parke. Therioma, a soore of the priuy members, wher∣by all the partes theraboute, are corrupted, and therof issueth blacke and stynkynge hu∣mour. Theristrum, a thynne vayle, which the women of Palestina dyd weare. Thermae, are bathes of hotte water. Thermefacio, cere, to chaufe or make one hote with outragious eatynge and drynkynge of hote thynges. Thermopolium, a place where meates and drynkes were solde, wherewith menne were made hotte or warme in colde wether. Thermodoon, a ryuer in Cappadotia. Thermodonticus, ca, cum, pertaynynge to that ryuer. Thermopoto, tare, to drynke hotte or warme drynke. Thermopylae, a mountayne, whyche passeth through Grece, hauynge a narowe entrye or passage, where two thousande Lacedemony∣ans, with theyr capytayne Leonidas, faught agaynste fyue hundred and .xxviii. thousande Persyans, and resysted them two dayes, vn∣tyll the sayde Lacedemoniens were all slayne. Therpsichore, one of the muses. Thersites, was a prynce that camme with the Grekes to the siege of Troy, whiche in per∣sone and condytions was of all other mooste defourmed. Thesaurizo, are, to gather treasure. Thesaurus, & thesaurum, treasure. Theseus, sonne of Egeus kynge of Athenes, a stronge man and valyant, and the company∣on of Hercules, and in famous actes nexte vnto hym, whiche was moch defaced by bre∣kynge his fayth, whiche he had promysed to Ariadne the doughter of Minois kynge of Creta, whome he lefte in a deserte yle calyd Naxus, for the whiche as Vergyle wryteth, he is perpetually tourmented on a wheele in helle. Thesiphon, tis, a citie in Parthia, not far from Seleucia, the great citie of Assyria. Thesis, a clause in wrytynge or speakyng, whi∣che contayneth a sentence. Thesmophoria, the ceremonyes of Ceres the goddesse of grayne. Thesmophoros, was a name of Ceres. Thespia, a fre towne in Boeotia.
Thespis, a towne in Boeotia by the hyll called Helicon. Thespiades, the Muses. Thessalia, a region in Grece called also Aemo∣nia, sometyme Pandora, sometyme Pyrrhea, of some Pelasgia, of Homere Argopelasgi∣con, it is inuironed about with foure great and famouse hilles, on the cast the mountai∣nes of Pelion & Ossa, on the north with O∣limp{us}, on the west with Pindus, on the south with Othrys, it marcheth on Macedoniam on the este. The people were valiant men on horsebacke, and inuincible in battayle as Po¦lybras writeth, but very iniuste of theyr pro∣myse. The women there beinge wonderfulle wytches, tranfourmed men into the fygure of beastes. Thessalicus, ca, cum, of Thessalia. Thessalonica, a citie in Macedonia. Thetis, tidis, the mother of Achylles. Theucitis, a rushe growyng in Nabachia, whi∣che hath the taste of sharpewyne. Theositas, for sodalitas. Theutones, & theutonici, people in Germany called Duchemen. Thirromachus, one of the sonnes of Hercules by Megara. Thisias, he that is burste or broken in his stoones. Thideus, was the name of the father of Dio∣medes. Thyestes, the sonne of Pelops, and Hippoda∣mia, who aspyring to the kyngedome of My∣cenae, commytted auoutry with the wife of his elder brother Atreus, who therfore slewe the chylderne of Thyestes, and causing them to be rosted, made his brother to eate theym vnwares. Thieum, for succinum, aumbre. Thita praefigere, for condemnare. Thymelici, players of enterludes. hereby wold the place be corrected in the digestes.  de his qui notantur infamia, where for Temelici wolde be put Thymelici, they be also com∣mon dauncers. Thoa, one of the nymphes. Thoas, the name of two kynges, one of Tau∣rica, the other of Lemnos. Thoes, be wulfes in Ethiope, Arrianus dothe call them tygres in India. Tholos, a scochen or small tergate, also the sil∣dynge of a house, or a rounde house. Thomices, lyches of hempe, wherwith halters are made, they be also lyttell bosters, whiche men do weare whan they cary burdens, for fretynge of theyr neckes and shulders with cordes or ropes. Thon, nis, he that fyrste broughte physike in the fourm of a sciens, among the Egiptians Thoota, the daughter of Phorcus, on whome Neptunus gate Polyphemus. Thoracatus, he that weareth curettes or brest plates. Thorax, racis, is properly the hole bulke of a man from the necke to the myddell, it is also curettes or brest plates. some tyme it signify∣eth a towre. Thous, a duke of Troye. Thracia, a Region in Eurupa ioynynge vnto Macedoniā and Mysiā, & hath on the north the ryuer called Donow, on the easte the sea called Pontus, on the southe the sea called Aegeū, therin is the citie of Constantinople. Thraceas, uel thrassias, a northwest wynde. Thrasimedes, the sonne of Nestor. Thrasomenus, a ryuer in Italy nyghe to Perusia. Thrax acis, a man of Thracia. Threces, idem quod gladiatores. Threnodia, a mournynge songe. Threnos, a lamentacion, whiche was vsed at buryenge. Thressa, a woman of Thracia. Throni, be one of the .ix. orders of angels. Thronus, the seate or chayre of an emperour or kynge. Thrulla, a truell, whiche masons, tilers, and pargettours do vse for layenge of morter. Thrullisso, are, to laye on morter. Thryallis, an herbe called Rosecampyne. Thryps, a mowthe. Thule, an yle beyonde Scotlande. Thunnus, a fyshe called Tuny. Thuribulum, a sensar. Thuringia, Thuryn in Fraunce. Thurini, a people in Italye. Thuriferus, ra, rum, that whiche beareth Frankynsence. Thurifico, to make a perfume, or to sence. Thurius, a, um, of incense. Thus, thuris, frankyncense. Thuscana, a citie in Italye. Tusculani, a people by Rome. Tusculanum, a place not fer from Rome, wher Tullius, Cato, Varro, and diuerse other no¦ble Senatours of Rome had manour places. Thusculum, a diminutiue of thus, Also a citie Latium. Thyas, a woman whiche offereth sacrifice to Bacchus. Thyasus, a daunce dedicate to Bacchus. Thyella, a storme. Thymbra, an herbe called sauery. Thymele, les, a woman, whiche fyrst taught daunsynge in open places. Thymelici, maye be called daunsers of Mo∣risdaunces. Thymiama, matis, a swete perfume.
Thymus, an herbe called tyme. Thymum, a wart, which is as gret as a beane Thynnus, a fyshe called Tuny. Thyridion, a wycket or lyttell dore. Thyrsus, the stalke of lettyse and of other her∣bes, whiche maye be eaten. somme do take it for a speare with a sharpe heade, which had boughes and leaues of yuy wrapped aboute them: suche speares dydde Bacchus and his flocke of drunken harlottes, beare in theyr handes. Lucretius the poete taketh thyrsum for fury of an ardent mocion. some do name it to be a longe steme and streyghte, suche as is of a esyll, or suche as do growe in fennes hauynge blacke knappes and rounde. ¶T ANTE I. TIARA, an ornament, whiche the wo¦men of Persia did weare on their hea∣des, whiche was rounde, and couered onely the hynder parte of theyr heades. prin∣cis and pristes vsed also to weare it. Tiatura, a citie in the countray of Misia. Tibareni, people in Scithia, beinge in Asia. Tiberias, a citie in Galilea. Tiberis, a riuer called Tiber in Italy whiche commynge from the mountayne called Apen ninus, diuideth Ethruriam from Vmbria. Tibia, the leg, properly the shanke or shyn bone it is also an instrument called a shalme. Tibialis, le, perteynynge to shalmes. Tibiale, lis, pluraliter tibialia, legge harneys, called greaues. Tibicen, & tibicina, he or she that bloweth a trumpette or shalme. Tibicen, is also any thynge, wherby is sustey∣ned, as a shore or proppe. Tibi, to the. Tibicis, a riuer in Scythia. Tibin, a baskette or coffyn made of wyckers or bull russhes, or barke of a tree: suche oone was Moyses put in to by the daughter of Pharao. Tibilustria, were dayes whan men wente with trumpettes, as it were in procession aboute theyr lambes. Tibini, tunes made with shalmes. Tiburtes, people in Italy nyghe to Rome. Ticinum a citie in Lumbardye nowe called Pauia. Tigillus, a rafter. Tignarius faber, a Carpenter that maketh a house of tymber. Tignus, & tignum, a rafter of a house, which beareth the roufe. t is also generally all the timber, whiche serueth to a house. Tigrane, a riuer in the countrey of Media. Tigranes, the proper name of a kynge of Me∣dia of the greatter Armeny. Tigris, a beaste of a wonderfull swyftnes, it is also one of the foure ryuers, which commeth out of Paradise, called Gion, it passethe through Armeniam and Mediam. Tigurini, people of Germanye, whiche do in∣habyte the fourth parte of Heluetia, or Swi¦zerlande. Tile, an yle beyonde Scotlande, called also Thule. Tilia, a tree, whiche some do suppose to be bir∣che, not withstandynge our byrche doth not beare fruite as great as a beane, rounde and longe, and lyke to yuy beries in the which are sedes lyke to Arage sede, as Theophrastus writeth. Tilium, a citie in the weste parte of Sardinia, on the sea syde. Tilos, an yle in the Indian sea, wherin is plen¦ty of perle, and trees of dyuerse fruites, and the leaues of trees there growynge do neuer fall, also wolle groweth on trees there, whi∣che do beare gourdes of the gretnes of quin∣ces, and beinge rype do open, in the whiche do appiere the wolle, wherof are made fyne and preciouse clothes. About that place doth begynne the mountayne of Caucasus, why∣che dothe passe throughe a great parte of the worlde. Timalos, an herbe and flower growynge in waters, called commonlye of apothecaryes Nenufer. Timaeus, a noble philosopher of Pythagoras secte. Timanus, a ryuer in Italy besides Aquilia. Timens, he that feareth for a tyme. Timidus, he that alwaye feareth, called ty∣morouse. Timeo, mui, mère, to feare or dreade. Timeo te, I feare the as myne ennemy, leste thou shalte do me harme. Timeo tibi, I am aferde of the as my frende leste thou shuldest haue any harme. Timeo mihi abs te, I am afrayde that thou wylte do me harme. Timeo furem pomis, I am afrayd that one wyll steale myne appulles. Timeo moriatur, I am aferde that he wyll dye. Timidèè, fearefully. Timiditas, feare. Timiopôlae, ingrossers or regraters of mar∣kets, whiche do bye moche corne or vyttayls together, to make it scarse and dere. Timor, moris, & timos, feare of some euyll commynge. Timotheus, was the name of a noble capitayn of the Athenienses; who for the good fortune that he had in battayle, was paynted lienge a slepe, and hauynge by hym a nette pitched,
wherin fortune was taken. Also a cunnynge musitian, whiche vsed to take of his scholers which had lerned before, double salarie, that he toke of other, whiche neuer lerned, sayeng that he toke with them double labours, that is to saye, to make them to forget that whi∣che they had lerned afore, and than to teache them perfytely. Tin, olde writers vsed for Eum. Tina, & tinia, a great bolle, whiche being full of wine, euery man mought drynke therof as moche as he lysted. Tinctor, toris, a dyer. Tinctilis, le, that whiche is dyed. Tinctura, dyenge. Tinea, a mothe, they be also wormes in the bea¦ly, also wormes bredynge in bee stalles. Tineosus, a, um, full of mothes. Tinge, a promontorie or elbowe of Affrica. Tingitana, a parte of Mauritania or Barba∣ria agaynste Spayne. Tingo, xi, gere, to deepe a thynge into lycour to dye colours. Tinnio, nire, to rynge or make a sound as met¦tall dothe, sometyme as in a mannes eare. Tinnimentum, a ryngyng in the eare of a man Tinnunculus, a byrde, which maketh a sharpe ryngynge noyse, and is of the kynde of hau∣kes, and in some place dothe brede in houses whiche with his voyce dryueth awaye other hawkes, and therfore the byrdes of hym are kepte in erthen pottes couered with clay, and hanged vp in douehouses, which causeth cul¦uers meruaylously to loue theyr house. Tinnulus, la, lum, sharpe in sounde, as that whiche is made by beatynge on mettall. Tintinaculus, he that beateth with roddes, a transgressour of a lawe. Tintinabulum, a lyttell bell. Tintino, nare, to ringe lyke a bell. Tiphernum, a towne in Italy. Tiphis, an excellent carpenter, the which foūd fyrst the meane to gouerne a shyppe. it is al∣so a rother. Tipula, a worme, whiche runneth on the wa∣ter as other wormes do on the lande, and hath syxe feete. Tiresias, a poet of Thebes, who finding twoad¦ders ingēdring togither & striking thē with a staffe, he forthwith was turned into the form of a woman. A leuen yeres after he lyke wise finding two serpentes together he also strake them, and became eftsones a man. Iupyter and Iuno contendynge to gether, whether the man or the woman was more prone vnto lechery, they chase Tiresium arbytre, whiche had experience in bothe kyndes, whoo gaue sentence on Iupiters parte, wherwith Iuno beinge angry toke his syghte from hym. but Iupiter to comforte hym in his blyndenesse gaue to him that part of diuinitie to know al that was done or shoulde happen, by reason wherof he was had in great honour, and his aunsweres were estemed equall to theym of Apollo. Tirius, a Ryuer in Grecia: also the countreye where Hercules was borne in Peloponesso, nowe called Morea. Tirinthius, was a surname of Hercules. Tirinthis, a famouse olde citie in Grecia. Tis, for tui, the genitiue case of tu. Tisiphone, one of the furies of Helle, whiche was supposed to tourment homicides, or sle∣ers of men. Titanis, titanidos, the daughter of Titan cal∣led also Latona. it is taken also for the mone. Titan, & Titanus, was the brother of Saturn and is taken for the sonne. Tithymalus, an herbe called spourge whereof be .vii. sortes, all hauynge mylke sharpe and bytynge. reade in Cataputia, & Lathyris, & Ricinum. Titillo, are, to ticle, to prouoke or meue plea∣sauntely. Titio, onis, a fyrebrande or wod, whiche hath ben in the fyre. Titiuillitium, signifyeth nothynge. Titubantia, stammerynge. Titubo, are, to stacker in speakynge or goinge, as a man beinge drunke or sycke. Titubanter, stameringly. Titulotenus, no further than his title. Titulus, the title or inscription of a warke or acte. sometyme dignitie, also a monument or other remembraunce. Titus, the name of a man. Titus Liuius, the mooste excellente hystorien or wryter of stories, in whom was the fountain of the mylke of pure eloquence. Titonus, the sonne of Laomedon kyng of Troy whome Aurora tooke to her husebande, and therfore she is of the poetes called Titoni a coniux. Tityus, the sonne of the Erthe, whome poetes fayned to be slayne by Apollo, bycause he wolde haue rauysshed Latona his Syster. And therefore lyeth in hell, hauynge an Egle alwaye eatynge his lyuer. And it is also sayd that his bodye was in lengthe nyne furlong. Wytnesse Tibulle, whiche was a Poete, and also a greatte louer, and therfore coulde not lye. Tlepolemus, was the kynge of the Rhoodes, whiche came to the battayle of Troye with nyne shyppes.
¶T ANTE M. TMolus, a mountayne in Lidia, wheron dyd growe great plenty of saffron and vynes. it is also a lyttell bushe, whiche beareth floures of saffron colour. ¶T ANTE O. TOdi, lyttell byrdes, I suppose it be the byrde, whiche is called a titmouse. Toga, the common garment of men and women, called a gowne. And bycause the Ro¦maynes specially did weare that garment in the tyme of peace, toga was taken for peace as arma was for warre. Toga praetexta, a garmente whiche the Ro∣maynes dydde were afore that they were of the age of xvi yeres. Afterward it was worn of them, whiche were in auctoritie. Toga polymita, a garment made with thredes of sondry colours, as motley or bauldekyn. To gata Comoedia, a commedye or enterlude, wherein the maners of the Romaynes were expressed. Togata Gallia, the Countraye nowe called Lumbardye. Toga candida, was a garmente, whiche they dyd weare, that sued for any greate offyce in the citie of Rome. Togati, apparayled in gownes. Togatus, he that weareth a gowne. Tolerantia, sufferaunce. Toleranter, pacientely. Toliapis, the Ile of Tenet by Kente. Tolles, a waxynge kernell. Tolleno, nonis, that wherin any thyng is put or layde to be drawen vp. sometyme a bucket wherwith water is drawen vp. Tollenon, an engine to drawe vp water which hath a great poyse at the one ende. Tolero, rare, to suffer, to endure, to beare, to lyue poorely, or nyghely. Tolerare uitam, to lyue, or to maynteyne his lyfe. Tolerabilis, rabile, that whiche maye suffer or beare. Tollo, sustuli, seu tetuli, tollere, to lyfte vppe to sette vp, to take away, to nourishe, to de∣ferre or prolonge, to haue a chyld by a womā. Tollere clamorem, to crie out. ❀Tollere cristas, to set vp the crest, applyed or them that be proude or arrogant, and doo stretche vp theyr browes with a disdaynefull countenaunce. Tolle digitum, holde vp thy fynger, confesse thy selfe vanquished. Tollere gradum, to sette forthe, or to mar∣che forthe. Tolle hanc patinam, take awaye this dyshe. Verum, quod erit natum tollito, what so e∣uer is borne, put it to nourishynge. Omnes tollo ex hoc die in alium diem, I put them all of from one day to an other. Tollere minas, to thretten or menace. Animos tollere, to be proude. Cachinnum tollere, to laugh out of measure In coelum tollere, to prayse excedyngly. Tolosa, a citie in Guyen, called Tolouse. Tolutarius, & tolutaris equus, an aumblynge horse. Tolutiloquentia, a swyfte or faste speche. Tolutim, an amblynge pace. Tolutim loqui, to speake faste one worde af∣ter an other. Tomaculae, Tomacula, & Tomacla, a cer∣tayne sorte of pouddynges, properly swynes pouddynges. Tomentum, floxe, whiche is shore of wollen clothe, also lockes clypped of whyte wolle. Tomices, hempen cordes, also colers, whiche are put on carthorses, for hurtynge of theyr neckes. Tomos, is taken for a volume where dyuerse warkes of oone author be seuered in to sun∣drye partes. Also a citie in the countreye of Pontus. Tomyris, was a noble queene of Massagetis in Scithia, agaynste whom whan Cirus the great kynge of Persia came, and had slayne her sonne, she pitchyng a fyld agaynst him, & of purpose hauyng great plenty of vyttayles in her pauilions, after a lyttell skyrmyshe she and her hoste fledde. And whan Cirus had a whyle folowed the chace, and blowen to the retraicte, he came to her campe, and fynding greate plenty of vyttayle, he and his people dyd so moche fylle them selfes therwith, that fallynge a sleape, they were all taken by the queene, and slayne, and she causynge a great vessell to be fylled with the bloude of Cirus, and the Pertians, dyd caste his heade ther∣into, saying, Bloudde thou hast thyrsted, and nowe drynke therof thy fyll. Tonarion, a certayne shaulm with a soft soūd, on the whiche in the old tyme some oratours vsed to haue, to playe by theym, whan they pleaded, that by the tunes of the shaulme, theoratour moughte moderate and order his pronunciation. Tondeo, totondi, tondere, to clyp or sheare. Tonesco, tonui, tonescere, to thunder. Tongri, the duchy of Brabant. Tonimus, for tonamus. Tonitrus, & tonitru, & tonitruum, thunder. Tonitus, idem. Tonitruo, are, to thunder. Tono, nare, to thunder, to make a gret sound
or noyse, to speake loude. Tonsae, shepe, whiche be shorne or clypped. al∣so ores of botes or shyppes. Tonsilis, le, that whiche is shorne or clypped. Tonsilla, a poste, hauynge the one ende armed with yron, whiche is pitched into the erthe, to the ende that shyppes or botes maye be ty¦ed therat. Tonsillae plurali, a disease within the chekes, and mouthe lyke to great kernelles. Tonsi montes, hylles without woddes. Tonsor, & ronstrix, tricis, he or she which clip¦peth or sheareth. Tonsorius, a, um, perteynynge to clyppynge. Tonstrix, tricis, a woman barbar. Tonstricula, idem. Tonstrina, a place where they do vse to clyp, or a barbers shoppe. Tonsus, a, um, shorne or clypped. Tonus, a tune or accente. also the space or dy∣staunce, whiche is betwene the erthe and the moone. Toparcha, he that hath the gouernaunce and charge of one only countrey. Toparchia, the rule of one countrey. Topazion, & topazius, a preciouse stone of the colour of golde. Tophus, a kynde of stone, whiche is sone re∣solued in to sande Topiarium, a warke made of trees, bushes bri¦ers, or herbes, for pleasure, and conteyned places to sytte or walke in, as it is vsed now with box, eglantine, iacymine, and other like trees or thornes, that be flexible, or wyll be wounden. Topiarius, he that maketh suche warkes. Topiaria, the warke. Topica, warkes in that parte of logike, which declareth the places, out of the whiche argu¦mentes maye be inuented, that moste proper∣ly perteyneth to oratours. Topographia, the description of a place, as of a countrey or citie. Topper, the olde writers vsed for sone, shorte∣ly, or quickely. Toral, & oralium, in plurali numero, tora∣lia, euery thynge that lyeth on a bed, as shee∣tes, blankettes, and couerliddes. In the olde tyme it were certayne floures and swete her∣bes wounden together in ropes, and hanged before the place, where men dyd lye. Like as nowe they vse in London at Mydsommer to hange afore theyr dores. Torcular, aris, & torculare, & torculum, a presse for wyne, sider, or vertiuyce. Torcularius, a, um, belonginge to a presse. Toreuma, matis, & tereumatum, warke im∣bored in mettall or stone. Toreutis, a grauer. Toreutice, ces, the crafte of grauynge. Tormen, minis, frettynge or tourmente in the bealy and guttes. Tormina, idem. Tormentum, tourmente, or an engyn to tour∣mente men, generally all ordinaunce pertey∣nynge to warre. Torminosus, he that hath tourmentes or fret∣tynge in his guttes. Tornacum, a towne called Tornay. Tornatilis, le, that whiche is tourned with a whele. Torniamen, maye be nowe taken for a tour∣nayment or iustes. Torno, are, to torne or warke with a whele, as tournours done. Tornus, the instrument or wheele. Torpedo, dinis, slouthefulnesse. also a fysshe, whiche in the takynge maketh the handes of them that do drawe, to be astonyed or deade for the tyme. Torpeo, & torpesco, pui, torpere▪ uel torpe∣scere, to be astonyed, or slowe. Torpor, poris, a debilitation or feblinge of mynde, an vnaptnes to do any thynge. Torporo, rare, to astonie, or make astonyed. Torquatus, a ringe doue, or stocke doue. it is he also that weareth a colar or chayne. Torqueo, torsi, quêre, to wynde in, to whirle about lyke a whiele, to susteyne or beare vp, to tourment, to spynne. Torquere telum, to throwe a darte or iaue∣lyn, that he runne rounde. Torquere saxa, to tourne great stones. Oculum torquere, to loke a syde. Torques, a colar, chayne, or bye of golde or sil¦uer, suche as is worne by knyghtes or esquy∣ers about theyr neckes. Torrefacio, cere, to broyle or rost at the fyre or by the heate of the sonne. Torrens, tis, a streame, that commeth downe of hylles, whiche is caused by moche raygne or snowe. Torrens, a participle, signifiethe flowynge with a great swepe. Torrentior, more flowynge with a greatter violence. Torreo, rui, rere, idem quod orrefacio. Torresco, re, to be broiled or rosted, or dryed. Torridae zonae, ar two girdels imagined in the fyrmament on euery syde of the equinoctiall lyne, vnder whiche gyrdels the people which inhabite there, are burned with the seruente heate of the sonne, bycause the sonne abydeth longeste in those .ii. places. & are also named Tropicus cancri, & tropicus Capricorni. Torridus, da, dum, dryed or burned. Tortilis, le, that whiche is bente or bowed. Torris, a sticke of fyre. Tortiuum uinum, wyne of the laste presse. Torto, tare, to tourment vehemently,
Tortor, toris, a tourmentoure, or he that ca∣steth a stone with a slynge. Tortum, an engin, to throw great sones with Tortuosus, a, um, wounden or tourned many wayes. Tortus, ta, tum, croked. Toruè, toruum, torua, toruiter, properly in beholdynge sowerly or grymly. Toruinus, an apparayle of a womans heade. Torus, a bedde. it was sometyme made with herbes wounden together. Tori, the brawnes of the armes and legges, or the fleshe myxte with sinewes. Torosus, a, um, mighty or stronge in brawnes of the legges and armes. Torsio, onis, Theodorus Gaza, and Longo∣lius supposed to be a sturgion. Paulus Ioui¦us is of a contrary opinyon. Torulus, a lyttell bedde. Toruè, sturdily in loke. Toruitas, tatis, sturdines. Toruus, ua, uum, cruell and sturdy in lokinge. Tostus, ta, tum, tosted or rosted. Totidem, verily so many, euen as many. Tot, as many. Toties, so many tymes. Totus, ta, tum, all the hole, euery whit. Toxicum, venym or poyson. ¶T ANTE R. TRbales, a certayne tourment. Trabalis, le, perteynynge to a beame. Trabalis clauus, an yron pin or greate nayle wherwith beames are mode fast to the rafters. Trabea, a kyrtell worne by kinges vnder their mantelles of astate. Trabica nauis, a ship made with great bemes. Trabs, & trabes, a beame of a house. Trachale, the ouer parte of a fyshe called Mu∣rex, of whom purple colour is made. Trachea, the weson or pype of the lunges. Trachelum, the myddell parte of the sayle of a shyppe. Trachelus, the chine of a man or beaste, frome the heade to the haunche. Trachida, trachina, & trachurus, I suppose is a banstikle. Trachinia, a kynde of roses, not perfytely red, lyke to them, that we call frenche roses. Traconia, a roughnes within the eye lyddes. Traconitis, a countrey in Syria ioynynge to Arabia. Tractabilis, treatable, that maye be intreated Tractare, to handell. Tractim, on length, a longe tyme or space. Tracto, tare, to intreate. Haec arte tractabat uirum. She handled the man craftelye, or of that sorte. also to vse or exercyse, to order or gouerne. Tractare rationes, to meddell with reckenin¦ges, to be accomptable. Tractorium, a wyndlas to drawe vppe heuy thynges. Tractus, us, a space▪ a countrey. Trado, didi, dere, to delyuer, also to teach, to commytte in truste to an other man. Mores opibus tradere, to set more by his ri∣chesse than by his honour. Per manus tradere, to leaue it from one to an other. Prouinciam tradere, to gyue in charge. Memoriae tradere, to put in writynge. Traditio, a tradition. Traduco, duxi, ducere, to brynge frome oone place to an other, to bringe ouer, to translate out of one language into an other. sometyme to dishonour. Traducere tempus, to passe the tyme, to bringe vp or nourishe. Traduces, vynes or trees trāslated from place to place. Tragacantha, a thyng lyke to a gumme which vulgarly they call Dragaganthum. Tragelaphus, a beaste in parte lyke a harte, in parte lyke a gote. Tragemata, that whiche are commonly called bankettynge dyshes. Tragice, cruelly, in the maner of a tragedy. Tragicum tueri, to loke grymly. Tragicus, a wryter of tragedyes. Tragoedia, a tragedy, whiche is an enterlude, wherin the personages do represent some hy∣story or fable lamentable, for the crueltie and mysery therin expressed. Tragoedus, he that exercyseth some parte in a tragedye. Tragonis, siue Tragion, a tree growynge in Candye, lyke to Iunyper, the iuyce wher∣of is lyke to mylke, and waxethe thycke lyke gumme. Tragum, is lyke a tyzan made of weate, it is also a fyshers nette called a dragge. Tragonia, an herbe nowe called Taragon, late sene in this realme, whiche hath a taste lyke gynger, whiche herbe layde to the lefte syde, consumeth the splene. Tragopa, a byrde in Ethiopia, greatter than an egle, & hath on his hed hornes lyke a gote. Tragopogus, a fyshe called a barbell. Tragoriganon, an herbe whiche I suppose is called Peniroyal, growynge wylde. Tragula, a iauelyn with a barbyd heade. Tragurium, an ile in the sea called Hadriaticū. Tragulam inijcere, to practise deceyte. Traha, a dray or sled drawen without wheles. Trahax, acis, a couetous personne, the whiche draweth all thynges vnto hym.
Traho, traxi, trahere, to drawe, to leade, to de¦ferre, to delaye, to extende, to remoue, to pro¦longe, to tary, to liue. At{que} egomet me adeo cum illis unà ibidem traho, And I my selfe taryed as longe with them. Et uos ut tutam tranquillam{que} fortu∣nam traheretis, mea perfeci uigilantia, And by my vygilancye I broughte to passe, that ye shoulde lyue in a sure and quiete prosperitie. Trahere diem, noctem, tempus, to passe the daye, the nyght or the tyme. Rubiginem trahere, to waxe rusty. Pallorem trahere, to be pale. In diuersum trahere, to bringe in doubt. Trahere in religionem, to make conscience of a thynge. Traijcio, ieci, ijcere, to leade ouer, to carye o∣uer, to brynge ouer, to srike through. Traiectitia pecunia, moneye caried ouer the sea. Traiectus, tus, a passage. Traiectio, idem. Trallis, a citie in Lidia, an other in Phrigia. Trallianus, a man of that citie. Tralucidus, da, dum, clere, that a man maye loke throughe. Trama, vn vnder garmente. Trames, mitis, a crosse waye. Trano, nare, to swymme ouer. Tranato, tare, idem. Tranquillè, softly without noyse. Tranquillitas, tranquillitie, rest, quietnes. Tranquillo, lare, to make quiete. Tranquillus, la, lum, quiet, in rest, peasyble. Tranquillum est, it is fayre wether. Tranquillus locus, a good place to rest in, a place of quietnes. Trans, ouer, from one place to an other. Transactio, an agrement vpon communicatiō Transactus, ta, tum, passed, longe agone, acheued. Transalpina Gallia, Fraunce on his syde, the mountaynes. Transalpinus, a, um, ouer the mountaynes of Alpes. Transcendo, dere, to go ouer, to excede. Trascindo, scidi, scindere, to cut on sonder. Transcribo, scripsi, scribere, to wryte out a co¦py. somtyme to translate, to gyue or delyuer, also the transposition of a possession from one to an other. Turne tot incassum fusos patiere labores. Et tua Dardaneis transcribi sceptra colonis Wylt thou Turnus suffer thy labours to be lost, and thy realme to be gyuen to the inha∣bytauntes of Troye? Transcurro, rere, to runne forthe. Transcurrit aestas, the sommer is passed. Transcursus, us, a course. In transcursu, In passynge forthe. Transenna, a loupe to loke out at, also a wyn∣dowe, or casemente. also a rope stretched out a snare or trappe. Transeo, siui, sire, to go forthe, to passe ouer, to passe. Transire domum, to go home. Transeunter, passynge by or ouer. Transfero, tuli, ferre, to cary or brynge from one place to an other, to translate from oone language to an other, or from ones possession to an others. Translatus, ta, tum, the participle. Transfigo, xi, gere, to thruste through. Transfuga, he that departeth frome his owne people or capytayne vnto the parte of the en∣nemyes, or of them that are suspected in time of truce. Transfodio, dere, to dygge throughe. Transfossus, a, um, digged or striken through Transfiguro, rare, to transfourme, to turne in to an other fygure. Transfretatio, a passage ouer the sea. Transfreto, tare, to passe ouer the sea. Transfugio, gere, to flee from place to place. Transfugere ad hostes, is to go and yelde hym to the contrary parte. Transfugium, an yeldynge to ennemies. Transfulgeo, gere, to shyne throughe. Transfundo, fudi, fundere, to poure oute of one vessell into an other, also to translate frō one to an other. Libentius omnes meas laudes (si modo sint aliquae meae laudes) ad te transfuderim. I haue more wyllyngly tourned my prayse (if I haue any prayse) vnto you. Transgredior, deris, di, to passe or go ouer or beyonde, to excede, to transgresse a lawe or commaundemente. Transgressio, is a fygure of retoryke, where a man leaueth the princypall matter, and en∣treth into an other thynge, and after retour∣neth to his matter. We commonly call it, a digression. Transgressus, us, a passynge ouer the sea. Transigere uitam, to passe his or theyr lyfe. Transigo, egi, igere, to dryue forthe, to treat a mater, to agree or condescende, or come to a poynte: as hapneth betwene men, whiche do contende for somewhat, to perfourme. Transilio, siliui, & silij, ire, to leape ouer. Transiluania, a countrey beyonde Hungarye, wherof the people were somtyme called Getae Transitio, a passinge ouer, a going forth. Transitus, idem. Transitorius, a, um, that which shortly passeth. Translatio, a translation, or bryngynge frome one place to an other. Translego, gere, to rede ouer.
Transluceo, cere, to shyne throughe. Transmarinus, na, num, that which commeth from beyonde the sea. Tranimigratio, a departynge or goinge frome one place to dwell in an other. Transmigro, grare, to go further, to dwelle further of, to transpose my dwellynge. Transmissio, a goinge or sendynge further or ouer. Transmitto, misi, mittere, to sende frome one place to an other, to go or runne quickely, to send shortly or quickely to passe ouer a water Transmittere mare, to passe ouer the sea. Transmittere tempus, to passe the tyme. Transmittere discrimen, to escape a danger. Tectū lapide transmittere, to throw a stone on the house. Bellum transmittere, to commyt the charge of a battayle to one. Transmitere literas, where paper soketh in inke, that the letters maye be perceyued on the other syde. Tēpus transmittere, to passe forth the time. Transmoueo, êre, to remoue from one place to an other. Transnato, are, to swym ouer. Transnomino, nare, to chaunge his name. Transpadanus, a, um, on this syde the ryuer called Padus, in Italy. Transpareo, rêre, to be sene through a thinge. Transpicio, spexi, spicere, to loke throughe. Transquietus, ta, tum, in quiet or reste frome henseforthe. Transtra, transoms whiche do go ouerwharte a house, also the seates, wheron they do syt, whiche do rowe in a shyppe or bote. Transtyberinus, na, um, that whiche is or dwelleth beyonde the riuer of Tiber. Transuado, are, & transuador, ari, to wade o∣uer a shalowe place of a ryuer. Transueo, uexi, uehere, to cary ouer. Transuerbero, are, to strike throughe. Transuersus, a, um, ouerthwarte, not straight or directe. Transuersum agere, to tourne hastely away from the purpose whiche a man went about. ❀Transuersum unguem non discedere, not to go a nayle bredth from it. A prouerbe sig∣nifienge a lyttell distaunce. Transuersum digitum, idem. Transuerto, cere, to turne awrye, or out of the ryght facion or waye. Transuideo, dêre, to se through a clere thinge. Transulto, tare, to leape ouer. Transumptum, that whiche is written out of a recorde, and approued vnder the kynges seale, or the signynge of a iudge. In the com¦mon lawe they call it an exemplification. som do also call it a transumpte. Transumptio, a figure called also Metalepsis, wherby one signifycation is gathered of an¦ther: as of Nox atra, a blacke nyghte, is ga¦thered Nox tenebricosa, a darke nyght. Transuolo, are, to flee ouer, or leape ouer, or to go or runne beyonde a place. Transumo, sumpsi, sumere, to take of or from an other, to remeue from one to an other Transuo, ere, to sowe throughe. Trapetes, petum, a myl wherin oyle is made Trapeza, a table, wheron an exchaunger doth tell moneye. Trapezita, an exchaunger or banker. Trapezus, zuntis, a Citie in the countreye of Pontus. Trapezuntius, a man of that citie. Trapit, olde writers vsed for Vertit. Trasibulus, was duke of Athenes whiche dely¦uered the citie from the .xxx. tirantes. Trasimenus, a ryuer by Perusium in Italye where Hanniball slewe Flaminium the con∣sull of Rome, and .xxiii. M. Romayne, and toke syxe thousand prisoners. Trastou, a certayne rosine or gumme, the beste of that whiche is called Gummihamoniacū. Traulius, he that speaketh with gret difficulte Trebia, a riuer in Italy by Placentia. Trebellicum uinum, seu Trebulanum uinum, wyne growynge about the riuer of Trebia, in Lumbardye, the Italyons doo call it Trebiana. Trebula, an olde towne nygh to Rome. Trebulani, men of that towne. Trecae, trecarum, a citie in Champaigne. Treceni, thre hundred. Trecenti, & trecentum, idem. Trecentenus, na, num, the thre hundreth. Trecentesimus, ma, mum, idem. Trecenties, thre hundred tymes. Tredecim, thyrtene. Tremebundus, he that trembleth moche. Tremefacio, feci, facere, to make to tremble or quake. Tremisco, scere, to tremble. Tremo, ere, to quake as one doth in a feuer. also to feare. Tremulus, he that quaketh for feare. Tremor, oris, quakynge, also feare. Trepidatio, tremblynge, feare. Trepidanter, fearefully, tremblynge. Trepido, dare, to feare, to make haste. Trepidus, da, dum, feareful, also he that doth a thynge hastely. Trepondo, thre pounde weyght. Tres, thre. Tressis, thre pounde. Treua, a citie in Almayne called Hamburgh. Treueris, a citie in Germany called Tryre. Treueri, people called Treues. Triambi, were thre whiche spake together in a tragedy.
Triangularis, re, hauyng .iii. corners. Triangulus, la, lum, thre cornerde. Triarchus, a master of a shyp with .iii. toppes. Triarij. souldyors that be set alway in the rere∣warde, whyche were the strongest men, they faught standyng, bowing their knies, as they wold rather dy than remeue frō their placis. Triatrus, a festiuall day kepte after the thyrde Idus of euery moneth. Tribaces, they which be worne with strypes. Triballi, people of a countray beyonde Hunga∣ry nowe callyd Seruia. Triboci, people of the countrey of Alsate. Tribrachus, a fote in meter of .iii. short siilables Tribula, & tribulū, a fiayle, or other lyke thing wherwith corne is threshed. Tribulis, a kynnesman that cometh of the same stocke that I do. Tribulor, aris, ari, to be troubled with heuynes of mynde. Tribulus, a bremble. Tribunal, the place where a Iudge sytteth in iudgement. Tribunatus, the offyce or dygnitie of a tribune. Tribunus, was an offycer amonge the Roma∣nes, hauynge chyefe iurysdyction amonge the communes. Also a Capytayne in warres, hauyng auctoritie ouer souldiours, to view & se that they were well armed and exercysed. Tribunitius, a, um, pertaynyng to the tribunes. Tribuo, buere, to gyue, sometyme to set moche by. Also to fauour. Tribus, bus, a part of the people, somttyme di∣uided into thre partes. It semeth that it was somtyme taken for a family or particular iu∣risdiction among the people, and therof com¦meth tribulis. And therefore the partition of the people of Israel were into .xii. Tribus. Hereof be sundry opinyons. Rede Calepine. Tributarius, he that payeth tribute. Tributim, by sundry famylyes or partes of the people. Tributum, trybute. Tricae, fethers in the fete of chykens and pyge∣ons, whiche do let them to go, and therefore al thynges whych do let a man ar callyd Tri∣cae. Vide extrico & intrico. Tricaptum, a garment, which was so fine, that it semed to be made of small heares. Tricenus, na, num, commeth of triginta, thyr∣ty. it is sometyme taken for tricentenum. Tricentuplus, a, um, thre hundred folde. Triceps, cipitis, hauynge three heedes. Tricerberus, a great hell hounde. Trichiae, be fyshes callyd Sardynes. Trichila, a vessell hauynge three lauers, out of the whiche water is poured. Trichomanes, an herbe callyd Maydenheare, whych groweth by welles and sprynges, and is a lytle herbe, in facion lyke to a ferne, the leafe therof being tourned as it were the bak syde forwarde, and is narowe the braunches wheron the leaues be, do glisten, and be very small, brown in colour, and bitter in tast, it is of a good temperance betwene hot and colde. Rede Adianton. Triclinarius, the seruant whiche dothe seruein the parlour. Triclinarius, a, um, pertaynyng to the parlour or dynynge chaumber. Triclinarium, idem quod triclinium. Triclinium, a parlour to sup in, wherein were thre tables and thre beddes. For in the olde tyme they vsed to lye, whan they dyd eate. Trcôlon, hauynge thre membres. Tricones, men hauynge sowre countenaunces, and that be neuer or seldome sene to laugh al∣so pykers of quarels. Tricongius, was one which dranke or he rested thre mesures of wyne, callyd Congij, whiche as I suppose, was thre galons and a pynt of our wyne measure. Wherfore Tiberius the Emperour promoted hym to honour, and at the last made hym Consul of Rome. Tricornium, that which hath thre hornes. Tricubitalis, le, of thre cubytes in measure. Tricubitus, ta, tum, idem. Tricus, a stone, whiche althoughe it be blacke, yet sheweth he at the rote blacke, in the myd∣dell sanguyne, at the toppe whyte. Tridacna, an oyster so great, that a man muste make of hym thre morsels. Tridens, tis, euery instrument, tole, or weapon hauyng thre teethe. Tridentum, a city in Italy, callyd Trent. Triduanus, a, um, of thre days continuance. Triduum, the space of thre dayes. Triennalis, le, of thre yeres. Triennium, the space of thre yeres. Triennis, ne, thre yeres olde. Triens, tis, a coyn which is the thyrde part of a pound, it is also a cup contaynyng that poise. Trientalis herba, an herbe whiche hath leaues as great as the coyne callyd triens. Triental, a vessel contaynyng the third part of that measure, which was named Sextarium. Trierarchus, the capytayn of a shyp, which is callyd trieris. Trieris, a great shyppe, whiche hath in it thre orders of seates for the rowers. Trietericus, ca, cum, for triennalis, that whiche hapneth to be done euery third yere. Trieteris, the space of thre yeres. Trifariam, in thre partes or .iii. maner of ways. Trifarius, a, um, of the same signification. Trifaux, faucis, hauyng thre chekes. Trifax, & triforū, a weapon of .iii cubites long. Trifer, ra, rū, that which bryngeth fruit thrise.
Triferus, ra, rum, idem. Trifera, is a medycine and other delycate spy∣ces, to expulse easyly corrupt humours. Trifidus, da, dum, dyuided into thre partes. Trifinium, the buttyng of thre fieldes, whiche ioyne togyther. Trifolium, may be taken for the generall name of all herbes hauynge three leaues. All be it there is one herbe callyd so proprely. Trifur, furis, more than a theefe, three tymes wars than a thefe. Semblablye tri, ioyned with any thynge, signifieth more. Triga, a carte drawen with thre horses. Trigarium, a certayne course with such cartis. Trigamus, he whyche hathe or hathe hadde thre wyues. Trigarius, a place by campū Martiū, at Rome. Trigemini, thre chyldren at one byrthe. Trigeminus, na, num, idem quod Tres, thre. Trigemmis, a plant or slyp, hauyng thre ioyn∣tes, and three buddes. Trigesimus, ma, mum, the thirtieth. Trigesies, thyrty tymes. Triginta, thyrty. Trigla, a fyshe, I suppose it be a soore mullet, such as ar takē in Deuonshyre & in Cornwal. Trigles, a stone, whyche is of the colour of a soore Mullette. Trigo, gare, to bynde or to draw a thyng close togyther. Trigon, gonis, a balle, also a turtyl. also a fishe callyd a thornebacke. Trigonalis, le, that whiche is three cornerde, hauynge thre lynes. Trigonia, the thyrde age. Trigonus, na, num, thre cornerde. Trilinguis, he that speaketh thre languages. Trilix, licis, a garmente with three dyuers thredes. Trimatus, tus, the tyme of thre yeres. Trimembris, bre, hauyng thre membres. Trimestris, stre, of thre monethes. Trimetrum, a verse of thre feete. Trimma, a wyne made with spyces, as that whiche is callyd ypocras. Trimorion, is named of .iii. sygnes in heauen, whyche contayne .lxxxx. degrees or porcions. Wherfore Trimorion, is in calculation of natiuities from the tyme of the byrthe or con¦ception, the lxxx. and tenth part or degree. Trimus, ma, mum, of thre yeres. Trimulus, the diminutiue of Trimus. Trimyxos, a lampe or candelstycke, bearynge thre lyghtes. Trinacris, & trinacria, the countrey of Sicile. Trinepos, potis, he whiche is three dyscentes lyneall from my chyldes chylde. Trineptis, a woman in lyke degree of bloudde as trinepos, potis. Trinitas, trinitie, the number of thre. Trinoxius, a, um, three nyghtes. Trinundinum, the thyrde fayre or markette, whiche was wonte to be proclaymed, to the intent that it shuld be the better remembred. Trinus, na, num, three. Trioboli homo, & triobolaris, a man worthe thre halfe pens, of lyttell value. Triobolus, thre halfe pens, or worthe thre half pence. Triones, plough oxen. also they be seuen sterrep beinge in the northe. Triophthalmus, a lyttell stone, hauyng in him the fygure of three eyen. Triorchis, a kynde of hawkes, hauynge thre stones. Triparcus, a great nygarde. Tripartior, tiri, to diuyde into thre partes. Tripartito, an Aduerbe, sygnyfyenge in three partes. Tripartitus, ta, tum, dyuyded in thre partes. Tripedaneus, a, um, hauynge thre feete. Tripes, pedis, with thre feete. Trifolium, thre leaued grasse. Triphillon, idem. Triplaris, thryse as moche. Triplex, plicis, three folde, treble, a table with thre leaues. Triplicitas, treble. Tripliciter, three folde. Triplico, are, to do or folde a thyng .iii. tymes. Triplium, a vessell lyke a basket. Triplus, a, um, treble. Tripolis, a cuntray in Affrica, an other in Sy∣ria, the thyrde in Phenicia. Tripolium, an herbe, whereof the roote is of some men supposed to be Turbit. Tripondium, thre pounde weyght. Tripontium, a towne in Vmbria in Italy, soo callyd bycause it hath thre brydges. Triptolemus, a man whyche founde the vse of grayne in the countrey of Athenes. Tripudium, daunsynge. Tripus, podis, euery thyng that hath thre fete. Tripodes, were also tables in the temple of Apollo, of golde. Triquetra, a fygure thre cornerde. It was also a name of the yle of Sicile. Triquetrus, tra, trum, hauyng thre corners. Triremis, a galeye, hauynge three orders of oores. Tris, thre, or thryse. Trismegistus, the name of Mercurius, in latyn Ter maximus. Tristegum, a chaumber in the thyrde storye or floore of a house. Tristimonia, heuynesse or sorowe. Trissis, thre pounde weyght. Tristis, is also taken for doctus. Iudex tristis
& integer, A iuge wel lerned, and of a good conscyence. Tristis, agaynst his wyll, not well content. Tristitia, sorowe, or heuynesse. Tristis, sorowfull, heuye, also cruelle, of moche grauitie, bytter, more dyffycile or harde, som∣tyme angry. Tristo, tare, to make heuy or sorowfull. Trisulcus, ca, cum, hauynge thre edges. Trisulcum telū, a wepon hauyng thre edges. Trisyllabus, ba, bum, hauyng thre syllables. Tritauia, my great grandfathers mother. Tritauus, my great grandfathers father. Tritheles, an herbe whyche hathe thryse in the yere flowres. Triticeus, a, um, of wheate. Triticum, wheate. Trito, tare, to breake or beate smalle. Triton, one callyd god of the sea, the sonne of Neptunus, it is also a ryuer in Aphrica. Tritonia, the name of Minerua. Trituro, rare, to threshe corne. Tritura, threshynge. Trituratio, idem. Tritus, ta, tum, worne. Triuenefica, a great sorceresse. Triueri, Trier in Almayne, whyche nowe is vnder a byshop. Triuia, a name of Diana. Triuialis, le, commune, or of smalle estimation vsed or taughte in hygh wayes, also rude, not elegant. Triuialis lingua, a homely forme of speche. Triuialiter, communely, in the vulgar or home∣ly facyon. Triuium, where wayes doo meete. also a place where commune recourse of people is. Trium literarum homo, was spoken in scorne of hym, that wolde seeme to be a gentylman, where he was none, whych word was made by this occasyon, that amonge the olde Ro∣maynes, gentyll men vsed to wryte theyr na∣mes with three letters, as, Q, F, M, for Quintus Fabius Maximus. Also this prouerb was spoken of them, whiche were theues, bi∣cause that Fur, contayned but thre letters. Triumphalis, le, belongyng to triumphes. Triumphalis uir, he that hath triumphed. Triumphator, he that triumpheth or hath tri∣umphed for vanquyshyng his enmyes. Triumphatus, ta, tum, of the whyche one hath tryumphed. Triumphatus, tus, a tryumph. Triumphatio, idem. Triumpho, phare, to tryumphe, to reioyce ex∣cedyngly. Triumphus, a tryumph, whyche is a solemne pompe or ceremony, where a prince, a consul, or principall capytayne of an army, hath had vyctory of the ennemies of his countrey, and therfore is brought home and receyued with all reioycynge and honour that may be diuy∣sed of the people. The order and forme ther∣of ye may se in Titus Liuius, Apianus, and Iulius Capitolinus. Triumuir, one of them, whiche is in any office, wherof be thre in lyke auctoritie. Triumuiralis, le, pertaynyng to an office or au∣ctoritie, wherin be thre persones. Triumuiratus, is an offyce in the publyque weale, wherin thre men haue equall iuris di∣ction togyther. it is also the offyce or auctori∣tie of Triumuir. Triuncis, & triuncium, thre ounce weyght. Trixalis, a worme lyke to that which is callid Locusta, but he hath no wynges. Trixago, ginis, an herbe callyd Germander, rede Chamaedris. Troas, adis, the citie of Troy, and the coun∣trey about it callyd the lesse Phrigia. Trochaeus, a foote in meter, whiche is of two longe syllables, and one shorte. Trochilos, a lyttell byrde, whyche is callyd kynge of byrdes. Trochiscus, a lyttell wheele. alsoo Trochisci, be of physytians callyd, lyttell balles, flattē at bothe endes, whyche be made of sundrye poulders. Trochum, a certayne stoole or chayre, whyche wyll be tourned aboute. Trochus, a top, wherwith chyldern do play. Troclea, & trochalea, a poley, wherin the cord runneth, whereby any thynge is drawen vp, it is also the gyn, whyche is callyd a crane. Troezenē, a citie in the parte of Grece, celled Peloponesus. It is also a countraye in the lasse Asia. Troglodytae, people in the furthest part of Af∣frica, beyonde Aethiopiam, whiche dwell in caues, and do eate the fleshe of serpentes. Troia, the citie of Troy. also the cuntray wher∣in Troy stode. Troianus, na, num, of Troy. Troianus ludus, was a playe of chylderne on horsebacke. Troicus, ca, cum, for Troianus. Troiugena, idem. Troius, a, um, of Troy. Tropeus, he that dothe a shrewde tourne, and runneth away whan he hath done. Trophaeum, was a marke or token of tymber or stone, sette in the place, where ennemyes were vanquyshed or put to flyght, sometyme it is taken for vyctory. Tropicè, fyguratiuely. Tropice, ces, a kynde of bulle russhes, the seede wherof wyll make one to sleape. Tropicus, ca, cum, fyguratiue.
Tropei uenti, wyndes, whyche do come from the sea. Tropologia, a fyguratiue speakyng. Tropus, a fygure, a maner or fascyon, an alte∣ration of a worde or sentence frome his pro∣per sygnification. Tros, troos aut trois, a Troyan. also the name of a kyng of Troyans, sonne of Ericthonius. Trossulum, a citie in Italy. Trossulus, in the old tyme was taken for a hors¦man or man of armes. It is also a person de∣lycate, well fedde, or fleshy. Troximi, grapes to be eaten. Trua, idem quod trulla. Trucido, dare, to slea cruelly. Trucidatrix, she that kylleth one. Truciter, cruelly. Truculentè, idem. Trucitas, crueltie. Truculentia, idem. Truculentius, more cruelly. Truculentissimè, moste cruelly. Truculentitas, idem quod truculentia. Truculentus, cruelle in countenaunces or me∣naces. Trudo, trusi, trudere, to thraste oute with vy∣olence. Truella, a vessell wherewith water is throwen into the synke. Trulissare, to parget. Trulla, wherein meate is put whan it is roste or sodden, callyd a trey. It is also a pyssepot, of some it is taken for a greate cuppe, brode, and deepe, suche as great masers were wont to be. Trulla, a trewel, wherwith masons tylers and pargettours do lay morter. Trulleum, a bolle. Truncatio, a cuttyng in pieces. Truncatus, ta, tum, cut in pieces. Truncator, & truncatrix, he or she that cutteth in pieces. Trunco, are, to cutte of. Truncus, a piece cutte of from the resydue spe∣cyally of a tree. Truncus, a, um, cutte of. Truo, onis, a byrde callyd alsoo Onacratalus, and is lyke to a swanne. Trusatilis, le, that whiche may be tourned and dryuen about with a mans hande. Trusatiles molae, a querne, such as malte is grounde in, or mustarde is made in, and is tourned with ones hande. Trutina, a wayenge balance. sometyme it is taken for iudgement. Trutino, nare, to waye or examyne. Trux, trcis, cruell, horryble. ¶T ANTE V. TV, tui, tis, tibi, thou, of the, to the. Tuatim, after thy facion or custome. Tuba ductilis, a brason trumpet. Tuba, a trumpette. Tuber, beris, a puffe growyng on the ground, lyke a musheron or spunge▪ It is alsoo gene∣rally euery swellynge in a mans bodye or vy∣sage. It is alsoo in a tree lyke to a greatte knotte. Tubercula, a lyttell swellyng or pushe. Tubero, are, to swelle. Tubicen, cinis, a trumpettour. Tubulus, a lyttell pype, wherin water runneth from a sprynge. it is also a riede. Tuburcinor, aris, ari, to eate hastily. Tubus, & tubulus, a pype, wherin water is con¦uayed to a cundyte. It was also a thynge, wherwith they made walles hot, before there were chymneys. Tucetum, a meate made with chopped flesshe lyke to a gygot or alowe. Tudertum, a citie in Italy. Tudicula, a ladell, a pryntyng yron, wherwith vessell is marked. Tudiculo, tudiculare, to steere, to prynte a marke. Tuditantes, they that trauayle in busynesse. Tuditanus, the name of a man, so callid bicause he had a head as bygge as a bytell. Tuditis, a mallette. Tudito, tare, to labour for aduauntage. Tuesis, the ryuer callyd Twede, whyche dyui∣deth Englande from Scotlande. it is also the towne callyd Berwyke. Tuor, cris, eri, to defende, also Tueor, tuêris, to see. Tugurium, a howse of husbandry. Tuguriolum, a cotage. Tuipse, thou thy selfe. Tulisurgium, Bruneswyke, a cytie in Almayn. Tulit, he brought. Tullij, some suppose theym to be ryuers, some flowynges of bloude out of sundry membres or ioyntes. Tullianum, a doungeon within the commune pryson of Rome. Tullius, reade in Cicero. Tum, than, whan he goth before cum, it signi∣fieth as well. Tumba, a holowe place in the grounde, a se∣pulchre. Tumdemum, fynally. Tumefacio, feci, to make to swelle. Tumeo, & tumesco, scere, to swelle. Tumet, thou thy selfe, Tumidus, da, dum, swollen.
Tumor, ris, swellynge. Tumulo, are, to make the grounde holowe, to burye. Tumulor, ari, to be buryed. Tumultuarie, in haaste, withoute moche ad∣uysement. Tumultuarij milites, were men of warre, whi∣che in the tyme of a sodayne rebellyon, or o∣ther sodayne daunger, were taken without any musters or other election. Tumultuarius, a, um, that which is done with∣out aduysement or in haste. Tumultuo, are, to make rumour. Tumultuosè, troublousely, or without study. Tumultuosus, sa, sum, troublous, or makynge rumour. Tumultus, tus, a rumour, a comotion of people Tumulus, a lyttell hylle or barowe, sometyme a tombe. Tunc. than. Tunc temporis, at that tyme. Tundo, tutudi, tundere, to smyte, to braye or beate as in a morter. Tunetū, a citie in Affrica called nowe Tunyse. Tungo, gere, olde writers vsed for Nosco, no∣sce, to knowe. Tunica, a iackette. Tunica pallia propior, my iacket is nerer than my gowne, A prouerbe applyed where we wyll sygnify that all frendes are not to be lyke estemed or made of. Tunici, an herbe, whiche some do suppose to be that whiche bryngeth forth gylofers. Tunico, care, to put on a iackette. Tunicatus, he that weareth a iacket. Tuopte ingenio, of thyne owne wytte. Tuor, eri, to beholde, all be it that worde is not in vse. Turaius, a strete at Rome. Turbatio, trouble. Turba, a multitude or assēbly of people. Quid illaec turba est? numnam ego perij? What a multitude is yonder? am not I vndone for euer? Also it sygnifieth trouble. Propter eam haec turba at{que} abitio euenit, For her sake is all this trouble or dyssencion. Turbasis, sterche. Turbella, a lyttell trouble. Turbidè, troublousely. Turbidus, troublous, not clere. Turbinatus, ta, tum, rounde and sharpe, lyke a toppe. Turbino, nare, to make sharpe at the ende. Turbistum, is a thynge myxt with the lykour, wherewith woulle is dyed, whyche maketh the dye to synke into the woulle, whereby the colour is made perfyte. Turbit, is a thynge moche vsed nowe a dayes to purge fleume, and yet be men vncertayne whatte verye Turbit is. Actuarius saythe, that it is the rote of Pityusa. Manardus af∣fyrmeth, that Turbit wherof Mesue maketh mencion is the second kynde of Tithymalus, callyd of Dioscoribes Myrsinites, but that Turbit wherof Serapio maketh mencion, is thought of some men to be Tripolium, after the description of Dioscorides. Turbo, bare, to trouble, to stere. Turbo, binis, a boystouse wynde, whyche doth blowe downe trees and howses. also a toppe, wherwith chyldren do playe. It is generally all thynge, whiche is round and brode aboue and sharpe beneth. Turbulentia, trouble. Turbulentus, troublous, angrye, fulle of con∣tention. Turcae, people callyd Turkes, whiche inhaby∣ted the countray ioyned to the sea callyd Ca∣spium, and the hylle callyd Caucasus, some of theym were accompted amonge the people of Scithia, of whome Pomponius Mela maketh mencyon. Which about .DCC. and xxv yeres passed, wandryng about as vaga∣bunde robbers wasted and destroyed dyuers countrayes, but afterwarde by the valyaunt prowesse of chrystyan princis in the tyme of Godfray de Boloigne, and after, theyr puis∣saunce was abated. But afterwarde in the yere of our lord .MCCC. one Othomanus the tenthe from Solymanus, which nowe is the great tyraunt of the Turkes, a ploughe∣mans sonne, valyant and subtylle of wyt, ga∣therynge a great army of vagabundes, wan a great countrey in Asia the lesse, and so suc∣cessiuely, euery one sense hath increased their domynion, hauynge nowe vnder their subie∣tion, all Asiam the lasse, Syriam, Mediam, Mesopotamiam, Aegyptum, Greciam, Illi∣riam, eueryche of these contaynynge many greate and famouse royalmes. Besides Hun∣gary and the yle of the Rhodes, and many o∣ther yles sometyme chrystened. They do now calle Turchiam, proprely that which was na¦med Asia minor, and somme do name it Na∣toliam. Turdetania, a countray nowe callid Granado. Turdetani, & turduli, people of that countray. Turdus, is a kynde of byrdes of the which A∣ristotle sayth, that there be thre sortes, one is of the greatnesse of a pye, and is callyd in greke Ixiboron, or Ixiophagon, as it were an eater of misselden. An other is lesse, about the quantitie of a thrush, and is in greke cal∣lyd Trichas, the thyrde is very lyttell, and in greeke is callyd Tyla, as Athenaeus wry∣teth. Plinius sayth, that Turdus is in som∣mer sommewhat redde, and in Wynter
waxeth blacke. also that in sommer his necke is of a dyuerse colour, in winter of one colour and that he maketh his nest with claye on the toppe of a tree, some doo suppose that it is the byrde, whyche is callyd an ousell or black byrde. Turdus is also a fyshe callyd in greke Cichle, lyuing among stones and rockes, & is lesse than a foote in length & hath .iiii. fynnes besydes the hyndermoste fynne, and is in fy∣gure lyke to a tenche, in colour russette, and hauyng on his bealye spottes of pourple and white. Turgeo, êre, & turgesco, scere, to be swollen. Turgidilus, la, lum, somewhat swollen or bol∣ned out. Turiones, the tendrelles of trees. Turma, a company of souldyours, contaynyng xxxii. horsemen. Turmatim, in order of battayle. Turonica, Tours in Fraunce. Turpis, pe, fowle, dysshoneste, cruelle. Alsoo greatte. Turpiter, shamefully, dyshonestly. Turpissimè, moste shamefully or dishonestly. Turpitudo, dyshonestye, vyllanye, deformitie. sometyme rebuke. Turpo, pare, to defyle, dishoneste, or bryng out of good fashyon. Turreus, rea, reum, lyke a towre. Turrifico, care, to cense. Turris, a towre, or any thyng made like to it. Turricula, a lytell towne. also a boxe, out of the whyche dyce are throwen. Turriger, that whyche beareth a towre, as an Elephant. Turritus, ta, tum, hygh, also towred, or fulle of towres. also the name of the ydolle, whyche was callyd mother of goddis. Turtur, turis, a byrde callyd a turtell. It is also a fyshe callyd Trigon. Turundae, pellettes of breadde or paste, where∣with capos or other fowles are crammed. Also a tente, whyche surgeons doo put into a wounde. Tus, turis, frankyncense, it is also wryten with h, as thus. Tuscia, a countrey in Italye, wherin be the cy∣ties of Florence, Sene, Luca, and Pise. Tusculum, a lyttell piece of Frankincense. also a citie by Rome set on an hyll. Tusculanus, na, num, of that citie. Tusculanum, was the terrytory about Tuscu∣lum, where dwellyd Cicero, Varro, and di∣uers other noble men. Tuscus, ca, cum, of the countrey of Tuscia. Tussedo, dinis, the cowgh. Tussicula, a lyttell cowghe. Tussilago, ginis, an herbe, whyche putteth a∣way the cough. somme men suppose it to be coltes foote, callyd of the Apothecaries Vn∣gula caballina. Tussio, siui, sire, to cowghe. Tussis, the cowghe. Tutanus, was supposed to be a god, which had the custody of men. Tute, thou thy selfe. Tutela, the wardshyp or custody of infantes. Tutelaris diuus, the saynt whome we doo take for our speciall aduocate to god Tutelina, was callyd a goddesse, vnder whose custody was corne, whyche was in barnes or rykes. Tutia, is called of the grekes Pompholyx, the thycker part therof is Spodium. Tutissime, moste sure. Tutius, more sure. Tuto, without peryll. Tuto, tare, to defende. Tutor, taris, tari, idem. Tutor, a garden, he that hathe the warde of an infant. Tutorius, a, um, pertaynyng to a gardeyn. Tutulus, a toppe of the heare wounden with a purple lace on the crowne of a womans head whyche was onely worne of her that was wyfe to the great priest at Rome, callyd Fla∣men Dialis. Tutus, ta, tum, sure, defended from peryll, out of daunger. Tuus, a, um, thyne. ¶T ANTE Y. TYber, a great ryuer, whyche is by Rome Tyberinus, of Tyber. Tyberius, the name of an Emperoure of Rome. Tybur, & tyburtum, a citie by Rome. Tyburtinus, na, num, of the citie of Tyburtū. Tyburs, burtis, & tyburtis, hoc tyburte, of Tyber. Tydeus, the father of Diomedes the noble ca∣pytayne, whome Venus dyd wounde at the battayle of Troy. Tyle, callyd also Thule, an yle within one days iourney of the frosen sea. Tylus, a worme, whyche lyeth vnder stoones and tiles, which haue lien long on the groūde and is somwhat blacke and skalyd, and hath many legges, whyche beyng touched, closeth hym selfe rounde as a pease, and is most cō∣monly callyd a cheselyppe. Tymbra, a great fielde in the contrey of Troy through whyche the ryuer of Tymber roun∣neth into the ryuer of Scamander. Tymoetes one of the sonnes of kyng Priamus Tymolus, idem quod Tmolus.
Tympanista, he that playeth on a drumslade or tymbrell. Tympanistria, a womanne that playeth on a tymbrell. Tympanites, a kynde of dropsye, wherin the bealy swelleth greate, a tympanye, whereof wynde is the chiefe occasion. Tympanizo, to play on a tymbrell, tabour, or drumslade. Tympanotriba, idem quod tympanista. Tympanum, a tymbrel, a tabour, or drumslade. Seruius calleth it a couered charyot or cart, other do suppose it to be the strake of a carte wheele. I suppose that it maye be taken for that, whyche is callyd the corse of a charyot or horselytter, made with bayles or bourdes ioyned, whiche is not moche from the opyni∣on of Seruius. Tympanum, is also a great whele, wherin men do go and drawe vp water. it is also a plat∣ter, whiche serueth for meate. Tymphei, people in Etholia, whyche is in Grecia. Tyndarus, the father of the fayre Helene, for whom Troy was distroyed, and also of Ca∣stor and Pollux. Typha, groweth in fennes, with a longe and smothe stalke, hauynge on the toppe, a floure, whych flyeth away lyke the flowre of thistel. Typha Caerealis, is a kynde of corne lyke to our rye, by the description of Theophrastus, and I suppose it is that, whiche with vs is callyd rye. Typhon, & typhos, was a greate gyaunt, the sonne of Tytan. It is alsoo a greate puys∣saunt wynde. Typhonae, be certayne impressions in the ayre lyke globes of fyre or dartes. Typhis, was a carpentar, whyche fyrst dydde fynde the way to gouerne a shyppe. Typus, a fygure, an exaumple or a fourme, a lykenes or shadowe of a thynge. Tyrannicè, cruelly, tyrannousely. Tyrannicus, ca, cum, of a tyraunt. Tyrannis, nidis, a cruell or vyolent rule or go∣uernaunce for a priuate commoditie, and not for a publyke weale. Tyrannicida, he that sleeth a tyrant. Tyrannicidum, the kyllynge of a tyraunt. Tyrannus, a tyraunt. Tyranthina, a garment of purple colour. Tyranthinus color, purple colour. Tyrius, a, um, of the yle callyd Tyrus. Also vy∣olette or purple colour. Tyro, ronis, a yonge sowldiour or man of ar∣mes. Also he that fyrst entreth into the expe∣rience of any science, art, or exercyse. Tyroniacus, ca, cum, of a younge souldiour or lerner. Tyrocinium, the fyrst exercyse in any thyng. Tyros, a citie in Phenicia. alsoo an yle, where the colour of purple was fyrst founden. Tyrunculus, a veray yonge souldyour or yong lerner. Tyrotarichus, a sawce made with chese. Tyrrheni, the people of Thuscane. Tyrsis, the circuite withoute the walles of a towne, wherein menne maye walke for their solace. ¶V ANTE A. VACCA, a cowe. also  a citie in Numidia. Vacanter, at good leysure. Vaccinus, na, num, of a cowe. Vacerra, madde, withoute wytte, percloses or ray∣les, made of tymber, within the whiche some thynge is inclosed. Vacillo, are, to moue inconstantly, to wagge or waue, to be vnstable, or vnsure. Vacinium, the flowre, which is also callyd Hy∣acinthus, and hathe longe leaues, a rounde roote, a stalke of a spanne longe and more, ha¦uynge on it many purple flowres, wherwith in some places they do dye purple. Vacillatio, a waggynge or wauerynge and in∣constant meuyng. Vacillantes literae, letters wrytten crokedly, or out of order. Vacillans testis, a wytnesse, which inconstant∣ly dothe varye in report or deposition. Vacat, it serueth to no purpose, it is superflu∣ouse. Also it sygnifieth I am at good leysure, or without busynesse. sometyme it sygnifyeth to care or force. Et cui esse deserto uacat, And who careth to be well spoken or eloquent. Vacatio, vacation, or tyme whan a man is out of his common busynesse. Vaco, care, to apply wytte or studye. Vaco sa∣pientiae, I applye my study to wysedome. Vaco rei diuinae, I apply my wyt to goddis seruyce. also to be empty or voyde. Fac uacent aedes, Cause the house to be voyded. Vacat occupatione, He is withoute occupation or ydell. sometyme it sygnifyeth to be superflu∣ous or vnprofitable. Quantum temporis uacabit ab officio pu∣blico, Durynge the tyme that I shall be at leysure. Nullum tempus ei uacabat à cogitando, he neuer ceassed to thynke. Vacare ab omni administratione rerum, to meddell with nothynge.
Vacabam culpa, I was nothynge gylty. Si uacat, yf ye be at leysure. A metu uacare, to be out of feare. Populo uacare, to take noo hede or regarde what the people sayth. Vacat mihi esse diserto, I haue soo lyttell to doo in other thynges that I haue leysoure to speake. Vacuefacio, cere, to empty or auoyde. Vacuo, are, idem. Vacuus, a, ū, voyd, empty, or without a thyng. Vacuae aures, Date mihi uacuas aures, dum eloquor, Gyue your eares only to me, while I speake, or here nothynge els. Vacuus animus, a mynd without care or so∣lycitude. Animo uacuo, at leysure. Vacuus equus, a spare horse, whyche hath no man on hym. Vacuus a periculo, out of daunger. Vacuus à re aliqua, delyuered of any thynge. Vacuna, was callyd a goddesse, vnto whome husbandmen after that harueste was cleane done, dyd sacryfice, as to the goddesse of qui∣etenesse after labour. Vacuitas, emptynesse. Vadimonium, suretie to appyere at a daye as∣sygned. Vadimonio obstrictus, let to bayle or main∣prise, whan a man is bounden to appyere at a daye assigned by a iustice. Vadimonium obire, to appere at the daye assygned. Vadimonium deserere, to make defaulte at the daye, and not to appiere. Vadimonium missum facere, to discharge recognysance or suerties that were bounden. Vadimonium differre, to gyue a longer day of apparaunce. Vadis, & uas, uadis, he that vndertaketh for an other. Vadium, suertie. Vado, dere, to go forthe, also to fynde suertie. Vado, dare, to wade. Vador, aris, ari, to fynde suerties. Vadosus, a, um, ful of fordes or shalow places. Vadum, & uadus, a fourde or shalowe place in a water, where men and beastes may go ouer Vaeh, an interiection, wherwith we do curse. Vafellus, he that is somewhat crafty. Vafer, fra, flum, subtill, crafty, sly. Vaframentum, subtiltie or crafte, slynesse. Vafrae, craftely, fynely indeceyuynge. Vagabundus, a wanderer about. Vadigabar, an hebrewe worde, whiche in La∣tine is Numeri, oone of the fyue bokes of Moyses. Vageni, a people dwellynge amonge the moun¦taynes called Alpes. Vagina, a shethe or scaberde. Vaginula, a lyttell shethe. Vagio, gire, to crie as a chylde. Vagitus, tus, the cryenge of a chylde. Vago, gare, for uagor, to wander. Vagor, aris, ari, idem. Vagus, ga, gum, wanderynge, and abidynge in no place. Vah, an interiection, wherwith we wonder at a thynge, also of reioysinge. Vaha, an interiection of reioysyng or laughing Valde, very moche. Valdius, for ualidius. Vale, farewell. Valentia, the fyrste name of Rome. also a citie in Spayne. Valens, puissaunt, hole, stronge. Valentia, puissance, habilitie. Valentior, ualentius, more puissaunt or strong. Valentissimus, moste puissaunt or stronge. Valentulus, somewhat stronge. Valeo, lui, lêre, to be able, to be hole, also to be worth, to be stronge or puissant, to maye do or be of force or power. Neque tam imperita ut quid amor ualeat ne sciam. I am not such a foole, but I knowe what loue maye do, or of what power loue is. Male ualeo, I fare yle, I am yll at ease. Valere ab oculis, to be hole of the dysease in his eyes. Valére a pecunia, to haue money inoughe. Non tantum ualet, he is not of suche puis∣saunce. Valuit authoritas, his authoritie was great Valet amicis, he hath many frendes. Corpore ualére, to be stronge. Cursu ualére, to runne well. Valére gratia apud Senatū, to be in fauour with the Senatours. Valére opibus, to be riche. Valére stomacho, to haue a good stomake. Valére uiribus, to haue moche strengthe. Valére apud aliquem, to do moch with one. Valet in id, it is good therfore. Valet sestertijs uicenis, it is worth .xx. pense. Valere à morbo, to be recouered frome syckenes. Valeat, fare wel he, I care not for hym. Imo habeat, ualeat, uiuat cum illa, well lette hym wedde her, I care not for hym, moche good do it hym with her, or let hym haue her, god be with hym, lette hym make mery with her. Si deus talis est, ut nulla gratia, nulla homi∣num charitate teneatur, ualeat. If god be su∣che one, that he hath neyther fauour nor loue to mankynde, I care not for hym, Valeant, qui inter nos dissidium uolunt, They that wyll haue vs at variaunce let them get them hense, or god be with them.
Valeriana, an herbe called Valerian, reade in Phu. Valesco, scere, idem quod ualeo. Valeria, the syster of Messala, wyfe to a noble man called Seruius, who beyng dead whan she was asked, why she dyd not mary again, she answered, that she alwaye lyed by Ser∣uius her husbande, it is also a countreye by Hungary, nowe called Stiria. Valerius, a mannes name. Valesius, for Valerius. Valetudinarium, a place where men do lye, whan they be sicke. Valgium, an instrument to make flores smoth. Valgulatio, a question in rebuke of one. Valgustus, a croked staffe. Valgus, he that hath his legs bowed inwarde narowe at the knees. Valetudinarius, a, um, nowe and than sycke, oftentymes sycke. Valitudo, & ualetudo, dinis some tyme signy∣fyeth sickenes, sometyme helthe. Valetudini operam dare, to haue regarde to his lyfe. Longa & pertinax ualetudo, a long and con¦tinuall sickenesse. Validè, valiantly, myghtily, puissantly. Validus, da, dum, valyant, myghty. Validior, ualidius, more myghty. Validissimus, moste myghty. Validitas, tatis, myght. Vallecula, a lyttell valey. Vallaris, re, pertaynyng to a trenche in a felde. Vallaris corona, a garlande gyuen to hym whi¦che fyrst entred into the trenche of the enne∣myes campe. Vallescit, olde wryters vsed for perierit, he is loste or peryshed. Vallis, a valey or dale. Vallo, are, to inclose, to fortifye. Vallonia, was callyd the goddesse of valeys. Vallum, & uallus, a trenche, whiche is made in a felde to defende an hoste, within the why∣che pauyllions are pytched. also a post, wher∣vnto vynes are bounde. Valli, are pales made sharpe aboue. Valor, oris, value or price. Valuae, doores whych be shut on two partis. Valuulus, the codde of a beane or pease, or other lyke thynge. Vanans, olde wryters vsed for fallens, decey∣uynge. Vandalia, a countraye in the northe parte of the world. Vanè, vnly, foolyshely, lyengly. Vane, scere, to vanyshe, to be brought vn∣ ought. Vangiones, people in Germany of a cytie cal∣lyd Wormes. Vanidicus, a lyar or tellar of foolyshe tales. Vaniloquus, idem. Vaniloquidorus, idem. Vaniloquentia, vayne speche. Vanitas, tatis, vanitie, lyghtnes, lesyng, foly. Vanitudo, vanytie. Vanno, are, to vanne corne. Vannus, a vanne. Vanus, a, um, voyde or empty. alsoo foolysshe or enuyous, a maker of lyes, not lykely. Vapor, oris, & uapos, a vapour or hot brethe issuyng out of a thynge. Vaporarium, a place made hotte to sytte in, in the wynter tyme. Vaporo, rare, to heate or make warme a place Vappa, wyne, whiche hath lost his verdure. it is sometyme taken for a man, in whome is no wytte or perfyte reason▪ Vapo, onis, a beast that fleeth. Vapularis, he that is beaten. Vapulo, lare, to be beaten. Variabilis, le, varyable. Varar, Dunbar in Scotlande. Variantia, uarietas, & uariatio, varietie, dyuer∣sitie in thynges. Varices, & uarice, uariculae, are veynes, whi∣che do swelle excedyngly. Varicosus, he that hath suche veynes swollen. Varicor, aut uarico, to transgresse, to passe ouer a thyng neglygently. Varicus, an Aduerbe, whyche sygnyfyeth stry∣dynge. Varae manus, croked handes. Vari, spottes in the face. Variè, dyuersely. Variae, for Pantherae, beastes of dyuers colours. Variegatus, a, um, paynted or garnysshed with sundry colours. Varius, a fyshe callyd a troute. Vario, are, to make dyuerse. Variolae, measyls. Varius, a, um, dyuers, vnlyke, inconstaunt, varyable. Varolus, a deuourer. also a pycker. Varro, ronis, was a noble Romayne, of all o∣ther moste excellently lerned. Varus, whose legges are croked inwarde. Varus, a ryuer, whyche dyuydeth that part of Fraunce, that is callyd Narbonensis frome Italy. Also it was the name of a poete. Vas, uadis, a suretye that vndertaketh for annother man. also a pledge. Vas, uasis, a vesselle. Vasa conclamare, to crye, to trusse vp caryage and bagguage, as whan an armye dothe re∣moue. Vascones, people in the parte of Spayne cal∣lyd Taraconensis. Vascularius, a potter.
Vascularius, a goldesmythe, the whyche ma∣keth plate. Vasculum, & Vascillum, a small vessell. Vastatio, destruction. Vasterna, a horselytter, or any thynge borne by two horses. Vastescant, olde writers vsed inhorrescant. Vasto, are, to waste or destroye. Vastus, a, um, great, huge, somtime desolate. Vastitas, tatis, uastitudo, & uastities, greatnes also destruction. Vasum, a vessell. Vates, a prophete, a poete. Vatesco, scere, to be distroyed, to be dried vp, to be forsaken. Vaticanus collis, a hyll in Rome, where nowe is the churche of sayncte Peter. Vaticinor, aris, ari, to prophecie or tell what shall happen, to coniecte. Vaticinium, a prophecy, a coniecture. Vaticinatio, idem. Vatidicum, for propheticum, that whiche is spoken in a prophecy. Vatius, idem quod valgus, he that hath cro∣ked legges outwarde. Vatrax, & uarricosus, he that hath ill legges, from the knee downewarde. ¶V ANTE B. VBER, & huber, a womannes breste. uide Huber. Vbi, where, in what place. sometyme whan, after. Vbiloci, idem. Vbij, people in Germany dwellynge in Colain and the partes adioynynge. Vbi{que}, in all places, euery where, in all. Vbi{que} gentium, in all countreys. Vbi{que}, loci, in euery place. Vbilibet, where ye wyll. Vbicun{que}, in euery place, Vbicubi, idem. ¶V ANTE D. ☞ VDVS, da, dum, moyste. Vuidus, da, dum, moyste inwarde. ¶V ANTE E. VE, idem quod Vaeh, also it is put for uel; or {que}. Vecors, dis, mad, or troubled in spirite Vecordia, madnesse or trouble of mynde. Vectabulum, wherin any thynge is caryed. Vecticularia uita, to haue moche to day and no thynge to morowe, sodaynely ryche, and as sodaynely poore. Vectigal, a tribute, a pention, a rent, a yerely reuenewe. Vectigalis, le, by whom or wherof tribute, pen∣cion, or rente. is payed. Vectis, a barre. also a leuer, wherewith thyn∣ges be lyfte, or borne by men. It is also the name of an yle of Englande called the yle of Wyghte. Vecto, are, to cary. Vectito, idem. Vectatio, cariage. Vector, toris, he that is caried, sometyme he that caryeth. Vectorius, a, um, apte to carie. Vectura, cariage, also the hyre or money gy∣uen for cariage. Vedra, the riuer of Were in Wales. Vegeo, gere, to be in helthe. Veget, for uegetat. Vegetius, a noble man that wrate of marciall doctrine. Vegeto, uegetare, to recreate, to quicken, to conserue. Vegetus, ta, tum, hole, stronge in helth quicke Vegrandis, great and yll fourmed. Vehea, for via. Vediouis, & veiouis, was called a god which had no power to do good, but onely harme. Veheare, olde wryters vsed for uehere. Vehemens, tis, vehemente, great, vrgente, fyers, sharpe. Vehementia, vehemency, myghte. Vehementer, vehemently, sharply, myghtely. Vehementior, tius, more vehement or sharpe. Vehementissimus, ma, mum, most vehement or sharpe. Vehes, a carte or wayne. Vehia, in the olde Tuscane unge was a carte. Veiatura, for Vectura, cariage. Vehicularius, a carter. Vehicularis equus, a cartehorse. Vehiculum, a generall name to all thynges, whiche serueth for cariage. Veho, uexi, uehere, to carie. Veios, a citie in Hetruria. Veientes, people with whom the Romaynes had longe tyme warres. Veientanus, na, num, of the citie of Veios. Veli, the people of Veios. Vel, or sometyme also, chiefely, namely, at the leaste. Velabrum, a place in Rome. It maye be alsoo called a tente, whiche craftes men do set vp, where they haue no howses, to be in stede of theyr shoppes. Velamen, minis, a couerynge. Velaria, clothes wherwith tentes ar made, al∣so the same tentes. Velatura, a frayte. Velatus, ta, tum, apparayled. Velanni, Velay in Fraunte. Veles, uelitis, a souldiour that weareth lyghte
harneyse. Velia, a fenne in Italye, in the countreye of Calabria. Velifico, care, to sayle. Velina, a strete in Rome, by the hyll called Mons Palatinus. Velis equis{que}, by sea and by lande. Velitaris pugna, battayle done by theym that are lyght harneysed. Velitatim, by leapes or skyppes. Velitor, aris, ari, & uelito, uelitare, to stryue, to brawle. Velitatio, brawlynge. Velitrae, plurali numero, a citie in Italy .xx. myles from Rome. Veliuolus, a, um, that whiche gothe with a sayle, or is occupied with sayles. Vella, olde writers vsed for uilla. Vellaturam facere, to lyue by cariage frome one towne to an other. Vellicatim, by pluckes. Vellico, care, to pynche, sometyme to rebuke, to byte, to rent. Vello lere, to plucke vp, or pull a thynge. Vellus, velleris, a flyse. Velo, lare, to couer or hyde, to bynde, to ap∣parayle. Velocitas, swyftnesse. Velocior, velocius, swyfter. Velocissimus, ma, mum, swyftest. Velocissimè, moste swyftly. Velociter, swyftly. Velox, locis, swyfte. Velum, a sayle, a curtayne or a vayle. Velut, ueluti, as, lyke as. Vena, a veyne. Venabulum, a huntynge staffe. Venalitiarius, he that selleth slaues. Venalis, le, that whiche is set to sale. Venalitium, a place where any thynge is solde. Venalitius, he that selleth. Venaphrum, a citie in Campania. Venaria, an yle, wherein be many veynes of mettall. Venaticus, ca, cum, perteynynge to huntynge. Venaticus canis, a hounde. Venatorius, a, um, idem. Venator, a hunter. Venatrix, a woman hunter. Venatura, idem quod uenatio. Venatus, tus, huntynge. Venatio, idem. Vendax, acis, he that gladly selleth. Vendibilis, le, easy and redy to be solde. Vendicatio, a clayme. Vendico, care, to vendicate, to clayme. Venditarius, a, um, redy to be solde. Venditatio, an auaunt. Venditio, a saale. Vendito, tare, to sell often, to auaunt. Vendo, didi, dere, to selle. Veneficium, the acte and crafte of poysonynge. Veneficus, & uenefica, a maker of poyson, a vser of sorcery. Venenariae mulieres, womenne that doo sell poyson. Venenatus, ta, tum, poysoned. Veneno, nare, to poyson. Venenosus, a, um, that hath poyson. Venenum, poyson, it is the generall name of al that doth alter the nature or colour of that thynge, wherwith it is myxte. Veneo, niui, nire, to be solde. Venerabilis, worthy to be honoured. Venerabundus, he that dothe worshyppe any thynge. Venerandus, idem. Veneranter, reuerentely. Veneratus, ta, tum, humbly prayed vnto▪ some tyme reuerende. Veneror, aris, ari, to honour. Veneratio, honour, reuerence. Venereus, a man disposed to lechery. Venetiae, arum, the citie of Venyce. Veneti, Vanes in Brytayne. Also the people of Venyce. Venetus, ta, tum, of Venyce. Also the colour of lyght blewe or blunket. Venia, pardon, forgyuenesse. Tua uenia, by your lycence. Venibo, auncient writers vsed for ueniam. Venio, nire, to come, to springe. Venire in mentem, to come to remembrance. Venit in mentem, it commeth to my mynde. Venitur ad me, they came to me. Venila, for unda, water in a ryuer. Venor, aris, ari, to hunte, to gette a thynge craftelye. Venta, an hauen in Englande called Bristowe Ventanea, thynges that seme to be daungerus and yet therin is no daunger. Venter, tris, the bealy or panche. sometyme it is taken for the stomake. Ventilabrum, a fanne or flabelle, wherwith wynde is made. Ventilatio, a fannynge or wynnowynge. Ventilator, a vanner or wynnower of corne. Ventilo, are, to gather wynde, to vanne or wi∣nowe corne, to tourne oute of one hande in to an other. Ventito, tare, to come often. Ventosus, a, um, wyndy, also lyght. Ventositas, wyndynesse. Ventulus, a lyttell wynde. ❀Vento uiuere, to lyue by the wynde. A pro∣uerbe applyed to them, whiche haue no sub∣staunce to lyue on. Ventus, wynde. Ventus operam dat, the wynde bloweth a
good coole. Ventus popularis, vayneglory. Ventrale, a stomacher. Ventriosus, a gorbealy. Ventriculus, the stomake. Venum ire, to be solde. Venundo, dare, to sell. Venundatio, byenge and sellynge. Venus, ueneris, called goddesse of loue, some∣tyme lechery, also carnall appetite, also beau∣tie, by whiche a man is stired to loue. Venustas, tatis, beautie, properly of women. somtime a dilectable pronuntiation of speche Venusté, properly, pleasauntly, amiably. Venustulus, a, um, somewhat fayre. Venustus, ta, tum, fayre dilectable. Venusto, are, to ornate or make beautifull. Veprecula, a lyttell bramble. Vepres, bryars. Vepretum, a place full of briers. Ver, ueris, the sprynge of the yere. Veratrum, an herbe called also Helleborus. Verax, acis, he or she that saythe truthe. Veracitas, tatis, truthe in speche. Verbascum, an herbe wherof be .ii. kindes, of whiche one is supposed to be Molin or longe worte, the other is supposed to be that which is called primrose, some doo thynke it to be rose campin. Verbena, & uerbenaca, an herbe called veruin sometime Verbenae, are all leaues sodeynely plucked vp, to garnyshe howses or churches or to make garlandes. Verber, a small longe sticke or yarde. Verberaljs, worthy to be beaten. Verberatio, Verberatus, tus, a beatynge Verbereus, a, um, worthy to be beaten. Verbero, rare, to beate, to punyshe. Verberare cogitationis conuicio, to blame or rebuke one in his mynde. Verbero, ronis, a person worthy punyshement the reproche of all seruauntes. Verberito, tare, to beate ofte ofte. Verbigero, rare, for uerba facere, to talke. Verbenarius, was oone of the ambassadours sent fro the Romayns vnto theyr ennemies, which ware on his head a garland of veruin Verbose, an aduerbe, signifienge with manye wordes. Verbositas, moche talkynge or speakynge. Verbosus, full of wordes. Verbulum, a lyttell worde. Verbum, a worde, also a sentence comprised in one worde, a prouerbe. Verba ad rem conferre, to do as he sayth. ❀Verba mortuo dare, to speake to a deade manne, a prouerbe whan a manne loseth his labour. Verba dare, to deceyue. Verbi causa, as by example. Verbi gratia, idem. Verba istaec sunt, these are but wordes. Verbis meis salutem dicito, salute hym in my name. Vercellae, was a citie in Liguria, nyghe to the mountaynes called Alpes. Veré, truely. Verecundanter, & uere cunditer, shamefastely Verecundia, shamefastenesse. Verecundé, shamefastly. Verecundor, aris, ari, to be ashamed. Verecundus, da, dum, shamefaste. Veredarius, a messanger that rydeth by poste. Veredus, a lyght horse, a huntynge nagge, or swyfte geldynge. Verenda, places in a man and woman, which without shame may not be named. Verendus, da, dum, to be feared or dradde. Vereor, reris, reri, to feare as the chylde doth the father. Timêre, to feare, as the slaue or boye dothe his mal Vereor dicere, I dare not tell. Vereor abs e, I am aferde of the, leste thou wylte do me displeasure. Vergiliae, the .vii. sterres, called also Pleiades. Vergo, uersi, aut uerxi, gere, to declyne or bowe downe. Veridicentia, truthe in speakyng a true tale. Veridicus, ca, cum, he or she that telleth truthe. Verifico, care, to verifie as lawyers do saye, to auerre. Veriloquentia, idem quod ueridicentia, Veriloquus, & ueriloquax, he that speaketh truthe. Verisimile, lykely. Verisimiliter, idem. Verisimilis, le, lyke to be true. Verisimilitudo, lykelyhode. Veritanus ager, a feld diuided among the peo∣ple, so that euery man may haue a porcion. Veritas, trouthe. Vermiculatim, an aduerbe, sygnifyenge in small pieces. Vermiculus, a lyttell worme. Veriuerbium, a true tale. Vermiculor, aris, ari, to be full of vermyne, or wormes. Vermiculata opera, warkes whiche are of small pieces of diuers colours, wherin ar set out sondry pictures, lyke as we se in spruse ta¦bles or counters. Vermina, prickinges in the body, that it se∣meth wormes were cut a sonder. Vermino, nare, to haue wormes. Verminatio, the disease of the wourmes, pro∣perly in cattell. Verminosus, a, um, full of wormes, or that wherin wormes are.
Vermis, a worme. also it is a fyshe in the riuer of Ganges, whiche is in length .lx. cubytes, and is blewe in coloure, whiche hath suche strength, that whan Oliphantes come to the water and do drynke, he wyll take one of thē by the nose, and plucke hym in to him. Verna, a bondeman or bondewoman, borne in the house of the lorde, of his bondeman and bondewoman. Vernaculus, la, lum, al that taketh beginning in our owne countrey, as Vernacula lingua, the countrey language, the comon speche pe∣culiar or proper to countrey or house. Vernaculi, be also men of yll maners and lan¦guage, whiche vse to slatter or to speake in rebuke. Venacula putatio, cuttynge of vynes in the sprynge of the yere. Vernalis, le, perteynynge to the sprynge of the yere, also seruile. Vernaliter, lewdely, flatteryngly. Vernatio, the olde skynne of an adder. it is sometyme taken for age. Vernilis, le, seruile. Vernilitas, flattery. Vernilitus, olde writers vsed for a flatterer. Verniliter, flattery. Verno, are, to sprynge as herbes done, also to synge as byrdes done. Vernula, a diminutiue of uerna. Vernus, a, um, lusty, freshe, as the spring time. Verò, truely, verily. sometyme it doth affirme that whiche foloweth. also but yet. Vero, is also a ryuer in Byskay. Vero, are, to saye truthe. Veromanditi, Vermandors in Fraunce. Verna, a noble citie in Italy in the countreye called Marchia Taruisina, not far from the mountaynes, where Catullus the poete and Plinius were borne. Verones, people dwellynge nyghe to the ryuer of Vero. Veronensis, & Veronius, a man of Verona. Verpus, pa, pum, that whiche hath no skinne It is also the myddell fynger. Verpi be also Iewes. Verra, an altar at Rome, wherat they prayed that chyldren shulde not be wronge borne. Verres, a hogge vngelded, a tame boore, as aper maye be called a wylde bore. Verricula, olde writers vsed for articulus. Verriculum, a nette called a dragge. Verrinco, care, to tourne or chaunge a thinge vnto better. Verrinus, a, um, of a bore. Verruca, an hyllocke or knappe on a hyll. also a warte. Verrucaria herba, wartworte. Verrucosus, he that hath wartes. Verrucula, a lyttell warte. Verrunca, olde writers toke for a hyghe place. Versatilia, thynges that are tourned or woun∣den one about an other, as two cordes or two stickes wounden together, also pyllers made of the same fascion. Versatilis, le, that whiche tourneth or maye be tourned. Versicolor, oris, chaungeable, or that whiche changeth colour, also of sondry colours. Versicolorius, a, um, any thynge tourned out of his naturall colour, also that whiche is of dyuerse colours myxte to gether. Versiculus, a lyttell verse. Versipellis, a crafty person that wyll tourne often as he lysteth. Verso, are, to tourne. Versat animum cupido regni, He thynketh and diuiseth howe to be kynge. Animum muliebrem uersare in omnes par∣tes, to tempte the woman by all maner of wayes. Authores uersare, to reade often good authores. Dolos uersare, to deuyse howe to begile one. Versare in corde, to thynke. Oues uersare, to pasture shepe. Versare diu quid ferre recusent, to thynke longe what they wyll refuse to susteyne. Versare testes, to examine witnesse in diuers maners of wayes. Versor, ari, to haunte, to be often tymes in a place, to be occupied in a thynge or matter. Mihi antè oculos dies noctes{que} uersaris, I thinke vpon you daye and nyght. Versatur circa res omnes, he medleth with euery thynge. In acie uersari, to be in the battayle. In discrimine uersari, to be in daunger. In munere suo uersari, to be busy in his office In re aliqua uersari, to traite of some matter. Inter manus uersari, to be often tymes handled. Versoria, the needell in a shyppe, to knowe the costes. Versura, a tournynge. it is also whan a manne boroweth of one to paye his dettes to an o∣ther, and to borowe in suche wyse is Versu∣ram facere. Versura, is also the coyne or corner of a house or wall, wherat menne doo tourne. it is also whan the horses or oxen do tourne in a carte or ploughe. Versuram soluere, is to chaunge creditours, as to borowe of one man to pay an other. som do reade Versura soluere .i. uersura facta aes alienum soluere. Versus, sa, sum, tourned. Versus, us, a verse. sommetyme an order. also
a onge, towarde. Versutè, craftely. Versutus, mutable, oft tournyng, wyly expert. Versutia, wylynesse. Versutiloquus, a crafty speaker. Vertagus, a hounde, whiche wyll hunt by hym selfe. Vertebrae, places in the body, where the bones do not meete, but are knytte to gether in such wyse with senewes, that they maye tourne the more lyghtly. Verto, ti, tere, to tourne, to drawe, to trans∣late or interprete out of one tungue into an o¦ther, to consider. Vertere terga, to run away, to fle inbattaile. Vertere solum, to go from one countrey into an other to dwell. Vertere, for versuram facere. Vertere stultitiae, to repute folye in a thynge. Vertere uitio, to put the blame in one. Quis erit, uitio qui id non uertat tibi? Who is it that wyll not put the blame in the? Agrum uertere, to tyll the grounde. Bene tibi uertat, god spede you well. Dij bene uertant, I praye god tourne it to good. In crimen uertere, to blame a thynge. In discrimine uerti, to be in daunger. In fugam uertere, to put to plyght. In rem suam uertere, to tourne it to his profytte. In relligionem uertere, to be scrupulouse. Male uertit res paecuaria mihi, I am an ylle marchaunt of cattell, or I am vnlucky in by∣enge of cattell. Vertex, & vortex, ticis, a whyrlewynde. also a whirlepoole in a water, also the crowne or top of the hed also the top of euery thynge. Vertibulum, idem quod uertebra. Vertibula, a fyshe called also vrtica. Verticulum, a wherue, which is a round thing set on a spyndell, to cause it to tourne. Verticillum, a lyttell wherue. Vertigo, ginis, a sickenesse of the head, wher∣in it semeth to a man, that he seeth thynges tournynge. Vertigus, a whirlsnge about. Vertius, a man of great strengthe. Vertunalia, the solemnitie of Vertunus, which was kepte in October. Vertunus, was called the god of byenge and sellynge, it is sometyme taken for the yere. Veru, a spytte or broche. Veruetius, a, um, lyke a shepe. Veruecinus, a, um, of a wether. Vernat, for circundat, it compasseth. Verutum, a castynge darte with a strynge. Veruactum, the sommer tylthe. Veruina, a longe darte or iauelyn. Veruculum, an instrument of goldsmithes like a lyttell broche. Veruex, uecis, a wether shepe. Verus, ra, rum, true, substancial, vncorrupted, good, iuste, profytable. Veritas, tatis, truthe. Verum, an aduerbe, signifieth truely, also but Verumtamen, yet not withstandynge. Vesanus, a, um, cruell, furious, wood. Vesania, fury, woodnesse. Vescor, sceris, sci, to eate, to vse. Actius vsed it to see. Vescus, ca, cum, euery thynge that maye be eaten, also lyttell or leane. Vesca, browse, leaues, wheron beastes do fede in wynter. Vessones, Champaine in Fraunce. Vesculus, a, um, very leane. Vesicaria, an herbe, whiche apothecaries doo call Alkakengi. Vesica, a bladder. Vespae, they whiche do burie deade corsis. Vespa, a waspe. Vesper, the euenynge, or euentyde, also the e∣uenynge sterre. Vesper, ra, rum, of the euenynge. Vesperi, an aduerbe, signifienge late, at the ende of the daye. Vespero, raré, to be euenynge. Vesperasco, scere, idem. Vesperna, olde writers vsed for coena, supper. Vespertilio, onis, a reremouse or backe. Vespertinus, na, num, that whiche is done in the euenynge. Vesperugo, ginis, idem quod uesper. Vespices, places thycke of bushes. Vespillo, onis, he that caryeth deade men to be buried. Vesta, the daughter of Saturnus, whiche for her chastitie was honoured for a goddesse, sometyme it is taken for pure fyre. Vestales, were virgins, whiche mynystred to Vesta, whiche were chosen betwene the age of .vi. yeres and ten yeres, and .xxx. yere they remayned virgines, afterwarde it was leful for them to marye. Vester, tra, trum, your. Vestiarium, a warderobe, wherin garmentes are layde. Vestiarius, the yoman of the robes, or he that kepeth the warderobe. Vestibulum, a voyde place without the doore where men do tary whyles they doo knocke and vntyll the doore be opened. Vesticeps, cipis, a yonge man, whiche begyn∣neth to haue a berde. Vestigabundus, he that seketh moche. Vestigator, he that seketh for a thynge. Vestigium, the prynte of a mannes fote in the
grounde. It is taken also for a signe or token of any thynge that is done. Vestigo, gare, to seke. Vestimenta, a vesture or garment. Vestini, people in Italye. Vestio, iui, ire, to apparell, to adorne, to keuer. Vestiplica, a mayden whiche layeth vp her maystresse garmentes. Vestis, a vesture, a garment, sometyme it is put for a berde. Vestispicus, & uestispica, he or she whiche ke∣peth theyr maisters or maistres apparayle. Vestissimus, a, um, best apparayled, best clad. Vestitus, ta, tum, apparayled. Vestitus, tus, apparayle. Vestrapte, & vestroptè, of your owne. Vestras, tratis, yours. Vesulus, a mountayne in Ligurta by Alpes, at the rote wherof the riuer called Padus, or Po spryngeth out. Vesuuius, or Veseuus, an hyll in Campania, foure myles from the citie of Naples, wher∣on groweth plenty of vynes and olyues, but the toppe therof is barayne, by reason of fire whiche sometyme riseth out of the erthe. it is also called Vesulus. Veter, olde. Veterior, ueterius, elder. Veterrimus, ma, mum, eldeste. Veteramentarius, a coblar or botcher. Veteraneus, a, um, auncient. Veteranus, sommetyme signifieth olde. Alsoo he that hadde serued a hole yere in the citie. somtime he that hath long contynued in war¦res, an olde souldiour. Veterator, oris, ueteratrix, a crafty begiler. Veteres, men of olde time passed. Veterina, beastes whiche do serue for burdeyn as horses, mulettes, and asses. Ve, uide in Veh, Ve uobis, out vpon you, so∣rowe come to you. Veterinarius, he that letteth to hyre horses or mules. Veterinarius medicus, a horseleche, or ferror. Veterinarius, a, um, belongynge to horses and mules. Veternus, slepe without wakynge, also slouth or sluggyshenes, also to moche slepe. Veternosus, he that slepeth to moche, sluggish, slouthfull also he that hath the dropsy. Veteresco, & ueterasco, scere, to be olde. Vetero, rare, to make olde. Veto, tare, Veto, tere, to prohibite. Vetonica, an herbe called Betayne. Vetulonia, a place in Tuscia, called also Viter bium. Veterbo. Vetulus, la, lum, a diminutiue of uetus. Vetus, teris, olde, auncient. Vetustas, age. Vetusté, agedly. Vetustesco, scere, to be olde, to be the warse for age. Veteresco, scere, to be the better for age. Vetustus, ta, tum, olde. Veuina, a longe darte. Vexillarrius, & uexillifer, the baner bearer. Vexillum, a baner. Vexo, are, to vexe or trouble. Vexabundus, he that troubleth or vexeth other Vexatio, vexation Vexator & uexatrix, he or she that vexith other ¶V ANTE I. VIA, a way, a iourney, the maner, or meane custome. Via militaris, the brode hyghe waye, for horsemen and fotemen. Viam munire, to make or repayre a waye. Viatica coena, banket gyuen to a man at his departynge. Viaticor, aris, ari, to prepare vytayles necessa¦ry for iourney. Viaticum, necessaries for iourney, be it in vit∣tayle or other thyng, preparation for iorney. Viator, toris, a trauayler by the waye, a waye farynge man, whiche warneth men to assem∣ble to counsayle, and serueth officers, to call men vnto them. Viatorius, a, um, perteyninge to the waye. Viatoria uasa, vesselles whiche do serue for iourneye. Vibex, bicis, a spotte remaynynge in the skyn, after beatynge. Vibratio, a brandyshynge. Vibrissae, heares in a mannes nose. Vibrisso, are, to quauer in singynge. Vibro, brare, to shake a thynge, or to make a thynge to shake or quauer. Viburnum, the sprynge which commeth out of the rote of a tree. Vicani, men of the village. Vicarius, a, um, that whiche is in the steede or place of an other. Also the seruaunte of hym, whiche is a seruaunt. Vicariam operam impendere, to execute an other mannes offyce. Vicatim, in villages or stretes, also streete by strete, or vyllage by village. Vicem, uice, plurali, uices, uicibus, tyme and tymes. Per multas uices, multis uicib{us}, many times. Vnica uice, ones. somtyme it signifyeth pay∣nes. also peryll, sometyme place. or stede. Fungar uice cotis, I wyll vse it in the steede of a whetstone. Vicenarius, a, um, the twentieth. Vicentia, a citie in Venetia, betwene Verona and Padua.
Vicenus, a, um, twenty. Vicia, a certayne grayne, whiche lyke to a vine runneth vpon the stalkes of herbes, whiche do growe hye. Viciarium, the sowynge of suche grayne. Vicies, twenty tymes. Vicinia, the neyghbourhede, whiche corruptly we call vicinetum. Vicinitas, tatis, nyghnesse. sometyme the mul∣titude of neyghbours. Vicinus, a neyghbour. Vicissatim, by tymes, by tournes. Vicissim, by tourne, nowe one, nowe an other, sometyme it signifieth on the other parte. sometyme semblably. Vicissitas, idem quod vicissitudo. Vicissitudo, dinis, the tourne, nowe one, nowe an other. Victima, the beast that is kylled in sacrifyce. Victimarius, the mynyster, whiche serueth to the sacrifice. Also he whiche bought the sa∣crifice to sell it. Victito, tare, to lyue by eatynge certayn meate. Victor, toris, he that vanquysheth. Victoria, victory. Victoriatus, a certayne coyne, wherein was the image of victory. Victoriosus, accustomed to haue victory. Victrix, plurali victricia, perteining to victory. Victrix, a woman that vanquisheth. Victurus, the participle of the future tense, as well of Viuo, as of Vinco. Victus, tus, & uictuis, sustinance or fedynge. Also a kynde or fourme of lyuynge. Victus, ta, tum, vanquyshed. Vicus, a strete in a towne. also a vyllage. Viculus, a lyttell strete or village. Videlicet, as who saythe. sometyme it signy∣fyeth surely. Video, di, dêre, to se. it is sometyme applyed to other sences, as Vide qualis est sonus, Here what a noyse it is. Vide quid oleat, Smell wherof it sauoureth. Vide {quam} durum sit, Fele howe hard it is. Also it signifyeth to take hede or consider, to prouide. Vide tibi, prouide for thy selfe. Tu uideris, loke therto, well, take good hede, for I care not for it. Videro, I wyll prouide. Videor, I remember me well. Videre uideor, me thinketh I see. Videtur mihi, me semeth. Viden for Vides ne doest thou not see? Vidua, a wydowe. Viduertas, calamitie or misery. Viduitas, wydowhedde, lacke of thynges necessary. Vidulum, wherin any thynge is kepte. Viduo, dare, to dyuyde or take awaye, to leaue alone. Viduus, a, um, diuided alone. Vienna, a Citie in Austria, an other in Dol∣pheny. Vieo, êre, to bende, to bynde. Vietor, toris, a couper, whiche with howpes byndeth vesselles. Vietus, ta, tum, softe, weake, bendynge. Vietus, a howpe, or strake of a carte. Vigeo, gui, gêre, to lyue, to be stronge, to thryue in growynge. Vigesimae, as decimae. Vigesimarium aurum, idem. Vigesimus, ma, mum, the twentieth. Vigil, lis, watchful, vigilante. also a watchman Vigilans, tis, vigilant, watchefulle, diligente, circumspecte. Vigilanter, watchefully, diligently, vigylant∣ly, circumspectly. Vigilantia, vigilanci, diligence. Vigiliae, watches, as well by day as by night. sometyme the men whiche do watche. Vigilo, are, to wake, or watche, to be vygy∣lant, or very diligente. also to here diligently also to take peyne. Vigilare, decet hominem qui uult sua tempori conficere officia, a man muste take peyne, that wyll finyshe his busy∣nes in tyme conuenient. Vigisonus, a broke by the citie of Padua. Viginti, twenty. Vigor, goris, strength, force. Vigorosus, a, um, stronge, firme. Vilis, le, vile, of no value. also good chepe, of lyttell price. Vileo, & uilesco, scere, to be vile, or of smal or none estimation of price. Vilitas, good chepe, contrary to derthe. Viliter, an aduerbe, signifienge cheape. Vilito, tare, to make cheape. Villa, a manour out of a citie or towne. also a vyllage. Villanus, a man of the village. Villaris, re, & Villaticus, ca, cum, perteyning to the village. Villico, & uillicor, aris, ari, to be occupyed aboute husebandrye, to haue the rule of husebandrye. Villicatio, occupation about husebandry. Also the rule of husebandry vnder the owner. Villicus, & uillico, a bailiffe of husebandry. Villula, a lyttell village. Villum, small wyne. Villus, heare. Vimen, minis, roddes, whiche wyll wynde lyghtly, wherof baskettes are made. Vimineus, a, um, wyckers, wyndinge roddes or osyars. Viminalis, le, apte to wynde. Viminalis collis, a lyttell hyll at Rome. Vinacea, kernelles of grapes.
Vndo, are, to ryse in wawes. Vndosum mare, a troublous sea, and fulle of wawes. Vndulata uestis, chamlet, or a garmēt wrought as it were with ryuers. Vndula, a lyttell wawe. Vnguentum, & ungentum, a swete oyntment. it is vsurped for euery oyntment. Vngues, muskyls. Vngo, unxi, ungere, to annoynt. Vnguen, nis, oyntement, or any thynge that is facry. Vnguentaria, the craft to make oyntmentes. Vnguentarius, a maker of swete oyntmentes. ❀Vngues arrodere, to gnaw on his nayles, Aprouerbe applyed to them, whiche are in a study, howe they may alter suche thynges as they do repent them of. Vnguicula, a lyttell softe nayle. A teneris un∣guiculis, from his tender youth or infancy. Vnguis, a nayle of the fyngars or toes. it is al∣soo a dysease whyche at lengthe couereth all the eye with flesshe in the corner of the eye. It is in an hors takē of Hierocles for an haw in the eye. Vnguis, in a rose is the white and thycke part of the flowre, next the toppe of the stalke. Vngula, a howfe of a horse, or other beast. Omnibus ungulis, with al myght and power Vngulatus, he that hath fowle great nayles. Vngulum, of olde wryters was taken for a rynge. Vngularius, a great nayle and ragged. Vngustus, a croked staffe, or suche as cōmonly men doo calle a croke, wherwith they drawe to them any thynge. Vnicalamum frumentum, wheate, which hath but one rede growyng out of the roote. Vnicallis, an herbe which hath but oone stalke without any braunches. Vnicè, onely. Vnicolor, oris, of one colour. Vnicornis, Vnicornius, & Vnicorniū, a beaste callyd an vnycorne. Vnicuba, a woman which lyeth or companieth but with one man. Vnicus, ca, cum, one alone. Vnigenitus, one chylde without mo. Vngae uineae, vynes in the whiche vppon the proppes beyng set vp, sundry rayles are laide on the one syde. Vnio, iui, ire, to ioyne togyther. Vnio, onis, concorde. sometyme a perle. Vnioculus, he that hath but one eye. Vnipes, pedis, hauynge but one foote. Vnitas, tatis, vnitie. Vnitio, a ioynyng togyther. Vnitus, ta, tum, ioyned togyther in one. Vniuersalis, le, vnyuersall. Vniuersipotens, he that hath power ouer all. Vniuersipotentia, power ouer all. Vniuersitas, vniuersitie or generalite. Vniuersus, a, um, vnyuersall, somtyme it sygni∣fieth all, or the hole. Vniuira, a woman hauyng but one husbande. Vniuocum, that whyche sygnyfieth but oone thynge. Vniuocè, of the same sygnification. Vnose, olde wryters vsed for simul, togither. Vnni, Hungariens. Vn{quam}, any tyme. Vnus, na, num, one, also alone. Vnus & alter, both, nowe one, nowe an other. Vnusquilibet, Vnusquis{que}, Vnaque{que}, Vnum∣quod{que}, eueryche. Vnis aedibus, in the same house. Vno animo, of one accorde. Vnus quiuis, who so euer thou wylte. Vni sex dies, syxe dayes contynuall. Vno ictu, at one stroke. Vno uerbo, at one worde. Vnum, one thynge. Vnus ex multis, Vnus ex omnibus, one a∣lone, onely. ¶V ANTE O. VOberca, a towne by Bilbo in Spayne. Vocabulum, the denomination of any thynge. Vocalis, le, loude. also that which hath a voyce also a vowell. Vocalitas, a tune or sounde of a voyce. Vocatio, a callynge. Vocator, a caller. Vociferatio, a crienge out. Vociferator, he that crieth out. Vociferor, aris, ari, to cry out, to crye lowde. Vocifero, idem. Vocito, to calle often. Voco, care, to calle, to bydde, to aske. Me ad Democritum uocas, thou doest allege Democritus, and woldeste haue me to be∣leue hym. Ad calculos uocare, to calle one to accompt. Ad exemplar alterius uocare, to exhorte one to folowe the example of an other man. In discrimen uocare, to put in daunger. In ius uel in iuditium uocare, to accuse one o∣penly: to brynge an action agaynst one. Voconia, a kynde of peares. Vocula, a lyttell voyce, sometyme obloquy. Voculatio, an accent in speche. Vola, the myddes of the hande or the foote. it is taken for the soole of the foote. Volaticus, ca, cum, that whyche flyeth or goth away sodeynly, flyttynge.
Volatilis, le, that whych can flye. Volatus, & uolatura, a flyght. Volema, a great peare, a wardyn. Volens, wyllynge. Volenter, wyllyngely. Volentia, wylle. Voliba, a towne in Cornewayle callyd Bod∣myn. Volito, tare, to flye often. Volo, are, to flye, to rounne or goo quyckely, or faste. Volo, uis, uolui, uelle, to wylle. Volo tuam gratiam, I desyre your fauour. Volo te, I wolde speake with the. Volones, were bondemen at Rome, whiche in the warres of Carthage, whan there lacked Romayns, offered theym selues to fyghte for theyr maysters, and bycause they dyd it wyl∣lyngly without constraynt or callyd, therfore they were callyd Volones. Volsella, an instrument to plucke heares from the body or face. Volua, for uulua. Volubilis, le, that whiche is easyly tourned. Volubilis, is an herbe, whyche rounneth vppe by trees, hauynge redde braunches, and the leaues bytynge and blysterynge the tungue. Volucer, cri, swyfte, lyght. Volucra, a beaste, whyche eateth the tender vynes. Volucres, byrdes, fowles. Volucrior, more swyfte. Volucris, cre, all thynges that doth flye. Volucrum, the after byrthe in a woman. Volumen, minis, a booke. sometyme part of a boke, callyd a volume. Voluntarius, a, um, voluntary, wyllyng. Voluntas, tatis, wylle. Voluo, uere, to wrappe, to tourne. Voluox, & uoluola, idem quod Conuoluo∣lus, a lytell wourme with many legges, whi∣che eateth the leaues of vynes, and of other trees. Volup, for uoluptas. Volupe, delectable. Volupia, & Voluptia, goddesse of voluptie or delectation. Voluptabilis, le, that whiche reioyceth. Voluptaria loca, places of pleasure. Voluptas, tatis, an inordynate reioycyng or de∣lectation in thynges worldly or carnall. Voluptatem magnam nuncias, thou telleste me good tydynges. Spero fe nobis hanc coniunctionem uo∣luptati, I truste that this alyaunce shall be to our comforte. Voluptatem eius capio, I take greate plea∣sure in hym. Voluptuarius, & uoluptarius, he that is gyuen to carnall delectation. Voluptuosus, a, um, voluptuouse, vnsaciable in carnall pleasure or delectation. Voluta, that whyche karuers and paynters doo call drapery & cylery, wrought lyke cloth or leaues tourned dyuers wayes. Volutabrum, a place where swyne do walowe. Volutabundus, walowyng, tournyng, tossyng in the mynde. Volutatim, an aduerbe sygnifyenge, eftsoones tossynge in the mynde. Voluto, tare, to tourne lyenge, to walowe, to reuolue and tosse in the mynde. Vomer, meris, the culter of a plowgh. Vomica, a rotten impostume, whereout roun∣neth matter. Vomitus, vomyte. Vomitio, idem. Vomo, mui, mere, to vomyte or parbreake. Vopiscus, where two chyldren are conceyued, and one of them is abort, he that commeth to perfyte byrth is callyd Vopiscus. It was al∣so the name of oone that wrate the lyues of emperours. Vopte, for Vosipsi. Voraciter, lyke a glutton. Vorago, ginis, a swolowe or gulfe. Voro, rare, to swolowe downe meate ere it be chewed. also to eate gredyly. Vorax, racis, a glutton. Voracitas, gluttony. Vorsura, for uersura. ❀Vorsurā soluere, a prouerb applied to them that so dyscharge theym selues of one busy∣nesse, that they enter into an other more peyn¦full or daungerous. Vortex, for uertex. Vortumnalia, a solempne feaste to the god Vortumnus. Vos, you. Votiuus, ua, uum, that whyche is vowed. also desyred. Votiua uerba, uotiuae praeces, wordes and prayers, wherin we desyre somewhat. Votum, a vowe, sometyme a desyre. Votiuae aures, eares whyche desyre to heare. Votium, olde wryters vsed for uetitum. Voto, & uotito, to make auowe. Voti compos, he that hath that whyche he desyred. Voueo, ui, uere, to vowe, or make a vowe. Vox, uocis, a voyce. Voce assa, with the voyce onely of a manne without any instrument of musyke. ¶V ANTE P. ❀Vpupa, a lapwynk or blacke plouer.
¶Z ANTE E. ZEa, a kynde of wheate. Zelo, are, & zelor, lari, for aemulari. Zelor, aris, ri, to be angry, or to haue zele Zelotes, for aemulator, he that hath enuye at one, or assayeth to folowe an other in liuing. Zelotypia, ialowsye. Zelotypus, ialowse. Zelus, sometyme enuy, sometyme loue, some∣tyme emulation. Zenobia, a quene of Siria, whiche in greeke and latyne was very well lerned, and was al so valyaunt in armes. Zephyrus, the weste wynde. Zeros, a kynde of christall, which hath spottes white and blacke. Zeta, & Zetacula, a littell chamber for one bed and two stoles, ioyned to an other chamber, with courtaines, soo that the courtaines be∣inge drawen, it made but one chaumber. and hauynge windowes on thre partes therof to receyue in the heate of the sonne. Zenith, is a word belongynge to cosmography and signifyeth a poynte in the firmament di∣rectely ouer the crowne of a mannes heade where so euer he be. Zereth, an hebrewe measure whiche is an handbrede. Zeugma, a fygure, wherby many sentences ar ioyned together with one verbe, as, Ne{que} is es Catlina, ut te, aut pudor à turpitudine, aur metus à periculo, aut ratio a furore reuoca∣rit, Ne thou art suche a man Catilyne, as ey∣ther shamefastnesse can withdrawe from dis∣honestie, or feare frome daunger, or reason from vengeable angre. Zeusis, an excellent paynter, which so paynted a boy caryeng grapes, that byrdis cam to the table and pecked on the grapes, wenyng that they had ben very grapes, which Zeusis be∣holdynge, was with him selfe angrye, and sayde. If I had made the boye as well as I haue done the grapes, the birdes durste not haue come so nyghe to the grapes. Zeus, a fyshe taken about Calis in Spayne, whiche is blacke, but he is very delycate. ¶Z ANTE I. ZIgena, a fyshe of the sea. Zigari, people, whiche we do call Egip¦tians, that wander about in euery re∣alme and be horrible theues. Zigarum, the countrey from whense the sayde people do come. Zizania, cockle wche groweth in corne. Zinziber, gynger. ¶Z ANTE O. ZOdiacus, a cercle  heuen, wherin  the .xii. sygnes. Zographia, the pyctur of beastes. Zoilus, was a poete, which enu Homerus, and therfore the enuiers of well ned men are called Zoili. Zoelicum, certayne flaxe, that commet  of Spayne, wherof threde is made for ntt to take byrdes. Zomos, gruell. Zona, a gyrdell. Zonatim, in compasse aboute. Zopissa, pitche taken from shyppes whiche be¦ing tempred with waxe and salte, is of more efficacie than other pitche. Zopyron, an herbe, whiche some do suppose to be Pulyol mountayne. Zopyrus, was a manne, whiche by phisnomye knewe euery mannes condicions. And whan in beholdyng Socrates he iudged hym to be vnthrifty, and therfore was scorned of many men. Socrates answered, Zopyrus is not de¦ceyued, for in dede I had ben suche one as he sayth, if I had not by philosophy subdued na¦ture. Also Zopirus was a noble Persian, ser∣uaunt to Darius, whiche whan the citie of Babylon rebelled agaynst king Darius, and that he had made longe warre▪ and could not subdue them, vnwares to any man, did cutte of his owne nose, and wounded him selfe, & fled to Babylon, sayinge, the kynge had soo disfygured hym, bycause that he perswaded hym to haue peace with the Babylonians, whiche they herynge, made him theyr chiefe capitain. Than by lyttel and lyttel declaring to them the strength of the kynge, and howe they mought not indudure long agaynst him at the laste he caused them to submit them sel¦ues to the kynge, and to receyue him into the citie. Wherfore Darius was wont to saye, that he hadde leauer haue one Zopyrus than twenty Babylons. Zoroanda, a ryuer, whiche the great water of Tigris maketh on the one syde of the moun∣tayne Taurus. Zoroastes, the fyrste fynder of Magike. ¶Z ANTE V. ¶Zura, bearies of white thorne. ¶Z ANTE Y. ¶Zygia, a pipe, wherin men dyd play at wed¦dynges. Zythus, drynke made with barley sodden. It may be taken for ale or biere. ☞ FINIS DICTIONARII. ❧
L∣VCRECI∣A R∣OMANA THOM∣AS BERTHELETVS ❧ LONDINI ❧ IN OFFICINA THOMAE BER∣THELETI TYPIS IMPRES. CVM PRIVILEGIO AD IMPRI∣MENDVM SOLVM. ANNO M.D.XLII. ❧
Circle divided into four quarters with geometrical alphabetical markings.
