7892 20213198 23823
By the Quene. THE Quenes maiestie considerynge, howe necessarye it is and pleasynge to almyghtye god, to haue concorde and peace wyth all prynces, and speciallye wt suche as be hir neighbours: And findinge not onely hir realmes and do∣minions lefte to hir in hostilytie and warre after the de∣ceasse of hir deare sister the late Quene, with the realmes of Fraunce and Scotlande, but also an honorable occasi∣on offred of treatie of peace with both the said Realmes: hath therfore vpon good aduise, remoued al ennimitie, & hath vpon most godly, honorable and profitable considerations (vpon the second of thys moneth) passed, concluded and agreed, a good, perfect, sincere and perpetual amitie, peace, intelligence, confederacion and vnion, to remayne and contynewe for euer betwene hir moste excellent maiestie, hir heires and Successors on the one partie: and the ryght high and mightye Prince Henrye the Frenche kinge on thother party, their realmes, Coun∣tries, Cities, townes, landes, dominions, terrytoryes, segnories, castles, vassalles and subiectes, by land, sea, and freshwater, and elsewhere. And the like peace also betwene hir sayd maiestie and the king and Quene, Dolphines of Scotlande, and their Realmes and cositries. By the which peace it is prouided, that al hostility and warre shal cease on eyther partie, and that the sayd Prynces, their Subiectes and vassalles, shall lyue toge∣ther in peace, amitye, intelligence and frendshippe: And that all thynges be vsed and ex∣ercised as freely and lyberallye, as they haue done in anye former tyme of peace, had be∣twene the sayd Realmes and dominions. ALL which premisses hir maiestie hath thought mete to notifie to al maner hir Sub∣iectes of what estate so euer the same be, that they and euerye of them, obserue all that hereto belongeth: as the like is at the Citie of Paris in Fraunce on the french part pub∣lyshed and notifyed. YEVEN at the palace of Westminster the seuenth of Aprill the first yeare of the raigne of our soueraigne lady Elizabeth by the grace of god Quene of Englande, Fraunce and Ireland, defender of the faith. &c. GOD saue the Quene. Imprinted at London by Rycharde Iugge and Iohn Cawood printers vnto the Quenes maiestie. Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.
