7839 33151094 28920
¶ A Proclamacion, set furthe by the kynges Maiestie, with the aduise of his highnes moste honorable counsaill, for the publishyng of sundery statutes and ac∣tes of Parliament heretofore made, for the prohibicion of the cariyng out of the realme of gold or siluer, and of eschaunge and reeschaunge. FOrasmuche, as there hath growen, and daily groweth, great displeasure of God, and inestimable dāmage and hurt, to the kyng our souercigne Lorde, and to his people, of this his realme of Englande, by the inordi∣nate chaunges and rechaūges of money, and cariyng out of the realme golde or siluer, in money, bullion, plate, or vessell, that hath been of long tyme vsed, and yet continueth in his realme, without licence and auc∣thoritee, geuen by the kynges Maiestie, to suche chaungyng, rechaun∣gyng, and cariyng out of the realme, to the greate impouerishement of this his saied realme: for remedy whereof, diuerse and sundery notable and profitable statutes and ordi∣naunces haue been made, prouided and ordeined, emongest the whiche, one very notable and profitable statute was made, ordeined and enacted, in the .iij. yere of the reigne of the right noble and famous prince, of worthy memory, kyng Henry the .vij. graundfather to our saied souereigne lorde, aswell for the confir∣macion of diuerse and sundery profitable statutes, before that tyme made and prouided, for that Godly intent and purpose, as also for the due execucion of the same. In the which estatute, of kyng Henry the .vij. it is further conteined, that no man should make any eschaunge, without the kynges licence, ne make any eschaunge, or reeschaunge of money, to be paied within this lande, but onely suche as the kyng should de∣pute thereunto to kepe, make, and answere suche eschaunge, and reeschaunge, vpon pein of forfeicture of suche penalitie, as is conteined in the Statute, made in the tyme of Kyng Richard the second: whiche is, that the offendor shall forfeicte, as muche as he maie forfeicte, aswell for the priuey and apert sendyng, or bringing, or causing to be sent or brought, out of the realme, of any gold or siluer, in money, bullion, plate or vessell, as also by eschaunge to be made: all whiche thynges, bee more at large conteined, in the saied se∣uerall estatutes. Our said souereigne lorde, by thaduise of his counsaill, consideryng, and right well per¦ceiuyng, the greate enormities and preiudice, whiche groweth vnto his Maiestie, and the common wea of this his saied realme, by occasion of the said cariyng, chaungyng, and rechaungyng: willeth, defendeth, and streightly, by this his Proclamacion commaundeth, that the saied former statutes, and euery of them, be obserued and kepte, in all and euery Article and poynct, articles and poynctes, and that due execucion be there of made, as apperteineth, vpon suche peines and penalties, as in the said statutes been comprised. And that no maner of persone or persones, of what degree, estate or condicion so euer he or thei bee, ta vpon hym or thē, to cary out of the realme, any gold or siluer, in coyne, or bullion, or make any eschaunge or reeschaunge, contrary to the forme of the saied estatutes, and this his highnes Proclamacion, without his Maiesties licence and aucthoritee, to hym or theim to be geuen. And his maiestie willeth it to be vnderstand and knowen vnto all his subiectes, his graces ful mynd and pleasure is, that thei and euery of theim, obserue and kepe his lawes, ordinaunces and statutes here∣tofore made, concernyng the premisses, as thei will auoyde his greate indignacion and displeasure, and further to incurre the daūger of his lawes, whiche his highnes willeth, duely to be put in execucion, with∣out respect or fauor, to be geuen vnto any offendor, contrary to his said lawes and this his highnes pro∣clamacion. God saue the Kyng. RICHARDVS GRAFTON typographus Regius excirdebat Mense lunij. Anno. 1551. Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.
