7863 33151098 28923
¶ A Proclamation set forth by the Kyng and Quenes most excellent maiesties with th aduice of theyr most honorable counsayle of certeyne moneyes and coynes of fyne gold & fine syluer with the valuation of the same, newlye set forth by theyr highnesse. WHERE the Quenes highnes (calling to her gratious remē∣braunce the great and intolerable charges, growen & chaun∣ced to her highnesse speciallye, and also to all her louing sub∣iectes, as well by reason of the base moneyes, made within her realmes and dominions, as also by greate quantities of the like base moneyes, made and counterfeyte bothe in thys her highnesse realme, and in other forren realmes conueyed hy∣ther, and issued oute within her graces realmes and domini∣ons) caused to be made and set forth in the fyrste yeare of her raygne certeyne coynes of mo∣neyes, as well of fyne golde, as of fyne syluer, accordinge to her highnesse proclamation, sente forth in that behalfe. THE King and Queenes maiesties of theyr great and aboundant clemencies, mindinge to auoyde all inconueniences, happening and growing thereby for the tender scale and loue they beare to all theyr louyng subiectes, and for the commoditie of theyr said louing subiectes, are resolued and determined to continue the sayd fyne moneyes, and therfore haue newlye caused to be made and set forth within theyr mintes certeyne peces of coynes of mo∣neyes of golde and syluer of the fyne standerdes, with suche stampe and prynte (deuised by theyr graces appoyntement) as is mete and conuenient for the same, and most redcundynge to theyr graces honours, after the rates and values hereafter expressed. THAT is to saye, one pece of fine golde called a Soueraigne of the value of thirtic wil∣linges of lawfull moneye of Englande. One other pece of fyne golde halfe of the sayd Soue∣raigne, called the Royal of gold of the value of fiftenne willinges of the lawful moneyes afore sayde. One other pece of fyne golde called the Aungell of the value of tenne willinges of the lawfull moneyes aforesayde. One other pece of fyne golde called the halfe Aungell of the va∣lue of fyue willinges of the lawfull moneyes aforesayd. One pece of fyne syluer moneyes cal∣led the willing of the value of twelue pence of the lawfull moneyes of Englande. One other pece halfe of the sayd willing of the value of sixe pence of the lawfull moneyes aforesayde. And one other pece called the Grote of the value of foure pence of the lawful moneyes aforesayde. Al which peces of coynes of moneyes of gold & syluer the King & Quenes maiesties willes & pleasures is, walbe curraunt within this their highnes realme of England, and the domini∣ons of the same, after suche value, and in suche maner and forme, as aboue is declared. Strayghtlye charging and commaundinge all maner of persons within theyr sayd realme and dominions, of what estate or degree socuer they be, to receaue and paye the sayd seuerall peces of moneyes, as well of golde as of syluer accordinglye, vpon payne of theyr highnesse displeasure, and to be further punished, as shall some to theyr graces most conuenient. Neuer∣thelesse theyr maiesties expresse cōmaundement is, that all suche base moneyes as haue bene reduced to the value of a lower rate, shall go curraunte in receypte and payment in lyke ma∣ner and sorte, as the same be curraunte at this daye▪ according to the proclamation last made in the time of the late most noble Prince Kyng Edward the .vi. in ye behalfe, vntill suche time, as theyr highnes with th aduice of theyr counsaile shal take further order, touching the same. GEVEN at our pallaice of Westminster the .xxvi. daye of December, in the fyrste and seconde yeares of our raygnes. Excusum Londini in aedibus Iohannis Cawodi Topographi Regiae Maiestatis Anno. 1. 5. 5. 4. 26. Decembris. Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.
