8740 33150314 28549
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms ❧ By the King. ¶ A Proclamation concerning the Prorogation of the Parliament. THE Kings most Excellent Maiestie, with the aduice of the Lords of his Priuie Councell, hauing taken into consideration, That a generall sickenesse and disease, which proues mortall to ma∣nie, and infectious to more of his louing Subiects (euen now to∣wards Winter) hath dispersed it selfe within the Cities of London and Westminster; And that, if the meeting of both Houses of Parli∣ament should hold (according to the last Prorogation thereof) on the second day of Nouember next, the same might proue dangerous, as well to his Maiesties owne Royall person, and his deare sonne the Prince (the occasions of Parliament requiring their often resi∣dence, and being in, and neere the Cities aforesaid) as to the Nobilitie and Gentrie of the land, to be called thither, out of the fresh ayre, from all the parts of the Kingdome; Hath therefore (by the aduice aforesaid, out of his Princely and gracious care of his louing Subiects of all sorts) resolued to Prorogue the said Parliament, from the said second day of Nouember, to the sixteenth day of Februarie then next following. And to the end, That, as well the Lords Spirituall and Temporall, as the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of Parliament, may spare and forbeare their attendance accordingly; His Maiestie, for their ease, hath thought fit by this Proclamation, to publish and declare his Royall resolution and intention therein: So that they, nor any of them (other then such, as for other occasions shall happen to be in London or Westminster, who may attend the making of the said Prorogation) shall not be bound, or compelled to appeare the said second day of Nouember, at the Citie of Westminster, but shall be discharged thereof against his Maiestie. Neuerthelesse, his Maiestie doth will, charge, and command them, and euery of them, and all others, to whom in this case it shall appertaine, That they, and euery of them, do personally appeare and be present, vpon the said sixteenth day of Februarie next comming, at the said Citie of Westminster, to treat, consent, and conclude, vpon such matters, as in the said Parliament shall then, and there, of the common Councell of the Realme (by Gods fauour) happen to be ordained. Giuen at the Court at White-hall, the first day of October, in the two and twentieth yeere of his Maiesties Reinge of Great Britaine, France and Ireland. God saue the King. ¶ Imprinted at London by Bonham Norton, and Iohn Bill, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Maiestie. ANNO DOM. M.DC.XXXIIII.
