a129 12891438 95110
AN ABSTRACT OF THE COMMISSION FOR Greenwich Hospital FOR SEAMEN. Design of the Commission.HIS MAJESTY by His Letters Patents di∣rected to His Royal Highness the Prince of Denmark, and others, setting forth His Desire, That the Trade, Navigation and Naval Strength of the Realm of England (where∣upon the Safety and Fourishing State thereof does so much depend) should by all proper Means be Pro∣moted; and being perswaded that nothing will more Effectu∣ally contribute thereto, than by Encouragements to Increase the Number of English Seamen, as well for the Strengthening the Navy Royal, as for Supplying the Occcasions of the Merchants: And whereas the Seafaring Men of this Kingdom have long distinguished themselves throughout the World, by their Industry, Skilfulness, Courage and Constancy, in Engagements and Hazards for the Defence and Honour of their Countrey; and nothing being more likely to continue their Ancient Reputation, and invite greater Numbers to betake themselves to the Sea, than the providing, That Seamen, who by Age, Wounds or other Accidents shall be Disabled, may be Supported at the Publick Charge; and that the Children of such Disabled, and also the Widows and Children of such as be Slain in Sea-Service may be Provided for and Educated: He hath Determined to Erect an Hospital for the Purposes a∣foresaid. Grant of the Kings House at Greenwich.And in Order to put the same in Execution, His Majesty, with the late Queen, did, by Their Letters Patents Dated the Twenty fifth Day of October last past, Grant unto Trustees
therein named, a Parcel of Ground in East Greenwich in the County of Kent, containing and fet out as in the said Letters Patents is fully expressed, together with the Palace at Green∣wich, Built by King Charles the Second, to the Intent that the same shall be converted to an Hospital for Seamen, their Wi∣dows and Children. And His Majesty considering, That the Constituting a Foundation of that Nature, and Framing Rules and Statutes for the Government thereof is a Matter of Difficulty, and such as requires Mature Deliberation; therefore reposing especial Trust and Confidence in their known Discretions,Commissioners appointed. Abilities and Integrities, he hath Appointed the aforesaid Commissioners. Who are Directed to Meet from time to time, and so many as shall be present,The Quorum. of whom any one of His Majesties Privy Council, and any one of the Commissioners of the Treasury, and any one of the Commissioners of the Admi∣ralty, and the Mayor of the City of London, or any one of the Aldermen of the said City for the time being, to be Four at the least, to consider of such Methods as they shall judge Expedient to be Observed in Executing the same. And any Seven or more of them, of whom Four or more to be such as aforesaid,To take to their Assistance such as they think fit. are Authorized to take to their Assistance such Persons as they shall think fit to Advise with, in the Execution of this Commission. And out of their own Number, as often as they shall judge it Expedient,To make Sub-Committees. to Constitute such and so many Sub-Com∣mittees, and to Invest them with such Powers, as they shall think fit, pursuant to the Powers given to themselves: and to Revoke and make Void, and to Revive the said Committees, and calling to their Assistance the Surveyor General of His Majesties Works, and such others as they shall think fit, to consider what part of the Structures now standing will be un∣fit,To Consider how the pre∣sent Building may be made serviceable. and in what manner such as they shall think fit to stand may best be Alter'd for the use of the said Hospital, in order to Represent the same to His Majesty, and to prepare Mo∣dels of such Buildings,To prepare Models and Schemes. and Conveniencies, as they shall think proper to be Erected upon the Premisses Granted, with such Schemes or Draughts as may Explain the same, and with all convenient speed to present the same to His Majesty for His Royal Approbation. And a Charter and Statutes to be approved of by His Majesty.And with the Assistance of the Attorney or Solicitor Ge∣neral or others His Majesty's Council Learned in the Law, to prepare a Charter of Foundation of the Hospital, and Sta∣tutes, Constitutions, Orders and Ordinances for the Founda∣tion, perpetual Management, Rule and Government thereof, and all other Matters relating thereto, and to present the same to His Majesties Royal Consideration. His Majesty gives 2000 l. per annum to the Hospital.And His Majesty, as an Instance of His Princely Zeal to so Pious a Work, hath Determined, and doth Declare, That He will yearly cause the Sum of Two thousand Pounds to be paid out of His Treasury, to the Uses of the said Hospital,
without any further or other Warrant to be obtained for the same, into the Hands of the Treasurer for the Hospital, at such times as shall be desired by the Commissioners. And not doubting but His Example, and the great Advan∣tage it will prove to the Kingdom, will dispose great Num∣bers of His good Subjects to the Advancing so Charitable a Design,The Commis∣siones impow∣red to receive Subsiptions of Mony, &c. He doth Impower the said Commissioners to Take and Receive all such voluntary Gifts or Subscriptions of Money, Goods or Chattels, Estates or Interests in any Manors, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Hereditaments or other things whatsoever, which any Persons, Bodies Politick or Corpo∣rate shall be willing to Give, Bestow, or Bequeath to the same: And requires,To ake pub∣lick Notices of this Commissi∣on. That the said Commissioners do Cause Publick Notification to be made of these Presents, in such manner as they shall think most conducible to the furtherance of the said Charity. To epute Per∣sons o take sub∣scripions, &c.And they are Authorized to Depute Persons, by Instru∣ments under their Hands and Seals, to Take Subscriptions, and to Collect Monies Contributed, and to bring in to the Hands of the Treasurer; and to displace such Deputies, and appoint others as they shall see Cause; and to establish Cheques, Comptrolls and Orders, for the due Charging of the Treasurer, and also the said Deputies, and all other Per∣sons who shall be Chargeable with any Monies or other Pro∣fits to the said Uses: And upon suspicion of Fraud,Powe to Exa∣min upon Oath. or Con∣cealments of Monies or other Things Given, to Examin Wit∣nesses upon Oath, or by any other Lawful means, and to pro∣ceed thereupon with effect. Required to cer∣tifie to the Trea∣sury all Gifts.And They are Required to Certifie, from time to time, to the Treasury, the Names of the Persons, Societies, &c. who shall Give to this Charitable Design, with the Sums of Monies or other Things devised, to the end a Perpetual Me∣morial may be made of such well disposed Persons, and whereby the Treasurer may be Charged in his Accounts. Treasurer ap∣pointed.His Majesty confiding very much in the Ability and Faith∣fulness of John Evelyn, Senior, Esq hath appointed him Treasurer and Receiver General of the said Hospital, during His Majesty's Pleasure; And in Case of his Death or Remo∣val, doth Impower the Commissioners or any Seven, of whom Four or more to be as aforesaid, to appoint One or more Persons to the said Place of Treasurer, and such to Remove or Displace, as they shall see Cause:The Treasurer to give Acquit∣tances. And the Treasurer is Impowered to give Acquittances for all Sums of Monies or other things Received; and shall be subject to such Com∣ptrolls as shall be Established by the Commissioners: His Majesty strictly enjoyning, That nothing given to the said Uses, be diverted or otherwise applied, than to the Charita∣ble purposes mentioned, or to defray necessary Charges re∣lating thereto. Power after His Majesty has ap∣proved the Mo∣dels, to Proceed and Finish.And the Commissioners are Impowered, so soon as His Majesty shall have approved, under His Sign Manual, their Report in that behalf, to take down, or to alter the present
Structure, in such manner as shall be appointed. And after such time as He shall have allowed of such Models and Schemes as they shall have presented, as aforesaid, under His Sign Manual, or otherwise, for the Building, Fitting and Furnishing the said Hospital, To Put in hand, Carry on, and Finish the same, proceeding therein in such Method as to them shall seem best. All Monie to be Issued by Warrants in Writing.And by Warrants in Writing, to direct the Issuing of all Monies, for Buying Materials, and other Uses and Expendi∣tures of the Hospital; and all other Charges incident to the Execution of the Commission; And Agree upon, and Set down Instructions, for the keeping of the Money brought into the Treasury, and the Materials, Provisions and Stores, and for the Issuing of the same; And appoint in what man∣ner all Books and Accounts shall be Kept, Audited and Al∣lowed. Powers to be given to ub-Committes.And out of their own Number, and such others as they shall choose, to make Sub-Committees, and invest them with Power to make Contracts, or other Things which they shall intrust them with, pursuant to the Power given to them∣selves; and to make Void, and Revive the same, as they see needful: And they are to Consider and Determine of all other Matters for the Carrying on this Design, till the same shall be Compleated. Commissoners to be accounta∣ble each for himself only.And His Majesty doth declare, That the said Commissioners shall be accountable only for their own respective Receipts, Actings and Doings. And doth Grant to the afore appointed Treasurer, the Yearly Sallary of Two hundred pounds, from time to time to be allowed upon his Accounts. And doth Impower the Commissioners to Proceed, Agree and Con∣clude in all Cases and Things left undetermined upon His late Commission granted for the purposes aforesaid, Dated the 12th day of March last past; which Commission is hereby Revoked and Determined. Dated at Westminster the 10th Day of September, in the Seventh Year of His Majesties Reign. LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb deceas'd, Printers to the King's most Excellent Majesty, 1695.
