A677 17199860 106198
A TESTIMONY OF ANTIQUITY: Shewing The Ancient Faith of the Church of England, Touching the SACRAMENT Of the Body and Blood of the LORD, Here Publickly Preached, And also received in the Saxons time, above Seven Hundred years agoe. Jeremiah 6. Go into the streets, and inquire for the old way: and if it be the good and right way, then go therein, that ye may find rest for your souls. But they say: we will not walk therein. OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printer to the University, Anno Dom. 1675.
The Preface to the Christian Reader. GREAT Contentions hath now been of long time about the most comfortable Sacrament of the bo∣dy and blood of Christ our Saviour: In the Inqui∣sition and determination whereof, many be charg∣ed and condemned of Heresie, and reproved as bringers up of new Doctrine, not known of old in the Church before Berengarius time, who taught in France, in the daies when William the Norman was by Conquest King of England, and Hil∣debrand, otherwise called Gregorius the Seventh, was Pope of Rome. But that thou mayest know (good Christian Reader) how this is advouched more boldly then truly, in especial of some certain men, which be more ready to maintain their old judg∣ment, then of humilitie to submit themselves unto a truth: here is set forth unto thee a Testimony of very Ancient time, wherein is plainly shewed what was the judgment of the Learned men in this matter, in the daies of the Saxons before the Conquest▪ First thou hast here a Sermon or Homelie, for the holy day of Easter, written in the old English or Saxon speech, which doth of set purpose, and at large, intreat of this Doctrine, and i ound a∣mong many other Sermons in the same old speech, made for o∣ther Festival daies and Sondaies of the year, and used to be spo∣ken orderly according to those daies unto the people, as by the books themselves it doth well appear. And of such Sermons be yet many books to be seen, partly remaining in private mens hands, and taken out from Monasteries at their dissolution: part∣ly yet reserved in the I ibraries of Cathedral Churches, as of Worcester, Hereford, and Exeter. From which places diverse of these books have been delivered into the hands of the most Re∣verend Father, Matthew Arch-bishop of Canterbury, by whose diligent search for such writings of History and other Monuments of Antiquitie, as might reveal unto us what hath been the state
of our Church in England from time to time, these things that be here made known unto thee do come to light. Howbeit the Ser∣mons were not first written in the old Saxon tongue: but were Translated into it, as it should appear, from the Latine. For about the end of a Saxon book of LX Sermons, (which hath about the middest of it this Sermon against the bodily presence) be added these words of the Translator, writ in Saxon, and thus Englished. He let pass many good Gospels which he that list may Translate. For we dare not enlarge this book much further, least it be over great, and so cause to men lothsomness through his bigness. And in another book containing some of the Saxon Sermons it is also thus writ∣ten in Latine. In ho codicillo continentur duodecim Sermones An∣glicae, quos accepimus de libris quos Aelfricus Abbas Anglicè trans∣tulit. In this book be comprised 12 Sermons which we have ta∣ken out of the books that Aelfrick Abbot Translated into En∣glish. In which words truly there is also declared who was the Translator, to wit, one Aelfrick. And so he doth confess of himself in the Preface of his Saxon Grammer, where he doth moreover give us to understand the number of the Sermons that he Translated thus. His words be in Saxon, and thus in En∣glish. I Aelfrick was desirous to turn into our English tongue from the art of Letters called Grammer this little book, after that I had Translated the Two books, in Fourscore Sermons. But howsoever it be now manifest enough by this above declared, how that these Sermons were Translated: I think notwithstanding, that there will hardly be found of them any Latine books being (I fear me) utterly perished and made out of the way since the Conquest, by some which could not well brooke this Doctrine. And that such hath been the dealing of some partial Readers, may partly hereof appear. There is yet a very Ancient book of Canons of Wor∣cester Library, and is for the most part all in Latine, but yet in∣termingled in certain places, even three or four leaves together, with the old Saxon tongue: and one place of this book handleth this matter of the Sacrament: but a few lines wherein did consist the chief point of the Controversie, be rased out by some Reader: yet consider how the corruption of him who∣soever he was, is bewrayed. This part of the Latine book was
taken out of two Epistles of Alfricks before named, and were written of him as well in the Saxon tongue, as the Latine. The Saxon Epistles be yet wholely to be had in the Librarie of the same Church, in a book written all in Saxon, and is Intituled A Book of Canons, and Shrift book. But in the Church of Exe∣ter, these Epistles be seen both in the Saxon tongue, and also in the Latine. By the which it shall be easie for any to restore a∣gain, not only the sense of the place rased in Worcester book, but also the very same Latine Words. And the words of these two Epistles, so much as concern the Sacramental bread and wine, we here set immediately after the Sermon: First in En∣glish, then the words of the second, in English and Latine: de∣livering them most faithfully as they are to be seen in the books from whence they are taken. And as touching the Saxon writ∣ings they be set out in such form of Letters, and dark speech, as was then used, when they were written: Translated also for our better understanding, into our common and usual English speech.  now it remaineth we do make known who this Ael∣frick was, whom we here speak of, in what age he lived, and in what estimation. He was truly brought up in the Schools of Aethelwolde Bishop of Winchester, Aethelwolde I mean the El∣der, and great Saint of Winchester Church: So Canonized be∣cause in the daies of Edgar King of England, he conspired with Dunstane Arch-bishop of Canterbury, and Oswalde Bishop of Worcester, to expel out of the Cathedral Churches, throughout all England the Married Priests, which then were in those Churches the old dwellers, as writeth Renulphus Cestrenis in his Pollironicon, and to set up of new the Religion, or rather Su∣perstition & Hipocrisie of Monks, after that the same had been a long time, by the just judgment of God, utterly abolished, the Danes spoyling them, and cruelly burning them in their houses, as is at large and plentifully confessed in the Historie of their own Churches. For this new rearing up of Monkery is Aethelwolde called in most Histories, Pater Monachorum, the Father of Monks. Under this Aethelwolde was Aelfrick traded up in learning, as he witnesseth of himself in the Latine Preface of his Saxon Grammer, where speaking of his interpreting La∣tine
words he writeth thus. Scio multis modis verba posse inter∣pretari, sed ego simplicem interpretationem sequor fastidium vitandi causa. Si alicui tamen displicuerit nostra interpretatio, dicat quo∣modo vult. Nos contenti sumus sicut didicimus in Scholis venerabi∣lis praesulis Aethelwoldi qui multos ad bonum imbuit. I know that words may be expounded diverss waies, but for to avoid lothsom∣ness I do follow the plain Interpretation. Which if any shall mis∣like he may do as he thinketh best: but we are content to speak, as we have learned in the Schools of the most worthy Bishop Ae∣thelwolde, who hath been a good Instructor to many, or who hath brought up many to good. This he writeth of himself. So up∣on this his education in the Schools of Aethelwolde he became af∣terward to be an earnest lover and a great setter forwards of Monkery, and therefore no less busie writer and speaker against the Matrimony of Priests in his time. For which respect he was afterward so regarded, that he was made by Oswalde Bishop of Worcester (as reporteth John Capgrave) the First Abbot of St. Albons newly restored, and replenished with Monks, and also made Abbot of Malmesbury by King Edgar, (as reporteth William of Malmesbury) in the life of Aldelmus. And truly he call∣eth himself Abbot in diverse of his Epistles, although he never named of what place, as in that he writeth Egneshamensibus fra∣tribus de consuetudine Monachorum. To the Monks of Egnesham, of the order and manner of Monks, and in this he writeth to Wulfstane Arch-bishop of York, and in another against Priests Matrimony sent to one Sigeferth, with whom was an Anker abide∣ing, which defended the Marriage of Priests, affirming it to be lawful. The Epistle is in the Saxon tongue, and in our English thus, Aelfrick Abbot doth send friendly salutation to Sigeferth. It is told me that I teach otherwise in my English writings, then doth thy Anker teach, which is at home with thee. For he saith plainly that it is a lawful thing for a Priest to Marry, and my writings doth speak against this, &c. Thus as well in his own Epistles, as in all other books of Sermons in the Saxon tongue, that I have seen I find him alwaies called Abbot, and only so called. Howbeit, John Capgrv who  together into one Volume the lives  the life of Oswalde, that Aelfrick
last of all advanced to the Arch-Bishops See of Canterbury. In aliis inquit Angliae partibus insignes Ecclesias ob praefixam causam Clerieis evacuavit, & eas viris monastica institutionis sublimavit: quorum haec nomina sunt. Eeclesia S. Albani, S. Aetheldredae Vir∣ginis in Eli, & ea quae apud Beamfledam constituta honorabilis habe∣batur. Instituit enim in Ecclesia S. Albani Aelfricum Abbatem, qui ad Archiepiscopatum Cantuariensem postea sublimatus fuit. In other parts of England Oswald avoided out of the most notable Churches the Clarks, and advanced the same places with men of the order of Monks, whose names be these: S. Albons, The Church of the Virgin S. Aetheldrede in Ely, and that which is at Beam∣fieot reputed very famous. He did appoint Abbot in S. Albons Aelfrick, who was afterwards promoted to the Arch-bishoprick of Canterbury. Truly this Aelfrick we here speak of, was equal in time to * Elfrick Arch-bishop of Canterbury, as may certainlyWho did put out secular Priests out of the Church of Canterbury, as the story of that house sheweth. appear to him that will consider, when Wulfstane Arch-bishop of York, and Wulfsine Bishop of Scyrburn lived, unto whom Ael∣frick writeth the Saxon Epistles, from which the words concern∣ing the Sacrament hereafter following be taken. And the cer∣tainty of this consideration, may well be had out of William Malmesbury De Pontificibus, and out of the Subscriptions of Bi∣shops, to the Grants, Letters-Pattents, and Charters of Ae∣thelrede who raigned King of England at this time. Howbeit whether this Aelfrick, and Aelfrick Arch-bishop of Canterbury was but one and the same man, I leave it to other mens judgment further to consider: for that writing here to Wulfstane, he nameth himselfe but Abbot, and yet Aelfrick Arch-bishop of Canter∣bury. was promoted to that his Arch-bishop Stoole six yeares be∣fore that Wulstane was wade Arch-bishop of York, as is declared most manifestly in the Histories of Symeon of Durham, Roger Hoveden, The Histories of Rochester, Flores Historiarum, Thomas Stubbs in his History of the Arch-bishops of York, and in all o∣ther most Ancient Histories, as well written in the old Saxon tongue, as in Latine: Moreover in many Deeds and Writings of Gifts, made by King Aethelrede, when Aelfrick subscribeth as Arch-bishop of Canterbury, then in them is one Aldulphus, Wulfstanes predecessour named Arch-bishob of York, and Wulf∣stane
himself subscribeth but as an inferiour Bishop. But be it, that this Aelfrick was onely Abbot, and not Arch-bishop of Canterbury, yet this is also most true, that beside the praise of great Learning, and of being a most eloquent interpreter (for which William of Malmesbury doth greatly commend him) he was also of such credit and estimation, to the liking of that age in which he lived, that all his Writings, and chiefly these his Epistles, were then thought to contain sound doctrine: and the Bishops themselves did judge them full of right good Coun∣sel, Preceptes, and Rules to govern thereby their Clergy: and therefore did most earnestly request to have these Epistles sent unto them, as do well appear by Two short Latine Epistles, set before the Saxon Epistles, whereof the one is sent to Wulfsine Bishop of Scyrburne, the other to Wulfstane Arch-bishop of York. And after this also Bishops of other Churches among other Canons that they collected out of general and particular Councels, out of the Books of Gildas, out of the Penitentials of Theodorus Arch-bishop of Canterbury, out of the Extracts of Egberhtus the Fourth Arch-bishop of York from Paulinus: out of the Epistles of, Alcuinus teacher to Charles the great, and to conclude, out of the Writings of the Fathers of the Primitive Church: among other Canons I say, they collect∣ed together for the better ordering of their Churches, they do place among them also these Two Epistles of Aelfrick, as is to be seen in Two books of Canons of Worcester Library: where∣of the one is all in the Old Saxon Tongue, and there these E∣pistles of Aelfrick be in the same Tongue: the other is for the most part all in Latine, and is intituled Admonitio spiritualis doctrinae, where these Epistles be in the Latine Tongue, and be joyned together for an Exhortation to be made of the Bishop to his Clergy. There is also a like book of Canons of Exeter Church, where these two Epistles in Latine be appointed in∣steed of two Sermons to be Preached, Ad Clericos & Presbyte∣ros, to the Clerks and Priests, and the Epistles be also in the same book in the Saxon Tongue. And this book was given to Saint Peters Church in Exeter by Leofrick the first and most famous Bishop of that Church, as in his own Record and Grant
of all such Lands, Books, and other Things he gave unto the Church, expressed in the Saxon Tongue, but in English thus: Here is shewed in this Book or Charter, what Leofrike Bishop hath given unto St. Peter's Minster at Exeter, where his Bishops Seat is; that is, That he hath got in again, through God's help, whatsoever was taken out, &c. First, shewing what Lands of such as was taken from the Church be recovered again, partly by his earnest complaint and suit made for the same, partly by his giving of rewards. Next, making also report what Lands, with other Treasure of his own, he gave of new to the place. He cometh at last to the rehearsal of his Books, whereof the last here named is a Canon▪book in Latine, and a Shrift-book in English, is the Book we speak of, and hath in it the Latine and Saxon Epistles of Aelfrick. Thus as this Book of Exeter Church hath this good evidence by which it is shewed, that Leofrike was the giver thereof; even so the Book of Canons of Worcester Church, written all in Saxon, hath in it most certain testimony that the Writer thereof was the publick Scribe of the Church, whose name was Wulfgeat. For thus is it recorded therein, even with the same hand of the Scribe wherein all the Book is written. In English thus: Wulfgeat the Scribe of Worcester Church did write me. Pray I beseech you for his transgressions the Creator of the world. And God grant that he be alwaies happy that writ me. The other Book of Canons of Worcester Library, which I have said is for the more part in Latine, and is intituled Admonitio spiritualis do∣ctrinae, is written in so old an hand as is that of Exeter Church, and seemes to be possessed of Wulfstane, who was Bishop of Worcester in the daies of William the Conqueror. And that he should be the possessor of this ook, I do thus affirm: when in his daies Lanfrank made first this Law of Priests, in the Councel he held at Winchester, in the year of our Lord 1076. Decretum est, ut nullus Canonicus llxorem habeat: Sacerdotum vero in Castellis, vel in vicis habitantium habentes llxores non cogantur, ut dimittant: non habentes interdicantur, ut habeant. Et deinceps caveant Episcopi, ut Sacerdotes, vel Diaco non praesumant ordinare, nisi prius profi∣tetur ut  non habeant. That is, It is decreed that no Canon have a Wife. But of Pries, such as have Wives, dwel∣ling
in Castles and Villages, let them not be compelled to put away their Wives: but such Priests as have no Wives, forbid them to have. And let bishops take heed that they presume not to ordain Priests or Deacons, unless they do first profess to have no Wives. Now albeit this and many other Councels held from time to time, by the space more then of an hundred years after this did little avail, but that the Priests did both marry, and still kept their Wives, because as writeth Gerardus Arch-bishop of York to Anselm, Cum ad ordines aliquos invito, dura cervice re∣tuntur re in ordinando castitatem profiteantur. When I call any to Orders, they resist with a stiff neck, that they do not in taking Order profess Chastity. Or as is reported in the Saxon story of Peterborow Church, speaking of the Councels of Anselm, of John of Cremona, and of William Arch-bishop of Canterbury, All these Decrees availed nothing, they all kept their Wives still by the Kings leave as they did before. Yet it came to pass upon this Decree of Lanfrank, that the form of words wherein the Priests should vow Chastity, was now first put into some BishopsNo such de∣mand of this profession in any English pontifical be∣fore this time. Pontifical. Ego frater N. promitto Deo, omnibus{que} Sanctis ejus castitatem cor∣poris mei secundum Canonum decreta, & secundum ordinem mihi imponendum servare domino praesule N. praesente. And as the words were thus put into some Pontifical in a general speaking, as the manner is; so in the beginning of this Book we here speak of, wherein be Aelfrick's Epistles, are the self-same words of pro∣fession, written in the same old hand, as is the rest of the Book; and addeth also there the special name of Wulfstane Bishop (who was present at this Councel of Lanfrank, and unto whom it did first appertain to exact of Priests in the Diocess of Worcester this profession.) The words be these: Ego frater N. promitto Deo, omnibus{que} Sanctis ejus castitatem corporis mei secundum Canonum de∣creta, & secundum ordinem mihi imponendum domino praesule Wulf∣stano praesente. I brother N. do promise to God and all his Saints chastity of my body, according to the Decrees of Canons, and according to the order to be put upon me before Wulfstane Bi∣shop. By this I do affirm, that this Book did belong to Wulf∣stane Bishop of Worcester; and so by him was afterward given to the Library of that Church, where it now remaineth. Where∣fore
of this now declared: First, touching the Sermon spoken of in the begining, whereof (as of many other contained in two Books) Aelfrick was but the Translator, and therefore were Books of Sermons before his time. N, touching the publick receiving of the Epistles of Aelfrick, wherein (I say) is denied the Bodily Presence; and also by the infarcing afterward of these Epistles by Bishops into their Books of Canons, in stead of Ex∣hortations to be used unto their Clergy, it is not hard to know not only so much what Aelfrick's judgment was in this contro∣versie, but also that more is, what was the common received Doctrine herein of the Church of England, as well when Aelfrick himself lived, as before his time, and also after his time, even from him to the Conquest. But what was the condition and state of the Church when Aelfrick himself lived? In deed to confess the truth, it was in divers points of Religion full of blindness and ignorance; full of childish servitude to Ceremonies, as it was long before and after; and too much given to the love of Monkery, which now at this time unmeasurably took root, and grew excessively. But yet to speak what the Adversaries of the Truth have judged of this time, it is most certain, that there is no Age of the Church of England which they have more re∣verenced, and thought more holy than this. For of what Age have they Canonized unto us more Saints, and to their liking more notable? First Odo Arch-bishop of Canterbury, who died in the beginning of King Edgar's Reign. Then King Edgar him∣self, by whom Aelfrick was made Abbot of Malmsbury. Then Edward called the Martyr, King Edgar's Bastard-Son. Then Editha, King Edgar's Bastard-Daughter. Also Dunstane Arch-bishop of Canterbury, of whom Aelfrick was greatly esteemed. Aethelwold Bishop of Winchester, under whom Aelfrick had his first bringing up. Oswald Bishop of Worcester, and after Arch-bishop of York, who made Aelfrick Abbot of St. Albons. Wulf∣sine Bishop of Scyrburn, unto whom Aelfrick writeth the first of the Epistles we here speak of. Elfleda a Nun of Romesey, and Wulhilda Abbess of Barking, lived in the daies of King Edgar. And last of all Wulfritha, King Edgar's Concubine. All these, I say, with some other more, be Canonized for Saints of
this Age in which Aelfrick himself lived in great fame and credit. Also Leofrick and Wulfsine, whom we have shewed to have been the givers of those (anon-books, wherein be seen Aelfricks E∣pistles, be reverenced for most holy Men, and Saints of their Churches. And these two lived Bishops in the coming in of the Conqueror. Thus do some men now-a-daies, not only dissent in doctrine from their own Church, but also from that Age of their Church which they have thought most holy, and judged a most excellent pattern to be followed. Wherefore what may we now think of that great consent whereof the Romanists have long made vaunt, to wit, Their Doctrine to have continued many hundred years, as it were linked together with a continual chain, whereof hath been no breach at any time? Truly this their so great affirmation hath uttered unto us no truth, as (good Chri∣stian Reader) thou mayest well judge by duly weighing of this which hath been spoken, and by the reading also of that which here followeth, whereunto I now leave thee. Trusting that after thou hast well weighed this matter of such manner of the being of Christs Body in the Sacrament, as shew∣eth this Testimony, no untruth or dishonour shall need to be at∣tributed to Christ's loving words pronounced at his last Supper among his Apostles; no derogation to his most Sacred Institu∣tion; no diminishing of any comfort to Christian mens souls in the use of his reverend Sacrament: but all things to stand right up, most agreeably both to the verity of Christs infallible words, and to the right nature, congruence, and efficacies of so holy a Sacrament; and finally most comfortable to the conscience of man, for his spiritual uniting and incorporation with Christ's blessed Body and Bloud to immortality, and for the sure Gage of his Resurrection. Amen.
A SERMON Of the PASCHAL LAMB, And of the Sacramental body and bloud of CHRIST our Saviour. Written in the old Saxon tongue before the Con∣quest, and appointed in the Reign of the Saxons to be spoken to the people at Easter, be∣fore they should receive the Communion. MEN beloved, it hath been of∣ten said unto you about our Saviours Resurrection, how he on this present day af∣ter his suffering, mightily rose from death. Now will we open unto you, through Gods grace, of the holy housell, which ye should now go unto, and instruct your under∣standing about this mystery, both after the old Covenant, and also after the new, that no doubting may trouble you about this live∣ly food. The Almighty God bad Moses his Captain in the land of Aegypt, to command
the people of Israel for to take for every fami∣ly a Lamb of one year old, the night they de∣parted out of the country to the land of pro∣mise, and to offer that Lamb to God, and after to cut it, and to make the sign of the Cross, with the Lambs blood, upon the side posts, and the upper posts of their door, and afterward to eat the Lambs flesh rosted, and unleavened bread with wild lettice. God saith unto Moses, Eat of the Lamb nothing raw, or sodden in water, but rosted with fire. Eate the head, the feet, and the inwards, and let nothing of it be left until the morning: if any thing thereof remain, that shall you burn with fire Eat it in this wise. Gird your loins, and doe your shoes on your seet, have you staves in your hands, and eat it in hast. This time is the Lords Passover. And then was slain on that night in every house throughout Pharoahs raign, the first born child: and Gods people of Israel were delivered from that suddain death through the Lambs offer∣ing, and his bloods marking. Then said God unto Moses. Keep this day in your remem∣brance, and hold it a great feast in your kin∣reds
with a perpetual observation, and eat unleavened bread alwaies seven daies at this feast. After this deed, God led the people of Israel over the red sea, with dry foot, and drowned therein Pharaoh, and all his armyExod. 14. together, with their possessions, and fed af∣terward the Israelites forty years with hea∣venly food, and gave them water out of the hard rock, until they came to the promisedExod. 17. land. Part of this story we have treated of in another place, part we shall now declare, (to wit) that which belongeth to the holy housell. Christian men may not now keep that old law bodily, but it behoveth them to know, what it ghostly signifieth. That innocent Lamb which the old Israelites did then kill, had significa∣tion after ghostly understanding of Christs suffering, who unguilty shed his holy blood for our Redemption. Hereof sing Gods servants at every Mass. Agnus dei qui tollis pecca∣ta mundi, miserere nobis. That is in our speech, Thou Lamb of God that takest away the sins of the world, have mercy upon us.
Those Israelites were delivered from that suddain death, and from Pharaohs bondage byMat. 27. Mar. 15. Luke 24. the Lambs offering, which signified Christs suffering: through which we be delivered from everlasting death, and from the Devils cruel raign, if we rightly believe in the true Redeemer of the whole world, Christ the Sa∣viour. That Lamb was offered in the evening, and our Saviour suffered in the sixt age of this world. This age of this corruptible world is reckoned unto the evening. They marked with the Lambs blood upon the doors and the upper postsNo such sign com∣manded by God in that place of Scri∣ture, but it was the bloud that God did look upon. Exod. 12. Tau, that is the sign of the Cross, and were so defended from the An∣gel that killed the Aegyptians first born child. And weUnder∣stand this as that of S. Paul, Ephes. 2. Christ re∣conciled both to God in one body through his Cross. ought to mark our foreheads, and our bodies with the token of Christs rood, that we may be also delivered from destruction, when we shall be marked both on forehead, and also in heart with the blood of our Lords suffering. Those Israelites eat the Lambs flesh at their Easter time, when they were delivered, and we receive ghostly, Christs body, and drink his blood, when we receive with true belief that holy housell. That time they kept with
them at Easter seven daies with great worship, when they were delivered from Pharaoh, and went from that land. So also Christian men keep Christs resurrection at the time of Easter these seven daies, because through his suffer∣ing and rising we be delivered, and be made clean by going to this holy housell, as Christ faith in his Gospel. Verily, verily, I say unto you, ye have no life in you except ye eat my flesh, and drink my bloud. He that cateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, a∣bideth in me, and I in him, and hath that everlasting life: and I shall raise him up at the last day. I am the lively bread, that cameJohn 6. down from heaven, not so as your forefathers eat that heavenly bread in the wilderness, and afterward died. He that eateth this bread, he liveth for ever. He blessed bread before his suffering, and divided it to his Disci∣ples,Matth. 26. Luke 22. Mark 14. thus saying. Eat this bread, it is my body, and do this in my remembrance. Also he blessed wine in one cup and said. Drink ye all of this. This is my blood that is shed for many, in forgiveness of sins. The Apo∣stles did as Christ commanded, that is, they
blessed bread and wine to housell again after∣ward1 Cor. 11. in his remembrance. Even so also their successors and all Priests by Christs command∣ment do bless bread and wine to housell in his name with the Apostolick blessing. Now some men have oftenThis was now inque∣stion, and so before Beringarius time. searched and do yet often search, how bread that is gathered of corn, and through fires heat baked, may be turned to Christs body, and how wine that is pressed out of many grapes, is turned through one blessing to the Lords blood. Now say we to such men, That some things be spoken of ChristA necessary distinction. by signification, some thing by thing certain. True thing is and certain, that Christ was born of a Maid, and suffered death of his own accord, and was buried, and on this day rose from death. He is said bread by signifi∣tion, and a Lamb, and a Lyon, and some where otherwise. He is called Bread, because he is our life and Angells life. He is said to be a Lamb for his innocency. A Lyon for strength wherewith he overcame the strong Devil. But Christ is not so notwithstanding after true nature neither Bread, nor a Lamb, nor a Ly∣on. Why is then the holy housell, called Christs
body, or his blood, if it be not truely that it is called? Truely the bread and wine which by the Mass of the Priest is hallowed, shew one thing without to humane understanding, and an other thing they call within to believ∣ing minds. Without they be seen bread and wine both in figure and in tast: and they be truely after their hallowing Christs body and his blood through ghostly mystery. An heathen child is christened, yet he altereth not his shape without, though he be changed within. He is brought to the font-stone sinful through Adams disobedience. Howbeit he is washed from all sin within, though he hath not changed his shape without.The wa∣ter in Bap∣tisme, and bread and wine in the Lords sup∣per, com∣pared Even so the holy Font wa∣ter that is called the well-spring of life is like in shape to other waters, and is subject to corruption, but the holy ghosts might cometh to the corruptible water, through the Priests blessing, and it may after wash the body and soul from all sin, through ghostly might. Be∣hold now we see two things in this one crea∣ture. After true nature that water is corrup∣tible water, and after ghostlie mystery, hath hollowing might. So also if we behold that
holy housell after bodily understanding, then see we that it is a creature corruptible and mutable: if we acknowledge therein ghostly might, then understand we that life is therein, and that it giveth immortality to them that eat it with belief. Much is be∣twixt the invisible might of the holy housell, and the visible shape of his proper nature. It isNo Tran∣substantia∣tion. naturally corruptible bread, and corrup∣tible wine: and is by might of Gods word truly Christs body, and his blood: not so not∣withstanding bodily, but ghostly. Much isDifferen∣ces betwixt Christs na∣tural body, and the Sa∣crament thereof. betwixt the {double barline} body Christ suffered in, and the body that is hallowed to housell. The body truly that Christ suffered in, was born of the 1. Diffe∣rence.Not the body that suffered is in the hou∣sell. flesh of Mary, with blood, and with bone, with skin, and with sinewes, in humane limbs, with a reasonable soul living: and his ghost∣ly body, which we call the housell, is ga∣thered of many cornes: without blood, and bone, without limb, without soul: and there∣fore nothing is to be understood therein bodi∣ly, but all is ghostly to be understood. What∣soever is in that housell, which giveth sub∣stance of life, that is of the ghostly might,
and invisible doing. Therefore is that holy housell called a mysterie, because there is one thing in it seen, & an other thing understand∣ed. That which is there2. Diffe∣rence. seen, hath bodilie shape: and that we do there understand, hath ghostlie might. Certainly Christs bodie which suffered death and rose from death, never3. Diffe∣rence. dieth henceforth: but is Eternal, and unpassi∣ble. That housell is Temporal, not Eternal.4. Diffe∣rence. Corruptible, and dealed into sundry parts. Chewed between the teeth, and sent into the belly: howbeit nevertheless after ghostly might, it is all in every part. Many receiveMath. 15. that holy bodie: and yet notwithstanding, it is so all in every part after ghostly mysterie. Though some chew less deal, yet is there no more might notwithstanding in the more part, then in the less: because it is whole in all men after the invisible might. This mysterie is a5. Diffe∣rence. pledg and a figure: Christs bodie is truth it self. This pledge we do keep mysticallie, untill we be come to the truth it self: and then is this pledg ended. Truly it is so as we before have said Christs body, and his blood: not bodilie, but ghostlie. And
ye should not search how it is done, but hold it in your belief that it is so done. We read in an other book called Vita patrum, that two Monkes desired of God some demon∣strationThese tales seem to be infarsed, placed here upon no occasion. touching the holy housell, and after their request, as they stood to hear Mass, they saw a child lying on the altar, where the Priest said Mass, and Gods Angel stood with a sword, and abode looking untill the Priest brake the housel. Then the Angel divided that child upon the dish, and sbed his blood into the Chalice. But when they did go to the housel, then was it turned to bread and wine, and they did eat it, giving God thanks for that shewing. Also S. Gregory desired of Christ, that he would shew to a cer∣tain woman doubting about his mysterie some great affirmation. She went to housell with doubting mind, and Gregory forthwith ob∣tained of God, that to them both was shewed that part of the housel which the woman should receive, as if there lay in a dish a joynt of a finger all beblooded: and so the womans doubting was then forthwith healed. But now hear the Apostles words about this mystery.
Paul the Apostle speaketh of the old Israelites thus writing in his Epistle to faithful men. All1. Cor. 10. our fore-fathers were baptised in the cloud, & in the sea, and all they eat the same ghostlie meat, and drank the fame ghostly drink. They drank truly of the Stone that followed them, and that Stone was Christ. Neither was thatNote this exposition which is now adaies thought new. Stone then from which the water ran bodily Christ, but it signified Christ, that calleth thus to all believing and Faithful men, Whoso∣ever thirsteth let him come to me, and drink. And from his bowels floweth lively water.John. 4. This he said of the Holy Ghost, whom he receiveth which believeth on him. The Apo∣stle1. Cor. 10. Paul saith That the Israelites did eatExod. 17. the same ghostly meat, and drink the same ghostly drink; because that heavenly meat that fed them forty years, and that water which from the Stone did flow, had signifi∣cation of christs body, and his blood, that now be offered daily in Gods church. It was the same which we now offer; not bodily, butMat. 26. Luke. 22. Mark. 14. ghostly. We said unto you ere while, that christ hallowed bread and wine to housel be∣fore his suffering, and said, This is my bo∣dy,
and my blood. Yet he had not then suffered, but so notwithstanding heNov we eat that bo∣dy which was eaten beeore he was born by the faithful. turned through invisible might that bread to his own body, and that wine to his blood, as he before did in the wilderness before that he was born to men, when heSee a transub∣stantiation. turned that heavenly meat to his flesh, and the flowing water from that Stone to his own blood. Very many eat of thatManna. heavenly meat in the wilderness, and drank that ghostly drink, and were never theJohn. 6. less dead, as christ said. And christ ment not that death which none can escape; but that everlasting death, which some of that folk deserved for their unbelief. Moses and Aaron, and many other of that people which pleased God, eat that heavenly bread, and they dyed not that everlasting death, though they dyed the common death. They saw that the heavenly meat was visible, and corrupti∣ble, and they ghostly understood by that visi∣ble thing, and ghostly received it. The Sa∣viour saith: He that eated my flesh, and drinketh my blood, hath everlasting life.John. 6. And he bad them not eat that body wherewith he was enclosed, nor that blood to drink which
he shed for use,What bo∣dy do the faithful now eat. but he ment with those words that holy housel, which ghostly is his body, and his blood, and he that tasteth it with be∣lieving heart, hath that eternal life. In the old law faithful men offered unto God diverss Sacrifices, that hadA signifi∣cation be∣fore Christ. signification of Christs body, which for our sins he himself to his hea∣venly Father hathA Sacri∣fice in Christs time. since offered to sacrifice. Certainly this housel which we do now hallow at Gods Altar isA Re∣membrance after Christ Math. 26. Hebr. 10. remembrance of Christs bo∣dy which he offered for us, and of his blood which he shed for us. So he himself com∣manded, Do this in my remembrance. Once suffered Christ by himself, but yet nevertheless his suffering is daily renewed at the Mass through mysterie of the holy housel. There∣fore that holy Mass is profitable both to the living, and to theThis do∣ctrine with praying to Images, & to the dead bodies of men at their tombs took his be∣ginning of the avarice of Monks unto whom it was gain∣ful. dead: as it hath been often declared. We ought also to consider dili∣gently how that this holy housel is bath Christs body, and the body of all faithful men, after ghostly mysterie, as the wise Augustine saith of it. If ye will understand of Christs bodie, hear the Apostle Paul thus speaking. Ye truly be Christs body and his members. Now is The hou∣sel is also the body of all faithful men.
your mysterie set on Gods Table, and ye re∣ceive your mysterie, which mysterie ye your selves be. Be that which ye see on the Altar, and receive that which ye your selves be. A∣gain the Apostle Paul saith by it: We ma∣ny be one bread, and one body. Ʋnderstand now and rejoyce, Many be one bread, and one body in Christ. He is our head, and we be his limbs. And the bread is not of one corn, but of many. Nor the wine of one grape, but of ma∣ny. So also we all should have one unity in our Lord, as it is written of the faithful Army, how that they were in so great an unitie, as though all of them were one soul, and one heart. Christ hallowed on his Table the my∣sterie of our peace, and of our unitie: he which receiveth that mysterie of unitie, and keepeth not the bond of true peace, he receiv∣eth no mysterie for himself, but a witness a∣gainst himself. It is very good for Christian men, that they go often to housel, if thy bring with them to the Altar unguiltiness, and inno∣cencie of heart. To an evil man it turneth to no good, but to destruction, if he receive un∣worthily that holy housel. Holy books com∣mand
thatNo Scri∣pture en∣forceth the mixture of water with the wine. water be mingled to that wine which shall be for housel: because the water signifieth the people, and theThe wine signisieth Christs blood. wine Christs blood. And therefore shall neither the one without the other be offered at the holy Mass, that Christ may be with us, and we with Christ; the head with the limbs, and the limbs with the head. We would before have intreated of the Lamb which the old Israelites offered at their Easter time, but that we desired first to declare unto you of this mysterie, and after how we should receive it. That signifying Lamb was offered at the Easter. And the Apostle Paul saith in the Epistle of this pre∣sent day, that Christ is our Easter, who was offered for us, and on this day rose from death. The Israelites did eat the Lambs flesh as God commanded with unleavened bread, and wild Lettice:How we should come to the holy! Communi∣on. so we should receive that ho∣ly housel of Christs body and bloud without the leaven of sin, and iniquitie. As leaven turneth the creatures from their nature: so doth sin also change the nature of man from innocencie to uncleanness. The Apostle hath taught how we should feast not in the leaven of
evilness but in the sweet dough of puritie and truth. The hearb which they should eat with the unleavened bread is called Lettice, and is bitter in tast. So we should with bitterness of unfained repentance purifie our mind, if we will eat Christs bodie. Those israelites were not wont to eat raw flesh, although God forbad them to eat it raw, and sodden in wa∣ter, but rosted with fire. He shall receive the bodie of God raw, that shall think without reason that Christ was only man like unto us, and was not God. And he that will after mans wisdom search of the mysterie of Christs Incarnation, doth like unto him that doth seethe Lambs-flesh in water; because that wa∣ter in this same place signifieth mans under∣standing: but we should understand that all the mysterie of Christs Humanitie was ordered by the power of the Holy Ghost▪ And then eat we his body rosted with fire; because the Holy Ghost came in fiery likeness to the Apostles in diverse Tongues. The Israelites should eat the Lambs head, and the feet, and the purtenance; and nothing thereof must be left over night: If any thing thereof were left,
they did burn that in the fire: and they break not the bones. After ghostly understanding we do then eat the Lambs head, when we take hold of Christs Divinitie in our Belief. A∣gain when we take hold of his Humanitie with Love, then eat we the Lambs feet: be∣cause that Christ is the beginning and end, God before all world, and Man in the end of this world. whit be the Lambs Purtenance, but Christs secret precepts, and these we eat, when we receive with greediness the word of Life. There must nothing of the Lamb be left unto the morning, because that all Gods sayings are to be searched with great carefulness: so that all his precepts may be known in understanding and deed in the night of this present life, before that the last day of the universal resurrection do appear. If we cannot search out throughly all the mysterie of Christs Incarnation, then ought we to betake the rest unto the might of the Holy Ghost with true humilitie: and not to search rashly of that deep secretness above the measure of our understanding. They did eat the Lambs flesh with their loynes girt. In the loines is the lust of the bodie. And he
which will receive that housel, shall cover that concupiscence: and take with chastitie that holy receipt. They were also shod. What be shoes but of the hides of dead beasts. We be truly shod if we follow in our steps and deeds the life of men departed which please God with keeping of hiscommandements. They had Staves in their hands when they eat. This stafe signifieth a carefulness and a diligent o∣verseing. And all they, that best know and can, should take care of other men, and stay them up with their help. It was injoyned to the eaters that they should eat the Lamb in haste. For God abhoreth slouthfulness in his servants. And those he loveth that seek the joy of everlasting life with quickness, and hast of mind. It is written: Prolong not to turn unto God, least the time pass away through thy slow tarrying. The eaters might not break the Lambs bones. No more might the Souldiers, that did hang Christ break his holy legs, as they did of the two Theeves that hanged on either side of him. And the Lord rse from death sound without all corruption; and at the last judgment they shall see him,
whom they did most cruelly wound on the Cross. This time is called in the Hebrew tongue Pasca, and in Latine Transitus, and in Enghish a Passover; because that on this day the people of Israel passed from the land of Aegypt over the Red sea; from bondage to the Land of promise. So also did our Lord at this time depart, as saith John the Evan∣gelist, from this world to his heavenly Father-Even so we ought to follow our head, and to go from the devil to Christ; from this un∣stable world to his stable kingdom. Howbeit we should first in this present life depart from vice to holy virtue; from evil manners to good manners, if we will after this corrupti∣ble life go to that eternal life, and after our resurrection to Christ. He brings us to his everliving Father who gave him to death for our sins. To him be honour, and praise of well∣doing, world without end Amen. This Sermon is found in diverss Books of Sermons written in the old English or Saxon tongue: whereof two books be now in the hands of the most Reverend Father the the Arch-bishop of Canterbury.
Here followeth the words of Aelfricke Abbot of St. Albons, and also of Malmsbery, taken out of his Epistle written to Wulfsine Bishop of Scyrburn. It is found in a book of the old Saxon tongue, wherein be XLIII. Chapters, of Ca∣nons and Ecclesiastical Constitutions, and also Liber Poeni∣tentialis, that is a Penitential book or Shrift book, divided into Four other books, the Epistle is set for the 30. Chapter of the Fourth book, Intituled in the Saxon tongue be preost sinothe, that is, a Synod concerning Priests: and this Epistle is also in a Canon book of the Church of Exeter. SOme Priests keep the housel that is hal∣lowed on Easter day all the year for sick men. But they do greatly amiss, because it waxeth hoary. And these will not under∣stand how grievous pennance the Penitenti∣al book teacheth by this, if the housel become hoary and rotten: or if it be lost, or be eaten of Mise or of beasts by negligence. Men shall re∣serve more carefully that holy housel, and not reserve it too long, but hallow other of new for sick men alwaies within a week or a fort∣night, that it be not so much as hoary. For so holy is the housel which to day is hallowed as that which on Easter day was hallowed. That housel is Christs body not bodily, but ghostly. Not the body which he suffered in, but the bo∣dy
of which he spake, when he blessed bread and wine to housel a night before his suffering, and said by the blessed bread, This is my body; and again by the holy wine, This is my blood, which is shed for many in forgivness of sins. Ʋnderstand now that the Lord, who could turn that bread before his suffering to his bo∣dy, and that wine to his blood ghostly; that the self same Lord blesseth daily through the Priests hands bread and wine to his ghostly body, and to his ghostly blood. Here thou seest good Reader how Aelfrick upon finding fault with an abuse of his time, which was that Priests on Easter day filled their housel box, and so kept the bread a a whole year for sick men, took an occasion to speak against the bodily presence of Christ in the Sacrament. So also in another Epistle sent to Wulfstane Arch-bishop of York, he reprehending again this overlong reserving of the housel, addeth also words more at large against the same bodily pre∣sence. His words be these.
SOme Priests fill their box for housel on Easter day, and so reserve it a whole year for sick men, as though that housel were more holy then any other. But they do unadvisedly, because it waxeth black, or altogether rotten by keeping it so long space. And thus is he become guilty, as the book witnesseth to us. If any do keep the housel too long, or loose it, or Mise or other beasts do eat it, see what the Penetential book sayeth by this. So holy is al∣together that housel, which is hallowed to day, as that which is hallowed on Easter day. Wherefore I beseech you to keep that holy bo∣dy of Christ with more advisement for sick men from Sonday to Sonday in a very clean box: or at most not to keep it above a fort∣night, and then eat it laying other in the place. We have an example hereof in Moses books, as God himself hath commanded in Moses law. How the Priests should set on every Saterday twelve loaves all new baked upon the Tabernacle: the which were called Panes praepositionis: and those should stand there on Gods Tabernacle, till the next Saterday, and then did the Priests themselves eat them,
and set other in the place. Some Priests will not eat the housel which they do hallow. But we will now declare unto you how the book speaketh by them. Presbyter missam cele∣brans, & non audens sumere sacrificium, ac∣cusante conscientia sua, Anathema est. The Priest that doth say Mass and dare not eat the housel, his conscience accusing him, is accursed. It is less danger to receive the housel, then to hallow it. He that doth twice hallow one Host to housel, is like unto those Hereticks, who do Christen twice one child. Christ him∣self blessed housel hefore his suffering▪ He blessed the bread and brake, thus speaking to his Apostles. Eat this bread it is my body. And again he blessed one Chalice with wine, and thus also speaketh unto them. Drink ye all of this it is mine own blood of the New Testa∣mant which is shed for many in forgivness of sins. The Lord which halowed housel before his suffering and saith that the bread was his own body, and that the wine was truly his blood, he haloweth daily by the hands of the Priests bread to his body, and wine to his blood in ghostly mysterie, as we read in books. And yet that lively bread is not bodily so not∣withstanding:
not the self same bodie that Christ suffered in▪ Nor that holy wine is the Saviours blood which was shed for us in bo∣dily thing, but in ghostlie understanding. Both be truly that bread his bodie, and that wine also his blood, as was the heavenly bread, which we call Manna, that fed forty years Gods people. And the clear water which did then run from the Stone in the wilderness, was truly his blood, as Paul wrot on some of his Epistles. Omnes patres nostri eandem escam spiritualem man∣ducaverunt, & omnes eundem potum spiri∣tualem biberunt, &c. All our Fathers eat in the wilderuess the same ghostly meat and drank the same ghostlie drink. They drank of that ghostlie stone, and that stone was Christ. The Apostle hath said as you have heard, that they all did eat the same ghostlie meat, and they all did drink the same ghostly drink. And he saith not bodilie but ghostlie. And Christ was not yet born, nor his blood shed, when that the people of Israel eat that meat, and drank of that stone. And the stone was not bodilie Christ though he so said. It was the same mysterie in the old law, and they did ghostlie signifie that ghostlie hou∣sel of our Saviours bodie which we consecrate now.
This Epistle to Wulfstane, Elfrick wrote first in the La∣tine tongue, as in a short Latine Epistle set before this, and another of his Saxon Epistles he confesseth thus. Aelfricus Abbas Wulfstano venerabili Arshiepiscopo salutem in Christo. Ecce paruimus vestrae almitatis jussionibus transferentes Angli∣ce duas Epistolas quas Latino eloquio descriptas ante annum vobis destinavimus, non tamen semper ordinem sequentes, nec verbum ex verbo: sed sensum ex sensu proferentes. Behold we have obeyed the commandement of thy Excellencie, in Transla∣ting into English the two Epistles which we sent unto thee written in Latine more then a year agoe. Howbeit we keep not here alwaies the same order: nor yet Translate word for word, but sense for sense. Now because very few there be that do understand the old English or Saxon (so muc h i our speech changed from the use of that time, wherein Elfrick lived) and for that also it may be that some will doubt how skilfully, and also faithfully these words of Elfrick be Translated from the Saxon tongue: we have thought good to set down here last of all the very words also of his Latine Epistle, which is recorded in books fair written of old in the Cathedral Churches of Worcester and Exeter. QƲidam vero Presbyteri implent alabastrum suum de Sacrificio, quod in Pasca Domini sanctificant: & conservant per totum annum ad infirmos, quasi sancti∣or sit caeteris sacrificiis, Sed nimirum insipienter faciunt. Quia nigrescit, & putrescit tamdiu conservatum. Et Liber Poeni∣tentialis pro tali negligentia poenitentiam magnam docet: aut si a Muribus comestum sit: aut ab Auibus raptum. Tam sanctum est sacrificium, quod hodie sanctificatur quam illud
quod in die Pasae consecratum est. Et ideo debetis a Dominicae in Dominicam, aut per duas, vel maxime tres hebdomadas tenere sacrificium in alabastro mundo ad infirmos: e nigrescat, aut putrescat, si diutius servetnr. Nam in lege Moisi ponebant sacerdotes semper omni sabbato panes propositionis calidos in Ta∣bernaculo coram Domino: & in sequenti sabbato sumebant illos soli sacerdotes, & edebant: & alios novos pro eis ponebant▪ Fa∣cite & vos sacerdotes similiter. Custodite cautè sacrificium Christi ad infirmos, & edite illud, ne diutius teneatur, quam o∣portet. Et reponite aliud noviter sanctificatum propter necessita∣tem infirmorum, ne sine viatico exeant de hoc seculo. Christus Jesus in die suae saenctae caenae accepit panem: benedixit, ac fre∣git: dedit discipulis suis, dicens. Accipite, & comedite. Hoc est enim corpus suum meum. Similiter & calicem accipiens gratias git, & dedit illis, dicens. Bibite ex hoc omnes. Hic est sanguis meus Novi Testamenti, qui pro multis effundetur in remissionemThe words inclosed be∣tween the two half cir¦cles, some had rased out of Worcester book, but they are restored a∣gain out of a book of Exeter Church. peccatorum. Intelligite modo Sacerdotes, quod ille Dominus qui ante passionem suam potuit convertere illum panem, & illud vi∣num ad suum corpus & sanguinem: quod ipse quotidie sanctificat per manus Sacerdotum suorum panem ad suum corpus spirituali∣ter, & vinum ad suum sanguinem (Non sit tamen hoc sacrificium corpus ejus in quo passus est pro nobis: neque sanguis ejus, quem pro nobis effudit sed spiritualiter corpus ejus efficitur & sanguis: sicut Manna quod de coelo pluit, & aqua quae de petra fluxit. Si∣cut) Paulus Apostolus ait: Nolo enim vos ignorare fratres, quoni∣am patres nostri omnes sub nube fuerunt: & omnes, mare transierunt & omnes in Moisi baptizati sunt in nube & in mari. Et omnes e∣andem escam spiritualem manducaverumt: & omnes eundem po∣tum spiritualem biberunt. Bibebant autem de spirituali conse∣quenti eos petra. Petra autem erat Christus. Ʋnae dicit Psalmi∣sta. Panem coeli dedit eis. Panem Angelorum manducavit homo. Nos quo{que} proculdubio manducamus panem Angelorum▪ & bibimus de illa petra, quae Christum significabat: quotiens fide∣liter accedimus ad sacrificium corporis & sanguinis Christi.
AS the writings of the Fathers, even of the First age of the Church, be not thought on all parts so perfect, that whatsoever thing hath been of them spoken ought to be received without all exception, (which honor truly them∣selves both knew and also have confessed to be only due to the most holy and tryed word of God:) So in this Sermon here published, some things be spoken not consonant to sound doctrine: but rather to such corruption of great ignorance and superstition, as hath taken root in the Church of long time, being overmuch cumbred with Monkery. As where it speaketh of The Mass to be profitable to the quick and dead: Of the mixture with water with wine: and whereas there is also made mention of Two vaine Miracles, which notwithstand∣ing seem to have been infarced, for that they stand in their place unaptly, and without purpose, and the matter without them, both before and after, doth hang in it selt together most orderly; with some other Superstitious words, sounding to Su∣perstition. But all these things that be thus of some reprehen∣sion be as it were but by the way touched: the full and whole discourse of all the former part of the Sermon, and almost of the whole Sermon is about the understanding of the Sacra∣mentall bread and wine, how it is the body and blood of Christ our Saviour, by which is revealed and made known, what hath been the common taught doctrine of the Church of England on this behalf many hundred years agoe, contra∣ry unto the unadvised writing of some now a daies. Now that this foresaid Saxon Homely, with other Testimonies before alledged, do fully agree to the old ancient books (whereof some be written in the old Saxon, and some in the Latine) from whence they are taken: these here under written upon diligent perusing, and comparing the same have found
by conference, that they are truly put forth in Print, with∣out any adding, or withdrawing any thing for the more faithful reporting of the same, and therefore for the better credit hereof have subscribed their Names. Matthew Arch-bishop of Canterbury, Thomas Arch-bishop of York. Edmund Bishop of London. James Bishop of Durham. Robert Bishop of Winchester. William Bishop of Chichester. John Bishop of Hereford. Richard Bishop of Ely. Edwine Bishop of Worcester. Nicholas Bishop of Lincolne. Richard Bishop of S. Davids. Thomas Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield. John Bishop of Norwich. John Bishop of Carlile. Nicholas Bishop of Bangor. With divers other Personages of Honor and credit sub∣scribing their Names, the Record whereof remains in the Hands of the Most Reverend Father Matthew, Arch-bishop of Canterbury. FINIS.
