B1525 R13956 13588463 100607
A Faithful Testimony AND WARNING Concerning the Certainty of the Great and Notable Day of the Lord, broken forth (in this Age) after the long Night of Apostacy; wherein he will accomplish his great and glorious Work (determined) of Redemption and Restauration. With something concerning the Sufficiency of the Grace of God, which hath appeared to all men, &c. Tit. 2.11. And of the true Light, which lighteth every man that comes into the World, Joh. 1. With a brief Exhortation to them that believe in the Light, and are turned from the Darkness, Satan's power, to God. And a few words in Reply to such as query, or ask, Whe∣ther did you ever hear or read of a People (in all the Scriptures) that were Quakers; and that preached of a Light Within, as you called Quakers do? And whether you own the Scriptures to be the Word of God? And whether you do not hold that dangerous Tenet of Perfection? All briefly Answered, and given forth, for the sake of the Sim∣ple, to silence the Foolish-ignorant, and to reprove the Scorner; that all such may Awake, Repent and Turn to the Lord, before it be too late: for it is the Day of their Visitation. In True Love to all your Souls, by William. Bayly. Printed in the Year, 1672.
A Faithfull Testimony AND WARNING, Concerning the Certainty of the Great and No∣table Day of the Lord, broken forth (in this Age) after the Long Night of Apostacy; wherein he will accomplish his Great and Glo∣rious Work (determined) of Redemption and Restauration. THe Great and Notable Day of the Lord is now dawned, and broken forth, which hath been prophesied of since the Beginning, since Adam transgressed [That the Seed of the Woman should bruise the Serpent's Head] And by the Mouthes of his holy Prophets, from Enoch to the dayes of Christ and his Apostles, who also prophesied of this Day, and the Work which therein should be accomplished; which was then begun (though hindred by the Apostacy) for a time (fore-seen) and for an End determined: but now will the Lord God work, and none shall hinder; for the set time is come. Isaiah prophesied of this Day, chap. 2. vers. 2, 3. And Jere∣miah prophesied, chap. 50. And Ezekiel 39. And Daniel 12. And Hosea, chap. 6.2, 3. And Joel, chap. 2. And Amos, chap. 8. Obad. vers. 21. Mic. 4. Nahum 1. Hab. 1.5. & 2.20. Zeph. 1.12, 13, 14, 15, &c. Hagg. 2.23. Zech. 6. and chap. 9. vers. 8, 9, to the end. And Malachi 3.1. and 4.1, &c. And John the
Baptist, Mat. 3.12. And Christ Jesus, Mat. 24.30. And the Apostle Paul, 2 Thes. 2. These all prophesied of this Mighty and Glorious Day, wherein God would finish Transgression, and make an end of Sin, and bring in Everlasting Righteousness, and make a new Heaven, and a new Earth (which John saw) and exalt the Mountain of his own House above all the Hills, and establish it a top of all the Mountains, and many People should flow unto it, and flock as Doves to the Windows: and that this Day of the Lord should burn as an Oven, and all the Proud, and all that do Wickedly should be as Stubble, and the Day that [cometh] shall burn them up, and leave neither Root nor Branch of the VVicked: and the Day of the Lord [shall be] upon every one that is high, and lifted up, and he shall be brought low; and the Lord [alone] shall be exalted in that Day: and the little Stone (which Daniel saw) cut out of the Mountain without hand, that broke the great divided Image to pieces, and filled the whole Earth: and the time wherein [many] should be tryed, and purified, and made white (but the VVicked doing wickedly) and the Knowledge of the Glory of God should cover the Earth, as the VVater cove∣reth the Sea. This is the VVork which the Eternal God is now doing in this Day of his Power, which is come as a Thief in the Night upon many, who will not believe, though it be declared unto them. The Son of Man is come, and coming in the Clouds of Hea∣ven, with Power and great Glory; the Tribes (or Kindreds) of the Earth mourning and wailing because of him, who is come in Thousands of his Saints (or holy Ones) to judge the World, and convince the Ungodly of their ungodly Deeds and hard Speeches; Antichrist and Son of Perdition revealed, and consuming by the Spirit of his Mouth, and shell be destroy∣ed by the Brightness of his Glory; and the Son of God is come; and these are Signs of his coming, and of his Glory, whom the Princes of this World never knew. The Fig-tree hath blossomed, and put forth her tender Bud, we know the Sum∣mer is nigh; the Body is known to which the Eagles are gathe∣red; the two in the Field, the two at the Mill, and in the Bed, are separated; and the Unclean Spirits are tormented,
and the Devils cast out, and enter'd into the Herds of Swine, making them run with Violence, till they are choked; who have trampled the Pearls under their Feet, and turned again, and rented, as Christ Jesus (our elder Brother) said they would do; and the Dead are raised; the Blind (yea, the born blind) receive their sight; the Deaf hear; the Dumb speak, with new Tongues, the wonderful things of God; the Lame walk; the Lepers are cleansed; and the Poor (in Spirit) receive the Gospel, which is the Power of God to Salvation: These things are now again witnessed and fulfilled. The Great Day of the Lamb's Appearance (the second time to Salvation) is come; the Battle of the Great GOD is be∣gun; his Dividing Two-edged Sword is drawn; the Ax is laid to the very Root of the Tree; the Plough of the Almighty is entred into the Earth, and many have set their hands to it, (blessed be the Lord God forever) and dare not look back again to Sodom; and the World is turning up-side down; and the Unquenchable Fire is kindled-among the Bryars, and Thorns and Stubble, and it will consume them. Wickedness hath made the whole World like as a Wilder∣ness, and like a Garden all grown over with Thistles and Net∣tles, wherein the Lord God cannot take delight; but hath been (and is) grieved therewith, and greatly dishonoured and provoked: Great hath been the time of his Long-suffering; long hath his Lilly lain among the Thorns, his tender, Inno∣cent, holy Seed under the Clods of the Earth and Rocks of the Mountains; grievous and long hath been the Oppressions and Sufferings of the Lamb of God, since the Foundation of the World: But now he is coming up in his Dyed Garments, who hath Troden the VVine-press alone; and the Day of Vengeance is in his Heart; and he will trample the Op∣pressor in his Fury; for the Year of his Redeemed is come. And as it was in the dayes of Lot, and in the dayes of Noah, so shall be at the coming of the Son of Man, with Power and great Glory; and this is witnessed: and the Clouds of Heaven hath received him out of the sight of all the Gazers, and Despisers, and VVonderers that perish, and the blind So∣domites,
that cannot find Lot's Door; for our Door is Christ Jesus, and he is the Truth, and the Way to the Father and Kingdom of God, which none can see except a man be born again; and whoever climbs another Way, is a Thief, and Rob∣ber, and will be condemned by him, to whom all Judgment is committed, which stands at the Door; read within (for its the foolish Woman that is without.) And a Witness hath God placed in every mans Conscience, according to whose Righteous Judgment he will judge the secrets of all people: And this is not another then the Universal Light of the Son of Righteous∣ness, Christ Jesus, who is come with his Fan in his hand, and will throughly purge his Floor; and is now setting up his true VVorship again, after the Night of Apostacy, as he spoke, [The Hour is coming, &c.] this Hour is now come, and the Father is seeking true VVorshippers to worship him, in the Spirit, and in the Truth, which was begun Sixteen Hun∣dred Years ago; and these onely are the True VVorshippers, John 4.23, 24. Though in the Times of Ignorance God is said to VVink, (the Light closed in, or not so manifested) but now he calls all men every where (who are in Darkness, Ignorance and VVickedness) to Repent, and turn at his Reproofs, lest they dye in their sins, and so never come to enjoy the Soul's Rest, (which is prepared for the Obedient) of which the outward Sab∣both was a Figure, as all the other of the Temple-VVorship, and Sacrifices, and Ceremonies, were but Types, Figures and Shadows, and not the heavenly things themselves, no more then the Shadow of a man, or an Image drawn of him, is the very man himself: The Substance (or Body) is Christ, as it is written, by whom the VVorld was made; though the VVorld knew him not, he was in the VVorld before Abraham was, or Adam either; the VVord of God, the Truth, the true Bread, the true High-Priest, Temple and Tabernacle, the true Prophet, the true VVay, and true Rest to the Immortal Soul; of which living immortal Substance the Lord God expected (and waited) to see, if the people would perceive something beyond all these Shadows and Figures, which made nothing perfect, as pertain∣ing
to the Conscience, but they remaining hardened, and in the Blindness of their minds, understood not Moses and the Pro∣phets, though they had their Writings read every Sabboth day; and so not-answering the Mind and Will of God, but perse∣vering in Sin and Wickedness, and depending on those out-side things commanded, and settled on their Lets, and Name of Profession; the Lord raised up (and sent his Servants) the Prophets, to try against them, both Priests, Rulers and Peo∣ple, as being weary of the multitude of their Sacrifices and Services, and their Holy Things became Abominable to him; the sacrificing a Lamb, as if they cut off a Dog's Neck; and Obla∣tions and Incense, as if they blessed an Idol, and offered Swine's Bleed (the Life of a Swine) this was their state, by reason of their gross Hearts and deaf Ears, which were hardened and stopped through the Deceitfulness of sin, in which they continued; so that none truly seek'd after God, but were all out of the Way of Peace and true Attonement; gross Darkness covered the People; the Ox and Ass-knew their Owner and Master's Crib, better then they knew their Maker, whose Love and render Care was towards them, in visiting them that their souls might live; for that was the Cry of his Servants beyond all their Pro∣fession and Worship. Turn ye, turn ye; why will ye dye and Pe∣rish in your Iniquities? for iniquity and sin was their Ruin, as God fore-warned them of it: For that was the cause of his An∣ger that was kindled against them, and of hiding his Face (and with-holding Good Things) from them, Isa. 59.1. And this is the same Partition-Wall at this day, among all blind, hard-hearted, poluted Christendom, who are rending and tearing about Shadows, and devouring one another about fa∣ding perishing Things, not minding the Mighty Day of God, that is now come and coming, wherein your Heavens shall be on Fire, and Elements melt with fervent heat (for it burns like an Oven) and the old Earth, and its Works must be burnt up, Root and Branch: This Work is begun amongst ye, though the Blind cannot see, who have Eyes, and see not; and Ears, and hear not, like the old Jews. And now thousands of Rams, and Ten Thousand of Rivers of Oyl, will do no good, as pertaining
to the Conscience: Nay, If I should give the First-born of my Body for the Sin of my Soul, it would not be accepted;  its only the Blood of the Son of God (the Life) as of  Lamb without Spot and Blemish, that can redeem it out of Transgression, and re∣concile it unto God, who had a Body prepared, in the fulness of time, to end all the outward Sacrifices under the Law, through which the New and Living Way was consecrated through the Vail, that is to say, his Flesh: which Vail all blind Profes∣sors and Prophane in Christendom cannot yet see through to this day, no more then the blind Jews and blind Guides could see the end of Moses and the Prophets words, to the Everlasting Priesthood, and Worship in the Spirit and in the Truth (within the Vail) though they had the Scriptures; who cannot see to the Beginning, beyond the Visibles, to the only wise invisible God, before Bread, and Water, and Wine, and Books, and Priests Lips, that Preach for Money, and Hire and Gain from their Quarter; which the Prophets saw beyond, and cryed against; and them that bore rule by their Means, which was a filthy and horrible thing. And Abraham saw Christ's Day, before Moses was born. And John the Baptist saw beyond the Water, to the Fire and Holy Ghost's plunging, to the Christ that was before him (and to the Fan in his Hand) and preferred before him; saying, He must Increase, but I must Decrease: Yet John was born (outwardly) before him, and his Ministry a Fore-runner, and Signifier of the Day at hand, of through Purging, and fanning the Chaff from the Wheat, by the unquenchable Fire. Hear this, ye Professors of Christ Jesus (who feed upon Husks) Can ye believe this Work is now again begun, and that Fire can swallow up Water (as in dayes of old) and that the Elements shall melt with fervent Heat, as was Prophesied of? and John Baptist decreasing by degrees, till there is no Wa∣ter left to comfort the Soul, but of that sort the man in Hell Torment wanted, which the true Believer, and Abraham, and Lazarus had enough of? as Christ said, He that believeth in me, as the Scripture hath said, out of his Belly (or inmost parts) shall flow a River of Living Water, which shall be [in] him a Well of Water, springing up unto Eternal Life: And he that eateth my Flesh, and drink∣eth
my Blood, dwelleth in me, and I in him: and except ye eat my Flesh, and drink my Blood, ye have no Life in you. Was not this a hard Saying? and many more he had to say to them, which they could not bear then, nor many cannot bear now; though they profess the same in words, the Life they are ignorant of that gave them forth, which God hath manifested to them that waited for his pure spiritual Appearance; and the Day is come where in the true Worship is set up again (as I have said) after the Apostacy, the falling away from the true Life, the Power and Spi∣rit of God, and from the true Worship in the Spirit and in the Truth, as was fore-told by Paul to the Thessalonians 2 2. and seen by John; and the Fall of Babylon and Antichrist, whom the Lord would consume and destroy by the Brightness of his coming, and Babylon should never rise no more at all, the great City of Confusion; and the Holy City New Jerusalem should come down like a Bride adorned for her Husband, which should have no need of the elementary Lights, but the Glory of God and the Lamb is the Light thereof: if ye have Ears to hear, hear. And now is Babylon fired at both ends, and the Archers are come up against her out of the North Country, as Jeremiah saw, that should make her desolate, chap. 50. whose Bow is bent by the Strength of God, and she must fall; for strong is the Lord that judgeth her: Rocks nor Mountains can't hide her from the Wrath of the Lamb, flee whither she can, from the Stroke of the Almighty's holy Life, that is come forth conquering and to conquer, like a Man of War, to plead with all flesh by Fire and Sword, who is King of kings and Lord of lords, whom the Armies in Heaven follow (whose Name is call'd, the Word of God, Him by whom the World was made) who hath taught their Hands to War, and Fingers to Fight in this Battle of the great God against Principalities and Powers, and Spiritual Wick∣edness in high Places; whose Weapons are not Carnal, but Spiritual, and mighty through God, to the pulling down of the Strong Holds of Satan, the old Serpent, who is King of Babylon. Therefore flee out of her for your Lives (as Lot out of Sodom) for Fire is come down from God, that will consume her; and he will bring forth his Glorious Work, his New Creation, which hath been long determin'd, and none shall hinder it; the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against his VVork, now begun in the Earth: the Mouth of the Lord hath spoken it.
ANd now a few words to you (in particular) that cry out against the Grace of God, which hath appeared to all men, as Insufficient for Salvation; and yet profess the Scriptures to be your Rule, that testifieth of the Sufficiency of it; as the Lord God said to his Servant Paul (in his Trouble and Affliction) My Grace is sufficient for thee, 2 Cor, 12.9. And by Grace are we saved, not of our selves, it is the Gift of God, Eph. 2.8. and God called it his Strength, My Strength is made perfect in Weakness: Now where did Paul, or any other of the Saints in Light, leave a Testimony behind them of its Insufficiency, Inability or Weakness, whose words you (that have thus cryed) profess to be your Rule? Shew me your Rule for this; except from the Lyar from the beginning, which is your exact Parallel: For God said to A∣dam and his Wife (If ye eat of the Tree of Knowledge) ye shall surely dye; The Serpent said (in contradiction) Ye shall not sure∣ly dye: God said to Paul, My Grace is sufficient; but you have said, It is not sufficient; like your Father, whose work ye do (notwithstanding your Profession) God calls it, His Strength; you say, Its Weakness, and Ʋnable: The Apostle (that proved it, and knew its effectual Work) said, It brings Salvation; and the engrafted Word was able to save their Souls; and they were com∣mitted to the Word of his Grace: which was able to build them up, [Mark] and to give them an Inheritance among all them which are sanctified. Acts 20.32. here ye may read of its Ability. And the Spirit of Grace and Supplication was prophesied of, to be poured forth; and its the Spirit giveth Life (as Christ Jesus said) the Flesh prosits nothing. So consider these things, and see if ye be not in the Opposing and Gainsaying God, Christ Jesus, and his. Apostles, like Jannes and Jambres resisting the Truth, 2 Tim. 3.8. And let God's Witness in you answer, and let all people judge. And was not the Fulness which was in Jesus Christ (and the Glory John beheld in him) Grace and Truth? And is not Grace
and Truth one? Were not they saved by Grace? and did not the Truth make them free, who received it with Meekness, in the love of it? Doth not the Scripture testifie these things, which you call your Rule? or are they false Witnesses that gave them forth? consider it well in the Fear of God, and in Coolness; for that is the beginning of true Wisdom. And leave off Ly∣ing, and learn to speak every one Truth to his Neighbour: and do not smite your Fellow-Servants (for we profess one God and Christ for Salvation) nor eat and drink with the drunken (as ye have) any more; but be sober, and watch, lest the Lord come upon you unawares, and cut you assunder, and give you your Portion with Lyars, Hypocrites, and Persecu∣tors; for God is not mocked, what you sow shall you reap: and this is in true Love to your souls. Is not the Grace, the Light and the Truth one? and is not the Power and Spirit of God one? and is not God Light? is not the Word, the Father and Son one? and is not Christ the Light, and the Truth, and the Life? and is not he the Door, and the Way to Everlasting Rest? is there any Inheritance among the sanctified Ones, but by him, whose Name is called, the Word of God, the Al∣pha and the Omega? And if there be a Thousand Names, were they not all of one? was not the holy Thing (in Mary) called, The Son of God; and Immanuel, God with us; and Jesus, for he shall save his People from their Sins? Are there not many Names given to the one Saviour? or are there any more Saviours of the immortal soul in this case, beside this one, that can save his People from their sins? seeing God (who is Light) has said, Beside me there is no Saviour; I know not any, Isa. 43.11. & 44.8. Now if you can find out another, beside him (who is the Word (in the beginning) you are wiser then the old Serpent made Adam, when he beguiled them; or else you are Fools, and blind in your Imaginations. Therefore come to the true Tryal; the Light will make you (and your Airy Minds, Dark Hearts and Vain Thoughts) ma∣nifest, if ye will but bring all to it; and teach you to speak and do Truth, and to stand in Awe, and be still, that he may go before you, and lead you, in whom there is no occasion of stumbling; this was the Saints Walking-place, and this Grace of God was
their Teacher, wherein they witnessed the Blood of Cleansing, as ye may read. And this Grace of God hath appeared to all men, and its the Gift and Talent which he hath given (according to measure) to every one to profit withal; of which he will require an Account, how it hath been improved to his Glory, your Neighbours Be∣nefit, and your own Souls Comfort. For this is the Condemnation of the World, that Light is come into the World, and men loved Darkness rather then Light, because their deeds were Evil: The Condemnation is not, because ye had not a Ta∣lent; but because it is not improved, but hid, or buried in the Earth: For the Free Gift is come upon all, Jew and Gentile, through one; Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ, who lighteth every man that cometh into the World; this is Glad-tidings, the Go∣spel preached to every Creature. Therefore deceive not your selves with Lying Vanities, neither feed on Husks, and that which dyes of it self; but remember the Strait Gate and Narrow Way that leads in the Regeneration, in the Daily Cross, to Life E∣ternal: For your great Notions, and Talk of Religion, Church and Worship, will not save you, nor give you an Inheritance with the Saints in Light, while you love Darkness, and live in it; if ye had all the words of holy Men from the beginning to this day, and of what Christ did and suffered, this is all but cry∣ing, Lord, Lord, while the Heart is far off, and the True God, and his Worship (in Spirit and in Truth) is not known by you; For such the Father is now seeking to worship him, who worship him in the Spirit, and have no Confidence in the Flesh: As a Shepherd seek∣eth out his Sheep in the day when they are scattered abroad, and gathering from the Mouthes of the Idol-Shepherds, and from off all the Barren Mountains, into the fresh Pastures of Life and Peace, unto the Fold of Everlasting Rest, where no Ravenous Beast can come; Glory to the Lord God for evermore: And against this his Work (now begun) Gog and Magogg shall never prevail. The Great Day of the Feast is come, wherein he is inviting the Poor in Spirit, the Hungry and Thirsty Souls; the Year of his Redeemed is come, and the Day of Vengeance is in his Heart;
which Day the Apostle saw, and wrote of, that should come af∣ter the Apostacy (or falling away) where the Man of Sin should be consumed, and destroyed; and the Great and Glorious Work of Restauration (determined) should be accomplished. And this is from the Lord God Almighty, to all the Inhabi∣tants of the Earth, whether they will hear or forbear. I have a few words more to all you that Sleight and make a Mock at the Light Within; as a Foolish, Erronious and Contemptable Thing. O Ye brutish among men! and Fools that hate Knowledge, and ignorant of the Scriptures of Truth, of the Pro∣phets, Christ, and the Apostles, which testifie of the True Light, that lighteth every man that cometh into the World; of which Moses wrote, and John bore witness, John 1.9. though you profess their words: And Abraham saw Christ's Day, the True Light; did he see it Within, or Without? Answer me: And Enoch walked with God before the Scriptures were given forth: And John's Message was, That God is Light: And God said (of his People) I will dwell in them, and walk in them; is not this the Light VVithin, or is God changed? Did not Isaiah say, (Isa. 26.) The Lord was an Everlasting Light; and in the Lord Jehovah was Everlasting Strength; and bid people trust in him; and that he had wrought all their Works [in] them? And did not the Apo∣stle say, It is God that worketh in you, both to will and to do of his own good Pleasure? And do you not make a Mock at God and Christ (that dwelleth in his People) and at the Scriptures, you that mock at the Light VVithin? Did not the Light that shined in the Saints, give them the true Knowledge of the only true God, and his Glory in the Face of Jesus Christ? or did ever any know the true God, and Jesus Christ (which is Life Eternal) by a Light VVithout? seeing the Scripture saith, The things of God
knoweth no man, but the Spirit of God (by which they are revealed) 2 Cor. 2.9, 10, 11. And no man knows the Father, but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him, Mat. 11.27. And the Inspiration of the Almighty giveth man Ʋnderstanding, Job 32.8. Whether this Spirit. Inspiration and Revelation be Within or Without? And by what did Abel, Enoch and Noah (and many others) know God, before the Scriptures were given forth? or whether the Invisible God (which is a Spirit) was ever seen by any carnal or visible Eye; seeing Israel saw no Similitude, but only heard a Voice? Deut. 4.12, 15, 16. May I not say to such, Go to the Beasts, and they shall teach thee; and to the Fowls, and they shall instruct thee? Hath not God (in his Universal Love and Tender Care) ordained a Universal Light, and Sun, to shine without, for the Well-being, Comfort and Refreshment of all Creatures (Man and Beast) even of the Mor∣tal Bodies, throughout the Habitable Parts of the Earth? who causeth his Sun to shine, and Rain to fall on the Just and Unjust. And hath he not afforded or ordained a Universal Light and Son of Righteousness for the Immortal Soul, the Inner Man, for its Help, Comfort and Refreshment; which is of far greater value (in his sight) then the Mortal Creatures? If he be thus straightened, and his Arm and Hand of Love thus shortened; when came this to pass? seeing his People and Children have found him (in all Ages) Unchangable, the same yesterday, to day, and forever; who taught his Followers, To be Merciful, as their Heavenly Father is Merciful; who would have all men come to the Knowledge of the Truth, and be saved, 1 Tim. 2.4. O the Blindness that is happened to people professing Christia∣nity, to despise and deride so Glorious a Comforter! It is no less then the Manifestation of the Spirit of Truth, which guides and leads its Children into all Truth, and shews them things to come. My soul pitties you, and I could even mourn in secret for you, knowing how miserable your Feet will stumble at the dark Moun∣tains (who hate the Light) and the Mockers Bands be made strong, Jer. 13.16. Isa. 28.22. I will ask you this Question, and let the whole World answer me, if they can; What will become of the Immortal Part (or Inner
Man) which must have a Beeing forever, when the Body or Outward Man is perished? what will be its state, when deprived of all visible (or outward) Light to all eternity, and the Light Within wholy reje∣cted? and whether that state be not the utter Darkness spoken of Mat. 25. where neither any Glory nor Benefit can be seen (but Torment) from the Light Within? Consider it well in the Fear of God, and what will be thy Portion when the Desire, Beauty and Comforts of thine outward Eyes are gone, and thou gone to thy long Home, if thou hast no Benefit of the Light Within to comfort thee. Bles∣sed are the Eyes that see, and the Heart that understands and be∣lieves in the Light; for such become the Children of Light (as Christ said) and they are the Children of God: For God is Light, and in him is no Darkness at all, 1 John 1.5. Objection, But some may object, and say, How can any be in utter Darkness, seeing thou affirmest, every one in the World is lighted with the true Light of Christ Jesus; and that it is the Talent or Gift, given to every man to profit withal; and that all must give an Account of the Improvement of it? And how is it said to be taken from a man, and he cast into utter Darkness? Answ. It is thus taken away, Through Disobedience to it (the not improving of it) the Benefit and Comfort of it is lost; and if a man live and dye in the state of Rebellion, it only remaineth in him as a Tormenting Worm, that never dyes; And thus you may read of the Wicked and Slothful Servant, who had a Talent, and did not improve it, as required, but hid it in the Earth (read within) this was his Condemnation; and this is the Fire that never goes out. And the Rich Man in Hell Torment (who had lived in the fulness of Pleasures) had enough to see himself in Darkness, and Tormented in the Flame; and Abraham and Lazarus in Joy and Comfort, which added to his Misery, and not to his Refreshment; for he desired but a little of their Water, and could not get it, as ye may see Luke 16.23, 24, 25, 26. And it was said of them that separated themselves from the Saints in Light, That they were sensual, having not the Spirit: that
is, They (not being guided, lead and taught by it, but were disobrdient to it) had not the Benefit and Comfort of it, nor a right Understanding by it of the Way of God, nor true Know∣ledge of the Work and Mysteries of God, which were the things that belong to their Everlasting Peace; but it reprov'd and con∣demn'd them for their Rebellion, as it is written, The Rebellious dwell in a Dry Land, Psal. 68.6. But the Apostles and Servants of God, who were led by it, had the comfort of it, and it abode with them so forever; and they handled, tasted and felt the Word of Life, which was in the beginning, and they fed upon it, and it nourish'd and strengthen'd them with all Might in the Inter-Man; and it was a Sword and Armour to them, a Defence against Evil and Darkness: And others, they cast it behind their backs, and so must needs go in Darkness; For the Word is a Light so their Feet that take heed to it, and it is powerful; so people cast that which is powerful behind them, and then complain, they have no Power; this is the state of the Disobedient: But to as many as recei∣ved him, to them he gave Power (even to as many as believe in his Name) to become the Sons of God; and he is the Author of eternal Salvation to as many as obey him, Heb. 5.9. And so Disobedience is the Ground of man's Ruin and Destructi∣on, and not the Insufficiency of God's Gifts, or any straitness in him towards Mankind. So remember you are warned, and its the Day of your Visita∣tion from the Lord God, in Love to your Immortal Souls; and prize your Inch of precious time, and fear God, and give Glory to him; and worship him that made Heaven, and Earth, and the Fountain of Water; for the Hour of his Judgments is come (in which Babylon must fall) and his invisible Glory be revealed more and more, to the Ends of the Earth, till the kingdoms of this world become the Lord's, and he shall Raign forever and ever, world without end, Amen. I thank thee, O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, that thou hast hid these things from the Wise and Prudent of this World, and revealed them to Babes; for so it pleaseth thee.
A few words (in true Breathings of Love) unto you that are turned (in this Day of his Power) from Darkness to the Light, and do believe in it, and have tasted that the Lord is Gracious. DEar Friends, dwell in it, dwell low, and cool, and still, in the true Dread of the Lord (Wisdom's Gate and Door) and there keep your Watch, and be sober; for your Enemy seeks to devour you; all Opertunities he waits for his Prey, to catch and destroy your poor tender Souls, who are escaping from him, whose desires are after God, and things Above: Remember it is the Old Serpent, and he wants neither Age nor Cunning, he is still more subtil then any Beast, and is Cursed forever: You have no Armour against him like the Armour of Light; therefore keep it on (and Watch and Pray) continually; and wrestle against this Principality and Power of Darkness, the Enemy of Mankind, which lies near to many; and then he cannot enter, he cannot spoil you, nor sow his Tares of Corruption and Wickedness; but while men sleep he sows them, that was his first Oportunity, while men slept, and hath alwayes been, and is the same now, and no o∣ther. So dear Friends, keep your Watch, its the Word of the Lord to you; then you keep out the Enemy, and over him, in true Dominion and Peace; and your Soul is Comforted, and God Glorified, and his Work prospers in the Earth, which prai∣seth him, who hath Wonderfully and Graciously Appeared in this his Day for the deliverance of his Chosen; and he will ap∣pear more and more, till Jerusalem is made the Praise of the whose Earth, and none shall hinder. W. B.
An Answer to those Cries among some ignorant People, viz. Where did you ever hear or read in all the Scrip∣tures of a people called Quakers, and that prea∣ched of a Light Within people, as you Qua∣kers do? And is not your Religion a New Religion, of a∣bout Twenty Years standing, not heard of before? And whether you, called Quakers, do not deny the Scriptures to be the Word of God? And whether you do not hold that dangerous Tenet of Perfection in this Life? Given forth for the sake of the Simple Inquirer, and to silence the Ignorance of Foolish Men, and to Reprove the Scorner, who Err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the Power of God. AS for our Religion, it is no New Religion, neither is it onely of a late standing (as you suppose) and yet as new to many now, as Christ's was unto the Jews, who did not believe his Doctrine. For the Light is a New and a Strange Thing to such as were
born Blind, and have alwayes lived in Darkness, though it hath been the standing Rule and Path of the Just from the begin∣ning, as you may read and see (if you are not still blind) in what followeth. Though the Name QƲAKER hath been given us in Re∣proach and Scorn, by Scoffers and Mockers (which the Apostle said would be in the last dayes) yet we know that the Holy Men, and Servants of God of old, did witness Quaking and Trembling, who would have been mocked by you, had they been in your dayes, who were Quakers and Tremblers, and preached the Light above Twenty Hundred Years ago, as ye may read in the Scrip∣tures of Truth, from the Mouthes of more then two or three Witnesses, herein mention'd, which is but in short of what may be declared. 1. Moses, a Servant of God, by whose hand the Lord wrought Mighty Wonders, and deliver'd his People out of Egypt, the Land of Darkness; he was a Quaker, and a Trem∣bler; and all the people of the Camp Trembled, Exod. 19.16. Hebr. 12.21. 2. Those that Trembled at the Words and Commandment of God were the Choice Men, and Chief in Counsel with Ezra; and in the Work of the Lord, in building the Temple, Ezra 9.4. and 10.3. (see whom the Lord chuseth to do his Work.) 3. Ezekiel, a Prophet and Servant of God, who did and wrought great Things in his day, was a Quaker and Trembler chap. 12. vers. 18. 4. And Isaac Trembled very exceedingly, Gen. 27.33. Would not you (like Ishmael) have Mocked such an exceeding Trembler, and called him Quaker, had he been in your dayes? Consider it. 5. Job. a Servant of God, who saw God, and knew his
Redeemer live, in his day, an Upright man, Trembled, Job 21.6. & 19.25. 6. And Daniel, a Man greatly beloved of God (in whom was an Excellent Spirit of Light and Understanding) he was a Trembler, and the men with him Quaked; and we do not read the Heathens Mocked them, chap. 10. nor called them Quakers. And King Darius made a Decree, That all men Fear and Tremble before the God of Daniel, chap. 6.26. 7. And David, a Man after God's own Heart, was a Trem∣bler, who did great things for God and his People, Psal. 55.5.119.120. but he was the Song of the Drunkards, and despised of (Saul's Daughter) his Wife. 8. Habakkuk Trembled, Prophets of the Lord all owned Trembling. Hab. 3.16. 9. Jeremiah Trembled, Prophets of the Lord all owned Trembling. Jer. 5.22. &. 23.9. 10. Joel and Trembled, Prophets of the Lord all owned Trembling. Joel. 2.1. 11. Amos Trembled, Prophets of the Lord all owned Trembling. Amos 8.8. 12. Nahum, a Prophet of God, witnessed the Mountains to Quake at his Presence, chap. 1.5. And Isaiah (who spoke in the Name of God) said, Hear the Word of the Lord, all ye that Tremble at his Word; your Brethren that hated you, and that cast you out for my Name sake, said, Let the Lord be Glorified; but he shall appear to your Joy, and they shall be Ashamed, chap. 66. Hear this, ye Outside-Lip-Professors and Scoffers. And saith God, To this man will I look, even to him that is Poor, and of a Contrite Spirit, and Trembleth at my Word, chap. 66.1. And Paul, an Apostle and Minister of Jesus Christ, Trembled; and the Converted Goaler Trembled; and Felix Trembled, reasoning with Paul about Righteousness, Temperance, and Judgment to come, Acts 9.6, 24, 25. & 16.29. Would not you Unrighteous and Untemperate Ones have scoffed at them,
and called them Quakers? Consider it, and Repent, and Dread the Lord God, who will not be mocked. And Paul preached in much Trembling, and in the Power and Demonstration of the Spirit of God; and his Work was, To turn people from Darkness to the Light: and said, God (who is Light) had shined into their Hearts; And the true Belie∣vers were to work out their Salvation with Fear and Trembling; And it was God that workt in them, &c. as you may read, 1 Cor. 2.3, 4. 2 Cor. 7.15. Phil. 2.12. 2 Cor. 4.6. And many more Qua∣kers and Tremblers preached the Light, the same true Light which John bore testimony of, that lighteth every Man that cometh into the World. And Abraham saw the Day of Christ (the true Light) before Moses was born, who wrote of Christ, and the Law of God; and Enoch walked with God before Abraham was born, who was the seventh from Adam, and had the Witness in himself, That he pleased God. And Isaiah Preached and Prophesied of the Light; and the House of Jacob (when Idolatrous) was called to walk in the Light of the Lord, Isa. 49.6. & 60. & 2.5. And Christ was further promised to be for a Covenant of Light and Salvation, Isa. 10.17. & 51 4. Ezekiel speaks of the Voice and Glory of God, when he had seen the Fire and Lightening, chap. 1. But this is hid from your Eyes who are in the Dark. And Daniel declared of the Light, chap. 2.22. & 5.11, 12. And the Queen (of that Country) said, It was [in] him; and that it was an Excellent Spirit: and did not Mock him, nor at the Light Within; as many do who profess Christianity, but are worse then the Heathens. And David preached the Light Within, and VVord VVithin, Psalm. 27.1. & 36.9. & 97.11. & 37.6. & 119.11. & vers. 105. And Job owned and preached the Light, chap. 24 16. & 25 3. & 33.28. And he saw God with his Eye, which is Light, chap. 42.5. And Paul preached the Light VVithin, 2 Cor. 4.6.
And Christ Jesus preached the Light, and bid People believe in it (and so do we) that they might become the Children of the Light, John 12.35, 36. And John, his Message was, That God is Light, 1 John 1.5. And God said, He would dwell [in] his People, 2 Cor. 6.16. And the Saints Inheritance is in the Light, Col. 1.12. And Im∣mortality dwelleth in the Light, 1 Tim. 2.16. which is the Saints Inheritance, though the Unsanctified, Dark and Unclean have no part in it (in that state) or Knowledge of the Wayes of it, while they Rebel against it, as you may read Job 24.13. Much more might be written, as to this particular; but this is onely mentioned (in short) for the sake of such as may simply inquire, and to stop the Mouth of the Lyar and Scoffer, who speak evil of those things they understand not. And also, I do affirm, That the Quakers and Tremblers, which were Servants of God of old (as I have here shewed) did bare a Testimony against all the Unrighteousness of men (in their day) without Respect of Persons, in Plain Language to the people (and did preach the Light) as we have done, and yet do (in our Age.) And the Gospel of this Kingdom (of God Within) must be preached for a Witness unto all Nations, and then shall the End come. They testified against Idolatry; against the Proud, Mockers and Scoffers, against the Rebellious, who rebelled against the Light; and pronouced many Woes against the Hypocrites, and False Shepherds, and Hirelings, such as seek't their Gain from their Quarter, that fed themselves, and bore Rule by their Means; and Prophesied for Money, and Barley, and Pieces of Bread; that ruled with Force and Cruelty, pushing with their Horns, like as some bruit Beasts have done in this Age; a∣gainst whom the Lord God did move many of his Servants to testifie, as may be yet remembred. And there was a time when Christ Jesus was daily striving with such in their Tem∣ple, to have gathered them in their day, but they refused; and then after said, They are Blind Leaders of the Blind, let them
alone; which was an Expression of a sad Sin and Consequence; for they would both fall into the Ditch. Which may serve for an Answer to some that have inquired, Why we do not visit them as formerly; if they had Eyes to discern the Times and Seasons, which are in the Father's Hand. Much might be said to this. They testified against the Bloody, against Robbers, and Ly∣ars, and against the Covetous, Violent, and Oppressors of the people. And Zephaniah cryed, Wo to the Filthy and Poluted Op∣pressing City, whose Princes were Roaring Lyons, and Judges Even∣ing Wolves, and Prophets light and treacherous, chap. 3. And read Amos 6. And against such as were in Cain's Way, and Balaam's Way,Michah 3. Nahum 3. Ezek. chap. 34. Jer. chap. 4. Isa. 10.1. and Chap. 28. Jude vers. 11. And Isaiah pronounced, Wo to the Crown of Pride, to the Drunkards of Ephraim; they shall be troden under Feet, Isa. chap. 28. And Wo unto them that decree Ʋnrighteous Decrees, &c. chap. 10.1. and to the Rebellious Children, that took Counsel, but not of the Lord; and that co∣ver with a Covering, and not of his Spirit; that they might add sin to sin. Hear this all ye Outside-Professors of Christianity, who re∣bel against the Light and Counsel of the Lord, and his Spirit Within, which reproves you for your Sin and Hypocrisie; your Covering is too narrow, and your Bed too short, to hide you from the Wrath of the Lamb. The Sheep's Clothing will not serve you, while you are inwardly ravened from the Truth (required in the Inward parts) no more then Cain's Sacrifice did, while Sin lay at his Door. The Day of the Lord is come that discovers you and your works, and the Fire shall try them. And Christ Jesus cryed many Woes against the Scribes, and Pharisees, and Lawyers, and Blind Guides; and called them, Hypocrites, and Serpents, and Vipers. And John cryed, Wo to the Inhabitants of the Earth; and said, The Devil is come down un∣to you, Rev. 12.
And the Serpents, and Vipers, and Cain, and Blind Guides, (like Moles) are the Earth's Inhabiters; and the Roaring Ly∣ons, and Evening Wolves, and them that pusht with their Horns, and the Swine, Dogs, and Foxes, and Thorns, and Thistles Christ spoke of, are all of the Earth's Inhabitants, and all the Ravenous and Unclean Beasts; and the Devil went into the Swine; and Cain, the Wicked one, sacrificed, and slew his Brother about it, a Vagabond and Fugative in the Earth, an Inhabitant there; and so the Wo remains upon all in his Way, and in Balaam's Way (Blind-Guides Way) who could not see the Angel: And such cannot see the VVay of the Lord, nor his People, nor their States and Conditions, nor their VVorship, till they are turned to the Light, and the Eye become opened, which the Godd of this VVorld hath blinded. And so I have no Pearls to cast to Swine; but to this man hath God regard, That is Poor, and of a Contrite Spirit, and Trembleth at his Word. VVherefore Fear God, and consider these things, and be VVise, and do not Mock at the LIGHT, nor at the QUAKERS; but remember your Latter-end, and Repent, lest the Lord's Anger be kindled against you, and you perish in your Folly: For the Holy Men of God prea∣ched the LIGHT, and witnessed QUAKING and TREMBLING, as I have shewed you. So take VVar∣ning while you have time, and prize it. And as for the SCRIPTƲRES, we own them in their place, as Christ Jesus said of them, John 5.39. and as the Servants of God, in Ages past, acknowledged and testified, Luke 1.1. 2 Tim. 3.16. To be a Trus Declaration; and leave it to the VVitness of God in you all to consider and judge, whether they are all the Word, or Words of God, yea or nay, as by what followeth,
First, In the Bible, or Scriptures, are many words relating to divers Matters, which we do not Question the Truth of the Relation thereof. There are the words of God; and of Adam and Eve in the Fall; and of the Serpent, that beguiled them: I hope you will not say, These are are all the VVord, or VVords of God; but very much to be distinguished, by them that have a Right Understanding, as Contradictory. And there are the Words of Cain (to God) who slew his inno∣cent Brother about Sacrifice. And the words of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and of Moses and the Prophets, Noah, Daniel and Job; Holy Men. And there are also the Words of Esau, the Prophane Person; and the Aegyptians, and Sodomites; and of them that caused Da∣niel to be Cast into the Lyon's Den, for Praying to his God. And the Words of David, Mordecai and Esther. And of the Philistines, that Fought against Israel; and of Proud Wicked Hamon, who sought the Jews Destruction, because Mor∣decai would not do him Reverence. And the Words of Ahah and Jezebel, that Murdered Naboth for his Vineyard; and the Words of Samuel to him, whom he called his Enemy, though a Holy Man. And there are the Words of Saul (who sought David to slay him) and of the Witch he went to; and of the Priest's Son Pashur, Chief Governour, &c. who smote Jeremiah. Are all these the Words of God? And there are the Words of the Devil concerning Job, who would have destroyed him; but confessed, God had made a Hedge about him. And a Relation of the Reign of Good Kings, and also of many Bad Ones. And of the False Prophets and Hirelings, that seek't for their Gain from their Quarter, and spoke Lyes to the People, whom God never sent, and so did not profit them at all who heard and believed them.
Secondly, And in the Scriptures are recorded the Words and Sayings, Works and Sufferings of Christ Jesus (the true Prophet, of whom Moses wrote) and the Words of the De∣vil, that Tempted him; and of Judas, that Betrayed him; and of the Priests, that gave Large Money to the Souldiers, to tell Lyes, How his Disciples had stole him away while they were Asleep. Is that likely, They could tell what was become of Him, being all Asleep? VVhat a Shift, and poor Refuge of Lyes, the Devil putteth his Servants to, when his Kingdom is going down? And there are the words of Pilate, that delivered him into their hands, and Washed his own (but that would not do) and of them that Blindfolded and Mocked him. And there are the Words of the Holy Apostles, and their several Letters and Epistles to the several Congregations of the Lord's People. And also, of the Vagabond Jews, who bound themselves under a Curse, Neither to Eat nor Drink till they had Killed Paul. And of the Captain that Rescued him out of their hands. And the words of the Orator, that called him, A Pestilent Fellow. And of them that said, Christ had a Devil, and cast out Devils by Belzebub. Are these all the Words of God? Much less the VVORD, that was in the Beginning, that Liveth and Abideth for∣ever. And in the Scriptures may be read the Words of the Persecutors, who strictly Charged the Apostles. To leave Preaching in the Name of Jesus (the True Light and Pow∣er of God) But Paul and Silas Sung in the Prison; and they could not but speak that which they had Seen and Heard of Christ Jesus; and could not Flee, like the Hire∣lings, that leave the Sheep when the Wolf comes among them: For a Work of Necessity was required of them, to turn the People from Darkness to the Light, from Satans Power to the Power of God: And they had the Word of Reconci∣liation. And this Word was in the Beginning, by whom all
things were made, before the Scriptures were; of which the Scriptures testifie, John 1. and they are a True De∣claration, Luke 1.1. And this is our Belief concerning them. And so we make a true Distinction between the Re∣port, and the Thing or Things reported of, as Isaiah did, who said, Who hath believed our Report? and to whom is the Arm of the Lord Revealed? And the Record which God gave of his Son, is not the Son himself; but to be Believed concerning Him. And so the Scriptures are not the Word; for that is Christ's Name, Rev. 18.13. John 1.1. Nor can they all truly and properly be called, The Words ef God, as I have here demonstrated (in short) to the View of all who are not wilfully Blind. So come to the Light of Christ Jesus, which shines in your Dark Hearts; in which you may see your selves, and your Ignorance, and Vain Thoughts, and Hard Speeches; and learn to put a Difference between the Pre∣cious and the Vile in your own Particulars, and then you will divide aright between Good Men and Wicked Men, and their Words and Actions, as between Light and Darkness. And as for our holding that Dangerous Tenet (as you call it) of Perfection in this Life; I Answer, We hold no other Perfection, or Tenet, then what the Holy Men of God of old did; who did hold the Head, Christ Jesus, and laid hold of Eternal Life; in which is no Danger, or Imperfection, but safety and Peace; who is come to Destroy the Devil, and his Works, which hath made people Imperfect, and brought them into Dan∣gers, and the Pit of Darkness and Ignorance, by Trans∣gression,
in which lieth the Danger of Everlasting Destru∣ction, in this Broad Way: but in Christ, the Truth, the Life, the Way to the Father, is no Imperfection or Danger, as I have said, but Eternal Life and Salvation; in which Life we have Perfect Peace, as our Minds are staid on him, and not in any other. And he bids his People, Be Perfect, as their Heavenly Father is Perfect. And this is no Dangerous Tenet, To obey God and Christ Jesus; which you your selves have promised, and do not perform, but are Disobedient; and here lies your Dan∣ger, In professing God and Christ in Words, but in Works deny him, and are Ignorant of him. For, No other Perfection, or Dangerous Tenet, do we hold at this day, then what we were bound to be∣lieve, and walk in when we were Children, and to wit∣ness performed by the Spirit and Grace of God with∣in us. And in the same Covenant are you ingaged, and have promised to fulfil it on your part, who pro∣fess your selves Christians: Therefore look you to the Danger of breaking your Promise made to God, as ye may Read in the Publick Baptism, in the Common-Prayer-Book (and consider it well) in which we were taught by our (then) Teachers, (as people are now) First, To renounce the Devil, and all his Works; the Pomps and Vanities of this Wicked World, and all the Sin∣ful Lusts of the Flesh. Secondly, And to believe all the Articles of the Chri∣stian-Faith. Thirdly, To keep God's Holy Will and Command∣ments, and to Walk in the same all the Dayes of our Lives. Thus did we and you Ingage and Promise unto God; which is a state of as great Perfection as can be witnessed, and is to be performed and fulfilled in all true Christians.
Therefore weigh the Matter well, and see where lieth the Danger; on them that wait upon God, to receive his holy Spirit and Grace, to perform what hath been promised; or on them that promise, and do not regard to perform their Vows to God, as you and your Teachers have done? who have Reproached us for the same things which you your selves profess to God in words, like the Pharisees and Hypocrites of old, who said, God was their Father, and yet put Christ Jesus to Death, because he acknowledged him∣self to be the Son of God. So the Lord judge between us and you, and open your Eyes, that you may see a Difference between him that Sweareth, and him that feareth an Oath; between him that doth in Deed and Truth serve God, and him that serveth him not, but onely with the Lips, and the Heart far off, which the Lord re∣quireth; who is onely Worshipped in the Spirit and in the Truth (which is Perfect) And then you will perceive, That our Religion, and Worship, and what we hold, is neither New, Strange, or Dan∣gerous, as ye have imagined; but the Good Old Way of Holiness, the Pure Religion, and true Spiritual Worship, which God alone (who is Perfect) hath set up, and is Well-pleased with, who is the Au∣thor of it: And this was before the Devil's Works were (which hath made People Blind, and Misera∣ble, and Imperfect by Transgression.) The Holy, Pure and Perfect Life, and its Works was the First, and will be the Last upon the Earth, the Alpha and Omega. It was the Enemy of Mankind that sowed the
Tares; the Lord sowed Good Seed in the Field, the Wicked One sowed the Bad, whose Work the Son of God is manifested to destroy; and he will O∣verturn again and again, till he comes to Reign, whose Right it is. And against this his Work (now begun) the Gates of Hell and Death shall not prevail, the Mouth of the Lord hath spoken it. Much more might be declared, as to this Mat∣ter; but thus much (in short) I have given, in Answer to these things, that your Eyes might be opened, who Err in Vision, and Stumble in Judgment; that the things belonging to your Ever∣lasting Peace might not be hid from you, in this your Day. So Fear God, and prize your Precious Time; this is in true Love to all your Souls, by a Friend to all People, William Bayly. THE END.
