B151 11892639 50460
Juvenilia SACRA, OR Divine Youthfull Meditations; CONSISTING, Of a Dialogue between Christ and the Soul. A Preparation to the Lords Supper. Characters of the Pious and Impious Man. Of the Good, and Wicked Woman. The Foure Quarters of the Year. Ten Historicall, Ten Scripture, and Ten Occasional Applications. By, P. B. Gent. London, Printed by Tho. Mabb, for John Playfere, at the White Bear in the Upper Walk of the New-Exchange, 1664.
Perlegi hunc Libellum cui Titulus (Juvenilia Sacra) in quo nihil reperio sanae fidei Di∣sciplinae Ecclesiae Anglica aut bonis moribus contrarium. Joh. Hall R. . D. Episc. Lon. à sac. Domest. Mar. 15. 1663.
TO HIS Honoured Friend, Francis Dashwood Esq SIR, I Have Read of Pylades and Orestes and many others, but the Past, Present, or Future Age, have not; nor will never Produce such a Stupendious Example of Friendship, as Yours to me; which though I cannot Requite, yet I will never
Cease to Acknowledge. I here Present You the Fruits of my Youthfull Idle Hours and it will be a Repetition of your former Courtesie, to Protect and Accept such a Trifle; yet therein You have Your own Picture drawn in the Character of my Piou Man, which if it be not to the Life, the World wil conclude, that it is not be∣cause You wanted Merrit▪ but the Unskilfulness of, Your Humble Servant, P. B
Courteous Reader, PErhaps in the Perusal of my little Book, thou mayest think me too Sa∣tyrical, but I hope thy Ingenuity will apply these Invectives to those, unto whom they were di∣rected, to the Vicious; for mis∣take me not, I am none of those that think all they which wear black patches, cannot go to Hea∣ven, I only aime at such, as hang them out as the Ensignes of Lust; neither do I carp at all that are
attired in Gorgeous Apparrel: (No) for surely, the Lillies Beauty, and Solomons Royalty, was not displeasing to God; But only at such who are proud in them, that hug their Inventi∣ons for devising fantastique fa∣shions, that spend most of their time, in pruning of their Locks, and setting those Netts to catch Fools, Suppose you should be Enamoured of a false, though a seeming Lovely Beauty, and at the Instant of the Injoyment of your Imaginary Heaven, when your Sun should disrobe her self of her Shroud; If then I say in∣stead of the Beams of a dazling
Beauty, you should meet with nothing but Deformity; Those Tresses which you have Esteem∣ed as the Netts of Cupid, as the Beams of the Sun, should prove the horrid spoils of the dead; and those teeth which you call'd Pearles, should be false, as her self, and confin'd each night, in∣to a Box; would not this fright your resolution? This is all that I have endeavoured to do, to un∣mask the Strumpet, and shew you her ugly Visage, hoping it may perswade you no longer to serve so deformed a Mistris; Here thou wilt finde Heavenly Milk for Babes; Counsel for Young
Men, and such was I, being but sixteen when I wrote most of them; hereafter when my Judg∣ment grows Riper with my Years, I shall endeavour to give thee more solid food; If you reap any Fruit by the peru∣sall of my Book, I am too well paid for my Labour in Compo∣sing it, Thine P. B.
Heaven and Earth in a Dialogue betwixt the Soul and Christ. CHRIST. 1. AH Foolish Soul! how often have I displayed unto thee the Beau∣ties, and Riches of Heaven, pro∣pos'd such Glories as thy dim eyes were too weak to behold; Why wilt thou feed on huskes? empty pleasures, when thou mayest be sa∣tisfied with Heavenly Manna, and
Fountains of ever Living Waters? why will you walk in the wayes of Sin? which are black as Egyptian darkness, horrid and full of preci∣pices, and decline the milkie paths of Heaven which are smooth, and full of Innocency. SOƲL. 2. True Lord, but yet my Darling World, comes with ten thousand charms, and ravishes my Soul, and can those paths be unpleasant, which are strewed with pleasure, and paved with love, if thy paths are so smooth, how then comes it that thy Servants so often stumble in them, sure they are either rug∣ged, or as you say hells are, so they are dark, tis the Poets milkie way is full of Stars. CHRIST. 3. Thy Darling, and all her Charme will soon leave thee; doest
thou trust to terrene pleasures? Alas the World is but a rotten staire to mount up to Glory; Had Jacobs Ladder had one such round in it, he could never have mount∣ed up to Heaven by it; Could'st thou by the eye of Faith, but see the beauty of holiness, the charms of thy Saviour, how would thy enlarged Soul be ravished with them; and if there be any rubbs in Heavens path, there are no pre∣cipices, they do but stumble, not fall; whereas the wicked, when they are once fallen, are like the Elephant, they seldome rise; and as the Poets, so is Heavens milkie way full of Stars; it is stuck full of the Pious Examples of my Saints, which may serve as so many Con∣stellations to guide thee; And I thy Saviour am thy North Star, by which if thou doest stear, thou canst not erre.
SOƲL. 4. But Lord are not thy paths more rugged then those of sin, Loves fire with a kind of mistick heat onely cherishes our Souls, and who would not rather live in such a flame, then such as do thy Ser∣vants, who are consumed by that of Martyrdom; what are thy cares but deaths heads, sighs and tears, and are these thy pleasures? is this Heavens banquet? CHRIST. 5. The Paths of sin seem smooth, but alas they are paved with thorns, though sin hath subtilly covered them with flowers, and guilded her poison: Hells flames are not so black as those of lust, instead of cherishing thy Soul, it preyes upon it; whereas the Fire of Martyrdom, doth make you like Gold to come out of it more
glorious: And if Deaths Heads, Sighs and Tears, are such harsh food unto thee, it is because thou knowest not how to use them a∣right, and besides this thou shalt eat Celestial Manna, and if all this will not please thee thou shalt by faith eat my Flesh, and drink thy Saviours Blood. SOƲL. 6. When I assault a Beautie, what delight it is to see what pret∣tie shifts it will make, to avoid be∣ing conquered, how sometimes I am forced to let mine eyes, showre on her stonie heart, till their con∣tinual dropping have worn away its hardness? what prettie devices it makes us invent, when Doves are our Post-Masters, how some∣times I seek to bribe my prettie Enemie with gifts, and then how I glory in my Conquest? my thinks
Caesar did not so well deserve a tri∣umph, for subduing the Universe, as I for Vanquishing my little World. CHRIST. 7. And I will teach thee how thou shalt woe Heaven, how thou shalt make the Heavens bow, and come down, and catch thy pious whispers, and my Holy Dove shall be the Carrier of them, and bring them into my Fathers bosome, and thus shalt thou subdue Heaven, and thousands of Angels shall rejoyce at thy Victory, and thou shalt ride in Triumph on a Cherubs wings, and thus shalt thou enter the ever∣lasting Gates of the King of Glory. SOƲL. 8. How do the Ravishing Charms of a beautious Face allure my Soul? Who would not be an Astronomer in such a Skie? O! I
could eternally gaze on her faire Stars, and view the mistick Circles, and Lines of that little Heaven. CHRIST. 9. How then wouldest thou be ravished at thy Saviours Beauties? when Angels themselves, are not Eagles enough, to behold such a Sun, without vailing their faces with their wings. SOƲL. 10. Oh but then her eyes have a powerfull influence over me? with what a Divine Light they pierce through my Soul? How doth it ravish my heart to behold those prettie Babies in them? how like airie Cherubs they dance on our twisted Beams? Had Adam fal∣len for such Apples, he had in some sort been more excusable. CHRIST. 11. And wilt thou loose Hea∣ven
again for an Apple? If her eyes are Stars, they are blazing ones, and such as portend thy Ruine. Troy had stood, had not Hellens eyes set it on Fire; Thou wilt prove but a bad Pilate if thou Stearest by those Stars; Ah how Glorious, how full of charming Innocency must thy Saviours eyes be, which as my Spouse sings, are as the Doves, washed with milk. SOƲL. 12. Who can see her cheeks? and not admire their rich Carna∣tion? or who but views the Cher∣ries of her Lips, and would refuse such a Banquet? CHRIST. 13. And canst thou not for∣bear to quaffe poison, because it is in a ruby Cup, If her Cheeks be Beds of Roses, dost thou not care if thou art smothered in
them? Oh how fragrant are the Roses of thy Saviours Cheeks? how soft are those beds of Spices? how sweet must his Lips be? That like Lillies drop with sweet smel∣ling Myrrhe. SOƲL. 14. Can she be lesse then Hea∣ven? From whom the same effects proceed? Doth not the Lightning of her eyes, like that of Heaven, melt the soul, yet spare its sheath▪ Is there not the Harmony of the Sphears, in her tongue? If man be called a little world, surely woman is a little Heaven, and then what mistick fetters are her locks? when Kings in the midst of Mighty Armes have been enchained by them? And how Lord am I able to break those fetters, when the great Sampson, he to whom the strongest bonds, were but as Flax
before the Fire, was manacled by them? CHRIST. 15. And if Beauty do spread her locks to catch thee? must thou needs be taken? Tis the degene∣rate Flie, is trapt in the subtil net of a Spiders web, the Noble Eagle breaks through such a weak toile. SOƲL. 16. How doth the presence of my fair one Chear my heart? those Clouds of sorrow which benight∣ed my Soul, fly away at the ap∣proach of my fair Sun; But ah! her absence is my Hell? then my eyes are loath to open their lidds, since that which onely was plea∣sing to them is gone, unlesse it be to free a tear, which they detained in their Cristal Prisons. CHRIST. 17. Foolish Soul, thus to Joy
when thy ruine is near, and bewail it absent? were those tears shed, because thy Son of Righteousnesse had withdrawn his face, they were worthily spent, indeed thou shouldest resemble the pretty Mary Gold, which when night is come, and it is deprived of its beloved object, it hangs down its weak head, and washes its Cheeks in tears; but as soon as its Sun ap∣pears, it advances its Crown, and displaies its Saffron Cheeks, and if any tears appear on them, they are tears of Joy; For after a while I will come unto thee again, and comfort thy sick soul with Apples, and kisse away thy tears with the kisses of love, and I will fill thy heart with joy, till it over-flow its banks, and I will leave thee no more, but we will fly to the Moun∣tains of Myrrhe, to the Hills of
Frankincense, and there will I give thee my Loves, there shalt thou en∣joy pleasures and beauties, as last∣ing as yours are fading. SOƲL. 18. Can that Beauty be fading, that hath a continuall Summer in its Cheeks for forty years? And how can the Lillies of her Cheeks wither? seeing they have two such Chrystal Fountains, as her eyes to water them, two such Suns to che∣rish them, with their heat and in∣fluence. CHRIST. 19. Alas how short a moment is thy forty years, to the eternity of thy Saviours Beauty? Dost thou place thy Felicity in such fa∣ding Beauties, when in that space its Lillies and Roses shall wither? and then not all her Charms, nor her Angels voice shall bribe Death;
the silent Rhetorick of her eyes shall not woe him to defer the stroke one moment; but those Chrystal Fountains shall be dryed up, and darknesse possesse the Orbes of those fair Suns. SOƲL. 20. But Lord there are more variety of pleasures in the service of sin, then in thine; sometimes sweet society joyes my soul; some∣times again I recreate my self, sit∣ting by the sweet murmurs of some purling Brookes, and bathing in it, or under the shade of some lovely Grove. CHRIST. 21. This, and more then this can I give thee, thou shalt sit with greater pleasure under the shad∣dow of my wings, thou shalt sit by the streams of Righteousnesse, and bath thy Soul in them, thou
shalt commune with Heaven it self and quiers of Angels with Joyful Hallelujahs, shall salute thy Eare. SOƲL. 22. Sometimes my Fancy i both pleased and busied, to view magnificent Palaces, how thei Towring heads seem to kisse th Clouds, the statelinesse of their Gates, the Richnesse of their pave∣ments, and glittering with Gold. CHRIST. 23. And I will carry thee to the New Jerusalem, to my Fathers Mansions, whose every Gate is Pearle, the Streets are paved with Gold, and precious Stones, that which is now thy Idol, thou shalt then tread under thy feet, and how glorious a reflex must they make, being guilded by the Beams of the Son of Righteousnesse, there is no other Son, the Glory of God
and the Lamb are the Light there∣of; And then wilt thou say, Fool that I was, I had thought that thy Jerusalem, had been like one of our Citties. SOƲL. 24. They say Riches have wings and fly away; true they fly away, but then they send me home in their stead, sweet Wines delici∣ous Cates, and gorgeous Appar∣rel, and who would part with such beloved Minions, since they make me respected of all? Nay I think my self almost a God, whilst I walk in the midst of my thousands of Angels. CHRIST. 25. If they are Angels, they are evil ones, they fly away, and send thee home sweet Wines, and delicious Cates, that is Feavers, and Surfets, dost thou trust to such
helps? as are swallowed in the curling of Neptunes, or thy Princes frown? But wilt thou be Rich in∣deed? Oh! then Treasure up thy Wealth in Heaven, if thou wilt put out thy money to the highest Interest, put it out to the Poor, and then thou needest not fear to loose it, for God himself is their security, and surely he is sufficient to repay thee? SOƲL. 26. Surely they are deceived, that say a Crown hath more Thorns then Jewels in it; That Ambition is a Mountain, whose ascent is craggie, and its top of Glasse; If State be a Prison, tis a Golden one, and who can be more secure then he that is encompassed with huge Armes? with what rap∣tures is my soul inspired, to see it self elevated above the Common
Rank, like some New Star stuck in the Firmament, the Object of all mens eyes and wonder. CHRIST. 27. If thy Prison be of Gold, the more is thy misery, for it is the stronger. A silly Shepheard is a far more happy King then thou; whiles he makes a Mole-Hill his Throne, none seek to rend it from him, and being but low, his Fall cannot be Great, his Innocent Sub∣jects obey his Voice, and without murmuring pay him the Tribute of their Silver Fleeces: But thou deceivest thy self in thy Security on a Throne; Do'st thou think to escape Storms and Thunder by as∣cending a Mountain? If thou wilt ascend unto the Stars indeed, thou must do it by descending, for hu∣mility is the readiest flight to Hea∣ven, and that is a path so plain
and smooth, thou needest not sea falling, and there alone tho can'st rest secure, for Legions o Angels shall be thy Guard, an thousands of Cherubins wit their flaming Swords defend the SOƲL. 28. But Lord I am a Souldie and shall I forego my Fame whic speaks me great, and Ring through the Universe? Whilst  carve out a Monument of my ow Glory with my Sword, where if  perish it is Nobly, and in the Be of Honour. CHRIST. 29. Thy Fames story must b writ with thy own Blood, thy ga¦ping wounds must be the mouth  to speak thee Famous, see at wha a rate thou purchasest empty Ho¦nour? And wilt thou for a blast o breath, lose thy own breath, and
t be in a bad Cause, thy Soul too? But if thou fightest under my Ban∣ners, thou shalt subdue Sin and Hell, Monsters and Devils, and every drop of blood thou loosest, I will Esteem as a Pretious Ruby. SOƲL. 30. What though I have not Virtue? Yet I can look so like her, that simple ones can call me pious. CHRIST. 31. But thou must be pious, and not onely seem so, else thy God when he comes to bind up his Jew∣els, will easily discern such Bristow Stones from Diamonds, and give thee the reward of Hypocrites. SOƲL. 32. But Lord, thy Servants, do not only lead a life full of Misery, but often leave this Life with a bloody Exit.
CHRIST. 33. Alas, my Yoak is easy to all them that bear it, for my Spirit strengthens them in all their trou∣bles, nay I can make them even in love with Death it self, and swee∣ten that bitter Cup to them. SOƲL. 34. Surely Death is a grim Ser∣vant, what can there be in him to enamour me, is it his Beauty? Ah no! Night and Darkness are in his face, his Embraces are rough, he darts not smiles, but a deadly shaft, and is this a Beauty to be ravished with? CHRIST. 35. Is a Feast the worse, because a Black-amoore Ushers thee to it? Such is Death, or else Death is but like a dark Vaile drawn o're thy face; and although thou dost sit in a scarlet Cloud, yet thou shalt
rise again with greater Lustre of Immortality and Glory. SOƲL. 36. Thou art all sweet oh my Saviour, thou hast overcome, and now I find all my supposed de∣lights but as a dream; Now I see my Delila's Deformity, She that I once thought fair as Heaven, but I now look on her eyes as Nauplius false Light set to draw the Grecians to their Ruines; on her Cheeks, as beds that for one Rose bear a thousand Thorns; on her lips, as soft wax wherewith we sealed ma∣ny a wicked bargain; on her locks as fatall Giues that have kept me too long a Prisoner; that bosome which I called Loves Tempe, is now as a Valley hideous with Thorns; her voice is as the Screetch Owles which bodes destruction; Oh that foolish man should trust
these Syrens; Farewell, for eve all you false Beauties, farewell my Delilahs: I will sigh no more, to puffe the spark of Affection into a flame in my Minions breast, to thee sweet Jesu shall they be sent; to thee shall all my vowes be paid, thou shalt be the Sun under whose sweet influence I will desire to live, thy Armes the Prison, from which I will pray never to be freed; when I fit by the murmurs of a Brooke, it shall be to consider its Obedience to its Makers Com∣mand, in paying the Tribute of its water to the Sea; And how I have run backwards; when I lye under a Tree's fair shade, it shall be to ad∣mire the soft musick of its leaves, as if every leafe were a tongue to sing its Makers Praise, and how mine hath either been silent or else Blaspheming of him. I will be
Ambitious, but it shall be of thy Favour; My Riches I'le distribute to the Poor, and then they will have wings indeed and take their flight to Heaven; The desires of my heart shall be to be dissolved, and to be with my Saviour; For Lord, the Walls of my Clayey Prison hinder my Soul from view∣ing thee fully, it can but peepe through the Casements of my eyes, and so by reflex in thy word, see some weak glimmerings of thee; This, this is the way to make me a Conquerour, me thinks al∣ready my wars are done, and I have nothing now to expect but Rewards and Triumphs, hence forward is laid up for me a Crown of Life and Glory.
A PREPARATION TO THE LORDS SUPPER. OUr Blessed Saviour knowing how weak man is to perform his Duty, least we should faint in our Pilgrimage to the New Jerusalem, hath provided for our Sustenance his own flesh and blood: A Food which the Angels have not; do thou therefore run often, and with Joy, to the Sup∣per of thy dearest Lord, and not
with the Israelites, seem to have Manna so long about thy Tents, that now thou loathest it; thou often faintest in thy Combat with Satan, and therefore hast often need of this Cordial, of this Cha∣lice of blessing to comfort thee, and canst thou too often remem∣ber thy Saviour? Or is that which he hath done for thee not worthy thy memory? But have a care that thou comest prepared, for Bees suck honey from this flower, but Spiders poyson: And if thou un∣worthily receivest, this water of life will become as the waters of Marah, it will be bitter unto thy Soul: It is the Marriage Supper of the Lamb, put on therefore thy Royal Robes; but Purples or Ty∣rian silks is not the wedding Gar∣ment, wherewith thou must be cloathed, but Faith, Hope, Repen∣tance,
Eucharist, and Charity; and now that Christ will come in and Sup with thee, let not the fil∣thiness of the Room drive him away. Aspicis ut veniant ad candida tecta Columbae, Accipiet nullas sordida turris aves. And that spotlesse Dove will not dwell in a polluted Soul; and therefore thus do thou prepare the Cabinet of my heart, first wash it throughly with Repentance tears, then make it bright with Charity, for the money thou givest in Alms guilds thy soule; hang it round with Purity and Innocence; let it be paved with Love; and least it seem dark, alight in it the Lamp of a holy Zeal. Thou must examine thy self, and repent thee of all thy sins; Ah Crucifie them which have Crucified thy Saviour; thou must
not have the least affection for any of them, no, not for thy Darling Crown it with hatred and con¦tempt, which hath Crowned him with Thorns, and why shoulde thou spare thy Darling sins, whe the Almighty spared not his Be∣loved? And then think of th greatnesse of thy sins; which could not be expiated but by th death of the Son of God: and th with humble thoughts of thy sel with a broken heart receive a bro¦ken Saviour. Christ will not dwel in a Den of Theeves, thou must overturn the Tables fill'd with un¦lawfull gain, and cast out Frau and Covetousness, whipping the out of the Temple of thy heart thou must lay aside Anger, and without Malice approach the Ta¦ble of the Lamb of peace; and though the worldling had rather
st sins false Delicates, yet do thou hunger and thirst after this ood, Oh it proves sweet to the hirsty Soul. This duty of preparation ought not to be the work of an hour, or a day, for thy Soul is too filthy to be cleansed in an hour, and thy Re∣bellious Lusts too stubborn to be subdued in a day; and when thou hast with the most diligent care, and strictest zeal, prepared thy heart, yet still confess thine own filthiness, for indeed thou mayest justly fear that thou shalt lodge thy Saviour, as he was at his birth, in a Stable amongst Beasts, in a foul soul, amongst bad thoughts, and evil desires; and therefore pray that he would cleanse thee, and then thou wilt be clean indeed; thy poverty can be no excuse to thee, for this is such a Garment
as every one may purchase. The happy hour being come approach with reverence, imagin your self at Gods Table, that yo are at Supper in Heaven; hereb the eye of Faith thou mayest re¦present to thy self thy Saviour Passion writ in red Characters; th Sun of Righteousness setting in ruddy Cloud. Here thou maye behold that lovely Rose of Sharo purpled with his own blood; th Lamb of God worried by Wolves now he truly seems as a Lilly a¦mongst the Thorns, whilest Cru¦cified betwixt two Theeves; tho mayest behold him denyed b men whom Devils confessed, scof¦fed, and wounded, whom th Angels count i their highest Glo¦ry to reverence. When thou seest the bread bro¦ken, ah then remember a torn Sa¦viour;
as thou tastest the sweet∣ness of the wine, think what a bitter Cup he drank: see, see him stretching out his Arms ready to embrace thee, and fix'd with nails, as if to signifie they would be ever open: See those hands which healed others, now wounded; that mouth praying for those which fill'd it with Gall and Vi∣negar: Consider what a weight did thy sins add to his Crosse, when he sunk under it; The Jewes Crown'd him with Thorns, but how many Thorns in that Crown were thy sins? The Thorns prick'd his Temples, and thy sins his Soul. Then remember the infiniteness of his love, doth he delight in the death of a sinner, who dyed that he might live? Would he have bought thee at such a dear rate, if he had not lov'd thee? He paid
for thee every drop of his hear blood; Those were the Rubie wherewith he purchased thy Re∣demption; and Lord what an ill bargain thou seem'st to have of it and almost to have been too pro∣fuse of thy Coelestial Treasure, to pay down such a price for a poo worm, a clod of earth: How short is all love to thine, who ever fed his Friend with his own flesh and blood? This Lord thou dost; and least we should doubt of the reali¦ty of thy love, thou sufferest a window to be made in thy side that through it we might look, and see the sincerity of thy heart▪ When thou canst thus represen to thy self the Dolour of thy Sa¦viours Passion, what tears should this extract from thy eyes? What sighs from thy bosome? And if thou art not fill'd with Compas∣sion,
the very Earth and Rocks will rise up in Judgement against thee, for the Earth trembled, and the Rocks groan'd, and were rent a sunder at his sufferings. But this is not all, thou must not only commemorate thy Saviours death, but withall believe, that his wounds make thee whole; that his blood cleanses all thy spots, ap∣peases his Fathers wrath, and sub∣dues sin and hell, his Crosse was the Club wherewith our spirituall Hercules subdued all his and our E∣nemies; If thou canst thus receive thy Saviour, he will not only come in and Sup, but abide with thee for ever: A bundle of Myrrhe will thy Beloved be, and will lye all night betwixt thy breasts: thou mayest then be assured that thy sins are forgiven, thou hast Gods hand in the Scriptures, and the
broad Seals of Heaven, in this Sa¦crament, for the pardon of them How bitter will the Worlds De¦licates tast after this feast? It is sai of one, that he sold a Kingdom for a Cup of water; ah who woul not, though he were Master of th Universe, sell it for one drop of th Chalice? And now thy Christ being en¦tred into thy Soul, entertain th great Guest with holy Discourse desire him, since he hath cast or the strong man, now to keep po¦session; and Satan, knowing th he who hath so often overcom him is within, will be discourage to assault thee any more; and if th Blind and Lame, the Sick and Le¦prous, were cur'd but with a touc of his Garments: Surely thou wil be throughly healed, seeing tha Jesus dwells in thy Soul; and the
return him Praises and Thanksgi∣ving, because he hath brought thee to his Banquetting House, and dis∣played his Banner of Love over thee; and hath made thee sit down under his shaddow with great de∣light whilest his fruit hath been sweet to thy tast; and do not thou refuse to feed his Members with Bread, who hath fed thee with the Bread of Life; and now thou art cleansed, take heed thou Defile not thy self again; Alas, spots add not to the Beauty of Christs Spouse; and seeing he to Espouse thee hath become bone of thy bone, and flesh of thy flesh: and hath left Father and Country, Hea∣ven and Glory, for Love of thee: Ah, do not thou run after a second Love; do but compare thy Spouse to the deformity of Satan, and then sure thou canst not be so stu∣pid,
as to exchange a spotless Dove for a Vulture: beauty, and him that is the choicest of ten thou¦sands, for a Blackamore, and De¦formity: Let his Love therefore alone satisfie thee, and thus whe the night of thy death is come thou shalt go and enjoy thy Spouse for ever.
CHARACTERS OF THE PIOƲS, IMPIOƲS, Man. GOOD, WICKED, Woman. A Pious Man, IS the only Ʋlysses that can passe by the Syrens of the Earth, and not be taken by them: the Strum∣pet World, spreads forth her Dan∣gling Tresses to insnare him, war∣bles her most Ravishing Layes to Court him to her Embraces; but he like Sampson snaps his bonds in sunder, and all her Charming can
never induce him to Dance afte her Pipe. In the Glasse of h Wisdome, he sees the Vanity o the Delights of Lust; by it he per¦ceives the Lillies which the La¦vious fancy in their Minio Cheeks, to be Lillies indeed, no some and unsavory, therefore cha he is, and under the Roses of h Lips, are hid prickles, which the lye in Garrison to defend the from the Rude Assaults of Lus His House is a little Church, h Heart the Altar, whereon conti¦ually flames a Holy and Religion Fire; Temptations may Assaile but not Conquer him, or if an pleasure do take hold of him, it but to make him tast their bitt sweetness, that so he may the mo abhor them: He is above th World, and being founded on th Rock of his Salvation, he the
sits and laughs to see how the Am∣bitious man puffs and sweats, to Climbe the craggy Mountain, Ho∣nour, from which he often irreco∣verably falls. He is a Pious Dove, not Gall enough in him to pro∣voke an injury, his mind is a Sea alwayes calme, neither the adverse puffs of Fortune, nor the nipping blast of Malicious Tongues, can raise one wave, or make it swell into the least Intemperate Anger, Afflictions cannot dismay him, for he knows them to be the Correcti∣ons of a Gracious Father, yea even at the Martyrs stake, like the pret∣py Nightingale against a Thorn, he can sweetly chaunt forth Halle∣lujahs to his God; and therefore needs not be smothered in a Cham∣ber full of Roses, as a Tyrannous Emperour did his Servants, that they might meet with sweetnesse,
even in the bitternesse of Death for he can find it in the middest o the flames, which is to him but a bed of Roses; he hath often tug¦g'd and wrastled with Satan, an though the Divel may give him  half turn, or some little foiles, ye yet he is alwayes fain to take th fall himself; Nay sometimes h will prevaile with God, and b his fervent Prayer, disarme th Almighty, as it were of his Thun¦der, and with his tears quench th fire of his sparkling Anger; Hi Virtues Crown him with a starry wreath of Glory, in which hi Wealth, which others count thei greatest Diamond, he Esteems hi least spark, and if he rejoyce i them, it is only that by possessin them he is able to do good, an sustaine the bruised Reed; Him selfe is a Pearle above all hi
Riches, for in Poverty he appears most Glorious, his Wealth at best is but the Guilded Casket, which incloses this Jewel, and the Shroud being gone, his Soul being open and uncovered, shines with grea∣ter Glory and Luster: In all Con∣ditions he is content, and so in Rags injoys a Kingdom, and will rather fit down with his poor Pit∣tance, then make the Backs of the Poor, the Ladder to climbe to the Gawdy Seat of Wealth. He thinks every Man Good, because he is so Himself; chide him, if your re∣proof be just, he will thank you; if unjust, his Innocence is his only Defence, and indeed an Impene∣trable Armour, on which the Darts of Malice may Graze, but never Pierce: There is a Compo∣sed Calmness in his Soul, the Ele∣ments Warr not with one another,
the Fire makes not the Water boyle, Choller justles not Mild∣ness away; but all the Pegs being wound up to their just height, his Soul like a well tun'd Instrument, strikes an Harmony equall to that of the Sphears. He esteems a mo∣derate State best, and therefore like the humble Briar, hath chosen a middle Station; not so low that Contempt can step upon him, nor so High, but that the Storms and Billows passe over his head. He is a Star of the first Magnitude; a Tree, which like those in the Hes∣perian Garden bears Golden Ap∣ples. A Nose-gay, wherein his Ver∣tue's like so many pretty Flowers send forth a Fragrant Sweetnesse, and happy is she whose Bosome i possest of so pleasing a Posy. He i never in better Company then when he is alone, for then will
his Soul commune with his God. He is knit unto his Friend by his Heart-strings, and nothing but the Sword of Death can dissolve the Gordian Knot. His life is a well Acted Comedy, which alwayes ends with a happy Exit. Death which to others seems so Grim to him, appears of a Smiling Coun∣tenance, and that deadly Draught but a Spicy Cup. His good Name is a Pretious Ointment, a sweet Flower which shall Bud in Eterni∣ties Garden, and ever be a fragrant Odour in the Nostrils of Posterity. Lastly, He is a Phaenix, it is rare to see two of his Kinde together, and out of his Funeral Ashes shall arise, young and glittering with the Beams of Immortality and Glory.
The Impious Man, IS a strange Kinde of Monster made up of Swine, Goat, an Vulture. The Tavern is hi Church, his Mistris the Golde Calf, to which he dulier payes hi Devotion, then to his Maker. Hi Mouth is a Cannon, which he al∣wayes keeps Charged with at Oath, and will out-goe any Can¦noneer in the Celerity of Dis∣charge. He loves Mirth as hi life, and cares not if he Dance a Jig to Hell. He is a weak un man'd Fort; no Vice, but at first Battery, makes a Breach into his Soul; if Satan does but present him with a Cherry from his Mi∣stris's Lip, or an Apple of her eye
he is as soon taken with the Beauty of them, as was Adam with his in Paradice, and never imagins it to be Forbidden Fruit, if he taste hose Cherries in Lasciviousnesse. Before he could speak, he could speak Mischief; before he could goe, he could run in the wayes of in. His Heart by its hardnesse, hould be a Flint, and yet is none, for that hath Fire in it, but his not one sparke of Grace. Yet if God in his Mercy causes any Streams of Righteousness to slow out of him, e renues his Miracles in the Wil∣dernesse; and brings Water out of  Rock. He is a strange kinde of oyle, in which though Vertues eeds be sowne, will still bring up Wilde Oats, a Medly of Wicked∣nesse, Pandoras Box was never fill'd with so many Evills. He has his Paradoxical custome to repair
to, a Hot-house in the midst of Summer, [as if he would practise Hell here on Earth] and that no to heat him, but quench hi Flames; but alas it often prove too hot for him, and he is Scorcht and by a Hellish Fire too, and so comes home by Weeping Crosse He rises up early to Sin, and scorn to be out-done by any man in mis∣chief, and so takes pains to pur∣chase Destruction, and large stride to Hell. His Drunkennesse de¦priving him first of his ration¦al Soul, makes him a Beast, and then of his Senses also, and so h becomes a meer Stock, and ye this man thinks himself in th Right Way; but let him res assured, that though we read o the Good Thief who at last stol into Heaven, yet never of any man that Stagger'd in thither; H
greedily feeds on the Fruits of sin, and is ravished with their false sweetness, although they are but Dainties drest by Hells Fire; He is made up of wiles, and whilst he smiles every dimple is a pit of destruction, and every Syllable he speaks a nooze to catch thee; he s a slave to his Wealth, Satan detains him Prisoner in Golden Chains, and he is content with such Fetters, and had rather injoy the ompany of an Angel in his poc∣et, then in Heaven; but having y extortion wrung an Estate out f the very bowells of the Poor, r by deceit increased his Store; he Worme growes proud, and alks as if his head were above the Clouds, or knockt at the Battle∣ments of Heaven, and every man must strike saile to his pride, but whilst he deceives his poor Neigh∣bour,
at the same time Satan cheats him of his Soul. Thus in his prosperity he seems to have the heart of a Lyon, or out-rore the Thunder, but in misery that of a Child, like a bladder he swell with the least puffe, and is down again with the least prick; and yet sometimes his passions so blind him, that the Wasp with an eage fury will pursue an imaginary in∣jury; his revenge must be writ in bloody Characters; but alas whereas by other sins he goes by degrees, by this he oftentimes from the place of Combate, make but one leap into Hell; He is an uselesse drone, and spends the greatest part of his life in Glut∣tony and Drunkennesse, in Gay∣eties and empty Vanities, and i may for fashion-sake, may send forth a few Prayers, and Ejacula∣tions,
but they also are lame and aggy wing'd, and never reach to eaven; Thus he regardlesse lets is Glasse run, as if his time were  no value, whilest the Pious Man y spending it virtuously, esteems nd makes every grain of sand a earle, and those very pleasures e imagines to injoy here, are oth vanishing and imperfect; In e midst of his delights, his con∣ience the bird in the breast, in∣ead of a sweet Lullaby, sings him small notes, interrupts his sleeps, nd soure's his pleasures; This is is portion here, and without Re∣entance he will be hereafter a ire-Brand of Hell, the object of he Almighties Indignation, the ceptacle of all those Torments which the wrath of Incensed Ma∣sty, and Justice can Inflict.
The Good Woman, IS a white Rock, that Repells a Shocks of Temptations, brea those fiery waves, and turns the into froath; And as the pret Mary-Gold, will not turn it se nor open its leaves, to any oth Light, to any other Star, but on the Sun; So this sweet flower  all but her Husband is shut and r¦served; he is the Sun to who alone she opens her leaves, and h embraces; her arms are chai strong enough to keep her Hu¦band at home, and he is so tak with that pleasing Captivity, th when he considers how far t Nectar of her kisses, surpasse h sweetest wines, and the cherries  her lips the fruits of sin, they e¦sily
perswade him to forsake all lewd society. Columbus never dis∣covered such Mines of Treasure in the vast Universe, as are in this little World. She blushes at the hearing of an obscene Speech, as if her Cheeks hung out their red flaggs of defyance, to such a rude party. She is commonly silent, or at least she will be but the treble in the consort, for low musick, and a soft tongue, make alwayes the sweetest Harmony; She is of an an humble spirit, and to all Cour∣teous and Affable, the windy prai∣ses of flatterers cannot puffe her into pride, for beauty she knows like the Glory of a Rain-bow, soon passes away, and that those eyes which they compare to the Sun, are out-shined by the dwindling Beams of a farthing Candle; If a
storm arise in her Husbands breast as rain the winds, so one little shower of her tears will allay its blustering; her sighs will puffe out the fire of his anger; she opposes not his rising fury, but counts it the best Victory, if as the Scythi∣ans she can conquer by retreating. Her Apparrel is decent, though not costly, she can be fair without patches, and if her own native beauty be not charming enough to purchase her a Consort, she thinks that none but fooles will be taken with such poor baits, for surely a good beauty, as well as good wine needs no Bush; She seldome fixes her eyes on any man, least some one be vanquished, by continually discharging her darts from those Chrystal Quivers; neither will she let those subtill spies to wander, for the roving arrow, as well as the
directed shaft may chance to hit the mark; Her husbands afflictions she makes her own, and by a secret sympathy seems to partake of the same griefs; he is her head, no wonder then, if she be troubled when her head akes; She loves not to dally with the flames of lust, nor play with Cupids shaft, for she knows edge tooles are sharp, and may cut her fingers. Tears are the Beads of her De∣votion, and she wooes heaven so Nobly, and with such perseve∣rance, that she will seldome let her God go without a blessing from him; She is up with the early Lark, and as that pretty Quirister when he first rises from his bed of Grasse, she sings some prayer or Ejaculation, and when her husband rises, it is like Phaebus full of blushes to see his Hesper, his
Morning Star, so duly usher him to his taske. She is a Casket full fraught with Rich Jewels; when Satan shewed our Saviour all the Glories of the World, this little World surely was the greatest Wonder, the greatest Temptation; The saying proves false in her, that there is no Fortresse so strong, but that an Asse laden with Gold may en∣ter, for the English mens Angels can neither tempt her, nor their Crowns allure her, nor the French Pistols shoot her Chastity dead; She is the Crown of her Husbands joy, and it sweetens his Labour to think when his course is done, and his work at an end, he shall go and rest his wearied neck in his Theti Lap; As her life is sweet, so whe she dies, she expires like the Phae∣nix all in spices, and leaves a per∣fume behind her.
The Wicked Woman, IS a Basiliske, for with her eyes she will look thee dead, and as Archimedes Glasses were said to burn Ships afar off, so her false Opticks often fire at a distance; At the first assaults of Lust, she blusht, and wept, and her eyes bewail'd the sad Conquests they had made, till her Lover came and wip'd away her tears, and whisper'd his false story in her eares, and she was charm'd, and was willing first to be drawn by the Cords of Vanity, and then she could run without drawing, and entice frail man to tast of her Forbidden Fruit; So by degrees she grew a proficient in Wickednesse, and at last she committed sin with
greedinesse, and as of a Viper, al∣wayes a Viper proceeds, so I use brought forth Murder, and thus as her face was tainted with a false fucus, so was her Soul with the blood of her Infant; She is a strange kind of fortresse, that not onely yields without resistance, but also sues to be taken; She will out-vie Cupps with men, but whilst she Carouses others healths, she drinks away her own; Her body is often faire to a wonder, but by her wicked deeds she seems to confirm the Opinion of the Moors, that there are white Devils; Her chiefest pleasure is to catch young Birds and Fishes; but whereas in others the chiefest of their Art is in the subtil concealing of their snares, she hopes to catch most, when she most discovers hers; Her Locks are the lines, her bar'd
Breasts, the Baits wherewith she goes a Fishing, and hopes to catch some silly one with those Flesh-baits; sometime in a moment she catches her silly Prey; otherwhile like a cunning Angler, she lets the wanton Frie sport with the Bait, till they are taken in the Snare: Which having taken that which seems strangest, is that contrary to others, she only Strips them of their Skales, and so lets them goe; She is a strange kinde of Butcher that sells her own Flesh, and that for lesse then would buy a Calf; She is Loud and Stubborn, her Tongue is no sooner heard in the House, but like a Fatal Alarum Bell, it sets the whole Family in an Uproar; With a thousand Arts▪ she indeavours to Hide and Prop the defects of Time, and Nature, but who will not judg that which
is so Be-patch't, a Ruinous Fabrick; She is a Salamander that lives in the Fire of Lust, an Ordinary open to all comers; She may well be cal∣led the Weaker Vessel, he that relies upon her, Launches his Ho∣nour in a Leaking Barke; She is surely an Athiest, for Pleasure is her God. Bride-well her Hell, and the Constable or Marshal, all the Devils she fears; Her Favour is more Fatal then her Malice, for that at most can but Kill thy Body, but her Smiles will perswade thee to destroy thy own Soul; the burnings of Granado's, is a gentle and Lambent Fire, to that of her Eyes; She perswades the silly Youth to turn his Land into Gold, till at last, she leaves him nothing but the Water of Repentance and Tears; Her Strength and Stomack seem beyond Belief, for she will
swallow two Acres of Land for a Breakfast, and carries two more upon her Back; When she sayes she is your Servant, it is no Com∣plement; She is a common Pud∣dle, wherein every Stallion comes and Quenches his Thirst: Lastly, It is but a ust Judgment of God upon her, that she who would live in a hot house here, should live Eternally in one hereafter.
THE FOUR Quarters OF THE YEAR. Quid non in species secedere quatuor annum, Aspicis, aetatis peragentem imitamina nostrae. OVIDIUS. Nam tener & lactens pueri{que} simillimus avo, Vere novo est, tunc herba nitens, & roboris expers, Terget & insolida est, & spe, delectat agrestes, Omnia tunc florent, florum{que} coloribus almus, Ludit ager. THE Glorious Preparation which Dame Nature makes,
declares the Springs approach, tha season wherein she layes in, and i delivered of her wonderful Births▪ And the pretty Flower no soone peeps out of the Bosome of it Mother, but it is Enamel'd with Pearly drops, a true Emblem o thy Infancy; for when thou wer first brought foorth, thy Eye distill'd with Tears, the forerun∣ners of thy future Miserie; No in this onely doth it resemble thee but as the Flower, is subject to be cropped by Beasts, to be Blaste with Winds, so is it in every one power that passes by, to Ravis thy Life from thee; Afflictions an Sicknesse can Disroab thee of a thy Beauty, and see thou wert n sooner Born, but thou offendes the Flower ill prospers, and th Pretty Lilies droops its wea head, loaden with Dew and Tears
Darknesse and Affliction surround thee, but canst thou but Repent, as the Comfortable Beams of the Morning Sun, dries up the Dewy Purles on the Lillies Cheeks; so will the Sun of Righteousnesse wipe away all Tears from thy eyes, and Dissipate those Clouds of Darknesse: It is thy Sins which Ecclipses the Sunshine of his Glo∣rious Face. But perhaps thou mayst aske me, which of the Trees or the Flowers of the Field I would have thee Resemble? Not the Ce∣dar, for that is the Ambitious Man, and besides it bears no Fruit; Nor the Birchen Tree, for that is the Tyrant, Gods Scourge; whose Crimson hue, shews it Delights in Blood. Nor the Lilly, for that is the Hipocrite, Faire without and Unsavory within; But it is the Rose I would have thee imitate, let
its Blushing Cheeks teach thee Modesty, its Prickles Watchful∣nesse, and alwayes to stand upon thy Guard; the expanding its Leaves at the Suns approach, thy Willingnesse to Receive thy Savi∣our; but above all, Matchlesse are its inward Vertues, such would I have thee, thy inward Graces, like that sweet Flowers, to surpasse thy outward Beauties. In this season all Nature seems to Rejoyce, the Fields are Diapred with Fragrant Flowers, Neptune Smiles, not one Wrinckle in his Front; The Lillies are Cloathed with Beauty above Solomons Royalty; and thou least thou shouldst be left Naked; Intseat of thy Saviour, and he will Cloath thee with the Robes of Righteousnesse; let Penitent Tears be thy Pearls, make Brace∣lets of thy Folded Armes, and
thus attired; Oh! how lovely wilt thou be in Gods sight? not Solomon, or the Lillies of the Field, did ever parallel thy Glory. Oh teach thy Infant steps to walk in the wayes of thy God; How fragrant is the budding Rose? how sweet will the perfume of thy Infant piety be to him? the very Birds by their pretty warbling, the purling Brooks by their sweet murmurs, seem to caroll their praises to their Maker; and wilt hou be more ingrateful then these? Oh! Remember thy Creator in the dayes of thy Youth; Christ is in Love with little ones, and bids hem come unto him; Ah! he will embrace thee in his Everlast∣ing Arms, and cherish thee in his own Bosome; Do but thy indea∣our, and he will Guide and Sup∣ort thy weak feet, and thou wilt
highly need his aide, for the young Bird is easily ensnared, and Satan will lay his baits for thee, swee wines, and luscious delicates, to please thy taste, the charming laye of lacivious Syrens, to lull the asleep, shew thee the Roses of thei Cheeks, and Lillies of their hand and then aske thee if thou an afraid of a few flowers; But ah sly from them, for under tho flowers lurks a Serpent. Ʋlysse gifts cannot be safe to Troy, a these are but his Gins, which  thou art not wary will soon en¦trap thee; but thou wilt say, th match is unequal, a child again such a potent Enemy; Oh! b thy Christ will gird thee wit strength to cope with him; an then again thou dispairest becau thy lusts are untamed, and perhap dost say, what can a green hat
Apple please my Saviours tast, who s altogether sweetness? Oh! but he can sweeten the bitter waters of Marah; the sowre Apple by time grows sweet and mellow, and  clouded morne, may prove a glo∣ious day. Summer, OR YOUTH. OVIDIVS. Transit in aeestatem post, ver robustior Annus, itque valens Juvenis, neque enim obustior aetas lla, nec uberior, nec quod magis ardeat ulla est. THe Sun and thou are climbing towards the Meridian; The
Birds by this time have chosen themselves Mates, & this being the greatest Act to felicity in this life; I can find no Nobler Example to fol∣low then the Dove, that Emblem of innocent Love, looks not to the Richnesse and Gayety of her mates feathers, but to the sweet com∣posure of its limbs, and the char∣ming effects of his sweeter nature for him she will reject the gaudy Peacock; These two harmless one will sweetly sit and bill, whilst the ravinous Vulture is engaged i wounds and quarrells; take hee least being too covetous, thou sel∣lest thy content for a little drosse and it may be to one who may prodigally spend it; chuse but  pious and loving Consort, and b assured thou hast a Pearle worth the Worlds Treasure; And no being joyned in Hymens bonds
let the twining Vine teach thee, how indissolvable the Marrie Knot is, for it will sooner suffer its arm to be rent off, then  be se∣parated from the strikt Embrace of its Beloved Elm; So must thou eave all for thy Spouse, let nei∣ther the Iron teeth of time, or ne∣cessity be able to dissolve that knot; But methinks, I see thee with ad∣miration gaze on the great ones of the World, and sighest at thy own lesse Glorious Condition, but grieve not because thou art none of those Loftier Cedars; true, thou rt low, but the lesse subject to torms and Thunder, the high Mountain is barren, tis the low Val∣ey, and Humble Heart, that brings oorth the best Fruit; And yet I ould have thy Contemplations are to Heaven; The Lark builds er Nest on the ground, yet when
she sings, she Towers above the Clouds, as if she disdained Earth; Earth is unworthy the Larks Har∣mony and thy thoughts, thou wilt not need the wings of a Dove, on the wings of Contemplation, thou wilt out-strip the Lark, and sooner reach Heaven; But let Heaven be the object of thy Meditations, which surpasses the Earth as much in Excellency, as in immensity  Earth hath Flowers for its pave∣ment, and Heaven Stars, or rather those Stars are the knotty ends o Heavens Tapistry; Ah! how Glo∣rious then must those Mansions be whose superficies is so beautifull but all this cannot perswade thee to forsake thy darling World, thy wedges of Gold fasten thee to it, the arms and tresses of Laciviou Strumpets enchain thee, and thou unmindful of Heaven, carried on
with thy Youthful heat, swimmest in a Sea of pleasure; this Stage of thy life seems delightfull to thee, strewed with Perfumes and Flow∣ers, and thy Glass fill'd with Gol∣den Sands, and thou with the Ma∣rigold, in pride advancest thy glit∣tering Crown, but poor blossome, whence springs this vain pride, is it from thy Beauty? Alas, that will soon fade, and no Rose will sooner wither then that in thy Cheeks; or from thy prosperous Felicities? But how many sorrows meet each minute to interrupt them, which may soon turn thy quiet calm into a storm? Or is it from thy Valour, and frequent Vi∣ctories ore thy Foes? Oh! that were better turned against thy self, and thou shalt obtain more Glory by subduing thy self, the little World, then by being Conque∣rour
of the great One; Have a care that neither Prosperities, not delight sooth thee into a security; How often is the pretty Nightin-Gale, even whilst she sits, and Carolls foorth her sweet Layes, kill'd by the Archer; And we see many in the midst of their jollity, carried aloft on the wings of plea∣sure, shot by Death, and tumble from the height of their mirth in∣to the grave; Oh! forsake the World, and all her empty delights, suck no longer her false breasts, her milk is but sugar'd poison, thou art now a man, and at these years, it is time for thee to be wained.
AUTUMN, OR Manhood OVIDIUS. Excipit Autumnus posito ferrore Juventae, Maturus mitis{que} inter juvenem{que} senem{que}, Temperie medius. GOne are thy Mirthsome days, thy Summer is done, till now thou wert a young Sprig, and the sweet Breath Zephyr onely wanton'd with thy tender Leaves, thou hast danc't out thy Youth in Loves and Pleasures, but now it
is time for thee to bear Fruit; thou mayest trifle away no more hours, but as thy Years, so let thy Faith increase; indeavour that the Seeds of it may take firme Root in thy Soul; intreat the Sun of Righte∣ousnesse to shine on it, omitt not sometimes to water it with a few Repentant Tears, and no doubt it will Prosper; And do not think to purchase Heaven by sitting still; how doth the little Emmet toil be∣fore she possesses her store; the Hus∣bandman purchases his encrease with the sweat of his Brows; Hea∣ven like the Hesperian Garden is guarded by a watchfull Dragon, and no coming to the golden Fruit, nor entring this Paradise, till thou hast Vanquished him: The Sheep yield their Silver Fleece to their Carefull Pastor; The Springs and Rivers pay their Tribute to the
Sea; and wilt thou return no Fruit? either be barren or bear evil Fruit; Oh no! thou art now grown a goodly tree, thy boughs are exten∣ded to Heaven, and canst now not only be good thy self? but do good unto others; Oh let the parched Rose, the Sun-burnt Traveller, enjoy the comfort of thy shade; Let the Mate-deprived Dove, the Mournfull Widdow pearch under thy Roofe; Untwist no the weak Wreathing Jvy from thy Armes, but support the Poor and Needy; but perhaps thou thy self art Poor and Thirsty; and seest the Joyful swain Feast on the Fruits of his Happy Labour; O do thou but ask of thy Saviour, and he will give thee of the Fountains of ever Living Waters, Costial Manna, and the Bread of Life to satisfie thy Hunger; but some say the Meat is
sweetest that is nearest the Bone, and so thou mayest desire one: Well then, take a Deaths Head, for out of it, a Pious Man will pick Heavenly Food. Oh here is a Feast indeed! that great Shepheard will not let his Sheep to want; for he hath promised they shall feed among the green and fat Pastures, and that he will lead them to the cooling Streams; from him thou receivest all that thou hast, 'tis he Communicates all those Blessings, all those Beauties and Graces thou Enjoyest; It is the Sun beams that Damask the Apples Cheeks, and it is the Sun of Righteousnesse that makes thy Soul blush for its Sins; White and Red are the Com∣pounds of an Earthly Beauty, and White and Red Innocence, and Pious shamfac'dness, are the chief∣est of the souls perfections. Christs
Beloved Spouse was White and Ruddy, thou of thy self art Poore and Naked, if he do not Enrich thee; But thy Autumn is done, the trees begin to shed their leaves, and thou thy hairs; and now thou beginst by piece meale to fall into the Grave; thou hast but one strain more to the top of thy Life, and that a Rotten one too; Age that subtile Thief steals swiftly on thee; Learn therefore willingly to sub∣mitt thy spirit into thy Saviours hands, like the Corne, to fall and Kiss the Feet of him that cuts thee off, canst thou Murmur at him that doth but fell the tree to transplant it into a better soile; but above all things be prepared for thy end, that when thy houre comes, thou mayest fall like Fruit, full ripe for Heaven.
WINTER, OR Old Age. OVIDIUS. Inde senilis Hyems tremulo venit horrida passu, Aut spoliata suos, aut quos habet alba capillos. THat Season is come that co∣vers the ground and thy Head with Snow; the Lil∣lyes have lost their Milky hue; the Trees have nothing to hide their naked Armes; the Springs are Congealed, their Waves no more wanton with the Shoare, nor thy
Blood in thy Veins. See World∣lings, see; What is bocome of the Idoll thou so much Adorest? Where are all those charming Beauties which shin'd in thy Face? that Face which some have called a little Heaven, wherein thy Eyes like two Suns Displai'd their Beams; but now alas thy Heaven is Clou∣ded, thy Suns are eternally Ecclip'd, and nothing remains of thy beau∣tiful Fabrick, but the gastly Ruines, so Fraile is Serene Beauty; thy Life at longest was but a Span, but how short a space of that span hast thou to Live? Old Wood soon Blazes out, soon will thy shorten∣ed Tapour sink into its Urne; now or never is the time for thee to be Fruitfull; if thou prodigally wa∣stest this thy last inch of thy Ta∣pour, thou art irrecoverably lost; The Lillie Withers, but with the
next Spring wil appear in a fresher beauty; but if thy Sun set in a Cloud, it will never more arise. See, see the Heavens weep for thee, and seem to shew thee thy duty, the violent blasts that Boreas sends from his swollen Cheeks, intimate that thy sighs should be fervent; Its distilling in plentifull showers, that those eyes which in thy youth were Lustfull flames, should now be trickling Fountains; Oh! quench those Flames with Penitent Tears; hast thou mispent thy time, yet dispaire not, if thou wilt return, there is mercy for thee; those tears are pearls of vallue enough to re∣deem thy time? What if time have Furrowed thy Face; Plow∣ed Land the better bears Fruit; but methinks I hear thee say, What must Trees bear Fruit in Winter? Oh yes! Man is a Tree must bear
in all the Seasons, especially in the Winter of his Age, and shall ei∣ther for being fruitful be trans∣planted into Heavens Garden, there eternally to flourish, or else for his Barrennesse, be hewen down for the Devils Fire; But alas! thy heart is colder then the Season, the curled stream is ockt up in Ribs of ice, and that s frozen; Oh! beg of the Sun of Righteousnesse to shine on it, and e will dissolve thy Icy heart, and make it flow into streams of Righ∣teousnesse; Time hath silver'd thy aire, do thou silver thy time; and hough in thy Youth, like the sil∣ver Swan, thou wert a stranger to Harmony, yet at the last thou must ither like her sing melodiously, or owle in Hell for ever; Summon ogether all thy strength, all that hou hast of pious in thee, that
thou mayest expire like the dying Tapour in a Glorious Blaze; Oh let the sweetest be at the bottome, if the sand of thy Youths-Glasse were of Gold, that of thy old age is powder of Rubies, every grain of it is worth a Universe, and doe thou so slightly value this Inesti∣mable Jewel; Is this a time fo thee to dance lustful measures when every minute thou maye dance into thy Grave? when lik an aged tree, with every wind tho totterest, when every sickness shakes thy very heart-strings, tak heed for if Death catch thee dan∣cing; the flying bird is the faires mark, and that black Archer wi not neglect his advantage, and  thou mayest caper into Hell.
Historical Applications. Quocumque tempore non cogitaveris Deum, puta illud tempus amisisse. 1. HEnry the fifth King of England, in his Younger years was a most Dissolute Prince, addicted to Robberies, and many other lewd Practises, which made the world guesse by these pretty Tyrannies, those High ones, he would after∣wards commit; But this Crooked Twig, prov'd as Goodly an Oake, as ever grew in Brittains Forrest, For when he came to be King, he orsook both them, and all those of
his Companions that would not turn over a new leaf with him. I have spent the best part of my Youth in pleasures, Oh! that I could now with this good King, devote the rest of my dayes, unto the service of my God; When I was a Child, I did like a Child, but now I am a Man, I will do like a Man; then I was Ignorant, but now I have reason to Consider, that all things here below are Vanity  Therefore will I leave off my Drunkennesse, to tast of the Foun∣tains of ever Living Waters, in comparison of which, the best o Wines, are as the bitter waters o Marah; I will forsake my Glut∣tony to tast of the Bread of Life; My Christ shall be my Riches, will contemn the Worlds Deli∣lahs, that I may enjoy him for my Spouse; is there any beauty in
them? Oh! but he is more lovely, the choicest often thousand; The fairest earthly Beauties, in compa∣rison of Him, are but blear-eyed Leahs; tis he only is the lovely Rachel, that deserves our seaven Years, yea all our lifes Service. 2 THe Fabulous Poets report of Ixion, that in his Lustful heat, thinking to embrace an armfull of pleasure, in the enjoyment of fair Juno, was deceived, and found it but a mist. Thus foolish man pursues, fleet∣ing delights for realities, and per∣swades his heart that he shall long enjoy them; He grasps the mist in his armes, but alas, he will find that their glittering gayeties will disappear; His shining Taper will out in a snuffe, his pleasing dream will pass away, his Syrens Song
will end, his Juno, his Darling plea∣sure will vanish into smoak, and prove at last sowre like the Grapes of Sodom, or like those Apples which are said to turn into ashes if but touched; so will they, and we shall have nothing left of them, but their Cinders to increase out Torments in Hell. 3. CAesar after his Victories, and Glo∣rious Triumphs, was murdered in the Senate-House; Herod in the midst of his Glory, eaten up by Worms; Swedelands Mirrour cut off by Death, in the strength of his Years. Alas! what a vain thing is man a meer bubble, a walking shaddow, one blow cuts his thred in twain, one little bullet stops his breath, one sicknesse pulls him into his Grave; it is most certain, that we
shall all take up our Lodging in Deaths darke Retiring-room, the Grave; but nothing more uncer∣ain then the time, when? Oh! that we could therefore be always bout that taske which we have here to doe, like the Heliotropium, still turning towards our sun, Our Sun of Righteousnesse: Thus if we live whereas the Waftage of the Wicked out of this world, is Stor∣my and Tempestuous, and are rou∣ed by the Horrours of never dy∣ng Torments; our shall be calm and gentle: Our Deaths will prove but a short sleep, and when we a∣wake, we shall finde our selves in Abrahams bosome, incompassed with incomparable Felicities. 4. MEn whilest they are in this World, do but play the Indu∣strious Bee, always buzzing about,
seeking some Flower, some occa∣sion by which they may encrease their Stock: their chiefest Garden is the Exchange, to which they in Numbers resort, there it is they meet with most bargains, and from thence with loaded thighs they fly unto their Hives or Houses. Thus should the Life of every Christian be, could we be but as wise for Heaven as we are for the World; with the Emmet, carry but one grain of corn, do but one Pious deed a day; this day draw a line of Christian Charity, that of Obedience, and another day of Hu∣mility, we should soon draw the whole Image of our saviour in our souls; and at the years end, finde our spiritual treasure encreased to a massy heap. Heavens Exchange-Royal is the Church, for there we may hear glad tidings of our Coe∣lestial
affairs; there we shall be sure to meet with good bargains; it is there only that the Exchange never falls, but is always at a high Rate: for a few odd pence be∣stowed in Alms, we shall receive innumerable Treasures; for a few trickling penitent Tears, Inestima∣ble Jewels; and for a few old rags given to the needy, the Cloathing of a Glorious Immor∣tality. 5. ZEuxis a Famous Painter, Pour∣traying a Vine and a Man by it on the same Tablet, the Grapes were so exquisitely drawn, that the de∣ceived Birds flew and peckt them; yet by this we may see, that though Art may Imitate, yet it is farr short of Nature; for had he drawn the Man so well to the Life, they would have been more afraid of
him, then allured by the Grapes; Art may Pourtray a Rose of a fresh Carnation, but compare its Beau∣ty to a reall one, of how faint a die it will seem to the others native Crimson. And yet how many have we in this age who daube over the works of Nature, and think to borrow a Beauty from a few colours: but poor souls, do they think to mend Gods work? hath thy God com∣manded thee, Not to make unto thy self any Graven Image, or the like∣nesse of any thing, and doest thou make one of thy self? could you but see how like unskillfull Painters, you marr what you would mend. Tis Satan presents you with a false mirrour, wherein that seems faire, which indeed is deformity it self; did you but see your selves in Vertues Glasse; you
would confesse that a Moore with his Darke-lanthorn face, is a farr more Reall and Lovely Beauty then yours: Christs Spouse went not thus disguis'd, he will never know you with such a vzzard on, neither shall those have any share in his Victory, who wear and serve under the Devils Colours. 6. SInon was a Crafty Grecian, most expert in the Art of dissembling: This Sinon by his Deceit, and Feign'd tears perswaded the Cre∣dulous Trojans to draw in the Wooden Horse, and with it their Ruine. Every Fair shew must not be trusted, for Cain could friendly parley with his Brother, and slay him; And Judas come with a Haile Master in his mouth, and be∣tray his Lord: Man busies himself
to invent mischief, and with dis∣simulation covers his snares; His heart is crooked and full of guile, a forge of iniquity, a mint where∣in lies are coyn'd to deceive the Innocent; He sings thee asleep, as Mercury did Argus, that he may slay thee; In the one hand he car∣ries a Rose, wherewith smiling in your face, he pleasingly tickles your nose; in the other a Dagger to stab thee to the heart: In thee therefore Oh my God will I put my Confidence, for Just and True are thy wayes, and all thy paths are Righteous. 7. IT is said of Demosthenes, that be∣ing to deliver an Oration to the People in the Market-Place, he had very few Auditors, whereup∣on he whooping, whistling, and acting the Fool, the People prest
in great numbers to see him, when he rebuking their folly, got them by this device to stay and hear his Eloquent Oration. And alas! how thin are our Churches now a dayes? How few come to hear Gods divine Ora∣tours, and were every one to give a shilling or two in Alms when they come to Church, as they do to see a Stage-play, I fear our Tem∣ples would have fewer Auditors then they have; whereas at a Co∣medy, the thronged Theaters al∣most crack with numbers. Thus can we lay out our money, for that which is not Bread; and mens perverse hearts are so stubborne, that scarce any persuasions can prevaile to draw them from this folly: Fools thus to dispise Coele∣stial Manna, for dirty crums, and the sacred word of a God, for a
few humane inventions. 8. THersites was of such a currish disposition, that he was always barking at those who had done him no injury; he could not see Ʋlysses, but he must term him Coward; no Menelaus, but he must beat him with his broken Ribb, with his Wives dishonour. Just thus have I seen some sit snarling all the day at others; they whet their Tongues to pierce the sides of the Innocent: they cannot see a man passe by without casting some of their filth upon him; but give me, Oh my God, a quiet Con∣science! the best Antidote against their poison, then shall I injoy a continual Feast within me, al∣though their Malice seek the de∣sturbance of my Peace; and at length, their Calumnies shall re∣turn
upon their own heads; That pitch wherewith they intended to blurr my Innocency, shall stick upon their own fingers; then shall I Triumph in my Innocency, but they be ashamed of their hatred and folly. 9. WE read, that Aesops Cock find∣ing a Pearle, contemned it for one Barley Corn: Christ is our Pre∣tious Pearle; but alas! how many reject him for a little worldly gain? How many will sell their Saviour for a lesse price then did Judas? but oh my God! grant that I may in∣deavour, yea give all I have to purchase this Pearle, then shall I prove a happy Merchant; for none but those who have this Pearle shining in their Bosomes, can enter Heaven. That is the Sacred Badge by which St. Peter knows who he
is to let enter those Everlasting Gates. Let Worldling scrape this Dunghill World, but I, when I have got this Pearle, my Christ, have attained such riches, to which theirs is but Drosse and Dung. 10. DIogenes was a man so much des∣pising Riches, yt being proferd great Wealth by Alexander, he bid him stand out of the Sun-shine, as being a comfort, that all his Riches could not bring him; He chose a Tub for his Pallace, a Wooden dish was all his Houshold-stuffe, and Water and Herbs his chiefest Sustenance: Though some may take this for a Tale of a Tub; yet surely it is a great example of a Generous and Moderate life, which without doubt was full of a perfect Tranquility. His minde was calm, not like the Merchants tossed
with every Wind more then his Ship, nor alarum'd with Thieves seeing he had nothing but his Wooden dish to loose; and Chri∣stians may be ashamed to be so farr out-gone by a Heathen in Morral Vertue: but yet we finde this Dio∣genes, whose diet was so spare to desire the unchaste embraces of a Lais; Ah! how then doth the Pampring of our bodyes now a dayes put oyle to the flame, and increase our natural lustful desires; t is a worthy sentence of Hesiod, that half is better then the whole; one dish will serve nature better then ten, for with our many Cour∣ses, we course away our Health; though Bread and Water be all my Food, as long as the Sun of Righ∣teousnesse shines on me, I will not envy Sardanapalus all his daints of the Sea and Land.
Scripture Applications. This Book of the Law shall not depart out of thy Mouth, but thou shalt Meditate therein Day and Night. 1. UNmatchable was the strength of Sampson, yet could he not∣withstand the charming allure∣ments of Delilah; but by her trea∣chery, his so admired strength was brought to nought.
How carefull therefore ought we to be, to eschew the company of these subtill charmers, to stop our ears to these Syrens Harmony: doth their pleasing Warbling Ra∣vish thee? Oh! consider their Lustfull Layes will lull thee a sleep to thy ruine: Doest thou admire them for their Lilly hands? Know that therewith they will lead thee to all uncleannesse: Perhaps their Golden Locks may ensnare thee, but be assured, that every curle is a chain to hold thee to thy sin: Or if their twinkling eyes have bewitch∣ed thee, consider them as false Lights, as the fatall Funeral piles of thy honour and chastity; thy Saviour had not whereon to lean his Head, and wilt thou rest on a downy Bed with thy lewd Minion: Oh no! but reject these Delilah's, since they like Sylla and Charybdys,
miserably Shipwrack all those that approach them. 2. NAaman Captain of the Host of Assyria was a Leaper, who was Cured by Elisha, by being dipt sea∣ven times in the River Jordan. Most Leaprous is my soul, wash it therefore, Oh my Saviour! in the Jordan of thy blood; but are not Abana and Pharphar Rivers of Da∣mascus, better then the Streams that flow from thee? Oh no! they may wash the filth from our bo∣dies, but never from our souls. Tis only the Rivolet of thy blood can make us perfectly clean: Oh! be thou my Jesus, or the Physitian to my sick soul, and heal me; and for my Cure, I will not return thee money, or coyne, nor offer up un∣to thee Sheep, or Oxen; but Pray∣ers, Thanks, and Tears; Sacrifices
most acceptable unto thee; In∣cense which smells sweetest in thy Nostrills. 3. VVHen the Israelites abode in Shittim, the Daugh∣ters of Moab, allured then to com∣mit Whoredoms; and thence we see a sad story of Cozby, arise; who was slain in the lustfull embraces of her Lover, in the sight of all the Congregation. And yet how many Daughters of Moab have we in these dayes; Ah! how many Delilahs, which wear the Sun of Darknesse in their Faces, and I fear to in their hearts; who preferr a white Cheek or a Cherry Lip, before the beauty of Holinesse it self; and which covet no other Heaven, but their Lovers Armes. Fools thus for a moment of fading pleasures, to purchase
everlasting Torments: For let them know, their Patches do not Beautifie their Faces, but set so many black spots upon their Souls; their Anointing and Painting, cau∣ses them to slide the quicker into Hell; and their Pouders and Per∣fumes, do but make them a dain∣tier bit for Divels. 4. VVHen Goliah Encountred David, he was Armed with a Helmet of Brasse, and a Coat of Maile, with a Sphear like a Weavers Beam; but on the con∣trary, David comes in the Name of the Lord of Hosts, the God of the Armies of Israel; and thus with a Sling and a Stone only, he Slays this mighty Phylistine. Victory is in the hand of God, and in vain is the strength of man without his assistance: if God be
on thy side, let not the number of Enemies dismay thee, for he can defend his Elisha with Charriots of fire, and save his David both out of the Paw of the Lion, and out of the Hand of the Phylistine: He that comes in the name of the Lord of Hosts, is sufficiently armed a∣gainst all Encounters; thus Guar∣ded, I'le not fear the World, the Flesh, no nor Satan himself, for when the Tempter comes, I will meet him with my Saviours an∣swer; [It is written, Thou shalt wor∣ship the Lord thy God, and him onely shalt thou serve;] This, this is the way with these Weapons, with David I will strike the Monster in the forehead and slay him. 5. SInfull Soddom sinned against God, and Just God Punish∣ed Soddom; But what was
wretched Sodoms sin, which hath not been in our habitations? what Crime did miserable Gomorrah perpetrate, which we have not committed? Niniveh in forty days, could Repent at the Preach∣ing of one Jonas, and we not in fourty years, though hundreds thunder daily in our ears, the em∣minent Judgments of God upon us. Purples and Silks are the Sack-cloath, and Powders and Perfumes the Ashes which we Repent in. Ah! our God, we have justly de∣served, that thou shouldst make our Land a place of dead mens Sculls, an Island encompassed with her own Blood. Once, what Land more Righteous then England? and alas! now who more sinfull? she was once the Daughter of Na∣tions, the joy and perfection of the whole Earth; but now her
Beauty is departed from her, she is black, but no more comely: Lord we were once thy Darlings, as dear unto thee as the Apple of thine eye; Oh! therefore do not leave is nor forsake us, but draw us with the Cords of thy Love, that we may once more run after thee; Poure the Oyle of thy Mercy into our Souls, and heal us, that thou again mayest be our God, and we thy People. 6. WHen I call to mind my Christs Death, I cannot but admire the goodness of my Saviour, that he the Son of the King of Kings, should suffer his precious side to be pierced with a Spear; His Sacred Temples, those beds of sweetest Spices to be rent and torn, and all to preserve me from destruction: But must no less
then the blood of the King of Hea∣ven be the Balm to heal our wounded Souls? Shall my Jesus shed forth more drops of Blood then I shed tears? Shall he be Cru∣cified for me, and I not Crucifie my Sins? Ah no! I will not be in∣grateful to such a Saviour, to such a sweet Redeemer; But I will bath my self in Repentant Tears, I will weep day and night because of my sins, my mouth shall continually Praise my ever Blessed Redeemer. 7. WE Read, that though the Prodigall had spent his Wealth in Riot, yet when he came to his Father with the con∣fession of his fault in his mouth, he not onely pardons him, but kills a fatted Calf, for joy of his return, and receives him gladly. Men cannot be readier to sin,
then God to forgive a penitent Sinner; Art thou turn'd Prodigal and hast forsaken thy Heavenly Fathers House, spent thy Coelestial Treasure by turning his Grace into Wantonnesse? Yet if thou wilt at length return, Oh! he will Re∣ceive thee with Embraces of Love, and kisse thee with the kisses of his mouth; yea there will be rejoycing in Heaven, and it will be a day worthy an Angels joy, wherein a Son is new born to the King of Glo∣ry: Dispair not then, Oh my Soul! to find pardon at the hands of thy Mercifull Father, it is in his power alone to make a Blackamore white; nay wert thou stai'd as much as was Manasses that made the Temple slow with innocent blood; if thou wilt but wash thy wounds with penitent tears, he will poure the oyle of his mercy into them, and heal thee.
8. THe poor Widdow casting but two Mites into the Treasury, was more praised by our Saviour, then those Rich men which cast in plentifully of their Abundance. It is not the largeness of Almes, but the freeness of heart by which it is given; not the length of Prayer, but its fervency that is pleasing unto God; The short but humble Petition of the Publican was sooner accepted, then the long vain Glorious Prayer of the Pha∣risee; and the Widdows two Mites before the Rich mens great gifts; let the Wealthy cast in of their Abundance, but I, though I cannot with Solomon Sacrifice thousands of Oxen, yet will I endeavour to offer up unto thee my heart; This Lord is the Mite I give thee, give thee dId I say? Alas! that was
thine before, and I must pay thee Tribute with thine own Coyne; But I have so defac't the Image of the Great Caesar of Heaven, which was stamped on it, that thou wilt scarce know it for thine own; yet Lord if I can sincerely tender it to thee, even this dispised Mite thou wilt not contemn. 9. CHrist going to see Jerusalem, Rode thither not in one of Caesars Glittering Charriots, but on an Humble Asse; The King of Kings, he that Rides in Triumph on the Clouds, he that Sits mount∣ed on Cherubins, dained to Ride on an Asse, and surely a better Tri∣umph then any of the Caesars; and by this we may see how far above all men he was meek, whose Tri∣umph the subject of our greatest pride, was more humble then o∣thers
humblest actions; and where∣fore did he thus debase himself, but to teach us Humility? what do we see in our selves to be proud of? Is it our frailty, or because we are born of the dust? How good∣ly a thing it is to see a poor worm, a clod of dust, clad in the pomps of the silk worms spoils, to vaunt it self? Oh! our God give us hum∣ble Souls; Pride and Ambition puffs up the heart of man, and the path to Heavens gate is too narrow for the swelling ambitious Soul to walk in; those who in their own conceits are goodly Caedars, in Gods are but dispised Shrubs, fit stubble for Hells Fire. 10. HOly Peter by that Excellent Sermon of his Crucified Sa∣viour, converted thousands to the Faith.
Great Orpheus, who with the Musick of thy tongue, didst not only make Trees, and Stones, but very Beasts to dance; Those Brests which were Barbarous, and Raging like a Tempestuous Sea, thou madest smooth as the brow of a Cherubin: Thy Saviours words are now true, thou art be∣come a Fisher of Men, and hast ta∣ken no less then three thousand at a draught; If this be so, what then is the reason, that instead of ha∣ving three thousand converted at a Sermon, I fear we have three thousand Sermons, and scarce one converted? Have the Dispensers of the Word now a dayes less skill in Angling for Souls, then this Blessed Fisher? Oh no! surely it is the hardness of our hearts, which were they not more obdure then Stones, the Hammer of the Word
would break them; were we not exceeding secure, those Sons of thunder would waken us, not dea∣fer then Adders, those Sacred Charmers would Charm us. OCCASIONAL Applications. Vel bonas cogitationes alat animus, vel statim malas extinguat. 1. On a Withered Rose. THis Flower in the Gayeties of her Youth, was Fresh and Glittering like a New Married Bride; but being Coy, and Self-conceited, She defended her self
from all those that would crop her, with her prickles; At last time, blasting her Orient hue, she is re∣jected of all, and stands in a corner unregarded, bedewing her Cheeks each Morn for her former folly: Thus Lord in the pride of my youth have I disdained thee, thou hast woed me till thy locks were wet with the dew of Heaven, thou didest promise to transplant me in∣to thy Garden, water me with thy tears, and nourish me under the shaddow of thy wings; Oh! what a happy flower had I then been, but I like a sullen Rose stubbornly de∣nyed, Crucified thee afresh, and prickt thy fingers: I knew Lord that the Offering of the first Fruits were most pleasing unto thee, that the blooming Rose, and early morning virtues, smelt sweetest in thy nostrills; Yet have I continued
in sin, whilst I was able to sin, and now return unto thee because I can sin no more; Whilst my Tapour was long, and its flame shining as the Lamp of Heaven; I spent my Light in Satans Court, and now come to burn my Snuff in thy Pa∣lace; Oh! that my head were wa∣ters, and my eyes Fountains of tears, that I might weep night and day for my Youths follies; Oh! how justly may I fear that thou wilt refuse Satans leavings, that because in my Youth I rejected the things that did belong unto my peace, that now they are hid from my eyes: Is a wrinckled Beauty a fit Spouse for the King of Glory? Will he inhabit Ruines? But Lord thou art merciful, if our Return be hearty, we can never come too late unto thee; therefore will I not dispair to be admitted, amongst
that Blessed Posy of Flowers, which thou wilt place in thine own Bosome. 2. The Fly in the Candle. THis Fly, and Ambitious Icarus, soaring too nigh its Sun, the Candle, scorches its wings, and so perishes. Thus too many poor Christians dallie with Hell, and nibble too long till they are taken with the snare, they deem the day far off, and themselves secure, though at the brink of the Burning Lake; they take an Ignis Fatuus for their Guide, and never consider that it leads, unto Pitts or Precipices; With the Fly, the Light of the Candle, Lusts flames seem pleasing
to them, but they are unmindfull that they will burn them: Thus miserable wretches buzzing too nigh the fire their wings are scorched, and they perish; too much Sun shine, too many Plea∣sures so blind their eyes, that they cannot see their danger, and so are precipitated into the Pit. 3. On a Blotted Paper. PAper whilst fair serves for ma∣ny good uses, but being once blotted, is not fit to have Cha∣racters upon it, but onely to sup∣ply some servile Occasion, or the Fire. Hath not God Created most of us a fair sheet, pure and without blemish? and shall our pride com∣maculate
our faces with patches; every patch we wear is a blur in the fair story of our lives? and where do we think there is space for God to set his Impressions, and Characters upon us, to mark us out for his, being already blotted, and full of the Devils stamps; Our bodies are the Temples of the Holy Ghost, and shall we thus Soil them? Oh no! for God will never dwell in such defiled lodgings, Christ will never own us for his, seeing the mark of the Beast in our Fore∣heads; But that Immaculate Lamb will separate such spotted Goates from his unblemisht Sheep, with a depart from me you workers of Iniquity, I know you not.
4. The Sow in the Mire. A Brutish Nature will alwayes act accordingly, nothing can perswade a silly Swine from its nasty Mire, nay were a Bed of Doves Feathers set before it, it would rather chuse to wallow in its filth, then repose in it, although it often meets with a stone which molests its imaginary rest. What a true Emblem of a world∣ling is this? for oh! how it tickles his fancy to wallow in the Mire of sin? Earth is his delight, he is al∣wayes tending to the Ground his thoughts, his Meditations are all Earthly, as if his Creator had not made his countenance erected, but groveling downwards like these
brute Beasts: He will not be with∣drawn, although he often meets with a stone, and his dainties have too soure a sauce, for he cannot laugh heartily but the tears will stand in his eyes; Thus the best of Earthly Felicities have a tart fare∣well, yet will he not forsake them, but prides himself in his sports, and like the Swine, because he sees them not, he thinks himself Beau∣tifull; But the wise-mans eyes see how vilely he is bedaubed: Lord we are all vile and filthy, Oh! do thou wash us in thy Sons Blood, and then though we are never so unclean, we shall be white as Snow.
5. On the whipping of a top THe oftner the Child strikes the Top, the better it spins, but if the stroke be omitted, of it self it ceaseth to go, if too violent it over-turns it. Thus Lord is it with us, as long as thy Rod of Affliction lies on us, we go and walk the better in thy wayes; the more stripes thou givest, the more prayers send we up unto thee; But often when thou ceasest scourging of us, then we cease glorifying of thee: But oh! my Saviour remember the smart of thy own Stripes, and so have pitty on mine; Consider Lord, what a powerfull Arm sets on the blow, thou needest not whet thy Sword
to destroy a broken and bruised Reed; but chear up, Oh my Soul! thy Prayers are heard; me thinks I see my Jesus Mediating for me, and smiling in his Fathers Face, in∣terposes his hand betwixt every blow; thou hast such an Advocate, as cannot, will not he denied; when he undertakes thy sute, thou mayest boldly presume of Pardon. 6. On a Fleet of Ships in the Night. SEe with what a nimble security the Fleet glides through the Bosome of the deep, though Dark∣nesse surround it, and Rocks on each side threaten Destruction; guided onely by the skill of the Pilot, and the little light in their Admirall.
Our Saviour that Blessed Pilot, hath made the most perfect disco∣very of the new Jerusalem unto us; and if we will but follow his course, we shall finde sufficient Light in him to guide us; and who can doubt of a Prosperous Voyage, having such a Pilot: canst thou fear Storms, when both the Wind and the Sea obey him; or Pyrats, when he hath already carried a∣way that grand Pyrat the Devill, captive in Chains. Oh my Jesu! Thou Coelestial Palinurus, do thou steer, for thou onely canst do it, this crazy Barke of my Soul, Se∣curely through all Enemies, by all Rocks, by Scylla and Charybdys the Devill and the Flesh, till it arrive at Heaven, the Saints Indies; where is such Treasure, as Eye hath not seen, Eare hath not heard of, neither hath it entred into the Heart of Man to conceive.
7. On the dropping of the Eaves. VVOnderful are the Effects of these little drops of Water, for they falling on a Stone, not onely soften it, but wear it a∣way. Lord, I have a Flinty, Rocky Heart; Ah! do thou let fall the Drops of thy Grace and soften it, till it bow's in Obedience unto thee; What Heart so Stubborn, which the Distillations of thy Mercy cannot make pliable. But yet alas! we see to our sorrow, that though thy Mercies come un∣to some, rather like Showers then by Drops, yet are they not at all
Mollified, but rather Hardned in their Obstinacy towards thee; Stony ground, Barren Souls, which such sweet showers cannot make fruit∣full; for every little favourable blast puffs them up, and they think their Causes must needs be Just be∣cause they Prosper; but let them not deceive themselves, for they are but Exalted with wofull Ca∣pernaum, to the Heavens; that their fall may be the greater into Hell. 8. On a Ship-Wrack. POore Passengers in a Storm, being Ship Wrackt by the Fu∣rious Sea; know not where to turn in their Distresse, but unto the same Rock, which was the cause of their Destruction.
Lord, thy Waves and thy Bil∣lows have gone over me; Oh! whither, whither shall I turn but unto thee? Lord, I know that if thou doest lead me through the Wilderness Hungry and Thirsty, thou canst Rain down Manna from Heaven, and draw Water out of the Rocks for me, if one of thy Hands is arm'd with a Rod, in the other thou hast the Balm of Gile∣ad; thou Lord art the strong Tow∣er of Israel, and the Rock of Jacob; under the Shaddow of thy Wings I shall Rest secure: the Winds may blow, and the Seas swell, but all their Rage shall prove but Froth: he that relies on any other defence trusts to a Fort of Sand, which the least winde scatters; tis thou Lord alone, art able to deliver my Soul out of the deep Waters.
9. The Castle. MAn is a Fortresse, Beleaguerd All his Life with Armies of innumerable sins, and Satan is their Captain-General. His Forces are devided into three Squadrons; The first is composed of Scarlet Troops, and under these, fight Blood-thir∣stinesse. Revenge, and Murder; and these commonly take the For∣tresse by Storme. His second Squa∣dron hath black Ensignes, under which fight Dispair, and he gives a furious Assault; Next comes Co∣vetousnesse, who seeks to Bribe and Betray the Fortresse, and with these are all other deeds of Dark∣nesse; but his third Squadron have White Ensignes, and under these,
are all catching Pleasures and Al∣lurements; Ambition, Fame, Pride, Riot, and Lasciviousnesse: 'Tis these that come with the white Flag of Truce, and yet mean War; tis these that seem to be the least considerable Troops, and yet the most to be feared; tis these lay all the Ambushes, with these are his Artillery, and that is Woman; out of the Loop-holes of her eyes, she discharges her murderers; this is the fatal Flame that sets the whole Fortresse on fire, and besides these, that he may not omitt any thing on his part, he hath intelligence within, even thy own thoughts; thou thy self art foe to thy self, and Satan beats thee with thy own Weapons; but that which shews the height of his Policy is, that he will be sure to storm the Fort in the Weakest place: but do thou Jesu
stand in the breach, and repell him back; do thou Man the Castle with Assurance and Constancy; Strengthen Faith, that it may keep its Ground; cause Repentance to open the Flood-gates of his Eyes, and drown its Foes; and thus shall the Siege be raised, and thou re∣main Conquerour and Faithfull Souldier to the King of Heaven, who will reward thy Victory with a Wreath of Glory. 10. The Ship. THis World is a Sea, Man is the weak Barke that is tossed in that Restlesse and Stormy Ocean; our hands are two of the Oares that Row us thither, and every good Deed we Act, we fetch a
Stroak towards Heaven; and the Almighties Spirit is the gentle Blast that fills our Sails, for with∣out it we are becalm'd. He that sails with the Tide glides towards Hell; Orphans sighs, are the winds that drive him swiftly on, he hath often a merry Gale, and he seldom thinks on the sadnesse of his Voy∣age, till he almost arrive at the Dismal Haven of Death; and though God the Searcher of Hearts, who knows if he liv'd lon∣ger, whether he would steer a new course, may pardon him; yet this is dangerous, and he often Misera∣bly Perishes. But he that will steer in a direct course to Heaven, must Saile against the Tide, and he must always be Rowing; for whilest he is idle, the Stream carries him backwards; he will often meet with a thousand Impediments in
his Voyage. Though Historians doubt whether there be any Sy∣rens, yet in this Sea he will meet with many. Riches is the Fatall Remora, which sticks to the bot∣tome of the Vessel and hinders its course; but above all, he must have a care he doth not Shipwrack himself against the White Rock of a Womans Breast. And besides these, he shall meet with other Storms, which will drive him back again; but he must Wrastle with these difficulties, and tug against the Stream, and if he chance to o∣vercome the Tempest; Zephyrus gently filling his Sailes, and he en∣joys Peace and Tranquillity; let him consider, that after the wan∣ton play of Porposes there comes a Storm, and therefore repair the Breaches which the Tempest hath made; hath Dispair enterd? cast
it out and resume thy Anchor of Hope; and at last thy Voyage shall be Prosperous, and thy Barke shall unlade its Pretious Fraight in the Bosome of its Saviour, that Great Factor of Souls; who will Treasure it in his Coelestial Store-house, and binde it up amongst his Jewels to all Eternity.
A Table of the several Sub∣jects in this Book. HEaven and Earth, a Dialogue, where∣in Christ Convinces the Soul that all those Honours, Gifts and Pleasures, which it imagines to injoy here, are to be found in him with advantage, page 1 A preparation to the Lords Supper, p. 25 Character of the Pious Man, p. 37 Character of the Impious Man, p. 44 Character of the Good Woman, p. 50 Character of the Wicked Woman, p. 55 The four Quarters of the Year; And First of Spring, or Infancy, p. 61 Second, Of Summer, or Youth, p. 67 Third, Of Autumn, or Man-hood, p. 73 Fourth, Of Winter, or Old Age, p. 78 Ten Historical Applications. 1. Henry the Fifth; By his Example to forsake this Worlds Vanities, p. 83 2. Ixions Cloud, or the vanity of Earthly pleasures, p. 85 3 Caesars, Herods, and Swedlands Kings death, or the Frailty of Mans Life, p. 86
4. The Exchange; Or Divine Trafick, p. 87 5. Zeuxis Tablet, against Painting, p 89 6. Sinon, or the Hypocrite, p. 91 7. Demosthenes Oration; Against Com∣medies, p. 92 8. Thersites, Or the Back-biter, p. 94 9. Aesops Cock; Christ our Pearle of Price, p. 95 10. Diogenes, An Example of Tempe∣rance, p. 96 Ten Scripture Applications. 1. Sampson; Lust to be avoided, p. 98 2. Naaman; Christs blood can only cleanse Ʋs, p. 100 3. Cozby; Lusts punishment, p. 101 4. David and Goliah; God alone the Giver of Victory, p 102 5. Soddom; Its sins compared to Eng∣lands, p. 103 6. Christs Death; Expressing his Love to Ʋs, p. 105 7. The Prodigal; Gods mercy upon Repen∣tance, p. 106 8. The Widdows Mite; God regards not the full hand, but the heart of the Gi∣ver, p. 108
9. Christ Riding on an Asse; His Humi∣lity, p. 109 10. Peters Sermon; The words power, and our hardness of heart, p. 110 Ten Occasional Applications. 1. On a withered Rose; Our backward∣ness to Repentance, and Gods mercy, p. 112 2. The Fly in the Candle; Carnal Secu∣rity, p. 115 3. On a Blotted Paper; Against Patches, p. 116 4. The Sow in the Mire; or the worldling, p. 118 5. The Whipping of a Tap; or Fatherly Correction, p. 120 6. On a Fleet of Ships in the night; Christ our Pilote, p. 121 7. The dropping of the Eaves; Mercies cannot mollifie us, p. 123 8. On a Ship-wrack; Christ the Rock of our Salvation, p. 124 9. The Castle; Man a Besieged Fortresse, p. 126 10. The Ship; the World a Sea, wherein poor man is tossed, p. 128 FINIS.
ERRATA'S For CAres, Page 4. line 8. Pilate, p. 8. l. 6. Searest, p. 8. l. 7. Armes, p. 9. l. 17. Sos, p. 13. l. 6. Brooks, p. ibid. l. 13. Son, p. 14. l. 20. Armes, p. 16. l. 20. sit, p. 20. l. 18. may for, p. 48. l. 22. party, p. 51. l. 9. Trget, p. 61. l. 5. Lillies, p. 62. l. 22. intseat, p. 64. l. 19. indissolvable, p. 69. l. 2. strikt, p. 69. l. 5. wained, p. 70. l. 17. Ferore, p. 73. l. 2. strain, p. 77. l. 9. Ecclip'd, p. 79. l. 10. our, p. 87. l. 14. Worldling, p. 96. l. 2. staid, p. 107. l. 1. sports, p. 119. l. 9. Read Cares Pilote Steerest Armies Suns Brook Sun Armies set may be for parley Turget Lillie intreat indissoluble strict weaned Fervore staire Ecclips'd ours Worldlings staind spots
