B2888A 12402791 61316
Mataeotechnia Medicinae Praxews. The Vanity of the Craft of PHYSICK. Or, A NEW DISPENSATORY. Wherein is dissected the Errors, Ignorance, Impostures and Supinities of the SCHOOLS, in their main Pillars of Purges, Blood-letting, Fontanels or Issues, and Diet, &c. and the particular Medicines of the Shops. With an humble Motion for the Reformation of THE UNIVERSITIES, And the whole Landscap of PHYSICK, And discovering the Terra incognita of CHYMISTRIE. To the PARLIAMENT of ENGLAND. By NOAH BIGGS, Chymiatrophilos. Pauca vigent hodie prisci vestigia veri. Vae his qui nesciunt experiri nisi in hominibus. Rog. Bacon. Dii vendunt sudoribus, non lectionibus solis, Artes. London, Printed for Edward Blackmore, at the signe of the Angel in Paul's Church-yard 1651.
To the PARLIAMENT. THe report that I received from the sound of your own Act, Parlament of Eng∣land, of the high pitch of noble enter∣prizes, and undaunted courage and reso∣lution, your vast and renowned Genius, moved by a lusty wheel, bear'd ye to make us a Commonwealth; and that both in the right Constitution, and in the right Reformation of a Real Com∣monwealth, the things that I now move for, did call for speedie redress; and considering your active endeavours in seeking to wipe off the imputation of intending to discourage the progress of true Learning; and now taking notice (then which was nothing more) that that gallant and victorious Commander, the Lord General Cromwel, desires in his late Letter to your selves, Noble Senators, as a signal and acknowledgement of thankful∣ness to God for the late victory over the Scot, That ye would re∣form the abuses of all Professions; Your actions also manifestly tending to exalt the Truth, and to depress the Tyranny of Error and ill Customes, both Religious and Civil; whereof to this day ye have done well, whereof not to repent, were the cardinal mo∣tives that induc'd me to present your worthy notice with a dis∣course, conscious to it self of nothing more than of diligence, and firm affection to the Publick good. And that ye would take it
so, as wise and impartial men, obtaining through the good hand of God so great power & dignity, are wont to accept in matters both doubtful and important what they think offer'd them well meant, and from a rational ability, I had no less then to perswade me. By the same nourishment then, by which they first took life, I seek to preserve them, from which Sea this rivulet took its rise; on the swinge and rapt of which most potext alliciences, I dare to expose as freely what fraughtage I conceive to bring of no trifles. And having had an experimentate opportunity to know, that the publike Head hath alwaies an ear open, and stands ready to sa∣lute and receive every glimpse and dawning of knowledge, or at least cherish those that do so, and looks every ingenuous Head should strike and vail, and commands the best of every mans thoughts; what can be expected but that I should dedicate▪ not according to the swelling Epidemick custom, though not the Pun∣ctilio's, yet the puncta's, the full points, and marginal hands in the folio of my burthen'd thoughts? Dedications▪ I confess, though of themselves they be of little worth, and by me esteemd light and vain, as being the adulatory prodromes for a mendi∣cant assistance of a shoulder, or serene brow to the ensuing ma∣ter, yet they have that command in the respects of  by reason of that which they use to signifie, by reason of their impression, that like brass farthings, the stamp of the Royal Arms and Crown makes them go the curranter, though the matter abaseth them; that some whose mindes are below the performance of no∣bler endowments, that look no further then bark and out-side, do seek reputation by the Patronage of a great Personage; yet in things of so high a nature, and general concernment, as the re∣dress of old neglected grievances and customs, never enough to be lamented; yea, the Reformation of the body of a whole Art that has layn long eclips'd and deformed, so worthily and so nearly concerning your knowledge, I fear to be so unna∣turally cruel to my own reputation, and the Minerva of my la∣bours, as to neglect the tenders of my endeavours to your high no∣tice. Tis true, I have long travel'd with a desire humbly to re∣monstrate to you VVorthies in Parliament, but have had all along the unhappy indisposition from various affected thoughts, to fear to disturb and call you from your emergent occasions, the capi∣tall
Remora that I have not adventured to lnch forth: but con∣sidering that publick actions are commonly uncertain, which do put on several countenances according to the variety of occasions; and considering that it is alwaies a feasible opportunity, and no time lost nor ill spent in assuming thse thoughts in the midst of your most urgent dangers, to lay a model and draw the lines of happiness and security for all posterity; and seeing that with∣out presumption, I may confidently believe the contents considered, shall not want the iust length of your, either ars, or faith; nor have I whither to appeal, but to the concourse of so much Piety, Wisdom, Learning and Prudence housed in this place; or who more concern'd in it, and so much the more to be urg'd then the healths of such as you who sit at the Helm, on whom, as on our Deliverers, all our grievances and cures by the merit of your eminence and fortitude are devolv'd? Or to whom could I better declare the loyalty which I ow to that Supreme and Majestick Tribunal, and the opinion which I have of the high entrusted judgement, and personal worth as∣sembled in that place, then to your own selves? He whose civil and serious accomplishments and desires has led him forth to a∣wait to obtain any thing from the publick, it is not enough to be so penurious to blurt out an occasional word of it in his Dedi∣cation or Preface of his book, not praying, or absolutely saying that he desires it and expects it; nor giving them proofs not one∣ly that he deserves it but that they ought for their own sakes and posterity to grant it, in regard they may expect great profit by it. For it is an error extremely disadvantagious to the enlarge∣ment of the Empire of Truth, and an error of weakness, rather than a becoming shamfac'dness and modesty, yea, a vitious hu∣mility, which will prove a kind of baseness and weakness, for a man to neglect his virgine thoughts, and the impetus of his spark∣lie inclinations, or withold through faintness his worthy re∣quests, or conceal Meridian-truths, which would so much con∣duce and disseminate to an universal benefit, under the covert and eclipse of a bashful silence: and if he know and well consider the gentleness and freeness of those to whom he addresses to hear reason speak, he hath no reason to be ashamed of any, unless they degenerate into irregularities, and exorbitancies, being such as
he makes meerly for his own peculiar benefit, to those from whom in Justice he ought not to exact any. That it is not thus with me (Honoured States) in my harm∣less, innocent and humble requests, though otherwise according to your high exalted dignity and renowned merits variously as∣serted, let the Series and purport of this discourse bear witness; which, if necessity be not to pass unconsidered, and charity be not quite shut out of doors, cannot, at the threshold, be over-looked. Charity therefore beggs, desire seeks, commiseration melts ne∣cessity requires the whole people of the earth (chiefly heads of a larger size than the vulgar) emulously to contribute to this un∣dertaking (of which onely a hint shall yet be offered) namely, to the reformation of the stupendious body of Universal Learning Lan∣guages Arts and Sciences especially this of Physick, as to the most important thing in the world, wherein they have all an equal in∣terest. And I hope it may happily alight into the hands of some, who have both power and will to make this desire and expedient effectual. Let not England forget her precedence of teaching other Nations how to live; let her have the honour and happiness, as in all great assertions and undertakings she has been, to be the leading Card, and her first turn'd up practice, to be Trumps to all the world; for it seems as her alone Charter before any other, that out of her should be proclaimed, and sounded forth the first tidings and Trumpet of Reformation to all Europe. What was't ye intended, VVorthies in Parliament, by Refor∣mation? Was it the Reformation of some Roman Prelatical abuses, and violences to Religion, and the Consciences of men? Was it the Reformation of Pluralities of Benefices, (when Fellowships need as much) the unfrocking of a Priest and the paring of a Pres∣byters mils? Or was it more General Reformation? That that shall deserve the name, and look like Reformation; as of things Mo∣ral, Oeconomical, and Political; and as of things for the health of the soul, so this of the body, except your heads be amus'd by same unexperienced Dictator, frozen Sadduces, or some others  worse name, who are lethargically content to snore and please selves with the reverend nothings, follies, and dreams of  Forefathers, thou all is well enough: such being fit to be rank∣ among these who say, that this of Physick and health of the
body, is the proper tendence and Metropolitane work of School-Doctors and the Colledge. It's true, though it may be answer'd, That the Reformation in Divine things, in Religion, in Worship, was the Cardinal work of School-Divines and Ministers; (yet we are not of opinion that the tenth part of Learning stood or fell with the Clergie) yet we see Your selves, honoured Patriots, gave heat, warmth, motion, and life to the same, or else, in Humane Reason, it might have prov'd abortive: They were the Door to shew the way, but ye the Hinges on which it turn'd: 'Tis not deny'd, but gladly confess'd, we have cause to send our thanks and vows to heaven louder then most of Nations, for that great measure of Reformation and Truth which we enjoy: but he who thinks we are to pitch our tets here, and have attain'd the utmost prospect of Reforma∣tion, That man, by this very opinion, declares himself to be far short of the banks of it, and of what the desires and thoughts of good and ingenuous men look for. Let England then keep that ho∣nour which hitherto she hath had vouchsaf'd her from heaven, to be the Cathedral to other Nations, to be the Fore-man to lend and give out Reformation to the world, both in Religion and Arts: it is great pity she should now flag in the Rere, and thereby have her metempseuchos'd Genius transmigrate into another People, to carry away the Garland of Honour that for above a demi-Myrad of yeers she has sat crowned with, and now become the latest and back∣wardest Scholar, of whom God offered to have made her the Teacher. 'Tis as true, renowned Parliament, that through long Custome radi∣cated in the non-age of People, revolutions of Ages do not oft recover the loss of a rejected Truth, for the want of which whole Nations fare the worse. That I therefore, among others, may pay the duty that is tributary to the Frame and right Constitution of that present Government, under which we now have the leisure (which God continue) to revolve what may make it famous, and will tend to the Weal of it, have not refused the pains to be so studious and diligent to shew some Grievances and Abuses in that Science, a tho∣row Reformation of which, I have laid out my best wishes and poor endeavours not to loose, for the want of a seasonable and well-grounded speaking. And, to exercise the natural endowment of your wonted gentle-brooking spirit, in acknowledging and hearkning to the voice of Reason, from what quarter soever it be heard speak∣ing,
let me tell you, in that plainness, yet with that seriousness as becomes one speakng to so great and grave an Assembly of Censors and Senators sitting in Parliament, That the common allow'd Ply∣sick, which is at this present day prescribed and practised in this Nation, the Inventors of it, some of them, were such whom ye will be loth to own, and of whom one day, and perhaps not long, we shall be perfectly asham'd. As though our souls and heads were not our own; as though there were no Smith in England, but we must thus Foot it over to the Times of Trajan, and City of Prga∣mus; to the Romances and Directories of such uncircumcised Philistims, is such Barbarism and Rudeness to the lofty Genius of this Nation, worse then Indian. That we should pin our faith and knowledge upon the Cabin of an Amen-corner, when the Ri∣alto, or Palace Royal of Galenical Physick, where they have crown'd him with the Title of Parent and Monarch thereof, stands unhung with any experiment of real good, and devested of all real, solid and substantial vertue of Medicine. Certainly the Father of lights hath given a divine and singular testimony of this gift of healing, that it is worth the laying to heart: That he which hath created all things, yet singularly glories to be the Creator of the Physitian; and he to whom all glory and honour is due, hath yet commanded to be honoured onely our parents, and the Physitian by him created. When I consider the slowe progress has been made in Physicks, and how it hath stood at a stay for these many Decads of yeers; and been obscured and eclipsed, and see how other Arts daily have sensible increases, and receive new additions, new light, and further perfections, (as to the proportion of things as they now are) and the healths and lives of you our Governours consi∣dered also, and so much the more I press it, noble Senators, could do no less then urge me to call to you, honour'd and memorable Parliament, as to a hand to help, as to an arm to uphold, hold out, and give command to an undertaking of that lasting memory, that shall speak loud, and be a stately Parliamentary Monument of your magnanimous example to succeeding Ages: and the annuary Re∣gisters of after-times, shall insert it in their Ephemeris, and in their Catalogue of notable things; and though not the Dominical, yet is such Capital letters, that they shall compute, and reckon, From suc a time, so long. I know you know, that notwithstanding the man
overtures that have been made, and stout lifts have been given towards this main designe, yet there are many things left to your hands to do; and I wish it were in my power to shew, and your pa∣tience to hear them, or view them in their large particularities, which must be set down in a general draught onely. And a high enterprise (worthy Sirs) a high enterprise it is, and a hard, and such as every seventh son of a seventh son does not venture on; yet in the boldness of Truth, I shall proceed fearless. Wherein is our Ʋniversities reformed, or what amendment of her Fundamen∣tal Constitutions? How ill dispos'd are those few Colledges in this Land, that should be collateral or subservient to this designe? Or wherein do they contribute to the promotion or discovery of Truth? Where have we Professors and Lectures of the three principal Fa∣culties, and how cold and lazily are they read, and carelesly fol∣lowed? Where a serious disquisition of all the old Tenents? Where have we any thing to do with Mechanick Chymistrie the hand∣maid of Nature, that hath outstript the other Sects of Philosophy, by her multiplied real experiences? Where is there an examina∣tion and consecution of Experiments? encouragements to a new world of Knowledge, promoting, compleating, and actuating some new Inventions? Where have we constant reading upon either quick or dead Anatomies, or an ocular demonstration of Herbs? Where a Review of the old Experiments and Traditions, and cast∣ing out the rubbish that has pestered the Temple of Knowledge? How are Mechanicks countenanced and encouraged, in the con∣crete, but not in the abstract, when the illiterate, rude, and the dregs of men, and but a farraginous Syndrome of Knaves and Fools hud∣led together, their habilities not being tempered, nor consistent to en∣large the Territories of Truth and Learning, whose unqualified Intellectuals unable to rectifie the errours of their Reason, cannot reach unto half the advantage of their Knowledge, and are onely fit to maintain Errour and their present Practice, of which many of them can give no reason, and commonly but the apish Prentices of some old dotard Citizen, who have as much wit as their Ma∣sters, and that, like knotty and crabbed blocks has been writhed in∣to them, being tawed open by wedge after wedge, and know onely what has been hammered into them by ill Methods and thumping Tutors, are the onely white boyes, while the rare Founders and In∣ventors,
whose labours have been salt unto them, who have spent much sweat and oil, or persons as well in every degree qualified and seasoned with sprightly industrious endowments, who carry Mines and Forges in their heads, and have a greater vivacity of more sublime and refined spirits, and understandings above theirs that taught them what they know, are dejected, as being disengaged from ingenious enquiries, and proofs of their towardly and man-like abilities and endowments, by a cold requital of their several re∣demptions of Truth, and dismission of their Intellectual and Ra∣tional or Mechanick Manufactures, with censure and obloquie of Singularities; or a cold encouragement to perfect their begun Idaea's into actual existence and real entities and substantialities. That this is not then (Honorable Heroes) the disburdening of a particular fancie, or the humorous complaint of one so addicted to the made of Melancholy, as to render him distracted, testie, or troublesome, but the common grievance (and I do but now make their suspirations articulate) of all those who have prepared their mindes and studies, and took their flight above the lowe pitch of Vulgarity, to advance Truth in others, and from others to enter∣tain it, thus much may evince and satisfie. And in their name I shall for neither friend nor foe conceal what the general murmure is, That Truth, and the once-lovely body of Learning, is become a deformed and ill-favoured Medusa, with her tresses full of Ad∣drs, and her limbs, like that of Osiris King of Argives mangled body, lies torn and scattered in as many pieces; and that they are as hard to finde and re-unite as his was. That there is no publike encouragement given to the sad friends of Learning, such as dare appear in a day of need, those gallant industries, imitating the care∣ful search that Isis made for her Osiris violated form, that go up and down and endeavour to gather them up limb by limb as they can finde them, and as much as may be, re-compose them. This were the neer utter disheartning and discontentment, not of the mercena∣ry crew of falfe pretenders to Learning, but of the free and inge∣nuous sort of such as evidently were constellated to Studie, and love Vertue and Learning for it self, not for lucre, or any other end, but the service of Truth and their Country, if they were not really pre∣judg'd and possest, and easily assured of your gallant intentions and enterprises, with your active endeavours in seeking to wipe off the
imputation of intending to discourage the progress and advance of Learning, and to confute all the scandals of your deadly adversa∣ries, who have been stout Subjects to the Anarchy of Detraction, and have took all liberty to speak you worse then Goths and Van∣dals, and the utter destroyers of all civility and Literature, by the serious composing your selves to the designe of che∣rishing of either. And when we make reflection back of what great things you have done for us, equal to what hath been done in any Nation, either stoutly or fortunately, and what steps you have made forward in this great designe, we are led to believe a gallant progress you will make, and bring us back from that great distance we have run in a line from the first point of errour, to al∣most its largest latitude and dissomination from the Aequator of Truth, into the true Caus-way, and unto our journies end. Now, how this may be effected, I have neither vanity nor im∣pudence enough to direct you. But he whose heart can bear him to the high pitch of your noble enterprises, it cannot but tell him that the power which he addresses himself unto, cannot not onely do it in a better manner then he can think of, but in a fuller; and may easily assure himself that the prudence and laudable far-judging industrious diligence of so grave a Magistracie sitting in Parliament, who have before their eyes the ruines of Learning, and cannot be insensible of the cruelties and unsucces∣fulness of the Medical profession, on main limb of Ʋniversal Learning, cannot reject the cleanness of these reasons, and these allegations both here and within offer'd them, nor can overlook the necessity that there is of reforming this piece of Knowledge, and studying more probable means, and finding out more whole, some, expert, and rational ways of Healing. Conceive it, I pray, worth your patience and notice to consider, that those Arts we speak of, are Theotechnal, the Arts of God, or the handy-works of that Protoplast, in his Counter-type, or Second, Nature: not those petty Rattles or upetri, nor thse laborious industrious Trifles proceeding from the Ars publikely professed, and to the disadvantage of Truth allowed, whose effects are false, and fit for nothing but corrupt and violent ends, or to be Quacked forth in Bartholmew-Fayr, among the numerou y of those serious Ba∣bles, the spawn of the Head or Hand, which are no Subjects to
the prudent Scepter of Nature, nor of her Fundamentals, or the Retinue to her Commonwealth, but onely the wilde, violent, ir∣regular productions of the Anarchy of Fancie. Give me leave to tell you, and I will henceforth labour to obtain to have it be∣lieved, That the Art which in the simplicity of Nature God has revealed, is true and natural, truely Physical, Nature's Auter∣gie, not a whit belowe her self, though they seem never so mean, by the which we may attain to all the secrets and mysteries in Nature. And this is the Art, the centre of the Physicks of the ancient Philosophers; because Natural Philosophy is the Basis or main Fundamental of Medicine: for where Philosophy ends, there Medicine is to be enterprised, whence it's clear, that such as is the insight of a Physitian into natural things, (namely, whether it be superficial, or profound) such also will his perfection be in Medicine. For He who is ignorant of the mystical Arcana's of Physicks, of necessity it will follow, that the more occult secrets of Medicine shall be hid from his eyes. This is not in the spurious productions, and Colossian Library of Galen, that God should turn it over to him and the Apothecaries. Insecta ex putredine Galeni. It's a base unworthy, and terrible thing truely, to prefer Aristotle to Emepht, and condemn the Truth of God, to justifie the Opinions and Traditions of Man. This is an Humour that runs not in their Euphrates, and they are wholly unacquainted with any of its Tack∣ling. Their Writings are so superficial, and so remote and alien from the Centre, and true Marrow of this Science, that the my∣steries and secrets of Physicks being omitted, or by ignorance neglected, we catch at onely painted Butter-flyes, and speculate not the Magnesia or substantiality of Physicks, but rather its Ʋmbrage; not the Body, but the Bark, and superficial outside. 'Tis not rare, but very frequent with them, (and surely they are taught from their own experimental unsuccessfulness) to admire, and mouth out the supposed perfection of their Art; and yet they have nothing in their mouthes but Ars longa, Vita brevis; and true enough: for they cure either late, or never, which makes their Art long: but they kill quickly, which makes life short; and so plowing with their heifer, the Riddle is expounded. A Sect there are of people in this Nation, who make a great famous buz of the Spirit, but it is but like some Dor; who say, they see
God in all and every thing. I wish it were true; but let me deal plainly, An evil spirit is gone out, to seduce them to lye unto them∣selves, and to the Truth of God. For those things they see, hear, taste, and handle, they know not what they are, neither without nor within themselves. He is too inward in the private Cells and Recesses of his Creatures for their shallow and unhallowed eyes to penetrate; and none of them all can see him without fire, not the Chymists Kitchin-fire, but the true Philosophical fire, Or that which freely encompasseth all, And makes but one bare Individuall. There's none sees him, but he who as if he were looking sted∣fastly on him when he was about his hebdomadal work of the He∣xameron Fabrick, can face him in his several operations and productions. And if yonder Sun ride sure, so shall he know all things that Art and Nature can tutor him in. The God of all grace and good gifts grant then, that we may seriously compose our selves to apply to the declarations of Himself in his works of the Creation, and lead me by the hand to receive Truth from himself, and give it out to others. What I have to offer then, must be but short, (and like a Mercury, onely point) yet to the purpose, because I have but something to say. Be pleased therefore not onely to make some steps forward, wherin ye do well, but a sound progress in setting upon the effectu∣al advancement, not the bare permissive propagation of Learning, and to that end to promote an Academy of Philosophick freedom, to call together the wise counsels of prudent and well-instructed men, of what Liberal Profession soever, of eminent spirit and breeding, joyn'd with a diffusive and various knowledge of Di∣vine and Humane things, able to balance, and deputed to define Good and Evil, Right and Wrong, that they may make it their designe, and joyn their counsels, and lay out their endeavours to work off the inveterate blots and obscurities wrought upon our mindes, and brought upon the Literary Republike of Ʋniversal Learning, Languages, Arts and Sciences, by the subtil insinu∣ating of Errour and Custom. Secondly, That you would call forth some, and enable them with Authority to see the Ʋniversities reformed and laboriously rummig'd in her stupendious bulk of Learning, that so the great
Ocean of Ʋniversal Knowledge flowing from those two Promon∣tories, may run pure and fair in this Nation; and that they may be reduced to their primitive Constitution, and serve to a nobler end then to water and nurture the young Nursery of green sprigs onely, but the Oaks also, and well-accomplished Subjects of the Commonwealth of Literature: That so our Youth may not be train'd up, or instructed, nor receive in their Pupillage the seeds of Errour, and the destruction of men. For so long as they are tutor'd in those untrue Notions, and corrupt Elements, Do∣ctrines, Opinions, and Principles of Naturalities, and that of Pagans and Infidels too, till the body of Physick be changed and reformed, there's little hopes that a better Sanation of Diseases, or a Melioration of the languid condition of men and women will follow, then what has been hitherto▪ and what that has been, let the clamours of the Sick, and standers by, the cries of Wi∣dows and Orphans, and the ocular unsuccessfulness of Physitians in their own practice, decide, whether the things that I now move for, chiefly as to this, and the promises within considered, do not groan for a Reformation; therefore deserve not to be over∣looked, if the most urgent and excessive grievances, happening in the Medicinal Profession, be worth the laying to heart, which, unless Charity be far from us, cannot be neglected. Thirdly, That you would reform, as was hinted before, the abuses of all Professions. Fourthly, That the Temple of Aesculapius might like that of Janus, with his two controversal faces, be set open. And that it may be allow'd and granted for the glory of this Nation, and the good of the people thereof, that the whole Systeme of Practical, as well as Theorical Physick, may be calculated by the Astrolabe of clear Reason and Experience, to see if the Light and Know∣ledge thereof cannot square to a greater measure and perfection, beyond the Lines of Galens degrees and complexions, or the Pe∣ripateticks Elements, or the constituted discipline of Coe: or whether the Cruse of the knowledge and power of Healing, can run no other Oil then what is sublim'd and drawn off by an Alembick of a Colledge-Dispensatory. Fifthly, I would obtain to have it appear, that the daily insight of Physitians into the unsuccessfulness of their own practice from that
vessel of Physick, which was not long ago broach'd, and exhibited from their new and late polish't Pharmacopoeia, do not deserve to be thought worth our patience to expect, and study and labour to at∣tain to a richer liquor of knowledge, of more refin'd spirits then what the Symposcks, or Galenical bruage, and dry banquets of the Colledge (whose-fashion it is, like the belly-Priests, not to take no∣tice of any that's beneath them in cloaths) have sewr'd in, and usher'd to us in the Cratera of their Dispensatory; and that a life wholly addicted to studies and practice in the mechanick operations of Pyrotechnal Science, ought to open the windows of its Intellect Eastward, if he expect a greater light in Physick then what Galen has beaconed up to us, and comes Occidental in at the Colledges Casements. Sixthly, That the most excellent and natural Art of Chymistry, scarce yet beyond seeming uncouth, and unheard of, as being the Terra incognita in the old world of Physick, may be called from her Ostracism, and may with eye open and allow'd be call'd to the bar, to the touch, and her readings reviv'd, and operations gratifi'd with your countenance; for they whom this thing concerns, will not receive these things from a private instruction, whereby it easily appears that it is not reason now adayes that satisfies and suborns the common credence of men. Perhaps in time to come, others that respect a publike good, and have not their understandings de∣vour'd and made insensible by the itch of gain, will know how to esteem what is not every day put into their hands, when they have markt events, and better weigh'd how hurtful and unwise it is to hide a pernicious rupture under the ill counsel of a bashful silence. If no body will after me thus second their own occasions, they may sit hereafter and bemoan themselves, to have neglected through faintness the onely remedy of their heavy sufferings. What have I left to say, but your own goodness to essay, and to attend when you shall be invited from those poor reflections to take the advice of more noble thoughts and vast considerations? It remains, that I ex∣press▪ my self to wait for the accomplishing of these things wrought into me by your own designations and consequencies from your lau∣dable endeavours, by making good wishes, and breathing after these huge attempts, the pursuance whereof shall embalm your me∣mories to all posterity. And now I draw towards an end, I feel
my self (as those who at the beginning of no mean endeavour are heightned and depressed) variously affected, and might have rested nameless, but that an undertaking of that nature, not infe∣riour to the highest pitch of a true-bred manliness, and the very at∣tempt of this address thus made, and the thought of whom it hath recourse to, hath got the power within me to a passion, (though otherwise retired) far more welcom then incidental to a Preface, which hath excited me to pray, That the fate of Learning may tarry for no other Reformers, and hath nurtur'd me to that growth of gratitude and due respects in acknowledging by whose indefati∣gable vertues, extraordinary prudence, and laudable actions and resolutions, I have the freeness, quiet leisure and good will to subscribe my self The Honourer and strict studious Observer of their noble Worth and Goodness, Noah Biggs.
COgnitio Naturae & essentiae, non sumitur ab effectibus impropris adjacentibus, & accidentlibus; sed à cognitione Principiorum, & Seminibus rerum, quae hactenus Schola Peripatetica ignoravit. Nam ut ut naturale ingenium & acumen judicii Philosophus habeat, nunquam tamen ad rerum na∣turalium radicem, aut radicalem scientiam admittitur nisi igne. Per nostram Mechanicam scientiam intellectus est rectificatus, vi experientiae, respectu oculi, & verae notitiae mentalis. Imò experi∣entiae nostrae stant supra probationes phantasticas conclusionum, ideóque nec eas tolerant: sed omnes alias scientias ostendunt vivaci∣ter intrare in intellectum; unde deinceps intelligimus per naturam, intus illud, quod est, & quale est. Quin per talem scientiam, In∣tellectus stat denudatus superfluitatibus & erroribus, qui ipsum or∣dinariò removent à veritate, propter praesumptiones, & praejudicata, credita in conclusionibus. Hinc enim nostri se direxerunt ad intran∣dum per quamlibet scientiam in omnem experientiam, per Artem, juxta Naturae cursum, in suis univocis principiis. Raymundus Te∣stamenti, c. 26. Per hoc genus demonstrandi, fugiet à te omnis obscuritas, & ac∣quiretur tibi omnis fortitudo fortis vincens omnia subtilia, & solida penetrans. Tabula Smaragdina.
To his honoured Friend, The Learned AƲTHOR. THy youth's adorn'd much like an ancient Sage, And Plato's spirit flows th'row ev'ry page. I much admire thy vertue, Heroick soul, That dares so many Anakims controul; Whose hoary-headed Custom well might stay Thy well-tun'd Spheres, until a springing ray Of Truth approach, exposing forc'd Disguise To the perspicuous view of vulgar eyes: Then mightst thou calmly pass, and in thy zeal, Free from all letts, thy active fires reveal. But since th'art fearless, go forth, noble Heart, Vertues Embleme, Elia Lelia's Art. W. R. Mystica-Physophilos.
To his honour'd and well-accomplish'd friend, on his Mataeotechniatria, vulgaris. HOw like the morn the Harbinger of Day, Thy Lines i' th' blushing East their rays display! And ancient Hyle in form, appeareth light, The great Preserver of all earthly Might: Whereby we know that in the Centre sleeps A quick'ning Spirit, which, all-seeing, keeps Bodies sweet consort: yet the darksome minde Of most's to Outward Remedies inclin'd: Compositions crude, and undigested, As Nature's sole Guardians, are invested. But seeing they do break the sacred Bound God set to Creatures, and their folly sound Th'rowout the Earth, I'll sum their fate, and call This Book, as it shall prove, Impostures Fall. Abusers must be whipt when once they aw Natures own Edicts by a Colledge-Law. That Simple honesty they scorn, has Fame, And dares meet any that hath breath or name In Reasons Lists: and for fond Ignorance, Time turns the Wheel, till Wisdom up advance. Scandal in Print, by them on others cast, Shall come to nought; 'tis Truth can onely last. Whose childe this is, will own it: let them say, 'Tis neither Truth's nor Errours, Night nor Day, Lest by Conclusions they too soon declare Who's ignorant, and who the knowing are. Humours are natural in them; their skill In Physicks runs in Elements. My Qill Is to seek the Seminalty of things That's cover'd in these Lines; the pleasant Springs That lead unto the Fountain's bubling head, Whose bleeding tears drop after drop hath fed The flames of her Joves fires, till one in one Sprouts forth, mantl'd by all, though seen by none.
A mystick Birth. Dame Nature in a cloud. A midnight-sun; but not without a shroud. How unlike are the Potions most do hug, Which flow from corrupt Roots, and mortal Drug That invade Sol's own Throne, with dismal fear! Which if reduc'd to th'ONE, would truely chear The wearied parts with rest, and quickly lend Such unseen fires, Corruptions veil should rend. Nature's sweet Parent, that in thy first Dress Sendst forth such Sweets, as all that know, possess. What's for the vulgar eyes unfit, here Thou In shades to wise men, secrets dost allow To be exprest: most happie is that heart Seeks without vanity to bear a part In thine own Qire: for Mysterie's musick's sweet; (So silent groans with Heavens Ecchoes meet.) Where Virgin-earth modestly doth cover Male and Female, Loving and a Lover. These shadow'd glories do here represent The image of thy Minde, so much intent, That from one Principle, already past, Does to the acmie Light with speed make haste, And from the Mother, to the Father hie: For Lamps burn dim, to him who Sol does spie. Damn not these Glories then, y' ostents of Pride, Who leidger lie at Censures; nor deride: Whose Brains wear midnight, ne'er shall see those showers Of sweet Perfumes that spring from Nature's Bowers; Where Cab'nets unlock'd stand, that would benight Critick spectators with redundant light, And lead men th'row the clouds, unto a Sun Shall never set till Nature's course be run. Which Burnings no man sees, that can depart Till in those flames he sacrifice his heart. Who seeth this, will soon, with me, allow This Work, and to the Author's Spirit bow. James Villwiers, Jes. Coll. Cantab.
To his ingenious Friend, N. B. On his MATAIOTEXNIA. 'TWas boldly ventur'd 'gainst the Idol (Art) Thus, since you meant to strike, to pierce to th' heart: Nor less discreetly in you to despise Old reverend Errors for Truth's Novelties. You've undeceiv'd the world; reduc'd in one What once lay scatter'd in confusion; Taught single preparations to supply Mix'd monster-Forms of multiplicity: Not in so large nor nauseous Dose to state A succedaneum to Methridate; But more successful (in whose Extract lies No lurking drugs of discord qualities.) Your's in Life's lowest Ebb might raise a flood, And resublime the spirits of the blood: Or (Phoenix-like) Man's ashes seem to turn Into New Man, calcin'd in his own Urn. Our baffled Maximes now at last may tell Us, we mistook them for infallible; As if whole Nature had in pupillage been Unto one Galen or an Avicen.
The Act for such observance we repeal, As void, 'cause never sign'd with Hermes Seal. But what needs all this Train? which doth but run Like Lucifer before the rising Sun; And with our dimmer Tapers strive in vain To shew thy Lustre i'th' Meridian, Who shinest best by thy own light, whilst we Shadow thy praise with our obscuritie. 'Tis onely our Ambitions hither clime T'inrol our names, and bind them up with thine. The honour's great enough for us, if we Are onely read by such as admire Thee. Our memories might else been drown'd i'th' dark, Had they not swum for refuge to thy Ark. R. B. Iatrophilos.
The SUMMARY. 1. THe difficulty of discourse without the knowledge of the Mind, without which, it's but a discursion onely. 2. The Author pressed with abun∣dance of matter, and the thoughts of being tedious in this work. 3. Some reasons of his Appeal to the Magistre. 4. A natural disposition, and unna∣tural distemper in us to swallow impli∣citely those things which are as poyson to us, and with a nausous reluctance to kick at good food. 5 The common fate already ad∣judg'd of the Authors intentions, and this his undertaking, by ignorant and unadvised pretenders. 6 His being tempted to be silent, and leave these things to time. 7 The Authors protestation. 8 Every poynt in Physick, cannot in this work be touched; and more, is a work too low for the Author. 9 The Science of Physick at this Day, found to be a meer imposture. 10 Its authority is more from our deluded credulity, then its own real verity. 11 The two grand Sectaries in Phy∣sick, and their clashing described. 12 They have made it a hard uneven path, and dangerous way. 13 Some had rather be not good, then not great Physitians. 14 Those twins, grave obstinacy, and formal ignorance, are the cause of the slow progress in Physick to this very day, and of all the miserie at∣tends and follows it. 15 The profession of the Author, why he fell ight down on the practick part of Physick. 16 The Studies, Books, Councels and practices of Physitians sound of nothing but trifles. 17 A brief Summary of the grand helps, and universal remedies of Phy∣sitians at this day. 18 The Authors shame, that we should both in Philosophy and Physick be the Apes and Zanies of ignorant fellows in Nature. 19 The Archetype not being good, in the understanding, our imitation of it, must be as bad. 20 Nature loaths the impurities and crudities of our common medicines at this day in the shops. 21 The diseases of the medicines are first to be cured. 22 Custom and her adherents, ano∣ther reason of the little profit in Phy∣sick, especially the pharmacentick part. 23 The rspect had to Antiquity, another errour extreamly prejudicial to the advancement of Sciences. 24 The necessity of acquiring new knowledge in, and perfecting the Art of Physick, is demonstrable from the defect thereof. 25 Physick a Science which should teach a man so perfectly to understand Nature, that it might be ease for him to
exempt himself from all kinds of diseases. 26 It ought to be the subject of our lamentation, that other Arts and Pro∣fessions every day receive new light and further perfection, and this of Physick little or none at all. 27 The tedious Lectures of Anatomy for these two thousand years, with the curious inspections, have not better'd the Physitians of this day, one jot in the sanation of diseases. 28 The Author desires this may not be publish'd, to the dishonour of this Nation, for the faults of some few. 29 The time is a coming, when it shall be a by-word and shame to be a good Physitian. 30 Reading no way conducible to knowing. 31 Galen not at all known in Pyro∣technal Phylosophie, nor never saw Rose-water. 32 The falsity of that saying, The Dsease known, it's half way to the Cure. 33 The vanity of the Physitians ap∣plying themselves to the Galenical tem∣peraments of heat and cold, in the vul∣gar Physick of the shops. 34 All the medicines of the shops in Antipodaean position to our bodies, and the diseases of our Country. 35 The Schools ignorant of the Quiddities and Dihoties of things. 36 The Schools have introduc'd, and Physitians know onely a palliative Cure of Diseases. 37 The bald shifts of the schools in rendring diseases as incurable, and turning them over to the simple rules of diet. 38 Physitians begin to be sensible of their own delusions, their unsuc∣cessfulness, and infelicity of curing. 39 The Galenical Physitians fear to be out-gone by the Chymists. 40 Speculation has darkned the glory of practice, and is the pattern of idleness. 41 The effcts of Physick, more like a Shambles, then a Sanctuary. 42 Among all Arts, none more inhumane then Physick. 43 The Authors study. 44 Too much of opinion in the in∣tellectual Art of Chymistry, as 'tis handled. 45 The Author not troubled at ei∣ther the difficulty or censure of this work. 46 The Conclusive proposition. 47 This work, though strange and paradoxical, yet honourable. 48 He that shall attain to restore Physick, (such as is declared in figure 25) to it's pristine glory, shall deserve to be thought the highest and chiefest Benefactor of humane life. 49 Two Hydra's of several opposi∣tions, discover'd. 50 The Authors requests of his Judges. 51 That he might not be mistaken, but that the reformation in Physick may be orderly and legal. 53 A distinction between the gray-hair'd Physick of the Ancients, and the old scurf of Galen. 54 The dotage of them who dwell upon Antiquity. 55 Who are the onely Cathedral Doctors and Physitians of the times. 56 What kinde of honour is due to the Physitian. 57 A fourfold ignorance of Phy∣sitians. 58 The Authors excuse for his roundness and plain dealing. 59 A Metamorphosis in the whole System of diseases. 60 A censure of a rash kinde of men, who oldly rush into Physick, of whom the Magistrate ought to take care, or
a description of several Physitians or Sects. 61 Galen, an Empyrick, and his Master Quintius. 62 Every disease Curable. 63 All things cry out for revenge against the Galenical contemners of Pyrotechny. 64 The preparation of true medicine is not proper, nor doth not belong to our Apothecaries or Pharmacopolists. 65 The original of Dispensatories, and the medicining at this day. 66 A touch of the describers of Simples. 67 Indians and Barbarians excel the Europaeans in the matter of berbs. 68 The custom of Galen in steal∣ing privily from others inventions. 69 The Sexes of Herbs brought up∣on the stage. 70 Signature of Herbs ridiculously cast upon Chyromancy. 71 Endowments of Simples from the Creation. 72 A foolish invention to refer Herbs to the Zodiack, and their ver∣tues to positions of Heaven. 73 A discourse touching the causes of Sympathie and Dyspathy, that in them lies all the knowledge of occult properties. Examples of the same. Why a Drum made of a Sheeps pelt, will not sound if another Drum of a Wolfs hide be beaten a pretty di∣stance. 74 That is least lookt into, which ought to be most consider'd. 75 A shameful thing to measure the endow'd gifts of Simples from the de∣gree of heat. 76 The stumbling of Herbalists. 77 No remedy against the defects of Simples as yet found out, besides the contemptible decoctions of the shops. 78 The true deputation of Simples hath remained hitherto raw and undis∣covered. 79 Cruor and Sanguis differ also in Plants. 80 Quercetane deceived in Ice. The Father of lights the onely giver of knowledge infused without the obser∣vance of effects. The means to the knowledge of the vertues of Simples vain. 81 A specifick sapor in some things, besides acid, sharp, bitter, salt, &c. that is appropriate to the Seed. 82 What things are required in the knowledge of Simples. 83 Pyrotechny opens and discovers the way. 84 The diversity of Agents in Nature. 85 The curious activity of Spagy∣rick medicines. 86 Balsome preserving juyces of herbs from putrefaction, without the alteration of propriety. 87 An opinion of extracts and ma∣gisteries. 88 The strange and ridiculous con∣fusion and plurality of Simples. 89 The shameful practice of Physi∣tians in their Sccedneums. 90 Dispensatories are good for no∣thing but expedition: not, appropri∣ation. 91 Patients gulled, the Authority of the Magistrate not preventing. 92 God composes something which man may not separate, nor adde a third to them. 93 When is Conjunction or Com∣position to be admitted. 94 The Authors opinion of the va∣lue of Dispensatories. That they have more hurt then good in them. 95 The vertues and strength of ma∣ny things are dulled by sweet things. 96 An answer to the objections for sweet things. 97 The vanity of Syrrups. 98 Chymistry prefer'd before all
other Professions. 99 The use of Transmarine things. 100 The importation of Transma∣rine Drugs inculcated against by an instance of the matter of that foul vice of drunkenness being taken away. 101 The weakness and defaults of decoctions. 102 The defects in Electuaries, Pills, and Consections. 103 Against the confusions of simples. 104 An Examination of Purgers, and Solutives. 105 The first confession of the Schools of their Purges. 106 The fraud of Correctives. 107 Another Confession. 108 A third. 109 The excuses of Physitians. 110 A fourth confssion. 111 A deceit and cheat in the name. 112 It's explained what it is to give a Laxative, while the humours are tur∣gid, and how full of fraud it is. 113 Nine notable things to the damage of the Schools. 114 A fifth Confession. 115 The vain and beastly subterfuge of the schools. 116 An Argument of poyson from their stink. 117 An experimental proof. 118 The same out of Galen. 119 A probation from the effects. 120 The Schools impugn their own Theorems. 121 The Schools Hypotheses being firm, no man should ever die by Fea∣vers, and, it would be false that Purges are not to be given at the be∣ginning of Feavers. 122 That this Aphorism includes deceit, and the inadvertency of Hip∣pocrates. 123 What a true Luxative is. 124 Objections concerning Solu∣ives, answered. 125 A threefold Character of a true and good Purge. 126 What kind of preparation of simpls is to be despised. 127 The boyling of odoriferous things to be condemned. 128 The burning of Harts Horn ridiculous. 129 The fatal correction of many things. 130 The faults of Simples, and absurd Miscellanies in the confection Lithontrion, Aurea Alexandrina, and those two pillars, Mithridate and Treacle. 131 The whole Earth hath poysons. 132 Under poysons lurks most pow∣erful Arcana's. 133 An error in the Castration of Asarum. And another of his crudity. 134 No true poyson in ens pri∣mum. 134 An examination of Vipers. 135 Arsenicals by what means they are the remedy of ulcers. 136 How poysons may be made wholesome remedies. 137 The Chymick medicines of the shops. And an examination of gold and gems in healing. 138 An Objection of the Solution of Pearles and Coral. 139 How the things dissolving are separated from the dissolved in the Sto∣mack. 140 To precipitate, what it signi∣fies in Chimistry. 141 The objection repeated, a sub∣terfuge to the softer tophes or stones of animals. What is the action of gems in us. What it is that operates in a softer stone, its powder remaining whole. 143 Mechanick experiments. 144 An examination of Bezoar stone. 144 The Galenists beat with their own weapons.
145 An unknown danger in the Schools by the use of Pearls dissolved. 146 Mechanick demonstrations of some abuses of the same. 147 An Axiom founded upon verity. 148 The Pearls which are dissol∣ved in the shops, are not Pearls. 149 The restaurative vertue of an old Cock, an old womans dream. 150 Clysters why an enemy to the Intestines. 151 Clysters never reach to the Ileon. 152 Poysons are hurtful under what title or way of reception soever they be ingested. 153 Feavers are never drawn forth by Clysters. 154 Nourishing Clysters a sottish opinion. The use of Oyls. 155 What goes away in clarified Sugar. The manner of applying ex∣ternals. 156 The gathering of Simples. 157 An examination of Simple distilled waters of the Apothecaries. Great light come unto Physick by true distillation. 151 A description of our distillati∣on. 159 The great ignorance and er∣ror of the Colledge that is committed in the making of extract. Rudii. 160 A shameful, yet a common saying in Physitians. 161 An objection of the clouted-shooe Distillers, for cold herbs to be distilled in a cold Still. 162 The Authors answer. 163 There is in all things lumen vi∣tate, and in Cychory, Plantain, &c. as well as any hot herb. 164 All vegetation is from the spirits. 165 An Analysis of Cychory. A great error in Physicians concerning opium and anodynes. 165 An excellent Medicine made  Cychorie in the Jaundise. 166 Vegetables draw Mineral and metallick spirits unto them. 167 An examination of Vinegar in its generation or production. 168 What Tartar is. 169 Distilled Vinegar very bad. 170 The foolishness of Physitians in their Preparatories. 171 That rule of the schools concer∣ning the activity of Simples, is concisely argued. 172 A paradox is proved against the schools. 173 The explication of vertues, by what means it is made. 174 Whence it comes to pass that the vertues of medicines are alienated from the schools. Fol. 136. Fig. 195. The grand help of Phlebotomy or blood-letting is examined. 178 Blood-letting was at first lear∣ned from a Horse. 179 An universal proposition for Phlebotomy according to Galen. 180 A Syllogism against the same. A Logical probation. 183 That a Plethora of good blood is impossible. Cannot be said to be in a neu∣tral state of blood. 184 Phlebotomy cannot be demon∣strated from the Theses of the schools. 185 What a Cacochymie is properly in the veins. 186 The endixes or co-indications of the schools in the place of proper indi∣cation, and opposite to contra-indicati∣on, do but badly agree. 187 A proposition against blood-let∣ting in a Feaver. 189 The schools do infame their laxa∣tives by their probations of Phleboto∣my. The end of Co-indications. 190 An advertisement of the Author,
191 The Turks and a great part of the world know not Phlebotomy, and yet are cured. 192 How blood-letting doth refri∣gerate. 193 A lamentable story of the hurt by blood-letting. 195. The essential state of Feavers. 195 An explanation of the precedent argument of refrigeration, and the subtersuge of the schools. 197 That, not to go from one ex∣treme to another, is badly urged in Phy∣sick from demonstration 198 An Elenche, or sophistication in healing. 199 The argument of the Thesis of the Schools is opposed. 201 Nature the sole Aesculapius of diseases, and the strength, the Lord paramount of indications. 202 Hippocrates is urged concerning Athletick bodies, but perversly under∣stood. 203 The differences of depletions. 204 The Feaver hurts less then blood-letting. 205 An obligation of Physitians. 206 The general intention in Fea∣vers, and to it, blood-letting is oppo∣site. 207 Mathematical demonstrations to prove that Phlebotomy greatly hurts. 208 The inconstancie and instabili∣ty of Physitians argues the defect of principles. 209 Phlebotomy cannot take away, nor diminish the cause of Feavers. 210 An argument from a sufficient ennumeration. 211 Another from the quality of blood. 212 Whither are the Schools hur∣ried. 213 The vain hope in the mutati∣ons of the blood being let out. 214 That fictum impossibile of the Schools, the putrefaction and corruption of the blood in the veins, strictly ar∣raigned. 215 The proposition, That the blood never putrefies in the veins. 216 Putrefaction what it is, accor∣ding to the Peripateticks. 218 The native property of the veins. 219 Either Nature, or the Doctrine of the Schools is ruined. 220 A Paradigme of the diversico∣loration of the blood. 221 The ridiculous Table of blood emitted. 222 An argument from the Plague against the custome of the Schools. 223 Another from the Plurisie. 224 The turbulency and effervescency of the blood do not declare its vitio∣sity. 225 The blew deceptions of the Schools. 226 An example that the blood pu∣trefies not. 227 Corruption whence. 228 The haemorrhoidal blood not putrid. 229 A wonderful remedy against the Hemorrods. 230 The so much magnified suc∣cesses of Phlebotomy examined. The vain Co-indication of Phlebotomy as well in a Feaver a Menstrua's. 230 Drivation sometimes is useful in To pick diseases, but in the Topick of Feavers impertinent. 231 Blood-letting hurtful in the Pluresie. 232 Revulsion a rule in Feavers. 233 Revulsion considered. 234 What the Physitians may learn from this Head. 235 An examination of Fotanels or Issues.
236 Cauteries or Issues nothing but permanent wounds. 238 The name of a Fontanel a cheat. 239 What God saw was good to be whole, is commended by the Schools to be divided. 240 The childish and ridiculous promises of a Fontanel. 241 The denegation of the impro∣bability of Catarhes, denies the use of Fontanels. 243 What is excreted or purged by a Fontanel. Nine conclusions against the institution of a Fontanel. 244 The vain and foolish desires in a Fontanel: 245 To whom Fontanels are hurtful. 246 The indistinction of the Schools 247 The scope or end of Fontanels vanishes. 248 The world is basely cheated by Fontanels. 249 A Fontanel has no sympathy or communion with the Brain. 250 Absurd consequences about the doctrine of Fontanels. 251 The onely sanctuary and re∣fuge of the Schools. 252 An answer to that. 253 Fontanels driven upon Rocks. 254 What the Schools answer when they are driven to difficulties. 255 The multiplication and election of a Cautery, by what boldness it hath risen and been usurped. 256 Some facete jesting trifles of the Schools. 257 The Gout makes a meer moc∣kery of Physitians. 258 Fontanels are foolish and ridi∣culous. 259 Wholly frustraneous in their desperate cases. 260 The Schools have not yet con∣cluded in what cases Fontanels are help∣ful. 261 The cases in which Fontanels may be helpful. 262 The cruel and filthy remedy of Cauteries and Fontanels how they may be prevented. 263 A Fontanel an unworthy thing to a Physitian. 264 The examination of Diet. 265 They prescribe a Diet in dis∣eases, who are ignorant of diseases. 266 Diet suspected to be an im∣posture. 267 Some errours about the rules of Diet. 268 Sanation is not under Diet, nor an effect of the Kitchin. 269 An opinion of the Author. 270 The object of Diet. 271 A proof from common event. 272 Oblique and sinister ends. 273 From an enumeration of the parts. 274 Diet doth secretly accuse an ignorance of better means. 275 The just complaint of the poor. 276 The ridiculousness of Diet. 277 Bread is not so much Cibus as obsontum. 278 Why Bread is mingled with meats. 279 The main point of Diet. 280 A certain rule. 281 Why the Rules or Commands of Diet are faithless and treacherous. 282 Ten Theses or positions of the Author. 283 How far the vertue of Parsi∣mony and temperance extends it self. 284 The necessity of Mastication. 285 Whence is the variety of things digested. 286 An examination of Ptisans. 287 Some precautions. 288 A question of the Ferment of of the Stomack.
289 Digestions prescribe the Rules of Diet. 290 There is in no Art or Science in the world such trisles and fopperies as in that of Physick. 291 An examination of that uni∣versal intention of healing by Contra∣ies. 292 Which is not found but in irascible entities. 293 Why any one nauseates Cheese, and how it comes to pass. 294 Heat is not contrary to cold, nor fire to water. 295 An examination of another universal intention of healing by simi∣lity, or things like. 296 Of medicine made out of the Chymists Terry of Sal, Sulphur and Mercury. 297 What was the ancient and pri∣mitive method of healing. 298 When Chymick Medicines may justly take place. 299 Two sorts of people are out of the way concerning Chymistry. 300 Objections against Chymical medicines. 301 Answers to them. 302 The essential oyl in aromaticks, or the crasis of the same, how it may be made an Elixir, by a hundred times more powerful. 303 Most of the common used Chy∣mical medicines of the shops adultera∣ted, and nothing worth. 304 The old way and method of Poysick called Galenical, good for nothing but to fill the world with impudent Qacks. 305 The Conclusion and desires of the Author concerning the Reformati∣on of the Universities in all its Sciences and body of learning, and of the chief subject of this Book, Physick.
The PRINTER to the Reader. REader, you are to take Notice, that by reason of some Accident happening while the Book was under the Press, and the Authors absence, some faults have escaped; and particularly, the transposition of the Figures, which must be read as they are set down and directed in the Summary. Other faults mend as followeth. ERRATA. In the Epistle. page 4. line 5. read affected. p. 5. l. 18. r. lead. In the Book. Page 5. line 20. read precipice. p. 11. l. 14. r. For he. p. 37. l. 7. r. a species. p. 43. l. 2. r. denudate. p. 60. l. penult. r. morbifick. p. 101. l. 11. r. saline. p. 103. l. ult. r. circumvolution. p. 119. l. 22. r. empyreumate. p. 156. l. 16. r. veins. p. 169. l. 1. r. themselves. p. 190. l. 28. r. of a Fontanel. p. 196. l. 29. r. sanation. p. 197. l. 15. r. of the.
Mataeotechnia Medicinae. THE Vanity of the craft of Physick: OR A NEW DISPENSATORY, Discovering the errors and weaknesse of the Grand universal remedies of the Schools; as Blouding, Purging, Issues, Dyet, &c. And the particular Medi∣cines of the Shops. AS the defection of our Natures is such, we cannot look upon Nature with a  full ey'd penetrative aspect, but by the paralytick glaunces and touches of our dull & imperfect Opticks except our eyes be anointed with the true eye-salve; such also is our shameles prostitution to that habituated Custome to the wild discursions onely of our tongue and pen, that we cannot fix to any reall discourses, but what the wanton and inconstant wombe of pu∣tation hath generated, and what the Labirynth of weake fancy hath coin'd, or what hath been forged and circulated in the Poniterium or Laboratory of
our running, rambling Invention, being wyer∣drawn and obtruded upon us by the frighted re∣maines of that caduce, specious and seductive cha∣meleon, Reason; So that it is now a difficulty, not barely to thinke, not to talke and prate; the grea∣ter difficulty to discourse solidly, except our tongues be touch'd with a coal from the Altar of God; and our Cognition of objects in the verity of their essen∣ces be indubitate, flowing from the serene and om∣ni-lucent fountain, the Intellect: yet as to this my Undertaking, I must in sober verity, and in all hu∣mility; without offence to any, seriously professe, That, that which is the onely discommodity of speaking in a clear matter, the abundance of argument that pres∣ses to be utter'd, and the suspence of Judgement what to choose, and how in the multitude of Reason to be not te∣dious, is the greatest difficulty which I expect here to meet with. Mine Appeal is faire, and not a whit derogatory from the honour or Credit of the Schools or Colledge, except they will stand to vye with the high Tribunal of this Nation, chiefely when things of this Nature, bulke and size, are worthy of the high notice of that supream Court and power, and is their due by that grand Charter of Philantie and selfe-concernment; more especially, when some of them have under∣gone the lash of miserable experience; and Physitians themselves must volent nolent subscribe to their own unsuccesfulnesse. And lastly the slow progresse they have made for these many yeares together in the principles and practise of Physick, wherein as much refractorinesse also is observed, as of former ages;
and which is to be pittied, an Antipathy of their spi∣rits for the most part to this present government: all which, with much more may be said, gives us small hopes of ever effecting our design with any good successe, without the help of them, to whom, as to all humane affaires, our addresses and redresses are to be had. Those that are come to that unnaturall Dscrasie, as to digest poyson, and keck at wholsome food, it is not for any sober head to feed with them any longer; which, hath led me out among others, to reforme and oppose the utmost that study and true labour can attain: which new overture I know will have  the common fate, to be sinisterly receiv'd, and disrelish'd by those, whose gust cannot digest any thing, that hath the face or tendance to a generall good; which will appear on all hands very unde∣servedly in this, in that it undertakes the Cure and remove of an inveterate disease, crept into the greatest part of the world, and the best part of hu∣mane society. For alas! what shall I get by this undertaking? It is  better for me to be silent, and leave the discovery of these things with others of the like nature, unto the revolution of time the Mid-wife rather then the mother of truth, who is justified of her children; when she shall take these infant-issues out from the open field into her bosome, to keep them warm and raise up their spirit and life, when she hath washed them and salted them, declared them legi∣timate, and church'd the father of the young Miner∣va from the needlesse causes of his purgation. Neither mine ear nor thoughts have, I may safely
obtest the highest, been courted with the tickling affectations of praise, or deterred by dispaise or to be accounted unworthy, evill, not knowing or rash, for the good of the Creation of God, and so be my  Neighbour feel not detriment by the common Phy∣sick: In the explosion of which, I do not intend to unbinde or meddle with that farrago, that bulkie and unwieldy part of blind learning, as to distect each ar∣tery, veine, and nerve of the whole Edifice of Physik: For every principle is not fatall to be throughly fifted, neither have I vow'd my life or pawn'd my studies to clense this Augaean stable by an Hercule∣an interpreting and detecting others dreames and dotages, a worke too low, and too hard for me; but yet perhaps such, as shall do more then whisper to the next Ages. It is calculated for the Meridian of fifty two degrees, Northern latitude, but may indif∣ferently serve for the greatest part of the Europae∣an World. The intire series or method of Physick is like the Polyus head, wherein there are observed to be  yea, more with pitty, then rashnes we speak it, we finde it to be a meer imposture, & scarce an Oedipus in the world able to understand this knotted Sphynx, to which mans creduli∣ty, through a conceived hope; hath easily subscribed;  and so, that religio medica, hath begotten it authority; because for the most part, we too easily beleeve, what we too greedily wish or desire for; but yet it may as readily be made appear, that our confidence in the Theorem's of physick at this day, stands more upon our concessions then its patrons confessions. It is not unworthy our thoughts to consider how
hotly like a Lady, Physick is courted and cring'd to, at this day. Her chief courtiers & contenders, are the old stercoratian & snaile creeper the Galenist, & the up∣start single fangl'd Paracelsian; these two, like Peter and John, seeke to out-runne one another, till they have out-runne their Breath, their Books and the Constable, their Reason; if the good man ore take them to see the peace kept, he bids them, with his staffe his alone Charter and prerogative, stand; at which, like Paul and Barnabas, the contention's so hot, they evaporate in fumo, and one takes one way; and the other▪ another, so that they come no agreement, but this, that 'tis all the mode d' Phy∣sick, every one to follow his own Jnventions, & kill cum Privilegio. These two between them, would precipitate and  drive away the rationality in physick, from out the open-common, and upper region of Ingenuity and light of Nature, into the low marrish puddle inclo∣sures of their own particular modes; and thereby have made it like a percipice, or razors edge, to walk on: In which game there are some of that temper, the pulse of whose art, skil and learning, beats after the old rugged mode of Galen, who had  rather be not good then not great Physitians; so that through an imbecillity of minde, not knowing how to make a departure from the gravity of their usuall pace, do oftentimes meet with and undergoe the lash of miserable experimentate miscarriage, by those twins, their grave obstinacy and formall igno∣rance. Hence is that flow progresse in Physick! hence the lamentable and dreadful effects! that men are ei∣ther
fatted up for the slaughter, or live walking ghosts, a life of languishment and misery; who think it mercy to knock them on the head, and cry out for an exit from the tragedy and more thn back-burden of cruelties, their bloudy butcher, act, and load upon their carcasses, the scene of all their blew experiments and tryalls: which hath cast me perpendicular on the Pharmaceuticall part of Phy∣sick: Quae enim in schola & Cathedra aliquando praeter rationem, plerunque ad acuenda ingenia Juventutis in theoria proponuntur, sunt toleranda: Quae verò n pra∣xi  in perniciem aegrorum praeser buntur potius execran∣da & damnanda, quam admutenda esse, existimo. For unto us, and any Judgement that is not of a cast with those subjected to the tyranny of Custome and Pre∣scription, it seems very grievous, that the studies, books, Orations, Councels, Conversations Chairs and practises of Physitians sound of nothing but tri∣fles  and anxtious disputes; So that the whole huge bulke of the art of healing, seemes now adaies to be moved upon the slender hinges of purgations, phlebo∣tomy or blouding, scaring scarifications, boxing, cup∣ping, bath, sweatings, fontanels, Caueries; and in short, upon no other then the diminution of strength, and emaciations of the body, and abbreviations of the life, or exsiccation of Rheumes, the onely comple∣ment in Physick now adaies. To me seriously it is an amusement, not much on this side a wonder, that our Europaean world, hath not had one sober consult with thought, to consider what postern-door for evasion or any escape there will be left, that for so many hundred years down to posterity they have been the apes and monkies,
the mimes and zanies of poor heathenish literalism, both in Philosophy and Physick, that they have sate like the dull praecisian poedagogues to the ferula and pedantick Tyranny of the Stagirite, and ethnick  Dispensatories, the mothes and Scarabe's of Physick: For if the Archetype be not good which is in the under∣standing, the imitation of it will hardly prove capable of successe, or perpetuity; and if the constitution of remedies, in their bulke, in their entity, in their horizon, do square to an ill-affected, or ill-aspected position; what will not the diseases of them too, in their crudities, heterogenieties & impurities, add to the affliction and grief of our languishing brother? It's  against the haire for Nature to seek help from an E∣nemy, from a second disease, excentricke, as bad, and sometime worse then the Inherent, the foul dis∣ease of the medicine; whereby she must needs fall into a greater peril, then if she were to try the com∣bate onely with the sicknesse: but she despiseth these dreames of Physitians, and doth loath them and fly from them: Insomuch it appears, that the  errors ignorance and implicite confidence in Phy∣sicks is not the disease, or hectick of this age, but our very constitution: and not so much the consti¦tution and temper of our remedies, and medicines, but the diseases of them, & sic è diametro, are to be com∣plain'd of, and worth our serious teares: all which  we can referre justly to no other Author then Custome and her Adherents, which hath been extreamly dis∣advantagious to the whole round of Physick, and in nothing more, then in the Pharmapoietick part. Its an error tributary to the Custome-house of most  mens opinion to thinke there can be nothing found
in the Sciences, better then what hath been found out by the Ancients, and some conceive not so much as what the meaning of Physick is, or what they are good for. Now I know, I shall be sooner desiute of leisure, then of proofe sufficient to evince, that the too great Reverence born to Antiquity, is an er∣ror extreamly prejudicial to the advancement of Sciences, yea, so prejudiciall, that till it be rejected, it is impossible any new learning can be acquired; which may be one reason to prove, that we are far from knowing all we are capable of. But there is  nothing wherein our necessity of acquiring new knowledge, is more apparent then in physick: for although that no man doubts that God hath furnish∣ed this Earth with all things necessary for man to conserve him therein, in perfect health, untill an extream old age; and although there be nothing in the world so desired as these things, so that herto∣fore it hath been the studies of Kings and Sages; yet experience, and a few papers shew, we are so far from having it wholly, that oftentimes a man is chain'd to his bed by small diseases, which the most learned Physitians understand not, and onely make them rage more by their remedies, when they undertake to expell them; wherein the defect of their art, and the necessity of perfecting it, is so evident, that for those who understand not what the meaning of  Physick is, it is enough to tell them, that it is the Science which should teach so perfectly to under∣stand the nature of man, and all things, that may serve him for nutriments or remedies, that it might be ease for him, thereby to exempt himself from all kinds of diseases.
It is to be lamented seriously, and the subject of  our serious sorrow it is, but more of our wonder, when we consider, how ingeniously elaborate they are in other professions and mechanick arts, and how they dayly receive advancement, and ascend by the degrees of new discoveries, neerer towards their per∣fection; but in this of Physick, how cold, and dull they are in their most serious disquisitions hitherto, though charity towards our neighbour be penally com∣mended, that it is now in its Apogaeo, or retrograda∣tion, except it meet in Cazimi, in conjunction with the body of the sunne of truth: for all things have remain'd most obscure, and for the most part, most false, and those things which should chiefly conduce to the scope of healing, are not touched with so much as a finger. To what end tends the Anatomy of these two  thousand years, with those tedious lectures, if the Sanation of diseases, be not more happier at this day, then of old? what meanes that tearing and Cadaverous dissection of bodies, with that curi∣ous inspection and inquisition into the capillary veines, if we may not learn by the Errors of the Ancients, and if we may not make an emendation of those things that are past? Let it not be told in Gath, nor publishd in As∣kelon that the Genius of the English Nation, now made a Common-wealth, should be so low, so base, and so beggarly, to daunce after the pipe of meer whiflers, to be the Hinch-boys of Aristotle, and con∣fine themselves to the principles of those, who are as a dark lanthorne in a thick night; as if we had no brick to make, without raking the straw, and
stubble of Galen, Hyppocrates, Mesine and other hud∣dle of tongue Physitians; or as if the whole batch of medicines would be dowe, without the Leaven of these Tare-gatherers. Have we no Smith in England that we must thus foot it over to the land of such uncircumcised Philistims? Its reported of Caesar, that he on a day seeing wealthy strangers have lit∣tle dogges and monkies in their armes, and that they made marvellous much of them, he asked them if the women of their Country had no Children? wise∣ly reproving them by his question, in that they be∣stow'd their naturall love and affection upon bruit beasts, which they should have bestowed upon ra∣tionall Creatures. Antisthenes answered one very wisely, that told him Ismenias was an excellent player on the flute, but he is a naughty man, said he, or else he could not be so cunning at the flute. I shall leave the application to whom it concerns. So Philip King of Macedon, said to his sonne Alex∣ander, when at a feast he sung passing well, and like a Master in Musick; and art thou not asham'd sonne, to sing so well? And thereto we hope,  and are not overbold to suppose, that a time will undoubtedly come, when it shall be a byword, and ignominy to be a good Physitian, that is, well read in Galen, and to be a proficient Galenist. Know∣ledge and learning without experience, is like the statue of Polyphemus, which wants an eye. The hand is the instrument of skill, and all con∣templation. Such, (saies an Author) as speak of mat∣ters of state and government, but especially of mat∣ters of warre, say we, chiefly of matters of Physick, by the book, speak but as book-knights, as the
French proverb termeth them, after the manner of the Grecians, who call him a book-Pilot, which hath not the sure and certain knowledge of the things that he speaks of; meaning thereby, that it is not for a man to trust to the understanding he hath gotten by read∣ing  in things that consist in the deed doing where the hand is to be set to the worke: no more then the often hearing of men talke and reason of paint∣ing, or the disputing upon Colours, without taking the pencill in hand, can stand a man in any stead at all, to make him a good Painter. Let silence in the  Galenists then, be accounted as a sacrament, seeing their Parent in Physick, was not at all known in pyrotechnal Philosophy: or Fhe poor man had never in all his life the happinesse to see so much as Rose∣water. His ambition to be Principate in Physick, in such a poverty of knowledge, had bin a little excu∣sable, if once at least, he had had the knowledge and skill, to extract any real principle out of any thing, and so might have proceeded, and been cring'd to, as Monarch of Physick; and not so easily expos'd himself, to be a laughing-stock to posterity and ingenious heads of his time, by his huge volumes and blew Comments on diseases. I wish I had not occasion to bewaile, when in the concentrations of my mind, I am led to consider the falsity of that saying, not lesse vain and unsuc∣cesful, then common; that when the Disease is known, it's halfe way to the cure; so that the other halfe, is left as the alone, and proper worke of me∣dicines, but how unable, lamentable experience will testifie. This is that hath amus'd me, that the Schools in the Remedies of Diseases, both of simples
and their mortarian labour of Compositions, have apply'd themselves to the threed-bare and short-coated descriptions and discourses of Heat and Cold; both in the Crasis of things, with the Nature, Ele∣ments, temperament, humors, powers; that as out of the Monocracy and single-sol'd intemperature of the Liver, they have rendred us perhaps two hundred Diseases; so out of this Binary of Heat and Cold, they have builded their indispensable Dispensatory, and utter'd to us a thousand medicines, in antipodaean position to the diseases of our Country. What more grosse and palpable thicke darknesse, and ig∣norance? As if the whole make of the universe, with such an infinity and alterity of Natures, were to be patch't up with the two fig-leaves, of Heat and Cold:  As the preposterous ignorance of the Constitution of man in generall, and of the quiddities, and Dihoties of things, as of that one the essence of the bloud, with that Diananizing of those Terra del' fogo's or incognita's, the scene of humours, beyond the line and America of Nature, and solid truth, hath obte∣nebrated the whole table of Physick, by undue in∣distinction; so hath it been a meanes to usher in that incongruous form of unadaequat remedies, and thereby to become a laborious cherisher, to devolve and heape up one huge halfe of all the languishing miseries and Calamities on man since Adam. Behold, what can any of the whole systeme, or batch of medicines of the shops do to that copious company of incurables, that they have rang'd and reckoned, as desperate: For of them they have gi∣ven but a slight touch, and made a litle and mai∣den-like bashful mention, and introduced onely a
palliative cure, and left the rest to the providence, protection and compleating of Nature, and kitchin-Physick: so that in the end it appears, how full of  Calamity and desperation their engines are, too contemptible and weak to defend nature, or make any assault and battery upon the Eenemy; when they shall bring almost all diseases into the Catalogue of incurables, or turne them over to serve out their prenticeship, with the number of them, who are to be cured by change of Aire, diet and kitchin-Phy∣sick; that for the most part some of those  or Triacle sellers, or some old woman must cure, whom the great learning and skill of Physitians have left as uncurable, and then go about to excuse their ignorance and temerity, with a salva inobedi∣entia aegrorum circa dietae regulas non strictè servatas. Ah alas! how many absurdities and abuses are committed with these deceits, which to the world are not yet sufficiently known. But we have just cause to hope, at least to wish, that Thysitians will now at length suffer themselves to be instructed, from the autopticall unsuccesseful∣nesse of their own practice, what straw devices, what leane, idle sleights their thoughts have suggested to flatter their starv'd hopes: And to me it is an Argument not to be slighted, that the schools, and Physitians of our daies, begin to be sen∣sible of the ignominy cast upon them, and their art, by the sling of vulgar tongues, from their infe∣licity of curing; that they now are perswaded, to look a little back to chymick remedies; that now there is a bridge from Galen to Paracelsus, and they can easily remove their Land-marks, and neglecting
the foundations of their own art, they can as indif∣ferently and promiscuously use any chymick reme∣dies, and most miserable poysons, as those, which their Dispensato ries have describ'd, and taken upon  trust; insomuch the Galenists fearing to be out∣gon, what by the Collier Chymist and the Chymaericall contemplative Chymist, and perceiving the dulnesse both of the remedies, and Theorems of their Patron, can a little bend the hams suppled with the oyle of smooth and implicite credulity, and an idle lazy sub∣scription, and have now stoop'd to that infatuated principle of Tartars of Paracelsus his own coin. This makes me see, that the Corrupt opinion and indeavour of Politicks, have cast no little darknesse on the glory of gray-hair'd experience; have forsaken her standard principles, and have reduc'd mans mind from the greatnesse of works to the smalnesse of ob∣lique and circulatory way of intelligence, specula∣tion,  the alone Patron of idlenesse, and lazinesse, which weakly understood, and violently put in pra∣ctise, hath made a Shambles, rather then a Sanctuary, to butcher men violently, and devoure and destroy them insensibly, then give ease or succour. For there is nothing more hard, more inhumane and full of Cruelty, among all humane Arts, through so many ages undertaken and usurp'd, then that art, which by a concentrick subscription doth make new experiments by the deaths of men, where the Earth covers the vices, the errors & fraud of its professors; who having never touch'd so much as to the bark & utter shell of knowledge, and although they creep on their bellies all daies of their lives, and feed upon the dust of the earh apt to be blown away by every
puffe of solid truth, yet think they are in the third heaven of Physick, and light of nature, and by read∣ing of Galen and Aristotle, conceit they have rifled her rich Treasuries, trac'd her footsteps to a haire, and exactly survey'd the whole field and round of Nature. But verily they who think so, if they be such as have a minde large enough to take into their thougts a generall survey of naturall and humane things, would soon prove themselves in that opini∣on, far deceiv'd, and would soon tie up their tongues, discerning themselves all this while, like the high flown, selfe-conceited Laodicea. For while they presume and deem they keep the keyes of the science, do yet neither themselves enter into the Closet and inner parlour of Nature, nor will they admit willingly others that would. I thought once to have becalm'd this Sea of distra∣ction  by the golden Trident of chymicall Theorem's, whom as a Lady of honour I have courted, and de∣voutly kiss'd, and to whom, I am not asham'd to profess I ow my strict observance; but alas and alack for wo! I could find no rest here: I found too much of the leaven of Chrysippus, who was the first that pul∣led  Physick out of experience, & put it into opinion: , were a generation of men, in Plato's daies, and the line it seemes is not yet extinct. Because therefore I cannot foole my own credulity so far, as to sit down to an implicite conformity, coopt up and immur'd within these paper walls; and finding it a slaughter-house of humanity, and to conspire to the extirpati∣on of whole families and Common-wealths, (the best part of the world,) and seeing I plow in the
same field, I shall endeavour, and am resolv'd by the knife of chiropona pyrtechny to cut the throat of these Pety-toggers and let ut the heart-bloud of the blinde Physick of this Nation, who deserves to be the leading card and do humbly con∣ceive  it nothing above my duy, either for the diffi∣culty, or the censure that may passe thereon, o com∣municate the sence and revolution of my thoughts, and Collections, and do offer them now in this ge∣nerall labour of reformation, to the candid view of all good Christians, to the Schools, and all inge∣nious heads; especially because I see it the hope of a handful of good and learned men, that this Croco∣dile, who seems to weepe for, and offer helpe to, the afflictions and languishing miseries of men, and yet destroies them, might spend its utmost date in this Common-Wealth; and that there might be some course taken in the body of Physick, in this Nation, that the squalid diseases of Physick and me∣dicines might be cured; without which, no hopes of ever curing the sicknesses of the body of man: this therefore shall be the steerage, the taske and period of this discourse, to prove, That the whole mode, method and body of Physick, as it is now prescribed and practised, with the desires of good men, groans for a reforma∣tion. I thinke, I shall have no just Cause to complain of any thing but that it is indeed too copious to be the matter of a dispute, or a defence, rather to be yielded, as in the best ages, a thing of common rea∣son, not of controversie. To write in that in which there is no beaten path,
is most honourable, for he that leades, hath this advantage above others, if others follow him, he hath the glory of it, if not, he hath the excuse of prejudice. He therefore who by adventuring shal be so happy, as with successe to light the way of such an expedi∣ent liberty and truth, as this, shall restore the much abused, overwrong'd, and eclipsed glory and re∣nown of Physick: and shall deserve of all appre∣hensive men (considering the ruines, the dangers and dreadfull effects, the ignorance, errors, abuses, impieties and cruelties of Physitians, in a thing of so great price, whose losse is irreparable, and most perilous to humane estate, which, for want of in∣sight into, and reformation in the practise of Phy∣sick, have been committed in this, as well as other Common-wealths) shall deserve I say to be reck'ned among the publick Benefactors of civil and humane life, equal, nay above the Inventours of wine and oyle: for this, namely, health, is a farre dearer, farre nobler and more desireable cherishing to mans life, unworthily and unmercifully expos'd to ruine and danger. In which work, he whose courage can serve him  to give the first onset, must look for two Hydra's of several oppositions; the one, from them, who would exact the tunnage and poundage of all knowledge and skill, and excise all ingenuity and Autergie; who have sworn themselves to long custome, and the affected tedious scrible of Galen; whose whole spheare of reason, art, skill and practise, turnes in Galens Zenith, and his accomplices, will not out of the road: The other from those, whose formal ig∣norance
grosse and vulgar apprehensions, together with their grave obstinacy, ('twixt whom an entire league hath ever been held) conceit but low of Phy∣sick, whose cloudy and imperfect opticks, could ne∣ver  endure to pry into the Mysteries of Nature, and in the work of healing, thinke they have all. This only is desir'd of them who are minded to judge hardly of thus maintaining, that they would be stil, and heare all out, nor thinke it equall to answer de∣liberate reason, with sodain heat and noise; remem∣bring this, that many truths, now of reverend esteem and Credit, had their birth and beginning once from singular and private thoughts, while the most of men were otherwise possess'd, and had the fate at first to be generally exploded and exclaim'd on, by many violent opposers: Neverthelesse it shall be here sought by due waies and means to reclaim, and bring it from under the rubbish of gentilish and anarchicall principles, into the Monarchy of pyrotech∣nall  experience. Yet would we not be mistaken, to be thought for stiffe pleading for a confus'd abo∣lishing of these things, as the Rabble demolish I∣mages, in the zeale of their hammers oft violating the sepulchres of good men; or rudely break up, not  go through open doors. The Apollinian science then, or art of Physick, is every where brought upon the Stage; and made the laughing-stock of the sick-brain'd vulgar; because Physitians, who have heterodogmatiz'd, and  deviated from the ancient beaten path of clear rea∣son and experience, put no distinction between the venerable grey-haires of ancient Physick, and them who weare her honourable silver livery, from the
old scurff of Galen and his accomplices, benighted to the clouds of ignorance, and that Tatterdemalion Lanostema of Peripatetical & Galenical predicaments of qualities; whereby, to heads of a larger size, they seem to have put out their own eyes, and wil∣lingly subject themselves, like Mill-horses to grind in the Mill-house of custome and Tradition, and a∣forehand, to have stak'd themselves to a resoluti∣on to confine to the Custome of the Schools, and sit down to a precise Conformity, to lap up the prodi∣gious vomits of Aristotle, Galen and other illiterate Ethnicks, and in effect to prescribe all the heads of the present age, as Pupils to the dull and doting ad∣visoes of the ancient, precedent Paper-stuffers; and then no lesse to say, as in supernaturall things they are wont, so in naturall, to make it a kind of blas∣phemy, at least presumption, to step one haires breadth from the cry'd up and vulgar receiv'd way: So hardly in good sooth can the dotage of those who dwell upon antiquity, allow present times any share  of wisdome or skill. For we are not overbold to sup∣pose what they read, they beleeve, and what they beleeve, they leave to the confection of an Apothe∣cary and family, without any manuall or mechanick experiment. For who among the formost of them, can justifie their positions and rules by practise; not by their hands, but fancies. Hence it is that every druggist and old woman, with Mother Mid-night, and of every occupation sally forth, and dare to intrude themselves into the practise of Physick, putting an affront upon Physitians, because oftimes in many things they excell them. For of old they are wont to reserve somethings to themselves, as a pledge of
their fame and family: But after that the slothful and lazy disquisitions of Physitians prevail'd, & the itch of Gain turn'd Physick into a plow, to make long fur∣row's on the backs of poor mortals, by the just judg∣ment of God all things went to wrack. The Schools will have the shuffling and cutting  of the Cards, and the Colledge drawes the choice of physitians, so that the whole pack of those that by them are accounted worthy, are they who have subscrib'd to the ignorance and unskilfulnesse of Ethnicks; that the Cathedrall of all reason, learning, skill, Philo∣sophy and all judgement, might vail to them, and they keep the keyes; and mans life it selfe should be committed to them. So that if he be but an Aca∣demick, though a meer mammothrept, and perhaps a Midas, if they can but hide his two ambitious eares, which they can easily doe, by his implicite confor∣mity, he shall passe for Cathedrall Doctor, a Phy∣sitian in folio, with an imprimatur on his back, as if he were the microcosmall Councell of State's chief Physitian, cum privilegio custod, salutis populi: so that upon the posts, and frontispeice of the medi∣call conclave is written like that of Plato's Academy, with a Nemo huc ingrediatur nisi &c. Whereby all o∣thers are like a pawn at Chesse, fill up a Room, and that's all. This is now handed down to us Europaeans, and is in possession and practise among English men, that hath carry'd away the bayes from all others, that they will not be befool'd of their liberties, nor blinded in their understandings, by any devise: so that charity is grown cold, and sloth introduc'd under a more fafer seal, and long use hath confirm'd this begotten ignorance, pretending the right
of prescription. And we wish it doe not prove a kind of staple merchandize, to be seal'd and stamp'd like our Broad-cloth, or Wool-packs; and that Art and Ingenuity become not tributary to the Custome-house of error, opinion and Customes, and that the Fa∣ctors or Farmers thereof, do not so monopolize, or monarchize, to put truth at the bottom of the sack, and their own inventions at the sacks mouth; wher∣by God should withdraw his gifts, and those which  he hath given to others, continue. The Apostle Paul would have widows to be honour'd, that were widows indeed, in good works; according to the command, which hath ordain'd the Physitian to be honour'd, who shall truly be a Physitian in good works, and so shall testifie that he is created, and chosen of God; whose works shall follow him, worthy of his vocation, as letters patents, as signs and merits of his honour: which text being consi∣der'd we find honour to be appointed to the Physi∣tian because of necessity; which necessity doth pre∣suppose bringing forth fruit, otherwise in vain: not that the force of the precept, runs so in necessi∣ty, as, that when a sound man doth not need a Phy∣sitian, that then he is to be honour'd: For then a Judge, Councellour, Lawyer, Souldier, Husband∣man, Weaver; &c. should be prescribed to be ho∣nour'd, by the same right of necessity. Honour therefore is ordain'd to the Physitian, created by the goodnesse of the highest for the necessity of the sick, to heal them: But the necessities of a souldi∣er, Judge, Executioner, weaver, &c. are not con∣sider'd, as chosen by God, but as promoted by men, to execute those offices, that are requisit, and that from the malice of men.
There is a four fold mist of ignorance, hath en∣ter'd all at once, into the medica profession, and hath lef it without honour▪ namely, the ignorance of causes, the remedy, the manner of making it, and coaptation of it. Truly as pyrochn doth o∣pen bodies before our eyes, that are lock'd; so also it opens the gate unto naturall Philosophy Under the ignorance and sloth of the Schools, the true medi∣cine hath lurk'd so depress'd, that that which should have brought the greatest light unto the Phy∣sitian, seeing the whole work is accounted mecha∣nick, the want whereof is his blindness, and unskil∣fulnesse, that through pride and long Custome, is transferr'd out of his own hands, into the hands of an Apothecary and his servants; that now he sees not with his own eyes, nor handles with his own hands, nor understands with his own Intellect and judge∣ment, so that here lyes the mystery of iniquity. Our pardon for this plain-dealing, is sued out in forma R. P. both in the very name, nature, right constitution and right reformation of it; as also from the effect of the disputation, when it comes in competition with life, with diseases, with my neighbour, my Friend, my brother, my voca∣tion, with the truth, with good, with hurt, with things so truly serious, and of such moment. For I propound not to my self the thanks or favour of any man, having also learn'd to runne thorow good report, & evil report. For my own understand∣ing tells me, that the Art of Physick hath stood a long time at a stay, as is a shame to think; without a∣ny progresse made; because we had rather stand to, and bring honour to, and deck and polish the
Inventions of Forreigners, Greeks, Barbarians and Ethnicks. In the mean while there's a metamorpho∣sis in the whole systeme of diseases; new diseases a∣rise, which Galen and Hippocrates never knew; and the old ones with stranger and crueller symptomes; for they rise again disguis'd, therefore appear ille∣gitimate, not answering to the descriptions of the former: And that such a thing as this should stand at a stay, without any progresse, is both shame and lamentation; while our healths and lives call great∣ly for an increase of the knowledge of healing. How much, and to what end hath that lazy, dull and ungenerous kind of Physitians hindred the light of Physick, from breaking forth, who are wise only from an anothers Comment, and deny, that the art can encrease above what they know: And there∣fore what they know not, they drive with a cer∣tain desperation, into the Catologus of incurable. As if our Ancestours resting places, were to be like Her∣cules pillars, inscrib'd vith a Ne plus ultra; as if they had attain'd to the Meridian of all knowledg, by the fix'd North-pole of all perfection; and on that Axletree must turn the whole Globe of posterities knowledge, with the whole Hierarchy of lesser and greater increa∣sings: as if the wits and spirits of the present times would serve for nothing, but to go a wool-gather∣ing in the wildernesse or wild fields of the foregoing sheep-shearers; or were fit for nothing, but to sit with their hands in their pockets, in a lazy, and impli∣cite conformity to this medical statue of Aesculapius; and rather then to correct, adde, encrease, perfect, purg and reform the present mode and practise, had rather subscribe to it, and be an obedient son of the
former Physick-fathers, believe it cannot be amended, orits very difficult to goe about, and the way is not clear, and such like obstacles as these they put; as if the inventions of our Grand-fathers had ramm'd up the way of our own industry, and had occluded the Treasuries of wisdome; or as if she had now forsaken the thirsty and laborious inquirer, to dwell against her nature with the arrogant and shallow babler. Such is the sweetnesse of gain, that every one brags of, and with love admires their confusions and ms∣cellanies of medicines, which they call magistrall Receits: But the more secret things, which in times past rendred Physitians that were lovers of labour very famous, by the stupify'd drousinesse of Physi∣tians, contracted by the opium of dull ignorance and sloth, are now slipp'd into the hands of Apothecaries, and old women. The first that we meet with, who will needs be Physitians are those, who truly are not educated and instructed to this, but prompt of nature, whose Genius leads them to it, say they, and are cut out, and are configurated for it, whose bare inclination, and the tickling itch of gain is the Ascendant, da∣ring any thing, which they have heard to have pro∣fited others, without any disquisition, cognition, and discrimination of causes: For thence have al∣most all the experiments of the Schools flow'd forth: which Galen hath confirm'd by the example of his master Quintius. For making experiments by the deaths of men, the Schools call their graduats most expert. Others, that are vulgar Physitians, had rather heal vulgar only, and to these they give their Councells: some also of favour only, and be∣ing
ask'd; but the most part for the ambition of honour that they might be esteem'd as wise men, pos∣sesse this innate kind of vice. Of the same sort are those deceivers, who would seem to be rich, and therefore give all their ministrations gratis, to the destruction or casuall health of people. To these suc∣ceed they, who covet not moneys, but gifts, lest they should seem below the condition of great and noble men, and deserve nothing they say, but do it for a common good. The like to these are they, who confesse truly that they are not Physitians, but have great skill in Physick, and have their secrets and receits from Kings, Emperours, Queens and great Ladies: For these are wont to suborn the middle sort of people, which do extoll the price of the me∣dicine. Others there are who turn themselves into Physitians, who have been old Souldiers, and now left the warres, brag of, and shew their wounds, and thereby think, and perswade themselves they have got great experience. Some of the Clergy also, Priests and poor Scholars, that have nothing else to do must now turn Physitians. Some silenc'd mini∣sters and outed of their benefices, lay hold upon Physick, and commit force and violence to her body, that if one fails, t'other may hold, and think their Latin, and their Coat, the grand Charter, to entitle them to the practise in Physick. There are a generation also who pretend to Astrology, Chiroman∣cy, (and why not to Coscinomancy) to Physiognomy too, dare tamper with Physick, and by schemes, Angles, and Configuraions predict not only diseases, but the Cure also, and so thinke themselves able Physitians, and the rather, because they are now masters of Art,
in, and instituted by, the heavenly Academy, and Colledge of stars. Others scrible upon paper, (not the innoxious words of Salomon,) but Characters, charms as they call them, whereby Diseases, as well as Devils are chas'd away, and crosse themselves be∣fore and behind, least the Devil should take him a∣way, writing powerfull words. There are also, who are well known in divers Idioms, and pretend to speak Chaldiack, Arabick or Dalmatick, and are loden with many arts; at last vaunt only de mathesi or hi∣storiis: Many of these know nothing lesse then to make the Phylosophers stone, and carry about them propagable mines, with a perpetuall ferment. There are they again who pretend to be baptiz'd Jewes (more wicked then the not baptiz'd) who have learn'd from the Kabala to mortifie mercury divers wayes, and also to prepare poysons variously, which are good against all diseases, and many more. They brag of the Hebrew tongue to contain the fun∣daments of all sciences, and the grand secrets of States, and Common-Wealths, and are big with the foreknowledge of futures: They often cite their Rabbines, the book of Nebolohu, with the little key of Salomon, from whence they can read things past, as well as to come. Others also assert the medicall art to be hereditary, and to run in the line of their own progny although they be all fools or Knaves. And then at last if these cannot be accounted of among men, they have a sure Card they think to play, and to be sure they will be receiv'd among women; and to that end brag of the cosmetick faculty, of sweet oyntments, oyles and perfumes; and the art to pre∣serve their beauty, or repair it if ruin'd: And a
hundred to one, if they have not a fling at the Caele∣stiall stone too, of Armenia, whereby they can cure a large catalogue of diseases: for these are cut out of the same hide with Greeks and Jews; any thing wil erve, to cheat the credulous vulgar of their money, when it's known to all that know any thing of Physick, that that divine blew stone, is but Ro∣man vitriol, that is to be had at every Druggist and Apothecaries shops, and is us'd by every horse-leach. There is also a fugitive kind of men from the family of the Chymists, who while they brag of select and precious things, sell nothing lesse then poysons, and take all liberty of lying to the deluded igno∣rants: These fugitives being apostate Idiots from the Chymists furnaces. But the Schools do with greater security, and above all, with a most liberall autho∣rity impose their things upon mortalls. For when we shall come to shew by the inevitable determi∣nation of truth, that they have been hitherto igno∣rant of the knowledge of diseases, and their remedies, not knowing the essence of a remedie, in its true na∣ture, end and use; as also ignorant of the know∣ledge of simples▪ (as we shal shew anon) their prepar∣ation, conjunction, and appropriation: In the mean time, they promote their Schollars: This man be∣cause he hath Latin and Greek, a Doctor or Chi∣rurgian to his Father: Another because he is made a master of Arts, hath heard and read lectures: Ano∣ther also because he holds to Euclid's elements, and brags he is for him; or that he hath learn'd to di∣spute or rather scold from Aristotle: Another hath his call to practise Physick, from his daily reading of books, and subtile problematicall disputing upon every proposition; so that in three years they are
chang'd into very learned men: Wherefore they read the voluminous books of Galen, Avicen and the interpreters. Then they revolve Herballs, where∣in the shapes of herbs are decipher'd to the life; the which if they have not yet known very well, they are sent to the shops, and gatherers of simples, with this mandate, that when they have well known the effigies of the simples, they may re∣turn to their lections, which, with much and long study they have collected out of divers Authors, that they may learn the powers of simples and com∣pounds together with their applications: They see also cadaverous sections, and hear and learn the Ga∣lenicall Lurrey, the method of healing, the use of the parts and differences of pulses, and then when they have thus learn'd to sol▪ fa, they lanch forth into the sea of diseases to cure them, with that confidence and presumption, as if they had been at it a score of years, and look for salutations 12 score off. We pit∣ty the miserable condition of mankind obnoxious to so many internall calamities, and expos'd to so ma∣ny external outrages and violences of such ignorant pretenders; who when they have cruelly kill'd a∣ny Magistrate or great man, under the black and dis∣mall rules of the Schools, they fly to their Sanctuary, and take the liberty and boldnesse, as of law, to bring him to, and call it the incurablenesse of his disease, and every where have their patrons and accomplices: So much the more miserably do poor mortals trust to them, because they hide their ignorance among the vulgar, under the cloak of pro∣motion and swearing; because they swear they will faithfully help infirmities, which alas they are who∣ly
ignorant of, as also of the remedy; yea, that Hercules of Physick, Galen, their Prince, hath not  shewn one medicine, that is not borrow'd from Em∣piricks, howsoever he triumphs in his blew, and childish Throry of complexions and degrees, tam se∣cundum genera, quam loca. For Quintius Galens ma∣ster, was wholly an Empirick, and every where implor'd by his Scholar. Let not the Schools then contemn practise and experience; but fling away their pride and sloth, and it's easie to cure that dis∣ease among them, namely, the uncurablenesse of diseases. By this means shall the power and ver∣tue  of healing stand upright under every weight; that is, all diseases with her are of one price, and no diminution can be made by any disease. For God as he hath not made death, so neither doth he rejoice in the perdition of the living: For he made all Nations of the world easie to be cur'd, nor is there an exter∣minating medicine. It may be granted, that some∣times some alimentary diseases may be healed by the remedies of the shops, to wit, they which admit of spontaneous consumptions, and easie resolutions: but in dangerous, difficult, strong diseases, in which are fixt and chronicall roots, the use of them does more hurt then good. Hippocrates truly left to po∣sterity, the inquisition of higher remedies; because our Ancestors liv'd in more happy Ages. But the Schools and Physitians of an idle and lazy nature, have not respected the greater necessities of mortals, but content with Galen and his Quintius, have not perceiv'd the defects of mortalls, seeing gain hath carryed them away and they are sure to have it, whatsoever the event be. To this carelesnesse and
sloth of theirs is witnesse, that they have not yet once thought of a medicine for the stone, nor a poor Ague, or pain of the teeth. The powers of things, as well as the thundring  accusations of the sick, doe bespeak their ignorance: as if the powers and vertues of medicine, were put in∣to things by Nature, and the God of Nature, only as a box to contain them, and not to be open'd, and their excellencies to be communicated. That Science then,  which enables men to look thorow the shop of medi∣cine, the topick tabernacle of naturall powers, and teaches to unlock bodies that are shut, and to draw forth their hidden vertues, is not peculiar to the fa∣mily of Pharmacopolists, nor truly is the Pharmaceutick part a hand-maid to it (as is the talk of ignorants) but is a powerfull Tecmarsis of naturall history. For Pharmacy truly began at first from the Mer∣chants of simples, and collectors of herbs; but then when the Physitians perceiv'd, that it was not fit for every one to boyl, condite and prepare simples there∣fore that busines also, was committed to the seller of simples. In the mean while the more choice and secret things, Physitians kept to themselves, whereby they purchas'd honour to their posterity. But at length the sloth of Physitians increasing, they were content to run thorow the streets, from house to house, to make a feat of gain, by their frequency of visitations: Then at length chopt in Dispensatories, and select formes, that they should be kept in the shops, and set to sale, rather for expedition then propriety: whence at last Physitians joyning com∣pounds with compounds, they administred to the sick sometimes a miscellany of a thousand simples,
that if one would not helpe, another should; at least, they would be sure to excuse themselves, because they had carryed on the cure of the sick, according to prescrib'd rules. This is the medicining at this day, from which how much the chymick Philoso∣phy differs, they know who have but saluted the same at the threshold, and but warm'd at the herme∣tick fire. Before the threshold of the shop, we cannot chuse  but have a fling at the Describers of Simples. For though there be no field more spacious, plentifull and pleasant on the whole face of the Earth, nor where the minde may be more intent or delighted, then in the matter of herbs and vegetables, the Earths Embroidery, and dame-Natures revels, when in her Virgin vernall beauty, she bids Holy-day and rants it in her great silken simple ward-robe of sundry vestments, bestudded with the Pearls and Diamonds of lovely Flowers, yet notwithstanding lesse pro∣gresse hath hardly been made elsewhere. For the Arabians, Gentiles, Barbarians, salvages, and Indi∣ans, do more vigilantly and judicially observe their simples and things growing among them, then all the Europaean world besides. Since, even from the daies of Plato (wherein Dioscorides a military man lived) there hath almost nothing bin added to the vegeta∣ble Common-wealth, or matter of herbs, but very much taken away, and the Tyranny of we know not what strang Monsters of Physick introduc'd. Galen like  a Plagiary and sneaking Filcher▪ suppressing the name of Dioscorides, makes use of his words, which Pliny in the mean time besprinkles with many trifles, as being of a poor and shallow judgement▪ and una∣ble
to distinguish that which is likely from that which is true, and that which is false; by which means he heaped up a multitude of things, that by the bulk of his book, he might equallize the fulnesse of his name. But to this very day, even the more learned and leading part of Physitians, do as yet hold a Logomachie and anxiously dispute only about the shapes and names of Herbs. As if when the Counte∣nance were known, we should think the Powers did not openly speak unto them; the powers I say, first deliver'd by Dioscorides: so that the medicall po∣wer, seemeth to have arrived at her perfection, in the first Author. In the mean time those things that were of greatest moment have been neglected hither∣to. But the Neotericks and more modern Authors, have begun to distinguish Herb into sexes, and thinking that thereby they have discover'd many things, they have yet complain'd that these things have been veil'd: As if Nature did labour in jest, and not in earnest, being solicitous of the sex, whereas she contenteth her self with that which is androgynous and promiscuous. For the sex respects nothing but generation, and not the operation and relation of pairs: Wherefore to the end that she who wholy re∣ferr'd her self to certain ends, known to her Creator, might not frame one jot or title in vain, wheresoe∣ver there was no need of the marks of sexes for gene∣ration in the composure of things, she quite omit∣ted them. But if of two simples the one is stronger or rougher then the other, that denoteth not the sex, but the degree of rougher or gentler motion; for by longsoft motion, and circulation that is mode∣rate;
heat, sharpnesse, roughnesse, or what ever else is presented to the Pentarchy of sences, as ex∣tream and violent, is taken away; and becometh a subject wholly subdu'd to the scepter of our Na∣ture, and yields a sweet smelling favour: for a fragrant smel is nothing else then a sharp smel, when it is moderate. Example of Pepper and Euphorbium; of ough and violent motions, and therefore have no fragrant smell. While therefore the same sim∣ple rotteth, and is changed into little animals, these are not of one, but of both sexes; which truly would not come to passe if those simples had already a sex or sexuall powers within them. For of the same numericall herb, insects, as well of the male, as of the female sex, are promiscuously bred. There hath also arisen other sects afterwards, who observed the signatures, as it were a kind of Palmistry in Herbs; and this conceit hath been very much promoted by the root of Satyrion: And by means of this chiefly have they introduc'd scientia signata, or Anatomia essata; that is, new-fangl'd names, and swelling titles, to gloze their foppe∣ries. For me, I am assured by faith, that neither is man the Image of Nature, nor Nature the Image of man. God out of the eternall providence of his Goodnesse and wisdome, hath enough and more then enough provided for necessities to come. He made and endowed simples to the design'd uses of all necessities; that is, he compos'd and directed them to the end and scope of necessities: And therefore we may very lawfully and deservedly be excus'd, if we conceive the whole businesse of the Conquest of diseases, lies upon the shoulders and single stock of
simples in their right preparation for Physick; nay, we are bound to beleeve that simples in their sim∣plicities, are sufficient for the Cure of all diseases: wherefore we ought, and more becoming it is to us of this Nation, to employ more study in the enqui∣ry of their vertues, then in discussion of problems concerning them, since in simples, that is, in their right knowledge and Philosophicall preparation, is the perfect cure and remedy of all diseases; and conse∣quently Dispensatories, the monument of the lazy Li∣turgy of Physitians, and other Ethnick Directories, endeavouring to compound, confound and confect many medicines, make but a Hodge-potch though sew'd in with sweet broth, their syrups; and though they start, and hotly pursue the Game of simples, yet they loose their sent, grow lazy, undoe all, and with a secret kinde of blasphemy go about to sup∣ply the divine insufficiency: And let us be excus'd to pause a little, and bethink us every way round e're we lay such a flat Solecisme upon the gracious and most benigne bounty of God. Hence Paracel∣sus writeth to the Chirurgians; to what purpose do you superadde vineger to the root of Comfrey, or bole, or such like balefull additaments, while God hath compos'd this simple sufficient to cure the fracture of the bones? Whatsoever thou shalt adde to it, is done as it were to make God subject to thy correcti∣on. Thou art foully mistaken. In like manner we conceive that God hath sufficiently and perfect∣ly compos'd in simples the compleat remedies of whatsoever diseases. Finally upon sure grounds we know that we have no Anatomicall kindred with the Archevs of
vegetables, whether we respect the whole or the parts: For the endowments of simples are from the Creation, and not from the usurpation of possession. For the proprieties were in herbs, before sin, death and necessity. Besides we believe that God doth give the knowledge of simples to whom he will, out of supernaturall grace, and not by the signes of Na∣ture. For what Chiromantick kindred with the Pleuresy hath a boars-tusk, goats-bloud, bulls-pizle, horse-dung or the herb daisie? Or what signature have those simples common to them? Indeed I praise my Lord, who primarily created all things to his glory, before there were any diseases, nor did he marke the simples by reason of the diseases that might afterwards happen, but for the beauty of the Universe, whence ariseth honour to the Lord. There have not likewise been wanting, who  have compris'd the immense Catalogue of diseases, in the signes of the Zodiack, as Bartholomaeus Carich∣terus for one, whose number being too narrow, they enlarged every one of the signs into a triple section; so that they divided all the powers of Herbs into thirty six, and enclos'd them in a narrow room. There are they also whosquare the powers, vertues, aspects and applications in the Horizon of herbs to dis∣eases, from certain positions of Heaven, emitting some vertue which moveth everything in the kind, which yet is divers from the circular motion it self; or else they make them lesse efficacious, that is, in plain English ineffectual: And so they have denomi∣nated some herbs solar and some lunar, and such like toies put into great words, as that mechanick expe∣rimentator hath it in his Sylva Sylvarum. It is mani∣fest,
that there are some Flowers that have respect to the sunne, in two kinds; The one by opening and shutting; and the other by bowing and inclining the head. For Ma∣ry-golds, Tulippa's, Pimpernell, and indeed most Flowers, do open or spread their leaves abroad, when the sunne shineth serene and fair. And again (in some part) close them, or gather them inward, either towards night, or when the skie is overcast. Of this there needeth no such solemne Reason to be assign'd; as to say, that they rejoice at the presence of the sunne; and mourn at the absence thereof: For it may be nothing else, but a little loading of the leaves, and swelling of them at the bottome, with the moisture of the aire; whereas the dry aire doth extend them: And they make it a peice of the wonder, that Garden-claver will hide the stalk when the sunne sheweth bright; which is nothing but a full expansion of the leaves. For the bowing and inclining the head it is found in the great flower of the sunne, in Mary-golds, Wart-wort, Mallow-flowers, and o∣thers. The Cause is somewhat more obscure then the for∣mer▪ but I take it to be no other, but that the part against which the sunne beateth, waxeth more faint and flaccid in the stalke, and thereby lesse able to support the Flow∣er. The like trifling wonder make they of Rosa solis, or as others admit it Ros solis, with which if Purse∣lan or some other herbe were observed to do the like, it would scarce be of halfe nine daies, unlesse they think that it is like Gideons Fleece of Wooll, that the Dew should fall upon that, and no where else. It were well truly that this member of the Common-Wealth of universall knowledge was more studied, namely, this of Sympathies and Dyspathies, for in this
Angle (note Reader) lyes all the abstruse knowledge of occult properties; which thing the Schools have openly proclaim'd by their dull hammering upon and toiling about it, and which they have banished by their fetters and gins, desisting where they should have begun. There is then in inanimate things in∣habitant as species of sense, phantasie, yea and electi∣on: yet in an analogous consideration, according to the capacity and degree of every thing. We speak not here of plant-animalls which things might seeme ridiculous to many: but this our paradox will of∣fend no man, though but meanly knowing. In the first place then without doubt, there are some flo∣wers that are the Laquies of the sun; as well in lucid daies, in which the sunne shines not, as in the nights; witnessing that they have both motion, sense, and love of the sunne; so much, as without which, its impossible they should accompany the clouded Sun. And also as in the evening they lose the Sun, in his setting (who until he hastens to the East, doth not o∣perate among us dwelling in the darknesse or sha∣dow of the earth) yet neverthelesse whether the night be hot, or cold, or serene, or rainy, the flo∣wers do face about equally from the west, and bend themselves and salute the rising Sun. Which chiefly doth denote they have the knowledge of the rising and solar circuit, and in what part he is about to be orient or occident. Call it the instinct of nature, or what you will. Names shall not change the thing. Its a matter of fact, and the thing done hath his cause in the flower, in his own propriety, and not from any analogy, concord or positionall influx; doe not borrow this solissequous perambulation extra,
but it is their domestick and innate vertue. These things happen in plants vegetably animate. The lesse wonder. But that they have place in minerals also, I thus prove. There is almost nothing made in Nature, without his proper motion: and there is nothing moved of its own accord, or by himself, but by reason of the propriety put into it by the Creator, which the Ancients call self-love, and will have philautie to be nature, first-born, innate and given for the custody of its self. And where this is present, its necessary also there be Sympathy and An∣tipathy, in respect of the diversity of objects.  To this I will bring a pregnant example. Take a drumme made of a sheeps skin, or asses skin, and let another hard by be beaten, that's made of a wolfes hide, and upon that motion and sound, the other shall wax dumb, and not found at all. Such is the proprieties of naturall things that they must act and yield to the dominion and donation of the vertues implanted in them from the Creation, and which they enjoy and put forth from their own do∣micilium; and not from any imaginary house of hea∣ven. We would have all sects confine themselves to a mediocrity in opinioning, and not ramble over the whole wild of Fancy: For a very little patience, e're you hear, that the Earth hath of her self a semi∣nall vertue of producing herbs, which she therefore beggeth not from heaven. For the whole propriety of herbs is from the seed, and the seminative power is taken from the Earth, according to holy writ, and not from the faces of the Lights of Heaven. For sup∣pose that sixteen or twenty starres make a Constella∣tion, or one of the twelve Houses, and is extended
thirty degrees: in what manner can so few starres contein the essences, seeds, faces and properties of five hundred plants, differing in kind and inward pro∣perties? Besides a thousand other attributes of so many things as well humane as politicall: Away with these trifles. Every Plant enjoyes the capaci∣ty of vegetation according to the vertue of its peculi∣ar and domestick ferment originally inoculated in∣to its principles. And the Scripture intimates to us, that God created every plant of the field before it was in the ground, and every herb in the field be∣fore it grew. It's a base thing truly then in Christians to follow him hitherto as patron in Physicks, when of faith we beleeve that plants germinated, before the starres were, with a seminal vertue. For there is alwaies found in nature an agent, matter, and pro∣duct or effect, instrument and disposition. And the o∣peration of generation depends on Nature, and pro∣per organs. The proprieties are in the seeds of herbs, not in the heaven or starres. Those powers of the starres which have been fictitiously impos'd on heats, colds and complections by that Patron of chymaericall fictions, are now grown out of date. For the starres, what∣soever way they be taken, do much more differ from Plants, then herbs from Clouds and hoar-frosts, or fishes from pretious stones. Wherefore let it be a sophisme to attribute effects to causes, which possesse in them no causality at all: That is to dream whilst one is awake, if he beleeve such a thing, or by his own thinking to rove into madness: But we shall supersede this theam, least being too bu∣sie in it, we should seem to those who have false or
thick eyes, to demolish the fabrick of Astrology, or be found great with a sarcasme. Mathiolus, Tabernamontanus, Brassavolus, Ruellius, Fuchsus, Tragus, d' Allichampus and other Herbalists, have hitherto been busied only about the features, and visuall knowledge of Plants, but all of them in like manner describe the vertues out of Dioscorides. They also constrain them to the predicaments of qualities, to degrees of heat and cold, as demonstra∣ting something from the foundation: Certainly it  is a shamefull thing to fetch the temperature of sim∣ples from heat, and not from the fountains of the seeds. Dodonaeus, Friso, Tabernamontanus with some few others, although they insisted in the same foot∣steps of degrees, have yet subjoin'd certain additi∣ons from their own or others experiences: but without doubt as yet they are confus'd, uncertain and rudely distinguish'd, as being noted not from science, but either from the discovery of the vul∣gar,  or drawn from casuall experiments. There is none amongst all of them that hath scientiously de∣scrib'd the properties of simples. as he who treated of all, from the hysop to the Cedar of Libanus; which is a certain signe that true sciences are not to be drawn from any other then the Father of Lights. To come  therefore to the purpose. We believe there is no member in the vegetable Common-wealth, or province of herbs, but may be easily admitted and enroll'd in the journall-book or Catalogue of fit subjects to be reduc'd to the wholesome advisoes of digestion, and may be wholy subdued to the scepter of our stomach; unlesse those who are out of the line of communication, and listed
in the bills of mortality, excepted against in the list of non-compounders with the State of our vital Oeco∣nomy, who have a certain adhaesion of malignity to them, and are adjudg'd by the Parliament of our Intellects (where Reason sits sole Epistates) and openly declar'd by the tyranny of their own actions and pow∣ers, to be desperate malignants and Traitors to the present government and Republique of our Body. Small truly is the number of pot-herbs, and things be∣longing to food in the Crasis of herbs: which paucity surely doth accuse some certain malignity, which right∣ly sequestred, then, and not before, do they give forth their powers, as the end and scope of their mis∣sion, whom poysonous keepers did hide under themselves. Truly vegetables do work but a little in us; and the stomach is busied about them. Nor do they go farther, before they compound and pay the fine of their sequestration; before they first deposite their whole estate, that is, almost all the strength of their remedy. For otherwise the whole Fabrick of our peaceable Common-Wealth might be undermin'd, and it might go ill with us, and we should feel and smart under their tyranny, if the stomach, not being able to make a repulse and tame the vegetable ta∣ken in, cannot subdue and bring it under the rules and governments of his own Archaeus. For other∣wise, if a vegetable should go on, as Cuiasseer, strong∣ly fortified, and with his whole strength, he would also be made a companion of excrements, or trouble the whole oeconomy of sanguification. For else, that which would have withstood the action of the sto∣mach, now accustomed to crude simples; how could it transmute and tame, in the second digestion, the
unaccustom'd, in crude meats. The effect of such remedies likewise would be of greater difficulty, and more laborious work, then thence to expect fruit. Lastly, this being granted, the indistincti∣on, confusion and perpetuall turbulency of our Oeco∣nomy, should be condescended to; for if any thing be not first rightly subdu'd in the stomach, and thence the ex crement first sequestred, it would march on to our very vitalls. It is necessary therefore, that vegetables suffer digestions and formall transmutati∣ons: and the digestive faculties themselves also in working, do ordinarily suffer from the forreign fa∣culties of vegetables: a thing truly perilous, and of difficult experiment and judgement. Then fi∣nally over and above, all things being weigh'd ex∣actly, every vertue of the vegetables is restrain'd and limited to his own degree. It's enough truly that most of them have annexed their own cruelties infamy, immaturities, scabbinesse, rottennesse, exant∣lation of their powers, besides their manifold filth and impurities; forasmuch as they should be taken away with the emunctories dedicated to the evacuation of excrement, it's unavoidable but that their whole aliment is full of excrement: It is exceeding cruel therefore in the Schools, that there hath not been consider'd and found out a remedy against these defects, besides the simple and contemptible decoctions of the shops. At length, saving the censure of these, the injuries of plants being sequestred (the burnden of which our nature without great ruine cannot bear) so great is the debility of them beside their unusual protervity, that scarce any thing praise-worthy can be hoped for, out of the bosome of vegetables; when not onely they are compell'd to lay aside their fiercenesse, if
they be admitted further within; but also formally to be denthduate from all the benignity of themselves, be∣fore the Citizens of our Re-publick can entertain them. An entire and live animal cannot be bruis'd with∣out  his dung: It is therefore to be lamented that it hath not yet been so consulted with thought and experience to consider, that herbs have much dung, who never yet made any egestion thereof; and are therefore to be purg'd, not with the common de∣puration, but with greater Caution. Finally, in man we by many marks distinguish blood from goar; but in plants it is enough to have said, That plant in subject consists of divers and opposite properties: Here we stop without making further progresse then by some common sapors, and uncertain events. For from the stalk of Poppy being wounded, distilleth opium. Celandin weepeth a golden juice, and spurge a milky one: From Butter-burre floweth Gum, from Chameleon bird-lime; which simples if they be bruis'd, they yield another far inferiour juice, namely, dung and gore mingl'd with bloud, although they be cla∣rified: For Beginners must learn to distinguish the bloud of plants, from their gore and Parenchyma or garbage; and also to seperate them, if they think e∣ven to attempt any thing praise-worthy by meanes of simples. For hence it commeth to passe, that al∣though you labour stoutly in extracting after the manner introduc'd by Neotericks, yet one dram of crude Rubarb given in powder, will effect more, then whatsoever you shall extract out of a dram and a halfe: For the stomach by its ferment resolveth more, then the juice cometh to, which is drawn out by the Extractors, who without distinction re∣solve
the dreggs and vile liquor of the Parenchyma or garbage: For Quercetane, when he had observ'd that by the Chiromancy and Anatomy usually call'd signata, the inward powers of things were not suffi∣ciently examin'd, he call'd Pyromancy into his aid, but fails in the way. His device was, out of the ash∣es of a Nettle, to draw a weak Lixivium, which be∣ing put into an earthen vessell, and by chance, fro∣zen a little (for if the lixivium had been stronger, it would not have bin frozen) in the morning admiring at it, he cries out, Aha! I behold in the ice the fi∣gure of the leaves of the Nettle; and rejoicing found∣ed an Axiom; namely, that in ashes, the seminall sub∣stance wich figureth herbs, remains unconquer'd by the fire. But this good man declareth his ignorance of principles; not knowing in the first place, that all ice beginning, maketh jagged pikes, after the fashi∣on of a Nettle-lease. Next that the Archaeus is the fi∣gurer of the thing to be generated, which is long since burnt with fire, before the coal or ashes be made. Thirdly if the seminall substance of herbs were wrung from the lixivium, it ought to resemble not the leaves, but the root, stalk, flowers, and fruit. But the figurative power of seeds lies hid in the Ar∣chaeus, the Vulcan of herbs and generable things, who being not subject to fleshly eyes, it is to be impetra∣ted of God alone, that he would vouchsafe to open the eyes of the mind which to Adam and to Salomon, at first sight demonstrated the proprieties of things; which power and optick vertue to some few of late daies hath been bestow'd, St. Theresa having once mentally seen a Crucifix, perceiv'd that there were eyes of her mind, which he afterwards kept open
during his whole life, and that the flesh shutteth them by the corruption of Nature. For neither do we otherwise know natures à prio∣ri, nor do we know the alterities, and diversities of the Archaeus but by bare observation. Indeed many of the simples are bequeath'd to us, but for the most part false and incongruous. Nor doth the reading of books make us skilfull in knowing the properties, but by observation: no otherwise then a Child that sings a song, yet doth not compose it, as neither doth he know the first grounds of Har∣mony, for which the tones were so to be dispos'd. If this happen in sensible things known by the sense, the reason whereof the hearing measures; what shall not be done in matter of Physick, wherein the powers of simples can be trac'd by no sense? Now the descriptions of all sorts of Medicines, may be read in shops, with a defect of the knowledge of the pro∣perties and agreement. For we speak of the optick notion, falling under the sight, such as the soul, sepa∣rated from the body, enjoyeth, and such as God bestoweth in this life on whomsoever he pleaseth, and hath hitherto remov'd it far away from the Conclave of those, who give all veneration to Heathen books. Wherefore the Father of Lights is to be pray'd, that he would vouch-safe to give us knowledge, as he gave to Bezeliel and Aholiab, and to that famous society, and community of R. C. unto the glory of his name, and the meer love of our neighbours: For by this meanes the Art of Physick would stand in us upright under every pressure. But it is to be fear∣ed, lest he who suffer'd to perish the books of Salo∣mon, reserve this knowledge of simples till the Age of Elias the Restorer.
For the schools by the stairs of Tasts have promis'd an entrance into the throne of the knowledge of simples, by sharpe, bitter, salt, sweet, astringent, acid, and unsavory, they say, they measure heats and colds, as the Artists of all properties: And they have bin so rash of judgement, that they have taken upon them to judge of the nature and faculty of simples by their taste and relish, and thereby discern and deter∣mine their first, second, and thirdqualities, to the which afterwards all the vertue of the said simples was attributed. But because they found not this an universall rule alwaies and in all things, and that it did deceive; they fled to that back door of evasion for their ignorance & lazinesse, to the secret and hid∣den properties, arising from the forme and totality of substance. But these proud ostentations have by experience bin made a folly beyond ridiculous. These and such like starting-holes and subtilties have made of Physick a Meander, a Wildernesse, and wild labirynth of incertainty and unstable formali∣ties. We desire the linguacious Chymistry of these heads to tell us, how many bitter things there are in taste, which neverthelesse (according to the e∣dict of that rule) are not hot at all? For Opium and cychory which hitherto they have held to be hot, yet they teach to be very cold. But what vertue so cold I pray you is there in Opium, which shall make me sleep though unwilling, and hot enough? If the coldnesse of the vapours, why do wines after din∣ner provoke to sleep? whether therefore is there one identity of heat and cold to the procuring of sleep? why therefore is cold singularly attributed to Opi∣um? why are not hot things equally reckon'd narcotick
and dormitive? how doth opium amaricate? and a∣maritude in the schools predominating is accounted hot? Therefore it is of unavoidable necessity, that the schools should chuse one of these; to wit, either that the coldnesse of opium is not exceeding, and by consequence that Opium doth not produce sleep by his cold: or that bitternesse in the schools is a fallacious indicative of heat. For why is not cold purselane somniferous, by reason of his third degree? why is not a manipule of Purselane equivalent to two grains of opium, when the cold is more plentifull, and doth more powerfully refrigerate in such a portion, then in so little of Opium? wherefore doth Night-shade make one mad, and not rather by his Cold produce sleep? But we finde in opium a sharpe salt, and sudorifick, also a bitter oyle, farre rece∣ding from the odour of opium, yet saporiferous. A∣gain, how many sowre things are there which by their saporall rules should be most cold, which not∣withstanding are most hot: as spirit of Nitre &c. Thus sharp Camphire, which by their rules ought to be hot, yet notwithstanding they affirme without controversie to be cold. In like manner Chrysulca, oyle of vitriol, sulphur &c. being sowr, according to the rules of sapors ought to be very cold. Thus also many sweet things there are in outward tast, which in their internall substance, are nothing at all con∣temper'd. How many things that excentrically and at the threshold or first beginning of tast, are alto∣gether unsavory, and without relish, which in the parlour, intrinsecally and in faculty, are most sharpe and biting. Honey, Cassia and Sugar are in their con∣centrick substance so hot and violent, that out of
them may be prepar'd such dissolvers, as are wont to be made of Aqua fortis and Regis, which can dis∣solve gold and silver as speedily as the other. Thus lead in its elcony or frontispice yieldeth out no tast to the tongue: and yet in his chamber and internal sub∣stance, dwelleth a certain sugar'd deightfull sweet∣nesse, as is notoriously known and confessed by thse but meanly instructed in the famous art of Chymisry. Let not us then lean upon that broken reed of qualities and temperament of things, but more inwardly and exactly perpend, then by that superficia∣ry and slight manner of tasting and experimenting; but let their inward bowels, each sinew be dissected, by the acute knife of Pyrotechny, where they shall be found farre otherwise, and oftentimes different, not only in taste, but also in odour, and in their whole substance. But we will at length shew in its due place, either in this our worke, or in the next, when we come to perpend, detect and summe up the dotages of our Physick squarers by the impartiall Arithmetick of Reason and mechanick experiments of Pyrotechny, that the schools have not yet so much as lookt into the bark of the faculties of things, and have therefore passed over the fountains of seminal properties. There is at length a specificall sapor in each thing, which ought to teach the property, if at least any of the outward things that are signed do so. For example, there is in Cinamon besides sharpnesse, a pe∣culiar grace in the sapor, which you shall hardly find in any other simple else. So Gentian, Enula-Campana &c. besides common bitternesse, have a specificall sapor, which by reason of the singularity
to every simple, cannot be brought under rules, and is the sole distinguisher of every property. Now that simples are to be chosen when they are in their state and chief vigor, this is common to rusticks, to the schools, and to me. Namely the seeds when they are almost dry; but the stalks and leaves while they are succulent and full of sap; but the roots while they swell with vertue, and are not yet exantlate and exhausted with generating and con∣cocting: which after they have along time laine still, the Archeus being awakened they begin to think of, sprouting. Some advise to take the Autumne; but we for the most part love the spring, which we have learnt by experience in Polypody, Bryony &c. For the juice of herbs is gore which being more & more ripen'd, is ei∣ther collected and thickn'd, or endeth in the nature of fibres, or dischargeth it selfe while the vitall pow∣er thinks of propagating seed: Wherefore in search∣ing out and chusing simples, nothing hath bin more neglected, then that which was most repuisite, and wherein even from the beginning down hitherto, there hath bin no progresse made. For the powers of simples, and their immediate subjects have re∣main'd unknown. For they, besides the clear, and as it were optick knowledge of them, require an exact praeparation, and appropriation; especially the knowledge of sci∣ences, which presupposeth not traditions deliver'd at pleasure, and passed over from one to another: But praeparation doth require not only the boylings of the shops, or poundings, but the whole business of Pyrotechny, or art of working by fire: At length adaptation, application, or appropriation requireth a
Theory founded in the light of Nature concerning man, his diseases and affections; and then the depend∣ences, mutations, and alterations: It is therefore no marvail that the single-sold doctrine of simples hath stood deserted, and forlorn. In the mean time amidst so great sloth and cla∣mours of men, the Almighty hath been pleas'd to stir up Chymists, who might deservedly take in hand the consideration of the transmutation, maturity, tin∣cture and promotion of powers, and so progressing by degrees to the unisone of Physick, their followers became partakers of what they wished for. For they went not to the immeasurablenesse of the imaginary fain'd humors; their strife, and Chimaera of defluxi∣ons; nor to the products or fruits of diseases (by ta∣king away of which they know there follow'd nothing but palliations of diseases, which are attended usu∣ally with apostate and direfull recidivations) but they converted their study to those things, that had the priority of the former; knowing that the pote∣stative basis of many defects was imprinted in the Archaeus of life. Wherefore by the purity, simplici∣ty and subtilty of remedies, that Symbolize, they endeavour'd to enter into the middle life; that so if any of them do not penetrate to those things where∣of we are first constituted, yet at least in the thresh∣old of them they open and expose their endow∣ment, by exciting our powers by their grateful sa∣lutation. For Nature doth not onely acknowledge the acti∣on of such agents as seem in a manner to be justly rank'd in the number of Patients; (and only a cor∣poral action is of this sort, and the obedience of the
nutritive faculty:) but there is also an other autho∣rity of agents not to be slighted, which is the ex∣posal of the native endowment upon the very midst of the life of the Archaeus, by reason of the seque∣stration  from the delinquency of mortality, seculen∣cy and turbulency; by means of which superiority, such kind of agents do not suffer from their patients, much lesse are alter'd by resistance or reaction. For some remedies thus prepar'd by the embosoming and secret insinuation of themselves, do so refresh our faculties, that they ascertain us that they came for this purpose in the world. For some recreat us with their fragrancy: There are others also which being enclos'd are hinder'd from shewing their good will towards us; as Gold and Jewells. Others, their bands being loos'd and emancipated from the fet∣ters of corporiety, the alone Remora and clog of their activity, are brought into play, and having gain'd the liberty and authority of their powers, to act in their own Horizon, diradiate their vertues, erect us from falling, and solace us, with as strong and vigorous embracements, as rank and lethife∣rous poisons are wont to trip up and prosternat our strength. For they drive out the venome of the body wherewith it is as it were leaven'd; yea truly, both the corporall and fermentall poison; yet not that any medicine can refect or restore anew the extinct, abolish'd and exhausted powers implanted in the parts. But it hath been all along an error of the Schools not to ferment the juices of herbs together with their Parenchyma, before the segregation of the best parts can possibly be made. Next they neglect to enquire how the juice of
things being press'd out by the meer odour of a sul∣phureous fire, continueth afterwards uncorrupted, without that Barbarian Condiment, sugar, or any o∣ther Additament; by favour of which, it acquires a balsamick quality, and transfers the aetherial vertue, which is incorporated with it, to a high and perfect Entelechy. We are now come within ken of our expected port, and now will we descend to the weak and pig∣mie labours of the shops. In the first place, though Extracts may seem to ease the weak stomach of la∣bour, yet do we not much esteem them, or salute them with that magnifying, as they do their Hector and Ajax, those two Alexipharmicall Colossi, Mit hri∣date and Treacle. hew'd out of ethnick Dispensatories, and that for the above noted errors. But we willingly put Magiste∣ryes in the room of Extracts; in which the whole substance of the thing is reduc'd into its primitive juice: Which manner of preparation will for ever remain unknown to vulgar Physitians. In which iteration or going back of solution, the heteroge∣nerous juices are of their own accord separated, for the most part with divers sediments or bottomes, one swimming over the other, and one master-juice settles, notable for its diversity, containing a semi∣nall entity or substance. In the next place we pitty in Physick Ware-hou∣ses, the miscellaneous mixture, and confus'd jum∣blings together of so many simples, betraying both  ignorance and uncertainty. For that cardinal En∣gine of uncertain succedaneums, doth scrue the Schools to hope, that if one thing do not help, another will; Oh the shame of men! And so they associate
many things together by the commendation of the common Councell of Herbalists, extoll'd, even to an enacting, for the same purpose. To which are added those fripperies of vulgar heads, stew'd in the Hypocaust of ignorance, boiling and conditing, or sea∣soning, the twin-born sisters of Cookery. To which purpose Dispensatories are commended, being set forth by the Schools, and us'd by Physiti∣ans, only for expedition and readinesse, but not for propriety and exigence; as having only generall and universall Intentions, with the substitution and di∣spensation of one instead of another; whence they are call'd Dispensatories, or the Colledges poud'ring Tub, wherein are barrel'd up many mixtures, neither of their own, and which is worse without Salt. As though Men had not brick of their own to make, but they must gather the straw and stubble of Galen and his Fodder-eaters; a servitude worse, and ba∣ser then Aegyptian: what do we else then make their's the light of Goshen, and our own the thick darknesse of Aegypt. That there should be bread e∣nough in our Fathers house, in our own Land, which is not a wildernes, & yet that we should have such trunck-hos'd appetites, be so parsimonious as to dyet our selves, & be ty'd up to the manger; and feed upon the husks, and chaff of Ethnick and barbarian long-winded com∣positions, that have no footing in nature or art; nor any analogy among themselves, or to our bodies. But suppose them good, supppose them Manna it self; yet if an Omer shall be allotted us; if they shall be bar∣rel'd up from age to age, from the first gathering to this last Century, while God and Nature every morn∣ing rains down new, instead of being fit to use,
they will be found like reserv'd Manna, rather to breed worms and stink. Well may they be called Dispensatories; as of dys, and penso, things hard of digestion, or hardly consider'd or weigh'd in the ballance of clear Reason or experience. In all and eve∣ry of which, the concourse and mixture of crude simples makes the issue conjecturall. For the patient  is every waies cheated for his money, both by the fraud of the Druggist, and oath of the Doctor; think∣ing that he can neither err, deceive nor be deceiv'd that swears he will admit none to the degrees of Phy∣sick, but him that is skilfull and able. We could wish and and pray the Magistrate would prevent so great mistaking of the patients, and fraud of the Physitians. For our own part we chiefly admire in simples a sincere composition which is made according to the composure of God. In Comfrey we finde a full remedy  for broken bones, having all things that are need∣full; wherewith if you mingle bole, vineger, or o∣ther forreign things, as we before hinted out of Paracelsus, you then corrupt the mixture ordain'd  by God. But as oft as the things have not by them∣selves what is intended, then we admit additions, if the things acquire that by being coupled together, which they have not apart: Which thing is to be confirm'd by an experiment. And indeed we have a most pregnant instance hereof in Inke and Tinctures. Oftentimes under the penance of studies we have consider'd that since there was in Nature a cer∣tain proportion of matter to matter, and form to form, that there was the same observ'd in properties to properties, and consequently in effects to effects.
But the composition of simples did by and by teach our understandings, the defect of these; where al∣terations presently enter upon the mixture of seed, and for the most part destroy one another; no other∣wise then the seeds of many things pounded toge∣ther and blended, elude the expectation of encrease. Afterwards we knew by much sweat and oil, that the matters of remedies, exalted to a higher dignity by meer preparation, ascend to the top of perfecti∣on, liberty, subtilty, and purity; and would far ex∣cell the decoctions, syrups, and honyed pouders of the Shops. For whosoever is well skill'd in the mecha∣nick  practise of Pyrotechny, doth clearly perceive with me, that there is no medicine found in Dispen∣satories, that containeth not in it more hurt then good. For the Schools, which professe Hippocrates, if they acknowledge diseases to arise from a humour that is sharp, bitter, salt, or acid, they yet palliate, and season all their remedies with honey, or sugar; thereby abating the properties of them, though of themselves they be feeble enough; as if the only cure and top of all diseases consisted in that which is sweet. For their answer is, that laxatives work  never the worse, although sugar'd; then, that they are more gratefull to the Palate; and thirdly that they are by this meanes kept from mouldinesse and putrifaction. As to the first, we admit that poisons have equal force whether they be swallow'd with, or without sugar: For the power of laxatives sheweth it self wholly in the melting of the body, and the putrefaction of that which is melted, and so ought to be infamous for poison Wherefore the an∣swer of the Schools is impertinent, by poisons, to
the question, touching the remedies of diseases, as they are bitter, sharp, &c. To the second we say, that the answer is frivo∣lous as long as the first is not satisfied. So that they are as yet ignorant, that the militia of remedies are too contemptible to charge a disease, and that the force and fort-royall of them are changed and aba∣ted by sugar. That to many, the tast of Aloes is more pleasant then the drinking of honey. Finally, though they desire to sooth the tongue, yet they cannot sooth the stomach, which turns at the very sight of medicines cover'd with the Leger-demain of sugar: of the same size of foppery is that bauble for babies, gilded pills. Notorious it is, that a thing of ew drops is more easily taken in some vehicle, or liquor, and is more willingly entertain'd within, then if it were sweetned with much sugar. In a word, that being mixt with a convenient liquor, they insinuate them∣selves more deeply, and more friendly combine, then if they were daub'd with much sugar. That sugar though pleasing to them that are in health, doth yet quickly grow distastfull to such as are sick, and is an utter enemy in most diseases of the sto∣mach and womb; but in others, it often makes the help of the medicine added, to become ridiculous. For sugar is diametrically opposite, is the antartick pole, and at enmity with the acid ferment of the sto∣mach, and therefore makes the digestions more difficult. For sugar is clarified with a lixivium of unstalk'd lime and potters clay: And if Physitians had known the sharpnesse of the spirit of honey, and the filthy dregs of sugar, Charity being not quite
graded, we have the freenesse to think, they would have been content, to have us'd it more sparingly about the sick. To the third, we say, that the Schools do here∣in  confesse their ignorance, that they know not how to preserve medicaments from corruption, with∣out saucing, and castration of their vigour; where∣fore the fraud of beastly syrups, Loches, Eclegm's, and other the Tribe of daubing medicines, hath been suffi∣ciently detected; which are made only of simples de∣cocted, with the additament of honey or sugar: and it makes for this, that vegetables being boil'd in wa∣ter, and frighted out of their wits, only lay down their juice and mucilage; which being crude and impure, cause trouble to the stomach, untill being digested with honey, they make us heirs of their vertue; especially in that the gummosity of herbs, which are fryed with honey and sugar, is very in∣grateful and displeasing to the stomach, and in boil∣ing, there is made a great wast of the vertues. I  praise God who hath been so bountifull to me, as to call me to the practise of Chymistry, out of the dregs of other Professions: Since Chymistry hath principles not drawn from fallacious reasonings, but such as are known by nature, & conspicuous by fire; and she prepareth the Intellect to penetrate, not the upper deck or surface of things, but the deep hold, the concentrick and hidden things of nature; and maketh an investigation into the America of na∣ture, farther then the whole Heptarchy, yea, then the whole Common-Wealth of sciences, all put to∣gether, and peirceth unto the utmost confines and profundities of reall truth. For she admits an Ar∣tist
to the radicall entities or primitive roots of those things, with the dearticulation of the operati∣ons of nature, and the powers of art, and with the maturation of seminall vertues. For besides the manifest entity and creation of things, there is an a∣natomical lecture of the various creations and enti∣ties of them, to be read of us, and understood by us: Besides the generall and manifest creation of things, the particular form of things, not the Peripateticks forms, is to be examin'd, and much to be read and learn'd from the variousnesse, and that, not only of the generall form, but every single and particular form of the Individuall. And we must note, that the a∣naglyphe or exteriour Cortex and figure of things is the Hieroglyphick of an essentiall, true, reall, pow∣erfull spirit; beyond all the artificiall, superficiall, pyramidall Hieroglyphicks of the Aegyptians: For in those dead leaves, is written in folio, in large Cha∣racters, a living power or spirit of life; for besides its own spirit, it hath another, which is the wheell or primum mobile of it. Every ens beside its own particular heaven or firmament hath the heaven of sidereall and vitall light. Hence also the essence, pro∣perty, and vertue of every particular Individuall is as well, if not rather, occult, then manifest; and the true medicinall part in vegetables, as in all other things, which is the essence, propriety, vertue, strength, efficacy, life and soul of the Compositum and every specifick part, is not contain'd in the externall coat or form: For Physick, to speak to be understood of them, who know not what they speak themselves, or me∣dicine, the essence of the thing, is not externe, to be seen with Physiognomisticall corporall eyes, but in∣terne,
and to be sensibly perceiv'd by the eye of the Intellect. For the Sunne of every ens, concentred in its own firmament, doth not so diradiate its beams of vertue, and strength, to its Earth, the exterior Cortex, as to have her vestall virgin beauty prosti∣tute and ly open to the foul rape of an impure Tact, and embracement; or contaminated by the cloudy emissions, of our basilisk corporall eyes; but is to be gently handled, and drawn forth by Philoso∣phick Pyrotechny. For the most High is to be prais'd for his transcendent glory, who hath given this art to little ones gratis. Neither are we of a cast with those praecisians in  the lady like humours of farre fetch'd, and dear bought Gew-gaws: For we seldome use remedies that are transmarine, that come from beyond the seas, and are fetch'd from the furthest parts of the East; knowing that it is not need, makes our old wife to trot; but that the Almighty hath made all Nations of the Earth easie to be cur'd: Nor would he have us such Trugs to expect Barbarian Drugs from the Indian shore. What an absurd consequence, and what a shame it is to think that God was lesse favourable to mortalls before the Indies were known. Such is the Trade, habit, and iterate Custome and Practises of our Indian Drug-merchants and Physick-mongers; such is the zealous and ignor∣ant affectation, stupidity and perverse covetous nature of some; the hammer of whose desires, beats on the anvill of compleating and filling up the mea∣sure of the vices and miseries of their native Coun∣trey, by the importation of forreign and heathenish drugs. What is this but to nose the high and saga∣cious
Genius of the English Nation, and to lay them open to the scorn and derision of other Nations, and give them just cause to play and descant upon the poverty and improvidence of Nature in our own Countrey, to furnish us with remedies, for our ma∣ladies; as if we had no smith in England, but must per mare, per terras, ultra Garamantes & Indos, run to supply her deficiency. And the iniquity hereof  shall be further shew'n by a familiar instance, though the luxury and pride of those who sacrifice to the grapy God, open their mouthes wide, and gnash their teeth against me. What more foul and com∣mon sinne among us then drunkennesse, and who can be ignorant, that if the importation of wine, and the use of all strong drink were forbid, it would both clean ridde the possibility of committing that most odious vice, and men might afterwards live happi∣ly and healthfully, without the use of those into∣xicating liquors. Yet who is there the severest of them all, that ever propounded to loose his Sack, his Ale, toward the certain abolishing of so great a sin, who is there of them the holiest, that lesse loves his rich Canary at meals, though it be fetch'd from places that hazard the Religion of them who fetch it, and though it make his neighbour drunk out of the same Tun? While they forbid not therefore the use of that liquid merchandize, which forbidd'n would utterly remove a most loath∣some sinne, and not impair either the health, or the refreshment of mankind, supply'd many other waies: what can be expected in such a field of ry∣ot, but the tares and thistles of mortifick distem∣pers and maladies, and a course and custome of
easinesse, and boldnesse to rush into all manner of debaucheries? He to remove a nationall vice, will not pardon his Cups, nor think it concerns him to forbear the quaffing of that outlandish grape, in his unnecessary fulnesse, though other men abuse it never so much, nor is he so abstemious as to inter∣cede with the Magistrates, that all matter of drun∣kennesse be banish'd the Common-Wealth; we have the lesse cause to hope, so long as a thing of as much, if not greater Concernment, and of as little, if not lesse inconvenience, will not be forbidden, as this of forbearing the fetching of all exotick, Indian and Barbarian drugs, and heathenish Compositions for Physick, which would not worse, but much better our condition, is a thing so little regarded, and hath hitherto lyen so undiscern'd, and undeman∣ded. What is this, but to use the mouth of our generall Parent, the first time it opens, when he said or saw that all things he had made were very good, to an arrogant opposition, and correcting of Gods wisdome, freenesse and bounty; as if he were more carelesse and lesse regarding us, then other Na∣tions, though sinners of the Gentiles; or that Nature was more improvident, insufficient, and deficient towards us in her good things; or that the things of our Countrey were not good, or not good e∣nough (lamentabile dictu) for the Cure of our home∣bread dlseases, but must be beholding to others to supply the defects of God and nature, both as sup∣plement, and Correctives. No, no, we with seri∣ous tears speak it, that it is Mans perverse cooking, who hath turn'd this bounty of God into a scorpion, either by weak and shallow commenting with their
numerous, voluminous and impertinent amplifications and modifications; or by proud arrogance, covet∣ousnesse, envy, and cruelty to them, who neither in their purposes, nor in their actions have offend∣ed against the due honour of Physick, especially Pyrotechnall: For to our common and underfoot Chy∣mistry and jumblings of Apothecaries, is the tendence of them, who have the leisure to be industrious∣ly idle; and he who shall be tediously studious in it, argues a dulness little less then fatal, and hardly on this side sorcery, or inchantment, not to be undone by charms, or prayers: Insomuch that the fears which some men may have of an invasion and innovation into the Eutopian Empire of Galenical heathenish Phy∣sick, and constituting more clear, natural and ex∣perimentall foundations and principles, perhaps exceed the hopes that can be in others of ever in∣troducing it with any great successe. And that such a thing ought to be done, and chearfully gone about, and setl'd, enough hath been urg'd, and yet shall further; since we are clearly of that opinion, that it will be a harder Alchimy then Lully or Paracel∣sus ever knew, to extract or sublimate any sure re∣all foundations of Physick out of Galen, and his Task-masters. So that we see, without the help of further light, Salomons ships are more welcome that bring apes and peacocks, and I know not what monsters both of principles and practise; then the Gold of Ophir. Nothing now adaies is more dege∣nerately forgotten then the true dignity of Man, almost in every respect, but especially in this, and which is the aggravation, so neerly concerning himself. Indeed mans disposition though prone to
search after vain curiosities, yet when points of difficulty and danger are to be discuss'd, appertain∣ing to the removall of some unreasonable wrong, burden, injury and abuse from the perplex'd life of our Brother, it is incredible how cold, how dull, and farre from all fellow-feeling we are: but when neither the spur of Philautie and self-concernment, as this of our dear life and health, brought into un∣worthy snares, without which we are uselesse and spiritlesse to our selves and the Common-Wealth, shall not stir us up to consider and bethink of an expedient to get from under them, into a more ge∣nerous, easie, safe and exquisite way, both to pre∣serve and obtain our healths; either not to plead for it, or nor to see it, argues a coldnesse, dulnesse and dotage little lesse then incurable, or a stark dead∣nesse, contracted by the Opium and Lethargy of epide∣mick ignorance: Indignities that merit a Lucans spirit to lay open and explode them. And serious∣ly by this and other of the like bulk and size, if the Genius of English men must thus go a fishing on t'o∣ther side to have a draught, must be sent a pilgri∣mage to the Worlds End, and fetch home the Apes and Peacocks of Forreigners, and their Chimaericall humours, and all the way strike top-sail, stand bare and vail with reverence, to the statue of Dispen∣satories of others ignorance and unexperienced for∣malities, and suffer these spurious brats to take the wall of all the free spirit of clear reasoning, and the sons of Art and Ingenuity, we are no better then slaves and fools, and of desert to be reckon'd with the sonnes of Cham, and to work in the Laboratory of the Gibeonites. Let us resolve then like Men hum∣ble
in the sight of God, and with no lesse faith and a serious judgement apply our selves to the freeness And bounty of God in our own native Country: and know all the world, that the Divine goodnesse hath perswaded me that home-bred diseases have their remedies likewise at home. And Chymicall conclusions have taught me, that a little liquor may be provided, which will keep the tempers of simples  uncorrupted, without any forreign condiment. They boil therefore herbs in water, Wine, or di∣still'd liquor, (the absurditie, vanitie and iniquity of which shall further be shewen anon) even till the third part, or half be consum'd, in a double vessell under a double Cover, and so make a decoction, or anti-Chimicall porridge; wherein if the chiefest po∣wers do not perish, or are not evirate; yet is there nothing drawn from thence, but an ill pleasing and distastfull slime of herbs, to be digested by the sto∣mach; although the decoctions and juices be cla∣rified with whites of Fgges, and palliated with su∣gar. For they are drunk without separation of that which is pure, from that which is strengthlesse; with∣out unlocking the hidden powers by the Turn-key of Pyrotechny; without the root and participation of the life, or emendation of the defects, crudities, excrements, and violent powers, whose activities we have no Opium to dead, nor our nature cannot without great prejudice endure. Within the same list are marshall'd Electuaries, Confections, or Pills, either to comfort, or to loos∣en; who abound with greater miseries then the syrups; for without boiling, with meer pound∣ing or poud'ring they are ridiculously, ignorantly
and unadvisedly fram'd of many simples, which for the most part are in antipodaean position, and diametrally opposite one to another; so that they cannot conjoin the mutuall help which they owe unto us. For it is not in Nature as it is in Numbers, where the powers all meet in one, because they a∣gree by unities. For in natute every thing is sin∣gular, and lives of it self not delighting in conjun∣ction. Thus far likewise the operations of Phy∣sick proceed into the middest of the life of the Archeus; which by confusions and blendings, if it do not altogether perish, yet is it at least manifestly evi∣rate. For the frustrated successes of many seeds com∣pacted together, and the autopticall unsuccesfulness of Physitians, by these weak and contemptible en∣gines ought to have given sufficient warning to the Schools, that they should forbear from blending so many and different simples together. How much more when in that multitude, many counterfeit, opposite, uselesse, (but otherwise for the most part ponderous) impertinent, vain, improper, and there∣fore faint, over-worn, evill, and dead things are ad∣ded, or at least made: For although the adulterat∣ing of drugs are more justly charged upon the mer∣chant then the druggist; yet not to garble them, is the part of a sluggish, ignorant, or covetous Apothe∣cary. In the mean time it is certain that almost all the ingredients are taken crude, hard, unripe, shut, poisoned, impure, bound, and unapt to the commu∣nication of their powers, and are more depraved by mixture. And because the stomach of sick persons is hard-by, and in the threshold, therefore it is first offended, because it is feeble and unfit to extract
the middle life, beset with so many difficulties: Wherefore we ought in our labours and singular care, to be before-hand, that we may prepare all things for the languishing stomack, if we hope with delight to attain unto the conceiv'd and wished ends. Wherefore the use of all Confections is harsh, nauseous and tedious: Hence came the proverb, take that away, for it smells like a medicine. Likewise if you take from solutives, Scammony and Coloquintida, the whole Edifice of the shops in Solutives, will fall to the ground, those two pillars  being remov'd, whereon it rested. For solutives besides Scammony, Coloquintida, euphorbium elaterium, esula and manifest poisons, and those beside adulte∣rated, sordid and horrid; the source of the diminuti∣on of our forces and strength, contein nothing else, unlesse the same poisons be suppos'd to be al∣layed with aloes, rubarb, sene, agarick, manna and the like, and so the more liable to imposture. The schools acknowledge that their purges down to Agarick, have need of correction, to the intent, that they may bring in their very mouthes strength unto Nature: But ah would to God such lame Cor∣rections were not idle and unprofitable, were not foolish; and that they might serve rather to compare  the innocence of the medicine then his castration or gelding his powers: Because castration of powers, concludes and carries deceit in the very face; least, as who should say, the sick might understand the poison, that is in it. The balefull remedies also of the shops, are like a Crocodile, or domestick wolfe; who seeing his occasion, whil'st he is trusted to, re∣turnes to his wonted fiercenesse and cruelty of Na∣ture:
Hence neither dare they call their so corrected medicines by their proper Etymon: that is to say, they hide Scammony, under the name of diagredium, as also Colocynthis, they disguise under Alhandal. At length the compound laxatives in the Dispensato∣ries, do war under a fain'd and counterfeit title of Dux. In the mean while they cannot deny, but  that in all, and every of their solutives, Scammony and Coloquintida, are the two pillars, on whom, the whole Edifice of purging doth rest and lean; in the collision of which, all, whatsoever is built there∣on, doth fall to the ground. Their more gentle solutives then, as Manna, Cassia, Seney, rubarb &c. have given up their names to those two burley stan∣dard leaders. The schooles confesse that a laxative medicine  being exhibited, is no longer in the power of the Physitian; yea, and that more is, they by this means defame the Laxatives, and therefore esteem them lesse and set them behind phlebotomy. For if the  laxative hath committed any thing too cruel, they are wont to accuse either the dose, or the correction, or the sluid nature of the sick, or the Apothocary, or the servants, or the wife, or some bodie, or something, least otherwise the name and fame of a solutive me∣dicine should perish: yet notwithstanding in the  mean while they confesse, will they nill they, that all solutives contein in them a corrupting, wasting poison, and onely Aloes alone, they have made a proverb, and call it innocuous. But the rest are ad∣ministred with additament, correction and circum∣spection, and not preposterously, nor overhastily. Of late, a certain learned man to preserve his
health, took the usuall pill, ex aloe lota, (castrata potius) and not finding the effect, he goes to round another Physitian in the eare, and tells him of it, who blames the sluggishnesse of Aloes, and more∣over turns Picron sive amarum, into pigrum: I'le pre∣scribe you, saies he, gelded pills; which being taken, he miserably perishes, because he had labour'd a whole week in vain, that he might reform the dis∣order'd effect of the laxative medicine. He there∣fore that he might free himself from a future disease, perishes by the deceit of the Physitian, and leaves behinde him eleven children. Whence first it is manifest, that it's as free in a laxative to rage fierce in one, that is well in health, as in one that is sick; for this thing may goe on raging against the life of Magistrates and chiefest Governours, and that scot∣free, without danger of punishment, under those two cheats, the name of a Physitian, and the deceit of a medicine; because the Earth covers the cruell ignorance and unskilfulnesse of the Physitians. It's a specious title truly that of purgation or de∣puration, but full of deceit God knowes. Ah! would to God that the Physitians purge could expi∣ate diseases. Would to God as touching this, it may not be, that the sick would expect purges from the  hands of a Physitian, or his prescription. It's worth our serious sorrow surely that they say, a loosning medicine administred before the concoction of the disease, brings forth those humours (for they wil have laxatives have eyes, like that Epidaurean serpent, to bring forth by selection one humour and not ano∣ther) which otherwise, after the aforesaid conco∣ction of the disease, would be unusefull, yea, and
hurtfull. Notwithstanding neither will they learn hitherto from hence, that the humours brought out by laxatives, are not humours, nor things offending; (for otherwise, in either station of a disease, and with one only laxative, they should necessarily help equally, if they bring out the same peccant matter) but meer putrefaction, and meer rotten consum'd melted matter through the poison of the laxatives. So much the more unhappily is the enemy receiv'd, in regard he may exercise this cruell raging and ravening within, in the flesh and in the bloud. To prosecute the deciphering of those cruelties and outrages which are committed by laxatives, it will not be besides our purpose, to relate a story of our friend in this businesse, which he mentions of himself; and it is that acute Philosopher and inge∣nious Helmont, who when he was young, put on the glove of a certain damosell infested with a dry itch or scab; where he had contracted, first on that hand, then on the other, an unlucky scabbinesse, of a Purulent constitution, and with pustules. The senior Physitians of the City being called, they commanded, first a veine to be open'd for the cool∣ing of the liver: then, with an apozeme for three daies, they addressed themselves to prepare for the deduction of yellow torrid Choler, and salt flegme; and at length they intend the Purgation of the afore∣said humours, by the pills of fumitory, and they a∣bundantly provoked many seiges. And he was ther∣with glad, that he had excreted such a heap of stink∣ing matter. They advise therefore the same me∣dicine to be taken the third day after, and again also after three daies with the like successe: And
saies he, if all had been put together, it would have easily filled two buckets of filthy rotten and stink∣ing stuffe; which he did then think to be humours. He then who before was sound and lustie, in his full strength, light and imble in leaping and running; was now made macilent, his knees trembling, his cheekes were fallen, and his voice hoarse. I said (relates he) and that too late. In what chamber of this my peaceable Inne, did this croud of siking and unworthy guests lodge and take up quarters? For I found not, neither in the Crown office, my head; nor in the white-Hall of my brest, or unckle Johns-House of my body the belly, any place for so great a Farrago. For although all my bowells should be ta∣ken away, yet could not the whole Iakes or cavity contein scarce halfe the quantity. I conclude therefore with my selfe, that those humors were not preexisting▪ but made in me. And I knew, that that rotten stinking melted stuffe, was made by the medicine I had taken; which same thing would have come to passe as often as I had taken it: But it seems he was still troubled with his guest, the scrubadoe, and that the same scab had possess'd him as before. Whence may be known. 1. That this our porous velame, that is obtended like a scarfe over the whole frame of the body is the topick habitaculum of that contagion the fb, and is a disease of the pellis, and scarce enters beyond the confines of the membrana carnosa, and not an intem∣perature of the liver. 2. That the vitious temper of those humours in the scab, are false and fain'd, which were produc'd by the onely tact of the glooe.
3. That laxative medicines doe not at all purge or mundifie, but putirfie. 4. That they eliquate the vivid substance of the bo∣dy, and resolve it into corruption. 5. That they indifferently contaminate whatso∣ever by any meanes they can come unto; whether it be the Bloud, or the living flesh it self; and that they doe not, nor cannot selectively separate and draw forth one humour, from another. 6. That the contaminated doth denote his conta∣minating to be meer poyson, and doth effect onely the liquefaction and putrefaction of the body. 7. That the contaminated matter, nature driving forth, will flow out untill the whole strength of the medicine be exantlate. 8. That this cometh to pass as well in a sound man, as in a sick. 9. And therefore that a solutive medicine▪ is full of danger, before Nature is victrix in diseases: For afterwards, it doth not so manifestly shew its hurt. Which things having so seriously weigh'd with my self unto satiety of conviction and satisfaction, gave me ample cause to suspect the use of laxatives, espe∣cially those of the shops now in common use. A woman in Sepulchres parish neer snow-hill, of a laudable constitution, strong and lustie, took a potion of my own prescription, and it was onely of the common infusion of Senna and Rubarb; to whose streining was added only one ounce of syrup of Cychory with Rubarb; and she confessed, with others, it gave her above fourty stooles, and might have gone very neer to have done violence to her life, had not I with much industry applyed my self
to stay it; which was done with good successe. A certain man also took a Scammoniate medioine, and in one day, it gave him above fourty stools, which to∣gether with his pisse that he made that day, was weigh'd, and they weigh'd eighteen pounds and se∣ven ounces of stinking yellow stuffe. Now in sooth, if that rotten melted stuffe, be Choler, and one of the four; then the residue of fleam in the body, (ex∣ceeding choler by one third part, according to Ga∣len) shall weigh twenty seven pounds and ten ounces; and by the same compute, there shall exceed nine pounds, and three ounces of pure black choler; that is, of fleam and melancholy not mingl'd with yellow choler, thirty six pound and thirteen ounces. It's clear  therefore that in a purge there is no purification of the body, but rather a distemperature of the remaining humours if there be any such things. Then, that the aforesaid solution, is not a selective mundation of the choler, or a freeing of the body from superflu∣ous choler: but a meer putrefactive eliquation of the bloud. Because while the bloud is in the veins, it doth not stink; but by and by, it stinks in the guts, in the same instant, when it falls out of the veins: But I pray you, what house of office or Close-stool is there in the body, that can contain thirty seven pounds of fleam, and the remnants of black choler? chiefly when from a purge, the veins which before were full, are now fallen, and appear no more: for the following morning, the wretched man who trusted to the Physitians judgement, and thought himself so well purg'd and cleans'd, speaks now with a small, sharp and hoarse voice; his hands tremble, his knees shake, his eyes hollow, his veins exhausted his
look ghastly, and press'd with an unreasonable thirst, and dejected appetite, thought he should ne∣ver recover: And certainly if the dose of the laxa∣tive had been greater, it would have had his due, and might have made but an ill businesse of it. By this strong purgation then, may be gess'd, nay doth clearly appear the virulent propriety of solutives. The Physitians having their excuse ready, and  to salve up the businesse and their ignorance say, it was the easie nature of the man, in obeying the me∣dicine too much, thereby shunning the aforesaid Colluvies of the remaining humours, and also the disproportion of the same. The which Scammo∣neats, doth not onely draw forth choler out of pro∣priety; but of the bloud it selfe, or the compound out of the four, there is made up that one liquamen, that heap of stinking resolv'd matter: Whence we again conclude it an imposture and cheat, which supposes to bring forth choler or fleam, or a∣vouches, that purges, so call'd, are the Gold-finders, or like the City Night-men, do cleanse and mundify the body of its filth and impurities by the besome of laxation or appropriate and selective deduction; or that they can single out one humour from another, and fall foul upon it, and like a special Bayliff, ar∣rest one humour from all its fellows, without bail or mainprise, though they are all, subsidy entities accor∣ding to the Galenists) and of the grand Jury at the Assizes of life and death held in the Guild-hall or Court of our body▪ which to affirm is a madnesse and dotage beyond the power of Helebore; when themselves confesse that all are eliquated together: And according to Galen, when the bloud begins to putrefie there is made choler: and it's false that a
cholagogall medicine (verbi gratia) will cure ilious diseases. And that it is a deceit in them, who say, they bring out choler, when the other three being first corrupted, are also cast forth. There is no man that is studious of Truth who doth not under∣stand this thing presently, that the Basis of healing of the Antients is overthrown, as well in respect of the humours, as of the selection of solutive medicines. To me seriously it's a wonder not much on this side an astonishment, that the world hath not yet con∣sider'd the perniciousnesse of laxatives, who other∣wise can so quickly sent and perceive any vile arts bordering upon their own purse or profit. It's out of doubt truly, but that laxatives may carry an oc∣cult poison, which hath made so many thousands of poor widowes and orphans. Nor do they bring forth a singular humour after them, which things never were in Nature, unlesse in the books of Phy∣sitians. For truly, encrease the dose of the laxative, and it betrayes it self to be a deadly poison. Well, go to yet, I pray you, why doth that your choler following with such a swift flux, stink so abominably, which but one quarter of an hour before, did not stink at all? For the celerity of the flux, takes away the occasion of putrefaction, and so also of stink. For 'tis a Cadaver or dead body that stinks, & not the turd: Neither could it so suddenly borrow, or be impregnated with such a savour of a strong stinking turd from the gutts. Therefore stink smells of poison, and indicates an efficient poison, and cadavorous matter taken from the living: which I doe thus experimentally prove. If any one have
drunk a dram of white vitriol, dissolv'd in wine, by and by it provokes vomit. But if presently up∣on the drinking of it, he takes down a draught of beer, water, &c. he shall truly have most stools, and yet verily without stink. Scammony therefore and vitriol do equally liquate the mesaraick bloud: This truly, with the violent ponticity of it self; but that, with the putrefactive and stinking strong poison of the laxatives. For which consideration alone, a purgation, ought to be suspected as a cruel and stupid invention. For if according to Galen, while the bloud begins to putrefie there is made cho∣ler, then that same stinking, and yellow melted matter driven out by laxatives, and counterfeiting choler, is generated of putrefied bloud: And by con∣sequence the laxatives themselves are resolvers and putreiyers of the bloud: which is easily gather'd out of Galen, against the schools wills. For he chiefly commends Triacle, forasmuch as it power∣fully resists poisons: also he asserts it, to be the most knowing signe of the best Triacle, that if Triacle be taken, together with laxatives, undoubtedly there will not follow any seiges. Do not these words of Galen convince, that laxatives are meer poisons? To which suspition, the effects also do agree. For a purging medicine being taken, both the sick man  and the sound do equally cast out resolved matter, of the same colour, smell and condition: wherefore it doth not expell the peccant humour, before the non-peccant, but doth indifferently contaminate whatsoever it comes to. Moreover the schools do impugn this selective liberty which they attri∣bute to laxatives. For if any humour of the four
be putrid in feavers, it doth naturally betoken the ablation of it: But Laxatives may selectively draw out the humour out of the bloud; yea, in sound folks, as they list they liquefie the sound flesh; that thence they may obtain their scope, which is to pour down the stinking rotten resolv'd matter, into the common-shoar of the Oeconomy, of which the womb makes e∣jectment. Verily laxatives will not have the like liberty in feavers, to the drawing forth of the pec∣cant and putrid excrement. For the putrid hath no more its pristine essence and properties, which it had before its putrefaction. For although the load∣stone may draw iron; it will not therefore draw rust. Therefore though a purging medicine may resolve the flesh and bloud, that thence it may draw forth choler, which by a specifick propriety, being o'recome, doth draw unto it self: it doth not there∣fore in like sort draw the putrid and putrefied mat∣ter included in the veins, which would be the cause  of feavers. There is no man truly should ever dy by feavers, if those two axioms of the schools were true: To wit, if putrid humours be the cause of fea∣vers; and also, if they yield selectively to purges: It would over and beside be mad caution, that purg∣ing medicines should not be given in the beginning of feavers, before the matter grew turgid; that is to say, before a maturity and concoction of the pec∣cant matter, whence is sufficiently manifest, that the black and dismall use of laxatives are hardly on this side the banks of phlegetontal and direfull evils. But if they should be given after that the matter of the disease is rightly subdu'd, the aforesaid caution contains an imposture too, forasmuch as the effect
procur'd of its own accord and by the benefit of  nature, is attributed to the solvent medicine: from which also truly the good and honest Physitian should more justly abstain; because else it may per∣turb the crisis, and induce the danger of confusion and recidivation: verily a true and perfect purge, which is to say, a cleanser of the body, ought to work onely upon impure, unsound bodies. Here it ought to be a Herculean actor in the Augaean stables  or Dunghill of impurities, and not in the Seraglio or fresh and fair garden of healthy and sound persons. And because of this it's most perfect, which first of all insensibly lulls asleep and pacifies the Archeus, which afterwards (seeing Nature is sola medicatrix) mowes down the weeds, the thornes and thistles of Diseases, and morbifick distempers, and the occa∣sionall causes of them. But they object for their purgers, that it's nothing, though a laxative medicine casts forth the laudable juice out of the veins, chiefly because it drives out with a stronger power and shorter cut the morbi∣fick faeces. Nor is it greatly to be regarded, though solutives do make a little diminution of the strength, with the more crude bloud. But it may be made appear unto ample satisfaction by the con∣sent of experience, that laxatives do not take away the noxious humours, or any disease lodg'd in them. Then, that there are no such things in Nature; nor was ever this meridian of humours ever touch'd or come nigh to, by those, who, Drake-like, have compass'd the whole Globe and round of Nature, and taken all her dimensions by the Jacobs staff of perspective reason and experience; but hangs onely (like castles in the aire) in the Eutopia of vulgar Physitians brains, or
in the narrow creek of their base-born books, and no where else: neither do any diseases respond or goe a pilgrimage to lodge in the New-found-Land of Americall or Prestor-John humours. Then also, that whatsoever the Catharticks profligate, banish, and cast out from the Independency of our vitall Oecono∣my, is not one of the three humours which they say offends, is become malignant, and endeavours to settle a commission of array, to plunder not the petty suburbs but the Westminster-Hall of our sanity and strength, and hath been found, not onely plea∣ding for the monarchy and tyranny of diseases and distempers, but in actuall armes against the Re-pub∣lique; for which he is adjudg'd a Delinquent and Traitor, and to be sequestred and thrust out of the lines of Communication, by the back-door or port esquiline of our healthfull City: but is onely the honest round-head, a true and peaceable Common-Wealth's-man; the bloud who is chosen and ordain'd to be one of the Keepers of the liberties, life and health of our bodies, now slain by the laxative medicine, and sacrific'd as a Holocaust on the Altar of its viru∣lency and poison. Therefore neither dare they give purges in acute feavers, unlesse it be after the mat∣ter grow's urgid, which is as much as to say, after Nature hath return'd Conqueresse▪ For when the diseas'd guest is o'recome and now of his own ac∣cord about to retreat, would fall out, with other filth brought to passe by the Physick! unlesse the Archeus being pricked with indignation by an ho∣stile impression of the virulent medicine cast in, stirs up a fresh assault or recidivation of the disease; which thing we have observ'd to happen frequent∣ly.
Every laxative therefore is absolutely noxious, and also frustraneous, we should therefore be guil∣ty before God, and uncharitable to man, if we did not perswade to abstain altogether from purges. For let but a virulent solutive be a little while detain'd in the stomack, and it doth putrefie, and contami∣nate whatsoever was deposited in the mesentery to better uses: and drawes in place of the putrefi'd treasury, the depurated bloud from the vena cava, and doth leisurely contaminate it with a virulent contagion, and eliquate it with the stinking fer∣ment of the cadaver. Hence is that losse and over∣throwing of the strength by laxatives, and pertur∣bation of the vitall monarchy, without hope of sa∣nation from thence. And this rage of the laxatives doth endure, not only when they are present, but after they are gone, they leave such a tincture behind them, as causeth the body to work till it's wholly spent, and hath sufficiently sated it self on the li∣ving substances thereof; for the poison hath tainted with its contagion both the stomach and intestines. For so in some persons an artificiall Diarrhaea hath arisen, which thence forwards hath continu'd un∣till their dying day, and laugh'd at the promis'd help, and inefficacious try'd means of astringents. The use of laxatives therefore are altogether to be disallow'd and forbidden: Repetitions of purgati¦ons are more wicked and hurtfull; and indeed every purge is both frustraneous and hurtfull, in respect, they levell their power onely against the productions or effects, and not against the Causes; chiefly when viscid excrements are seated remotely from the sto∣mack, they are too stubborn and refractory to yield
to the laxative operation of Purgers. If any please to adde, that although Laxatives may seem to have afforded ease and relief, for a day or two after their use insomuch as the masse of crude and inconfected bloud in the mesaraick veins being voided by stool, there must of necessity succeed the more sparing dis∣pensation of blood through the body, and penury of nourishment in the lungs, and by consequence a lesse quantity of excrement be rejected: yet do they, by substracting from the necessary aliment of the whole, and by leaving behind them an evil tincture in the instruments of common digestion, every day more and more infringe the universall Oecono∣my of the body, and impugn the conserving vigour of nature. Wherefore we conclude with Hippocrates ad Democritum that every solutive works with the de∣prae'dation of the strength, and very substance of our bodies. Wherefore there is no Physitian, that can faith∣fully or dares freely promise health; by any laxa∣tives of the shops. But true solutives, as they nei∣ther putrefie, nor bring forth selectively any fain'd humours; nor resolve the vitalls, so do they disco∣ver themselves by a three-fold character. First, That they bring forth nothing out of a sound body, nor do they move, alter, or make it m. Then that they thrust not any thing out; but what offends: and therfore do not aggravate but lighten the burden, and then by and by the sick feels himself well. Then thirdly, that they draw not forth the disease neither by sweat, vomit, or seige; but insensibly resolve, in whatsoever part the disease is lodg'd, the rest nature being busied about.
Laxatives of this sort do not selectively bring out humours (which are fain'd in themselves) but (see∣ing that we are not nourished but with one onely juice, namely, bloud, therefore we intend the pro∣pulsion, not of bloud, but of morbisick exerements) do resolve whatsoever exotick or alien guest is in∣serted within the Inne of life, but not the vitalls: unlesse they be taken in an indiscreet dose or too of∣ten: otherwise they onely respect excrements, Na∣ture with in lending help to this purpose. Thus then the compound laxatives of the shops have appear'd in their colours, that they are an im∣posture, meer poisons, resolvers of the flesh and bloud, diminishers of our strength and substance, and them∣selves diminished, and enervated of their powers by their correctives. Wherefore we hate the pre∣paration  of simples, as oft as lotion, boiling, rosting, association, or calcination wasteth the powers there∣of. For Aloe by ablution looseth the juice, and there remaineth a meer rozen, which by its adhaesion to the entrails, stirreth up gripings and hemor∣roids. In a word whereas the geniall and chief vertue of  spices, is chiefly in that which carrieth the sent, if this of its own accord vanish, and of its non accord strike the smell, what at length will not be effected by boiling and rosting, especially when a degree is added? which our distillations of odoriferous things do teach us. Finally, what can be said more absurdly in the  schools, then to reduce harts-horn into ashes, which are altogether unsavory and without vertue, for great purposes? And instead of preparation to sub∣stitute
castration, or rather privation? For we have had the leisure to learn that most remedies with their odour and sapour, as well within, as without, do help our infirmities; and therefore we have de∣tested the mixtures of simples in that if you adde a∣nother odour to a sanative one, that may drown the other, palliate, or turn it into it self, or raise up a neuter out of both together, we know that the sa∣native vertue will be abolish'd, and the effect wished for by the patient, be made void. Therefore the association of spices and sweet things is by us suspe∣cted. Moreover we for the most part hate the other Confections of the shops, because they are without vertue, wherein they endeavour with certain ridi∣culous things to palliate and allay the excessive and violent power of things, yea in the mean time they give out that the innate benefit of such a medicine is as much promoted, as there is power taken away by the addition of other strong things. For with the greatest part they mixe some grains of Cinna∣mon, or other vain things, that they may quell the fury of the more violent ingredients; as if the madnesse of the laxatives were  with some graines of spices. Besides who is there, though meanly instructed in Chymicall matters, who know∣eth not that in aromaticall confections, the chie∣fest fault is committed by the plurality of the ingredients? Next that most of them offend in crudity, hardnesse, chausure, choice and substi∣tution.  Again that they are put in with an uncertain dose? By which means the hoped effect is disap∣pointed, and that by the error of each. And to
wind up all in one example: what is there in the confection Lithon-tribon, or stone break that is an∣swerable to the promises of the etymon or deriva∣tion of the word? For to what purpose is Cinna∣mon, Cloves, the 3 peppers, acorns, costus, rhapen∣tick, Cassia, delli, mastick, amomum, peuceda∣num, spike, ginger, the wood and juice of balsam, tragacanthum, germander, euphorbium, the oiles of nard and moschelinum? Do every one of these con∣spire to the end propos'd in the denomination of the medicine? Or from them being blended, and mar∣ring the intentions of each other, will a new ver∣tue arise, to perform the promised Cure? Can it powerfully break the stone in the kidney and blad∣der? And presently loose all the defects of the vrine? Or rather will not the juice of balsam pe∣rish among the other grolleries and trifles? But in opiate confections the same absurdity is observ'd as in the aromatick ones. Which we will also dispatch in one example. For to what purpose in the Aurea Alexandrina Ni∣colai is there a blending of sixty five Ingredients? Of which simples there is none of kin with Opium, and Mandrake, the pillars of the Confection. Of the like calculation are those cardinal columnes of Galenill Physick▪ Mithidate and Triacle, the be∣loved Minerva's of our Physitians and Fools, at this day, deify'd as little Indian Deiries, or he when su∣perstitious Moores salute his liht; so do those heads, who being ignorant of all things, foolishly admire all things so easily entertain them, and with that infatuated reverence, worse then moorish: as if they were Dame Natures second or her self, her chief
friend, her true Caelestiall balsam, her life, power and activity, the only refiner and sequestrator Ge∣neral of all her impurities, when in sober truth, both to themselves and nature, they are in direct anti∣pathy, as the Zenith to the Nadir; and little lesse then a stark and dead congèalment of wood and hay & stub∣ble forc'd together; the totality of whose nūber, nature, essence and property is but a meer olla podrida, not a whit convenient, nor effectually prepar'd by any art, industry or dexterity; and they have caught pro Junone Nubem. Medicines are like unto actors in the body of man, the soene: The Epitasis or main end of them, ought to be homogeniety in themselves and to nature, that so both may play their parts, before they make their exit, or quietus est. Truly the combining of simples, made according to the pleasure of some ignorant fellow, is of as i∣dle cordage, as his, who went about to twist a rope of sand, which was a task, they say, that pos'd the Devil; that, that hath infatuated the schools, ex∣animated and tortur'd the sick; having put them in hope, they have fail'd them, and by uncertain conjectures have set to sale the opportunities of cu∣ring, which are ready to slip away every moment, and causeth them to passe over. Wherefore the compositions of the shops, if you examine them with a single eye, and unprejuc'd mind, will every where in the syrups, electuaries, pills, Loches, Tro∣shiscks and other like, fill you with a profitable ad∣miration to observe how the world by the prattle of Physitians and fooleries of the Schools, and their vain presumptions is deluded and bafl'd▪ For we Christians believe with the Stoicks that the World
was created for the use of man: which we having heretofore diligently ponder'd in the concentrati∣ons of our mind, the result was, that the use of man might very commodiously have been without so many poisons. For we found that these more cold climates of ours, were herein more happy, that they had no creeping things that were both mon∣strous and poisonous, wherewith the hotter Zone abounded. Certainly we have not much need of poisons, or familiarity with, or abundance of them, neither will their use any waies compensate so ma∣ny calamities arising from them: yea if the Earth bring forth thistles and thornes for the curse of sin, certainly she bears far greater calamities on her back as well in the tribe of living creatures, as ve∣getables, which are hurtful to the life of man. Wherefore the text threatneth the least part by thi∣stles and thorns, of those evils which by the subtil∣ty of the Serpent, man hath felt. Certainly if it be well searched out, Nature hath hardly any thing free which hath not its poison secretly mingled with it. For we have no Roses and Violets which do not cozen us, and under so great fragrancy of smell do not hide the contagions of poison; namely, the signs of Putrefaction, the colliquation of our bodie, and steal∣ing away our strength. Wherefore making a list  of the simples, we shall find but few of them hurtless; yea, if you behold the fields, the whole globe of the earth, is but one contiguous spiders webbe. Moreover if we look narrowly into it, there seems to be at this day the same face of things, as was be∣fore the first sinne. And consequently perhaps from the beginning, there were more hurtfull and
noisome poisons then good things on the earth, yet was there no exterminating medicine for man, be∣cause Paradise wanted such poisons, although Ser∣pents were there, or perhaps for immortalities sake, poisons would have been nothing to man in Eden. But on the contrary, the Almighty saw, that what∣soever things he had made even in the world with∣out Paradise, were good in themselves, and to their ends. wherefore we must confess a while ago we do∣ted, thinking that poisons were unworthy to be; both because the honour of God required not their exi∣stence, as also that man would have more willingly been without many poisons whereupon we thought that poisons were neither conducible to the glory of God, nor to the use of man. For there are but few harm∣lesse ones, which one may use without caution, but the greatest part contend against us with horrid Tyranny. Others gnaw us while they burn with their sharpnesse. But the greatest part under a friendly and fair shew do beguile us, and hide with∣in a destructive enemy. In a word, every thing is full of filth, and is horrid with impurities, and con∣sisting of crudities, disproportionablenesse and invin∣cible pertinacy of perversitie. For though man were brought into Paradise, yet did the Creator know from eternity that the world should be a dwelling for him; and as he gave the earth to the Children of men, so he created the same with all the contents thereof for man. At length taking a view of all things by Chymistry, and seeing them more clearly, we repented of out rastinesse, and former foolish ignorance. For in both we adored in suppliant wise with admiration the immense
Clemency and wisdome of the Architect. For he  would not have poisons be poisons, or prejudiciall to us. For he made not death; nor any extermi∣nating medicine in the earth, but rather that by a little industry of ours they might be changed into great pledges of his love, for the use of mortalls, against the rage of future diseases. For in them ly∣eth hid that help, which more kinde and familiar simples do otherwise deny. For the greater and he∣roick uses of Physitians such horrid poisons are reser∣ved. For brutes scarce feed upon them, either that they intuitively know the poison, which other∣wise is not discovered by the smell or tast: or that some spirit governing bruits, doth keep those poy∣sons for greater uses, as being heires of the greatest vertues. It is at least sufficient that the bruites leave to us the chiefest remedies, as it were by the Com∣mand of the most High, who taketh more care of us then of beasts. For crude Asarum, with what anguish is it vomited up, being a present poison, the sto∣mack doth sufficiently testifie? as also how it is mi∣tigated with boiling, and the poison changed into an opening diuretick, the remedie of slow feavers, which thing discovers the aroma that was hidden therein. Thus Aron boiled with vineger becometh milde, and is the cure of great Symptomes. Wherefore the Schools have set on foot Corrections and we could wish they were not ridiculous ones, and such as gold and take away the force and vertue of simples: for they think that the laxative part flyeth away from Asarum, by boyling, no otherwise then in length of time, everything putrefieth with its own mould.
Yet at least the root of Asarum doth not alike grow milde being sodden with wine, as if it be boiled in water; yet in alike degree of fire the laxative part thereof would in like manner expire. Others there∣fore think that the cruditie in Asarum is the cause of Solution; but these neglect the herbs that are more crude then Asarum, and consider not that Helebore would not be brought to maturity by boiling, if vomiting arose from crudity. They boil Scammo∣ny in sowre things, that they may mitigate it, but ordinary Physitians know that Scammony is by this means gelded, so that if it be exposed to the sowre vapour of Sulphur, it will be wholly deprived of its vertue; so that so much sournesse as it takes, so much of its own propertie is lost. But we desiring with a fatherly mind to correct the raging force of medicines, well understand that the antient powers of things ought to remain, and in their root to be turned inward, or under their simplicity, to be transmuted into other properties there privily lurking under the guard of the poison, or gotten anew by reason of the perfection added: by which meanes Coloquintida turneth inward its laxative and noxious qualitie, and there ariseth from the bottome a resolutive power, that excel∣lency  cureth chronicall diseases. For Paracelsus in the tincture of the Lily of Antimony, did with praise attempt that; yet he concealed it, or was ignorant that the same cometh to passe in all the venomes of animalls and vegetables, by their circulated salt. For all their venome perisheth, if they return into their first entities. This high pitch, not the schools, but Gods chosen Physitians, whom the Almighty
hath elected from their mothers womb, shall know in the age to come, and it shall make a difference between the sheep and the goats, between them who enter into the medicall Temple by the door of the light of Nature, and the expert mechanick practi∣ses of Philosophy; and those who climbe up by the window of their own pride, self-conceit and the darknesse of Ethnick bookes. Wherefore the sim∣ples that are of great powers are not to be castrated, nor to be mortified, but to be meliorated by art, for the extraction of the things that lie hid, or by the suspension of the virulency, or substitution of one for another, by adding strong specificals. Thus much let this serve for them, to whom it hath not been given to tast the power of the greater circulated salt. For some things laying down their wildnesse, grow mild by the addition of other things, and become neuters, partaking of the pow∣ers on both sides. Neither is it therefore lawfull to borrow such kind of additions from the received Dispensatories of the shops, which doe not teach the melioration, or corrections, but the destruction of things, either altogether, or else afford but trifling Correctives. For example, the Marquesse Charles Spinelli Generall of the Tuscans; when he had walk∣ed on foot about the City of Florence, and viewed all the walls, commanded the Physitians to be cal∣led, and said unto them, that he had sometimes been sick of an Epilepsie, and was cured by Helmont, but afterwards was ever and anon troubled with a dizzinesse: after that he passed over the sea from Aquitane to Tuscany the Colledge of Physitians, on the morning following prescribe him a scruple of
white Helebore, and for a corrective adde as much Anniseeds: Halfe an hour after he vomits, and in vain implores the help of his Physitian being absent, accusing his murtherers and saying: Helmonte mio, voi me lo dicesti gli medici tuccideranno: my Hel∣mont, you told me the Physitians would kill me. He held his peace, and after two houres, his sto∣mack first suffering a convulsion, and then his whole body, he dieth in a swound. The Physitians seek excuses, and the earth covered their fault. For thus the Confections of the Schools by their foolish corrective Dispensatories, take up many things to fill up the load. The Opiates have chiefly hot things ad∣ded to them; but laxatives for the most part gin∣ger, mace, Annise; and whatsoever things ease gri∣pings, which follow from the laxatives. Oh with what licence doth ignorance rage uncontrolled a∣mongst men! How little do they understand their Hippocrates: If those things be taken away which ought, (that is, such things as are hurtfull and burden∣some) the patient mends, and easily beareth it. For since those things that hurt within, do oft-times not weigh a dram, all the purgation that ends in health, must be an evacuation either imperceptible, or at least very moderate, and with a restauration of the strength. For these are the things which patients easily endure with content. Wherefore the corre∣ctives of medicines are unprofitable loads, and with∣out knowledge of things described by the Schools, and so destructive to the medicines at least, if not to the Patients. This part of Physick requires a skil∣full and exact secretary of Nature; because therein, the ample riches of medicines, and the golden hous∣hould-stuffe
of Glanra is found. The Schools had heretofore learn'd of our Philosophers, that most ex∣cellent vertues dwell in simples, that were guarded with destructive poisons. This made way for the rashnesse of the Schools, who mingled the poisons drawn out by expression, and the corrosives o∣pen'd with their antidotes: hoping that by the goodnesse and quantity of the adjuncts, the malig∣nitie of the poison would be overcome; as if it were agreeable to health, to have a pestilent glove brought to guests into a chamber replenished with whole∣some aire. For we do not here accuse the viper in  Triacle, without which it would but be as it were a cadaverous heape of simples. For the flesh of vipers is in it self unhurtfull and without poison, yea an Antidote against it. But the Troshiscks made thereof, by being boiled, leave all their vertue in the broth, which the raw flesh did conserve. Concerning Ar∣senick in this place we complain, being Magisterially, as they call it, put into Antidotes. For the Schools presume for the raritie of their boldnesse to deserve be∣liefe, and to place the glory of studies in the authority of possession. Neither is it perpetual that the most ex∣cellent vertues attend about poisons in the same subject, so that they are covered by the poisons. For Arsenick, Orpiment &c. though they be fix'd and dul∣corated, are yet never to be taken inwards, although others perswade the contrary: they are onely good applyed outwards, and kill other poisons of ulcers, and tame them if they themselves be first tamed. Wherefore the corrections of medicines, are without the knowledge of properties, parts and Consonancies. For what doth a spice weigh in respect of a poison?
If the whole body being lustie and full of life doth presently fall down being smitten with the tooth of a viper? will Napelles grow milde with the ad∣mixture of cloves? Will Coloquintida cease to cause putrefaction with his torsions, if it be joined with Tragacant? Therefore corrections in Dispensatories are grievances, and dull additaments, which do not  mitigate the virulencies, but wast the powers of medicines. For as poisons have a fermentall quick∣nesse of working, so care should be taken that the strength and quickness of medicines might be con∣served, and they by the applications of Art be di∣rected against the necessities of Chronicall and remote diseases. This onely thing remained in this busi∣nes, that we infringe and subdue the violence of the thing, with a fermental propagation. Wherefore as we in generall pitty the Compositions and Correcti∣ons of the shops, so we yet more detest the precipita∣tions, vitrifications, and preparations of Mercury, An∣timony, Tuty, Sulphur &c. And also the adultera∣tions of Spirits from Aromaticks: hot seeds, of vitriol, of sulphur &c. For they are prepared for gain by our fugitive servants, and furnish Apothecaries shops, rather in comtempt of Chymistry, then the  defect of patients. In like manner we deplore the shamefull simplicity of those, who with great hope prescribe to patients those painted butter-flyes of leafe-gold, and pounded Jewels; selling their igno∣rance, if not their fraud, at agreat rate. As if the stomack could thence expect the least help. More suttle and therefore more to be condoled is the er∣ror of those, who corrode gold, silver, Coral, pearles and the like with soure liquors, and thinke they dis∣solve
them, so that they will be easily admitted in∣to the veins, truly communicating their proper∣ties to us. For they are ignorant, alas! ignorant that sourenesse is an enemy to the veins, and there∣fore that the forreign sourenesse of the dissolvents be∣ing overcome and transmitted, such metalls and stones are powder, as before. Which though it be brought into a most fine flower, yet cannot the same be subdued by the stomack, or impart its strength to us. Which that it may be apparent to the sight, poure salt of Tartar on the things dissolved, in some pontick corrosive liquor, and presently being dis∣solved, it will fall to the bottome in form of pow∣der. For if aqua fortis change not metalls in the substance, although those things become transpa∣rent, that were before opacous: nothing hinders but that silver may be thence again recovered. With what blindnesse therefore do they prescribe stones and pearles, as though by corrosives they left their former essence of stone or metall? For it was the in∣vention of a subtile deceiver, that he might before his patients set a high rate on his potions. Because ignorant deceivers think, if the thing dissolving be not by the sight distinguished from the thing dissol∣ved, that the thing dissolved is truly and substan∣tially transmuted. They urge, that pearls, Co∣rall &c. are not dissolved in acid liquors, but on∣ly as it were calcined by the salts of the things dis∣solving. And this they prove by silver dissolv'd in Aq. fortis or regis, which from thence is brought back again whole; therefore hath not lost its pri∣stine essence: and this they wrest to the aforesaid stones, and urge it, because by the salt of the alka∣li
of Tartar, the same stone is again precipitated to the bottome, which before was an invisible pouder; forasmuch as the alcaal salt doth drink up the ace∣tous salt, which did contain in it self the pouder of the stones. But they perceive not, first of all, that their own principles doe both teach and extoll dissolutions of this sort: Then also, that the sto∣mack wants this salt of Tartar, that she may precipi∣tate the dissolved pouders, and separate them from the thing dissolving, and therefore they propose a ridiculous thing. And by consequence, that the matter of Pearls, Corrall, &c. once dissolved af∣ter this manner, remains dissolved, and is admitted into the veins with the liquors of the Chyme, and moreover is transmuted into urine or bloud, and  performes what is promised. To which we sub∣join an answer. That Nature hath no need of the salt of Tartar, to the separating of this pouder, from the thing dissolving: Because she is taught as well by meanes of the aliment received, as of her own proper digestion, to sequester this pouder. For there are very many things amongst food, which doe shew forth this effect. Such as are pot∣herbs and Vulnerary-herbs &c. which for the most part have a lixiviall volatile salt. Moreover the di∣gestion it self of the stomack ordinarily doth trans∣mute acid vegetable spirits substantially into a faline volatile salt of urine: which when she may no long∣er enjoy her pristine power of dissolving, which she at first had in acidity; by and by she relinquish∣eth (that is precipitates) the pouder, which before she had dissolved under her own acidity: and there∣fore before the mouths of the mesaraick veins doth
precipitate, and cast off the aforesaid pouder. But the Galenists goe on and urge saying, that Bezoar-stones, and Crabs-stones (erroneously called Crabs-eyes) &c. as well taken in pouder, as dis∣solved in some acid dissolving thing, do notably help in the plague, feavers, stone, wounded persons, and bruised from on high. Wherefore it savours of sim∣plicity to deny the same in pearls, Corrall, &c. To which we answer, That Gemmes, stones, and things of a saxatile substance do differ much among themselves. For first of all Gemmes, flints, marbles, and whatsoever have a cristalline hardnesse, do not at all act or suffer in us, or by us, unlesse per mo∣dum appensi & periapti; and that but a little while, only untill they passe from the mouth thorow the excrements. Very languid therefore is the vertue of these, because it lies hid and shut up in too dense a body. But pearls and Corrall, and whatsoever else hath a saxatile hardnesse of shell-fish, must give place truly to gemmes for hardnesse; and yet they are not therefore digested in the Athanr of our Oe∣conomy, so well as in the stomack of some birds. But the stones of Bezoar and of Crabs &c. not so hard as pearls, are not of a saxatile nature: but are rather made of a lacteous semi-caseate & semi-petrified juice, and have a neutrall nature of a tophe, between a Cartilage and a stone. To this that hath been said, for the better understanding of the truth we take leave to adde, That though Bezoar stones, and the stones of Crabs &c. as touching the solid matter of their pouder, are in no wise digested in the Bal∣neum of our stomack; although they carry in their breasts a lacteous and mucilaginou juice, of great vertue, yet of an exiguous quantity; such as hap∣pens
to be drawn sorth also by the decoction of harts-horn rasped. If therefore you boil the pou∣der of the aforesaid stone in rain or distilled water, and streining the decoction by a filter you seperate it from the pouder, & this also draw off by distillation per Balneum, you shall then find somewhat of the a∣foresaid muccilage. But the rest of the pouder, as it is not overcome by elixation, so it continues in a perma∣nency of indigestion in the stomack, not to be subdu∣ed by charmes, or won to the scepter of subjection, neither by entreaties, nor by the whole power of the Archeus. And moreover from the smal quantity of the aforesaid liquor the reason's manifest, why one dram of the aforesaid pouder of bezoar stone taken in some vehicle, effects more then one scruple of the same. Here it will not be impertinent, nor beside the Cushion, if we speak of (not as falling foul upon it, but taking in our way) that scare-crow of imagi∣nary and pannick fear of the numerous vulgar and pusillanimous Physitians, concerning the dose or quantity to be taken at a time of Bezoar-stone. We intend not to make it our designe to beat down, or make apocryphall the praecipitous opinion of the com∣mon people, in their obstinate creed and implicite confidence in the goodnesse of this stone, from the incredible number of them in this Countrey, and in all Europe; whereby it's impossible that that coun∣trey of India (and but a spot of that neither) can fur∣nish so many Countreys by a thousand parts of these stones, that is every where so common: when it's e∣ported by those of the Countrey, and by Authors of good esteem and credit, That all the stones there must be brought to the King of that Countrey: And
Garcias ab Horto saies, that it is very difficult to get any there; whence seeing they are now so familiar and frequent among us, and how it comes to passe, and that we have any good, is almost a miracle, at least as rare as the white stone. Mathiolus also in Libro epistolar. tertio ad Quacelbenum, saies, That the stones the Emperour had, were not good. Val∣lesius again, a learned and chief Physitian to Philip the second, King of Spain, in his fourth book, be∣leeves the King himself had not, nor in all Spain was not a true stone. Moreover the Physitians them∣selves of that Countrey confesse that these stones are very rare, and besides are so dear, that they are kept very precisely by the Indians themselves for their own proper use. We dare believe, that above the hundred part of these Bezoar-stones so called, are sorged and sophisticate: such a cunning cast of suttle and deceiving merchants are there here in England, after the Italian mode, who can so exactly counter∣feit them, that themselves cannot know the one from the other, the true from the false, but by a certain eminent signe of notifying them. Josephus Acosta in lib. 4. cap. 42. confesses that the simple Indians themselves know very well to adulterate them, and do it with a wonderfull accurate artifice, and very frequently; and no wonder, nor unlike to veri∣fimility, when this cousenage is wont to happen very often in medicines of a lesser price. Lastly upon sure grounds we know, that there is not much to be trusted to this stone; because they do not answer to those effects written of by Authors. For they will have it to move sweat powerfully, and some∣times vomit, sometimes as alexipharmacall; and again as Cardiacall; and therefore fly to it as to the
last refuge, as to the Anchora spei, and Sanctuary of life. But alas poor ignorant deluded vulgar: who will rather snore in the lethargy of their stupid ig∣norance, then awake to the disquisition of Truth. They erre first, in their too good opinion of this stone. Secondly, in their too great ignorance of the quality of it. And thirdly, in their too little know∣ledge of the quantity. Which last is greatly feared among the common people, and the same is evi∣dent from the Physitians prescriptions. We will suppose now we have the true genuine Bezoar stone, because the wild beliefe of the wilderness'd vulgar runs a madding after this stone more, then seeking to be baptized with the new name, or have the E∣vangelicall illegible stone. The most are wont to fear the quantity of it, thinking it to be a most hot medi∣cine, and powerfully vigorous: and therefore dare not exceed above four or five grains at most; Seeing it causes large sweat. Now sudorificks seem to be begotten under the torrid Zone, to be hot, because they attenuate and cut the Line of humours▪ and expell them out of the Center of the body, unto the confines bordering upon the Territories of the Epi∣dermis by the Nilus of profuse sweat that rills through the creeks of the Pelt, the pores. But first it is to be noted that at this day we seldome find Be∣oar-stone to be the Mid-wife of evill humours, or impregnated with a vertue to deliver and purge the body of vitious excrements, by the menstruum of sweat, as daily experience testifies. Secondly, that whosoever takes this stone in the maximity or great∣est quantity of it, shall not therefore perceive him∣self to be e're the hotter; which every sound man
may bring to the Test of experience in himself. Thirdly, they who have written hitherto o this stone, & have sailed and coasted into the furthest parts of the knowledge of it, have steer'd by the compasse or Lant-skip only of others petragraphy and descri∣ption. Some calculate and will have it to dwell under the temperate Zone. Others under the fri∣gid. But no man who hath travelled into the In∣dies or America of its qualities and vertues, by the fixed North-pole of experience will say, that it is an in∣habitant under the sūmer solstice or more hotter Zone; but is a naked substance living in the Autumne or wildernesse of insipidity, having no elevation of either of those two poles of odour or sapour in it; which is a wonder that for all this, it should attain to the meridian of that degree of heat, as is compu∣ted and ascribed to it; whereby it's feared as a Har∣ry-Cain, least the deluge of sweat it may procure by its hot sudorifick quality, might drown and wash away our vitall powers: Therefore they get into the Arke of a small dose or quantity, and save them∣selves. But it is more nigh unto the Israel of veri∣simility, that it acts by an occult, and not manifest property, namely, Corroborating and fortifying the Canaan of the Heart, against the Aegyptian Garlick and onyons of malignant powers; whence we may in∣fer by the way. That the militia of this stone is uselesse and unprofitable to draw a Line of fortification, about the breast-works of the heart, except there be an hostile incursion and invasion of malignant distempers, to settle the barbarous tyranny of evill and venemous humours, to subvert and overthrow the actions and powers of the Common-Wealth of our vitalls. And so although it
may do no harm, yet to be sure it doth no good, and is administred in vain. Fourthly, They who write of this stone, do not agree in the latitude, de∣gree, or dose of it: For as in their petragraphicall cha∣racter of the qualities of it, they make many a voy∣age wide of the Aequator, and beyond the line of Truth; so in their description of its dimensions or quantity, they come short of it; and at the Lands∣end fall foul, and split upon the sands of a small and common dose, of three or four grains. But Mathiolus prescribes at least seven grains. Garcius ab Horto unto thirty grains, and confesses that more may be taken without hurt. And we verily be∣leeve and from the premisses we before hinted do affirm, that one main reason why this stone is so little ef∣fectuall, is because it is taken in too small a quantity. And it is recorded, that to Edward the Confessour was given a dram weight at one time of this stone in pou∣der, which is sixty grains. Fumanellus also com∣mends a dram of it to be given in the plague. And certainly if the stone be innoxious, a good quantity also will be innoxious. Thus therefore the mag∣nified vertue of this childish Rattle, like that pre∣tious trifle of the Countesse of Kents pouder, with those seriovs fopperies of Pearls, Corrall and Crabs∣stones, either in pouder, or dissolved in some acid liquor, crumbles away, and vanishes like a morn∣ing dew, before the sunne of Truth. Again, it's worth our noting that if wine or vineger be drunk in the same draught with the aforesaid pouders, they do not dissolve one sixth part of the pouder, and leave not the rest changed, but whole. The
which will be manifest from this experiment. That if any one drinks the stone of crabs, not in pouder, but broken in little bits, and after excretion it be washed, you shall find the same weight of it as before, and truly nothing of it brought under subjection to the stomack, nor it to pertake any thing of those stones by digestion. And here we advise the Gale∣nists to consider how they are beaten with their own weapon. For if the aforesaid stones or pearles be∣ing taken in pouder, do melt in us; they in vain attempt to dissolve them in the acid salnie vitriola∣ted qualities of wine, vineger or juice of Limons. For there is nothing of the indigestible dissolved thing conveyed into us, but that it contains its own digestible part, as we before have said of the lacte∣ous mucilage of animated stones. But if otherwise the dissolved should make progresse, and march in∣to the Garrison of the veins (which never happens) that he might offer and communicate his gifts un∣to us (suppose it be pearls, or the aforesaid stones) it would stir up a mutiny, and consecution of more miseries and anxieties from this soure enemy and a∣lien, then helps or profit. For in the first place, seeing they have refus'd to answer and subscribe to the engagement of the Common-Hall of our oecono∣my, the stomack, (who is made Lord paramount and Surveyor-Generall over all things that's to be re∣ceiv'd in) and have not submitted to the present power of digestion, (as was proved even now) that's conferred on it by the Parliament of our In∣teriours, in their totality and full session: it is therefore adjudged and voted that they shall not be preferred any further, nor admitted to com∣pound,
or be concocted in the second digestion: because they do not goe to the lysium of the second, but by the purgatory of the first. And therefore se∣condly, continue and are looked upon as Delin∣quents, and never are converted into true Com∣mon-Wealth's men, bloud, but into an other recre∣ment of the veins. Vain and fruitlesse are the blew promises of Phy∣sitians of their cordiall, exhilarating, fortifying and corroborating medicines, prepared of gold, gemmes, &c. of like stupidity with the rest. For although they be reduced into most fine poder, yet they that suffer nothing from the fire, how much lesse can they be transmuted by the digestive vertue. For first they are pouder'd in a brasse or iron mor∣tar; and the gemmes srape off, and carry away part of the brasse with themselves, because they are  harder then my file. And this we have shewed sometimes to the shops, when we have maerated that their pouder of pearles in Aq. fortis. For in∣deed by and by the gre colour hath betrayed it self, and the Apothecary confesses that in stead of his cordiall and fortifying medicines of pearles and gemmes which should act powerfully, he hath com∣municated to the sick the green rust of brsse or ver∣digrease. Then if afterwards the gemmes be more curiously ground upon a stone or marble, (far more soft then themselves) they encrease in weight, and the marbles and stones become confortative, beyond the originall gemmes. All which at length being summ'd up by an im∣partiall and mature judgement the totall product must amount to this. That the pouder of peals profit no more then flint-stones or glass-pouder taken inward∣ly.
And to this will subscribe all those, who ap∣ply themselves to the serious disquisitions and scru∣tinies of Nature in examining of bodies by Analysis, and who with me pitty the deplorable ignorance and foolishnesse of Physitians, and the unluckie tutelage of the sick. It is not denyed, but worthy of all due acknowledgement, that pearls, not of the same hardnesse with cristalline gemmes, but members of the animall Common-Wealth, do con∣tain most precious vertues and riches of good; yet cannot bestow any notable help; much lesse in their pouder or dissolv'd as afore. For we have had the opportunity and happinesse to learn, and now divulge to the world, that they may take notice in the first place, that whatsoever Physitians prate and babble, and largely promise concerning them, it is but meer vain boasting. Then that a true margaite or pearl, hath not within a farinaceous pouder, and dissimilar from its Cortex; but the whole systeme or globe of the pearle, with all the whole round of spheares, from the surface to the cen∣ter, is homogeneall, hath a Syzygia, a conjunction or revolution of meer pellicles, lying on one another, as the involved pills of onyons encompasse one ano∣ther. The which thing they can testifie with me, who know how to reduce pearls of ovall figures, in∣to orbicular ones. But the aforesaid firmament or Region of pellicles or conticities are in no wise resol∣ved and fixed into a Caput mortuum or alol pouder by the Crucible or reverberium of acidity as aforesaid. The which only grinds the meal of fals pearls in the  mill of its acid frment. And moreover, that al∣though the aforesaid circumvoltuion of corticities
should be dissolved, (which is not) yet were it but as a terra damnata or pulverata, and the whole batch, but the same meal or dust of the pearle as before. Doth it not then on all hands appear very ridicu∣lous, and worthy of hissing, that they will comfort, fortifie and corroborate with their Alkermes, gemmes, leaf-gold, pouder of pearls, &c. when an enemy in the bowels and heart of the City of our vitalls rages and tyrannizeth within, by the prerogative of routing our forces and remaining Conquerour, and precipitates the life it self into all disorder and confusion of dissolution? For such an enemy who could lay seige to our oeconomy, and dares to at∣tempt the scaling of our fort-rampant, beat all the Commanders and Officers from their works, and cause Nature not only to sound a Retreat, but quite quit the Garrison: how will he not grapple, within push of pike, with all her Auxiliaries, blow up the sconces and bull-workes of fortifications, the strong∣est of them all, despise their contemptible militia, and hang out the flag of defiance to all the Recruits the Physitian can make, and let down the port-cul∣lice, to stake out their Cordiall cups. He that can subdue and bring under subjection the health of the soundest man, and despises the strength of the strongest; what cannot he do to him being over∣come, though he hath the advantage of the sunne, wind and hill of corroborating cordiall medicines? Chiefly when these Auxiliaries have no good cause, no good ground or footing in Nature; seeing they are wholy exotick, not at all agreeing in union of symbole with the spirits. Will such an enemy, such a Sampson care for these cardiacall Phylistims? Or
think they to lull him a sleep or bind him with these cords? will he not rouse up, and shake his locks like a Gyant, and breake in pieces their bands as threed. As he neither fears nor cares for any Committee of sequestrations, their purges, so neither will he be bribed or laid asleep with their cordialls. In vain therefore is the ease or lightning of Sym∣ptomes intended, if a conquering power of healing be not present, which can compescate and procure the consopition of the confusion of the vitall Archeus: which truly is an essential and principall efficient of healing. And here we are fallen upon the detection of two other collaterall errors of Physitians, concerning the story of an old cock, and that pittiful poor in∣vention of Clysters. In the first place, Physitians, Mid-wifes, and others given to Physick, crack much of the vertues of Cock-broth. But this will vanish away in fumo, like an old-wifes-dream; Broth of an old cock joined with herbs, is a particular of the Lady Ignorances hous-wifery. For first a young Cock, hath more life, spirit and vertue then the old decrepit ones. Concerning this, let judgement be committed to the Hens. These Physick broths are very ingratefull to the stomack and troublesome, and therefore are easily let fall into, and made the companion of excrements. But we passe light∣ly over this messe. And now it will be expedient and comes with∣in  compasse of our course, to speake of that piece of Tripery, of washing the guts with a Clyster; though I am led to believe, I shall be cryed out on, by the common Physitians and their besotted admirers
the rabble of distracted vulgar, who are unacquaint∣ed with the more rationall waies of healing, who make it their designe to cry up any way or opinion that hath the least plausibility in it; and on the other hand to cry down what ever comes by the oblique line of their dark crooked and common un∣derstandings: as if the womb of teeming truth must be clos'd up, if she presume to bring forth ought that sutes not with their unchewed notions and sup∣positions. As for the last, it is not my task or de∣signe, neither do I seek or care to supplant them from their pater-noster or All-gospel, being such as my soul abhors. Quo semel imbuta recens servabit odorem. Testa diu. Yet seeing this sink-scourer, the use of Clysters is so generally and easily beleeved to be such a safe and familiar practise, that he is accounted no better then an Asse that speaks against it; I shall adven∣ture to leave them a hint, that Foolls are not con∣stellated to a capacity of medicinall principles, and that they stumble and erre in nothing more then in this their so much magnifying of Clysters. Which common unworthy and shamefull help of Physiti∣ans, is to be abhorred as a cruel and beastly reme∣dy, taught us (as they say) from a Bird. Hence upon rationall deductions we conclude, That every Clyster is naturally an enemy to the Intestines. After∣wards it will easily appear, That all things are received for the manner and respect of the Recipient. Which we thus further explain. The tears of the eyes, al∣though saltish, yet are indolent, because familiar and naturall to the eye. But simple water pains the
eye; and so doth any other thing else. The urine also, though salt, doth not mordicate or fret the bladder. But any decoction or liquor whatsoever conveyed with∣in by Cathaeter or other pipe, although very sweet, doth yet grieve and pain the body. But if the pisso hath drawn but the least acidity from new-beer, or otherwise, by and by there followes a very great strangury and guttation of urine. The ordure or turd therefore, seeing it is the naturall and dome∣stick content of the gutts, doth not prick or gnaw, nor is not felt, untill it comes to the fleshy parts of the Intestinum rectum, as executing the office of door-keeper, they do both feel and urge the protrusi∣on of the excrement. Whence we conclude, That e∣very Clyster seeing it is an exotick guest and alien to the guts, it cannot choose but be troublesome and ingratefull to them. Then, that a Clyster never ascends to the I∣leon. For if you cast in eighteen ounces of decocti∣on, either the greatest part is left in the pipe, or falls out in the delivery, and so it attains onely to the beginning of the Colon. And lastly, if there be laxatives in the Clyster (for so for the most part the sick is deceived, fearing laxatives) as with the one hand even now we exploded the poison of pur∣gatives, so by the same rule we throw down the use of a laxative Clyster also. we confesse a Clyster is lesse hurtfull: forasmuch as the mouth of the sto∣mack is alwaies exercised in the most noble business of life, and the life is hurt with the laxative poi∣son. But at least it cannot be denyed by no man, but that it is a hatefull thing to admit poisons within, though never so specious, or by what name or title soever dignified or distinguished, or under
what administration soever or manner of reception: because a purgative enema resolves the bloud in  the mesentery. No man ever yet brought out fea∣vers by Clysters: because they attempt not, nor come to the places encompassed with the feavorish matter; nor are they ever eased or comforted by them. Moreover there is another Imposture cal∣led  a nourishing clyster, the ultimate scope of a cly∣ster: because they cast in broths of liquated flesh, with the hope of nourishing, which truly is an ar∣gument of intolerable stupidity. For the liquors being injected, first of all, they mingle themselves with the turd found in the same place; then they are poured into those parts, to whom it's proper to change all things into turd or excrement; and third∣ly, it is clear by experience, that such broths, if they be cast forth again, two houres afterwards, they smel not only of a turd, but in a manner of cada∣verous matter. For seeing there is nothing goes to the second or third, unlesse it be by the first: it fol∣lowes, that out of meats undigested in the stomack, and not changed into true and laudable chyle, there cannot in no wise be made any bloud. Hence it's manifest also, that the injected broths are cadave∣rized, and can never passe into aliment. Nor doth it argue any thing, that such broths carry the resol∣ved flesh in the manner of chyle. For there is as good as nothing done, unlesse they have first taken the fermentall proprieties of the first digestion, pre∣paratory to life, not to be found any where with∣out the stomack. For whatsoeves falls out of the stomack vndigested, is very troublesome, and stirs up diarrhaea's, tortures and also sour and unsavoury
belchings, and breeds wormes. But those things which are injected beneath, because they partake not of the least benefit of the first digestion, they unavoidably become cadaverous. Because they have tryed the heat of the place, but are deprived of the true ferment of vitall digestion. An old wo∣mans invention then is a nourishing yster, and a laxative, a cruel one. Having now had a clear and uninterrupted pro∣spect into the field of the vulgar medicines of the shops. We now descend and take the chair on the stage of Topicks, the scene of oiles and suets, which are but mutes, and of no value for ointments and plaisters, Dramatis personae, unlesse perhaps to give consistence (the Epitasis of their action) to the medicine, and bring the heterogeneall parts into a chorus of mixture by their emplastick quality. For first a great part of men suffer not ointments applyed to the skin, be∣cause they excite itchings and whelks with swel∣ling. Next because the oiles aforesaid are for the most part made of herbs whose vertue lyeth hid in a mucilaginous and gummy juice, but that juice by boiling is drawn out into the porridge, or wrung out by the presse, which is not truly combined with the oiles, but at length being fix'd, groweth hard. But we collect the balsomes of flowers more rightly in honey. And we much more admit the simplicities of simple, then of compound oiles. Where∣fore we chiefly explode the unmeet and absurd compositions of unguents and plaisters sold in shops; in that nothing is more foolish then that the pou∣der, of vegetables under divers suets and fats igno∣rantly
mixt, should by being fix'd, harden, and so become good for nothing. Which if it be minerall, will not mingle with the fat, but is rather so drown∣ed therein, and imprisoned, that it is worth no∣thing, and oneiy encreaseth the weight. For no∣thing is to be mingled with oiles, ointments, and plaisters, which cannot in them be wholly homoge∣neously  resolved. It is also worthy of laughter that the most white sugar is commended, not because it is sweeter and in its vigor more worthy; but because it is dearer, and oftentimes hath been boiled with a lixivium of unslaked lime. Where the very name of purity hath made the cheat. The contused flow∣ers of herbs &c. being mingled with the whitest sugar grow dull, which by meanes of sweeter sugar contract a ferment, and by heating, draw out the powers of the simple. But afterwards by the enclo∣sed digestion of the heat, the ferment is checked and they become more powerfull by far. But the diversity of the ferment dependeth on the lixivium which one sugar hath, and another wanteth. We are likewise wont outwardly to apply ointment with choise. For in such maladies, whose cure proceedeth from the center outwards, as in wounds, contusions, combustions, &c. We advise that they be applyed warm; but where the inward malady requires outward help, as the dysentery, Colick or nephritick Convulsions, schirrhus, &c. ointments should be cherished from without, with a stone heat, or with hot sand. And we have learned by viewing Chaffe in a kettle of warm water walking to and fro, as it were from the heat kindled under∣neath; and therefore that by a powerfull heat oint∣ments
applyed, are quickned, and join their spi∣rit with our bloud; We first guessed and after found by experience, that the maladie is by this meanes drawn out, and the violence of the Sym∣ptomes staid. And whatsoever Baths do in the whole, the same is done in part without prejudice of the whole, by ointments being heat and cherished. For a fomenting tile, drives the smell of the plaister inwards, and draweth out those things which o∣therwise do stick more closely. In like manner the spirit inforcing it self is drawn together with the bloud, and is dispersed with heat, another suc∣ceeding in its place, exhausts the force of the me∣dicine, and as it were boiling within, is reverbe∣rated. Likewise about the gathering of simples it is not  Certainly agreed upon. They conclude that roots are to be gathered about Autumne. But for the most part simples afford the more powerfull roots at spring. The Polypodium of the spring is chiefly green and flurishing. In the Autumne it exhibits a hoa∣ry and black root, being worn out and uselesse. We conceive that each is to be gathered immediately before the state of maturity: for full maturity is the begining of declination. Wherefore let each fruit flower, root, leafe, barke, &c. have its determi∣nate space of maturity: for even the juice in plants first floweth up, which in many afterwards dryeth up, or is consumed and spent into leafes, so that the varietie of maturities begetteth variety of ga∣therings. For thus some leafes, after the flowers are more vegetous; but others are more juycie before them. There are also others, which are stronger
before the growth of the fruit; and there are others that perpetually persist. Wherefore they more rightly determine, who gather simples according to the exigency of their scope and designe. Hitherto hath my employment been to make us men, and to bring us from under the fraud, Er∣rors, Ignorance and other rubbish of that, which the folly and vanity of the Schools have falsly called a Science and Art. what art I pray you? Except the art to cloak their defects and Ignorance with impo∣stures, and only palliate diseases, and that as beastly as can be wished? For as the case stands, they have made of a lovely beautifull and bountifull virgin, an ill favour'd penurious Harlot, dress'd and trick'd up with Gew-gaw's; with whom the whole Europaean world hath committed most abominable fornicati∣on.  We will now wade lightly over, and that with a dry foot, this shallow brook, of simple di∣still'd waters of the Apothecaries in the common lead∣en stills, and hope with the Torrent of current truth, and rational deductions, to rince away this into the common-shoare of errors; and with the Index ex∣purgatorius of acute demonstrations, to wipe it out of the journall-book of Physick. How great and meridian light is come unto Phy∣sick onely by true distillation, as it is us'd of all men, so it is known but of a few; and daily experience teacheth, how great commodity hath redounded thereby unto the sick; so that by it hath more glo∣ry and renown been reflected on Physick, and more additions made, and perfections acquir'd, then by all the whole rabble of Galenicall and heathenish
traditions. We shall not stand to shew whence the word distillation is deriv'd; let it be their tendance who have the Art to be industriously idle; nor the manner of distillation or what instruments serving thereunto; nor how many sorts of distillation, as per Ascensum, Descensum & latus; or how many waies as per Balneum Mariae, per Cineres, per arenam, per campanam, per patinam; it being besides my purpose, and requires a peculiar Tractate. But it shall be here sought, whether that product, by the vulgar and rustick distillation of Apothecaries in the common leaden stills, be any other, then an insi∣pid, aequeous humour, frighted out of the whole meerly by the violence of the fire, without the Counter-magick of the still or instrument for that purpose, without any artifice, and without the e∣lementall, true, genuine, homogeneall entity of the compositum; without its spirit, life, or the domestick balsome inhabiting in the whole. Destillatio tunc est operatio, qua quod in Corpore est humoris totum illud va∣poris specie ab eo separetur, qui postea à frigido ambiente congelatus in liquorem ab excipulo recipitur. This is but a short and cold definition and description of distillation; but such as well will serve and sute with the common distillation. It's confessed on all sides, that in simple distill'd waters out of herbs, there may be the strength and vertue of the whole. I'le take the leave to adde; That out of herbs plants or any vegetable may be drawn forth a water by art, if they be distilled as they ought to be, (not in the com∣mon leaden stills,) which shall equall, if no surpasse the herbe as it is whole. For there is a terra damnata in all externalls, whether animall, vegetall, mine∣rall
or metalline, which must passe the Chymicks Limbus or Purgatory, before it enjoyes its own A∣strum or Sidereall firmament. This is the deciphering of our distillation. The topick or domestick astrum in the horizon of its own ens or orb, is excited and awakened by the enorman∣tick power of an exotick motor from the Lethargy of grosse inactivity, inoculated, contracted, and fast luted by the crude and cadaverous opium of corporeity and circumferentiall lumber, gets a habeas corpus from under the arrest of its own domestick luggage, eman∣cipated from the gabardine of corporeality, by the sub-poena or turn-key of Pyrotechny, and subtiliated into a jubilee of spiritual Aporhaea's or evaporations, sallies a broad hand in hand, emitting a continual steame of most subtle effluviums, homogeneous and consimilar, that is, of the same identicall nature with it self, wafted on the wings of its own hydromantick vehicle, being sufficiently sublimated, condenses in∣to a materiall water by the Deliquium of the stills Cranium periwigg'd, and seeks the nose or portal of the stillatories Cranium, at length is saluted by the cold embracements of the Recipient. What more foolish can distill from the crack'd Retort of whymsical or obtuse sculls, then the insi∣pid and unsavoury prescriptions of the Apothecaries common stills cookery: since we are of opinion that no man who hath but Philosophy, ingenuity e∣nough to examin the whole scheam of natural en∣dowments of each single ens, how upon the small stock of the smallest piece of the hexameron fabrick is inoculated severall azimuths meeting in the Ze∣nith of its own Horizon; and hath but so much un∣derstanding
to know what true distillation is in the nature, use and end; and how the severall epicycles may be drawn forth from the own individuall me∣ridian, by the Aequinoctiall line of Pyrotechny, must of unavoidable necessity confesse and acknow∣ledge, That simple waters of Apothecaries, as they are commonly distill'd, are but the stagnant, aqueous humour, and insipid snivell of the rheumatick vehicle or menstruum of the Compositum, castrated and ex∣cis'd of its vitality and energy, and is no better then that water which is the Cingulum macrocosmi, wherein the pulse of the great world beates. For let it be consider'd in all its stages by our Pharmacopropae∣ans, we mean, this vulgar operation of simple wa∣ters, by our Chymick mimes and counterfeits, and we shall find: That the whole scene of still pissing, all the journey, is nothing but the insipid, effeminate, cold shivering and aguish exudations, the stew'd steams of the Lady Ignorance's hous-wifery, so that the Catastrophe or last exit of drop into the stills chamber-pot, when it comes to the atrophy of a caput mortuum, doth epiloguise and confesse, that it is but the sceleton, a lean, starv'd anonymous thing, scar'd out of its wits, not endew'd with any formall transmutation, nor nothing differs from that thin-legg'd Gentleman-Usher, the fleam, as they call it, that comes forth in the prologue or first act. If the blind lead the blind, they both fall into the ditch, into this standing pool, or puddle of simple waters. What epidemick blindnesse and ignorance hath possess'd us of this age, in these common leaden stills, that it is got into every cor∣ner of the Land, with those who can goe to the
charges of keeping one at work, and think them∣selves not well till they have one; then they can∣not do a misse, when they shall have ready at hand the waters out of all herbs growing amongst them. But they will from hence learn, when they shall know, That nature loathes to pick strawes, yet is ne∣ver idle; and that this trifle so universally practis'd is no issue or product of her generous endeavours. It is neither the elementall, or seminll water, or radicall moisture of the compound, but a crude, raw, and phlegmatick matter, partaking little or nothing of vitality, For first such waters are destitute of savour and tast; for water of Worm-wood neither smelleth like Worm-wood▪ nor is bitter; yea, the more wonder it is sometimes somewhat sweet. Manarde in his Epistles lib. 15. Cap. 15. saith, That the common waters distill'd out of herbs by fire, nei∣ther the smell no tast remain, but many times the contrary; whereby is easily perceiv'd, that the simple waters have not the same vertues which the whole herb had. And why should one main prin∣ciple, the Earth, the faeces or ground after distilla∣tion e thrown away as a terra damnata: like that of the Colledge of Physitians bidding in their Di∣spensatorie the Apothecary to fling away the faeces in their extract. Rudy, (their best pill the most purgative and cordial part and so in other of their extracts also) when there lyes ambusadod in it a main principle of vitality, and if not ligamentum, yet Conservatum tatius, which cannot be destroy∣ed; which is wanting in the simple distill'd wa∣ters, and therefore worth little, and ub sapiunt: as that great Master once said▪ who was the salt of
sacrifices, and the light of the world, and his Schol∣lars the salt of the earth. This is clear out of the ashes of vegetables; for although their weaker ex∣terior elements may expire by violence of the fire, yet their Earth cannot be destroy'd, but vitrified. If this be true, as without and beyond the doubt of any the most pyrrhonian incredulity may be evin∣ced, what a sympathy then, and harmony there is between it, the humane earth, and his mother; in which are principles homogeneall with his life, such as can restore his decaies, and reduce his dis∣orders  to a harmony. But say they, if they do no good they do no harm. To which we reply, as good never a whit, as never the better: what are we to jest in Physick? Play the antick? play the Treuant? Shall not the compunction of this, call bloud into their faces, and imprint such a tincture, the character of shame so deep, as shall stand for e∣ver a statue of unworthy un-medical basenesse and ignominy, or be left, as only fit for the practise of Quacks. To which we subjoin, that the vulgar simple wa∣ters distill'd out of herbs by the Seplastaries or Apo∣thecaries out of the common leaden stills, are not only nothing worth, nor retain not the force, strength and vertue of the whole herbe, but are noxious, evill, and pernitious, and destructive to the nature of Man in generall, nauseous to the stomack, and loathsome to the sick, wholly differ∣ent from the nature of the herb of which they are distill'd, and partaking of an exotick, heterogene quality and nature. Distillation in the hands of such is as rats-bane
in the hands of a Child, who wanting judgement and discretion, not distinguishing it from sugar puts it to his mouth, and kills himself. For be∣sides their ignorance, a great error is committed, not onely in not knowing what distillation is, but their perswading themselves, and making the peo∣ple beleeve, they are the true essences, nature, strength and virtue, of the herbs out of which they are draw'n; not perceiving the strange, forreign na∣ture and quality they partake by assimilating an other nature contrary to their own, and the nature of Man. For not only they are altogether devoid of all odour and sapour, both smell and tast, except in some few whose sulphur lyes in the utter and su∣perficial part of the herb; but they are wanting both of quality and virtue; for we may as well be∣leeve a fifth Gospel, as that the quality or virtue of the herbs is draw'n forth in the waters, except like savour, or smell, or both, be in the same. For with∣out doubt the quality is wanting, when out of herbs that are hot, a cold phlegmatick moisture is draw'n, unworthy the name of distill'd wa∣ter, except to those who have a tendence to christen things improperly, and barbarously, or barbarously improper: But if we grant them this, it is a water; it is not the elementall, seminall or radicall water of the thing, as we hinted before; and we may very lawfully be allow'd to conclude, Such a water to partake nothing of vitality, essence, or na∣ture of the herb, and to be little or nothing differenc'od from common well-water, and is as obnoxious to cor∣ruption and putrefaction as others: yea also, by rea∣son of their crudities to congelation or conglatiation:
witnesse the intent diligence of Aothecaries to stop their glasses close, and care to preserve them from the cold in winter, from whose arrest they cannot be bail'd or secur'd, though by the subsidy of double glasse and stopple: Again that although there be a manifest difference between the herb of mint and lettuce, that the one is hot, and the other cold, yet the water of mints may very warrantably be said to be cold, when its calefactive, and conforta∣tive part remains in his oile, and his balsamick part in his salt, neither of which ne  quidem in the text, as∣cends not in the distillation that is common and usual. Waters distill'd in glassen, or glaz'd vessels after the manner of our distillation, and is known to some Apothecaries by our direction, which enjoies its grand principiative fundamina, and the most ra∣dicall and inmost nature and balsom, do so far pass those that are made simply by the fire in leaden stills, as gold passeth Iron: such a distillation as shall give forth the naturall odour, savour and tast of the herbs and flowers whereout they be taken, absque impyreumate, without any noisome smel or tast of smoake or burning, enjoing its saline bal∣samick conservatory of vitality, and from, putre∣faction and corruption; which cannot be perform'd to a moity in the common leaden stills. For the waters that are drawn off in them, are seldome, especially while they be new, without notable loathsomenesse of smoake and burning. For they acquire a sensible empyreumatick acidity, and inherit any forreign quality or tincture devolv'd from the churlish saturnine vitiosity of the still; which unto sick men that drink of them, either by themselves,
or in their sauc'd Julaps, are not only nauseous and very grievous, but also hurtfull, and pernitious: For the maligne and evil quality of the lead, en∣damageth both the stomack, the breast, and all the entrails; so likewise doth the quality of brasse, which Physitians perceiving, left them, and only us'd decoctions; which things also, may easily be made appear, with lesse adoe then a volume, how frivolus and fruitlesse they are; also how pernitious and evill. For in herbs, or any other matter of a vitriolated ferment, that have an acid sapor or spi∣rit, being decocted in brasen vessels, yeeld a deco∣ction very ungrateful, and partaking of a canckerous and aeruginous quality: therefore have our London Colledge of Physitians wisely and advisedly for∣bidden the decocting of acid things in brasse: in the 54 fol. of their Pharmacopaeia or Dispensatory, where they command that Berberries, of a tart vitriolate ferment, be boiled in vase vitreato terreo, and they give the reason, quod acida ab aereo ingratum sapiunt: And from whence they had this we need not be so∣licitous in searching to know. If the vessel alter so much in the decocting, why not as well in distilla∣tion? For if the decoctions may partake of a canc∣kerous aeruginous quality from the brasen vessel, why also may not the distill'd waters in the leaden stills with peuter-heads partake of a saturnine cerus∣sal quality, not to be digested by the most struthio∣cameline Athanor of the microcosmical aeconomy. Such things then as are destill'd after the common man∣ner of distillation, are altogether to be disallow'd, because of the Ceruse, and other malitious qualities of the lead: for water also that is convey'd by
pipes of lead Galen condemneth; for it breedeth diseases in the entrailes: and in this case it is worth a mans tenth reading: for if he affirm, That meer water only convey'd in leaden pipes doth breed diseases of the bowells; how much more ought we to fear our waters distill'd in a leaden still; for no smal Ce∣russe remaineth cleaving to the inner side of a lead∣en head, as in distilling of vineger is gathered: so by the force of the heat, or burntnesse ascending up with a vapour, many times also acid and tart, of a vitriolated nature and quality, doth infect and tinct the waters with a saturnine cerussall evill quality. For how comes it to passe else that simple water devoid of all its salt, and so of all tast, should at a∣ny time wax sour, and of evill tast, except it did partake of the evill qualities of the spirits con∣tain'd in the lead; which sournesse could never hap∣pen in simple waters by reason of their coldnesse. But, well may they with such devout confidence, even to superstition, administer such waters as partake an evill quality of the lead in which they be distill'd, when they shall plead the tyranny of prescription and Custome, and with no lesse temerity, and as much unsuccesfulnesse they shall not stick to admi∣nister those rattles and scurffe of their brains, the scales of brasse and Iron, inwardly. But a hard task think they we have to con∣test  against, and answer the following objection. For say these cold stomacks and understandings, that can very hardly digest this doctrine or any o∣ther save the crude sallads gather'd out of the Gale∣nicall elysium; that cold herbs as Roses, Succory, plan∣tain, burrage, &c. must be still'd in a cold still,
that is, a leaden still they mean. But what hi∣therto hath been spoke touching the invalidity and inefficacious remedy of distill'd waters, he who will deny to have been argu'd according to reason and all equity of demonstration from the rules of Pyrotechny, we professe we cannot edify how, or by what rule of proportion that Mans genius calcu∣lates, what his elements are, nor what his analyticks: confidently to those who have read good books, and to those whose reason is not an illiterate book, to themselves we appeal, whether they would not confesse all this to be true, were it not for that a∣fore-recited cold and dull objection of them, who like a lame dogge must be helped over the stile, cannot get over this adamantine Alpe of frigidi∣ty. But give me leave to propound, whether the acti∣vity, application, or accomodation of Cychory, (or any other cold vegetable) to the Liver, be in his body, in his cold, unactive, elementary quality, or in his spirit, (except we hold he hath none in him) or some other innate, peculiar disposition or balsome, which hath power to work, and which things Hippocrates calleth . That there is life, vertue, and strength in wa∣ters, (if the whole have any, and they be draw'n off by an expert Artist in Pyrotechny) is confess'd of all, except those whose obstinacy in incredulity confesses their benightment to the black paths of ignorance and error: for if as Christ saies my Fa∣ther worketh hitherto and I work, and it is God that cloaths the Lilly of the field, who toil not, nor spin their own garments, but God in Natures
Loom hath wrought both wap and woofe: what does he then cloath them with? with only the naked fig-leaves of their anaglyphe or exterior texture or vestment? yes certainly, he cloaths them with spirit, full of spirit and life, quick and living. Be∣sides the texture of them, the severall, perpetu∣all productions, their multiplication, augmenta∣tion are manifest and infallible arguments of life. There is then in all things lumen quoddam vitale, whereby they act that which they are accomodate to act. Támque in pisce vitale est, quàm in leone; támque in Cychoreo & papavere quam pipere, which is extinguish'd, obstructed, or diminished in this clouted-shoe, hob-nayl'd Chymistry of Apothe∣caries. If this be true, as to satiety of satisfaction may be clearly evinced, that every plant or herb en∣joies vegetation according to the seminal vertue of its domestick ferment, originally inoculated into its principles, by natural consequence from hence we may understand, That all vegetation is from the spirits. And that so all activity, capacity and pow∣er to worke proceeds from them: as also that all  debility to perform their original inhaerent and mplantate vigour, power and vertue in the bo∣dy, doth depend upon the obstruction, violation or diminution of the spirits and their peculiar appro∣priate ferment. Cychory having a bitter tast, com∣eth  from sal gemme, its naturall ferment according to the Chymists. So opium much more colder, hath in it a bitter and nitrous salt: yet in him besides his soporiferous quality, there is connexed virus a∣liud.
unde let halia papavera somno, decantantur à Po∣etis. And anodynes although they stupifie, instar frigoris; yet they are erroneously reckoned by the Schools, chiefly among cold things. For neither is it soporiferous sulphur in opium that doth cool; but greatly amaricate, and his salt is sharp and sudo∣rifick; and bitternesse in the Schools is a notable Indicative of heat. Out of opium we say separated from his narcotick sulphur, may be made a notable purger. The like may be done of Cychory, Cen∣taury, Fumitory and Gentian: Salt of a cleansing  nature; Therefore is a medicine out of succory made by fire, excellent in the Ictericall tincture to expell it. Certainly if we be not moles to our own under∣standings, and doe not wilfully shut the eyes of our reason, but do so much right to our own judgements as to perpend what quality there is in the elementall Crasis of succory, we shall find most manifestly a sharp bitter tast in it, which proceeds chiefly from his salt gemme, which is not cold, but of an active quality, which is the true hepatick me∣dicine in it, and the chiefe specifick part that aspects the Liver: is the Ascendant and Almuten in its own Horizon, that radically applies to the Liver: But the water of it, that is drawn off in a cold still so call'd, is void of course, and peregrine, that is, stript stark naked of its vertues, and is not in reception with his originall, and hath lighted in the via com∣busta; nor this balsamick hepatick salt, without which the whole is a nullity, is not in exaltation, ascends not in the common distilling, nor can by no meanes be translated thereto by the leaden stils.
The Caput mortuum after every distillation, in which is ambuscado'd the salt, is onely in the com∣bust way, and is not aspected of the water, that is, partakes not one grain of the salt, without which it is an unsavoury medicine. For if the aqueous humour, the chariot of the other inhaerent vertues, be drawn by these dull saturnine leaden-heel'd horses, the common stills, and be driven naked in∣to the world, rifl'd of all its force and vertue, and carries not in its belly neither wind nor fire; how can it be apply'd with honesty or conscience, as medicinal for the Liver; when to the most grosse and vulgar heads it confesses its invalidity, as being pillag'd and robb'd of its efficacy, spirit and life. And how all along it hath been handed down to posterity, and reckoned among the rapsodies of medicines, as a prime instrument to correct and condemne the distempers of Mans body to a ne ul∣tra, seems not so much a riddle as ridiculous, ex∣cept to the serious trifling gravity of such, who having as cold and dull a pace, as pate, in the scruti∣nies of Nature and her excellencies, have little else to doe; whose tendence seems to verifie the tenor of that proverb, better play at small game then stand out. Such herbs then as partake of a vitriolated quali∣ty, and an acid sharp spirit, though cold, ought not to be distill'd in a leaden still. Of a vitriolate  nature we say, seeing vegetables may draw mine∣rall and metallick spirits unto them. And let not other men thinke themselves free, and the thing equitable and rational, to call choler aeruginous, vit∣telline and porraceous, for the likenesse and affinity of
those things from whence the name is borrow'd; and goe about to debar me from conceiving my self tyed by the same duty. We have the same reason then, and as lawful it is for us to say, that either the humours of the body so called, or the topicall ferment of any part, may partake of a vi∣triolated nature and quality: so also vegetables may assume a vitriolate energy, as Lujula, Limons, suc∣cory, vineger, (which doth represent the tart qua∣lities of vitriol) &c. who have a sharp, piercing, powerfull spirit, and therefore not fit to be distill'd in lead or peuter. Hitherto the childish, ignorant and unadvised self-contradicting error of Physitians hath been ex∣ploded, and may much more be made manifest by their rash, simple and common practise in bidding and prescribing distill'd vineger in the common leaden stills. Unto so low a pitch of stupid igno∣rance hath vulgar Physitians fallen, that so easily and implicitely entertain the customes and traditi∣ons of their predecessours, without any examina∣tion or due disquisition of the things. Let us therefore take this to pieces, dissect the concentrals of it, and see if those stills be the true, na∣tural and genuine engines to draw forth the nature, essence and privy property resient in it. Vineger then, the circumferential round or cadaver of wine, whose acidity proceeds not, nor is not caus'd by e∣lemental frigidity, but is ambuscado'd in those occult and acid spirits of salt, lurking in the conclave or shop of the spirits of wine. This is perceiv'd in the whole field of wines, though never so gene∣rous, (before the spirits retire to their garrison,
or concentrals, as in the making of vineger) when in the drinking is perceiv'd a certain grateful pun∣ction, striking most pleasantly upon the palat, from the singular temper of the vitriolated acidity, being mix'd with sweet and sulphureous spirits placed in the wine by the Archeus of nature. Hence is it that some vinegers are made sharper then others, as they contain in them more or lesse of the nature of salt armoniack. For simple water devoid of all salt, by no frigidity can grow acid. Tartar then is nothing  but the acid vitriolate cristalline salt of the wine. Moreover vineger is both mineral and vegetable. But the vegetable excels the others: seeing not only art produces it, but also nature in acid fruit, chief∣ly in Citrons, limons, oranges: also in Goose-berries, barberries, &c. in herbs sorrel, trifolium, acetosum, nasturtium Indicum, &c. Every acidum then is not cold as the dull disquisitions of vulgar Physiti∣ans hath left to us, and as to ample satisfaction is elsewhere demonstrated. Nor is vineger made by the total separation of the sulphureous spirits from the wine; when of wine from which the spirits are divorc'd, or which is corrupt, and hath lost his spirit, no vineger can be made: But the more ge∣nerous and rich the wines are, so much the more strong is the vineger made of them. Of wine also express'd from omphacine grapes, and which is al∣most devoid of all spirit, is no vineger made. And not onely out of wine is vineger made, but also out of Beer, Ale, Hydromel, and the juices of some fruits abounding with spirit; and out of which a spirit like unto the spirit of wine may be drawn, but out of others which want such a spirit, it cannot be.
Is not then that lean flat and cadaverous product out of vineger by the common stills not only ridi∣culous, but abominably, and horridly hurtful? since every acidum by reason of its corroding energy, doth operate in a perpetual ebullition. The acid spirit in the round or verge of the masse of wine is of a vitriolated energy, powerfully insinuating and pier∣cing into a proper subject. For an absolute impos∣sibility it is that there can be any the least acidity, which having once met with a proportionate ob∣ject, does not immediately begin to operate on it. This is sober verity, as by example may be made  manifest. Vineger how weak soever, put into a peuter saucer, and suffering it to stand a while, by and by begins to put forth its active, acid corro∣ding spirit; and in the vineger you shall perceive clearly a certain white mother as it were swimming in the vineger; and the bottome of the saucer, shall be damask'd with white streakes, yea, shall be white and rough all over the bottome, and a certain substance like Cerusse shall be scrap'd off, and crum∣bled between the fingers: This by practise may be observ'd, as by ocular experiment we have try'd, and it is so trivial and common a businesse, that it is known to all Kitchin wenches, but is not re∣garded by the most Lady-like stomack. If it be thus, I may be sooner destitute of leisure then proof suf∣ficient to evince, That such vineger cannot be good for the stomack. Besides it makes it more flat and dead, when it hath sated it self on its proportionate sub∣ject, the peuter saucer. It partakes then of a sordid saturnine evill quality, pernitious to the tender tu∣nicles of the stomack. If it please you then Ladies
and Gentlewomen; and all of all sorts, lay aside your peuter saucers, and no more eat vineger out of them, but instead thereof, you may use saucers made of fine Earth, or silver plate. As clear again, vineger, how flat and cadaverous soever, having once touched upon the stone concre∣ted in the head or stomack of a Crea-fish, vulgarly (but erroneously) call'd Crabs eye, can by no means contain it self, but must immediately act in a phren∣sy of inquietude by oblique and circular motion to the dissolution of it, and resolve it into a clear, dia∣phanous liquor. But what I pray you of this acid spirit is drawn off in the distillation of vineger, by the common stills? Any thing but a bare fleam, as jejune as the crude and black ignorance of such phlegmatick heads. When shall we awaken from the Lethargy of this supine neglect? Unsuccesseful and deplorable are the prescripti∣ons of simple distill'd waters as the remedies and militia against the hostility of any disease or di∣stemper, either in the head, as by cephalick waters, of sage, betony, &c. In the lungs, by pectoral and pulmoniack, as of hyssop, Colts-foot, &c. In the Liver, by hepatick waters of Agrimony, Endive or Succory, &c. And so of the whole vegetable Mo∣narchy. Vain are the drinks of cooling ptisans. Vain are the liqorish sweet Julaps of distill'd waters, in feavers. Vain are the decoctions or Apozems, whose menstrue are distill'd waters. The like is to be said of the whole myrad of medicaments drawn from the poor and thin Common-Wealth of cold and crude sallads, without oile or salt. To which we may subjoin, that the same altitude is taken by
the Astrolabe of perspective reason of those ABCda∣rian Nuntii, the forlorn hope of further sicknesse, their praeparatories, as they have god-father'd them, except it be of as bad, if not worse remedy then the disease. What can they lay the mountains low? Can they exalt the valleys? Can they make the crooked path straight in the body of Man? Can they do any job of journey-work for their Ca∣tharticks that are to succeed? Can they attenuate that which is grosse, viscid and thick, or thicken the fluid and thin? Can they fix and nail that which is volatile? Can they humect the parts possess'd with an atrophy, or aridura membrorum? Unlesse it be with their waterish parts, and in analogy to common well-water? Can they exsiccate or dry up the superfluous humidities of the body? Yes, e∣ven as if dutch Wind-mills should drain the fens upon New-market heath; so as little power and vertue have they to do any of these: for nil dat, quod non habet. The propounders themselves seem to have mills in their brains, that thus grinde the grift of the dotages and dreames of their predecessours turn'd about with the epidemick vertigo, the current of distill'd waters of vegetables. As if our bread would be dough, and the whole batch of medicines spoyl'd, without the unsalted and unlea'vned prescriptions of simple waters. Ah! alas can these, as well re∣al, as nominal, simple waters serve as a breast-work▪ or pallisadoes to stake out the hostile invasion of a disease? Or barricadoe and dam up the recepto∣ry vessels, and all the passages of the body from the least entrance or footing of any malignant dis∣temper into our Common-Wealth? or drive
out any Goliah, or Pigmey distemper with these peb∣bles taken out of this shallow brook of waters? Once more, will the radical indisposition of the Lungs, Liver, or any other more or lesse noble part be hereby rectified, or defended from a second assault by this poor contemptible Chamber-maid militia? No sure, their forces are scatter'd, totally routed, never more like to ralley again. March boldly on then the enemies and invaders of our health; be not retrograde nor stationary, but with a full career charge nature through and through, while your adversaries forces are weak, and routed. For their General and Lord Nature cannot receive any recruit or assistance from her auxiliaries, or make any safe retreat back to her primitive strength, but must be inforced to resigne to the tyranny of the Conquerour, and cry for Quarter. And to me seriously by this and such ammuniti∣on, if the whole train of artillery be no better, nor those mortar-pieces and granadoes of Physick, Her∣culean actors so accounted, I make no doubt (the providence and power of that grand Archiatros, the Almighty, not resisting) but such a devastation and depopulation may be quickly made, as shall un∣hinge this huge fabrick, and calcine the world to ashes by the Chymistry of death. All these things, some Physitians with whom I have talked, I have observ'd have both seen, known, confess'd and contended for, and yet in their practice, and among their prescriptions, are so negligently for∣getfull, or desperately obstinate and wilful as to commend and command in their Recipe's the Apo∣thecary
to mingle some of these simple distill'd wa∣ters in a leaden still, and that with such serious gravity, as if they were to be saluted Doctor with four feet. Nay, what Physitian is there almost that by his practise does not confes his incogitant infa∣tuation, whose easy and incircumspect credulity can drink down, even to a deluge, this torrent of simple distill'd waters? Nor could I hitherto sufficiently admire how possibly our Europaean world could be so grosly circumvented by the grey-hair'd traditi∣onal dreams of their predecessours, in a businesse so vain, simple and inefficacious; that men whose clear reason doth entitle them to plenipotentiaries, should thus prostitute their credulities to the le∣gends and Romances of ignorant paperstuffers and scriblers. See then with what a full and swelling tide the insolent torrent of custome bears all afore it when even the best and understanding part of man, the crown and strength of all his faculties floats like a dead drown'd body on the stream of vulgar ap∣prehensions, drinking down even to gorging this puddle of simple waters, and other ridiculous fi∣ctions: and how possibly they should inhabit thus long, unlesse they be the lowest lees of an epide∣mick infection, liver-grown to their sides, which perhaps will never uncling without the strong ab∣stersive of some heroick magistrate, whose high of∣fice dares lead him both to know and to do with∣out any frivolous case-putting.
We will now at length come to shew the falla∣cy  of the schools, and their ignorance in the prerogative of simples and medicines; in their pro∣posing such a tedious interval of time between the reception of the medicine, and the working, or demonstration of his activity: by which meanes they have cloaked their defects, and more lightly set off among the common people their large time of curing diseases. The schools teach that the ca∣daveriety, and dull lethargy of medicines, is con∣tracted by the Opium of a frigidal temper and con∣stitution; and that they are altogether idle, fruit∣lesse and dead, unlesse first by our heat, as by a Cook; they are prepard and being excited are by it acua∣ted: This they have concluded and ratified; in as much as medicines taken or apply'd, do not by and by explode their faculties in us, instar ignis: but they have need of a certain space of time, whereby to produce their effects, by praevious disposititions. Neverthelesse if a space may be requir'd, that an alteration may be made, which is an effect of the medicine; that truly doth not a whit argue the a∣ction of the medicine to be by our heat, otherwise then necessary, that the medicine might acquire the donation of his activity or liberty of working, which he hath obtain'd and was granted him from the creation whole and sound, full and free. More∣over the effects of medicines are not produced, un∣lesse first there be a diligent and skilful preparation and due application, and then with a more exquisite appropriation they imprint their powers in us. Wherefore be it foolish, that pepper, vine∣gar, &c. ought to borrow their activities and gifts, [ad agendum suscepta] from our heat: as if the mo∣narchy
of one alone heat, should be the fountain and primary cause to give life to so diverse and manifold effects. Wherefore in good sooth that matter may act in us, as touching this, she hath no need of any other extrinsecal thing, extrase: but as primarily; so also without delay, she puts forth her powers by the importance of dispositions, if it be duely apply'd. But because the sensitive Anima (which the schools have basely confounded with their Calor) doth apply the receiv'd powers, and then doth make a certain new and proper action to  her self, and truly vitall. Therefore the powers which the sensitive Anima hath received from the medicine, are onely occasionall effective causes, and she can if she will passe them by, and neglect them, which is manifest in robust bodies, who di∣gest without trouble violent laxatives tanquam Ci∣bos. And in dying men; in whom there is an ap∣plication of medicines, but not an appropriation; by reason of the neglect or defect of the sensitive fa∣culty. For in strong bodies the exciting heat is not wanting, and yet no effect. Moreover if delay must intercede between the medicine that is apply'd and his effect; that doth not happen because of the defect or exigence of the activity of things; but by reason of the necessity of the vitall, emergent and subsequent activity through an impression made, by the medicine. For a virulent force is not wanting in the biting of a Serpent, although sometimes it doth not shew its effect, by reason of some impediment: so many have so accustom'd themselves to purges and laxa∣tives, that at length they work not a whit, not be∣cause
heat is wanting in the man; or that the laxa∣tives have lost their pristine strength: but the Ani∣ma hath contracted a certain familiarity by the fre∣quent use of them, insomuch that at length it doth more slowly inflame by those poisons, then by the first Course. Lastly it's true and perpetual that all sensation, consists rather in action and vitall judgement, then in a passion. Whether that sensation happens in the exteriour sense; or in some passion of the mind: or in the natural and sympathetick sense of inanimate things. At least it is clear, that medi∣cines do not need the praegression of our heat, that they may act simply: but a sensitive power, which is the principal actor, hath need of agents, and sensible objects, that she may perceive, and in per∣ceiving may act. Therefore the action of sensible things, doth occupy her self on both sides by the mean of an occasional cause, in respect of the sen∣sitive Anima. For that cause neither do medicines work in a dead body, by reason of the defect of the principal and immediate agent, which is the life or soul. Whence also it is sufficiently manifest  how preposterously hitherto the vertues of reme∣dies are attributed to an agent, or principall and vi∣tal efficient, and how neglected the principal agent hath stood as well in healing as effecting diseases. Verily if a medicine should be actuated by our heat, as such, it must come to passe, that every medicine alwaies, and everywhere, should equally worke in every humane object, actually hot. But a laxa∣tive exhibited in the same dose, loosens in one ter∣ribly, in another not a jot; and yet on both sides
sufficiently excited by our heat: yea, the same which in stronger bodies is without effect; in weaker bodies for the most part rages most violently. But we passe lightly over this scene, and resigne it to others. Thus by this plain and evident demonstration we have good encouragement to trust, where it shall meet with intelligible perusers, some stay at least of mens thoughts will be obtained, to consider and pro∣mote this prudent and manly expostulation; and not give away their birth-rights for a messe of this cold pottage of not daring or not willing to speak. We now willingly come according to our pro∣mise, which is due, to arraigne and examine the naturalities of the other universal main pillars of curing, namely phlebotomy, fontanells or issues, and Dyet, as three other props of healing, which being shaken, the whole edifice falls downe of its own ac∣cord as rubbish, and being taken away, Physitians do desert their patients, having no remedies but such as purging and bloud-letting, the only publicans which by an insupportable excise impoverish the whole body and make Nature bankrupt by exhaust∣ing the stock of aliment from the vasa and viscera. All which we will touch particularly. These things are practis'd and prescribed, as de∣signed for the evacuation and consuming the stock of morbisick distempers. We have done then with one manner of evacuation of evil humours, purgati∣on, and that by a twofold Instrument, viz. Cathar∣tcks or purges, taken in at the mouth, the Arctick pole, and a laxative Clyster, at the port Aesquiline  the antartick pole. The second manner of evacua∣tion
followes, which is the going out of the tide of bloud, by the sluice of phlebotomy or bloud-letting; which also weares the Fools Coat or Livery of the Lady Ignorance, and well may be reputed free of the Company of Physitians other, not more errone∣ous, then foul, mischeivous practises. As the Invention of Clysters was learn'd from a  Bird, so bloud-letting from a Horse. Good Teach∣ers. Maids children and Horses schollars shall be  well disciplin'd; better fed, then taught. Verily by the consent of Galen, In every feaver (the hectick excepted,) phlebotomy is requisite. To the schools therefore and the destructive custome of this giddy-headed Age we do frame this syllogisme; and that from feavers, the most acute Index of all their  grounds for bloud-letting. Phlebotomy is unuseful wheresoever it is demon∣strated not to be necessary: or where the indication, proper to it is wanting. But in feavers, it is not demonstrated to be neces∣sary. Therefore phlebotomy in feavers is unuseful. The major is proved: because the end is the first director of causes, and disposer of the meanes unto it self. Therefore in what thing soever the end doth not point out a necessity of the meanes, they are in vain fitted and related to it, not being requisite thereto; especially where it is clear by reflection from the glasse of Contra-indication, That bloud is not drawn out of the rivulets, the veins, without the fall or losse to the whole ocean of strength. Such meanes therefore are badly insti∣tuted which the end shewes to be in vain, unuse∣full
and to be done with the diminishing of the strength. The minor is proved by Haratius Augenius de moute sancto, in his three books Ex Professo. Teaching with the consent of the Academies That a plethora alone, or too great a plenitude of the veins, that is, a nimiety of redundance of bloud, is the only Gn∣mon in the table of directions for phlebotomy. And that it doth not run in a direct line to the sanation of favers, but to the oblique angle of slackning the full blown sails of abundance of bloud, and be∣calming the puffs and gusts of too much plenitude, by the Trident of phlebotomy, the Midwife to deliver onely the ingravidate and bigge-bel∣lyed veins from the Tympany of a Plethora. But a Plethora hath no subsistance under the torrid Zone of Feavers: Therefore in the hot spur of Feavers the cooling card of phlebotomy is never turn'd up, and consequently is not trump, is not requisite, but dealt about as alwaies unuseful. The conclusion indeed may seem to come out of the Eutopia of novelty and the Arabia of paradoxes, yet liveth in the Eden of sober verity. Which shall therefore be further proved, Galen himself prov∣eth the subsumption teaching, That there is more choler sattered in every poroxysmo of a feaver, then in two daies space is generated. In the mean time the rest of the members of our publick state adjourn not, nor supersede from receiving (according to the Isonomy or pari-formall lawes of Re-publiques) nouristment of the accustomed bloud. That is, besides the lavish expences and exhaustion of the common stock of aliment that is expended by this
new Tenant and Inne-houlder, the Feaver, who hath now taken livery and seisen, they consume their own patrimony, the fat of the ordinary bloud. Wherefore then from this advantage, it genuinely and necessarily followes, that if in a healthy person there be an allowance of eight ounces of bloud for a daily portion, that then so many also should be transmuted into nutriment, or otherwise the man should straight protuberate into an excessive huge bulke, more deformedly corpulent then any Gara∣gantua. Therefore if in a sound person there is diminution made of eight ounces of bloud: Cer∣tainly the greedy feaver will consume no lesse. See∣ing then there is little or no appetite of food, dige∣stion or sanguification, of unavoidable necessity, within two dayes, the full sea of a plethora (if there was any in the new Moon or beginning of the fea∣ver) will shift its tides into a low ebbe, and in the wane of its fall and decrease, the false and dangerous shole or quick-sands of indication for springing a leak in the vein by phlebotomy, will appear as a mare mortuum, and accordingly vanish into the Sty∣gian Gulph of errors. But that there is no plethora in Feavers, they see; who suffer ulcers by an Is- or Cautery: which truly are presently dryed up by the solstice of Feavers, nor make no effluxion, accord∣ing to the accustomed manner of their purulent excretion. But it is chiefly and deservedly to be noted, that the strength cannot offend, and deserves not to be blamed for its aboundance, no, not in Methusalem: neither also doth good bloud become peccant by nimiety, because the vital powers and bloud are Correlatives: seeing according to Scrip∣ture,
the soul or vital strength, rides in the Chariot  of the bloud. Therefore by consequence a pletho∣ra can never be in good bloud. We shall shew by and by, that bad and corrupt bloud doth never runne in the Canall of the veins. If therefore the extreame of a Plethora of the veins, can ever be possible, it ought to consist in a mediety, betwixt corrupt and very sound bloud: Whether we consider the same state of falling off and neutrality, or only, as mixt of both, at least, the Galenists should remember, that good proceed∣eth from its Trunk, an entire cause; but evill from the racemation of several defects: and so that this state should not be called plethoricall: but ca∣cochymicall. Neither to desire phlebotomy but ra∣ther purgation, which may selectively expell the  bad, and leave the good. And surely these their contradictory Theses being conceded, it will be a ge∣nuine illation, that the indication of phlebotomy is not yet in no wise proved. For according to the truth of the matter we before shewed, the Anarchy of a cacochymia keeps not court in the veins, the ef∣fect of whose Reigne is only the perturbation of the bloud. For the appeasing of which mutiny, the grand designe is not taken so much, from the exhaustion and arraignment of the well-affected bloud, before the Barre of phlebotomy, as the pre∣scribing a medicine, which shall be as a High Court of Justice, with the power of Oyer and Ter∣miner suddenly to take away and cut off this grand Delinquent, the sole troubler and his Tyranny.  Especially seeing that it is the purer bloud, which
passing by the center of the heart, obtaineth its own depuration: therefore that which is drawn from the divarications of the cubit, and first let out, shall be purer; but the more impure shall be left within. Moreover seeing it is already so clear, as it can escape the observation of no man, that there is no plethora in feavers, which may require bloud-letting; and this the Schools surrounded with shame, have somewhat smelt, and have sub∣stituted in the place of Indication, some Coindicati∣ons or Counter-Indications, in aequitality. and as ae∣quiponderant or aequipollent to Indication adae∣quate  in Nature, and praeponderant to Contra∣indication; which otherwise truly, seeing it is de∣sumed from the conservation of strength, ought wholly to obtain the chiefest place, for this cause seriously, That every feaver is quickly, safely and  perfectly cureable without bloud-letting. For in good sooth they use presently but one only remedy, and serve all their so multifarious and diverse pu∣trefactions of their Clients, the humours, and fea∣vers flowing from thence, with one writ of eject∣ment by the habeas Corpus or turn-key of Phlebotomy: Because it helpes aboundantly (as they say) and is stopped at pleasure. By which distinction truly they doe in some  sort disgrace their laxatives. For they say, although phlebotomy may seem requisite for a Plethora, by a na∣tural and singular indication of it self; yea, neither properly doth it take away the putrefied humours: yet it refrigerates, exonerates the burden of the veins, it recreates the powers, takes away part of the evil humour together with the good; and stops
the current or catarrh of humours, at the damme or nest of putrefaction, by derivation and revulsion, and also asswageth and removeth them. Where∣fore nature feeling comfort, is busied about, and fi∣nishes the rest more successefully and easily. These are good words (and we wish to be true) sayes the sow, eating penitential psalmes; but avail no∣thing to my hunger. These are the Endixes or Co-indications, by which they perswade to continue mens mischiefs; which we shall touch particular∣ly. And first of all we admonish, That although in a stronger and fuller body there may be no great hurt by bloud-letting, yea, oftentimes the sick may seem to be eased presently; yea cured: yet phlebotomy cannot scape scot-free, seeing it hath runne upon the score of many evils; nor go away uncondemned, forasmuch as feavers may more successefully be ured without it. For howsoever, phlebotomy at the first or reiterated courses, often∣times may seem to be as it were a pyromastix, and to usher in a power to tame and asswage the intense heat and acutenesse of feavers. Yet it falls out no otherwise then that the Archeus being driven into an horrid extasy by this unexpected unnatural extravenation, greatly feares the sudden depletion of the powers, and undue and impertinent refri∣geration, and so forgetting the duell or conflict with the disease, neglects to expell the feavorish matter, and excercise its function. But they who even now seemed to be lenifyed by bloud-letting, and thought the disease or'ecome, are now put to their shifts, notwithstanding their weak engine
of phlebotomy. For the enemy ralleys again, and the Archeus is a new charged by the fresh Alarum of elusory recidivation, and they now know it was but an Ambuscado retreat of the disease, and that the mount Aetna of feavers is too hard to be remov∣ed by the infirme fingers of pigmey phlebotomy; at least they are benighted to a later and weaker va∣letudinary state. Which assertion the Turks and a  great part of the world confirme, not owning with us the reasons nor use of phlebotomy, which was ne∣ver read, that God ever ordain'd it in Nature, nor to approve of it, nor yet to have made any men∣tion of it. Under the Ottoman Empire, the great∣est part of the Indies, phlebotomy is not used, nor so much as heard of; yet the strength of these Nati∣ons, their agility, readinesse, vigilancy, and constan∣cy of labour, as well in action as sufferance, you may learn out of the Histories. Now concerning the first scope of Co-indication, which is called re∣frigeration. In earnest, blood-letting doth no otherwise refri∣gerate, then as it steales from the vital heat: but hath not the northern pole of frigefactive and positive power for its Horizon, by which meanes truly such a refrigeration becomes nocivous. Why forsooth are they so cautelous, that they do not; nor dare not open a vein in the Hectick? doth not the feaver need refrigeration? Or doth it cease to be a feaver? But the deficiency of blood is apparent in Hecticks, wherefore in the systeme of Hecticks, and in the de∣fect of blood and strength, ther's an easie calculati∣on and illation of the hurt made by Phlebotomy; which otherwise is latitant under stronger powers.
In the consideration of which, we shall bring a re∣markeable story of Prince Ferdinand, Brother to the King of Spaine, who in Anno. 1641. was opened: for being agitated with a tertian feaver eighty nine dayes, dyed in the two and thirtieth year of his age. His heart, Liver and Lungs being taken away, and the veins and arteries dissected, such a paucity of blood was found, that a conflux of scarce a spoonfull of blood, issued in the cave of his Thorax: for his liver appear'd altogether exanguious, and the flaccid cru∣menation of his heart, contracted an atrophy, and de∣monstrated a penury of bloud also. For two dayes be∣fore his death he had eaten more, if more had been given him. For he was so exhausted by bloodlettings, purgations and hirudinall blood-suckings, as we said, that his sceletantall fabrick appear'd as a pale statu of exanguinality; yet for all this the cruel Tertian did not forget to keep its paroxysmal course and return.  What profited therefore so great an evacuation of the bloud? Or what may be observed by a judicious perpension, from that refrigeration, but the illati∣on of vanity to be clearly demonstrated from such evacuations, which do not take the least punctilio, from the latitude of feavers? The same degrees, and as bad and worse occurences of desperate evils and mischiefs, we find here at home, by this in∣veterate and deplorable practice of Bloud-let∣ting. Ah alas, is this the method of healing which makes a Physitian, whom the most High hath cre∣ated and commanded to be honoured for the neces∣sity of him? If it know not to cure a Tertian in a young man, to what purpose is that method? Is this
the Art that the whole needeth not but the sick? Let this therefore teach Physitians to fear how they expose their febrile patients to the congresse of cold things, in which they should be largely and pre∣sently experienced, and by a manifest token know the vertue of their refrigeratives, because they may not much confide in their Anomalies of heat and cold. For seeing it is clear that the whole meridi∣an, swindge and irradiation of heat in the province of feavers, is of the latitude, and Empire of the ve∣ry vital spirit it self: it followes also, That the breath of refrigeration by the Boreas of phlebotomy, is a meer exhausting and impoverishing of the Com∣mon-Wealth of the vital spirits and bloud toge∣ther. For if the feaver be to be cured as an intem∣perature by phlebotomy, as a refrigerating remedy, (contrarium heu constat!) and by cold alone, and others intend the cure even in a quotidian (which they have subscribed to be an inflamation of putrid fleam) they would obtain at least that refrigeration farre more easy, by exposing their patients half na∣ked to the breath of the north wind, or hanging him in water, or in a deep well, until he should confesse himself sufficiently cooled, for so presently and largely they should absolve the cure, if their conscious ignorance within, did not condemn their febrilous essence of heat. We cannot therefore so readily submit our belief, that the com∣motion  of our bodies in a feaver, is but a reverberium of heat, an impetuous agitation, and only a bare tem∣pest of heat: but ther is also the interposure of an oc∣casional vitiated matter of known hostility against the native oeconomy of the parts, the protrusion of which
the Archeus is labouring and busied about, in which concertation, their enterferes an adventitious ac∣cension, the symbole of its indignation. Which Theory so long as it shall be neglected in the Schools, the cure of feavers will be preposterous, pernicious and conjectural, and so all not worth thanks to the Phy∣sitian, seeing they may be cured by the spontane∣ous and mercifull goodnesse of nature: and we wish and with submission advise hat Physitians would not tamper with them so much as they do. But to make hast to the argument of curing by the subitaneous precipitancy of cold▪ the Schools will respond, It is a dangerous itry to go from one extreame to another. By which salve of their ignorance, they endeavour to stop the mouthes of people, as if they spake some thing worth our cares and faith: not being sensible of their rash inadvertency, how in the intertrigation of their own hypotheses they contradict themselves, when they encomiate Phlebotomy chiefly for that end, and dextralize and preferre it before their laxatives, that it presently and aboundantly helpeth by refri∣geration; and therefore in their nomenclature, have presum'd to give it the appellation of an easy, quick and universal help. For its own impoten∣cy grounded in ignorance, they distort and strain to the arbitrament of an ill understood and worse ap∣plyed  axiome: Because truly there is not the least question to be made, but that one may presently cut the rope of a man hanged, that being deprived of aire, he might enjoy it more quickly. Again, that one may place a drowned man in a prone po∣sture,
that he may cast forth the water out of his lungs. One may, I say, drag out some certain body to the bankside: and may presently free a wound from that exotick miasme and indisposition, that hath pos∣sessed it, and bring it to a circatrice. For very ma∣ny such wounds are closed in one day: because the solution of continuity wants nothing but its reuni∣tion; one may presently set a fractured or disloca∣ted bone. The sick may likewise be restor'd in the Epilepsie, Syncope, Lipothymie and Cramp much sooner, the belly loos'd presently and the detenti∣on of excrements absolved and may presently stop the muliebrall fluxe. For it is not to be supposed that nature rejoyceth in its own destruction, and that weary of a sound and lovely state of health, is willing to open the gates and let in grimfac'd re∣pentinous Death, and should refuse a Remedy of that noble entelechy, which should suddenly expell and drive out the malignant disease, except she loves to be thought not to do that, which in possi∣bilities is best of all, nor to desire that every thing should have a being, and be conserved. In de∣monstration indeed, it is accounted impossible to go on from one extreame to another, without a mean, and that mean wholly deny all interjacency: which if we have granted in naturalities with a cer∣tain latitude, we shall deserve to be adjudged hi∣therto to have done very well, and whereof not to repent. Verily we may not scrue and urge that of demonstration, unto sanation. We confess indeed that the Dropsy may not be drawn forth by Paraco∣tesis all at a time: as also to eliciate all the purulent matter at once out of an Aposteme, is not good;
neither to carry one frozen with cold, immediately to an Hypocaust, nor to feed one aboundantly who is almost starved with famine. But truly the slow and necessary incession of mediocrity, or the progression from one extream to another, doth not constrain that, as such, as if nature should make aversation from speedy opitulation. Seeing that this indication is peculiar, naturall, medullary and intirely proper to it. But these things are forbidden, because the exolution of the powers thence depending, would not bear those swift moti∣ons. The schools therefore by sophistication of a cause not as a cause, do drive the sick from a spee∣dy remedy which they have not; that they may veil their ignorance, and introduce their enthymemes among the common people, under certain Axi∣omes badly directed. For as often as nature effects, and with a Trine, aspects the perfect sanation of dis∣seases, which may be genuinely accomplished in her own termes, without losse or detriment to the powers, (for the constellation of powers hath the Ascendand and first house, the metrapolitane place in the systeme of indications,) whereby it's the soon∣er obtained, and manumitted into a greater Jubilee of Nature, as we have often observed in Fea∣vers, with much plesure, and profitable admiration. Therefore (in plain termes) if a meer heat above or against nature be the Ascendant in the Horizon of Feavers, and every cure ought to be performed by the monomachy or civill warres of debellative con∣traries: there is required therefore a praeternatur∣all refrigeration, namely that contraries may stand sub eodem genere. That is every Feaver should ne∣cessarily
be cured with the conclamate cold of the ambient: and chiefly because the cold of the cir∣cum-ambient aire doth collect, not dissipate the powers. But the consequent is false; and there∣fore the Antecedent. The schools therefore do not intend to perswade into a gentle calmnesse, their onely impetum faciens, the heat in feavers, by the ven∣tilating Rhetorick of Phlebotomy: but they chiefly respect the ablation of the bloud and mittigation of accidents, which ushers in and procures the de∣bilitated powers, or the diminution of the bloud and strength, is the only beam in their eye, and which they primarily intend. Whereby with a more colourable deceit they may call that a freer respiration of the arteries. But we very much e∣steem  the indication which concernes the reall con∣servation of the powers, & is opposite to the miser∣able and anormous depletion of the veins whatsoe∣ver, because in the diminution and prosternation of the powers and strength, being outed of their vi∣gour, and now exanimated into a dull and faint my∣cropsychie, no disease can in the least degree, or larg∣est latitud of intention be profligated from the con∣fines of vitality, nor doth any thing remain to be done by the Physitian, but to stand for a cypher. Hippocrates therefore concludes Nature to be the  only Aesculapius of diseases; because the indication which is desumed from conserving the powers, should moderate the whole scope of the cure. Ther∣fore as the keeping of the powers, is the prime indi∣cation perpendicular to health, and conducible to perfect restauration, and this to be perswaded from the convincing arguments of reason; so also its cor∣relative
the bloud, because it containeth them. Hippocrates indeed it's confessed, commands to let bloud presently and aboundantly in the strenu∣ous plethora of Athletick bodies: and that the schools every where thunder out for phlebotomy. But their allegations for that in the cure of feavers and diseases, is extreamly ridiculous and worthy the blushes of learned men. For he commands not that for fear of the plethora, although their veins might sufficiently abound with bloud: but onely least the full-stuffed vessels should strein and burst in the exercise of their strength: otherewise, what intercalation or advent is there that is common to sound Athletick Enterprisers, with the cure of Fea∣vers? For there is no fear of a plethora in one afflict∣ed with a Feaver, nor that a vein should be broke by exercise. Yet it is to be noted, that the deple∣tions of bloud, do so behave themselves, and are  at such a passe: Forasmuch as the luxuriant exhau∣stion of the powers accruing upon the libidinous sa∣crifices to the Cyprian Dame, is irreparable, because it takes away from the innate spirit of the heart. With semblable reason and in proximity to this, is the destructive exhaustion made by phlebotomy, for∣asmuch as it readily and privily steales away and that plentifully the influent Archeus. But although the malignant tincture and influence of a disease doth perpendicularly also oppugne the sysygia of powers; yet because it doth it not affatim, sed sen∣sim, therefore the cardinall effect, is rather a con∣cussion and attrition of the powers, then a real exhau∣stion. The restauration therefore of the strength from
the disease of attrition doth more easily and readily bend and follow the auxiliary hand of the Physitian then from that of exhaustion, by phlebotomy. For those who in any disease are debilitated by bloud-letting, are oftentimes disappointed of the Crisis, and if in the dilatory expergefaction from a dis∣ease, and raising its seige, they begin to recruit, and nature is not put upon such hard duty, but they now become a little better; yet they passe out at the postern gate and narrow way of many anxieties, and a long flux of time it is, e're these valetudina∣rists arrive at the broad and pleasant way of perfect convalescence, and not without fear of the fresh a∣larm of elusory recidivation. But they who take their decumbiture in a disease without phleboto∣my, are easily restored, and by and by attain to their pristine state of sanity. And if they are destitute of remedies, and sometimes are driven to great ex∣tremitys; yet Nature endeavors the Crisis and doth refect them, because although their strength suf∣fer a conquassation by a disease, yet they pe∣rish not, because no exhaustion by Blood-let∣ting. Wherefore a Physitian is bound by the peculiar  dictates of conscience and charity to heal the sick, not by a subitaneous expoliation of the powers, as neither by the dangers flowing from thence, nor yet by abreviation of life, according to that in the Psalmes, my spirit shall be attenuated, and there∣fore my daies shortned. And seeing according to Holy writ, the life lurkes in the bloud, therefore a plentiful profusion of bloud, cannot but be a con∣siderable prejudice to life.
For precisely the perpetual intention of Nature in curing feavers, is per , per sudores. And therefore the reflux or periodicall exacerbati∣ons for the most part are checked and ended by the profluvium of sweats. But phlebotomy is the antartick pole, is diametrically opposite to this intention. For truly it vellicates the bloud inwards, to replete the vessels empty of bloud: But seriously the mo∣tion of Nature requisite to the sanation of feavers, proceeds from the centre to the circumference, from the Regalia of the noble parts and en∣trails, to the line of this our garrison, the Region of the Pelt. But that bloud-letting does hurt unavoid∣ably, by the dependent necessity of its debilitation, we need no strong inducements to charme our be∣lief, although stronger and plethorick bodies, may seem to them, who to passe by the trouble of a ju∣dicial and serious pensitation, are inclined to be∣lieve, that they find and witnesse the contrary: if that holy writ which tells us, that the life dwells in bloud, hath not weight sufficient to engage our cre∣dence; at least it may be made manifest by the barbarous logick of Phlebotomy, please you to suf∣fer the easie trouble and experiment of opening a vein and bleeding largely. For presently the con∣clusion and evidence given in will be, That the strength or powers & the sick are faint and fall together. Therefore if in demonstration six things may nota∣bly hurt: three then cannot but hurt, though not  so sensibly. Farre therefore from the rules of sober verity and equity must his anomall intentions and pra∣ctise wander, who being delegated to cure and re∣store
nature, invents and tryes waies to hurt her, for which he hath not the least permission, if na∣ture be her own Aesculape, and so much the more happy and successeful, as she is stronger. For let it be but seriously weighed in the ballance, and by the weighty motive of the pressing necessities and mis∣chiefs that follow, and it will evidently appear that Physitians may deservedly suffer the lash and feel compunction for their inhumane languifying practises. For is it not enough to a Physitian that the sick pines and begins to grow faint, under the bur∣den of an inexcusable weaknesse by a deplorable disease, hunger, losse of appetite, inquietude, pains, anxieties, waichings, sweate, &c? Nor ought a faithful Adjuvant or helper to lay load upon load, & add weaknesse to weaknesses. Deceitful is that help which phlebotomy brings and his remedy so uncer∣tain, that no Physitian hitherto durst promise from thence future sanation. In earnest it is worthy our most serious consider∣ation, when we take notice how every Artificer performes what he promises, to wit, the Image-maker  his Image, the Builder his edifice, the Shooe-maker fashions his shooes, and all this ad un∣guem. But alas onely a Physitian, in a cold spasme of inconstancy, dares promise nothing of his Art: because the infirm nerves of his ground work & grand foundation leanes on the broken reed of uncertain principles; by accident only, and most times de∣ceitfully profitable: because however the mat∣ter is handled, it is full of ignorance to intend cure by procuring weaknesse, that is, by a sudden de∣pletion of the bloud, largely made; nature being
driven into the wild field of confusion, sounds a re∣treat, and neglects the expulsion of her enemy. Which expulsion notwithstanding, needs no vo∣lume to confirme, that being the Epitasis or heart of the businesse, or the Epilogue and winding up of the matter, contains the whole scene of feavers and nature. Farther, it's an indubitate and irrefragable truth, That the febrile matter doth not take up its lodging in the vein above the heart: and by con∣sequent,  that the seminall fomenting or occasionall matter, is in no wise exhausted or let out by the key of phlebotomy, or effectuously cures, by the direct and perpendicular intention of healing. Finally, if bloud-letting be concluded for the re∣fection of the arteries through the facility of per∣spiration, it is wholly frustraneous while the fea∣ver  is yet in Balneo, and in its ascension by the Cli∣max of aggravation, before it comes to the fire of sublimation, and hath not yet mounted the Apogae∣um of conflagration. And seeing that not in its fixation or stationary position, nor also in its retro∣gradation or declension, bloudletting is no whit ne∣cessary. Therefore never. But not in the state, is proved: because the Crisis is hindred, seeing nature (as they write) is most opposed and impe∣dited in her reluctation and conflict with the forren invasion of the disease, and for the most part re∣turns conquerour, then would it be inconsiderate and invincible dotage, to flank her files and fall foul upon her in the rear, by a rash attempt of vio∣lating her force: then would she least of all be able to suffer the losse of strength, and retreat from the duel. But if in the State Nature be forc'd to resign
to the tyranny of the Conquerour, what shall bloud-letting be, any other then meer homicide? If therefore in the state it is not convenient to open a vein, while the heat is in its Zenith, the anxiety and powerfullest respiration of the arteries is exa∣gitated: Farre lesse convenient surely will it be, in the beginning and augmentation. Especially seeing that in the first daies, the fear of a plethora vanishes away, and so without doubt the perspiration of the arteries is easy enough. But that diseases in Perigaeo or declination, have not the least latitude or intention for bloud-letting, and do neither re∣quire it, nor suffer it, is confessed by the common consent of all, and is so clear as needs no Apoixis, nor cannot escape the most blear-eyed and regard∣lesse observation, that no man will ever essay phlebotomy in the declination of a disease. Moreover consider we that in the meridian of  feavers, the bloud that runnes in its ecliptick, the veins, is either good, or bad, or neuter. If good, that it will be good to keep good, there's none so devoid of his reason to appear we believe so much a sceptick, to dispute against it: because it addes to the strength. For (as elsewhere we have shewed) the fear of a plethora even straight at the beginning, if there was any, ceased. But because in the Apo∣theosis of phleboomy they will have good bloud emitted, for ventilation and difflation of putrefa∣ction, when both the one and the other is taken away well enough; and that imaginary good, which they suppose in the Chymaera of their own brains, hath no other real Idea, or footing, but in the di∣stracted imaginations of the contrivers and abettors
of this fable, and brings nothing but loss of strength. Moreover the schools teach, that phlebotomy in a feaver, is not commanded because of the good∣nesse of bloud, which negative Thesis supposes evill and putrid. But they will otherwise learn when we come to shew that there is no corrupt thing in the Canals of the veins unto the last period of ani∣mation; and consequently this drift of phleboto∣my  will be cashiered. Let them therefore demon∣strate to us the malignity of the bloud, which is with∣out and before the corruption of the same. Next, how the bad bloud is kept in the vein, from the heart unto the Cubit, if they will have this their device of phlebotomy ratified. Let them tell us, I say, how that the bad bloud is not in the first recepta∣cles, and the bloud being brought out by the vei of the Cubit, a worse is not drawn to the heart, where the vena Cava makes the right sinus of the heart. Let them inform us likewise that the su∣periour veins being depleted, there is not greater liberty and impunity for both noxia and ebrilia to come to the heart, then before: yea, that in the place of difflating corruption (which in severity of truth we have proved to be none at all) there is not occasioned rather a freer passage of the putrid aire to the heart, towards which place seriously, the vacuity of the depleted veins doth attract the bloud be∣neath. Let them shew I say, how the effluvium of bloud, and diminution and excise of the strength by the Cubit, will be such a convenient mother, to own such a production as will impede corruption, or import the correction and redintegration of the putrid. Let them also explain themselves what
they mean, when they say, that phlebotomy should be made, that the arteries may more freely respire, when that putrefaction (if there were any possibi∣lity of it in the veins) would not affect the arterial bloud, the steward of whole Nature. Moreover let them prove that the good bloud and strength being diminish'd, proportionably, there is a great∣er power to the remaining impure and inquinated by corruption, (as they suppose) of preserving it self from the putrefaction that is imminent. Let them instruct us likewise contrary to Scripture, that the life and soul are rather, and more delectably in the remaining contaminated bloud, then in the purer that is taken away by phlebotomy. Other∣wise we may have freedome enough to conclude, that the letting forth of the good, doth neces∣sarily and regularly include the augmented stock & proportion, & unbridled licence of the remaining evil bloud. What if then in the feaver and veins the bloud be bad, and they say it is good (as a sign and effect) which in phlebotomy flowes forth bad: and should they esteem so much at least of the tak∣ing away of bad bloud; to which we find no grounds for our belief to incline. For, first let them prove, whereby, that their incrimination and arraignement of the bloud to be noxious, may appear by the verdict of apodicticall evidence and demonstration to be so indeed, as we before have, and by and by shall fully acquit and find not guilty. And then let them indoctrinate us how by such a sudden and large emission of the bad bloud, no prejudice is made to the powers and strength: and that the re∣maining inquinated bloud, the strength being now
diminished, and a depletion made of the bloud, shall be the cause why the corruption of the rest of the blond is lesse able to proceed? And whether they can hope, the bloud being, after what manner soever, once putrified in the veins, that from such a privation there can be in nature any regression: And also let them shew, not to contradict, how it is proper to the feaver to inquinate the bloud it self,  and this property to be taken away à posteriori, to wit, with the removing of the putrefyed humour? For if at first the impurer bloud be drawn out of the vein, they iterate the opening of a vein, and in the interim consternate and perturb the pow∣ers, and thereby take away all hope of the Crisis, which if it come out redder then ordinary, they cry out with that magnifying esteem, as if the whole heap of evill were taken away at once, and as if the seat of feavers had been extended in a paralell line, only from the continent of the heart, unto the Isth∣mus of the flexure of the Arme: but the good had been residentiall about the parenchymatick Labo∣ratorie of the Lier. But we have known fearfull evacuations of the last excrements alwaies in the Dropsy, much more therefore in the bare taking away of bloud, which in a direct line takes away the vital spirits, from the centre of the heart to the circumference, by the orifice of the vein, whether the bloud be good, or bad, or neither. And here seeing we are fallen upon it so directly,  we have a fair opportunity to enquire into the pu∣trefaction of the bloud or corruption of the same, and now strictly to arraign and examine its natur∣alities, and see if there be any possibilitie for it to
outlive the faith of them who seek to bear it down. And therefore not only simply heterodoxicall, but a very rough-hewed paradoxicall asseveration it will seem unto inflexible eares, if we say, That the bloud putrefies not in the veins, and perhaps to some as deeply heretical and of as high a Tincture, as comes not short of the transubstantial migration of the grapy juice of the papall Sacramentarians. The opinion of bad and corrupt humours, and worse bloud, hath been the Cantharides to phlebo∣tomy, and of bloudy disadvantage in the method of healing. Let the schools therefore know, That the bloud never putrefies in the veins, but (like Gemini in the Zodiack, or Hippocrates twins,) its line or Ec∣liptick it runnes in, the vein it self putrefies also, as in the Tropick of Gangrenes and mortifications. Moreo∣ver like precarious mendicants, they begge the question, who let out the bloud, least by the mag∣nt of its stagnancy it should attract and be impreg∣nated with the puddle of putrefaction. Also who assert, A synochus or Casus to be generated from the embryo of putrefyed bloud in the womb of the veins. Also who say, that when Mercury the bloud putrefies in the Balneum of the veins, it is transmu∣ted into choler. If we suppose that some excre∣mentitious, forreigne and alien humours and semi∣nalities, may impresse a seminall miasme in the parts, by a breath or blast of contagion or other inquina∣ting ferment, and thereby disorder and pervert the functions, yet will it not therefore follow, that they are capable of corruption or putrefaction. For pu∣trefaction, according to the faith of that great Ele∣mentarist, Aristotle, Is a corruption of the proper heat
secundum naturam, in every humidum, by another heat that is ambient. Here Aristotle requires three things necessary unto corruption. First the subject or matter of putrefaction, which is, unumquodque humidum. Secondly, the form and essence of pu∣trefaction, namely, the corruption of the proper heat from its own natural state, so that of a natur∣al state, it is made praeter naturam. And lastly, the efficient cause, to wit, the heat of the ambient. The which if one of these be wanting, corruption cannot then be made. In conformity and analogy to this, Alexander lends us his suffrage, in lib. 12. cap. 2. where he proves, The humours do not putrefie in the veins, but that they are rather congealed extra vasa, then putre∣fie. If they putrefy in the veins, wormes would be generated, because that there the heat is more vi∣gorous, then in the Intestines, where animals are begotten of corruption. Joubertus also is not farre from us, thinking, That all corruption is made cum faetore. But in the veins there is no faetor; There∣fore no corruption. Joubertus also adds, That all things are conserved in there proper places: but the veins are the proper Conservatories of the bloud and humours, therefore putrefy not. Capriolus responds to this, That although every thing is conserved in his proper place, yet the same may putrefy from causes proceeding som other way. He brings an exa∣mple of wine, which although it should be conserved almost alwaies in its proper vessels, yet sometimes it is corrupted in them, and putrefies by other causes. But because it is indecorum to the regulari∣ties of philosophy to deny Theorems, we constantly
assert, every thing to be conserved in his proper re∣ceptacle or native conservatory. To the example of Capriolus which he brings of wine, we shall one∣ly say, That wine is not in the Hogs-head or vessel, as in his proper natural place, nor hath it a proper place, when it is not contained in his proper term or boundary; for the wine is detained in the vessel against his nature. And those bodies which are taken away by external force and injury, have not a proper and natural place. Man for this cause is mortall. We remain also doubtful in the generall Theory of putrefaction; for we find it not an unusual (nor laudable) custome for fluctuating spirits, whose lenity of belief inclines, or obstinacy of will con∣streins them, to dilate the notions of things beyond the proprieties of their naturs. The schools they sup∣ponere quodlibet, ut probetur quidlibet, In their Theorems of putrefaction, which we thus prove: The bloud is kept fluid even in a Cadaver or dead body, in its Trunk, the veins, as appear, by the consent of all Anatomy, but once let out by the key of phlebo∣tomy doth presently by the deliquium of the Ambi∣ent, condense and coagulate into colchotar sanguinis, clods. Now the coagulation of the bloud is the prodromus and Alpha only of putrefaction. There∣fore if the veins by their proper balme, (not short of that of Memphis,) preserve the bloud from cor∣ruption in a dead body, much more will they in the living. Its an argument a minori ad majus. It's true some forreign excrements may perturb the bloud in the veins, as we before hinted, to wit, the surplusage,
or mean retinue as well of their own, as another di∣gestion, but never the Lord chief Treasurer of life, the bloud. Because according to scripture, it is the seat, the chamber and magazine of life. If therefore the grand seigniour himself, the life, cannot preserve his own throne and Treasury in the metropolis or Royaltie of the veins, from the invasion or treache∣rous undermining of that petty Rebell, corrupti∣on, from becoming competitor or Tenant thereto, when then will he keep it? And how can it be e∣ver free from the same? And also if the life cannot save harmles & keep indempnified from the charge of putrefaction, the bloud, custos vitae, in which she sits enthron'd and growes and encreases in glory  and vigour, how will then the bones he preserv∣ed? The veins therefore are ordain'd by the high court and Councel of Heaven to be Lord Commis∣sioners deputed to keep the bloud from corrupti∣on: because the life is confermented to the bloud of the veins, and therefore both are cast out by the lease of ejectment of bloud-letting; they both to∣gether have their current through the sluice of phle∣botomy, and make their exit at one door, the ori∣fice  of the vein. Under this question therefore the glory and destination of Nature doth come to ruin: or the whole course of healing hitherto ador'd by Physitians. But put the case that it be so▪ By what signes do the schools judge of putrid bloud? Is it not from the colour, whiter, blacker, yellow, gree∣nish, or brownish? From the matter viscous, thick, waterish, thin, &c? And at last from the consi∣stence, not febrous, or not hanging together? But
we declare under the penalty of being convicted of  a ly or suppos'd thing, if any one please to try and examine the bloud of two hundred common sound persons emited in one day, which though many of them may be very unlike in aspect, colour, mat∣ter and consistence; and let many of these be di∣still'd, yet they shall be found to be equally usefull and profitable in healing. For although many of them should seem putrid; some aeruginous or atrabi∣lious: yet in the first place, these persons whence the bloud flowes forth, are all suppos'd to be sound. Wherefore we have slighted the table of judge∣ments from the Haemascopy or sight of the extrave∣nated bloud, and have concluded, that the bloud commanded by the Physitians to be kept, was chiefly for this reason, that they might find out one visitation in the sick. Verily if putrefaction of bloud hath any place, and doth demonstrate its emission from that title, it takes place in the plague. But phlebotomy in the  plague is deadly; Therefore there is never no pu∣trefaction in the bloud. Suppose also there be thirty men alike afflicted with  the Pleuresy, and ten of them give forth bloud appa∣rently vitiated: (for the bloud of pleuretick persons is like to red wine mixt with curdled milk) the o∣ther twenty I'le undertake to cure without bloud-letting. Certain it is, that those twenty have their bloud no otherwise affected then those ten, who were let bloud. And again that those twenty that are cured, if a vein were opened, their bloud shall be found rectified, restored to its pristine perfecti∣on, and farre differing from the bloud of pleureticks.
Therfore the bloud of pleuretick persons is not cor∣rupted, although it may seem so: because from the black pathes of corrupted bloud, there is no return to the way of life and sanity. Black bloud therefore or livid, green, &c. do not signifie the corruption of it: but are symbolizations of only its effervescence, or fermentall turbulency. For in the first place, if the more waterish and yellow bloud doth denote its vitiosity, the arteriall bloud should be far worse then the bloud in the veins; which is false. For the Tree of life, the bloud, is no otherwise distin∣guished from the aforesaid racemations, then as the wine is troubled, when the vine flowers, yet is not therefore corrupted; for take away the trouble, and it returnes again to its pristine serenity and  clarity. So likewise a feaver doth variously affect and perturb the bloud, and discolorate it with sun∣dry and divers faces. But these larvations vanish, the feaver being taken away. Verily these Haema∣tognomists or diviners by the Phaenomena's in the bloud, in their Gnomologies may be compared to those who calculate and think to passe judgement on the Radix or scheam of Spanish wine, by the as∣cendant of their pisse-pot; who will judge of good  or bad Canary by looking on their urine. But they go on to say. That if putrefaction be not lodg'd in the bloud, and on the score of being a troublesome guest, why doth it therefore the third time, and not the first, or the first, and not the third time, spring forth with a blush purely red out of the vein? But this argument doth onely demonstrate one part of the bloud to be more and sooner troubled then the other, not the whole or altogether. And
if it be putrefied, it availes to avert the putrefaction, then in vain to mitigate the feaver by refrigerati∣on. But surely those things whatsoever, that resist putrefaction, are hot. For myrrh now two thou∣sand yeares preserves the embalmed Aegyptian Car∣casses; which otherwise with succory, plantain, and your cooling things had long agoe putrefied. The putrefaction therefore of the humours, of the bloud also and the spirits are fabulous stories, & a warring against them more ridiculous then a fight in Quixot. We adde one thing more, whatsoever has once apo∣statized into an exotick Diathesis of corruption in the body, nevr returns again into unity or favor: But the bloud of the veins howsoever it may seem corrupted returns agan into favor. Therfore it hath not bin once corrupted: The Major is proved, becaus corruption  in us, is an effect of the sequestration of the vitall dispositions. The Minor is proved by those cured of the Plague, pleuresy & feavers without bloudletting. Also, if the bloud is everjudged to be putrid or corrupt, existing in the veins, it is that chiefly, which is haemorrhoidall: but this is not corrupt, al∣though it be almost as it were extravenated. There∣fore the bloud is never to be judged putrid in the veins. The Major the whole practise of Chirurgery, proves, by ulcers begotten of the haemorrhoides. The Minor is proved, because we make a met∣tall, a ring of which being worne, takes away the pain of the haemorrhoides in a little space, and in twenty four hours the haemorrhoides as well intern as extern vanish away, although they be greatly swelled. Therefore that bloud, is received into pri∣stine favour, and they feel themselves well.
What hinders now, if taken up and committed to the managery of a judicious and deliberate per∣pension, but that this fabulous scene of putrid bloud will appear on all hands worthy the hiss off the stage of medical Theorems for phlebotomy; and to ac∣count it but in the list of nothing. Wherefore in se∣rious verity we have alwaies found that the help produced by the forcible taking away the powers and strength, to be full of deceit; that for a little ease, the powers, which are the Atlas of diseases, should be enervated. For even as a drink in the infancy of a feaver should be an adipson, and seem to refresh the thirst a little by the dugs of humifica∣tion: but who is so mad that would then drink, if he knew that it would take away his necessary strength. False therefore, deceitful, and but a momentary help is that, which advenes by phlebo∣tomy. But they go on, and of some (and they not a few, nor meanly wise, or so accounted) with whom I have talked, it hath been their last pin to shut up their tedious discourse, and with others, the Her∣cules, and main pillar of their faith in the premises of phlebotomy, to justifie it from the good successes usually attends and followes it. And the schools themselves go about to work it upon our be∣liefe by the Rhetorick of its good effects. Certain∣ly it is an injurious method unto Philosophy and Physicks, and a perpetual promotion of ignorance, in points of obscurity to fall upon a present refuge of that restlesse ill successe and events. And to speak truly an hazardable determination it is unto uctuating and indifferent effects to affixe a posi∣tive
type. For in effects of farre more regular causalities, difficulties do often arise. And we can with a little pains make appear what misera∣ble, bloudy, destructive and languifying effects hath followed it, that shall outvye and bear down all the mountains of good they can heap up. For what though the cruel and barbarous practises of these pseudo-medici by diminishing the requisite quantity of bloud, life and strength, to the great and almost irreparable detriment of the patient, do by exhausting the veins and emaciating the body, bring a little ease, do they therefore strike at the roote of the disease, and destroy the cardinall ef∣ficient thereof? Nothing lesse. Now concerning bloud neither good nor bad, it is not worth speak∣ing of in respect of phlebotomy: seeing it is de∣nyed disjunctively, it may also be denyed copula∣tively. For whether it be natural, which consists in a commixture of good with the depraved (sup∣posing depraved which is not) or that, to which there is a neutral alteration introduced, in each event the aforesaid do satisfie. At length we come to cut off the Cable of that Anchora spei of revulsion, and so to take away alike all the lesser tackling of Co-indications, that as in a mappe may appear the dangerous rock of these their unleavened Heterodoxes, as the miserable and tenacious subterfuges of Pertinacy. It is a mad help in theoricall or practicall phlebotomy (for they com∣monly draw out and exact a plenty of it for this end) in shunning the Scilla of feavers to fall into the Charybdis of menstrua's; and either in the first, or onely in the last to let bloud for revulsion: be∣cause
that the feavorish matter doth not swim in the bloud, or fluctuate in the veins, as a fish in the water: but is fixt to the vessel within. And in the menstrua's likewise: because that the seperation of it is made out of the whole, and not without the separating hand of the Archeus. But phlebotomy verily separates nothing of things separable, be∣cause it acts without any precognition of an end, and so without election. But the innoxious bloud, and in vicinity or proximity to the apertion of the ves∣sel, perpetually flowes forth: the which, because afterward in a continued threed, or undulation, other followes hard at the heels, for fear of vacuity. Therefore the whole retinue of menstrua's, about that peculiar monarchy of the womb, that have been collected by the study and labour of nature are then segregated by the destructive knife of phlebotomy, and make their retroition into the whole. But if phlebotomy sometimes in a plethorick and euchy∣mous woman, may have the plaudite and Elogie to happen successefully, yet really in many others, it procures but a lamentable Catastrophe. For if by its only quantity the menstrue (being now gathered and dispersed in the uterine veins) should offend, we will grant the individual indication of phlebo∣tomy, and in this only supposed Accidentality wil∣lingly admit it. But if the menstrue flowes in a womb of a laudable constitution, it aboundantly satisfies its own ends, and so forth revulsion is in vain, al∣though their Hypothesis supposes it impossible. For phlebotomy is nothing else but a meer and indistinct depletion of bloud. For the veins being now unna∣turally and unaccustomably emptied, they do attract to
selves forthwith, from every place, and any bloud whatsoever. Because as they are the greedy Capsu∣laes of bloud; so they are impatient of vacuity. But  Derivation, because it is a parsimonious effusion of bloud, (so that it be done out of congruous veins,) it hath profited in many topick diseases, but is whol∣ly impertinent in feavers. But they urge with that confidence and instance  bloud-letting to be so necessary in the pleuresy, that it is enjoined, not under capitall offence. For they say, That unlesse the confluent bloud, avelling  the pleura or thin membrane lining the chest, be revelled by a large effusion of bloud, there is dan∣ger, that the pleuresy would kill a man by suffoca∣tion. But their Theory is wholly besides the mark, and they level only at the productions and effects of dis∣eases, and not the causes. For they are ignorant of the Nature of a pleuresy in the material cause of its Generation, place for its conception, Conduicts for its Traduction, Receptories for its customary admission, and its penetrative corroding activity impregnated with that immanity to avell the pleura or lining of the Thorax from the ribs, which is firmely annexed and immediately adheres unto them, by the medi∣atory ligation of numerous solid fibres. Where∣fore we have no weighty engagement lies upon our reason to conclude, that in the pleuresy, phlebotomy hath no place, nor is of no use for revulsion and derivation: but for the meer exhaustion and diminution of the bloud and strength: so that truly Nature greatly fearing that evacuation, doth supersede, and desists to send plenty of bloud about the pleura. 'Tis not nuworthy their notice taking, and substantiall
determination whether this, with such a notable and sudden losse of strength (in a disease wherein the whole burden lies upon the shoulders of the strength and powers) be not to be cured, à posteriori, by precaution and prevention of the increase? And whether that be a proceeding to the connexed and fomenting cause, while they convert their whole work not ad faciens, sed ad factum esse? For mine own part and in me its neither vanity nor pride to say, and let it not be a grief or offence to any of their grave obstinacies and vulgarities, I let no man bloud in the pleuresy; nor have not since my peda∣tisme and junior practise in the medical profession, as many can witnesse, especially those who have had a constant opportunity for some length of time to see into, and be inwardly intimate in my practise and cures: and such a cure is both safe, sure, profi∣table and solid. None of them have miscarried, whereas those that are let bloud, after a long Tabes, and lingring death perish most of them, and have a quotannall recidivation. For according to Galen, whosoever within fourty daies are not perfectly cured, grow tabid. But there are many alive in several parts of this Nation, who can testify, That I cure perfectly within few daies; nor do they find relapses. Now it is to be considered if there be any use of Revulsion in feavers. For in sooth, seeing pri∣marily there is no other need of revulsion, then phlebotomy, to which the succeeding bloud that is about to flow, is hoped for, by accident, and by the benefit of which, it will not flow to the place affected. According to which Thesis it followes,
That by such an evacuation the peccant feavorish bloud, dispersed in the veins will be drawn; (con∣niventer loqui) which otherwise, latent in its own nest, farre from the heart, would not communicate the ferment of its hurt so hastily and fiercely to the heart. Which is as much as to say, That by such a revulsion, the peccant humour would be drawn from the ignoble part, to the more noble. For more crude and feculent is the bloud in the maze and La∣birinth of the mesaraick veins; but more defecate which comes to the pallace of life, the heart. For otherwise the first weapons of mischief had been placed by indiscret nature neer the fountain of life. Therefore seeing the stream of the feavorish matter flowes not in the veins, nor takes up quarters neer the heart: Farre be it from any sober head to fall into that dotage to believe, That it can be drawn forth, or caus'd to shift its quarters, by the rude hand of phlebotomy, however oftentimes a multico∣lorate bloud by the Court-ship of iterated bloud-lettings may be sent forth. It's a cruel remedy al∣so, if unto the place of the emitted bloud, some o∣ther shall come from more remote places. For so the tincture of labefaction of one place, should be communicated to the whole and to the more noble parts. Finally if once the old Troops of errors of the  Ethnicks were disbanded and cashiered the Regi∣ment of knowledge, the pretended Reformades, or part new modell'd Moderns would have more ten∣der regard to the life of their neighbour; and would likewise know, that the childish Theory of revulsions are but vain and ridiculous comments;
and that the losse of the Treasury of bloud and strength is pernicious; and that there is no hurt from the bloud within the veins; but only from hostile and alien Excrements: and also that God hath ordained sufficient Emunctories for any filth what∣soever; nor is there any need of incising the veins for the cure of feavers. Thus having evidenced, at least made dubious the litigious Theory and supinity of this practise of bloud-letting we think, and have some grounds to be confident, that the ingenuity and rationality of it will prevail more then our slender performances; whereby to fix as a very large discouragement, and disservice to the activity of those spirits who are the patrons and Cham∣pions of this practise. Herein we have been more elaborate, and the longer insisted, because the er∣ror is material, and a wicked and bloudy practise, and concernes oftimes the life of man; an error to be taken notice of by State, if they will make good that title and divine attribute to be merciful like Gods as they are called. And thus we could not but think it our duty, (according to our capacity,) wholly to subvert and disrobe this bloudy mantle of the exsecrable, and destructive Theorems and Epi∣demick practise of bloud-letting; the second man∣ner of evacuation. We have assigned the preceden∣cy and priority to purges from regular Idionomy and propriety of natures with their appellatives. The 3 manner of evacuation of evill humours followes. Now it will be seasonable for us to come to the 3 manner of evacuation of the schools; which is Fon∣tanels or Issues, another universal main pillar of heal∣ing: and to examine it by the fire of truth, and sub∣dichotomise
it by the severe incision knife of ratio∣nall argumentations. Which of all these generall remedies hath the principality of verity and vertue, and the optimacy in sanation, is not worth the dis∣pute. But this we believe. That this Trichotomy or Ternary of Racemations or branches of the me∣dicall Root, is like the Taxus of India, which the first year bears fruit, the second, leaves, and the third year, poison: and conclude, that but a mean ap∣prehension any thing well palated, will find no pleasant tast in this practise neither; except he have it brawn'd and made ingustible, as being paved with the free-stone of Custome, and the blew Theo∣ry of the schools. We shall therefore endeavour a full delivery hereof; declaring the grounds of doubt, and reasons of denial; which rightly understood, may, if not overthrow, yet shrewdly shake the se∣curity of this invention. Wherefore we will declare the ends and the effects of Fontanells and Cauteries. Cauteries in the first place are made by fire, and that either actuall, as by a red hot Iron: or potentiall, by  an escharoticall caustick: Fontanells also by a razor, or incision knife cutting something away. Of late, they have a trick of paring away, (palpably laniarious) & wounding the membrana Carnosa. But others prefer a wound by fire, or Caustick fitted to it, which is layed open by incision: because that by the actual heat and  siccity, they are led to think the flux of humors is bet∣ter impeded & stopped in their descent. As if in such a tantillation or moment of time, the fire should burne something besides the Eschar; or exsiccate some other thing, which they feigne is about to flow to the wound. And on both sides, these dreams
are magnifyed by the schools. Vain therefore are the Canteries or Fontanells, for the Revulsion and Exhaustion of humours, which have no real exist∣ence  in nature. For the adored Fontanell (for so they have christned their wounds made in the flesh, that the poor deluded vulgar may believe, that thereby diseases are exhausted, as by a fountain) helpes nothing, before the crustous eschar be taken away; and the vestigiaries of heat and drynesse be first removed. Because the protoplast or primi∣tive ordainment of a Cautery, had excretion for its object; which takes not the chair, nor flowes not, till the ebb or decidency of the eschar: and in its ex∣sudation can less transpire through the obdurate ob∣structed eschar, then thorow the integral porous pelt. Hence therfore the modr Pyhsitians have determined that howsoever the Fontanell was made, at least they would make solution of continuity, and keep it di∣vided.  For what God hath made and ordained in its integrality, to be kept untoucht, and adjudged to be best, seems unto the controuling ignorance of the schools, better to be vulnerated and divided, and so kept. To be wounded therefore, and keep wounds open, avails much to the health of the schools. And seriously it is worth our notice, but more our wonder, that they have not put wounding among their Canons of conserving health: forasmuch as Cauteries or permanent wounds are thought to be so neerly related to it. But the difference betwixt wounding and burning is only this, that there happens an emission of bloud: which one would think, under that title, should excell with the schools, unlesse the deceitfulnesse
of phlebotomy had discovered it self. They pre∣sume  and positively conclude forsooth, That a Cau∣tery or new imposed Fontanell is a new Emunctory, by which Physitians may compell Nature with a wet finger to exonerate her self. All which I say the schools have drawn into practise, upon the de∣signe of evacuation and exsiccation of superfluities, wildly imagining to comprehend the competent quantity of bloud, Generation of the exotick ex∣crement, and easy expulsion of the same under the single synonyma of Fontanells or Issues: whereby they can cite or summon the Catarrhall sminalities and radicities to make personal appearance before the Barre of the wounds orifice, at the pleasure of the Physitian. So that at this sluice of Fontanells is expulsed the Nilus of defluxions, and particuliar streams of gleeting humours, and it is now become a Cardinall point in the medicall compasse a main pillar of healing, and a Catarragogall Remedy cry∣ed up even to pulpitising, and has so farre prevail∣ed, that now also they are applyed unto children who have not yet attain'd unto 3 solar revolutions▪ yea that universality it hath acquired, that it is the only remedy and refuge not only of very many Inter∣nall, but also of most Externall and Cutany defects. But for our own part in the first place, we look up∣on Fontanells to contain implicite blasphemy, whereby they openly accuse the Creator of insuffi∣ciency in composing Emunctories. And also we have suffered above two hundred Fontanells or Is∣sues to dry up, and have advised to incarnate them, and bring them to a Cicatrize, which hitherto, so farre as we know, none have had cause to re∣pent.
And lastly we have considered the childish presumption of Physitians, in that they so seriously perswade themselves, they can engage nature in her passive auscultatory faculties to follow their com∣mands, and expell the catarrh or defluxion at the  hole that they have made in the flesh. That fi∣ctum impossibile of catarrhs, hath been a very conve∣nient mother indeed to bring forth the production of Fontanells: which Theory being denyed, the ground of Fontanells is a vain thing. For the schools teach, That by Fontanells, evil, yea exitious humours are forced out of the body, which otherwise would be either sent to another place, or by its declive tendency would voluntarily flow downwards. It's well truly, that Nature with a loose rein, against her will must dance attendance and wait upon the pleasure of Physitians, and the apertion of the skin; that by that way she may exonrate her self of that unprofitable burden, which otherwise would de∣cline towards a more noble member. As if Dame nature by her Mercuries or Emissaries should denounce her open and just anger, and threaten thus. Woe be unto you, unlesse you keep open for me the mem∣brana carnosa with a wound, when it shall seem good unto you, that ye may appease my fury by Revul∣sion, and avert me from the opinion of dimission. For otherwise, that which by a subcutaneous ex∣purgation, should be sent out by the high way and sink of all sordid excrements, I will now retract, in revenge, by the privy Garden of some noble mem∣ber. But I pray you, would it not amuse the activity of any sophistical head to tell us, from what centre, or ample source or head of the fountain, this cor∣rupt
stream of evill humours is delapsed, and comes to make this progresse? what is there in the liver, the Shop and Forge of the four humours, as they are pleased to have it? In earnest 'tis a Quaerie not below a solid determination, how the chanel of this evill humour, having so hard, long and salebrous way, so many creeks and intricate windings and turnings in its passage from the Metropolis of the liver thorow the Strand of the vena cava, and so tho∣row the Westminster of the Heart, wildly ranging, into the America and untravelled parts of the body can be carryed unto the utmost confines of the Epi∣dermis or scarfe skin of the Arme, Leg, or neck, not in the least contaminating the bloud, but the humour it self keeping its primitive virginity, and all this while remaining purely sincere? 'Tis a very cruel Emunctory truly which leads an evil humour thorow the Fountain of life. And so a cruel Phy∣sitian▪ and more cruel Schools which commands a noxious humour to be carryed thorow the heart. The schools they teach, That the greatest part of man-kind is in subjection to the Tyranny of a Cold Distemper of the stomack, & an hot distemper of the liver, and that from the stomack, during the whole act of Concoction, (as absurd as the former) doth sub∣lime and ascend whole clouds of vapours (the ante∣cedent matter of Catarrhs) into the Basis or lowest part of the brain, and there fix upon a plane: and that the Brain by its native Temperament, being Cold, and set like a cover over a boiling pot, or the head of an Alembick, in the highest Region of the Body; and so all those vapours that mount in∣to it. by the help of the locall cold of the Brain, are
again condensed into water, the vehiculum or mate∣riall cause of all erratick pains, the which, fontanels adopted by the paedantick schools as their Minerva, is the only midwife to deliver. Now what can smell more of stupidity and a dull phlegmatick o∣pinion, then this wild irregular Thesis of the schools? But we will descend to suppose, that this current of evil humors at this day unknown, may challenge the Brain (one of the most noble parts of the body) for its origination and Fountain: But where I pray you? Whether or no, is it generated in any sink of the Brain? either in the ventricles? Or in the Pelvis, or brain tunnell? Not truly in the first: for the ven∣tricles of the brain cannot be the magazine and nest of this foul evil humour, without prseent danger of death; or the ineviteable introduction of an A∣poplexy, or universall Palsie: if the doctrine of the schools, concerrning the origination of these dis∣eases, stand firm: Or in the pelvis of the brain, can this ill humour, which before was good, be creat∣ed? For in the basis of the brain is a narrow place called the Pelvis, or brain tunnel, which sendeth two small tubes, or outlets, toward the nostrills, and as many backward toward the neck. Which Cavities only could the Ascendant vapour insinuate it self into; and those are ever repleted with a muc∣cous or viscid excrement, and perpetually by a kind of guttulous distillation, discharge it down of their own accord into the pallat, and Nostrils, as the proper Emunctories or dreignes of the brain, destined to the evacuation of the slimy redundant humours: and therefore need no other vent or exit, as that unnecessary one of a Fontanell or Cautery. But
what a destructive man is he, and what an unworthy depraved quality it is, to maleficiate a humor in any part of the Head, which before was good, that he may from thence bring a malignant one to some in∣tercutaneous part, which the Physitian commands to be wounded? And how obedient is that, which being an evil humour (and doubtlesse over and be∣sides but a dead excrement) will suffer it self to be wracked and hurried to another place, which at a∣nother time, and another place, not a whit sollici∣tous of the oeconomy of life, by its own single decli∣vity conformes to the lawes of its situation! Last∣ly these things though conceded, yet it would want the essence and Etymon of a humour, and by conse∣quence of an evil humour, namely, fleam, one of the four. For whatsoever doth once steam up from the furnace of the stomack in a vapour, and con∣cretes into drops, is neither thick, nor viscous or te∣nacious, nor one of the four imaginary humours made in the Eutopia of the Liver: but should be a posthume guttulous liquor. Wherefore if the de∣praved impression of the evil humour, the finall cause of a Fontanell, be not forged neither in the Li∣ver, Brain, nor Stomack, what then shall be the mint of these evil humours for Catarrhs? Or what part and how high is it that hurles it forth, where∣by it may be carried more readily, and downward, according to its tendency, unto the hole of the Fon∣tanel. Thus the schools being on all sides compressed in  such a strait of trifles, are forced to confesse, That there is not any evil humour sent down to the Issue or hole of the Fontanell: but that the bloud turnes
Apostate in the wound it self, and sides ill dispos∣ed. For this is geniall to all wounds which lack  balsam. Certainly if the schools would conde∣scend to a serious examination of that Aphorisme, Dum pus it, major dolor, labor, & febris, quàm facto pure: they should know that the Pus is materially produ∣ced of bloud, by the labours of the faculties, and consequently, that for the same ends purulent mat∣ter is coveted in a Fontanell. Which being so, the Thesis falls down, which supposes bad humours are brought forth by a Cautery or Fontanell. 2. That the expulsion of the pus made in the wound, is not out of the centre of the body. 3. That it is not an excrement of the defluent Catarrhe. 4. That Fontanells do not purge bad humours, which transmutes the elixir of good bloud, into a Caput mortuum of an excrement, by the Athanor of the digestive faculty. 5. Fontanells avail nothing to the precaution of a malignant humour, which is topically made in the sides of the wound. 6. Pus and Sanies cannot retreat from the Turn∣pike, or orifice of the ulcer, and fall into the Quarters of a noble part, much lesse good bloud, of which the Pus is made. 7. If the bloud, of good, be made an evil hu∣mour, before it advenes to the Fontanell; then Na∣ture designes to send some evil from the masse of bloud, unto the wounded part only, that she may nourish it; or this is ordinary in every part: Then Nature is delapsed into that dotage and folly, that shall out-do Him, who to the end his Horse back
might not bear too heavy a burden, took it off and layed it on his own neck, and so rode upon him in that equipage. 8. 'Tis ridiculous, when that there is store of pus made, to say, the Fontanell is well purged. Seeing that foul error, and aberration into pus, de∣monstrates the Apostasie of the good bloud into corruption. And moreover if he who hath a Fon∣tanell, or Issue as it is called, be not well, in the stead of pus of a laudable constitution, there doth weep forth the lachrymations of an ichorous substance. 9. If therefore at the port hole, or scupper of the Fontanell, there is a pumping out or evacuation of ill humours, it unavoidably followes, that the man should feel himself better, when the stream of ichorous matter flowes out, then when pus is made: which is false in the Thesis. Hence therefore there is a genuine illation, That it is no select evil humour or pernicious excrement, which in its irresistible decidency would violate a∣nother part, that is expulsed by the Fontanell: but the totality of substance, whether it be pus, or a thin virulent matter, is no other thing then meer bloud, deputed to the nourishing of the cauterized or wounded part, and there corrupted by the di∣stemper of the part: and so the corruption of it, to measure the benignity and malignity of digestion, in the place of the Fontanell. And therefore whilst the whole Archeus after what manner soever la∣bours, there is also the greater infirmity of digesti∣on in the Fontanell, and the pus is nearer to putre∣faction. And hitherto the Fontanel by reason of the more powerful hurt of digestion then is accu∣stomed
doth weep forth an Ichor. Therefore its the desire of the schools that of innocuous bloud store of pus may be made, and of a laudable colour, white. And that they are pleased to say hath purg∣ed well, if any plenty of bloud be corrupted in the last digestion. The which, if it were strictly con∣sidered, then would it be made manifest, that a Cautery or Fontanell is not set to the expurgation of a malignant humour, nor that there is any exi∣stence of an ill humour: but only to the diminish∣ing of the redundancy of bloud; and so in the be∣holding  of a plethora alone. Whence we have a fair opportunity to collect, that they are to be ex∣punged out of the list of remedyes convenient to youth, or emaciated bodies, or oppressed with any disease: so neither to moderate Livers and least of all to abstemious persons, are they (without dan∣ger)  to be applyed. But they have not yet disco∣vered themselves to be so well learned to distin∣guish, whether the pus in the Fontanel be generat∣ed of bloud alone, or of one of the four conceited humours; or of a commixture of the four. If the evidence of truth go on the first's side, then the pus should not be of a bad, but of the best of the four humours, and so the Fontanel shall be in vain, and the best pus or effect of the Fontanel shall be worst, seeing it is nothing but the corruption of the best. But if they are pleased so well to opinion, and had rather comment, That the bloud was not evil be∣fore, but may be made bad in its range and strag∣ling from his other three comrades. But the other three, in this tripartatory secretion shall even then be worse naughty packs then the solitary bloud,
and a fontanel that corrupts the good and innocent bloud, may not be made for every event without a bad end. But if they will have the pus to be made out of a Tetrayncrasy or commixture of the humors, then a Fontanel ers in the end: seing the Fontanel a∣vails  not to the expurgation of maligne humours, but corrupting the good, sent unto it daily by un∣erring Nature, for aliment. Finally, a Fontanel cannot be adjudged the Institution, as the precaution of a Catarrhe: for otherwise the matter of a Catarrh should not be a vapour, nor fleam, but the bloud it self, which the Fontanel corrupts in it self. For pus is not made of pituitous matter; but of the bloud only, as is sufficiently taught in the schools. Therefore by the serious indagation of the essence of pus in its matter and efficient, the ends of Caute∣ries and Fontanels, and expurgation of Catarrhs and bad humours would vanish away. Yea truly, any symptome of wounds being removed, in Cau∣eries or Fontlls, and a valetudinary state sup∣posed, it is necessary, that the solution of continu∣ity bring pus into the Fontanel; and that may not flow from some other place; but be generated in the part it self. The Archeus also doth daily dispence proportionably so much bloud to the parts, as may serve for their nutrition. Therefore Pus is nothing but the vitiated bloud in that part which is wound∣ed, and the effect of vitiated digestion in the same place. The violation therefore of the integrity, continuity and digestion of the parts, and the transmu∣tation of bloud into matter, is reputed by the schools, as the only Achilles of Catarrhs, to obstruct and impede their progress: whether from the head, which
they have farmed as the ware-house for the genera∣tion and transportation of this liquid merchandise of Catarrhs, to extract an excrementitious humour (which otherwise threatned to fall down to a no∣ble part) by the hole of the Fontanell, or whether or no, there be a Deuteropathy or consent of the head with the part wounded? for it is all one, so be that the skin may be kept wounded, whether that ex∣crementitious humour be bloud, or whether there be made pus or sanies, it comes all to a passe, so that the easy credulous vulgar be gulled with the foole∣ries and thred-bare names of Catarrhe, precaution, derivation, Revulsion and Fontanell. We will take the Line at length, and view the whole series of di∣stempers that afflicts an Infant of a year old, who is dentien and febrient, with foaming at the mouth and indefinent salivation. Then followeth pitti∣ful ejulations and yelling through the torments in his belly, with seiges green and yellow. Certain∣ly that tooth is a part of the head: wherefore a Diar∣rhea shall be a Catarrh of the head. But what con∣sent is there, or how comes to passe the agreement of the budding or shooting tooth, and tumified gumme, with the Intestines? Or what power is there of generating and sending the Catarrhe out of the stomack of the Infant, into its head? and then into the Ileon? By what law shall the vapour that stills up from the Alembick of the stomack be condensed and transmuted into aeruginous choler in the retort of the head? peradventure the Shop of choler from the very thresh-hold of life, hath Pythagorized into the private ware-house of the head. Could the Fon∣tanel (if the tender Infant were capable of suffering
it) like a spunge suck into it self the diarrheall por∣raceous flux? And compensate and fobb off whole pounds of porraceous choler with a few grains or mi∣nutulous drops of pus? Wherefore doth the ulan of the Infants stomack forge the Catarrh for the odon∣talgie or pain of the tooth? why is it sent into the inte∣stine & not unto the aking tooth? Doth not the Rea∣der yet perceive that a Diarrhea is not a Catarrh? But the incensed Archeus is ready to transmute the ali∣mentary cremor into excrements, which by the schools are thought to be choler, fleam, &c. If therefore a Diarrhea be not a Catarrh, and the en∣raged Archeus can transmute any thing into a noxi∣ous liquor, if only the gumme be afflicted; whether or no she could not discharge her self on every side by the ordain'd Emunctories? nor need not to wait for the port-hole or aperture of the skin by a Cau∣stick? Nor do they consider that in women, and  grosse and fat bodies the membrana carnosa about the ordinary places of the Fontanell is meer fat, at least two Inches thick, to which persons notwith∣standing Fontanels are more frequently, and more successefully applyed: wherefore the extream or bottome of the Fontanell shall scarce reach half way of the fat: Therefore there is no Caus-way by which the evil fictitious excommunicated humour rushes out of the brain, or glides between the Cra∣nium and the skin, by the meanes of fat. But what then is that solitary humour which profligated  from the part sending for its default, descending un∣mixt by the substance of the fat, doth degenerate into pus? If it be a steaming up of vapours from the boiling pot of the stomack, why is it not more frequent in the younger fry, and hot stomacks, then
in weak persons, old men, and cold dyspeptick sto∣macks? By what meanes shall this grosse vestment of water, falling off from the Tiffany and thinner dresse of a vapour (if the exhalation of any such from the stomack be possible) who by enquiring out and pitching upon the Chamber-maid, the Brain, as most handy and accomodate to fashion her into the tire and mode of a water, now want∣only put off her lawn sleeves, that's like an old Al∣manack or wrinckled Bishop out of date, and as if en∣dowed with sense and arbitrary power of election, and by synaerisis, put on the white Sarcenet bag of pus, and take up quarters in the Cabin of the Cau∣tery or Fontanel? How shall it in its eager Quest of strange and unfrequented lodgings wildly range through the very body of the Brain, and the seere Cells and Chambers thereof▪ its Membranes, Suures, ful, and Periostion or Coat environing the scull, to find out and court this new Guest the orifice of the Fon∣tanel, that by that way only, as the alone Rod, it may glide down and enjoy his imbraces and be purged? Why doth not the vapour a hundred times sooner vanish into air by transpiration, be∣fore it arrive at the place assigned to the Cautery or Fontanel? How shall the water mounting up from the Trench of the stomack and scaling the Rampire of the Head, by and by appear in the scarlet Robes of bloud, and the mother to produce the white flag of pus? How shall bloud (the matter of pus, accord∣ing to Galen) be the matter of Catarrhe? Why is the bloud reduced into the series of ill humours, which not as yet contaminated, is dispensed by na∣ture unto the wounded place? Wherefore will na∣ture
(the wound being made) supersede from thrust∣ing forth the noxious matter by, and into the pla∣ces accustomed to her? For what, the skin being unlocked by a Cautery or incision knife at the plea∣sure of the Physitian, shall she lose or grow ignor∣ant of the way? Or labours she only that she might find an exit in any place? And that being done, will she afterwards become the obsequious Lac∣quey of the wounder? Unsufferable fallacies there∣fore and falsities are couched under these four, namely, That pus is the matter of the Catarrh; that a Catarrhe is materially from vapours out of the stomack; that a Fontanell is Remedium Catarrhago∣gum, or an adaequate meanes to excrete the Catar∣rhous matter; and that this matter would be divert∣ed to a noble part unlesse it were repelled out at another sluice or exit. The schools now surrounded in a Phylactery and  heap of straits, being too hard pinched, have yet one subterfuge left, to wit, That fontanels and Caute∣ries in chronicall diseases, and also in more obese and plethorick bodies have been known not seldome to profit. Therefore it is necessary that, at least, the evil humour, the wound being made, be purged, and the body exonerated. At which paper-wals and bro∣ken  reed we discharge and reply, That whatever the schools foppishly prattle concerning their whimsey of Catarrhs and Fontanells of their own christening, it will appear, that a Catarrh, its materi∣al Cause, Essence, Nativity, Place of conception, Effici∣ent, manner of Generation, receptory, progresse, and col∣lection, and also an evil Humour, and ends of Fonta∣nells are more ridiculous pedleries then the pagean∣tries
or puppetries of Bartholmew Faire; and let all passe but for a Christmas Tale, or old Beldames dream, and as the veil of their base unworthy lazinesse and Ignorance. What, shall the unconstant tide of e∣vents o'reflow the banks of Truth? To this shit∣tle-cock, and example of restlesse ill, Successe and E∣vents, we referre you to what we have said of the same in our examination of Phlebotomy, and hope with ingenious heads, it shall not have power to de∣stroy or abate the prerogative and soveraignty of verity. But what if the adored Fontanel hath proved to hit sometimes and profit some; that truly hath not been from the' root and essence of the Catarrh, in it self wholly nothing: Therefore if they have pro∣fited, the schools may confesse that Fontanels help by means and ends, to them unknown: and that they extoll with so great encomiums only a conjectural, uncertain and accidentall remedy: For no otherwise can we speak of it till our know∣ledge shall better direct us; till then, they are such as our ignorance (we professe) is well content it knowes not. For what if any one distemper of its own accord, or in processe and maturity of time should moulder away; what therefore do they think it equitable, and that they have the same free∣dome and authority, lamentably to torture two hundred in vain, if a Fontanel to one hath not by Accident been dismall and unfortunate? Certain∣ly it's a dangerous point to annex a constant pro∣perty unto any practise, and much more to this of Fontanells, But what if on the other side the Hi∣story  of many might be brought and compared, in
whom Fontanels have had but a bad Catastrophe: they presently cry out, we are not Empiricks, nor are we moved by examples. For the schools are rational, and moreover do lean upon the authori∣ty of the Ancients. And that, they thunder out so highly, as often as they are destitute of reasons, and convicted by experience, they cease to be most ex∣pert masters, nor will they be drawn by experien∣ces contrary to their own: but fly unto the reasons of their predecessors. For truly when the schools had perceived that some by hap-hazard had help  and benefit after a Fontanel then by and by a Seton or coard of twisted thred or silk is runne through on both sides the skin of the neck, which is belie∣ved to be a remedy for an ophthalmie, Lippitudo▪ yea and for Catarrhs themselves, and the vitiated di∣gestion of the eyes. Manifest presumption and as ridiculous is that lame opinion, That a Fontanell on the opposite Leg, is a help for the sciatick pain. They have made a great deal of doe about nothing, have stoutly played the Vulcans, and have made a great deal of smithes work, and have appointed  also Arabick ustions (to wit, not excepting goats dung fryed in a frying-pan) for the sciatica, and Arthritick pains. Verily the schools have mispent their sweat and oile every where in the medicall profession, in fripperies, childish pageantries, and have set to sale for solid substantiall verity, as ridi∣culous toyes as ever the Piazza Bordello, or loose stage-player, Balladier, or blind harper could expres, and such as deserve only the spunge, and the contrivers or Abettors the hisse. But at last, it can∣not  be lesse then any's wonder, that one poor Gout accounted for Catarrhs, like a suttle fox hath eluded
and bafled out all the Theorems and Fontanels of the schools: namely, hath shewn it to be false, that a defluent Podagra should be by a Catarrb, and that a Fontanell, is a vain and fruitlesse comment of deri∣vation and revulsion for an humour flowing down,  & are so thin and light, as set by Philetas in Athenaeus might be blown away by the least breath from the Eolus of truth. As intolerable and whimsicall also are Fontanells in Tabes, or Consumptions, distempers of the lungs, head, eyes, kidneys, yea in their idle ca∣tarrhall defects, so that we more admire their cru∣el butchery, with their impostures, then imitate and follow their vain essayes and endeavours. So  also they of Patavie, Hetruria, & Montpeen do drive a hot iron unto the very future of the Cranium in the epilepsy, without hope of cure, and do promise that the epileptick fumes shall come that way out of the brain; not that they may break the fit, but that they may suspend the rest. But these things the sick hold by a poor Tenure, that have no more assu∣rance then what comes in thus by their tortures, and suffer them with an insensible hope of health; at least wise without example. Nor do they once con∣sider, that those fained vapours do not afflict the brain for want of an exit: but on the contrary, they stirre up the tempest of the diseases causation, be∣fore they can come to the hairy scalp. Wherefore it is a blew busines, & vain is the work and help a Fon∣tanell, which begins à posteriori in curing diseases. For the schools have not yet determined, in what infirmities Fontanells are convenient, because they do but seldome help, and that by accident on∣ly: so that it is impossible their Hypotheses being con∣ceded,
that Fontanells should be profitable, and therefore impossible also to find their manner, meanes and ends. But laying aside these positions of the schools concerning Catarrhs and Fontanells, we come now to prove, that it is easy to find out the case wherein Fontanells are said to help, and that if all the demands of the schools hitherto mention∣ed, be freely granted them, yet could they be of no advantage, as to the manifestation of the Cardinal point in controversie, viz. the manner, reasons, and waies of the Fontanell and the transmutation and progresse of the pus, that hath its egresse out at the hole of the said Fontanell. For in sooth, by rea∣son of the necessary innovations of bloud in every station of the moon, namely, whatsoever of the old bloud shall be left beyond the period of the forego∣ing moon, in a plethorick body, that ought to be converted either into fat, or into an excrement of the  last digestion; which because it is dissipated upon a daily evaporation, and brought forth by the Fon∣tanell, therefore fat and grosse bodies, high feeding, plethorick and sedentary, do now and then feel a lit∣tle help by a Fontanell, and none other. Because that the swelling masse of bloud is reduced towards its just weight and requisite proportion: for other∣wise there would be an oppression and burden to the Archeus, and the parts, and the digestions and distributions of these, by its nimiety and redundan∣cy. For thus farre the fear of an instant evil may be shunned. Therefore all the extorted or hoped for benefit of a Fontanell is placed in a contempera∣tion of aboundance of bloud, by a daily and minu∣tulous diminution of it. Otherwise a Fontanell is a
cruel and beastly remedy, because by exercise, just parsimony, and due moderation and temperance may easily be prevented whatsoever the Fontanel can divert or expell. For let none be so absurd as to think, That whatsoever the sober rules of mode∣rate and spare diet cannot cure, any help is to be expected to be brought by a Fontanell. For those same things which have regard to a long and sound life, do excuse Fontanels. At the best a Fontanel is alwaies but a palliative cure, and but in some neither, and hitherto farre below and very unworthy the venerable medicall schools. I know it's usually said, That if a Fontanel be once made, unlesse it be continued, there's the fear of a greater evill incumbent. But we have known no such thing as we before have declared. Therefore be it the meer ignorance of the schools, who apply a Fontanell not unto the original, or to the cause or root of the disease, but unto the effects or products, which never were worthy of such a se∣rious application of cure, as they pretend, and make the world believe. Its unknown therefore as yet to the schools in what disease this palliative cure of Fontanells avails. Because by chance, and the Lady Ignorance the mother of fools being Leader, they have, and still do try all things. So that their prescriptions are alternatim, and they command one thing after another, that if this thing nor that, nor here nor there, or repeated Fontanell do not help, nor much pus, nor sames exreted. Let the Fonta∣nells be advisedly closed up. Thus therefore the generall Theory of Fontanells, being suspected; since they dilate the notions of it beyond the propriety
of its nature or ends; since 'tis not verifiable by ob∣servation; since the grounds are feeble that should establish it; and lastly since if all were true, yet are the reasons alledged for it of no sufficient satis∣factory inducement to maintain it. Now it becomes our method of exploring verity, & the course we at first propounded to our selves to look into the Physitians Pantry or cubboard, to see what good house they keep, and if we can find  any real substantiall food here, beyond their chaff and huskes which we have scattered by the breath of Truth. Now we have done with their languid and ineffectuall main pillars of healing by evacuations, viz. purgers, phlebotomy and Fonta∣nells, we shall now sift and examine their anonary or Kitchin Physick, their grave rules of Diet, which they prescribe with so much seeming seriousnesse, as they would be looked upon as nursing or feeding fathers. For let those eares that have the patience to hear, and the openesse to receive truth, know, That when Physitians see they have afforded no benefit to their patients, by the lavish expences of the laudable juices of the body, and the diminuti∣on of natural vigour, when bloud-letting, purging, cupping, rubbing, (ostler-like) and other grievous and ineffective remedies have done no good; they at length remit them to the sober rules of Diet, and think to turn out the disease at the back door and childish evasion of their Kitchin Aphorismes, as the onely hopefull meanes and Cardinal point of their recovery, and so leave them by the painfull use of fontanells, and reiterated moderate purges, to spin
out the weak thred of their remaining life, Diaete∣tice, by a medicall, that is, a miserable course of diet. This is but the thin-chopt Skeleton, the A∣natomy of the other burley bundle of Physitians not more erroneous then torturous remedies, but the dead corps of Physick, without any life or soul of truth, the Limbus or Physitians purgatory, to which the venial, as well as rebellious and strong-headed disease must be turned over to be crusht and crum∣bled away by this raw-boned furie, famine or strict Diet. So that by this Rear-Guard of diet, you may judge & give the word for the forlorn hope of a lin∣gring continuing disease to draw up, and appear in its colours. Whence we may deduce, That if any thing hath happened to succeed by the auxilia∣ry  hand of the Physitians conjectures, it hath ben by the proper goodnesse of nature. For presently after their universal helpes (for so they have chri∣stened phlebotomy and purgations) they turn o∣ver and enrol the other half of the cure to serve a∣nother master, namely a precise rule of Diet and life; which for the most part they estimate by heats, colds, and the temperance of these, for the regard to laudable juice. Well may they in much serious∣nesse prescribe this reverend nothing of diet▪ to an end wholly unknown to themselves, when they wallow in the thred-bare heats and colds of the Ele∣ments. For to speak soberly, besides their grosse errors, thred-bare Theorems, languid and invalid remedies, they blush not to veil over their bloudy ig∣norance by their specious Kitchin Canons, which may be made in dubious to the most prejudicate,  that it is but a pittiful sly imposture and suttle Ty∣ranny
of Physitians, and grievous servitude of the patients, prescribed not much on this side the pe∣nalty of capital punishment, and wrought into the heads of the sick, whose lenity of belief inclines them further then they have force from rational deductions to perswade, so that now it puts on the habit to exact their faith and confidence. For in the first place, whatsoever is farre fetched  and dear bought, is good for those gay things, cal∣led Ladies: and that, like so many frenchifyed Apes, (the Protaean monkies of the world) we praise and commend as best. And in medicines, leafe gold, pouder'd pearles, scarlet grain, cuchineel, crude silk, &c. (and perhaps spiders also, if they were brought from farre out of a strange countrey, would be dear and greatly esteemed, as crocodiles turd) in meats also; for whatsoever is pleasant to the tongue, nor very harsh to the stomack, that generally & present∣ly is cried up as euchymous, sound and wholesome: foras∣much as those things which pleasantly court the pa∣lat, ought to be most gratefull and healthful. There∣fore they vary these things according to the palat of the Physitian. For (according to the vulgar proverb, we have cibus anceps, one mans meat is another mans poison,) that which is praised by one and cried up as good, by another, to whome it is lesse pleasing, it is decried and nauseated. For by this means Phea∣sants, Partridges, Stares, Black-birds, and fat Ca∣pons, are preferr'd before Quadrupedes: although that these together with us are viviparous, and hi∣therto more familiar to us, then birds, fishes, and animals oviparous. So also fishes of stony or gravelly places are set before marine piscations; and man∣chet
or white bread, before brown. For these Ca∣pon-eaters being very dainty, and many a sweet tooth in their heads, advance their endeavours and studies in the Kitchin trade, or art of cookery, that they may please the sick, (like children and fools with rattles,) who being destitute of knowledge and remedies, have subjected themselves to a barren profession, who forsooth, do become master-cooks in time. How they traverse out of one hole into a∣nother, and how diligently and narrowly do they look into all things in Kitchins, butteries and dining chambers, that they may exercise their im∣perious jurisdiction, that they may seem to all, to have made a very sedulous provision, and thereby the more ready and fitted to exercise their cruelty on the sick. Even as though meats and drinks were  the Nurslings of Apollo, and the Aesculapius of great sicknesses. Certainly they may leave off their journeys to wait at the temple of Aesculapo, when culinary prescriptions, and Kitchin Aphorismes shall lay seige, and be the militia to encounter the hosti∣lity of a disease. Truly this is the shame of Physitins, and they tacitely confesse? that wholesome and mo∣derate diet is to be preferred to most of those un∣faithful medicaments of the shops: and, upon the te∣stimony of their own unhappy unsuccessefulnesse, conclude, that the patient ought to abstein from them, as hurtful, and at best but rarely to be used. Senation verily is the lovely effects of a Laboratory, and medicine, not of the Kitchin. Wherefore as we have had just cause to suspect the languid and contemptible weak engine of meats: so also not to guess, but conclude, that a precise conformity
to the dietetical rules, as well in the commander, as observer, do insinuate an implicite ignorance of a true and adaequate remedy; or a smooth impo∣sture. But on the other side, he which carrieth fire, can  burn; and he who hath a knife, can cut. So he, who hath so farre been followed, courted, and fa∣voured by the benefit of his labours, and industri∣ous performances to attain to a medicinal secret, graduated into the Zenith of a Noble Entelechie, whose balsam cannot be known from Natures own, He can cure in spight of all Accidentalities and ir∣regularities of diet, kick at their rules, and in this businesse slight and passe by the idle and needlesse industry and adulations of the schools. For those tares, enormities, and other racemations of irre∣gularities, that may grow up by the course manure∣ment of diet, are with ease eruncated, and anticipa∣ted by the Energy & prepotent seigniorie and good∣nesse of the remedy qualified thereto. For if Hip∣pocrate prefers meats in their afluefaction, though lesse commodious for esculency and sanity, yet not simply bad, before unaccustomed; and that diet is not to be altered easily, safely nor quickly from our accustomed cibations: what then may be judged as the aberrations of particular distinctions, custo∣mary elections, optations and desiderations of meats and drinks? Considering that Nature following her own peculiar inward dictates, hath been ob∣served oftentimes to excell a medicine, to the de∣served shame of Physitians, when they had precise∣ly forbidden it before. First of all diet doth not treat clearly of things
hurtful: For it is not disputed whether it is whol∣some to eat Poison or potshards, &c. nor whether it be healthful for the sick to stuff himselfe with much meat and drink, although of laudable juice; or whether crapulency, ebriety and an inordinate life be the actions of a sound state, or fit helpes to the conservation or recuperation of health: but diet is wholly busied about the particular distinctoins and selections of meats and drinks, which notwithstand∣ing, as indifferent nutriments, do consist within the bounds of goodnesse, and are differenced onely in the latitude of neutrality. And therefore we have alwaies looked upon the medicall Diet, as the dis∣closer of the ignorance of causes, of true medicine, and powerful remedy. How many non-Conformists are there to the Kit∣chin Canons, who do repudiate the rules that is pre∣scribed them, will be no obsequious dietetical slaves, will observe no bounds, and yet often recover and are well? The Physitian is his own encomiaste chaunts forth the praise of the cure, and rings out a pane∣gyrick to his rules; and the refractory disobedient patient laughes in his sleeve, to see his Doctor so transported with the honour of his diet, as ha∣ving the capital energy, which yet had no finger in it. Hence hath this Art of Physick been brought upon the stage and fallen under the facete reprehension of Comaedians, because the Kitchin or diaeteticall Apho∣rismes and rules do manifestly declare the slender∣nesse, of judgement as well in the Physitian, as sick. Whence the Physitians oftentimes hope to get an oc∣casion  of excuse of their murder upon the poor alle∣gation
of the disobedience of the sick, about the rules of diet not strictly observed. Ah alas how many and great absurdities are committed by this deceit, which in the world are not yet sufficiently brought to light! What, while they know nothing, nor have wherewith to assault, propell, and rout the conturmations of the disease, or constrain into a precisianisme of conformity, yet shall be adjudged that they would take away with much care and in∣dustry the bagge and baggage of a further encrease by the blandishments of Culinary prescripti∣ons? To proceed, if a conformity to the observance of diet were useful, it would be servicable either in sicknes or convalescency. But in sicknesse how importune, irke∣some and impertinent is it, is testified from their own unwilling subscriptions and acknowledgements? When commonly the edge of the appetite is dulled, and its vigour consternated, and which then is in∣duced to its own complacency, least it wholly pe∣rish? Whose conservation is of as great a moment as is the indication of life. For in the state of an unconstant appetite, nature doth oftentimes mini∣ster convenient food to her self; and that not so of∣ten, as then chiefly, when she stands most in need of help. Then do Physitians in their concertations with this good pleasure of nature most afflict her by their irkesome dietetical rules: from which let the sick abstain, if he would not have all the cause of his destruction imputed to a faithlesse and trea∣cherous helper. For then doth the Archeus sym∣ptomatically rage, and then followes a perversion of its functions, because she perceivs a denegation of
that, to which she hath had a strong optation, and it may be, some familiar longed for meat, or other ac∣customed food, and so they stirre up and accumu∣late strife upon strife. Even as if a horse passing tho∣row water, and not being suffered to drink that which is sufficient for him, retaineth afterward a difficulty of breathing, troublous to life.  But diet after sicknesse, or under convalescency, is al∣so wonderfull troublesome, if not in vain: seeing na∣ture now is willingly very diligent, and greatly bu∣sied about other matters. For in severity of truth a medicall course of diet, and Kitchin operations, can∣not but accuse the defect of a sufficient remedy, and so an implicite confession of a false and treacherous sanation. Let Physitians no more attempt by these fruitlesse meanes, to dreigne the hopes, bodies, veins, strength, and purses of the sick; but let them cure as they ought, and becomes them, worthy their name and profession, and as nature moves and enclines, and if not goe along with, yet to follow her, for the security and assurance of restaurati∣on. It is not to be scrupled that the omnipotent and wise Creator saw and judged all things that he had made to be good. That is, whatsoever he had or∣dained for food, was good. And whatsoever he had decreed to be poison, was good poison, quali∣fied to its purpose. For else the poor man, might with much right, and justly complain, that God in his distributions and largesses had dealt very un∣equally and lesse fatherly to him, because he had denyed him the means which should recover his health; for being poor, he was incapable to answer
the costly and sweet-lipped rules of diet: but to the rich he had been more bountiful, and with their wealth he had also bestowed health upon him; con∣sidering that he enjoyed the means, whereby to bal∣lance the charges of diet. For in earnest the chiefest part of the diet of  Physitians is rich and delicate, fitted to the adulati∣on of the sick and plausibility of the Physitian most commonly excepting wine. Also Physitians do crie up those things for most hurtful, which do most please themselves. And least this should be suspect∣ed to be a kind of soothing, they injoine a strict obedience, that by this severity and precisenesse of rules, they might be thought to moderate the ex∣orbitancies of life. First of all, bread is accounted the primary food; but other things as only Concibi or obsonia. But on the contrary we call other aliments veros cibos; but bread only obsonium. For many are found to have lived a long while with milk only. Irish peo∣ple  also, swift, and naturally strong of body, do in some part of the Countrey use onely shamroch or three-leaved grasse, instead of bread. And some Northern people do attain to a very old age, who do live upon fish only without bread, & stand stiffe and firm against piercing colds and insinuating dis∣eases. The stuffing with bread is bad in the Adage: not onely, because it is a token of poverty; but because truly it is very burdensome in a weak sto∣mack. Seeing bread by reason of the ferment (for else it is nothing but a barepaste) dissolving into a cream, constreins the herbs and meats with which it is ma∣sticated
to colliquate, (which we daily experiment in the digestion of dung) and for this consideration only we have given it the name of obsoni∣um rather then Cibus. But least we should dwel too long upon notions and nominalities, it shall be suf∣ficient to us, whatsoever it be called, so that the use and necessity of bread be known to be condu∣cible and most powerfull in the liquefaction of meats. Moreover we greatly esteem sobriety as the Car∣dinal point of all diet. The intention being not medicall, but ethicall or morall, and the symbole of a well informed judgement: yea further, if the Ap∣petite  be strongly carried out after any object, we freely admit it, but yet with the rule of mediocrity. And yet I am not He, who knowes not to preferre one meat or dainty bit before another, which may be more convenient for my patient: but it's no great matter which of the two the sick should take, so that he hath gotten but some good and sure reme∣dy. For in strict reason, if a remedy be invalid and not  able to charge a disease, or oppose the forcible as∣sault of a disease, and hinder it in its progresse by lesse convenient food, farre lesse able will it be to discomfit, overcome and expell diseases. It's fur∣ther discovered therefore, that the benefits which are with so much confidence hoped for, and with as much vanity answered from a medicall course of di∣et, is but a wild, languid, invalid, treacherous, and in∣deed desperate kind of remedy; and culinary cooke∣ries too contemptible a militia to encounter so for∣midable an Adversary, already entred upon the
borders of life. For as it is in the proverb, It is easi∣er to hold out, then get out, a guest. So in the correla∣tive. Whosoever presumes to overcome a disease by the vertue of a powerful remedy, let him be sure, that by that remedy, he shall farre more easily o∣vercome all things arising from the incongruities of aliments. 'Tis not therefore an inference in our opiniotry only, nor undeserving to be ranked much on this side a positive conclusion, if we expresse, that it is an eminent sign of weaknesse and diffiden∣cy in a Physitian as often as his needlesse and fruit∣lesse prescriptions are to be cooked in the kitchen, before they ascend the stairs, and passe thorow the long Gallery of the OEsophagus, into the great Hal of the patients stomack; for he wanting a worthy and powerful medicine, that in the mean time he may seem to do something, and not to take his fees in vain, he makes the critical day the Atlas of his hopes, and by his peuinary defraudations gulls his patient by his culinary prescriptions, and choice of Diet. Whence from semblable reason may be dedu∣ced, 1. That Nature in us is wiser then any Physi∣tian whatsoever, and is more knowing of her own profit and damage then the whole Conclave of Aescu∣lapes, or all the wits of the schools. 2. That Nature therefore chooseth and desireth those things, that are most convenient & fit for her. 3. That a beast never dyed, because he sa∣tisfied his thirst, unlesse perhaps he had swallowed down poison, or had fallen and miscarried by ex∣cessive eating, because drink in feavers doth sub∣vert many inconveniencies of drought.
4. That to drink in thirst, would not be lesse naturall, then for a man to pisle that hath need to pisse. 5. And therefore seeing this doth not po∣stulate or require the Physitians consent: it needs not his counsel. 6. That when I give together with drink a few drops of a thing, which facilly penetrating, spe∣cially in thirst, I have oftentimes strangled and killed many feavers together with their thirst, to the pleasant and profitable admiration of the sick. 7. That a great appetite to a thing, in the rules of diet apparently noxious, for the most part is created and acuated from the dictates of Nature, who hath marked and observed her own remedy, but not in the vain paper-works of the schools books. 8. That therefore we ought not to be much troubled about things desired and longed for, little hurtful, and lesse accustomed. 9. That if a remedy ought to be Lord paramount, and like a Cedar to o'retop the disease, the lesser shrubs, or meaner retinue of meat and drink, in their latitude, cannot contain the strength of a Pharmaceu∣tick entity. 10. That if aliments contain not an energetick remedy, so neither scarce any hurt in them, speak∣ing of nutriments, as such, that is, indifferent. Thus we perswade our self from the direction of our own knowlede, and thus we prescribe these things to others. Namely that the wholesome rules of ab∣stinence & temperance, hath the optimacy above the dieteticall ones: and chiefly when any thing is eat∣en
with a vigourous appetite according to the will of the sick: as that Adage hits it, Quod sapit, nu∣trit. That which savours, nourisheth. For the ap∣petite is satisfied by quality, not quantity. And if fulnesse loads and burdens the stomack of sound persons, much more the sick and weak. 2. Moreover let them eat, not truly to gorging, or stuffing the cavity of the stomack, nor to the sen∣sual humour and dictate of their Gust: but as much as easily suffices to sustain a sound life. And this, although at first it may seem a hard task to fresh men, and but beginners to accustome themselves to it; yet it will not be so to those who are beaten to it. For how ridiculous is it for one lamenting himself by his disease, to wish that he had not made such a Hogs-head of his belly, by his ingurgitations, or that he had not gorged and crammed the stowage of his body so much, whereby to surfet. Yet we would not have any man so farre please himself with the opinion, that this sobriety of life  can prevent or secure any body from the plague, from a fall, wound, lightning, &c. For it's a clear case, that externall incidencies do con∣temne the oeconomy of digestion, and distributions, be∣cause they exuperate them. 3. Seeing that all aliment ought to passe into a liquid reduction or tendance to chilification, and that  exquisite mastication is that which facilitates chilifact∣ive mutation, or alimental conversion, therefore thorow mastication is to be highly commended. For truly one morsel being not throughly subjected to the lawes of the Dentimolary operations, not well and duly masticated or chewed, brings more work and dif∣ficulty
to the Vulcan of the stomack, then three soundly chewed. Therefore rostrous animals, as birds, because they want teeth, have need of a dou∣ble stomack, though otherwise they are most power∣ful in digesting. Also every ruminating animal, as it was greatly esteemed in the Law; so also in fa∣vourable reason, it implies seriously to us the ne∣cessity of mastication, not to be extenuated. Yea, for that cause the ruminating brute in Scripture is cho∣sen for clean. 4. Lastly, whatsoever is taken in a surfet, above the native power of the stomachicall ferment, do wax hot truly within: and do putrefy, but are not un∣til then digested: as is most evident in feavers: But how much of more tenellous meats is swallow∣ed in a surfet, is digested ruly, but being delapsed out of the stomack, draws down with it a great quantity of de and indigested matter, as well by reaso of the extension of the vessel, as the careles∣nesse of Nature being oppressed. But if that which is very tender hath been digested, and should tarry in the stomack longer then is necessary, it would unavoidably wax deid beyond its due bounds and temper, or plainly putrefy: and migrates into a bitter excrement, which in its virgine matutine courtship salutes the nose with an acid , and is oftimes cast forth by vomit:  which the schools rudely and falsely impose the name of ho∣ler. 5. Whatsoever accustoed thing is taken in, that is  y desired, nor of any malignant semi∣nality or impression; that also absente saiet a) is facilly digested, and in the disease safely admitted
if it be taken soberly and moderately: because that the whole batch of accustomed things, espe∣cially, as I said, if desired, is leavened, transmuted and subdued by the mediation of the Locall and ap¦propriate Ferments. For Hippocrates also perswades to use a slender diet in acute diseases, until an edge shall be set on the appetite, and it rise from the opium of its dull inactivity. We do not Magisteri∣ally obtrude it as a definite position, but in the due freedome of opinion, and as experimentally enlar∣ged, we commend smal drink, as farre as we discom∣mend  sweet drinks, and ptisans, having a reflection on the words of Galen: Barley (saies he) a little boiled, doth cause ventosities: but better boiled, obstructions. Wherefore our Ancestours firmly beleeving, that boiled barley can by no meanes be innoxious, by procuring its germination, have meliorated its qua∣lification, which then they call Malt; by which meanes both ventosities and crudities are hindred. 'Tis most industrious idlenesse to presse any to Cook-brothes, Gelly of meats well decocted and stamp∣ed, or to stuff the sick with egges, &c. if he be infested with an acute feaver, being mindful of that precept: Corpora impura quo plus nutris, eo magis lae∣dis. For although in acute feavers the patient should live by only drink, without mear, yet would there be no danger of life imminent: yea, they the sooner mend, and by far lesse difficulty the strength and appetite return again. Doublesse as often as any putrefactible or cadaverizable thing is ingested into the stomack, wanting its digestive ferment: the digestible putrefyes, and is not digested. And this we conceive is the genuine and true explication
of that Aphorisme. For we never desired, that the sick should come out of feavers fat and cramm'd, but we chiefly intended this one thing: namely that they might quickly recover, and not suffer much detruncation or diminution of their strength. We cannot omit to declare what would not passe undiscovered, that the chiefest part of Diet in dis∣eases of the stomack we have drawn out of that A∣phorisme: Quod ructus acidus superveniens nidorsis, sit bonum. That an acid ructation, of a reparable fer∣ment, superinduced upon a nidorous one, is good. For nidorous ructations, the aversion of spontaneous nau∣seousnesse, flesh, fish, and egges, yea the loadings and op∣pressions of the stomack it selfe, do call for and com∣mand, that the sick be nourished with only potables: for otherwise by things cadaverable you may ex∣pect strange accidents, defects of the minde, and o∣ther incommodities of that kinde. Because potati∣ons then do humect, and in the refection of thirst, do refrigerate, and dispel the fuliginous aridities and debilities flowing from thence. But under the notionality of Potables is not to be understood here, jusculous sorbitions, aboundantly nourishing, to wit, of those things, which in a hot stomack are of their own accord cadaverized, without the diges∣tive ferment: but altogether of those, which do not putrefy: such as Panada's, and also Beer damaskd with wine, to which a crum of bread may also be mixed, that may be both meat and drink. We might here not impertinently ampliate what we hinted before in our Tractick of simple waters, of the digestion, or chilifactive transmutation of the stomack, whether it be pepsis or sepsis, digestion by
heat or other quality: but cannot laudably bring it in as a member of this practical, rather then spe∣culative or Theorical argumentative therapeutick Tractate, Yet we shall not I hope dull the edge of the stomacks vigour, though perhaps we may invi∣gorate the testie mood of the Aristotelicans if we say, That digestion or alimentary conversion into a Chilifa∣ctive liquid reduction, is made by a specifick appropriate ferment, and not by that fictuminane of heat. This though Peripatetical Problems approve not, yet Philosophical disquisitions and experimental obser∣vations will evince. Therefore as often as there is an aversation or opposition to flesh, and nidorous ructations Ascendant in the arched part of the highest orbe in the systeme of our bodies, the mouth, it's the significator of the presentiality of heat, and the acid ferment in its detriment. Con∣sider also this, how easily recent flesh if bound to the foot or hot head, would putrefie and presently stink. In a feavorish stomack therefore being very hot, wise Nature fears to make a Cadaver within her vital incommunicable world, and therefore pre∣sently there followes an aversation from flesh. Whether then is the ferment of the stomack  gone in a feavorish person? What hath it demigra∣ted to another place? Or is it extinct? For whe∣ther would the ferment go, that is not welcome nor acceptable but in her own private ecesses? Nor hath it perished: because it is vital; and what∣soever that is truly vital hath once degenerated from the concordant rules and harmony of that vi∣tal spark, which at first entitled it to Animation, and now is blown into a luculent flame, never remi∣grates
again from the winter of its privation. But the ferment is redintegral and redivivous. Thus therefore it happens. For either the discharging of the ferment out of the spleen, sometimes doth not extend to the stomack, by reason of some defect of either of the presidents or Archeus of the stomack, or spleen; or the ferment being entertained in the stomack is obvolved with an alien and feavorish o∣dour. Which understand thus exemplified. A hungry man, and well in health, tarrying long in the inconvenient smoake of coals, presently per∣ceives a nauseousnesse to arise within him, and a∣versation from meats, then also a pain of his head, and at length he vomits. The ferment of the sto∣mack therefore as it is covered with the noxious o∣dour of the coals: so likewise with the virulent breath and nidorous contagion of the exagitated feaver, so that there presently happens an aversa∣tion from meat, forasmuch as the indigenary fer∣ment in the stomack is covered with that favour. Wherefore now whatsoever suffers an alimentary conversion in the stomack, in the form of a liquid di∣aphanous reduction, by the vertue of its ferment, that hath entred the thresh-hold, and is admitted into the entry of a vital juice, although not yet in∣to the essence of life: and for that cause doth not so naturally and freely putrefy. But whatsoever is not dissolved, or if in it self it be dissolved, and yet doth not admit the ferment, as the serum of the bloud so called, and brine, &c. it is either an excrement, or is facilly made so, and is obvious to corruption: Therefore in dieteticall prescriptions the chief regard is to be had to the diseases and food, which in re∣spect
of the disease the sick nauses, or desires. For nature is to be served, not forced, and it is her office to serve also, not command. That is to say, let the ferment, which ought to be the Caterer, pre∣scribe them, and not the Physitian according to his appetite and pleasure, nor let him not make one last fit all sizes. Lastly exercise, labour, rest, sleep and air do depend on the rules which the importance of other digestions do dictate to us. Thus to conclude this is the true diet which Nature of her own accord and naturally doth shew and teach unto us. And let this one thing remain as a firm truth that shall outlive & bear away its unhappy pressures, that whosoever by the sweat and dust of his sober endeavours, and rifling the rich Treasury of Nature hath lighted on such choice remedies that are grand and powerful Arcana's, enriched with that sublime energy, that can presently restore the sick, and free him from a∣ny disease whatsoever: he need not prescribe any other diet to the sick, then what the sound are fa∣miliarly acquainted with. For to the sound all things are adjudged sound and wholesome; because that the digestive ferment does powerfully draw and constrain every thing into its own power and dominion. And so let digestions indigitate and pre∣scribe the rules of diet. Thus then we have seen the main Axes or poles of the whole systeme of the general and particular re∣medies of the schools, and present practise of Phy∣sitians shaken: it remains then, that that health or cure holds but by a poor Tenure that hath no more assurance then what is wafted in by the frigid north-pole
and narrow door of bloud-letting, purges, Fonta∣nells and Diet, &c. With these, such toyes and rattles as that of their Aurea Alexandrina, pill aureae, vng. aurcum, Confectio e Hyacintho, Requies Nicolai may passe for substantial and peculiar meanes: gold-Titles to set to sale their fopperies; and no won∣der when we all know that brasse farthings bear the stamp of the royal Armes and Crown. But and if their Shoot Anchors fail, then the stream of their Advice is such, that frights one more, then Lord have mercy upon a door. For if the former answer not their doubtful hopes, Quid tum nisi vota super sunt: and so the Doctor bids his patient goodnight, and He the world. And which is most remarkable, and none can plead Ignorance in though the sick are emaciated to living Skeletons or walking Ghosts by their torturous and murderous meanes and reme∣dies the Physitians have used to them, yet the dis∣ease remits not, nor discontinues the execution of its fury, but comes on with a rampant vigour, more heated and heightned by their seeming oppositi∣ons. Truly the acousations of the sick when they thunder it out against the supinities, falsities, impo∣stures, temerities, and the false merchandise of Phy∣sitians, whereby their lives & healths are spoiled, or brought into unworthy misery and languishment, hath caused us to cry out for an active endeavour of a thorow reformation in the medicinall part, that there may be a better preparation and conjunction of medicines, if that be good and needfull, that so  there may be a better sanation. If any man can match in all the world, in any Art or Science the like trifles and fopperies in decimo sexto, or the like mischiefs in folio, we professe we dare venture to
have our judgement burn'd in the Ear for a Fellon, or bored for a slave to their principles and practi∣ses, yea, morgaged, and benighted to eternall dulnesse. We are ashamed seriously not for own individual singularity and egoity so much, as for the sake of our Neighbour and Brother, that Physiti∣ans are so carelesse, and seem to study only for lucre of gain; and what it should mean we professe not to know, unlesse it be of divine ordering that the schools shall so long grope in the darke, and stum∣ble, till they are got clear and have quitted them∣selves like men from the errors of the Ancients, and come to sharpen their own Axes and Coulters at the forge of Nature. These things have been soon∣er, and rather found out by our eyes, then thoughts and meditations: yet at this bone Cape we would willingly touch and unlade our mind to the no∣tice of the sonnes of wisdome, that the errors and ignorances which have been here discovered by fa∣miliar and pregnant demonstrations, have not bin sucked and elaborated (like the Bee) so much out of, either the poison of somes dotages and uncer∣tain principles, or others Florilege and Analect, as from an inward teaching of the mindes heightning and enlightning by an invisible and yet sensible glo∣rious emanation of light, truth, God, Intellect and Intel∣ligible objects. For they have not come in at a crevise or hole of the door, or opened themselves by little and little, and entered gradually into our mind, so as that we have conceived, meditated, and found them out one after another. For if in this Discovery one thing after another had come to our knowledge, we should have esteemed the whole progresse to be the
enfeebled and wier-drawn inductions of Reason, and phantasie obtruded in the species of Intelligibilities. Lastly we have one thing more to propound and examine, which we have thought worthy a general notice, and cannot let pas undiscovered, that is, the two general intentions and indications of healing, promoted and abetted by the schools and most pra∣cticioners in Physick in the whole world, namely, by contrariety and smility. Some attempt to scale the Fort royal of diseases, and rout them in their strong holds per contraria, and so by Contentions, strifes, jarrings and clashings endeavor a mutiny; then comes the Crisis, as they call it, in diseases, whereby judgement is given of the victor, either the disease or Nature to o'recome. This plausible and stupid Doctrine, which will perswade no further then the lenity of beliefe in people inclines them, easily pleases all, who are prone to runne into the way of sloth, and facilly induced to subscribe by an im∣plicite credulity to what first hath chopt into their understandings, and possessed their too flexile na∣tures. All the schools of the Christian world have taught and subscribed to this, that Contraries have their remedy from Contraries. By which truly every excesse (marked with the nomenclation of a disease) should be reduced into perfect symmetry. As if a medicine should not worke Physically, but mechani∣cally, mathematically or demonstratively only. Whether we look upon substances, or only Ac∣cidents, we judge there is no contrarieties but be∣tween irascible entities, that is, in the irascible facul∣ty of sensitives, and no where else. Whence per∣haps by a Metaphor or improper Hyperbole, con∣trariety
is wrested to all Individuals in the world. When I take meat, I never find a contrariety in my selfe, nor in the meats: but if quantity or quality offends me; I find truly a deficiency in me: but not a contrariety. If any one nauseats cheese, it doth  not argue a contrariety or Antipathy; but a seminal disposition, a certain noxious thing operating. For, because of the necessary vicissitude in things, it hardly can be admittible to call every or any no∣xious qualities in us, hostilities, and enmities of things. Because in Philosophy we must confine to proper speaking: where words change the sense, and alter the essences of things; and chiefly when the whole Crasis of healing is distorted to the de∣struction of Mankind. For the schools reduce all sanation to the means of Contrariation in their vain and ridiculous Comments of heat and Cold. And yet when they are dashed upon rocks in these their le∣cturers, they will stoop to concede, that heat and Cold may dwel under one Roof, and yet not as con∣trary Guests or Inmates: seeing that in the least drop or smallest Atome of simples, heat and cold may be connexed: as in Opium a deep cold, and high heat also they discover in his amaritude. But we have in our Lecture of sapours, and examination of the medicines of the shops, when we discoursed of Opium, discovered, that the knowledge of the schools from sapours, was ridiculous and fruitlesse: because seminall and specifick faculties by the schools is basely confounded and traduced into Elementall qualities. For cold in Opium, though it be declared by no judgement of our senses, but supposed from its effects, because they have strain'd a dormitive
seminality in a ridiculous dream to cold. As if God when he cast Adam into a sleep, had stirr'd up cold in him: And as if after dinner a notable cold in us should steal up into our heads. To what hath been said of Contraries, that there is no intentions in Nature of contrariety in those things, in whom there is no pretention of hatred, variance, victory, or superiority, we add; that unity is not  contrary to Duality. Nor upwards to downwards, nor high to low, nor East to West are not contrary. Nor is the right car contrary to the left, although opposite. Nor is a volatile contrary to a Reptile. For the same silk-worm is both. Nor is Generation contrary to corruption. So likewise neither great is contrary to little, nor straight to crooked. When one & the same may be now small now great, straight & crooked. The same is to be said of sweet and bitter; hard and soft: heavy and light: sharpe and blunt: Coa∣gulate and resolved: or white and black. The like is to be said of water and fire: Heat and cold, which are not contrary. This the schools own Theorems do despise: the which so often as they list they will not follow. For in the plague and malignant Feavers, they administer Treacle, and other things not ob∣scurely hot; as also sudorificks, the indication of heat being neglected. An Erysipilas also, of all Apo∣stems most fiery (as they say) they will heal by put∣ting on it some of the best Aqua vitae. So that it ap∣pears these things are limitable, alterable, & by them∣selves not regarded, and so not fit for principles; and therefore no contrariety, hatred, discord, warre, strife of victory or superiority in natural things, but that they act without intention or precognition of
an end: and so although there be Philatie, Sympathy, Antipathy, Election, yea, and a kind of sense attri∣buted to inanimate things: yet let it be a certain Analogy shining rather in effects and causes, then in the direction of the creator, or distinction of ends: because that they are deprived of proper sense, e∣lection, intention of acting, and precognition of ends: The schools therefore and Physitians are ex∣ceedingly out of the way who will admit only those as remedies of diseases, which by a hostile contrary property, encounter and warre against them, as if there were a power of sense and an arbitrary power of Election in them. Others go more amicably to work, and cure dis∣eases by simility. Paracelsus himselfe hath too effe∣minately stooped to this opinion, and saies, that all Sanation must be shut up and finished by assimilation, admitting sometime otherwhiles the velitations and tempests of Contraries. And although simility doth proximely include familiarity, and facility of reception and entertaining the remedy, union, in∣gresse, and penetration by reason of the conformi∣ty of the Symbole: yet the abettos hereof know not that these are not Agents sufficiently indowed, nor capable or requisite to Sanation: but occasionall means, externe, or medicines procuring favour or help: such as is the purity and subtilty of a medi∣cine. Wherefore we conceive that a medicine pro∣perly, immediately, and efficiently consists in its competent or appropriate abilities: By which Na∣ture stands upon her own legs again, and rises from her fall. There are truly natural endowments, spe∣cifica and dotata, which differ from their simility. And
they are those things in which our Archeus finds de∣light. As for example. Bulimia or Famine, is as it were morbus peracutus, which by the sufferance of a few daies, cruelly kills. Now it is not healed by its contrary, meat, nor by simility. Neither doth famine accuse or declare a defect of bloud being ta∣ken away. For then Dysenteries and Phlebotomy or bloud-letting should necessarily make us hungry: But in famine there is a devastation of the nutri∣ment, and that of the stomack it selfe, not by the intense peptick quality, but by the vigour of the di∣gestible, esurine and depascent ferment. For as often as the ferment of the stomack is well disposed, not having an object whereon to work and sate its ap∣petite, it consumes the proper aliment of the sto∣mack. Famine therefore supersedes from raging and hath his quietus est, by meat; not as it's contrary to the ferment, nor that it is like to the same: but because it is an appropriate remedy. The like is in the healing of all diseases whatsoever, namely, there is required an adaequation of the remedy to the in∣disposition of the Archeus, and taking away the oc∣casional cause. Which appropriate conveniency of the remedy or the dose, presupposes a proporti∣on as well in the degree, as quantity, as also adap∣tation and application, with a specifick adaequation of conformity. Thus farre also it includes an in∣dication and cognition of the end: the habitude and exigency of our faculties and the accord of them with the remedy, in which again the dose is suppo∣sed. For so remedies would not only respond to the parity of objects, but also to the determinations of the ferments.
Others there are again who think to make medicine  out of the Chymists Ternary of new principles, Sal, Sulphur and Mercury; and thereby think themselves Natures Zanies and imitators. To this do many of this Age subscribe: but it is to be wished that they did know otherwise, and might come to learn that digestion of Nature never tends to those three prin∣ciples, and that we never are nourished by them: but with one onely and the same congenerous or consimilar liquor, whereby we consist and have our Individuum entirely preserved. Many things by their first bullition depone their pristine vertues. For so Asarum of a vomitive evades into a diuretick: And for the most part the unisone and specifick pro∣priety of a thing is destroyed, by running division into those three principles. For although they will keep some of the Crasis of the Concrete: yet not∣witstanding they are new created things, brought to passe by fire. For to speak severely and truly, the common Chymistry of this day, is not productio rei no∣va, but an alteration or transmutation by an exo∣tick motor. Happy sure was he constellated, who knew how  to take away diseases both safely and readily on the shoulders of crude simples. For it is the primitive method of healing noted in scripture. That the Highest had created medicine out of the Earth. Truly, as the Spagyrick art draws forth & invigorates many things with a degree of a greater and higher energy, inasmuch as it excites a new ens: so on the other side again it doth debilitate many things by a privie and insensible suffuration. It's a bold at∣tempt to accuse nature of sluggishnesse, dulnesse
and imperfection, whosoever supposes she can per∣fect nothing without Pyrergy. Let the semination of things bear testification to this. For in vegeta∣ble productions there are somethings which spring up of themselves. Such is the propriety of plants, which multiply within themselves and have no sexuall distinguishments, but the power of the spe∣cies contained in their individual seminalities and productions: according to the Law of the Creation, Gen. 1. Let the earth bring forth grasse, the herb yield∣ing seed, and the tree yielding fruit, whose seed is in it selfe. Which is indeed the natural way of plants: but some there are, which want sation and occatory operations. But yet their potestative inhaerencies which proximely and immediately dwell in the bo∣some of Nature, do emit their vertues by an ema∣native and influential manner, nor will they wil∣lingly conforme and submit to the Tyranny of fire. But those which are not immediately in the formes of the simple in its Individuum, but of the heterogene parts: are very often more dilucidate in their ab∣stracted part. For so Mace, Turpentine and Aspara∣gus, do delineate and describe their symbole in the pisse excreted. But the powers which do rise out of things by fire, although they may owe something to their concrete, as pledges and tokens of that Fa∣mily: but yet truly they are new and transplanted germinations, and commonly the vassals of another Monarchy. We have alwaies greatly esteemed the destination of God in the vertues and gifts of sim∣ples: forasmuch as he hath endowed them with ex∣cellent qualifications, natural, specifick and gifted to an end, without contrariety or simility. Yet in
this Panegyrick of simples, we do not vilifie, or detract from the due praises of Pyrotechny: but well serves onely for a lecture to those, who admit nothing but those three principles, as they are pleased to opinion. But when a disease hath all ready entered the bor∣ders  of life, and hath risen to some height, almost seen in the meridian of life, and is marched up to the walls of the pallace of vitality, and hath almost fatally foiled Nature, then there is required higher medicines, of a more noble Entelechie then those which Nature produceth of her own accord; and then the Physitian will know that he needs a great∣er light then what Galen and the schools have bea∣coned up unto him. And to speak freely what can∣not be concealed, and will daily break out more and more, all this is to be accomplished by the exact benefit and exquisite operations of pyrotechny. Con∣cerning which we cannot but ingeniously confesse that it now begins to be looked into; great capaci∣ties that are constellated to be something more then ordinary, being wearied out of the old fruitlesse un∣successefull way. Yet two sorts of people we finde are culpable of Hyperbolicall deviations. One in their  Encomiums of Chymicall preparations attributing too much we fear, more then they possesse: the other; we know, lesse then they deserve. A degree be∣yond the latter goes a sort, who raile, revile and speak evill of those things they know not. For in that thing, wherein they deny the verity of the science, they manifest that they are ignorant of it. others again in a pannick fear, but more friendly, yet  equally ridiculous, say, that chymick medicaments are not without empyrema: that they are hot, virulent,
and but little used, and lesse safe. Secondly, that they are basely sophisticated, and adulterated by Chy∣mists faithlesse selves, and carelesse servants. Third∣ly, That they are virulent medicines, powerfully poi∣sonous, and very dangerous. That they must ei∣ther cure or kill, and therefore desperate remedies: and with this face obtrude their pusillanimous and untrue notions and Mola's or false conceptions on the vulgar. To the first we shall briefly say, that we believe the resentment of the powerfull vertues and exqui∣site operations of Spagyrick remedies, is a sore tem∣ptation upon them to make many a voyage beyond the Aequinoctial line of Truth, to fetch Apes and Pea∣cocks; which makes them so content to gather the stubble of falsities, to make their brick withall. It is not therefore true, that all Chymicall medicines are prepared by the strongest degree of fire. For oftentimes but a gentle breath is felt, and sometimes scarce distinguishable. But to this Galen himself will answer, who teaches that by a strong fire most medicines do depone all their acrimony & mordacity. And beyond all doubt, and by common experience it appears, that by this Spagyrick art the fiercest me∣dicines are tamed, and by it medicines that are o∣therwise poisonous, their deletory parts being ta∣ken away, are transmuted into Cardiacall. More∣over though the essences of vegetables and aroma∣ticks  are hot: yet their volatile salts (which few have seen) are temperate, so that if thou knowest to transmute oile of Cynnamon, Cloves, Lavender, &c. into a volatile salt, you have then attained a temperate medicine, effecting as much as can be ho∣ped
for from those simples, in an old vertigo, palpita∣tion, Apoplexie, and the like. As for example. If oile of Cynnamon, &c. be mingled with his alkaal salt, and progressing by a most artificial and occult circu∣lation for three moneths without any water, till the whole be changed into a volatile salt, you have then a real temperate medicine of a great value; and then it will truly translate the essence of its sim∣ple into us, and bear it into our first constitutive principles. Verily the admirable powers of most excellent things cry aloud to heaven, as if they had come in vain; when there is scarce any man can e∣mancipate them from their fetters, and loosen their bonds, and free them into a Jubilee of liberty to act, and pay that benevolence which they owe unto mor∣talls. And to conclude this objection the Contri∣vers may be compared to the Fox, that despised the grapes for their sourenesse, when in Truth they hung too high for him, and so were out of his reach. To the second, that they are sophisticated and a∣dulterated, we reply, That we have to do with things and not words: we have to do with medi∣cines, and not with things nothing related to an ex∣pert Artist; with their right preparations, not so∣phisticated or carelesse preparation. Shall the abuse of a thing take away the use? And to come nearer to themselves, what greater cosenage and so∣phistication is there in their magnified Cardiacall stone of Bezoar? Will they therefore not use it at all? We confesse we cannot but acknowledge that there is much basenesse and fraud used in the common Chy∣mistry of the shops. For it is certain that fraud is
the adjunct, and is alwaies connected to gain, and so to the adulteration of medicines. But how this does square to the opprobrie of Chymists and their remedies, we leave to the decision of impartial and ingenious heads. It is no great thing to deceive the ignorant in things which themselves professe to be unskilful in.  Yea, those gentle things which their demure mo∣desties dare close with, as their essentiall oyles, which are sold for a deer price, are all and every one of them adulterated: if nine parts of oyle of Almonds be mixed to one part of the essentiall oyle, the expe∣riment is easily made. For cast it into a spoonfull or more of Aqua-vitae, and whatsoever swims a top, is of the essentiall oyle; but the rest Amygdaline. And this more safely and clearly may be made manifest, if you experiment it in Balneo. Oyle of Sulphur is halfe rain water: But the acid water of vitriol, wholly a cheat. Which with a simple examination in Balneo will presently appear, that scarce the sixth part is pure. And thus many more medicines which are gotten into familiar acquaintance now with Galeni∣cal Physitians, and are commonly used and prescri∣bed, may in time when the Spagyrick art shall come to be refined and sublimed, appear very ridiculous and worthy their blushes, being such as they will be ashamed to own. This then may serve to wipe a∣way that dirt which they have endeavoured to cast on the lovely face of Chymistry, and conclude this objection, desiring them to take notice that dogs bark not at the spots, but light of the moon. To the 3d. That they are virulent medicines, power∣fully poisonous, as appears by the smal dose or quan∣tity
given: That they either kill or cure, therefore desperate remedies, we reply, that these things proceed from their ignorance in this art, and the presumption and audaciousnesse of some knaves, who use only most vehement things, and prepared with a preposterous operation. But this doth verify that Adage, that knowledge hath no other enemy but the Ignorant; which is manifest by this, that these Corrosives and manifest poisons, by Art may be∣come sweeter then sugar. Moreover their own septicall and escharoticall medicines, their lammula, Crowfoot, smallage, &c. do lay down their vesica∣tory quality by distillation, as any vitriol vegetable as juice of Citrons its acidity, and water pepper its acri∣mony. Nor doth it avail any thing to say that chy∣mick medicines are administred in a small dose. For that doth not accuse its virulency, but declares its high entelechie of acting; and that they are more fa∣miliar and friendly to Nature. Besides it is more familiar to those Physitians that are called Gale∣nical, who follow the old doctrine and way to use those strong medicines, which the chymists bring seldome into use, at least they better prepare them. And which is a thing very observeable, in the  common and allowed way of Physick at this day, the sink and scumme of the world, the very draff of men and women; all of all sorts, humours, professions and Sect; any knave, whore, Baud, old woman; or any that have the impudence dares boldly rush into the Gale∣necall way of Physick, without controul: dare play with and dandle the lives of men and women in their hands: and unto so high a pitch of impudence have they flown, that they dare build their nests
in the Colledges Turrets, and use their highest medi∣cines▪ and plead prescription, Custome and present practise of the most eminent Physitians: which yet they dare not sore, nor so much as hover about the Air where chymick preparations breath: it being too high a region and the tenth sphere above their wild Astronomy. And in a word we verily beleeve, and have some reasons for it, that some rash unadvised ignorant pretender hath been too busie in tampering with chymick medicines, and like the fly about the flame of the candle, have burnt their fingers, and so like the Beggar, that because the sieve deceived him, would not trust his dish with his drink any more, they inveigh against the powerfullest and surest remedies of Nature. Thus have we at last digested our thoughts, and drawn our hints, and the impetus of our inolinati∣ons to a period; wherein if our weak performan∣ces afford no satisfaction unto others, I hope our well meaning, attempts and essaies will be adjudged laudable, & shall not bring any condemnation upon our selves: si non laudatur, tamen excusatur. Swarmes there are of many other things, in which we could enlarge, if we were willing, and thought it wor∣thy our pens taking notice and runne over the whole Rabble; errors so obvious as needs no Can∣dle, that cannot deceive a mean capacity, nor needs not the Collyrium of Albertus, nor no Argus to descry them: some of the chief of which our in∣dustry may collect, and in the futurities of our per∣formances ampliate and dilucidate: but othe a∣gain, and especially now, we shall not disparage our Reader so much as to mention them; much more
we shall forbear the enquirie into, and dispute of them, least we should have no defence lest us from seeming to challenge him of most impossible igno∣rance, and our selfe of as palpable pride and pre∣sumption. It hath somewhat whet our thoughts to consider what fabrick others have already rear'd: for some that have gone before us, have been diligent in the explo∣ration not only of vulgar errors (as our own Country man Doctor Brown:) but medical ones; as the Teutonick Jacobus Primrosius, and the Belgick Helmont; but the most of other writers have dealt with us either like part of Gideons men, or as a Dog touches Nilus. But least this our impresse should be suspected of novelty by those who smell ranke of Antiquity, and as for such who list themselves under, and follow Authori∣ty, which to stronger heads Testimony is but a weak kinde of proofe, and onely accommodate to junior indoctrinations, it being but a topicall probation, and an argument in Logick rightly termed inartifici∣all, and doth not solidly fetch the truth by multi∣plicity of Authors, nor argue a thing false by the paucity that hold so; yet we will say thus much, if they be such who list not to be malicious, but will be so ingenious as to do so much right to their own understandings to take notice, may finde, or hear related to them, that the thoughts of wisest heads, and hearts no lesse reverend for devotion, have tended this way, and contributed their lot in some good measure towards this which hath been urged for: who have loudly sighed and groaned (and we do but now make them articulate) for the errors, abuses, supinities, and deplorable cruelties, nor couched,
but embodyed in the stupendous bulk of the medi∣call Art; with the desires and Pressures for a speedy and thorow reformation; and also that these Ad∣visoes which we here bring have bin favoured, and by some of those affirmed, who in their time were able to carry what they delivered, had they urged it, through all Christendome, or to have left it such a credit with all good men, as they who could not boldly use it, would have fear'd to censure it. But the ocular testimonies of our present times, in the unsuccessefullnesse in this medicall profession will clearly evince against all the clamours, though of the generall part of the whole Nation: and see∣ing it savours of pdanery; and withall we have scattering here and there in our progresse nominat∣ed some; and knowing that if all the Testimonies in the world were brought, yet these things would not be redressed, and this would be no way capable of reducing the precipitancy and obstinacy of the vulgar, we omit to declare them. Henceforth then let them who condemne the assertion of this book for new and preposterous, be sorry, lest while they think to be of the graver sort, and take on them to be Doctors, they prove but Cymballs, and expose themselves rather to be pledg'd up and down by men who intimately know them, to the discovery and contempt of their ignorance and presumpti∣on. Having now attended that which was comprised  in our thoughts, with a diligence not drousie, we shall now come to our prayer and desires, and fix we hope with some advantage; and by a short view backward gather up the ground, and summe up the
strength we have into one main body, with that organick force, that the premisses considered proff∣ers us. Henceforth therefore let it be considered nay rather let it no longer be considered (for in re tm justa non est deliberandum:) seeing the longer we travel from the first point or beginning of error, we shall in futuritie I fear come to the largest latitude or distance from the Aequator of truth, and be so to∣tally orewhelmed and lost in its dissemination, un∣to discomposure into error it selfe. What shall we do then? the schools in a cold spasme of scruple, continue ignorant of the causes, ignorant of the re∣medies, and wavering twixt negligence and uncer∣tainty suspend all farther enquiry, snoring in the Lethargy of their idlenesse like drones in the hive of their pedantick Brother-hoods; contracted by the opium of a warme fellowship and their present Revenues whereupon they now surfeit, where∣by they are at Hercules Pillars, and thereby have choaked abundance of active Industries, and soules more towardly and capable are kept out. Shall we therefore sit still, and expect that those in whose hands the keyes of the Temple of knowledge is should quietly resigne them up, or new mould it themselves, or some fine chance should do it to our hands? no, but let us wait early and late at the door of Authority, and move them again and again for an assistance to this undertaking, to scatter those mists and clouds of vapours that have infested, eclipsed and orewhelmed the Horizon of learning; that its old hoarie and despised head may be raised up again by that Arme that hath upheld and stoutly main∣tained our liberties, worthy of praises that shall outlive time.
Its our sober utinam therefore and we would ob∣tain, that there may be a thorough and early plow∣ing up the fallow ground of the universities, that she may be laboriously rummig'd in her stupendous bulk of blinde learning, and her rubbish cast out, and no longer be a Quagmire of pittiful learned idle∣nes, to serve for no nobler end then to nurture a few raw striplings, come out of some miserable countrie school, with a few shreds of Latine, and to main∣tain the frothy lectures and mutterings over a few stolne impertinencies & wrackt disputations of in∣dustrious scoldings and bawlings of a few yongster Pedanticks, whose teeth are as long as their beards, and understandings as wier-drawn as their strutting bodies, who understand that which they professe as little as any thing else, & know asmuch of what they coldly deliver and mumble over, as their pupills, or as Coriats horse his masters greek and perhaps no more, though in harder words, then the postulated principles of Nature, born with us, and what they had heard their mothers talk by the fire-side at home in a Chimney-Corner Lecture, in a lan∣guage no finer spun then their Russet-grey. That a fair prospect may be taken of the whole Landscap of Physick, both in the dry ground of it, the vain spe∣culative part or Theory, overgrown with thornes and brambles; and as large in the moorish and fen∣nish part of it, the practick; that those parts of it which have not been justly measured, nor indeed scarce yet discovered, as the Terra incognita of Chymi∣stric, which in the known smal spot and portion of it, and habitable part, lies uncultivated and un∣manured, may be all taken in, not into particular inclosures, but levelled into the open common of
experience and reall truth, may be adjoyned to the large field and continent of knowledge, and have Nature in her largest latitude for its mridian. That they may make of this ill-favoured Medusa with her Tresses full of Adders, in a barren wilder∣nesse, a fair Damosel. That we may be acquaint∣ed with more rationall wayes of healing: and that it may be brought to those few rules and sure as a∣fore. That there may be a luxuriant farming of expe∣riments, a review of the old experiments and tra∣ditions, which have gul'd so many junior beliefs, and serve for nothing but to make and fill the world with impudent and detestable quacks. Also that the Body of Physick may be studded and embossed (not as jewels and pendants to hang in her ear) with new acquests and experiences. That they may take care and be intent to find out medi∣cine that shall be grand and universal Arcana's magnalia Dei, that shall be so homogene, essentiall and specifick to the Centre of diseases, where they first take up quarters, where the immediate cause lodges, where the nest is, the fountain and original of all vital faculties and actions whatsoever, that shall conserve, preserve, plant and build up the life, in that fountain of life, no lesse the Author of death and diseases, as of health. Surely medicine is not a naked word, the very word is not idle here: a meer word without a sense, much lesse a fallacious word, signifying contrary to what it pretends; but faith∣fully signifies healing, not by the chance-medly of fortune, accident and Natures work; nor by contra∣riety or simility. Therefore that such medicines
may be found out and prepared as are specifick, and such sure cards, that they may never leave them, ut play their parts so surely, as they may bring glory to God, honour to themselves, and good to their patients. For it is not enough, nor is there any such thing, as to chalk out the way, and say to a medicine, go thou to such a vein, or to this or that place: but a Physitian should be so ably and generally qua∣lified, that his medicine may be sure to eradicate the dis∣ese, and respect the proper Archeus of Nature, and the in∣tricate semanalities or roots of the diseases & not the race∣mations or products. And it should be the whole study of the Physitian to finde out remedies, with which all diseases secundum loca and secundum genera (that is of that which he hath to deal with) may be of one value, and the same price: and not to direct his study and intentions to things that come afterwards, or the alterations in the Archeus, or Sym∣ptomes concomitant. For in diseases all things depend up∣on an occasionall cause inoculated in the feild of life be∣cause diseases have not in themselves an essentiall radici∣ty of permanencie and stability, as other entities have, which abide and subsist in their seminalities. And finally to conclude, that our Reason like Solomon vertuous woman may set all her maidens at work, about this laudable attempt and designe, and not to make some step but go thorough stitch to the journeys end, that our knowledge may thrive by exercise, as well as our limbes and complexions, that so although we cannot attain un∣to perfection, yet that we may come to those things most probable. We fear to be more elaborate in such a perspicuity as this lest we should seem not to informe, but to upbraid the dulnesse of an age; this only, and not the want of more to say, is the limit of our discourse. FINIS.
