B3275 R3162 12185598 55777
BLOODY NEWES FROM St. ALBANS. BEING, A perfect Relation of a horrible Murder Committed on Wednesday last, upon Mris Bass a Widdow living at the Sign of the Green-Tree in the said Town; and how she was most cruelly torn, mangled and dismembred, her brains being dasht out against the walls in the room where she was murthered. Since which some persons are apprehended for the same, and committed to Hartford Goal. As is averred by Mr. Gunter, Gent, Mr. Younger, Mr. New, Mr. Thoowgood the Carrier, and several other Gentlemen of St. Albans, who now lodg at the Bell in Aldersgate-street and will witness the truth. Also, a barbarous and inhumane murder, committed by a Farmer near Colchester, upon his wife, how he stopt her Mouth, stuck an Awle in her Head and sowed up her Privities, for which being discovered by the Crowner and his own Guilty Conscience, he was try'd at Chelns∣ford, condemned and executed, this last Assizes. Likewise a cruel and Divellish Plot discovered at Wem in Shropshire by Mr. Page a Surgion, with the manner how the chief Actor was ta∣ken, and committed by the Mayor of Shrewsbury. The is confirmed by several Gentlemen of Shrewsbury, and also by Mr. Ashley, a Gentleman living near Cripple-gate. LONDON, Printed for John Johnson, 1661.
BLOUDY NEWES FROM St. ALBANS. Sent in a Letter from thence by a Gentleman of quality, to a friend of his in London. HAving lately received many Courtesies from you both by intelligence in manuscript, and also in those printed Occurrences I have daily been furnished with, by your industrious and diligent care, since I last was in your company at London; in which papers have been some things miraculous and strange to all who have perused them, Wherefore I thought good (having an op∣portunity) in part of requital, to gratifie your courtesie by sending you true account of a lamentable murther commit∣ted lately in this Town, the exact Narrative of which is as followeth, viz.
The Widdow Bass, of whom I write this sad and chri∣stian act, was a lusty Hostis who kept a house of entertain∣ment, and lived gallantly at the Sign of the Green-man in this own. She was a woman that was an early riser, her constant hour being four in the morning. But this last week proved a black week and clouded the glory of this lusty Dame: for on Wednesday in the morning she rise early, according to her former custome, to attend on the Company then in her house, and departing from the room. where they were, about half an hour after missing her so long, they sought after her, and could not hear any thing of her. At length coming to the room where she was murthered, on a sudden they were smitten with amazement, discovering th she was barbarously massacred, her brains and some flesh sting against the wall round the said room. Since this the whole Town are in great trouble, seeking daily how to find out the Authors of this cruelty, and several neighbours resort thither, and some do conjecture that it was done with a Hatchet, others that a left-handed man must be the Actor, but the truth cannot as yet be known; for her Brains are so divided and faned to the Walls, that it doth work great astonishment in the hearts of all that be∣hold it. There are some taken upon suspition, but upon their ex∣amination confess nothing, utterly denying that they have any hand in this bloody and cruel Tragedy; Notwithstanding, it is beleived that she was a woman well to live in the world, and that she had great flore of means, which as they do conjecture is the chief cause why this barba∣rous and unchristian Murther was committed; it being in∣deed more likely to be acted for lucre rather then any thing of envy or malice, thus having given you a full account of
what hath b thus  and  these parts. What shall hereafter happen here you need not trouble any other in, for no passage shall here fall out worthy your perusal, but I shall (according to your desire insert it, Ha∣ving nothing more to trouble you at present, or worth your observation, time being more hasty then my opportunity, I remaine Yours to serve you, whilst R. W. August, 11. 1661. For further confirmation of this sad and woful murther these persons following were resident in the Town when it was committed. For thus it is, after receipt of this Letter late yesterday being Tuesday Mr. Gunter gentleman, Mr. Younger a School-master living in the Abby at the said Town, and Mr. Thor∣rowgood the Carrier, who not only justified, but also gave an exact account thereof, and will confirm the same, they being at present in London, and some of them lodging at the Bell in Aldersgare-street. A sad accident fell out this week at Westminster, for yester∣day they went out together very good friends, took Coach and by the way some difference arose, and the words did not decide the controversie, for after they had a while treated it came to blowes, and they went out of the Coach, where they (though unfriendly) yet with noble spirits assaulted each other, both being wounded, but the one of them in a short time gave up the Ghost.
Here followes a true and exact account of that strange, and indeed wonderfull Scare-Crow which happened to the Country people at VVe Parish in Shrp-shire, viz. It happened to the aforesaid Parish that their dwelt one Waddow VVeston with her Kinsmaid Martha, whose house was continually cmbred and molested by vehement throw∣ing of stones about it, sometimes to the breaking of the Windows, sometimes up and down the Chimneys and other places of the house, not only within, but without in the Air, to the great prejudice of sundry persons which passed by. Insomuch that through the long continuance thereof, the neighbours waxed angry, and raised the Country to know the mistery thereof. Hereupon severall eminent Ministers Assembled together at the next house, to the said Widdow, to pray for the al∣laying of the said stones, and withall sent for the said Wid∣dow, with her said Kinswoman to pray with them. And it so sell out, that whilst they so prayed together by long continuance the stones throwing ceased, but immedi∣ately after they desisted, they began again as furious as ever. This continuing in so strange a manner, one Mr. Page 2 Chirurgion, who watching an opportunity, betook himself to a private Corner which he thought convenient for that purpose, and looking in at the Window, he discovered the Maid spinning, and as she turn'd the Wheel, she flung now and than a stone at the Window, some up the Chimney, some at those as pass'd by, which she still continued as formerly. Mr. Page having made this discovery, got a Warrant, ap∣prehended her, and brought her before a Magistrate, by whom she was committed upon complaint of the Neigh∣bours who had been disturbed by her. The Country round about gathered together, and coming to the Mayor of Shrewsbury, made a great complaint a∣gainst
her, declaring how they were daily affronted by her flinging of stones as they passed by. Upon their complaint, according to his Order she was brought before him, and being strictly examined, she con∣fessed that she had done all that they had said, and withall that she could not help it, for some evil spirit had pers∣ed her, and she must in spite of her teeth do it, for she was compel'd to it by some means or other, but how, she knew not, but so long as she was in that house it would continue so. She likewise acknowledged, that at any time when she went forth, she took an opportunity to fill her lap full of stones, and that when she came in, she fell to her labour, and so disposed of them as formerly, for she was daily vexed with some Spirit; who aggravated her to do it, and she could not be in peace till she had perform'd it. The Mayor upon this strict examination, considering of the hanious offence committed by her, ordered that she should be whipt for her obstinacy, which was performed ac∣cordingly, after which she was acquitted. The truth of this story is so really set down, that it will be at any time averred by severall Gentlemen of quality in Shropshire, and also by Mr. Ashley a Gentleman, living near Cripplegate in London. Thus have you the true account of this wicked & divelish design, with a sufficient justification of the same, which may give satisfaction of the truth thereof to every ingenuous Reader. At Chelensford in Essex the present Assises held there, was a man try'd for murthering his Wife who was discover∣ed by the Crowner of Colchester in manner following, viz. The day being come wherein he intended to bury the dead body of his Murthered Wife, he aske the people, whether the Crowner had been there or no? they answering he had
not as yet Whereupon as beent after the Corps he saw the Cer, and threatned to arrest him for not looking af∣ter his charge, upon which the Crowner caused the Coffin to be open'd, and found that she was murthered in a most barbarous manner; her private parts being sow'd up, and an  in her ead, and her mouth opt, all which he confessed at his examination, received entence for the fact, and is before this time executed for this bloody and inhu∣mane murther. FINIS.
