B3704A R212992 99825534 29918
THE BOOKE OF Common Prayer, now used in the Church of ENGLAND, Vindicated from the aspertion of all Schismatickes, Anabaptists, Brownists, and Seperatists. Proving and maintaining, that the English Common Prayer as now it is, was made and compyled by many most Reverend Divines of our Church in the Raigne of that ever-famous and first confirmer of the Protestant Re∣ligion in England, King Edward the sixth. With a true Catalogue of their names and dignities, collected from the records of Parliament Rolles in the Tower. Together with a discovery of a sort of people called Rebaptists, lately found out in Hackney Marsh neere LONDON. London, Printed for Iohn Thomas. 1641.
The book of com∣mon prayer now used in the Church of England, vindicated from schisme and errours. IT is very well knowne, to most professors of the protestant Re∣ligion in the Kingdome of Eng∣land, that the reformation (ful∣ly to be effected) began in the Raigne of that ever-famous Prince King Ed∣ward the sixth, whose pious and godly care was such, that with the advice of his most reverend and worthy Divines, an uniforme Booke of common prayers, and forth with complyed, and by act of Parliament, then fully confirmed, fur∣thered the subsequent yeares, of his ever deare sister, Queen Elizabeth of everlasting renowne: it was more amply manifested by acts of Parlia∣ment and Proclamation to her Eternall praise, and Gods glory, and the joy of all Protestant professours throughout the Christian world, all whose times it so continued with generall ap∣plause. And since, hath beene upholden by two most
renowned and religious Princes, King Iames of blessed memory deceased, and King Charles our dread Soveraigne now raigning over us, whom God long preserve, till of late schisme and facti∣on arising in the Malignant spirits of some Brownists, Seperatists, Anabaptists, who like the Egiptian locusts swarme in every corner of the City and Kingdome, and having of late got a head, began to oppose and spurne at that anci∣ent monument, defiling of it, with their op∣probrious tongues, and as much, as in them lies, seeking utterly to treade it under foot, and quite abolish the same, by calling it popish, and super∣stitious, others by taxing of it, viz. The Letta∣ny, to be in part conjuration, and such like charms or witchcrafts, to the great hearts griefe of good Protestants, and true professours of the Gospell of Christ, now hath it beene, depraved and reviled by those Ignorant, haire-brained, and Illitterate fellowes, who doe all things, by the motions of their unguided, unlearned, un∣advised, and foolish rash spirits, as they boldly in great multitudes from time, to time, most impudently seeke to maintaine. Proofes of the holy Scripture alleadged in Iustisication of the Booke of Common Prayer, now used in the Church of England. First, THat Go himselfe appointed in the Law, a set forme of Benediction, Numb; 6.23.24, 25.26. Secondly, that David himselfe, set Psalmes
to be sung upon speciall occasions, as the title of them sheweth, Thirdly; That the Prophet Ioell, appointed a set forme of Prayer, to be used by the Priests at solemne fast; Ioell 2.7. Fourthly that Christ not onely commandes us to pray, after such manner, Mat. 6.9. But to use a set forme of wordes, Luk. 11.2. when ye pray, say our Father. Fiftly. The spirit of God is no more restrai∣ned by using a set forme of Prayer, then by sing∣ing set hymnes, or Psalmes in meeter, which yet the adversaries of our Common Prayer, prac∣tice in their assemblies. Sixtly, Of all prayers, premeditated are the best, Eccle. 5, 2. Seventhly, And of premeditated prayers, those which are allowed by publike Authority, are to be preferred above those, which are utter∣ly by any private spirit. Eightly, All the Churches in the Christian world, in the first and best times, had their best formes of Liturgies, whereof most are extent in the writings of the Fathers unto this day. Ninethly, Let our service booke be compa∣red with the French, Dutch, or any other Lit∣turgy prefered in any of the reformed Church∣es, and it will appeare to any indifferent Rea∣der, that it is more exact, and compleat then any of them. Tenthly, Our Service booke was penned and allowed of, not only by many learned Doctors'
but glorious Martyrs, who sealed the truth of the reformed Religion with their blood, now what those most reverend Compylers of the book of Common Prayer as it now is, this ensu∣ing Table will truly and really dili∣neate.
The compylers of the English Com∣mon Prayer as it now is. Doctor Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury. Doctor Goodricke Bishop of Ely, Doctor Skipp Bishop of Hereford Doctor Thirlby Bishop of Winchester Doctor Day Bishop of Chichesler Doctor Holheck Bishop of Lincolne Doctor Ridley Bishop of Rochesler Doctor Gox King Edwards Almoner. Master Taylor Deane of Lincolne Master Heynes Deane of Exeter Master Redman Deane of Westminster Master Robinson Archdeacon of Leicester Mense Maii. 1541. VVhat grounds then have these Factions, and schisinaticall people, seing it is demonstra∣ted unto us, to be both lawfull and necessary in the Church, both by the word of God, and the learned Fathers in those times, but what can wee expect from a Mechanicke and Illiterate people, whose unseemely Gstures, are dayly apparant to the eye of the world, witnesse their Riotous, and uncivill disorders in the streets, on the Sabbath day, at the Church doore, un∣till divine service be read, talking all the while of pro∣phane and Idle matters, a rude and Ignorant fellow of that sect, violently tore a great part of a Communion
book in a Church in London lately, And being brought before authority for the same, answered nothing for himselfe, but that he could not abide in it, however hee was not suffered to passe so impudently without punishment, for he was comitted and suffered accor∣dingly, many other in divers places of this Kingdome, have committed many such like outrages, insolencies, against Church Government, and if there bee, not some course taken for the suppression of such outra∣ges, a great confusion is feared thereby to fall upon our Church; and for those, that have boldly taken up∣on them in private holes and corners, to blast the wor∣thy antiquity thereof, by their violent pens, but thanks be given to God, Revend Divines have vindicated the cause thereof, by the holy Scriptures, both in print and Pulpit to the shame of all opposers whatsoever. The discovery of a base sect of people called Rebaptists, lately found out in Hackney Mash neere London. ABout a Fortnight since a great multitude of people were met going towards the river in Hackney Marsh, and were followed to the water side, where they all were Baptized againe, themselves doing it one to another, some of which persons, were so feeble and aged, that they were fayne to Ride on Horsebacke thi∣there this was wel observed by many of the Inhabitants living there abouts, and afterwards one of them Chri∣stened his owne Child, and another tooke upon him to Church his owne wife, an Abominable Act, and full of grosse Impiety. FINIS.
