B5393 R219419 99830893 35355
Queries to Seventy Quakers. OR, A Second Sober Expostulation with the Hearers, amongst the Quakers, by way of Interrogation; touching the Doctrine and Practice of their Mer∣cenary Teachers, expecting their Answer, or else shall conclude by their Silence, they assent to what is objected against them by Fra. Bugg. The Introduction to the READER. READER, In February last I wrote a Book in Octavo, Intituled, A Sober Expostulation, &c. and I hope it hath some effect upon them, since I meet with no Answer: Their Teachers use to boast of their quick An∣swers, as in their Book, Judas and the Jews, &c. And formerly G. Whitehead wrote Three Books against me in Nine Months time; but this is the third time I have wrote against them in Six Months time, and no Answer, which shew they begin to flag, and hang down their Heads, as if they were unable; but now I'll let G. Whitehead alone, 'tis not manly to fight below; no, let him rise and wash himself, and then possibly he may come out with a Sheet against Twenty, and Nibble here and there like the Rats: But, Reader, observe but even those Parts of my Books, which the Quakers make no reply to, and the Charges therein laid; and it will discover to thee their Errors to be both great and dangerous. But why (I marvel) are their Teachers so slow at writing? What? Do their Spring begin to fail? For when Father Penn receiv'd Jer. Ives's Sober Request over-Night the 26th of October 1674. he took his Natural Rest, (as himself says) and in an Hours time next Morning wrote his Answer, why then will neither he nor Ellwood come in to the Assistance of their disconsolate Brother Whitehead? Why do they make such a drudge of him? Is it because he is expert in wording the Matter otherwise, and yet can mean the same thing, viz. write one thing and mean another? Thus much by way of Introduction. First, Touching the Charge on G. W. in Pil. Progress. p. 172. QUery. 1. Whether the Person that Suffered without the Gates of Jerusalem, be properly the Son of God? Answ. yea or nay. Q. 2. If nay, whose Son properly was he? Answ. Q. 3. If yea, Why do you follow such Teachers as utterly deny it? Answ. Q. 4. Whether your Teachers do not deny the Scriptures, when they call them Death, Dust, Serpents Meat, Beastly Ware? Answ. yea or nay.
Q. 5. If yea, Why do other of your Teachers say they prefer the Bible above all other Books Extant in the World? Answ. Q. 6. Whether your Teachers speak from the Spirit of Truth, or the Spirit of Error, in their Writings and Preachings? Answ. Q. 7. If from the Spirit of Truth, then whether their so speaking be of as great Authority as the Scriptures and Chapters are, and greater, as G. White∣head Teaches? Answ. Q. 8. If so, then whether their Doctrine do not tend to overthrow the Divine Authority of the Scriptures? Answ. yea or nay. Q. 9. Whether it be Conjuration to preach out of the Scriptures of the Pro∣phets and Apostles, as your Books Teach? Answ. yea or nay. Q. 10. Why do your Teachers Question, whether Moses or Hermes was the first Pen-man of the Scriptures; yea, either or neither? Answ. Q. 11. Doth it not from such Questioning appear, that your Teachers de∣sign the overthrow of Revealed Religion? Answ. Q. 12. Whether are the Sufferings of the Quakers greater than the Sufferings of Christ, his Apostles, and all the Martyrs since? Answ. Q. 13. If nay, Whether was not Edw. Burrough a Blasphemer, who so wrote, and G. Whitehead, &c. likewise, who approved and recommended such Do∣ctrine? Answ. Q. 14. Whether are the Sufferings of the Quakers more unjust than the Suffer∣ings of Christ, his Apostles, and Martyrs? Answ. Q. 15. If nay, Whether was not E. Burrough a Blasphemer, who so wrote, and G. Whitehead, who approved and recommended such Doctrine? Answ. Q. 16. Whether were the Sufferings of Christ, his Apostles and Martyrs, duly executed upon them by a Law, or at least in a great Measure? Answ. Q. 17. If nay, Whether was not E. Burrough a Blasphemer, who so wrote, and G. Whitehead, &c. likewise, who approved and recommended such Do∣ctrine? Answ. Q. 18. Whether this Doctrine of Burrough, Whitehead, Fox, Coale, &c. does not tend to undervalue the Death and Sufferings of Christ, and to exalt their own Sufferings, as not only greater, but more unjust? Answ. Q. 19. If yea, Whether your Teachers are not grand Deceivers and Antichrists, even such as Christ foretold of? Mat. 24.24. Answ. Q. 20. If yea, Whether you ought not to forsake such Impostors? Answ. Touching G. Fox's Self-Exaltations: See Pil. Prog. p. 21. 29. Q. 21. Whether you believe that G. Fox wrote his Book, News coming up, out of the North, &c. from the Mouth of the Lord, as in p. 1. he pretended? Answ. Q. 22. Whether you believe that G. Fox was Naked when he wrote that Book, as himself said? Answ. Q. 23. Whether you believe that his rising up out of the North was Prophesied of, as he there pretended? Answ. Q. 24. If yea, Then by what Prophet, whether Moses, Jeremiah, Isaiah, Eze∣kiel, Daniel, or by Lodowick Muggleton? Answ. Q. 25. If not by the true Prophets, then whether he was not an Impostor, who Imposed on the World his horrible Delusions? Answ.
Q. 26. Whether was G. Fox's Name so Covered from the sight and know∣ledge of the World, as that neither himself, nor his Name was known in the World, as he said himself? Answ. Q. 27. If yea, How came the People, when they saw him, and heard him speak, to say, Lo, this is George Fox; or how came the Justices to make his Mittimus; and send him to the House of Correction, for his Blasphemy, by the Name of George Fox, (the Shooe-maker)? Answ. Q. 28. Whether he that hath the same Spirit that raised Jesus from the Dead, be equal with God? Answ. Q. 29. Whether the Quakers have not the same Spirit that raised Jesus from the Dead? Answ. Q. 30. If yea, Whether the Quakers be not equal with God? Answ. Q. 31. Whether you do believe that George Fox attained in his Life-time to that fulness of Glory, as that his Head and Ears was filled full of it? Answ. yea or nay. Q. 32. If nay, Whether was not George Fox a grand Impostor? Answ. Q. 33. Whether you do believe that George Fox was before all Lauguages were, as he said he was? Answ. Q. 34. If nay, Whether then you ought to adhere to the Works of such an Impostor? Answ. And whether his Journal be better than the Bible, as William Mead said it was? Answ. Q. 35. Whether do you believe that George Fox wrought Miracles? Answ. Q. 36. If yea, In whose Name then did he work those Miracles; in his own Name, or in the Name of some other Man, since in the Name of Jesus of Nazareth he wrought no Miracle? Answ. Q. 37. If not in the Name of Jesus, whether he was not an Impostor? Answ. Q. 38. Whether do you believe that George Fox saw the Heavens open, as he pretended? Answ. Q. 39. If yea, Then what Heaven? Was it that above, as St. Stephen did, where he saw the Son of Man, or a Heaven within his Belly only? Answ. Q. 40. Whether do you believe that the keeper of the House of Correction, (whereinto G. Fox was cast for his Blasphemy) came trembling to him, as the Goaler did to Paul, who was a Prisoner for Preaching in the Name of Jesus? Ans. Q. 41. Do you believe that George Fox saw a Pool of Blood in the Town of Litchfield, and a Channel of Blood run in the Streets, (when no Man else saw a drop of Blood) as he said? Answ. Q. 42. If nay, Then whether you can believe, That such as took this Fox for a Prophet, were not as much bewitch'd, as the Samaritans were in the Case of Si∣mon Magus? Acts 8. Answ. Touching your Teachers Idolizing this Fox. Q. 43. Whether this Fox was the Father of many Nations, as Josiah Coale, one of your Teachers, wrote him to be? Answ. Q. 44. And whether G. Fox had a Kingdom, of whose Increase there should be no end, as Coale said? Answ. Q. 45. If yea, Whether George Fox was not a King, and both then and
now Ruling in Righteousness, in his Everlasting Kingdom? Answ. Q. 46. If nay, in that he is dead and rotting in his Grave, then whether Jo∣siah Coale was not then an Idolater? Answ. Q. 47. Whether G. Fox in his Life-time was Dignified with Eternal Honour, as J. Blaikling, another of your Teachers said? Answ. Q. 48. Whether it might be truly said of G. Fox, as it was of Christ, That he was in the World, and the World was Made by him; and the World knew him not? Answ. Now if these things be true of G. Fox. First, what he said of himself, next what his Preachers said of him, I marvel how the Jews, if they give the same Credit to the Quakers Books, that they give to the History of St. Luke, shall know which is the true Messiah, Jesus Christ, or G. Fox. But to proceed, Touching the Quakers Insolent Boldness. Q. 49. Whether was it not great boldness in your Teachers to write an Epistle, or new Liturgy, to be Read in Churches? Answ. Q. 50. Whether was it not great Presumption, Pride and Arrogance, in Geo. Fox, to write a Battle-door for the Clergy, to Teach them the English of Tu and Vos? Answ. Q. 51. Whether was it not abominable Pride, and impudent Boldness, in your great Apostle Fox, to pretend to write a Book, and affix his Name in six or eight places, to those Learned Languages in the Battle-door, of which he under∣stood not a word, but got Stubs and Furley to do it for him; and what they could not do, to Hire a Jew, and gave him 80 l. in Silver, and a Dozen Bottels of Wine, whilst he would be esteemed and taken for the Author thereof? Answ. Q. 52. Whether it was not great Boldness in this Ignorant Fox, and a Badge of Intollerable Pride, to put forth a Book, Stiled, A Primmer for all the Doctors and Scholars in Europe, containing 2434 Queries of Nonsense? Answ. Q. 53. Whether was it not great Impudence in your Teachers, to go into the Churches, and disturb Establish'd Ministry; as their Practice was for 10 or 15 Years together; and whether they would bear it now themselves, were they so Affronted? Answ. Q. 54. Was it not great Impudence in your Teachers, to call the Church of ngland, A Cage of unclean Birds? Answ. Q. 55. Whether it was not great Boldness in your Teachers, and Seditious in its own Nature, for them to give out a general Summons to all Ecclesiastical Courts and Officers, behind their Backs, as in Smith's Works? p. 161. Answ. Q. 56. Whether it was not great Boldness, and intollerable Presumption, in your Teachers to Catechize by way of Dialogue, all the Bishops, Doctors Vicars and Curates, and all Prelaticals, as in Smith's Works, p. 158, Answ. Q. 57. Whether it was not great Boldness, and brazon'd Impudence in your Teachers, to undertake and print a mock Tryal of the Church of England, and her Foundation, and therein to condemn her to be an Adulterous Womb, and guilty of Witchcraft and Sorcery, as in Smith's Works, p. 160? Answ. Q. 58. Whether it was not intollerable Pride and Arrogance, at another time
to Erect a mock Court, to feign a mock Tryal, and there to Examine, Try, and Judge all the Teachers and Ministers of the Protestant Churches; and therein to Condemn them Guilty of false Doctrine; yea, to agree and concur with all the false Prophets and Deceivers in former Ages, as well as in this, both in their Call, Maintenance, and Practice, (as their words are) and all behind their Backs, and then to Print and expose them so found Guilty and Condemn'd, as in Burrough's Works, p. 223. and Approved and Recommended by George Whitehead? Answ. Q. 59. Whether it was not intollerable Boldness and brazon'd Impudence, in your Teachers, to Charge the Common-Prayer-Book to be brought forth by an Adulterous Womb; and that the Pope gives Life and Breath unto it! and from the Pope's Loyns (say they) it receives its Strength, as in Smith's Works, page 164? Answ. Q. 60. Whether you agree and consent to your Teachers, Blasphemy herein objected against them, with their Idolatry herein manifested, with their Pride, Presumption, and Brazon-fac'd Boldness, herein set forth, or whether you will join to have these Blasphemous and Seditious Books Condemn'd and committed to the Flames, as their just merit; and as a Testimony against Qua∣kerism? Answ. Q. 61. Whether you believe with your Teachers, That all Governors and Rulers, ought to be accountable to the People, and to the next succeeding Ru∣lers, for all their Actions, which may be inquired into upon occasion, as in Burrough's Works, p. 442. and there 'tis made an Article of your Faith? Answ. Q. 62. If yea, Whether it be not a Lamentable thing, that such a Tribe of Ignorant Wretches, who not one of a Thousand of them throughout your Tribes, can say the Lord's Prayer, the Ten Commandments, and the Apostles Creed, by Heart, nor give an Account of their Faith and Hope, consistent with the Arti∣cles of the Christian Faith; I say, that such an Ignorant Tribe of Men, should Sit Judges, Erect Courts, and Condemn and Censure a National Learned Clergy, and the Best Constituted Church in the World, and Charge the Book of Com∣mon-Prayer to be brought forth by an Adulterous VVomb, to Spring from the Pope, and to receive its Strength from his Loyns? Tho' Establish'd by the Truth of the Scripture, and con∣firm'd by Act of Parliament. Good God! was ever the like heard of, that a People, who pretend to that meekness, that some think they would not hurt a VVorm, and yet be so bold as thus to proceed, thus to Print and Publish? Surely we may search all Europe, Asia, Africa and America, and not find the like Insolent Boldness; I say; is not this a Lamen∣table thing? Answer if you have any Courage left. Touching their Hypocrisie and Censoriousness. Q. 63. VVhether you still believe the Quakers to be the only Church of Christ, and that the Quakers are in the Truth, and none but they, as your Doctors, Whitehead, and Sol. Eccles Teach, notwithstanding you Reject the Ordinances of Baptism and the Lord's Supper, Reject the Reading the Holy Scriptures in your Meetings; yet read your own nonsensical Epistles, make no Confession of Sin, nor ask Pardon for Christ's sake, nor ever pray in the Name of Jesus to God the Fa∣ther? Answ.
Q. 64. Why do your Teachers leave out of your Marriage Certificates the Wo∣man's Promise of Obedience to her Husband, it being a Command of God? And is not this the main Reason that the Quakers Wives are not ashamed to tell you, they see no Reason that they should either Obey or Reverence their Hus∣bands? Answ. Q. 65. Whether you be not more Zealous for the Commandments of G. Fox, in the Education of your Children; teaching them strictly to observe Thee and Thou to a single Person; First, Second, and Third Day of the Week, not to wear Lace, &c. than you are for the Commandments of God, which teach VVomen to obey their Husbands, Children their Parents, Servants their Masters, Subjects their Princes and Governors? &c. Answ. Q. 66. Why do you suffer such Hypocrites to teach among you, as Cater, who pretended he suffer'd 20 l. for Preaching at Phakenham, in Norfolk, when he suf∣fer'd not a Groat, but got 10 l. clear into his Pocket? Answ. Q. 67. Why do you suffer George Whitehead to Teach amongst you, who Preach against Swearing, and yet himself did swear in the Lord-Mayor's Court, April 9. 1695. before the Quakers Oath was Enacted? Answ. Q. 68. Whether it was not a Trial of Skill to root out the Protestant Mini∣stry, and overturn the Church of England, when 7000 Quakers petitioned the Parliament against Tythes? And can you take it ill if you meet with such a Petiti∣on, to purge the Nation of Blasphemers? Answ. Q. 69. Whether you think Whitehead, your Drudge, can defend your Teach∣ers from what in this Paper, and my last Book, is objected against them? If not, ought you not to examine the Matter? Answ. Lastly, Who they Account False Ministers, and what such are? Q. 70. Whether you believe, as one sort of your Books Teach? Viz. First, Are all such as sprinkle Children; ALL such as Preach Christ without, and bid People believe in him, as he is in Heaven above; ALL such as Preach out of the Scriptures; ALL that Pay Tythes; ALL that Receive Tythes; false Mini∣sters? And if so, then Secondly, Are such Conjurers, Thieves, Robbers, Anti∣christs, Baal's Priests, Witches, Blind Guides, Serpents, and Devils? Are all such Liars, and the Sir-Symons of the Age, whose Commission and Call (say they) came from Oxford and Cambridge? Are all such Stewards of the Devil's Magazines, Dissemblers, Hypocrites, and a Viperous and Serpentine Generati∣on, as your Teachers say? Yea, of the Devil, fearful Blasphemers, Scarlet-co∣lour'd Beasts; a Harlot, full of Abomination and Filthiness; Babylon's Mer∣chants, selling Beastly Wares for a large Price; the LETTER, Mark, the Scriptures are with them Beastly Ware, Dust and Death, and else∣where Serpents Meat. which is Dust, and Death, and Whited Walls, professing nothing but Poysonous Stuff; Ravening Wolves, greedy Dogs? Really they are (say this Book of the Quakers) Blood-Hounds, still Hunting and Gasping after their Prey, like the Mouth of Hell, Barking and Raging like Sodomites, Ambitious Phari∣sees; yea, of the Devil; Wo, wo, wo, was the Portion of those Phari∣sees then, and wo, wo, wo, is their Portion now, and Wo and Misery is the Portion of the Upholders (i. e. King and Parliament) of that Treacherous and Deceitful Generation, &c. Answ.
POSTSCRIPT. Reader, This Sheet (which is occasion'd by the Quakers Deportment) gives a fresh Taste of the Spirit of Quakerism: For I having dispersed my Charge to G. W. as in Pilgrims Progress, &c. p. 172. into divers part of the Nation; not only by my Book aforesaid, but by a single Quarto Page; this has greatly tor∣mented the Quakers: For clear themselves thereof they cannot, and condemn their Errors they will not; for then down goes Infallability, and with it Qua∣kerism, that being the main Pillar, upon which their Babel-Building stand: And when I was at Oxford, I sent one of these Quarto Pages, containing the said Charge, to Sylas Norton, a Quaker; he asked the Messenger from whence it came, who told him from Francis Bugg; I will not receive it, said Sylas: The same day, I being at Christ's-Church-College, and discoursing of it, and how S. Norton rejected the said Charge and Challenge, one of the Fellows desired me to go along with him to S. Norton, thinking, I suppose, that he could prevail with him, to attempt a Defence; I went with him, and by all the fair VVords and Christian Arguments that he could use, could not gain the Point; tho' he told him the Charge was high; and if true upon them, the Quakers were not Christians; and if not true, he would engage the University should condemn Francis Bugg: I then also offer'd, that if I did not prove it upon them from their approved Authors, that I would burn my Book, as a Testimony against my own Injustice: But neither of us could prevail; but instead thereof, according to their wonted manner, he and his VVife railed at me, call'd me Liar, Serpent, Brute Beast, and the like Names; and not only so, but fell foul on the Gentleman, and told him, that they hired Ba∣laam to curse the Quakers, which I take to be a foul Slander cast upon that Fa∣mous University; for they never hired me, nor perswaded me to write a Line, nor put VVords into my Mouth; but what I write is of my own Accord; I never was, nor am, a Hireling, but a Volunteer. First, when I was a Quaker, I suffer'd Three Years and Four Months Imprisonment, for meeting, and not taking the Oath of Allegiance; I suffer'd more than 100 l. in Fines and Distresses for Meet∣tings; I was Recorder to their Monthly and Quarterly Meetings 16 or 18 Years, and never took one Shilling for all my Journeys, and other Service; I gave 20 l. towards building their Meeting-House in Milden-Hall, tho' when I left them, and they denied me the use thereof, by Agreement they repaid me 12 l. thereof, which I put to a better use; namely, Printing against those Errors I formerly held; I was one of the chief Entertainers of their Ministers in that part of the Country where I dwelt; I have Cloathed some, and put Money in the Pockets of others of them; I know not in what thing I was Inferior to them, which now Domineer and Insult over me. And Secondly, since I left them, I have waged War with their Teachers from 1678, to 1698; not only by Manuscript Controversie, but almost every Year, one with another, a Book, little or great, against them, in Print, and never till 1697. took Ten Shillings of all the Clergy: I never Cursed them; no, Christ commands to Bless, and Curse not; and the Doctrine of the Church of England teach the same; insomuch, that I have, and can pray, that God may Bless them, in turning them from the Errors of their Ways, upon their Confession of their Sins to God, and begging Pardon, for Christ's sake: But they have Cursed me; I cannot say with Bell, Book, and Candle, but in their Books and Letters; see Pilgrims Progress, p. 146. and not only me, but the Bishops of the Church of Eng∣land, and that in Print, calling them Cursed Bishops; and Sam. Cater, in a Meeting at Milden-Hall, in my Hearing, Cursed the Clergy, saying, They are Cursed with an Everlasting Curse: I then jogged
John Everet, sitting by me, (another of their Teachers) who going home with me, I asked him how he liked such Doctrine: He told me, not at all. And as for their Insolent Boldness, I have recited a Sample in these Queries, bottomed on Matter of Fact in their Books, and more largely handled them elsewhere, and this angers them; they began with Cursing and Railing, and continue the same still; they are not changed, they tell you so; but they like not to have it taken Notice of, that angers them; they love it as well as ever they did, and are as free in it; witness Sylas Norton's Carriage to me at Oxford; but as their Books are of two sorts, so are their Carriages; they'll be as smooth as Oyl to your Face, when the Poyson of Asps is under their Tongue; or else (as a worthy Clergy-man lately said) How should they prove themselves right-bred Children of the Accuser of the Brethren? It's true, I have ript up their Boldness, their Sawciness, and Impudence, that angers them; they love to use it, it's the Marrow of their Religion, and by which they have beguiled Thousands of young unstable People, by telling them, the Clergy are Witches, Devils, Conjurers, and the like: But this they would not have exposed; this is to use when they see Occasion; they can now word the Mat∣ter otherwise, and yet mean the same thing; G. Whitehead tells you so, and you may believe him. It may be their Hearers may say, that one Fool may ask more Questions than a Hundred wise Men can answer, which I grant; and one of those Fools I have long since taken their great Apostle to be, (Geo. Fox by name; yea, and Nature too,) who in his Book, stiled in Contempt of the Clergy, A Primmer for all the Doctors and Scholars in Europe, &c. proposed to the Universities and Clergy, &c. 2434 Que∣ries, which all the Quakers in England can never answer, should they go about it: But to avoid that Rock, I have proposed to their Hearers only 70 Queries, both plain and easie to answer, by saying Yea or Nay to each Question, and which, I my self can answer in half an Hours time; I have now by me near 4000 Quaker Queries to the Clergy, and many of them answered in Print, so many at least as are worth noticing: And since it has been their own Method, to trouble the World with their Impertinent Queries; as, What is a Dative Case? What is a Genitive Case? What is a Participle? What is an Adverb? What is a Dipthong? What is an E-dipthong? And who spake them first? And what is Dog-Madness? What is Badger-madness? And the like; Why may not I question them about their Funda∣mentals? 'Tis but a Query to a Person; 70 Queries to 70 Quakers; which, when answer'd, I shall propose 70 more, and so on, until we understand them: But to avoid that, I fear they'll not answer these few; for Error loves Obscurity, because Darkness is its Habitation; Counterfeit Coyn will not endure Trial: And this makes them rage, this makes them rail, fret and fume; for Reprobate Sil∣ver they are loath to be called, yet by the Help of a Metaphor, 'tis their proper Name; but not∣withstanding all this Plainness of Speech, yet I presume they'll again be angry: But I have learnt to bear all things; I know their Hypocrisie is as deep as Hell, and their Malice as cruel as the Grave, and that against me and others, who have discover'd their Cursing, their Railing, and Impudent Boldness; but I'll keep out of Moore-Fields, and hope to avoid the Dint thereof, and am content to become the Object both of their Scorn and Malice, so that thereby I may have Opportunity to make them manifest; first to themselves, that they may Repent, and then to others; for many of them are so Ignorant, (respecting the Christian Religion, which teach us to Love our Enemies, Bless, and Curse not, do Good to them that despitefully use you) that they know not their Right Hand from their Left, and yet so spiritually Proud, that they will not be taught. FINIS. Written by the Author of The Pilgrim's Progress, from Quakerism to Christiani∣ty, &c. Sept. 1698. and both Sold by W. Kettleby, at the Bishop's-Head, in St. Paul's Church-yard, London.
