B872 R5386 13687276 101358
A PINDARICK Congratulatory Poem To the Right Honourable George, Lord Jeffreys, BARON of WEM, and LORD HIGH CHANCELLOR OF ENGLAND To the High and Mighty Monarch King JAMES the II. &c. By Joshua Barnes, M. A. One of the Senior Fellows of Emmanuel Colledge in Cambridge. IMPRIMATUR, S. Blithe, Procan. Acad. Cantab. Octob. 5. 1685. London, Printed, and are to be sold by Walter Davis in Amen-Corner. 1685.
A PINDARICK Congratulatory Poem To the Right Honourable George, Lord Ieffreys, BARON of WEM, AND Lord High Chancellor, &c. Stanz. I. A Rise, my Muse, now take a loftier Flight, Toward Heaven thy dareing Pinions try; There on the Sun fix Thou thine Eagle Sight, The Object's Good, altho' 'tis High; And He, who sits to JAMES so nigh, (Tho' Just He be) in Mercy must delight. ThisOctob. 5. Day all Cambridge did conspire To Praise those Glories, We admire: Be that my single Task, which pleas'd that learned Quire. This Day our Sacred Body, all conven'd, (Where Loyalty and Knowledge do preside) Decreed to honour Mighty Caesar's Friend, The Muses Glory, and Astraea's Pride. To Him their humble Complements they send,
Tho' sorry, all their Art's too low The heights of his just Eminence to show; Much less with Equal Praise his Virtues to commend. Virtues, as far beyond his High Degree, As Him above our selves we see, The Prop, whereon Justice and Law do trust, Rais'd up aloft by JAMES the Just. By JAMES, of whom with Pride Apollo sings, The best of Friends, of Brothers, and of Kings. II. Now those, (if such there still can be, Black Rebells in the worst degree) Who dare distrust, Great Prince, thy Royal Word, May plainly see (If they can e're be wrought on to Repent) By this vast Instance, which thou dost afford, That 'tis thy firm intent, T' uphold the Government; And thenceforth acquiesce in thy Just Laws and Thee: Since Him, whom Factious Noise could never Awe, Nor Fear, nor Hope, from Rules of Justice draw, Since Him Thou'st made the Oracle of England's Law. Great Jeffreys, yet not half so Great as Good, How little was thy Worth once understood! How lay it unreveal'd, Like a rich Gemm, in dirty Mines conceal'd; When by the Mobile so much abus'd! Or rather then, How was thy Virtue known, And dreaded by the Vice-empoison'd Town, Who Thee (as sinful Jews the Saviour once) refus'd!
III. But CHARLES (whose Memory still shall live, While Pen, or Verse, a Name can give) Receiv'd Thee in His more propitious Armes; Where thy late-blessed Honor thriv'd amain, Its former Grace did quickly re-obtain, Encircled round with sweet endearing Charmes, And Crown'd with awfull Love again. So look'd Astraea, Reverend and Severe, Tho' to the wiser Gods, as Mercy, Dear. And thus, while in thy brighter Soul there stood The Heavenly Form of all, that's Just and Good. It's Beauties God-like JAMES beheld, (For Virtue best can Virtue's Beauties find) And straight with Love Divine His Bosom swell'd: Only such perfect Forms affect so Great a Mind. Then to Her Seat the Goddess He restor'd, And arm'd Her with a Whig-confounding Sword; Gave Her a Champion by Her side, Of Conduct and of Courage try'd: To Jeffrey's Care commended His dear Law, And bad him guard Her as the Soul, Which Monarchy it self doth actuate, Which only can Sedition's Powers controul, And Faction's Fury awe, And render Calm a Rough tempestuous State. Thus was Life's sacred Tree of old Committed to a Guardian Angel's Care; Who still a flaming Sword did hold; Lest Rebell Adam's Race should dare T' invade those Blissful Limits, where
The World's Great Monarch set his Plant of Gold. Thrice happy IAMES, whose First Year's Reign Hath brought Astraea back to Earth again! IV. Surely, Great SIR, when late Posterity Shall hear the sound of thy Renown and Thee; Tho' much thine Eloquence they will admire, And Loyalty (by which the Good aspire) Tho' much thy wondrous Judgment they will praise, And Love to Learning (rare in these our Days) Tho' much thine Equity they must commend, Tho' much thy scorn of Hopes or Fears, Great Virtues purchas'd in few Years! Yet this, I'm sure, will prove The greatest Praise thy Glorious Soul can love, 'Cause this doth all the others comprehend, When they shall say, "Wise JAMES was Jeffrey's Friend. And if from Gods and Kings we dare Pretend to Merit, when they bounteous are; Surely with Charms of Service Thou did'st bind Thy Mighty Master's generous Mind, And as it were oblige Him to be Kind. Or rather, 'cause He's Just, and knew That Thou, Great Jeffreys, wast so too, He judg'd thee Worthy of a Monarch's Love, And, like a Prince, did by His bounty prove What high Esteem in Him thy Worth did raise: When meaner Souls (the scandal of our Days) Repay Desert only with empty Praise.
V. Nor do we only love Thee now For Mighty Caesar's sake, But all the Land thy Praise doth speak, Oblig'd on't's own account, and humbly low To Her Deliverer's honour'd Name shall bow. Well did thy wisely-pruning Hand Lop off those Suckers of the Western Land, That once design'd to draw away The Vital Sap of Britain's Royal Tree, Whose Prosp'rous Strength's the only stay Of Government, Religion, Equity: On whose firm Branches Three Great Crowns do stand. Henceforth— (All Loyal Men, And Heaven and Earth sing an Amen!) The Root of Monarchy is fixt more sure; More wide the lovely Branches spread, And up to Heaven advance their aweful Head: Nor can the Thunders e're their hurt procure; Since they the Thund'rers Glory do secure; Nor shall they fear the touch of Light'nings Blast; 'Gainst Rebell Winds and Storms they shall endure, And an adored Oak of Trophies, last: Till Jeffreys's Fame's asleep, and Time it self be past. FINIS.
