C3728 11953127 51472
LICENSED, Nov. 24. 1676. Roger L'Estrange.
THE HISTORY OF THE Grand Uisiers, Mahomet, and Achmet Coprogli, Of the three last GRAND SIGNIORS, THEIR Sultana's and Chief Favourites; With the most secret Intrigues of the SERAGLIO. Besides several other particulars of the Wars of Dalmatia, Transyl∣vania, Hungary, Candia, and Poland. Englished by Iohn Evelyn, junior. LONDON: Printed for H. Brome, at the Gun at the West-end of St. Pauls. 1677.
To the High and Mighty Prince GODEFROY MAURICE, De la Tour, d' Auvergne, Sovereign Duke of Bouillon, Duke d' Albret, and Chasteau Thierry, Count d' Auvergne, Eureux, Vis∣count Turenne, Governour, and Lieutenant for the King in High and Low Auvergne, Peer, and Great Chamberlain of France. SIR, THIS Book I look upon as a Present so far from worthy of your High∣ness, that I cannot but charge my self with Presumption in the ve∣ry Dedication of it. But as the Work it self was written under your Roof, and the Author of it
had the honour at the same time to be generously obliged by your Highness. As it is properly the Life of an Hero, whom you your self have encountred with his Sci∣mitar in his hand; an Hero whose Victorious Course was then stop∣ped by your assistance, when our brave French gave that famous Defeat to the Grand Visier near the River Raab; the place where you gave so many signal marks of that extraordinary Valour, which is essential to the Character of your Illustrious Family, and he∣reditary to all that bear your Name; to whom, Sir, should I inscribe this Book but to your self, either upon the point of glo∣ry or protection? To sum up the number of your Ancestors, whose great Actions fill the best pages
of our History; to present you with your Pedigree, or the pour∣traits of so many Princes who have made your very Name immor∣tal; to insist upon those that bear it now, and by their own merit, and the great Charges they pos∣sess, are so considerable; that in your Highness and your Bro∣thers, one may behold all that is high, and exalted in France; to say that in your Family those Dignities are at present united, which never met in any Kings Reign before, as the Office of Great Chamberlain, Great Almoner of France, and Colonel of the Light Horse. I am not, Sir, now to learn, that these are Truths would offend your Modesty, and that it is peculiar to your House to reject all praises, how just so∣ever.
This is the reason that makes me sparing upon this sub∣ject; and to content my self with this humble profession, that I am with all respect, and venera∣tion, as I ought to be, SIR, Your Highnesses most Humble and Obedient Servant, De Chassepol.
To my GOVERNESS. THere needs no more to declare to all the World who you are, when I shall tell them, that it is to the most Religious, and vertuous; the most discreet, and the most charming of your Sex: to speak less, were to injure your Merits, as well as my Iudgment; to say more (and name you) were to undervalue the discern∣ment of all who know what perfection is, and where all the Graces which are scattered amongst other Ladies of Quality are assembled in one. I made choice of this piece (whilst I was lately at Paris) to divert my Go∣verness with; because the Truth and Dignity of the Historical Part (which you more affect) may commute for the Trifles of the Romantick (which you less
regard) and have rendered it English, not because you are unac∣quainted with the Original (who are Mistress of the most polished Langua∣ges) but to give you some account of the instructions I acknowledge to have received from you, how I should em∣ploy the less serious moments of my Time, as well as the most studious, and recollected. I had but to imi∣tate your example, to pay at once my duty to God, my self, and all the world. This is the express Character of my Governess, the account her Pupil thinks fit to give of his attempt, and of the veneration he bears Philothea.
THE HISTORY of the Grand VISIERS. The First Book. History of Sultan Amurath the Fourth. AMurath the Fourth of that name, Emperor of the Turks, had no sooner put an end to the differences that were between him, and Vladislaus the great King of Poland, but he immediately resolved to execute his long intended design of recovering the City of Ba∣bylon, vulgarly called Bagdet. Pekier Bassa, the better to shelter himself from Amurath, had delivered it to the King of Persia. The importance
of this enterprise was such, as made the Sultan think his own presence necessary to accomplish it. There∣fore to reestablish that glory which his Arms had lost under the Con∣duct of his Generals, he took the field at the head of three hundred thousand men, with such expedition, that he prevented the Sophy, and forced him to retire after he had for∣tified some places, which were not before in a condition to make any resistance. Tauris was the first place that presumed to withstand the Sultan; and it was so vigorously defended, that it provok'd him after he had taken it, to rase it, and plough up its very Foundations, thereby to strike terror into other places which he de∣signed to attack; from thence he march'd to Revan, where the Go∣vernor brought him the Keys, and came over to his side. Being thus possessed of this place, he turned all his Forces against Babylon, which he besieged and plied so furiously that at two and fifty days end, he carried it, after four of the bloudiest Assaults
that were ever made. The Pillage of it he bestowed on his Souldiers, com∣manding them to put all to the Sword without regard of Age, or Sex. Not satisfied with this advantage, he ex∣tended his Conquests over divers Provinces, wasting all the Country through which he past, and nothing being able to satiate his desire of re∣venge but the defeat of the Sophy, he staid not to attend his coming, but advanc'd to find him out, and offer him Battle; which the Persian Monarch thought not fit to hazard against the Victorious Ottoman, but retreated to the remotest Mountains of his Em∣pire: from whence, the Grand Signior, seeing he could not draw him by open force, he resolved to send him a challenge, by which he let him know, that setting apart the consideration of those great advantages he might certainly promise himself from so powerful an Army, (which was suf∣ficient to subdue all Persia,) he was ready by a private Combate to ter∣minate their antient quarrel, and the War which had so long ingaged both
Nations. The Sophy to free himself from the Obligation of answering it, made as if he had not received this challenge; and dispatched a Cham or Persian Prince, to make overtures of Peace to Amurath: Who perceiving his Troops to be much harrassed, to give them some repose, consented to inter∣rupt the course of his Victories, and hearkned to the Propositions of the Sophy, leaving his Grand Visier be∣hind him to conclude the Peace, whilest he himself retired to Damas: where, till the season was fit to re∣turn into Europe, he refreshed himself after the oils of War, in the Arms of a charming Persian Lady, who far out-shined all his other Favorites. This beautiful Persian, was Sister to Emir Gumer, who to obtain the Grand Signiors Favor, when he basely sur∣rendered Revan to him, presented him also with his Sister Rachima. The effect which her Charms had on the Sultans Heart, made the Sultaness Roxana, who had followed him to the Persian War, extremely Jealous. This Princess was not wont to suffer
a Rival; her Reign had been long and uncontrolled, and she had often sent the finest Women in the Seraglio into the other World, so soon as she was informed that they indeavoured to seduce her Gallant. Amurath be∣ing acquainted with, and fearing her humor, to prevent her resentment, and free himself from her importu∣nate Jealousie, sent her away before him to Constantinople; where all the extraordinary Honors that were paid her, were not sufficient to ballance her vexation for being supplanted by another; but not being able to re∣venge her self on her Rival, she re∣solved to fall upon those who re∣joyced at her disgrace. Her Jealousie, and cruelty made her formidable to all the World; but none had more reason to mistrust her than the Grand Signiors Brothers Bajazet, Orcan, and Ibrahim, the two first, (whose Valor equall'd their Birth) were tired with her persecutions: they knew her to be the cause that their Brother kept them in Prison, and how she had done her utmost to destroy them, that none
might remain to dispute the Empire with her own Son. The fear of death which threatned them, had hitherto kept them from shewing themselves justly sensible of the wrongs which the Sultana Valide their Mother, and the Princesses their Sisters had suf∣fered at her hands; but having learnt that she had lost much of Amuraths esteem, they laid aside their former moderation, and began openly to complain of Roxana; who was so in∣raged at it, that she vow'd their ruin, to let her Enemies see that her Authori∣ty was not at all diminished, and that none should go unpunished who offen∣ded her, nothing was left undone that might conduce to the accomplish∣ment of her design. By fair promises she gained the Caimacan or Lieutenant to the Grand Visier, (to whom the Sultan had left the charge of his two Brothers,) to act without acquainting Amurath, left that should discover her Treason. She counterfeited Let∣ters which assured him that these Princes had intelligence with their Brothers Enemies, and after she had
prepared all things necessary to justi∣fie what she was about to do, she pro∣duced a false Order of the Sultans, and was so cruel as to go herself (at∣tended by the Executioners,) to tell the unfortunate Princes that she sa∣crificed them to her own hatred ra∣ther than to the interest of Amurath. Bajazet after he had reproached her with all her crimes, and given her thanks for taking away that life which he could not imploy in de∣stroying her, submitted to the Mutes who came to strangle him. Orcan was not so patient; for without upbraiding her, he stood upon his Guard, and having slain two, disabled two more from having any hand in his death, which he was forced to undergo at last as well as his Brother. The Murder of these two Princes caused an universal sorrow, and con∣sternation; their Courage had given the World great hopes, and their death so inflamed the People against the Sultana, that had not the Grand Signior arrived, they had torn her out of the Seraglio, and made her a
victim to the Public hate. Amurath was received in Triumph, with more magnificence than was ever afforded any of his Predecessors, after their most Signal Victories. He had left Rachima at Damas, which made Roxana believe that she was not quite blotted out of his Heart, and that she should soon recover her ground. To this end she made it her whole business to ap∣pear more charming in his Eyes, be∣sides she brought him to thank her for the death of his Brothers, as an ex∣traordinary service, by which she had diverted the dangers that threatened his Person, and Empire. She had indeed a greater Ascendent over Amurath than she could hope for, and found it no difficult matter, to rekindle in him all those flames, which the fair Rachima seemed to have extinguished. He now heaped new favours on her, and abandoned himself to such excess of Love, as proved fatal to one of the Princesses, his Sister. As she came one day to cast herself at his Feet to complain of Roxanas injurious carriage towards
her, and of the unjust death of her two Brothers, he was so inraged at her, that with a Battle-ax which he held in his hand, he gave her a blow on the head, of which the Young Princess died on the place. Roxanas hatred was not satisfied with this Murther, she would have added that of the Grand Visiers Achomat, because he was of the Sultana Valides party, of whose Authority she was Jealous. Be∣sides the intention she had of putting the Caimacan who was wholy her crea∣ture, into his place, she found means to render him criminal, by accusing him of being acquainted with, and favouring the designs of the Princes. This was enough to ruin him, but the fall of this great Favourites head, made such a noise, that it awakened all the Grandees of the Empire; they complained loudly of the injustices which the Great Sultana made the Emperor every day commit; they ript up all the Murders she had been guilty of, and caused the Mufty in behalf of the Public, to complain of her to Amurath. He had no sooner
begun to acquit himself of his dan∣gerous Commission, but the Sultana Kiozem Amuraths Mother came and presented her self to him, together with a Slave whom she brought to discover the Plot, that Roxana had formed against her Life. The Sultan at first would believe nothing, but the Eunuch whose remorse had made him acquaint the Sultana Valide with what was contrived against her, pro∣tested so earnestly that after he had discharged his Conscience of those secrets which filled him with horror, he was not afraid to die, that at last Amurath was convinced. Roxana was sent for to answer to the crimes that were laid to her charge, which she did with so much Pride and Disdain, that not being able longer to defer her punishment, by burying his Poynard in her heart, he endeavoured with his own hand to repair all those ills she had been the cause of. She was three and twenty years old, and was thought the handsomest woman that ever came into the Seraglio. Her Picture that
Amurath ordered to be Drawn in the first transports of his Passion, which he always kept in his Closet, shews her to have been an accomplished Beauty. She was tall and well shaped, her Min was noble, and her Gate becoming, her Hair of a fair light Brown, the turn of her Face was Oval, her Complexion was very Clear and Smooth, her Eyes full and sparkling, her Nose well made, her Mouth little, her Lips Vermillion, her Teeth good and well set, her Chin was proportion'd to the rest of her Face, her Neck perfectly well shaped, with very pret∣ty Hands, her Physiognomy was pro∣mising: There was such an air of Majesty throughout her whole Per∣son, as drew the admiration of all the World; but with this she had Vices that rendered her insupporta∣ble: she was so cruel as to sacrifice all things to her Ambition and Jea∣lousie; she delighted in Treachery and Revenge, and certainly she was the most Proud and Inhuman Prin∣cess that ever liv'd.
Amurath, having by the death of this Favourite appeased the mur∣murs of his People, resolved to keep himself from being so strongly in∣gaged for the future; but all his Passions were violent; he now want∣ed imployment, had no Wars to busie himself in, and the remembrance of his past cruelties stung him continu∣ally. Every one endeavoured to drive away his deep melancholly, which was looked upon as dangerous, by entertaining him with pleasures and diversions. The Empire never in∣joyed a greater Calm, and nothing was thought of in Constantinople but feasting and rejoycing. The Grand Signiors Court since the Peace con∣cluded with the Persian, was crowded with idle Officers, who waited there in expectation of some recompence for their Services. Mahomet Coprogli Pacha was one of this number,The Original of Mahomet Coprogli. his Fa∣ther was named Co∣progly, whom some af∣firmed to be the Son of a Mariner, o∣thers of a Gentleman, who by some
concerns of his Family, being obliged to quit France, and settle himself in Italy, was in his Voyage thither assaulted, and slain by a Turkish Pi∣rate, by whom his Son then about ten or twelve years old, was made a Slave, and carried into Cyprus. The Bassa Barac Bey, Governour of this Island, taking notice of the gallant Spirit of young Coprogli and his incli∣nation to Arms, Educated him with great care, and when he went to the Persian War took him along with him, where he behaved himself so well, that he obtained a Timariots Place for him of the Emperor Achmet, and another very considerable charge in the Army, in which afterwards his Son Mahomet Coprogli, notwithstand∣ing his youth and the contrary cu∣stom of the Turks, succeeded him: He acquitted himself in his imployment with great reputation, and by his merit and good Min, advantageously maintained that Credit which his Valor had gained in the War. Though he had been all his Life time in the Camp, yet he had con∣tracted
none of that Rudeness and Barbarity which is commonly ap∣parent in the Carriage and Man∣ners of Souldiers; but was as refined, as if he had never been absent from the Court, whose Maxims he was per∣fectly acquainted with, and was a better Politician than those that sate at the Helm. This made him be∣think himself of getting some power∣ful Patron who might advance him in the Grand Signiors Favor, not being ignorant, that the most deser∣ving Courtiers make no Progress without such a Protector at their Ma∣sters Elbow. His insinuation and good humor soon gained him the esteem, and friendship of the great men; more particularly of the Kisler Agasi named Vglan Chief of the Eunuchs in the Seraglio, and Prime Mini∣ster and Confident of the Grand Signiors secret Pleasures. This Eu∣nuch was so favorable to Ma∣homet Coprogli, that he promised to second him in all occasions that might serve to raise his Fortune. He was a man of great address, had long
experience in all the Intrigues of the Court in which he was grown old, and had obtained this honora∣ble Station by extraordinary Merit. From him Mahomet Coprogli received Precepts how to behave himself, which were very serviceable in the raifing him to that preferment which he soon after arrived to. He disco∣vered to him the most secret privacies of the Seraglio and the Court; instru∣cted him in the humor and inclina∣tions of the Emperor, and told him the best means to obtain his good Graces, concealing nothing which might perfectly instruct him in all the interests of the Great Families of the Empire, and the Grand Sig∣niors Favorites. Coprogli knew well enough how to make his advantage of the informations of this crafty Aga. He began to put them in practice by compliance and submission to the Bassas, and all those who were near the Sultan. He was ever of the number of those with whom the Emperor diverted himself; the desire he had to please him made him use
a thousand little arts, and he pro∣ved so successful, that Amurath began to distinguish him from the crowd, and to look kindly upon him; which soon made the Courtiers jealous of him. Envy is a Vice inseparable from the Favor of Princes, render∣ing those hated whom they honor with their Friendship. Coprogli quick∣ly found the truth of this: Those whose esteem he had purchased by his Civility, and obliging conver∣sation before he was known to the Sultan, no sooner perceived the good reception he met with, but they openly declared themselves his Ene∣mies, and endeavoured all they could to overthrow the Foundation of his growing Fortune: but he having foreseen this alteration, had armed himself with Constancy against their persecutions. He behaved himself so wisely, that Envy herself had no∣thing to charge him withal, yet though he was prudent enough to avoid all the traps the Courtiers laid for him, he could not preserve himself from falling into the very
first snares of Love. One day Amu∣rath having (as he was often wont to do) made a debauch with his principal Favourites, he took a fancy to walk in the Gardens of the Seraglio, and as an extraordinary favour to let them go in along with him. When the Sultan walks in these Gardens, it is ordinarily with a design to favour some Sultana; and when he passes by the Ladies apartment, they use to throw Flowers to him, and send him Fruits, and Works of their own ma∣king, to deserve his kindness. They send these Presents commonly by young Slaves, or Odalisques, who forget not to inform him of their Mi∣stresses Name and Beauty. Amurath chose to walk in a Terrass, which ran along by the Seraglio of the Sultana's, and ended in a Cabinet that looked on the Sea. This place he had built at his return from the Persian War, to riot in with the more freedom. Hi∣ther he often came with his Migni∣ons, and that Persian Lord Gumer, who to avoid the punishment due to his Treason, had followed him to
Constantinople. This man was one of the most exquisite debauchées of his time; he had found the way to gain the Grand Signior's affection, by teach∣ing him to drink Wine, and a thou∣sand other excesses not fit to be na∣med. He entertained and discoursed with the Sultan, while he passed un∣der the Balconies, where he saw se∣veral Sultana's. It may be the good humour he was then in made him go by them, to shew them to his Favou∣rites; or perhaps, not having had any commerce with the Ladies since the death of Roxana, he began to be wea∣ry of living so reserved from the fair Sex, and had a mind to let the Sultanas know, that he had not resolved to deprive himself for ever of those sweets which he might taste in their company. Whatever it was, he was not displeased to see himself accosted by a young slave, who presented him with a basket of Fruit from a fair one he had not yet seen. This mes∣sage did no less surprise him than the Fruits, which were some of them na∣tural, others artificial; so well coun∣terfeited,
that they were hard to be distinguished. While Amurath was busied in choosing the Fruit, Mahomet Coprogli who stood behind him, was considering the beauty of the slave who brought it: he was naturally more gallant than ordinarily those of his Nation are, and seeing the Sultan taken up with the admiration of the Fruits, and the Courtiers earnestly commending the Lady who sent them, he thought he had a fit oppor∣tunity to let the young slave know what he thought of her beauty. But he not being the only man in the com∣pany who had discerning eyes, the charms of Fatima (so was the young Odalisque called) had made an im∣pression on more hearts than his. He had hardly time to speak some few words to her, but, he was inter∣rupted by Zelim Achmet, one of the Grand Signiors Favourites. This im∣patient fierce man addressed himself to Fatima more calmly then was otherwise natural to him, and seeing her eyes fixed on Coprogli, whose ex∣pressions without doubt she was not
displeased to hear, he could not hin∣der himself from shewing his distaste, and looking scornfully on a man whom he already apprehended as his Rival. The presence of the Grand Signior, and the consideration of the place where he was, kept Mahomet Coprogli from answering the fierceness of Zelim Achmet with actions, and looks as disdainful as his own. Re∣spect at present mastered his resent∣ment, which would have broke out in another place, notwithstanding the splendid fortune of this Favourite. However to revenge himself in some sort he kept as near Fatime as he could, to hinder Zelim from having an op∣portunity of declaring his passion to her. The difficulty of seeing women in Turky, and above all, those who are shut up in the Seraglio, causes Love not to be so tedious there as in other places where one must sigh a long time before one can make a formal discovery of it. Therefore Zelim Ach∣met for fear of wanting another op∣portunity, thought it not fit any lon∣ger to delay speaking to Fatima: Fair
Odalisque, said he to her, if your heart be as cruel as your face is charming, the sight of you would make me despair, not being able to look on you without loving you, or love you without a desire to please you. Mahomet Coprogli could not hear this declaration without regret. He cast his eyes languishingly on Fa∣tima, who at the same time turning hers towards him, could not help let∣ting him perceive that his comple∣ment had touched her more sensibly than that of Zelim; and she had al∣ready opened her mouth, to give him doubtless a favourable answer, when the Emperour, who heard them speak∣ing behind him, turned about to min∣gle in the conversation; the subject of which he soon found out by look∣ing on the young Odalisque, and con∣sidering her face more attentively than he had done before. Amurath, who setting a side his cru∣elty and avarice, had all the excel∣lent qualities that can be desired in a Prince, was also infinitely gallant; he continued the good humour he was
in, that he might not interrupt the conversation of Zelim and Coprogli with Fatima. For all that I see, (said he to the two Courtiers) your judgment is very good, and I can∣not blame you for being so earnest to gain the friendship of this lovely Odalisque. I my self, continued he laughing, am beholding to your gallantry for having made me take notice of her merit; but were you not disputing with her to know whether her Mistresses beauty e∣quals hers? I'le clear that doubt to day, added he, addressing himself to Fatima, and I will see if the fair unknown who sent you hither, has charms enough of her own, not to mistrust yours. The young Slave answered what he said with so much wit, that he was wholly ravished: but the joy that he shewed, exceed∣ingly disturbed Zelim, and Coprogli, who began to be Rivals, and already looked on one another as such. They fear'd lest the Grand Signior should rob them of Fatima, otherwise they might reasonably enough pretend to her, as
being one of those slaves that wait on the Sultanas, and that are ordinarily matched to the great ones of the Port, who marry them that they may gain the favour of the Sultanas. Mahomet Coprogli was deserving enough to ob∣tain Fatima, but the power of Zelim Achmet made him despair; he knew his love, and fear'd, not without good reason, lest he should make use of his credit with the Sultan, to deprive him of his Mistress: so that jealousie and fear seized on his soul almost as soon as love, The confusion he was in made him resolve to discover his pas∣sion to the great Eunuch, and implore his assistance, who promised him to have a care of his interests as well with his Master, as his Mistress, and was as good as his word. The Sultana Valide, Amurath's Mo∣ther, and the Kislar Agasi who were the two powerfullest persons in the Seraglio, were very good friends ever since the death of cruel Roxana. They had plotted between them to furnish the Sultan with a new Favou∣rite, who being beholden to them for
her greatness, should be obliged to espouse all their interests. The Eu∣nuch Vglan had undertaken to choose a fair one that should be proper for their design; he had cast his eyes on Zaime, a young woman that came to the Seraglio in the absence of Amu∣rath, she was recommended to him by the Bassa of the Sea, who had taken her away upon the Coasts of Circassia. Her beauty and her wit render'd her worthy of the place she was destin'd to; and Nature had made her so sur∣prising that she needed no body to speak in her behalf. The Sultana Valide, and the Kislar Agasi made no question but that she would infinitely please Amurath; to which end they agreed together what means they should use to captivate the Grand Sig∣niors mind, who seemed to have no more inclination to love. They ac∣quainted Zaime that they intended to make her great Sultana, and to ingage her the more to be greateful, exagge∣rated the beauty and merit of many others, before whom they preferred her. Then they instructed her what
she should do to get the Sultan's good opinion, and perswaded her to send him some of her own Works, which were done with a great deal of Art, to make him desire to know her. Zaime waited for an opportunity to execute what they had contrived, being in∣formed that the Emperor was in the Gardens of the Seraglio. She chose the time when he was walking on the Terrace we spoke of, to send him her Present, which she had disposed in little baskets of her own working. She gave this imployment to Fatima, whom she chiefly esteemed; but ne∣ver thought that Amurath would have found her so handsome as to fall in love with her: if she had made this reflection, she would not have hazar∣ded a conquest, the whole glory of which she intended to reserve to her self. Truly Zaime had need of all her charms to efface the impression which Fatima had made in the Sultans heart, whom she wholly possest so at first sight, that she had no leisure so much as to think of the Odalisque; and in a short time she rendred her self more
absolute over his will, than ever the crafty Roxana had been; but she made better use of her power, and forgot not that she owed it all to the great Eunuch, being impatient till she had testified her acknowledgments to him, when he came to recommend the inte∣rests of Mahomet Coprogli to her, desi∣ring her to beg the Government of Baruth for him of the Emperour. This Government is very consider∣able, it was sought for by many Cour∣tiers and Officers; but Zaime who had a mind to oblige Vglan, spoke so sea∣sonably to Amurath, that she obtained it for Coprogli before all other Compe∣titors, even Zelim Achmet himself, to whom the Sultan had promised it. She immediately got his Commission drawn, which she put into the great Eunuchs hands, withal assuring him that this was the least Grace he could ask of her; that she would make no other advantage of her power but to serve him; and that since he was kind to Coprogli she would take care of his Fortune. The Eunuch who re∣ceived these marks of her goodness,
with a great many submissions, and thanks, would no longer defer the ac∣complishment of Coprogli's happiness. He told the Princess Zaime that he was infinitely sensible of what she had done for him, but that since by an ex∣cess of generosity, she was pleased not only to load him with her bene∣fits, but to extend them also to his friends; he beseeched her to pity the love of Coprogli, who as soon as he first saw Fatima, became desperately in love with her. This slave was very dear to Zaime, and the proposition of the Kislar Agazi surprised her at first: she could not bestow Fatima on his friend without parting with her for ever. This separation seemed very difficult to her, and she could have wished that Vglan to whom she could refuse nothing, had desired any thing else of her; but the great Eunuch who had undertaken to render Maho∣met Caprogli happy, resolved to finish what he had begun, and at last pre∣vailed so far upon her, that she had no power to deny his request. Go Vglan said she to the Eunuch, go tell
your friend, that he is beholden to you for a favour, which none but you could have obtained of me. The Kislar Agazi did what became him on this occasion, and reiterated all the protestations he had before made of being faithful to her as long as he li∣ved. His place puts him in a conditi∣on of obliging or disobliging the Grand Signiors Mistresses, which makes them have the more respect for the chief of the Eunuchs who govern their Seraglio. He was no sooner as∣sured of Coprogli's felicity, but he sent for him to tell him the good news, who notwithstanding what he knew of the Eunuchs power, could hardly be perswaded that in so short a time he had been so successful, as to satis∣fie both his ambition and his love. But at last being possest of Fatima, and Vglan having given him his Commis∣sion for his Government, he thought of nothing beside the enjoyment of his good Fortune, which by the protecti∣on of the Sultana, and the friendship of the Kislar Agazi seemed to be firm∣ly established. But when he was ready
to go and take possession of his Go∣vernment, he saw himself exposed to the cruel persecutions of Zelim Ach∣met. This formidable Rival was not able to see his Mistress, and the Go∣vernment of Baruth to fall to Copro∣gli's share, without being jealous even to fury. He could not indure a preference that made him almost desperate, he presumed much on his own merit, on the Sultans favour to him, and on the authority of his Uncle Ragep Bassa, who had succeeded in the charge of Grand Visier, after the death of Acho∣mat; so that Coprogli was to expect all the ill offices that a private man can receive from a great Minister, and a Favourite who has his Princes ear: but yet having the Sultana on his side, he believed her able to protect him against his enemies: And he was so confident of this, that without taking any other measures, he parted from Constantinople with the fair Fatima, to go and take possession of his Govern∣ment of Baruth. He exercised his charge with so much integrity, that
he deserved the adoration of the peo∣ple. But who can be innocent when merit it self is an offence? The Grand Visier Ragep was wholly swayed by his Nephew Achmet, who could not digest the affront which he pretended he had received from Mahomet Coprogli, and was not satisfied with the Govern∣ment of Syria, which the Grand Signior had given him to comfort him for missing that of Baruth. This insolent Favourite projected the ruine of Co∣progli; but seeing that the Sultana Zaime protected him, policy kept him from declaring himself openly against him, for fear of displeasing the Emperour who adored Zaime. He knew Amuraths humour perfectly well, and saw plain∣ly that to oppose his love, was the way to ruine himself; therefore not to hazard any thing, he contain'd himself in expectation of some more favourable opportunity of revenge: and time had afforded him means, if the authority of the Grand Visier his Uncle had continued. Heaven which is weary of the injustice of the wicked, could no longer bear with those of
Ragep Bassa, but destroyed him to pre∣serve the innocent, who were the ob∣jects of his cruelties and treacheries. The jealousie which this Ragep, when he was but a simple Bassa, had hereto∣fore had of Emir Ticcardin Prince of Drus, whom the chance of War had made a Prisoner at Constantinople, after the loss of his Children, his Estate, and Treasures, made him now afresh persecute him with calumnies, and engage the Mufti and Religion against him, that he might oblige the Sultan to behead the Emir, who derived himself from Godfrey of Bouillon, King of Ierusalem, and was the Protector of the Christians, and Franks in the Eastern Provinces. He had counsel∣led Amurath to put to death Camtemir King of the petty Tartars, whom he had brought to Constantinople, under pretence of making his peace with the Great Cham of Tartary, who had corrupted him with Bribes. At last he had conspired to depose the Grand Sig∣nior, and set up his Brother Ibrahim in his place, So that the Sultan being in∣formed of the treasons of this first
Minister, who was the Author of all the Confusions in the State: he cau∣sed him to be strangled, and by his death prevented the destruction of many of the Grandees of the Port, whom he would have sacrificed to his ambition. This disgrace forced Ze∣lim Achmet to let Coprogli be quiet for some time. In the mean time Amurath, who had ended the Persian War, and calmed the troubles of his Empire, abandon∣ed himself to the delights of the Se∣raglio. But Death which had spared him in Armies where he was exposed to the greatest dangers, surprized him in the midst of his pleasures; for in the Beyran, which is the Turks Easter, at which time they are wont to be very merry, the better to forget the auste∣rity of their Ramazan, or Lent. The Sul∣tan made a debauch with the Selich∣tar, Cham Gumar, Machut, and Iarzai, two other Persians, in which he drank so excessively of Malvasie, and Ros∣solis, that he inflamed his bowels, and fell into a burning Feaver, of which he died a few days after. Several
Diseases, had taken away all his Children, and his cruelty had put all his Brothers to death, except Ibrahim, whom he thought incapable of reign∣ing. While he was sick, he asked of∣ten to see him, intending as some be∣lieve, to have had him strangled, that he might leave none of his Blood be∣hind him, but what should be born of Zaime, whom he knew to be with child. He had named Rahim Chiras, Cham of the petty Tartars to be his Successor, and had made a secret a∣greement with him, that in case Zaime should be brought to bed of a Son, he should resign the Empire to him. But the Divan ordained otherwise, and the Sultana Valide had no sooner closed his eyes but she went to take Ibrahim out of Prison. This Prince made some difficulty at the proposition which the Sultana his Mother, the Mufti, the Visiers and Bassa's made him of ascend∣ing the Throne; believing it to be a design to surprize him, and continu∣ed to counterfeit himself mad, as he had done till then, by the advice of the Eunuch Zomboul his Governour,
who had taught him this way to a∣void the cruelty of his Brother Amu∣rath; but when he saw the Emperors dead body, he convinced them that he had concealed his Reason to pre∣serve his life; and shewed so much judgment, that he at first suprized those who knew the manner of his Education. Ibrahim having taken up the reins of the Ottoman Empire, began his Reign with such Justice and Clemen∣cy, as seemed to give the people an undoubted assurance of an happy Go∣vernment. The first Commandment he gave was to Mustapha his Grand Vi∣sier, who had succeeded Ragep, That he should put no man to death, unless he were convict of so enormous a Crime, that he could not be pardoned without committing a greater. This Prince was extremely good natur'd, as might be seen by the lineaments of his face: he had a ruddy Complexi∣on, a broad Forehead, his Limbs well set, but his Behaviour was very silly, and innocent, proceeding from his obscure Education, which had quite
changed the vigor of his mind and health, so that it was feared he could have no children. This made the Sul∣tana his Mother have a great care of the Sultana Zaime, whom she knew to be with child. Zaime who loved the Sultana Valide as her own Mother, had discovered it to her; and the subtil Sultana Kiozem Ibrahim's Mother not believing he would leave a Son be∣hind him, would not suffer Zaime to retire into the old Seraglio, where the Sultanas of the deceased Grand Signiors shut themselves up. She fancied it would be no hard matter to perswade Ibrahim to love her: Zaime was young, her great belly appeared not, and no body knew of it; nor was it difficult to make him believe that the Child she should be brought to bed of was his own: but there was no need of all this contrivance, for Ibrahim who never knew what love was, was so well satisfied with Zaime, that exa∣mining no farther, he abandon'd him∣self wholly to the enjoyment of her: yet afterwards not contented with the delights he found in this Princess,
who had taught him to love; he had a mind to try if another could not as well recommend those pleasures which had so long been unknown to him, and took a liking to an handsome Georgian, well born, and a Christian, who had been taken from her Parents at twelve years old, and brought to the great Seraglio at Constantinople, as a perfect beauty. She had been bred very carefully, having been taught to sing, and play on several Instruments, to accompany her voice, which was admirable: and it was by this that she had attracted Ibrahim. This Prince was a great lover of Musick, both in∣strumental, and vocal. He walked one evening under a Balcony, where the young Bassée, so was the fair Geor∣gian called, sung a Song so passionate, that he would needs know the person that had sung it: but having found by conversing with her, that she had no less Wit than Beauty, he was so charmed, that immediately he threw her his Handkerchief, as a sure pledge of his Love, and a certain token that
she should that very night receive more particular favours. Of all the Passions that Princes are subject to, Love is the most powerful, and may boast of more triumphs than all the rest; and though it is said that fruition diminishes it, that of Ibrahim manifested the contrary, for by the possession of his new Favourite, he became more, and more inflamed: and his kindness increasing every day, contributed to Bassées good Fortune. The next morning she had eight wo∣men, four Eunuchs, and four Cooks added to her train. The Sultan sent her six Baskets full of very rich Presents, with a Cabi∣net stored with many thousand She∣kines, augmenting her allowance pro∣portionably to his kindness; and not thinking this sufficient, he would have her Train as great as that of the Sultana Zaime; so that he gave her more Eunuchs, and made up her num∣ber of women sixteen. He furnished a private Apartment for her with the best Furniture in the Seraglio, where he often did her the honour to eat with
her. The compliant humour of this Fa∣vourite diverted his natural melan∣choly; she would sometimes prevail with him to walk by the Sea-side, and to hunt in the neighbouring Fields. At last the Eunuch Zomboul percei∣ving her to be with Child, he carried the news of it to the Grand Signior, who took a Diamond of a great va∣lue off from his finger to make her a Present of; and not being able lon∣ger to contein his Joy, went him∣self to congratulate her, that she was become the depository of a Pledge so important to the Ottoman Empire: afterwards he visited the Sultana Va∣lide, to rejoyce with her. Zaime was quickly informed of it, and the news had like to have kill'd her; she found her self ready to lie down, which spoiled hers and the Sultana Valide's design. The time having deceived them, there not remaining enough to make Ibrahim believe that he was the Father of her Child. The Sultana Kiosem being one of the most subtle, ingenious Princesses that ever was, would not quite ruine Zaime, whom
she tenderly loved, nor expose a Child of Amurath; for she made no questi∣on, but that Ibrahim when he should come to know the truth, would sa∣crifice Zaime's Child to his own safe∣ty. Therefore she resolved to keep her lying in secret, and to convey the Child out of the Seraglio by some tru∣sty person. They could think of no body fitter to be trusted with so im∣portant a secret than Fatima, who was immediately sent for: She was ready to lie in her self, which served as a pretence for her coming to Constanti∣nople, whither the women of Quality often come to lay their great bellies. She was no sooner arrived, but she fell in labour; and a little while after, the Sultana Zaime was brought to bed of a Daughter, which she put into Fati∣ma's hands, desiring her to have as much care of her, as if she were her own. Fatima acquitted her self ve∣ry handsomely of her Charge, and brought up this Princess in her own house, under the name of Iohaime: She had a Son, who looked on her as his Sister, and was suffered to conti∣nue
in his error a great while, as we shall see hereafter when we come to his History. In the mean time the Sultana Zaime being freed from the apprehensions of her great belly, appeared more beau∣tiful than ever, which had some effect on the Grand Signior; but she could not quite regain him: he was con∣stant in his affection to the Sultana Bas∣sée, whose happiness made all those who pretended to his favour, jealous, and almost desperate. Zaime, whose loss was the greatest, was most afflicted; nor did she neg∣lect any means to destroy her Rival, who alone had banished her out of Ibrahim's heart. The Sultan percei∣ving her jealousie, and knowing her to be newly with Child by him, out of the apprehension he had of her wit and great power, endeavoured to re∣concile her to the Sultana Bassée. The two Sultana's willing to please Ibrahim by their obedience, seemed to have stifled their jealousie, which put the Sultan into such transports of Joy, as nothing could augment but the birth
of two Princes, which the two Rivals almost at the same time were brought to bed of. He now renewed the vow which he had before made of sending one of his Children to Mecha, to give the Prophet Mahomet thanks for the favour which he believed Heaven had bestowed on him by his interces∣sions. But as if the fruitfulness of Zaime and Bassée had distasted him, he took off his affection from them, al∣lowing them only a place in his e∣steem, and ingaged himself in new amours, which manifested the incon∣stancy of his humour. Ever since this Prince had let loose the reins to his Passions, his counterfeit, or natural sweetness degenerated into extreme effeminacy, and a bloody brutality. He began to despise those who ought to have been most dear to him, as the Sultana Valide his Mother, the Mufti, and Zomboul his protector. He put to death his Grand Visier Mustapha Bassa, and Salik Pacha who succeeded him, soon after had the same fate. Cappigi Bassa after the great services he had done him, had no better for∣tune
than the rest; he caused the Ca∣ptain Bassa General of the Sea, to be strangled for answering him freely in an important affair. The Aga of the Ianizaries lost his head for the insolence of the Souldi∣ers, who complained openly of the effeminacy, and cruelty of their Em∣perour. He was so fearful that he would put the most considerable per∣sons of the Empire to death upon the least suspicion. He craftily invited the Cham of the Tartars to Constanti∣nople, and beheaded him for saying, that if his Highness should die with-Children, he should inherit the Otto∣man Empire, which belonged to him of right by Sultan Amurath's Will, the Constitutions of the Empire, and the Laws of the Musulmans. These cruelties made him odious to the Grandees of the Port, and the chief of the Seraglio; of which number were the Sultana Valide, the Eunuch Zomboul, and the Mufti. Several Bas∣sa's revolted, but they were suppres∣sed by Mehemet Bassa of Damas, who was made Grand Visier, though he
could neither write nor read. All the Rebels were deprived of their Go∣vernments; that of Aleppo was given to Mahomet Coprogli, who relinquished that of Baruth, to his sworn enemy Zelim Achmet, who by his Intrigues at the Port had hitherto preserved him∣self. The Ianizaries and Spahies which are the two most considerable orders of the Turkish Militia, raised several tumults one after another, which were quieted again by giving them money. At last the Mufti, the new Grand Vi∣sier, and the principals of the Court, being weary of Ibrahim's cruelty, and ill administration, resolved to rid themselves of him; but fearing lest if he should discover their conspiracy, he would secure himself by the death of his own Children, that he only might survive of his race, and so save himself by the general necessity of the State, because the Turks cannot in∣dure to have any other Emperours but what are of the Ottoman Family. They agreed before they undertook any thing to make sure of his Chil∣dren, or at least to get one of them
out of the Seraglio, whom they might have in their own power. The best expedient they could think of to bring this design about, was to let the Sultan know by the Mufti, that he was indispensably oblig'd to accomplish the vow he had made while he had no children, of sending one of his Sons to Mecha; assuring him that if he delay'd it any longer he would bring the wrath of Heaven upon him, and by declaring himself a transgres∣sor of the Law, might cause an uni∣versal revolt. Ibrahim who was na∣turally very timorous, yielded to the Mufti's perswasions, sticking only at the choice of him whom he ought to send. The voyage being very long, the confidence he had in his Prophet, could not free him from his fear, lest some ill accident should befal the young Pilgrim: he would not ven∣ture his eldest Son by the Sultana Bassée, who was then about three years old, but was more inclined to send Prince Mahomet, then but thirty months old, whom he had by Zaime, who feigned her self to be with child again. She
was not informed of the conspiracy, and knowing the Grand Signiors design, she told him, she would not leave her Son, and that the inconvenience of her great belly would not permit her to accompany him in so dangerous a voyage. Perhaps her jealousie fur∣nished her with this pretence to re∣move her Rival from the Seraglio: on the other side Bassée knowing the con∣spiracy, solicited the Sultan to let her conduct Prince Ottoman his Son to the Temple of their Prophet; alledging that his eldest Son ought to accom∣plish his vow. The extreme care she had to free her Son from the tempest which she saw ready to fall on the Seraglio, and her desire to leave a place where she believed she had been poisoned, made her the more earnest to go, being se∣conded by the Mufti, who assured Ibra∣him that he ought to send the eldest of his children: So that the Sultan be∣ing pressed by such strong arguments, yielded against his will to superstiti∣on, and a Mothers tenderness. He immediately gave order to the Gene∣ral
of the Sea, to equip the strongest Gally he could find. There was one of a prodigious bigness, which was not quite finished. The Captain Bas∣sa sent him word that it would require some time before she could be sit to put to Sea: But Ibrahim who was ex∣tremely importun'd, said, that if she were not ready to sail in four days, his head should pay for his negli∣gence: in the mean while he imploy∣ed the little time prescribed for their departure, in ordering all things ne∣cessary for their voyage, intending they should imbark with the greatest splendor and pomp that had ever been seen. The day assigned being come, the Sultana Bassée who was otherwise in∣disposed, was more sensibly troubled to depart without her dear Confident Zomboul, who had discovered the plot to her, and desired her to provide for her own, and her Sons safety by quit∣ting the Seraglio. This Eunuch had the charge of Ibrahim when he was in prison, and had not only counsell'd him to coun∣terfeit
himself mad, to avoid his Bro∣thers cruelty, (who otherwise would have murdered him with the rest of his Brothers) but he preserved his life when the Emperor commanded him to dispatch him secretly. Yet Sultan Ibrahim was so ingrateful to Zomboul, that after he had put him out of his place of Capi Aga, he often threatned him with death; so that his resentment made him joy with those who conspired his ruine: and foreseeing the approaching revoluti∣on, he was willing to secure his for∣tune by following the young Prince, who in all likelihood would soon come to be Emperour. The Sultana Bassée just before she went away, when she took her leave of the Sultan, cast her self at his feet, with tears in her eyes, to implore the last favour that she should ever ask of him, on which the happiness of her life depended. The Emperor moved by her tears, presently lifted her up, and promised to grant what ever she would request. Sir, said she, I ask Zomboul of you, to accompany me in my voyage. I
know well enough that I shall rob you of a faithful servant; but when you consider it is for the service of your Son, and a Mother afflicted by so cruel a separation, I am perswa∣ded you will not refuse me this last grace. Ibrahim was a little surpri∣zed at this unexpected complement; he could hardly think of parting with a Slave to whom he owed his life, and one whom he believed the most faithful of all his Officers: but he had promised, and that to a person who was dear to him for his Sons sake; therefore he ordered Zomboul to be ready to part the next day, and gave him the general command of the conduct of the voyage. He would have their departure kept secret, to which end about midnight, the Sul∣tana Bassée, Prince Osman her Son, and her Servants being let out at the Gar∣den gate of the Seraglio, the Grand Signior came himself in a disguise to the Sea-side, to give the Sultana, and her Son his last kisses. This Princess answered the Sultan's tenderness in such a manner as would have inspired
the most insensible Soul with love and sorrow, Farewel Sir, said she with a languishing voice, you will never see me more, for I am poisoned by my perfidious Rival. After these words she went abord the Gally, and set sail, leaving Ibrahim in a melan∣choly which continued upon him for many days. Her last words were im∣printed in his Soul, and perhaps he would presently have made Zaime sen∣sible of his displeasure, had he not believed her to be with child, it be∣ing his desire to leave a great many children behind him. This inclined him to wait till after her delivery, to punish her for what she was unjustly accused of. Bassée who it may be had been poisoned by some body else, was vexed to leave her Rival in the Sera∣glio, although she had been promised that she, and her Son Mahomet should be involved in the Grand Signiors ru∣ine. She would rather have had her fall by the Sultans own hand, and this made her defame this Princess, who has given too sublime marks of her virtue, to let the world so much
as suspect her of so base a crime. Those who had conspired the death of Ibrahim, deferred the execution of their design, till Bassée and her Son were arrived at Alexandria; but the Gally which carried them, being met near the Isle of Rhodes by the Gallies of Malta, commanded by Boisbaudran the General of the Gallies of that fra∣ternity, was assaulted, and made a long and a valiant resistance, in which the Aga Zomboul after he had given proofs of an extraordinary courage, and done all that a brave man, and a wise Captain could do on such an oc∣casion, was shot through the body with a Musket bullet, which disabled him from fighting any longer. He caused himself to be carried down to the Sultana's Cabin, where having called the Captains to him, he coun∣selled them to compound with the Enemy: then kissing young Osman's hand, and taking leave of his Mo∣ther, he made them carry him up a∣gain into the fight, where he incou∣raged the Souldiers to the very last. His death disheartned the Turks, so
that the Knights soon became masters of the Vessel; but the Prize cost the Victors dear. General Boisbaudran performing the part of a great Cap∣tain, died of a Musket shot in his breast. Piancourt, great Steward to the Grand Master of Maltha, and Captain of the St. Mary, was slain as he was drawing an arrow out of his hand: and Monsieur d' Albigre a Novice of great hopes, lost his life there, with many more gallant Knights. The great booty was but an inconsiderable recompence for the loss of so many brave men. The Sultana, and the Prince her Son, with their train were conducted to the Isle of Malta;An. 1644. and the news be∣ing brought to Constantinople made the Conspirators defer their enter∣prize. The Grand Signior received the news with inexpressible sorrow, but when he heard that his dear Bassée was dead, his grief grew so excessive that he was almost distracted. He continued several days without speaking to any
body; and upon coming a little to himself, he remembred Bassée's last words at her departure; which plunged him again into his former despair. He commanded Zaime to be brought to him, who apprehending his cruelty, took young Mahomet along with her, who was then look'd upon as heir to the Empire, that she might allay the Fathers fury by the presence of his Son: but he would have revenged himself on the Mo∣ther, and the Son too, if they had not been delivered out of his hands. As soon as he beheld Zaime, he re∣proached her with her treachery, and without hearing her justification, which she was ready to make on her knees: he had thrust his Dagger into her breast, if young Mahomet had not staid his hand, and received the stroke which he intended to have gi∣ven his Mother. Hers and the Childs cries brought the Sultana Valide, and some Officers to the place, who freed them from the danger they were in. The young Prince was hurt above the right eye, where he has yet a great
scar; which a modern Historian im∣putes to the scratch of a Diamond, which Ibrahim had on one day when he gave him a box on the ear. However it was, this action made a great noise in the Seraglio, and alarm'd all the City. Every body thought that the Heir of the Empire was dead; and Ibrahim himself was induced to be∣lieve it by the pains that the Sultana took to publish it, and her making a magnificent Funeral for him, which filled the Seraglio, and the Town with mourning. He was the only man that shewed no sorrow for so deplorable an acci∣dent, which made him more hated than before. He sought to comfort himself for the death of his beloved Sultana, and the taking of his eldest Son, by the furious War which the un∣dertook against Malta. He swore to ruine that famous Island, and to de∣story all the Kinghts that should come into his power: and having learn'd that they were French Knights that took his Gally, he could hardly for∣bear violating the person of the Sieur
de Harley, Count of Cis, then Embas∣sador of France, at the Port, who re∣tired to Pera to escape his fury. He would have massacred all the French in his Dominions, if the Aga of the Eunuchs who was very powerful with him, had not hinder'd him by Re∣monstrances that had very near cost him his life. His cruelty augmenting more and more, fell upon the chief Officers of the Empire. One Hussein whom from a poor Shepherd the Sul∣tan had raised to an eminent conditi∣on, because during his confinement he had diverted him with his Pipe, and Country Songs, feeding his Sheep near the Prison, helped to nourish his brutish passions. The Grand Signior gave credit to none but this man, who being jealous of the authority of the Grandees of the Port, endea∣vour'd to build his reputation on the ruine of their fortune. To this end, he caused Mahomet the Grand Visier to be strangled, for going about to dis∣swade the Grand Signor from the War of Malta, the event of which he judged to be very dangerous. This
wholsom advice was the reason of his death, which was followed by that of Bekir, Captain General of the Sea; but whatsoever is too violent cannot last long. Zelim Achmet, Go∣vernour of Syria, and Baruth, Maho∣met Coprogli's enemy was made Grand Visier by the favour of the Traitor Hussain, who was his particular friend; either made so by presents, or that the sympathy of their ill nature had begot their friendship. Achmet was no sooner raised to this high charge, but he thought of overthrowing all those whose fortune gave him any su∣spicion. He wanted but little of ruin∣ing Valide, and Zaime, by the counsel he gave the Emperour, because they had heretofore thwarted his interest. The Sultan who had resolved what∣soever it cost him to be revenged on the Knights of Malta, seeing himself disswaded from that expedition, that his great preparations might not be fruitless, chose the Isle of Can∣dy and the Dominions of the Vene∣tians to be the object of his venge∣ance, sending all his Forces to the
conquest of the ancient Kingdom of Crete, under the conduct of Mahomet Bassa, who commanded the Land Ar∣my, and of Saffi, who in right of his charge of Captain General of the Sea, which Ibrahim had bestowed on him after the death of Bekir who suc∣ceeded Pial, commanded the Fleet. These Generals attacked Canea, and took it, notwithstanding the vigorous resistance of the Governour Antonio Navario, and the succours which An∣drea Cornaro the General of Candy sent thither, under the Colonels Angeli and Iustiniani, who signalized their address and courage, on this occasi∣on, as they have done on a thousand others. They continued the War three years with great disadvantage, and with such excessive charge, as ex∣hausted Ibrahim's Coffers, without making any great progress; which ei∣ther proceeded from the Venetians cou∣ragious defence, or from the frequent change of the Generals, who out of jealousie, or vanity, acted quite con∣trary to their predecessors.
In the mean time the Army requi∣red continual supplies of necessary provision, and the General Vssain Bas∣sa was very importunate for money to maintain his Troops; which not being sent, he suffered the Janizaries who were in Candy to return to Con∣stantinople to demand their pay, and be relieved by their Companions; who seeing those who came back so ill sa∣tisfied, refused to embarque unless they were paid beforehand, which so provoked the Grand Signior that he threatned the Grand Visier Achmet with the loss of his head, if he did not find money to carry on the War. This base Minister was glad of this absolute order, which was a sufficient pretence for him to lay extraordinary impositi∣ons on the people, and to spoil all those Bassa's and Governours of Pro∣vinces, of their riches, whose power he either suspected, or envied. To this purpose he summoned several of them to give an account to the Trea∣surers of the Exchequer, not forget∣ting Mahomet Coprogli, whom he im∣prisoned, with a great many more, as
innocent as himself. But he set him∣self particularly to persecute him, whom he had now gotten into the snare which he had so long laid for him. He thought he had now met with a lucky opportunity of reveng∣ing the affronts he had received from him, both in his love, and his fortune. He no longer feared the Sultana Zaime, who had ever protected his enemy, a∣gainst whom he had maliciously fo∣mented the Grand Signiors displeasure since the death of the Sultana Bassée; and he already beheld the ruine of unfortunate Mahomet with pleasure: but to accomplish his vengeance he had a mind to make him perish shame∣fully, by accusing him, as well as the rest of the Bassa's and Beys (whom he had imprisoned) of extortion, and ra∣pine. Though Mahomet Coprogli was innocent, his behaviour having al∣ways been unblameable; yet he could not but apprehend so dangerous an enemy, who without doubt would have brought his pernicious design to pass, if he had not been obliged to neglect his revenge, to take care of
his own life, which was odious to all the world. The injustice of this Grand Visier, and the crimes which he com∣mitted every day by sending persons of all ages and conditions to executi∣on, on the least suspicion, and fre∣quently without any other ground, than the satisfaction of his Hatred, and Avarice, or the keeping up of his Authority, were not to be indured. The Grandees of the Empire, the Mufti, and the Sultana Valide her self thought it not fit to defer the perfor∣mance of their design any longer. They foresaw the ruine of the State, if the Government should continue in the hands of such a lewd hairbrain'd Emperor, who committed the Sove∣reign Authority of the powerfullest Empire in the world, to two of the basest Ministers that ever mannaged publick Affairs. They resolved to take away the root of all the mischiefs that threatned them, by depriving an unworthy Prince of his Power, and by punishing the crimes of the Grand Visier Achmet, and the Traytor Hussein. The people, and the Janizaries were
easily brought into the Conspiracy, being both weary of the Tyranny. The people were so oppressed by the Grand Visier, and the Souldiers so pro∣voked for want of their pay, that they offered to set the Seraglio on fire. The Mufti, Who is the chief Priest of the Turkish Law, the Kadileskess who are the Judges, the Visiers and Bassa's who are the Chancellors of State, and Intendents of Provinces, the Aga of the Janizaries, who is Colonel of all the Infantry, the Captain who is Ad∣miral of the Sea, and generally all the principal Officers revolted with one accord. The Sedition was begun by the request which the Mufti made to Ibrahim, in the name of the whole State, to have the Grand Visier Achmet punished. The Sultan provoked by this boldness, commanded his Guard to chastise the Mutineers for making such an impudent proposition; but the Janizaries were too much in∣censed to obey him; which forced him to flie to the Sultana Valide, his Mother, who had fomented the Re∣bellion, that she might revenge the
wrongs she had suffered from her Son by the counsel of the Grand Visier, whom with the Traitor Hussein, Ibra∣him delivered up to the people to be torn in pieces; naming Mahomet a popular man who was threescore and ten years old, to supply his place, not being able to appease the Rebels any other way. But they were not satis∣fied with this, they would have Ibra∣him himself come and render an ac∣count of his actions before the Mufti, who summoned him before the Divan or Consul, by sending a Kadilesker to him, whom the Sultan slighted, and tore the Fetfa, which is a summons to appear before the Judges. This being reiterated in vain, the Mufti, with the Visiers, the Bassa's, and other Officers went to the Seraglio, and took him by force out of his Mothers arms, and carried him to the prison, in which he was brought up; where ten days after he was Strangled,An. 1648. his Son Mahomet who was then about seven years old,Aug. 18. being placed in the Imperial Throne, and
publickly proclaimed Emperor of the Turks, and his Mother Zaime, Regent, during his minority. The Sultana was assisted by a Coun∣cil of twelve Bassa's, who were to de∣liberate with her concerning Affairs of State; in which she was so well ver∣sed, that she soon obtained Authori∣ty enough to make any thing pass in the Divan, which she had resolved in her Closet, and discharged the Grand Visier of a great deal of trouble which she was willing to take upon her self. And not long after, the Visier died, leaving the Sultana at liberty to be∣stow his place on one of her own crea∣tures. However she was forced to use great caution, in the choice of this Minister, Policy instructed her not to raise one that might intrench up∣on her power, or one who by displea∣sing the Grandees, and the People, might render her odious to them both. She had fresh examples before her eyes, of the fatal consequence of such Elections, and of the dangers that the Sultans were exposed to by
the imprudence of their Ministers. Dissimulation is a virtue in Princes; she had already formed her design in her head, nothing remaining but to put it handsomly in execution; to which end, she caused the Divan or Council of State of the Ottoman Em∣pire to be assembled; to which the Mufti, and all the great men of the Port were summoned. She repre∣sented to them that by the death of Mahomet, the Office of the Visier Azem was vacant in a time, that consider∣ing the great Wars he was ingaged in with his most cruel Enemies, more than every required an able and expe∣rienced Minister to support the weak∣ness of the Sultan, who could not in many years be capable of taking care of his Empire himself. She told them that the Treasures were exhausted, and that she had brought them toge∣ther, to take their advice in such pressing necessities: adding, that it was requisite to re-establish the anci∣ent Taxes, without oppressing the people, who had suffered so much in the last Emperors time, that they
must not think of laying new imposts on them. She protested to them that she would wholly resign her self up to their counsel, in the sovereign admi∣nistration which the Divan had con∣ferr'd on her (an honour that had not been done to any Sultana before her) especially since it was composed of persons so well able to govern as they were. At last she concluded her dis∣course with a command to them to give their votes for him whom they thought fittest to be her partner in power, and Lieutenant General of the Empire. She foresaw that by this means she should make the Visiers and Bassa's so jealous of one another, that they would not resolve to choose any particular man, which was the thing she wished; and it fell out according to her expectation: for all those who aspired to the place, being ashamed to ask it, were unwilling to give their votes for another: and when she pressed them to declare themselves, they very submissively desired her to make the choice her self, since what∣ever liberty she had given them of
electing a Grand Visier, yet there could be none but such a one as she should approve; which inclined them rather to deserve her favour by their obedi∣ence. The Grand Sultana who under∣stood their meaning, was glad to see her designs succeed so well. She as∣sured them she would not abuse the trust they reposed in her, and that she would make such a choice as should be to their satisfaction, and to ingage them the more, she told them it was necessary to supply those Govern∣ments which were vacant, and to ex∣amine the accusations of those Bassa's, Beys, and Sangiacks, whom Ibrahim had imprison'd before his death, some for Rapine, others for imbezelling the Publick Treasure, that the innocent might be freed, and the guilty puni∣shed. This was a nice proposition, and sensibly touched those Visiers and Bassa's who protected the prisoners, and had contributed to Ibrahim's de∣struction. But the Sultana was glad to find this means to reproach them with the death of her Husband, and to oblige them to give her some satis∣faction
Since the love of your Country, and the interest of State, said she, caused you to remedy the disorders of the Government, by summoning my Lord, and your Emperour to the Tribunal, you ought to continue your justice to all the world, by relieving the in∣nocent, who indure those pains which are only due to the criminal: and it were of odious example if they should escape that punishment to which you condemned an Empe∣ror who certainly was not faulty, if you think those whose Sentence you defer, innocent. As she said these words, she let fall some tears, which she presently wiped away, for fear of provoking those, whom she intended to mannage to her advantage. She added, That although Sovereigns are above all Laws, and Subjects have no power to call them to an account of their actions, yet the Sul∣tan her Son would forget what was passed, and she would sacrifice all her resentment to the furtherance of that Justice, which she doubted
not but they would render to those who expected it from them. The Sultanas discourse was very sur∣prising to the Visiers, and the Bassa's, who had rather have set the Prison∣ers at liberty, without any farther inquiry. But the Divan was concer∣ned in honour to approve of her ad∣vice, lest they should be thought to exercise their Justice on none but their Princes. Commissioners there∣fore were named to go along with the Nectangi or Secretary of State, and the Tefterdar or Treasurer General of the Revenue, to visit the Prisons. There they found Mahomet Coprogli, who seeing himself among a great many Criminals, had insinuated him∣self so into his companions in misery, that with too much freedom they made him, whom they believed as guilty as themselves, the confident of their crimes: but he did it with de∣sign to make an advantage of their ea∣siness, either of his own accord, or by the command of the Sultana, who made use of this invention as a means to promote him to that dignity which
she intended for him. She knew where his prison was as soon as he was led thither, and Fatima who was very dear to her because of the care she took in the Education of the Princess Iohaime her Daughter, continually so∣licited her to use her Authority in set∣ting her Husband at liberty, which she could not do, being her self in disgrace at that time. However she might have freed him as soon as she was possessed of the Sovereign Power, but it was Coprogli's interest to remain in prison then, when his enlargement would have been fatal to him, because of the Sedition of the Janizaries, who having already murdered some of the chief of the Port, would cer∣tainly have destroyed him to have weaken'd Zaime's party. She esteem∣ed him not only for his Wifes sake, but for his own merit, and left no∣thing undone to preserve him. She secretly disposed the Commissioners to inform themselves particularly of Mahomet Coprogli's case, who behaved himself so well, that every thing seemed to fall out naturally: for when
he had fully justified himself from all the Crimes that were laid to his charge, he demanded with submissi∣on, which yet shewed his courage, and the greatness of his soul, whether his death was decreed. I am ready, said he, to suffer it with patience though my life might perhaps be very useful to the State: wherefore I desire my Judges to lead me to the Sultan before I go to Execution, that I may acquaint him with a secret, which I will discover to none but his Highness, or the Great Sultana. These speeches were reported in full Divan, where the Mufti, the Visiers, and the Bassa's knowing Zaime had a kindness for Coprogli, desired her ear∣nestly, to be just to so brave a man, to hear what he had to say, and to re∣ward his merit. She willing to take the advantage of their zeal, to ac∣complish her design, commanded them to send for that important man who had the applause of the whole Divan. Coprogli, when he came, by his good Min, and eloquence, confirmed the opinion that had been conceived of
him: and the Grand Sultana, after she had inlarged upon the report that had been made her of his virtue and me∣rit, asked him what it was he had to impart to his Highness. And when she had learn'd that it was an infal∣lible expedient to replenish the Grand Signiors Coffers without oppressing the people, or raising new Taxes, she declared him Visier Azem by the au∣thority of the Sultan, and the Divan. The whole Assembly was exceedingly astonished at this, having never so much as dreamt, that Coprogli should have been brought out of prison to be raised to the first charge of the Em∣pire. But the Visiers had consented to it themselves, by the information they had given the Sultana in favour of him whom she named. Every one murmured secretly, though they did not complain; and CoprogliHe receives the Seal of the Empire the 5th. of February, 1649. received from Zaime's hand the golden Box, in which was the Grand Signior's Seal, which it was his Office to keep.
Here was an extraordinary change, Mahomet who a little before was laden with irons, is freed from them to take upon him the Government of the most powerful Empire in the world; and what is more admirable, the alterati∣on of his fortune wrought no change in his manners: he was not at all daz∣led with the splendor of those honours which were heaped on him, but esta∣blished the foundation of his great∣ness by his discretion. He was com∣placent to the Great Men, merciful to the People, and equally just to all, ma∣king it appear that he was truly wor∣thy of his charge, which he began to ex∣ercise by restoring several good Laws, which the late disorders had interru∣pted. He made every one to do his duty, terrifying the Magistrates by the sentence which he pronounced a∣gainst the Bassa's who were left in pri∣son; where while he was their com∣panion, he had dived into their se∣crets, and found none of them in∣nocent. The Crimes they were con∣victed of were of such a nature, as could not be pardoned without great
prejudice to the State. He had given marks of the gentleness of his nature while he was Governour of Baruth and Aleppo, and the people of those Pro∣vinces knew him not to be inclined to bloodshed: but he was now raised to a charge that obliged him to force his inclination. All the Bassa's, Beys, and Sangiacks who were found guilty of Extortion, Rapine, or Treason, were condemned to death. And that the punishment of these Crimes might serve as an example to all the Offi∣cers of the Empire, and a pattern of exact Justice to the Grand Signior. He got into his hands the wealth of the Bassa's, who had been executed, and set up two Tables in the Hall, through which the Sultan was to pass to go to the Devan. On one of them he placed twenty of the principal heads that had been cut off, and covered them with a great mourning Carpet; and on the other he set a great many rich Purses full of Gold and Precious Stones, which was covered with an∣other Carpet, imbroidered with Gold and Pearls; and then waited for the
Sultan and his Mothers coming to the Divan, to shew them this strange spe∣ctacle. The great Sultana presently had a mind to know, to what end those preparations were, and what was under the Carpets; one of which the Prince her Son, without staying for an answer, lifted up, and in a fright asked what those heads did there? Sir, replied Mahomet Copro∣gli, directing his speech to him, they vomit up the blood of your Subjects, which they have sucked from them, and which, continued he lifting up the Carpet, you may see in these Purses: It is fit that Robbers should be punished: those men who have destroyed so many by their cruelty, and avarice, who have robbed so many innocent peo∣ple, are at last stripped themselves, and have rendred that money of which they have defrauded you. This proceeding seemed a little bloody, and made it feared that his admini∣stration would be very severe; but he regulated his actions with so much Justice, that he never put any man
to death, unless he certainly knew that he deserved it. The chief scope of this Grand Vi∣sier was to raise his Princes Authori∣ty, weaken'd of late by the frequent Seditions of the Janizaries, whose insolence he endeavoured to curb for the establishment of his own fortune too. He told them they were unwor∣thy of being inrolled, and receiving pay, if they were not in condition to serve, and ready to obey the Empe∣rors orders. But they instead of be∣ing satisfied with the death of Ibra∣him, thought to take the advantage of Sultan Mahomet's youth; and be∣lieving that the Grand Visier was as weak, and timorous, as his Predeces∣sors, whom they had either murther∣ed or deposed; they slighted his commands, and refused to pass into Candy, alledging that the Janizaries were priviledged from making War by Sea, that they were not to march any where without the Emperor, whom they would not leave, for fear of some innovation against him in their absence. The Sultana Kiozem furni∣shed
them with this pretence, the bet∣ter to compass a design which she had contrived. This Sultana who had still the title of Valide, was Grandmother to Maho∣met the Fourth. She had contributed to the death of her Son Ibrahim, be∣cause he took away the Authority which she had usurped. She fancied that since she had a share in the Go∣vernment, in three Emperors Reigns, she should have been made Regent of the Empire, during her Grandsons minority: but the Grandees of the Port, and the Divan having conferred the Sovereign Power on the Grand Sig∣niors Mother, she was extremely offen∣ded to see the affairs of the Ottoman Empire mannaged by a woman, who owed her fortune and greatness to her. She hoped that Zaime would sur∣render her Authority to her, but this being too unreasonable and improba∣ble a wish to succeed, Ambition which considers the extent of the desires, more than of duty, made her think of revenge. She thought of nothing but how to execute her projects, and de∣spaired
not yet to make her self abso∣lute Mistress of the Empire. To this purpose she imparted her design to the Kislar Agazi, who had always been her confident; but he could not so much as hear her Treason without horror. How Madam, said he to her, in disorder, is it possible that you would destroy a Princess who honours you as her Queen, and re∣spects you as her Mother? could you be so cruel as to kill young Sul∣tan Mahomet, because he is her Son? is he not yours too? does not nature it self speak in his behalf? No, continued he, I will rather lose my life than be an assistant in so foul an enterprise. Well, well, Vglan, re∣plied the malicious Princess (who per∣ceiving how coldly the Eunuch enter∣tained her proposition, bethought her self of counterfeiting repentance, lest he should betray her) endeavour then to restore my Authority, and dispose Zaime to take me along with her in the Regency; my advice will be very advantagious to her, and I will always behave my self like a
good Mother towards her. The Kislar Agazi promised her more than she asked, and swore never to speak of what she had imparted to him; neither had he any time to do it: he spoke with her in the beginning of the night, and the next morning he was found dead in his bed. No body could tell how it came to pass, but since that time it has been discovered, that a Slave whom she had gained, had blown poison into his Nose when he was asleep. The death of this Eu∣nuch was exceedingly deplored by the Great Sultana, who reflected on all the good Offices he had done for her: and she would have been more afflicted if she could have comprehended the greatness of her loss in him who would have done her a more impor∣tant service than ever, if death had not prevented him. The Grand Visier who owed his fortune to him, and looked on him as his Father, was in∣expressibly grieved, and suspected somewhat of the truth, but could not guess at it all. In the mean time the Sultana Valide
lost no time; she had by great promi∣ses ingaged the Aga of the Janizaries to the Aga of the white Eunuchs, the Bostangibachi, the Governour of the Pages, called Ihoglans, who are six hundred of the handsomest young men in the Empire, the Captain General of the Seas, and some of the most considerable Bassa's. She had so disposed every thing, that her design would infallibly have succeeded, if Heaven which takes a particular care of crowned heads, had not put it in∣to the Visier Azems mind to go out of his Seraglio at the beginning of the night, and to pass through the quar∣ters of the Town in disguise, with one Slave only whom he trusted most, to see what the Janizaries did, of whom he had some apprehension, as not be∣ing well affected either to him, or the Emperors service. He was much sur∣prised to find them all in the Hippo∣drome with their Muskets on their shoulders, and their Matches lighted, and Sentinels placed at all avenues. He was presently stopt, his looks be∣trayed his intention of not being
known, but he wanted not courage, and on this occasion manifested the presence of his mind. He asked with a great deal of confidence for Bactas the Aga of the Janizaries, and being led to his Oda, was astonished at his arrogance in not rising to salute him, though he knew him very well; when at another time he would have pro∣strated himself before the Grand Vi∣sier, who never goes to see any body but the Grand Signior, and when he re∣ceives a Visit, never rises to any bo∣dy but the Mufti. However he dis∣sembled his thoughts at present, knowing himself certainly lost if he did not make use of some subtilty to disingage himself from the danger he was in. The Aga in the mean time having made him sit down on his left hand, which is the most honourable place among the Turkish Souldiers, was just going to ask him the cause of his disguise, when Mahomet prevent∣ing him, Bactas, said he, I was in∣formed that you assembled your Troops to night for some great en∣terprise: I received this notice
from the Seraglio, from persons whom you know to be your chiefest friends, and I disguised my self, for fear of being known, to come and learn of you what I should do for your security, and my own. Bactas was struck speechless to hear that the Grand Visier was informed of all the Plot; he easily believed that he was come on purpose to him to endeavour his own preservation: and imagining it would be a great advantage to in∣gage this first Minister in the Conspi∣racy, he examin'd him a little, and then discovered the whole design to him; telling him, that he was to make himself master of the Seraglio, and seize on the young Sultan Maho∣met, whom he would either cause to be strangled, or shut him up in pri∣son with his Mother; that all was agreed on with the Sultana Valide, who was to have the Regency of the Em∣pire in the minority of Prince Soliman, whom they would place on the Throne instead of his Brother Mahomet: and finally, if he had a mind to secure his Authority and his life, he must
necessarily be assistant to this change. The Grand Visier demurred not one minute to give his assent, making as if he had been before informed of all that Bactas told him, and expressed a great deal of satisfaction that it was in his power to serve the Sultana Valide by imbracing her party, which he be∣lieved to be the strongest. Bactas suf∣fered himself to be wheadled by Co∣progli's promises, whom he obliged by Oath to be faithful to the Sultana Kio∣zem, and as a pledge of his faith to deliver his Boult, a Seal ingraven on a Gold Ring, which the Grand Visier always wears on his finger, (as a mark of his Dignity and Power) into his hands: then he sent him away with∣out Guards, to go and assemble the Divan secretly two hours after mid∣night, at which time he was to re∣ceive order from the Sultana Valide to enter the Seraglio with his Janizaries. These insolent Souldiers were resol∣ved on the attempt, and were impa∣tient to begin it, in hopes of rifling the great Wealth, and inestimable Treasures, which so many Emperors
had heaped together in this voluptu∣ous Palace. But heaven which abhors the re∣volt of Subjects against their Princes, so blinded the Commander of the re∣bellious Troops, that he let the Visier Azem escape, by whose order soon after, he and his Complices received the punishment they deserved. Maho∣met Coprogli had no sooner got loose from him, but he went to the Seraglio, where he was amazed to find the Gates open, and most of the Guards besotted with Wine, and Tobacco. Some of them would have stopt him, but he easily avoided that, by telling them that he carried a Letter from Bactas to the Sultan Kiosem. His habit of a Slave protected him, and they were so drunk that they could not dis∣cover him. Being passed them he ran presently to the Apartment of Soli∣man Kislar Agazi, who succeeded the Eunuch Vglan: but not finding him, he went to that of the Grand Signior, by the way meeting with the great Eunuch Soliman, who walked about the Lodgings of the Sultana Valide,
whom he mistrusted. He had that very night found her privately dis∣coursing with the Bostangibachi, and the confusion the sight of him put them into made him watch to avoid surpri∣zes; fearing lest something was con∣trived against the Grand Signior's ser∣vice, to whom he was very faithful. He was no less astonished to see the Visier Azem in that place, at such an unusual hour, than Mahomet Coprogli was to meet him. They presently acquainted one another with what they knew, and suspected, and con∣sulted how to free the Seraglio from the storm that threatned it. They judged it expedient to advertise the Sultan, and the Great Sultana, that they might interpose their Authori∣ty: therefore they went straight to the Grand Signior's Apartment, who slept in his Mothers arms, and made signs to the woman who watched by them, to wake them both; which they did without speaking: it being an inviolable custom among the Turks not to speak, out of respect in the Seraglio in the night time, but
chiefly while the Grand Signior sleeps: and it is a great crime whatsoever the occasion be, to break silence in the place where his Highness reposes. A woman went near the Sultana's Bed, and softly scratching her Feet, waked her, who was surprized to see two men she did not know at first. Ah my Son, said she, rising briskly, and taking him in her arms, we are lost. The young Prince without any fear looked on the Visier, and taking him boldly by the hand, asked him what was the matter, and if he were come to save him. The Grand Visier admiring the Princes Courage, threw himself at his feet, and kissing his hand, told him he need not fear any thing, that the Traitors should do him no mischief, and that his faithful ser∣vants would prevent the Treason. But Madam (continued he, directing his speech the Great Sultana) you must make use of all your prudence to avoid the danger that menaces us all. Then he sent for the Mufti and signed a Catecherif or express order of the Grand Signior, to the Ca∣ptain
Governour of Constantinople to come immediately to his Highness. He caused the Gates of the Seraglio to be shut up, and commanded that none should be let in or out without the Emperors permission. The Captain Bassa being come, he ordered him pre∣sently without noise to advertise the Inhabitants of every quarter that they should arm themselves, and Bar∣ricade the Streets, and seize on the Gates of the Town, that no body might go out. He sent to the chief of the Spahies, Solaquis, and Capighis to come and watch about the Seraglio, and secure the Emperor: five hundred of them presently came, and the Mufti, to heighten their courage by zeal for their Religion, cited several passages of Mahomet's Law, which admonished them, that those who eat the Princes bread, ought to expose their lives for his service. And to make his Harangue more effectual, he distributed some Purses among them, obliging them by Oath to die, if there were occasion in the Sultan's defence. In the mean time the Kislar Agazi had
waked all the Eunuchs, and Officers of the Seraglio, to the very Cook, and made them take Arms. The Pages too were put into the same posture, af∣ter the seizure of the Eunuch their Governour, the Bostangibachi, chief Gardener of the Seraglio, the Capi Aga Captain of the Gates of the Seraglio, and the Aga, or chief of the White Eunuchs, who acknowled all the par∣ticulars of the Conspiracy, and con∣fessed that the Sultana Valide had plot∣ted with the Aga of the Janizaries, and the principal Officers, to depose Mahomet, and Crown his Brother Soli∣man. This Prince was the second of four Sons which Sultan Ibrahim had by three Wives. Mahomet the eldest was the Son of Zaime; Soliman his younger Brother was the Son of the Sultana Maiama; and Bajazet and Orchanes were born of an Albanese. Maiama in hopes of raising her Son Soliman to the Empire, had promised the Sultana Kiozem all the advantages that she could desire, and her extravagant ambition had made her neglect no∣thing that could bring those over to
her party, who might further her en∣terprize. Her chief pretence was, that Mahomet was too weak and un∣healthy to be capable of governing so powerful an Empire: and that be∣sides Zaime was too young and unex∣perienced to supply his defects by her prudent Conduct, and would never be fit for so weighty an employment. That on the contrary, Prince Soliman was strong, handsome, and promising, and would be able to take care of his own Affairs, when she should be for∣ced to leave them to him, by age, and incapacity. Thus had she gained all those we mentioned, who by the in∣credible diligence of the Visier Azem were Arrested, he caused her Apart∣ment to be secured to prevent her es∣cape. The Sultan though very young had so much tenderness for his Grand∣mother, that he could not be brought to sign a Warrant for her Death who intended his: And his Mother was as good natur'd as himself, being of opi∣nion that she should only be imprison∣ed. She reflected on their former friendship, and her generosity out∣weighed
the necessity of her wrong: but her Virtue appeared not only in behalf of the Sultana Kiozem, she was moved with compassion also to her Rival Maiama, who with her Son Soli∣man was to have been punished with the rest of the Conspirators. She obtained their Pardon of the Grand Signior, and the Ministers who would have sacrificed her to his High∣nesses safety: but she was forced to yield to the Remonstrances of the Mufti and other Officers, who con∣vinced her and the Sultan too, that the Sultana Kiozem's Death was absolutely necessary to the good of the State, and quiet of the Empire: so that her Grandson Mahomet was obliged to consent to her death. The Ichoglans, Eunuchs, and some of the Souldiers, out of a brutish zeal, undertook this execution instead of the Mutes, and running tumultuously to the old Sul∣tana's Apartment, they could hardly find her; for hearing she was looked for, she hid her self in a Wardrobe, under the cloaths; from whence they pulled her out by the feet, and
forgetting the Emperour's Orders, who charged them to put her to no pain, they treated her basely without any respect to her Character or age. She in vain endeavoured to stop their insolence by fair words, and offers of great sums of money; for without hearkening to what she said, they drew her by force out of her Chamber, stript her, gave her several blows, and tore her very ears for Pearls of a pro∣digious greatness that hung in them. She strugled a great while with them, defending her self with extraordinary vigour for a woman of her age, but at last with much ado she was stran∣gled. Thus dyed this unhappy Princess, after she had lived fourscore years in the reigns of five Emperors. She was of the Isle of Chios, nobly de∣scended: She had five Sons and two Daughters by Sultan Achmet; Amurath, Osman and Ibrahim sate on the Throne; her two Daughters, with Bajazet and Orchanes died by the hands of Execu∣tioners. She seemed not to be above fifty years old. Her Constitution was wonderful, her great age had abated
very little of her strength, and brought no inconvenience at all along with it. She had still some remains of beauty that shewed her to have been the handsomest woman of her time. Her stature which was the most advanta∣gious in the world, did not incline her to stoop; she was not grown too lean, her gate was steady, her conversation pleasing, her hair very thick, and the change of the colour had taken away very little of its grace. Her forehead was not wrinkled, and her eyes were very lively. Her teeth were still so strong, that she bit off one of his fin∣gers, who went to take away a rich Necklace she had on. She was natu∣rally very neat, her heart was magnifi∣cent, her inclination generous, her soul great, resolute, and constant: she was mistress of a thousand extraordinary qualities, which had rendred her the most admirable person of her Sex, if she had been less cruel and ambitious. These were the two greatest defects that could be imputed to her, which at last deprived her of her honour, and her life. Bactas Aga of the Janizaries,
the Bostangibachi, the Capi Aga, the Captain General of the Sea, the Aga of the White Eunuchs, the first Ca∣pigi, or Captain of the gate of the Se∣raglio, and all the other Officers who were concerned in the Conspiracy, ex∣piated their Crimes, by several kinds of deaths. And the Grand Visiers command to hinder the Criminals from escaping, was so well executed, that none of them could avoid the punishment they had deserved. The Janizaries knew nothing of what had passed till they were disabled from doing any mis∣chief, and were not in a condition to resist the Spahies, who would have fal∣len upon them, and stirred up the peo∣ple to put them to the Sword for their Treason to Ibrahim, and their attempt on Sultan Mahomet; and the Grand Signiors Authority would not have kept them from coming to blows, if the Grand Visier had not with-held the Spahies by giving them money, and as∣suring them that the Sultan was satis∣fied with the punishment of their lea∣ders. After that, he assembled the
Divan, whither all the Grandees of the Port, and Constantinople repaired; to whom he made a fine speech, which he ended with thanking them from the Sultan, and the Great Sultana who were present. All the Assembly an∣swered him with a thousand acclama∣tions of Joy; and nothing was heard all over the City, but, live Sultan Ma∣homet, and the Great Sultana Valide his Mother. This Title which signifies Queen, or Empress, was then con∣ferr'd on her, it being never given to any but the Emperors Mother.
THE HISTORY of the Grand VISIERS. The second Book. AFter that Mahomet Coprogli had thus diverted the dangers that threatned the Sultana, he made it his business to restore the peace of the whole Empire, which had been long disturbed by the tu∣mults of the Janizaries: but knowing their seditious humor, and foreseeing it would be difficult to make them continue the War of Candy, in which they could never succeed, if they un∣dertook it unwillingly: He resolved to desist from that a while, and find them
imployment somewhere else, where they could make no excuse or objecti∣on to keep them from fighting. He took exceptions at the ambitious pro∣jects of Ragotski, Prince of Transylva∣nia, who was fallen out with the King of Poland, in favour of the Swedes, contrary to the orders of the Port, which allowed not that Prince to make any War without its approbation. The Grand Visier chose the most facti∣ous Officers to send with the Janiza∣ries into Transylvania, as well to cha∣stise Ragotski's rashness, as to receive the punishment due to their own dis∣obedience; for he doubted not but that they would meet with a vigorous resistance. This War proved ex∣tremely bloody, and disadvantagious to the Janizaries; they almost all pe∣rished in it either at the siege of Clau∣sembourg, which they were fain to raise after they had lost most of their For∣ces before it; or at the Conquest of Waradin, and the Combats they had with Prince Ragotski; besides those whom the Plague swept away in the Camp, finishing the destruction of
those who survived the War: so that there hardly remained an handful of them to bring the news of their total defeat to Constantinople. The Grand Vi∣sier who hoped for no better success, was satisfied to see his expectation was not deceived. Their arrogance was so much abated that he could not have taken a fuller revenge of them who had been so bold as to undertake to dethrone their Emperor. He deli∣berated a while whether he should re∣establish this Militia or no, which is accounted the best of the Ottoman Em∣pire, whose strength and support it is said to be: And this presumption is the reason of the liberty it so often takes of being seditious. It was in this Ministers power to abolish them; but considering that then the Spahies who take themselves to be the only Gentlemen among the Turks, would grow so potent that they would be no less dangerous to the Emperor and the State. He concluded it would be better to maintain two sorts of Mi∣litia in the Empire, whose emulation and jealousie would keep them in obe∣dience.
Therefore he made a levy of men fit to bear Arms, out of whom he chose fifteen thousand of the best to be Janizaries. These he Discipli∣ned for some time, often taking re∣views of them, and exercising them before the Grand Signior. To accustom them to be obedient, he gave them Captains that were at his devotion, who conducted them into Candia, where he resolved to continue the War, though it was very toilsome, and expensive. The Generals who had been sent to the Conquest of this Island, since the beginning of the War, made use of the command they had over the Army, to raise their au∣thority; so that they would hardly submit to the Port. They pretended at least to be equal to the Grand Visier, whom they no longer looked on as their Superior. The exigency of af∣fairs, and the troubles that hapned in the State, had hindred the Divan from repressing their insolence: But Mahomet Coprogli thought it high time to oppose the growth of an authority that destroyed his, and prevent the
ill consequences which the ambiti∣on of Bassa Delle Vssain, General of the Army in Candia, might have, who took a great deal of state upon him, contemned the Grand Visier, would re∣ceive no orders from the Port but such as pleased him, and used threats when he had not every thing he ask∣ed. He craftily got this proud Gene∣ral to Constantinople, to make a memo∣rable example of him to posterity, and to maintain the honour of his Master, and the authority of his Charge. Vssain Bassa was no sooner arrived at the Port, whither his own presumption, fortified by the Visier Azems splendid promises, had unhap∣pily brought him: but he was thrown into the bottom of a prison, with a great many Christian Officers, whom he had brought along with him in triumph, and whom, swelled with pride and rashness, he still abu∣sed in the Dungeon, where not long after he was strangled before them; which afflicted him more, than death it self. By this exact Justice, Mahomet Co∣progli
kept the Souldiers, and all the Officers of the Empire in obedience. The resolution of this great Minister was admirable, in this bold action, of putting to death so famous, and so im∣portant a man, who thought his Au∣thority secure, and much more his Life; having gained an absolute power over the Souldiers, and enga∣ged the chief of the Empire to his side. But the apprehension of the consequence of this blow, hindred not the Visier Azem from giving it, to prevent the Bassa's intrigues, which must needs have been prejudicial to the Emperor, and his Subjects. He foresaw how much he should expose himself, but his zeal to serve the State, and his Master, made him pass by such considerations, and slight all dangers. He was not at all concer∣ned that his enemies blamed this acti∣on, being certain that those who were of Vssain Bassa's party would impute his death to his jealousie: but he knew that there is no station at Court free from censure, and no behaviour so prudent, as to prevent all accidents,
and that the Ministers of Princes are most exposed to the wounds of envy. This consideration kept him from punishing the chief of the Port, among whom was the Mufti. The Sultana Valide was Regent of the Empire; she knew the fidelity, and wonderful genius of Mahomet Coprogli; she had an intire confidence in him, relied on his care, communicated all things to him, and was not ashamed to testifie her gratitude to him to whom she owed her life, and her Son, his life, and Empire. Those who en∣vied the greatness, and desert of the Visier Azem, found fault with the Sul∣tana Valide's kindness to him; which when this wise Politician perceived, that he might prefer the good of the State before his own interest, he was so generous as to desire the Sultana to moderate her affection, which per∣haps was but the pure effect of her gratitude. And she did it in confor∣mity to the prudence of this great man, who established his fortune with so much modesty, and discretion, that it was never subject to the least dif∣graces;
and he sustained the affaults of his Enemies with so much constan∣cy and steddiness, that they were for∣ced at last to beg his pardon; which the generous Coprogli easily granted them, besides many other favours. In the mean time the Recruits which he had sent into Candia, and the Troops which Ali Bassa had led into Dalmatia, gave hopes of great advantages over the Venetians, who seeing themselves attaqued by two powerful Armies at once, thought it their best way to make a League with some Prince that was able to divert the Ottoman Forces. To this purpose they sent to their Agent whom they usually maintain in the Persian Court, to treat an Alliance out of hand with the Sophy, to oblige him to take Arms in behalf of the Republick. The Resident succeeded in his Negotia∣tion, as well as the Signiory could wish. And Achab Acmes Sophi newly newly come to the Throne by the Death of the King his Father, took occasion to demand of Sultan Maho∣met the restitution of Bagdet, which
has ever been the Domain of the Kings of Persia, and in case of denial, declared War against him. Babylon, now Bagdet, is not only one of the best flowers of the Otto∣man Crown, but is a place of such im∣portance, that the Turkish Emperor could not restore it to the Persian, without opening him the way to Con∣stantinople. The Grand Visier thought it not convenient to facilitate the means of so dangerous an Enemies visiting his Master, when he should have a mind to it: therefore he sent back the Persian Embassador with a refusal, which made the Sophy endea∣vour to reduce Babylon with a power∣ful Army. The Grand Duke of Mus∣covy had pretensions to the Provinces that border'd his Dominions: he list∣ned favourably to the Complaints and Propositions of the Venetian Em∣bassador, and received his presents, with the offers which the Common∣wealth made him of a very consider∣able sum, in case he would invade the Turks. He sent an Embassador to Ve∣nice, to assure the Senate of his as∣sistance.
At the same time the Cham or Emperor of the Tartars thought of revenging the death of his Father, who was murthered by Sultan Ibrahim. The alliance that has always been be∣tween the Chams, and the Sultans, makes those Princes be thought to hold in some sort of the Turkish Em∣pire, because they receive great sums of mony to maintain the vast Armies which they have always on foot, to furnish the Grand Signior with Troops, when he undertakes any War; which causes a continual commerce between them: therefore the Grand Cham is not treated at the Port like other Fo∣rein Princes, but is looked on as the presumptive Heir of the Ottoman Em∣pire, in case the Race of the Sultans comes to fail for want of Males. And this was it that caused the Cham to send an Embassador at Mahomets com∣ing to the Empire, to desire that he might be named Tutor to the young Prince; believing that it belonged to him before any other, by the right which the laws of the Musulmans, and the Turkish Constitutions give him to
the Crown. But the Divan having rejected this Demand, he did not openly shew his displeasure, waiting an occasion to make it appear, and to require satisfaction as well for that, as for the murther of his Father. This conjuncture of affairs seeming favour∣able to his design, he declared the cause of his discontent, by denouncing War against the Grand Signior, and sending his Forces to spoil his Domi∣nions. This Enemy was very consi∣derable; the Sophy was no less for∣midable; the Moscovite was not to be slighted; and the Venetians on their side made great preparations: but beside, there sprung up a domestick dissension, which was no less dange∣rous. The Spahies and the Janiza∣ries who are the two strongest nerves of the Grand Signior's Forces, and are in continual enmity, by reason of their jealousie of one another, hapned to quarrel, and proceeded so far as to fortifie themselves one against the other; so that they became intracta∣ble, and could not be brought to march to the place where they were
ordered. They kept Constantinople in perpetual fears, no body durst stir abroad into the streets; nothing was heard of but Murthers, and Robbe∣ries, and apprehensions of Fire; the desolation was general, and the Se∣raglio was in the greater consternati∣on, because it seemed impossible to provide against so many mischiefs at once. But as if fate had raised all these disorders together, on purpose to set forth the prudence of the Visier Azem, by his prodigious conduct, he found means to appease the domestick tumults, and to stop the torrent of so many Potentates, who seemed to have united their Forces in order to the Sultans ruine. However, Mahomet Co∣progli preserved his constancy in the midst of their misfortunes; shewing how advantagious it is both to a Prince, and his people, to have a Minister whose steady courage no re∣volutions can shake: He judged it necessary to resist the greatest danger first. The Persian War seemed the most important, therefore he resol∣ved to discontinue that of Candia, that
he might not be obliged by so many diversions, to encounter so many ene∣mies at once. It was requisite to unite the Ottoman Forces to repulse the Sophy, who had made a furious ir∣ruption into the Sultans Dominions: but though he withdrew some of his Troops out of Candia, and Dalmatia, he left enought behind, to let the Ve∣netians see that he did not abandon his design. The Garrisons were suffici∣ent to preserve the conquered pla∣ces, and the Works that were begun; which were furnished with provisions enough to subsist till he should be in a condition to supply them with new Forces to continue his Conquests. These Troops being formed into the body of an Army were sent towards Transylvania, under the conduct of Ali Bassa. At the same time he caused a mighty Fleet to be rigged, with which the Bassa of the Sea was to op∣pose the Venetians. He ordered the Governors of Syria, and Mesopotamia, and the Provinces bordering on Persia to send all the Provisions they could to Bagdet, and to make speedy Levies
to reinforce the Garrisons, whilst he prepared a numerous Army to resist the Sophy, who on his side also made great preparations for the War. The Divan seeing the Grand Visier had so many Armies to bring into the Field, proposed to him to put the Law in execution, by which all the Grand Signior's Subjects, above the age of seven years, are obliged to take Arms for the defence of the State: But Mahomet Coprogli would not suffer it to be published, though they re∣proached him of rashly exposing the Sultan's Honour, and Power, and the liberty of his people, who were inva∣ded on all sides, and had not forces enough to repulse so many Enemies at once. He answered that it was true, the summoning of all the Grand Sig∣nior's Subjects might compose vast Ar∣mies, but that he did not think it fit to come to those extremities: be∣sides, that among such multitudes a thousand disorders would happen more prejudicial, than their assistance would be useful; that it was the way to expose the Emperors, and the Na∣tions
glory: that the Enemies would believe the Empire was reduced to the utmost straits, and would make their advantage of it; and lastly that the people whom they advised him to arm, not being disciplined, would make a tumultuous Army, and would confound the other Troops: and that he hoped the Sultan might face his Enemies, and finish the War without this last refuge. But as if Fortune had a mind to punish his presumption, and put his courage and constancy to the highest proofs, she raised him up a new enemy whom he never dreamt of. This Orcan Ogli Bassa of Aleppo, who having made use of the Grand Visier's orders to raise an Army of forty thousand men, caused them to march towards Constantinople, without declaring his design. Mahomet Coprogli was adver∣tised of his march at that time, when he was busied in raising of men to provide against the most pressing ne∣cessities. He was much surprized when he understood that he had taken the Field without his order, not think∣ing
at first, that he was revolted: but he soon found that this Bassa who had succeeded him in the Govern∣ment of Aleppo, and was Nephew to Delli Vssain Pacha, whom he had put to death some time before, was resol∣ved to make use of this conjunction of time to revenge his Unkle, and some private grudges of his own. He had drawn to his side several Captains, and abundance of Souldierr, who had served under this famous Bassa Dalli Vssain Pacha, whose memory was dear to them; and to make his revenge the more remarkable, and give the enterprize more weight, he pretended to establish one Soliman Amurath on the Ottoman Throne, who said he was the Son of the Emperour Amurat, and joyned himself to him with an Army of twenty thousand Arabians, Drus, and Armenians. Orcan Ogli acknow∣ledged him, and made his Army own him to be the lawful Successor to the Empire. This news was quickly spread over all the Provinces, and met with so much credit, that several Bassa's came to pay homage to the
new Prince, who already behaved himself as Emperor. The Provinces of Asia made no difficulty of submit∣ting to him. His Authority increased daily, and the little opposition he found to his new greatness, made the Bassa of Aleppo so confident of success, that he counselled him to reject the Sophi's Propositions, who offered to assist him to conquer the whole Tur∣kish Empire. This Prince swelled with his prosperity, and governing himself by Orcan Ogli's advice, whom he made his Lieutenant General, slighted these advantagious offers, believing he should have no need of Succors that would cost him so dear, to gain a Crown, which he hoped to wear without sharing it with so pow∣erful and dangerous a Prince as the King of Persia. Therefore he con∣tinued his march streight to Constanti∣nople, where the Bassa of Aleppo, Gene∣ral of his Army intended to place him on the Throne; not questioning but the Capital City of the Empire would open its Gates, in obedience to their Emperor Soliman Amurat, as
many others had done already. The noise of approach put all the world into a strange consternation. The Divan knew not what counsel to give the Grand Visier, but the extre∣mity of Affairs made him find expe∣dients in the greatest necessities. He preserved his judgment as well now as before, and studying how to pre∣vent what was most to be feared, sei∣zed on those Bassa's and Officers whom he knew to be ill affected, and might forment the Rebellion: and to sup∣press all murmurs, immediately pu∣nished these Incendiaries. Then he furnished the City with all sorts of Ammunition, and commanded his Son Achmet Coprogli at the head of threescore thousand men, with which he had design'd to oppose the Sophy, to march under the conduct of Musta∣pha Bassa, a man of integrity and great experience, against Soliman Amurath, and the Bassa of Aleppo, and give them Battle as soon as he could. The ap∣prehension of some insurrection, kept him from commanding this Army himself, believing it necessary for
him to remain at Constantinople, to have an eye to all: he had much ado to contain the Sultan, who burned with impatience to be in the Field, not in∣during to stay in the Seraglio, while his Favourite Achmet, who was almost of the same age, exercised his Valour against his Enemies, whom he would have chastised himself: but the Grand Visier told him, with the authority of a Governour, that his Highness ought not to remove from Constanti∣nople, lest the Mutineers should raise some Sedition in his absence, which would be of worse consequence than all the other mischiefs that threatned his fortune. That he should not ha∣zard his person against an Adventu∣rer, and a revolted Subject; that he could acquire no glory by their de∣feat, and that it became his great∣ness rather to punish them, than to expose himself to the danger of a War, which his Captains might ter∣minate, while he sate on his Throne, to take care of the Affairs of his Em∣pire, and answer the Embassadors of Princes, that arrived every day at
the Port. The Sultan yielded at last to the Remonstrances of this great Minister, and suffered Achmet Coprogli to go, who made all the haste he could to meet the Enemies; but he soon learnt that they having notice of his March, discontinued theirs to Constantinople, and made show to take some other way. He immediately ad∣vertised the Grand Visier, his Father of it, who at the same time was infor∣that the Sophy advanced towards Bag∣det with thirty thousand Horse, and fifty thousand Foot. Mahomet Copro∣gli found that the Enemies design was to stay till the Sophy was come into the Grand Signior's Dominions to make a diversion, which might facilitate their enterprize, and that this con∣sideration made them decline meeting his Son Achmet: therefore this Mini∣ster, judging truly of events, hastned the march of the Army, which he sent against the Bassa of Aleppo, reck∣oning that it would come time enough after his defeat to the relief of Bagdet, and the success answered his expectation. Mustapha and his
Son Achmet no sooner received his orders, but they followed the enemy with such expedition, that they over∣took them when they least looked for them; and gave them no time at all to look about them, and put themselves in order to fight. Achmet would not suffer his Troops to lose any of their zeal by resting after their tiresome march. He represented to his Ca∣ptains and Souldiers, that they ought to make use of the enemies disorder, and without any longer delay he char∣ged them so smartly, that he not on∣ly remained master of the Field, the Artillery, and the Baggage; but he took abundance of Prisoners, and so routed the Army, that the Bassa of Aleppo despairing of saving himself by flight, perswaded Soliman Amurath to render himself to the Conqueror, in hopes of better usage than if they should be taken flying. At first he rejected this proposition, but fearing some treachery from Or∣chan Ogli, whom he began to mistrust, and seeing his Army cut in pieces, he suffered himself to be carried to Ach∣met,
who presently sent him, and the Bassa of Aleppo, to Constantinople. The rest of the rebellious Troops yielded at discretion, and he pardoned them on condition they would serve the Grand Signior faithfully for the future, and having joyned them to his own Army, he marched according to the Grand Visiers order to the relief of Bag∣det. The news of Achmet Coprogli's victo∣ry was as satisfactory to his father Mahomet, as the arrival of Soliman, and Orcan Ogli was welcome to the Sultan, and the Sultana his Mother. The Vi∣sier Azem was infinitely pleased to have so hopeful a Son; and nothing diminished the Grand Signior's Joy, to see himself delivered from a competi∣tor who had shaken all his Empire, but his melancholy for not having vanquished him himself: But as if Fortune were weary of persecuting Coprogli, and intended to bless him by an happy return, she furnished him with fresh subjects of rejoycing, by the pleasing news of the Sophy's re∣treat. This Prince being informed
that Achmet Coprogli was coming to meet him with a victorious Army, and that the Mogul or Emperor of In∣dia, at the Grand Signior's desire, was ready to enter into his Kingdom, re∣turned the way he came, to defend himself from the Mogol; which made Achmet bring back his Army, to im∣ploy it where his Father thought fit: but he would not return to Constanti∣nople, till he had chastised all the Bas∣sa's, and Governours, who favoured the Bassa of Aleppo's Revolt, and So∣liman Amurath's enterprise. The Grand Visier caused them both to be behead∣ed, without regard to their Remon∣strances that his Son had promised to save their lives; and that they had not yielded but on that assurance. Policy would not give way to the per∣formance of this promise; and Soli∣in in Amurath, seeing he had no hope of safety, reproached Orcan Ogli with his baseness, in forcing him to yield, when he might have died gloriously with his arms in his hand, and have preven∣ted the ignominy of dying by an Exe∣cutioner.
The death of this Prince is no less worthy of compassion, than his story is odd, and deserves to be known. He was the Son of Sultan Amurath the Fourth, and that Rachima, of whom we spake in his reign. Though this Sultana had abundance of wit, yet she was very superstitious; so that she believed the predictions of an Alma∣sairis (so are the followers of Hali cal∣led, whom the Persians and Arabians own as a great Prophet; fancying that all his race have the gift of Pro∣phesie.) Rachima consulted this man upon all occasions, as soon as she found her self with child, she would needs know the success of her lying in. The Almasairis after some consi∣deration, answered, That she should bring forth a Prince, who would be one day Emperor of the Turks, if he could avoid the cruelty of his nearest kindred: and that if Heaven did free him from a misfortune that was to happen to him in the capital City of the Empire, which he was to avoid dwelling in, he would surpass the greatness of all the Ottomans his Pre∣decessors.
Rachima received this an∣swer as an Oracle; she desired Amu∣rath, who prepared to return to Constan∣tinople, notwithstanding a Prediction of the Almasairis which forbad it, to leave her at Damas. Sir, said she, ly∣ing at his feet, if I deserve any grace of your Highness, shew that your faithful Slave is not displea∣sing to you at this time, by grant∣ing her one favour. You know, Sir, that I never importuned you; it is true, your magnificence has loaded me with all sorts of benefits; but the favour I now implore will be more welcome to me than any I have already received, because your Highness is concerned in it: it is to suffer me to stay here till you re∣turn: I know no greater unhappi∣ness than such a separation; it would kill me with sorrow, Sir; but I had rather lose my life than ex∣pose you to the misfortunes that threaten you, if I follow you to the Seraglio, where my presence would cause too much disorder. Sultan Amurath was at first more surprized at
this request, which he expected not, than unwilling to grant it; whether he apprehended the effect of the Al∣masairis's Prophesie, or that his passion for Rachima was abated, or that he would not expose her to the resent∣ments and jealousie of the Sultana Roxana, whose love was increased more than ever by his absence. He bestowed rich Presents on Rachima, commanding the Bassa of Damas to have a care of her, and to pay her a very considerable Pension. He as∣signed her besides, the Tribute which the King of Arabia paid him, and took leave of her with great marks of af∣fection. A little while after Amu∣rath's departure, Rachima was brought to bed of a Son, whom she named Soliman Amurath. She observed the cir∣cumstances of the Prediction, and brought him up secretly, lest Roxana being informed of his birth, should order him to be put to death. She knew that this great Sultana was no less dangerous than powerful, and that only her distance from her freed her from her cruelty. The news of
her death was the more welcome to her, because she hoped to have sup∣plied her place. And she was pre∣paring to let the Sultan know the birth of his Son, when Amurath's death spoiled her design: and she thought it not fit to discover the young Prince Soliman Amurath, not having power enough to place him on the Throne: On the contrary, she was careful to keep him from being known to Ibra∣him, who succeeded Amurath, lest he who came not to the Empire, but for want of an heir, and was thought in∣capable of leaving any, should follow the cruel policy of his Ancestors by sacrificing Prince Soliman, who alone would dispute the Crown with him. Rachima therefore stood upon her guard, and contented her self with the Revenue that Sultan Amurath left her. But Sinan Bassa, Governour of Damas, who always had honoured her in the life of the deceased Grand Sig∣nior, and paid her Pension exactly, discontinued his respect to her in the new Emperors time, and threatned to send her to the old Seraglio at Constan∣tinople.
The Sultana mistrusting the Bassa, resolved to retire into Persia, where she was born, or to some Prince, whose Authority might protect her, and her Son, from her enemies. To colour her retreat, she gave out that she had made a Vow to visit the Tomb of the great Prophet Mahomet, and having begun her journey under this pretence, she went to Reba King of the Arabians, the same who was to pay his tribute to her. This Prince not being so barbarous, as usually those of his Nation are, received Ra∣chima with a great deal of kindness. This young Sultana, who was not a∣bove two and twenty years old, ap∣peared so handsome to him, that he not only promised her his protection, but also offered her his Crown, and his Heart. Rachima was no less plea∣sed with King Rabas person, than his generosity: He had so many good qualities, that he easily made himself be beloved. The Sultana sought a Protector, and thought it not fit to neglect the Arabian King. They found they had inclination enough to
one another; she received so many marks of sincere good will from him, that she made no great difficulty to bestow her heart on him. He took a particular care of the young Prince Soliman Amurath, being glad of ha∣ving such a Subject as might revenge the persecution he had suffered from the Port in the Reign of Amurath, who reduced him to pay Tribute; from which he would have freed him∣self by joyning with Emir Ficardin Prince of Dus his Kinsman, whom Bassa Giaphar overcame, and sent to Constantinople, where he was ignomi∣niously put to death. King Reba pre∣served his resentment, only waiting an occasion to shew it, and impati∣ently suffered the obedience and ho∣mage which he was bound to render to the Grand Signior. To shake off this yoke, he armed Prince Soliman, whhm he educated as his own Son, and negotiated secretly with the Bassa of Aleppo, and some other Governors of Provinces in Asia, who revolted from Sultan Mahomet when his Empire was invaded on all sides, with inten∣tion
to drive him from the Throne, and place Prince Soliman Amurath on it in his stead. We have seen how their enterprize succeeded, and the King of Arabia was slain with his arms in his hand, performing the part of a brave Souldier, and a great Captain, in the Battle that Soliman lost. Rachima, who followed him in this War, died a little while after of grief, that she had destroyed her Son, by endeavouring to bring him to the Throne, according to the Prediction of the Almasairis. This Prince had something extraordinary in his air, and Person. The Turks affirmed that he perfectly resembled Sultan Amurath his Father, who was the handsomest man in his Empire. After the death of Soliman Amurath, Orcan Ogli, and the Bassa's, and Go∣vernours who followed his Fortune, the retreat of the Persian Sophy left Asia in a peaceable condition; which made the Grand Visier apply himself to oppose the other Wars that mena∣ced the Ottoman Empire. He ordered
all his Troops to be in the Field by March, in the mean time he continued his negotiations with the Great Duke of Moscovy, to divert him from inva∣ding the Grand Signior, in favour of the Venetians. He expected the arri∣val of his Deputies at the Port, who were to explain the Dukes intenti∣ons; and not finding it so easie to ap∣pease the Emperor of the Tartars, whom he dreaded more than all the rest of the Sultans enemies, he secret∣ly engaged the Cham of the petty Tar∣tars to joyn himself with the chief of the Great Chams Subjects, who were revolted: so that when this Prince prepared vast Forces to invade the Grand Signiors Provinces, he was ob∣liged to make use of his preparations to defend his own Estate; and was glad to send an Embassador to the Sultan, to make him reparation, and offer him all his Forces, when he had appeased the Troubles which the pet∣ty Cham, and his own Grandees had raised. This Embassy secured the Grand Visier, and freed him from a very dan∣gerous enemy. However he left not
off his warlike preparations, both by Sea and Land, and continually en∣deavoured to render his Master the most formidable, and powerful Prince in the world. While he waited for a proper sea∣son to make some expedition, he dis∣patched a Chiaux to the Emperor, to demand passage through his Domini∣ons for the Sultan's Army into Friuli. The Chiaux was sent back with a refusal dishonourable to the Grand Sig∣nior; but the Visier Azem thought it not time to shew his resentment, or to send any Troops into Dalmatia, till the Sophy were quite determined ei∣ther to Peace or War. He feared lest he should agree with the Mogol, seeing the Ottoman Arms imployed in an∣other place, and defer the sending his Embassadors to Constantinople to re∣new the Peace which he had broken. The Venetians in the mean time be∣ing informed that the Troubles of the Port were accommodated; and that Embassadors were arrived there from those Princes of Asia, who had given them hopes of diverting the Ottoman
Forces, were afraid of having them all turned upon them in a short time; and though they had obtained great advantages over Sultan Mahomet's Fleet, they resolved to send, and im∣plore peace of him. But this Prince being swayed by his first Minister, re∣ceived their Agents very coldly, and told them that the Signiory of Venice had no other way to end the War, but to yield the Kingdom of Candia to him, and the Town of Clissa, the most considerable place in Dalmatia; and to pay him three Millions of Gold for the charges he had been at since the beginning of the War. These conditions were too hard to be accepted, and the War it self could not be more disadvantagious to the Venetians; and it was the Visier Azem's design to continue it: he had private reasons not to make Peace with the enemies of the Empire. He knew by experience that after such considerable preparations, it was dan∣gerous to dismiss the Souldiers with∣out abating their heat, and impetuo∣sity, by the toils of War. He had
a mind to imploy the Janizaries, to avoid the Seditions they commonly raise in Peace: So that the Venetians seeing themselves rejected, implored the assistance of all the Princes of Christendom. The Grand Visier who foresaw they would have this refuge, prepared to resist all their attempts, and obstinately pursued the getting of Candia, accounting it the most glori∣ous and beneficial conquest the Em∣peror could ever make. He sent great refreshments to the Troops that were there, and all provisions necessary to continue the Siege of the chief City of the Island. Now the Sultan was more desirous than ever of command∣ing his own Army, threatning if they continued to with-hold him, that he would steal away privately to go to the Camp, and discover himself to his Souldiers. Mahomet Coprogli im∣ployed all his art to moderate his ar∣dor, without incurring his hatred; making use of all his prudence on so nice an occasion. The Grand Signior honoured him as his Father, and had intire confidence in his conduct; but
he listned to the flatteries and partial perswasions of a great many young men, and Bassa's, who would have drawn him out of the Seraglio, that they might with more ease insinuate into his favour, and diminish the au∣thority of the Grand Visier. This Mi∣nister foreseeing the consequences, desired the Sultana Valide to joyn her endeavours with his, to convince the Emperor, that he ought by no means to expose himself to those disgraces that might be followed by the loss of his Estate, and life too. The Sultan would not disoblige the Sultana his Mother, or the Visier Azem; he per∣mitted him to send an Army into Dal∣matia, under the conduct of Mahomet Coprogli, who had order to besiege Clissa, and Zara; but his Valor was not seconded by his Souldiers, and with all his attempts, he could not carry these two places. This young Captain shewed a fierceness that asto∣nished the most resolute; he desired nothing but a Battle to end that War. Those who wondered at this vehe∣mence, knew not that the desire of
glory was not the only passion that animated his courage: but it is not yet time to discover the cause, and in∣terrupt the relation of Mahomet Co∣progli's Ministry, to treat of his Sons loves, which we will speak of at length in the sequel of this History. While brave Achmet pressed the Siege of the Capital City of Dalma∣tia, and the Army in Candia endea∣voured to conquer that Island in spight of all the Venetians resistance; the Grand Visier who applied himself to the particular Affairs of the Em∣pire, and to provide for the subsistance of the Armies, found himself at the same time obliged to extinguish a Ci∣vil War, which began to break out by the factiousness of some disconten∣ted persons. The frequency of these kind of disgraces had so confirmed Mahomet's soul, and courage, that no∣thing surprised him: nevertheless he stopt not this flame without difficul∣ty, and bloodshed. It cost young Mo∣rat, the Author of the Revolt, his life, who was the Son of Vssain, Captain General of the Sea, whom the Grand
Visier caused to be beheaded for fa∣vouring Soliman Amurath, and the Bey of Togor suffered the same punishment, for having committed some fault contrary to his duty. These troubles were no sooner quieted, but the death of Ragotski Prince of Transylvania, gave the Vi∣sier Azem an opportunity of extending the Grand Signiors Dominions. This Province had been the seat of a long War, which was ended by the sub∣mission of the deceased Prince, who paid great sums to the Port. The Grand Visier pretended this was a Tri∣bute, and that this Province hold∣ing of the Turkish Empire, the right of nominating a Prince belonged to the Sultan. The States of Transyl∣vania not giving way to this pretence, were assembled after Ragotski's death, to elect another Prince. Chimin Ia∣nos, and Count Barelay, were Compe∣titors at this Election. The first, who was the most considerable, put himself into the Emperors protecti∣on; promising never to have any thing to do with the Grand Signior.
The other on the contrary, relied on the Sultan, and promised to own him for his Sovereign. These two pre∣tenders divided the Estate by their Factions. Count Barelays submission was accepted of at the Port, and in his behalf the Grand Signior ordered Ali Bassa to enter Transylvania with fif∣ty thousand men, who presently took a strong place called Waradin, which refused to acknowledge Count Barelay. The Emperor on the other ide sent an Army to defend Chimin Ianos, and to keep the Turks from breaking into his Territories. Ali Bassa was no sooner informed of this, but he sent to Count Souches the General of the Im∣perial Troops, to pay the Sultan Ho∣mage for the places which the Empe∣ror possessed on the Frontiers of Hun∣gary; and in case of refusal, denoun∣ced War, and threatned his Highnes∣ses own coming with an Army of an hundred thousand men. The Em∣peror having received this news, put twelve thousand men under the con∣duct of Count Montecuculi, to guard the Frontiers, and sent to demand aid of
all the Princes of the Empire, fear∣ing the Grand Signior would break the Peace. But the arrival of a Chiaux whom the Sultan dispatched to him by the advice of the Visier Azem, who was not yet fully prepared to make War on the Emperor, secured him a little. The Sultan sent him word that he desired to maintain the Peace with him, and that he disapproved the pro∣ceedings of Ali Bassa, whom he had only ordered to support the Prince of Transylvania, who put himself under his protection. But the Emperor find∣ing that without any regard to the as∣surances of this Envoy, the General of the Turkish Army continued his Conquest in Transylvania, he stood on his guard, and recalling Count Souches to face the Enemy, and enter into the Ottoman Dominions, he sent Count Se∣rini to command his Troops: So that these two parties provok'd one an∣other by little and little, without co∣ming to an open War. The Grand Visier was unwilling to declare, yet he would not lose the opportunity of wholly reducing Transylvania, or at
least of making its Prince hold direct∣ly of the Grand Signior. To this pur∣pose he solicited Chimin Ianos (whom the Estates owned as their lawful Prince, and who in spight of the Ot∣toman Army had possessed himself of the best places) to submit himself to the Port, giving him hopes of a fa∣vourable protection: but the Prince rejected his propositions, which so provoked him, who had set his heart upon joyning this Province to the Sultans Dominions, that he could no longer contain his displeasure against the Emperor; resolving to have sa∣tisfaction from him, for hindering his projects: and to revenge himself more speedily, and obtain that by force which he could not get fairly, he put the Cham of the Tartars in mind of his promises to the Grand Signior, and received thirty thousand men from him with which he augmented Ali Bassa's Army. This General being thus re-inforced, divided his Troops, to make several attaques at once, at the same time besieging Zeiklit, Callo, and Zatmar, three places that belon∣ged
to the Emperor: but he found so much resistance, that with all his at∣tempts he could take none of them but Callo, and was forced to raise the other Sieges, and retire, to avoid fighting with the Imperial General, who of∣fered him Battel. This War hindred not the Grand Visier from pressing that of Candia, and sending continual refreshments to the Army, which held Canea against the Venetians; and after he had put all the Affairs of the Ottoman Empire to a good posture, he designed to go in person to carry on the Transylvanian War, not being satisfied with the Ge∣neral Ali. He mistrusted the great power which this Bassa had gained among the Souldiers, and feared he would be very troublesome to him, on the least discontent; he could not take away his command, or revoke him, without a specious pretence, for fear of reducing him to make use of his present reputation to maintain him∣self in his charge. This considerati∣on made him resolve to command the Army himself, finding no better ex∣pedient,
to take away all suspicion from Ali Bassa, who would be obli∣ged to give place to him without complaining, because the Souldi∣ers always look upon the Grand Visier, when he is in the Camp, as their only General. He had a mind besides to establish his Son among the Soul∣diers, who already knew how to gain their kindness: and he flattered him∣self with the hopes that he should one day be able to repose part of his cares on him. He knew his valour, and con∣duct, and believed him capable of fil∣ling up that place in the Army which was not fit for himself, and which he could not securely trust another with: but death prevented this great mans design. He was no sooner gone from Constantinople with the Grand Signior, who removed from thence because of the Plague, but he found himself at∣taqued by a violent Feaver, which forced him to stay at Adrianople, whi∣ther he sent for his Son; to give him his last instructions; foreseeing that he should not recover. At this time he imparted to Achmet Coprogli, all
the politick maximes which his long experience, and penetrating wit had taught him. He charged him never to do any injustice; to sacrifice his own interests, and particular inclina∣tions to the good of the State; to be always faithful to the Sultan, and to advise him to undertake no new War till those of Candia and Transylvania were ended: Remember my Son, said he, to observe the Laws, and that to serve your Prince is to ac∣complish the greatest part of the Law. After these Remonstrances, he called Fatima his Wife, who was infinitely afflicted to see this great man die without leaving any authori∣ty to his Son: but Mahomet Coprogli having somewhat recovered his spi∣rits, resolved to do something before he died, worthy of his subtilty, and prudence. He contrived with Fatima, and his Son, all that was necessary to make his last designs succeed; and he writ a Letter to the Grand Signior; in which he told him, that finding him∣self at the point to die, nothing trou∣bled him more than that he died be∣fore
he had finished the Wars which his Highness had with two powerful Enemies: but he hoped that he would happily put an end to them if he made use of the counsel which he had given his Son Achmet, to whom he had de∣livered the Seal of the Empire, to give it to his Highness, if he judged him unworthy to keep it: yet if the Sultan had any respect to his passed ser∣vices, or gave any credit to the last words of the faithfullest of his Slaves, he protested to him that he could not choose a man worthier to be Grand Vi∣sier than Achmet Coprogli, of whose abi∣lity he was assured, and whom he had furnished with all instructions necessa∣ry to acquit himself perfectly of that great charge. He added that he knew well enough this choice was un∣usual; but that the Sultans interest ought to make him neglect a piece of Policy that was not so useful to him as it had been to his Ancestors; and that besides his Highness should con∣sider, that Empires would perish, if the Laws were not often subjected to necessity.
When he had written this Letter with a great deal of pain, he com∣manded Fatima to send it to the Grand Signior, by the Visiers, who would come to receive his last words: but he char∣ged her not to give them the Seal, or∣dering Achmet to keep it, and to de∣liver it to none but the Emperor. At last, finding himself grow very weak, he left off speaking, for fear of being surprized by the Deputies of the Di∣van. When he saw them, he made as if he had lost his speech; and to let them see that he understood what they said, he pointed to his Son, who was by his bed-side. The Visiers, that they might know his meaning, look∣ed on Fatima, as if they would learn it of her. This cunning Woman bursting out into tears, told them that his meaning was that the Sultan might know by Achmet, what he would have learned of him; that he had in∣trusted him with the secrets of the Empire, by giving him the Seal, and discovering to him some particulars, very important to the State, of which she was ignorant: but perhaps that
Letter which she gave them might clear all; that they should carry it to the Emperor, and inform him in what condition they left the Grand Visier. She spake these words so naturally, that the Deputies suspected nothing, they were indeed concerned, that they did not carry the Seal of the Empire back with them; but they never imagined that the Visier Azems Son should keep it. They were hard∣ly gone from him, when he expired, and his death was no less deplored than it was particular to a man of his condition: for it is not usual for a Mi∣nister of the Ottoman Empire to die a natural death. Almost all his Prede∣cessors, either through the Grand Sig∣niors jealousie, or for their evil admi∣nistration, or their injustices, died by the hands of Executioners. The im∣portant services Mahomet Coprogli had done the State,March 7. 1663. and his great in∣tegrity deserved a better end, which happened in the seven and fiftieth year of his age. Those who envied the glory of this
great man, did all they could to ob∣scure it. They reproached him with too much gravity, which they ascri∣bed to his pride; but it was rather the effect of his temper: it is true, he knew the advantage he had over others by his experience, and was ve∣ry careful to preserve it; often hand∣ling those very roughly, who contra∣dicted his opinion, which he never ventured to declare, but when he was well assured of the consequence. The Divan, which he always governed, taxed him of referring nothing to them, and invading the Sovereign Authority. The success of his Mi∣nistry manifested that he had reason to act so, and that he had no need of any bodies assistance: but how unjust soever his enemies are, they cannot affirm, that since the beginning of the Turkish Monarchy, there were ever so many troubles, as during the administration of this Grand Visier. Never was any Prince more disturbed in his minority than Sultan Mahomet, or more vigorously defended: and when he was ready to sink under the weight
of so many Civil and Forein Wars, in his most tender age, he made three parts of the world tremble. He has increased his Empire by the conquest of a part of Transylvania, and by the wonderful prudence of this great Mi∣nister, constrained the mightiest Po∣tentates to sue for Peace. His readiness to punish those who were seditious was accounted cruelty; yet he never exercised this rigour, but to prevent combinations, which are ever fatal, and destructive to the people. He knew that the first strokes of Justice and Revenge are the best, and that the way to quiet a Sedition, was to strike at the authors of it. He had several other Maxims; and when he was forced to raise money to de∣fray the charges of the War, he was wont to say, that Peace was not to be obtained without Arms, or War carried on without money. So he exacted Tribute, without rendring his Administration odious to the people, who yet honour his memory in the person of Achmet Coprogli, the Succes∣sor of so worthy a Father.
The Visiers, whom the Grand Sig∣nior and the Sultana Valide had deputed to receive the Seal of the Empire, and the Visier Azem's last words, ha∣ving discharged their Commission, brought the first news of his death, which was extremely lamented by the Sultan, and the Sultana his Mother: but when they had learned the parti∣culars that Fatima informed them of by the Letter, which she delivered to the Visiers, they suspended their sor∣row, to consult how they should pro∣ceed in the choice of another Mini∣ster. Achmet Coprogli's youth, who was not yet thirty years old, out-weighed his desert, and seemed an invincible obstacle to the Grand Signior's design, of complying with the Sultana Valide, who had a mind to confirm the decea∣sed Visier Azem's choice of his Son to succeed him: and she alledged such strong reasons, that the Sultan, who referred all things to her, at last gave his consent. The Visiers represented to him, that to give the first Charge of the Empire to his Son who had possessed it before, was a contradi∣ction
to the Laws, and Maxims of State; that the Divan, the Militia, and the People, would repine to see a young man raised to a Dignity that was fit for none but a Bassa of extraor∣dinary desert, and consummate expe∣rience. However he was swayed by the Sultana his Mother, who on the other side, represented to him, that he could not sufficiently reward Ma∣homet's services, but by putting Ach∣met into his place. This was not the only consideration that made the Sul∣tana favourable to him; she held her self obliged to endeavour the prefer∣ment of a man who had married a per∣son that was so nearly related to her. This is a story that deserves to be treated of at length; therefore I will return to those things which I before only touched at, the better to clear those adventures that have hitherto been obscure: the most secret particu∣lars of which are come to my know∣ledge.
THE HISTORY of the Grand VISIERS. The third Book. WHen Fatima had received the Princess Iohaime, the Daughter of the Sultana Zaime, she brought her up as her own child in the house of Mahomet Coprogli her Husband, who was then Gover∣nour of Aleppo. Her Son Achmet was yet so young, that he easily believed Iohaime was his Sister: he accustomed himself to love her; and as much a child as he was, conceived a stronger friendship for her than usually that tender age is capable of. This kind∣ness
ness increased with the beauty of Io∣haime, who grew every day more and more amiable. Achmet always droop∣ed when he saw her not, and Iohaime was equally affected with his ab∣sence: their mutual inclination grew with them, and never was there a stronger sympathy of two hearts; they were bred up together with a Politene, which is not common among the Turks. Mahomet Coprogli, and Fatima omitted nothing that might give them an education conformable to their quality. They knew the union of these two persons, and their tenderness for one another; but they did not at all mistrust their virtue, or imagine that they could have other thoughts than such as were inspired by their seeming nearness of blood: therefore they suffered them to live at liberty, taking care to maintain their mistake, in which they continued them, till Achmet whose age made him more discerning, discovered it by remarking the difference which his Parents put between Iohaime and his other Sister; that they refused
several advantagious matches that were offered her; and often had pri∣vate discourses together in which she was concerned. This made him be∣lieve there was some mystery in it, and desiring his Mother to unfold the whole secret to him, which his own curiosity had already half discovered. Fatima who loved her Son extremely, and was assured of his discretion, told him that Iohaime who passed for hers, was the Daughter of a Sultana, but that it was as much as her life was worth to reveal it. Now Achmets eyes were opened, he found that all that he had felt for this Princess, was no∣thing but a violent passion; and ex∣amining his heart more nearly, won∣dered that he had so long mistaken himself to be her Brother, whom he had always beheld with a Lovers eyes. The possibility of having her one day in his possession, redoubled his joy, which he moderated as well as he could, lest Iohaime should find out the cause of it, being unwilling to lose the title of her Brother, till he could assume that of her Husband, of
which he did not despair; knowing that the Daughters of the Sultana's are frequently married to the Bassa's, and Grandees of the Port. The fa∣vour his Father was in augmented his hopes, and he beheld his felicity with so much assurance, that he was in pain for nothing but to know the hap∣py moment. Now he became more as∣siduous about Iohaime, whom he had promised Fatima always to treat as his Sister: but he could not keep his pro∣mise long; there are transports in Love, that are not usual in Friend∣ship. Achmet's passion was too strong for a Brother, and soon betrayed it self to proceed from love. The Princess Iohai∣me, who had no less wit, than beauty, observed an alteration in Achmet's behaviour: he was more particularly diligent about her; he received the innocent favours she did him as her Brother, with more satisfaction than ordinary, and endeavoured to make her bestow them oftner on him. Io∣haime perceived it, and he saw that she did. This reflection put him into confusion, so that he answered her
trembling, when she desired him to moderate his kindness, which seemed too passionate for a Brother. Achmet's disorder and ambiguous words surprized Iohaime, What say you, said she to him, of Passion and Love? do you remember that I am your Sister, and that you ought not to have any more than an innocent, and a pure friendship for me? Ach∣met, who was no longer master of his love, found that he had spoken too much, that he could not counterfeit any more, and that it was necessary to undeceive her: besides, a scruple came into his head of being behold∣en to Friendship for those pleasures, which he would rather owe to Love. I should abuse your ignorance, and credulity too much, fair Iohaime, said he, throwing himself at her feet; you would have reason here∣after to reproach me of going about to surprize your heart by a strata∣gem, unworthy of a man who adores you. You are not my Si∣ster, fair Princess, and love took care to tell me so before my Mother
confirmed it: but Madam, will not the confession I make injure this love? and will the Daughter of a Sultana permit the Son of Fati∣ma to be her servant? will she re∣member the kindness she had for Achmet when she was yet his Sister? The Princess Iohaime, who was strangely astonished at this discourse, beheld Achmet at her feet a good while, without being able to lift him up, or answer him: but having re∣covered her self, and not compre∣hending the truth of all that he said to her, she made as if she did not un∣derstand him, to oblige him to speak more plainly of her condition; which he did after he had made her promise inviolable secresie. She ha∣ving a tender friendship for Achmet, and being quite ignorant of love, li∣ved still with him as she was wont to do before she knew that she was not his Sister, and discovered no great joy to find a Lover in him, whom she had always respected as her Brother. But Achmet quickly converted her friend∣ship into a reciprocal love. These
two Lovers were indowed with all that was capable of maintaining a lasting passion. They were almost of the same age, Achmet being but two years older than the Princess. He was well and proportionably shap'd, his behaviour and manners pleasing, his eyes were lively, and sparkling; his complexion white, and his hair of a chestnut colour; he went handsomly about every thing he did; and the Grand Signior has been often heard to say, that he did those exercises which the Turks usually perform before him, better than any man in his Empire. The Princess Iohaime had qualities that rendred her no less amiable: her shape, though not yet quite formed, was likely to be the best in the world. The figure of her face was oval, her forehead was large, her eyes full; they were blue, and so sweetly lan∣guishing, that one could not see them without being sensibly affected; her nose was of a just bigness; her mouth and teeth admirable; her complexi∣on incomparable; her hair brown, and very thick; her min answered
the greatness of her birth, and her wit was perfectly correspondent to her outward charms: besides all this, her modesty made all the world adore her; especially Achmet, with whom she avoided being alone, since the de∣claration which he had made to her: her chastity reproaching her with those harmless privacies which she had before permitted. She lived so strictly, and reservedly, as hindred her Lover from taking any of those liberties which she had given way to, while she believed him to be her Bro∣ther. Never were so many charms, so much love, and virtue seen toge∣ther. She obtained of Achmet, that he should require nothing of her, but what the most innocent friendship could not refuse, and that he should keep his passion secret. They lived together very calmly, expecting when fortune would favour their desires, by rendring them completely happy; but fate, envying their felicity, di∣sturbed their repose, by a separation, which almost killed them with grief. Mahomet Coprogli, from being a Cap∣tive,
and on the brink of destruction, became the first Minister of the Otto∣man Empire; he was no sooner raised to this degree, but he took care to render his Son capable of serving the State under him. He had given Ach∣met better Education than usually those of his Nation bestow on their children, and then brought him to the Court of the Sultan, who at the very first took a kindness to him; and the Sultana Valide perceiving his good qualities, would have him always be with her Son Mahomet, into whose fa∣vour he so insinuated himself in a short time, that he could not indure to be one moment without him: but the Grand Visier had no mind to let his Sons courage decay among the soft pleasures of the Seraglio, intending him for a man of business; and the power he had over the Sultan, who minded nothing but his diversions, prevailed with him to consent that Achmet should go and make his first Campagna; where he came off with so much success, that he gained the esteem of all the Captains: who see∣ing
him begin so well, doubted not but he would be one of the greatest men in the Ottoman Empire. When he parted from the Princess Iohaime, he left her in inexpressible sorrow. Achmet would have discovered his love to his Mother Fatima, but Io∣haime opposed it so strongly, that he durst not do it, for fear of displeasing her: besides, he was afraid his Mo∣ther would reproach him with his weakness, and indiscretion, which might produce an effect contrary to his wishes: therefore he took leave of her, after a thousand protestations of loving one another eternally. Yet the kindness of these two Lovers at parting, was not so secret, but that Fatima perceived it; who whether she already suspected the truth, or feared the effect of so long a conversation, interrupted it as soon as she could. She knew somewhat of her Sons love, and apprehended the consequence; not being assured that the Sultana Valide would approve of Achmets passion for Iohaime. She thought it convenient to make use of the opportunity of her
Sons absence, to return the Princess to her Mother; knowing that when she was in the Seraglio, her Son could not so easily see her, and hold corre∣spondence with her: besides, that it would be more decent for her to be with her true Parents, than in Maho∣met Coprogli's house, whose Daughter she was thought to be. Therefore Fatima perswaded the Sultana Valide to have Iohaime near her: but the Sultana having some secret reasons why she would not yet own her for her Daughter, ordered Fatima to present her to her as the Visier Azem's own Daughter, which was done without acquainting Iohaime, who was brought to the Seraglio to live with the Sultana Valide. This young Princess who was not suffered to know her Mother, fore∣seeing the difficulty she should have to see Achmet, and how grievous this separation which was contrived with∣out his knowledge, would be to him, was so sensibly touched at it, that a great while she pined away; at last she fell sick, and had no body about her that she could trust to give Achmet
notice of their misfortune. She was in a place where she was watched very nearly. She mistrusted Fatima, whom she still called Mother, being thought to be so by every body. Seeing her very often, she resolved at last to give her a Letter, which she said the Sultan had delivered to her to send to her Brother (so she called her Achmet;) Fa∣tima, suspected nothing, taking it to be a mark of the Grand Signiors affe∣ction to her Son, with whom he was sometimes very familiar: therefore she sent the Letter to him, who recei∣ved it just as he was going to fight, and opening it found it, written to this purpose: As if your being exposed to the dangers of War, and my continual apprehensions of losing you, were not sufficient to afflict me, that I may quite despair. I am shut up in the Seraglio, I can accuse no body of it but your Mooher: I still pass for your Si∣ster, and I fear lest Fatima believes I love you, and that for that reason she has shut me up in a place, where your absence is not the only thing I dread; but return quickly, and free me from this mortal dis∣quiet
I am in. Write not back to me, lest your Letter discover the trick I used to con∣veigh this to you, which your Mother sent you as from the Sultan. Achmet was thunder-strook with this news, at first despair seized on his soul, but his hope of dying in the Bat∣tel did a little allay the misfortunes of his love. The fight drew near, and he was impatient to be ingaged; at the first incounter he rushed in among the thickest, and fought as one that sought not victory but death; but his good luck had the better of despair; he was not so much as hurt; and his desire of dying which made him face the greatest dangers, passed for the effect of an undaunted courage, and gained him the reputation of one of the bravest men in the Army. The Campagna being ended, he returned to Constantinople, where his valour re∣ceived the applauses of all the Gran∣dees of the Port, who studied to make themselves acceptable to the Grand Visier his Father, and the Sultan whose Favorite he was: but all their praises which perhaps would have satisfied a
more vain, or an ambitious man, did not move him at all. His love wholly imployed his thoughts, and he was already weary of those trou∣blesome complements that hindred him from contriving a way to see his Mistriss. He was warned by her Letter to mistrust his Mother, and he employed all his subtilty to know why she had delivered Iohaime to the Sul∣tana Valide; but Fatima found out his drift: She loved him too well, to give any cause to be angry, or complain of her; therefore she told him, that the Sultana had asked for the Princess, and that she was forced to obey her against her will. I know, added she, that it makes you melancholy, and I know the friendship you have for one an∣other; I would have you always preserve the same thoughts, and should be glad you could give Io∣haime assurances of them your self; but since it is impossible, I will do it for you. Achmet was vexed at this discourse, but he dissembled his grief as well as he could, and went to pay his respects to the Sultan, who
received him very kindly. After he had given his Highness an account of his Campagna, the Grand Signior in requital, told him what he had done in his absence, and ended his relation with the praise of Achmet's Sister, who was come a little before, to be with the Sultana Valide his Mother. If the Sultan had taken notice of the di∣sturbance that appeared then in his Favourites countenance, he had per∣haps suspected something of his love, but he did not perceive it; and Ach∣met then discovered part of his un∣happiness: he knew not that the Em∣peror Mahomet was Iohaime's Brother, and saw nothing that could hinder him from being her Lover. The thoughts of this wounded his heart, and he had almost betrayed himself by shewing his jealousie; yet at last he forced himself, and summoned all his reason to assist him, to beg the Sultan's permission to see his Sister. None but Achmet, who was so familiar with the Grand Signior durst have asked such a favour which is never granted to any body; for neither the Father, or the
other kindred of the young women in the Seraglio are suffered to see them, till they go out to be married. The Sultan, who had a secret end in Ach∣mets discoursing privately with his Sister, presently granted his request. He no sooner knew his Masters inten∣tion, but he was grieved that he had given him an opportunity of requi∣ring a service of him, that was so contrary to his passion. The Sultan had seen Iohaime a little before with his Mother, and he found her to be what she appeared to all the world, infinitely charming. His heart ha∣ving never yet been ingaged, he soon lost his liberty, and without consider∣ing whether it were as easie to be be∣loved, as to love. It was not long before he declared himself to her, not taking any notice of the Sultana, who he believed would not oppose him. She being informed of his love, did all she could to cure him; she employ∣ed all the arguments she could think of, to fix him on some other object; and all her authority was little enough on this occasion; his obsti∣nacy
surmounting his respect; yet he durst not continue his addresses open∣ly, for fear of disobliging his Mo∣ther: besides, he was unwilling to gain the favour of a beauty by force, which he had rather win by his dili∣gence, and services; therefore he courted Iohaime secretly, who being prepossessed in Achmet Coprogli's behalf, easily defended herself from the Sul∣tan's importunity. Difficulties com∣monly augment love. The Grand Signiors was heightned by the resist∣ance he found; but being naturally gallant, and free from those brutish inclinations which most of his prede∣cessors were subject to: he would try all honourable means to perswade Io∣haime to admit of his passion, and be∣lieved that his Favourite Achmet, (whom he took to be her Brother) might induce her to be kind to him. In order to this, he desired the Sultana Valide by a particular priviledge, to give the Grand Visier's Son leave to converse with his Sister. The Sultana, who had thwarted her Sons inclina∣tion, thought it not prudent to refuse
what he asked in Achmet's behalf, lest her denial should provoke him to transgress those bounds of respect he had hitherto kept: therefore she con∣sented that Iohaime should receive a visit from Achmet; but she charged her under pain of her displeasure, to re∣pulse the Sultan's addresses, and to be deaf to what ever the Favorite should plead in his Masters behalf. This pro∣hibition was needless; Iohaime's own interest was more prevalent with her than any command; as soon as the Grand Signior had obtained the Sultana's consent, he ran to find Achmet, who waited impatiently for him in his apartment where he left him. There, with a rapture of Joy which proceed∣ed from his hope of succeeding in his love, You may my dear Achmet, see the fair Iohaime when you please; I have with great difficulty obtained my Mothers leave; and I believe you will thank me for it, and do me all the good offices, that I may pro∣mise my self from your friendship: you have a great deal of power with her, and I hope you will make use of
it to make me happy; for (added he) I will no longer conceal from you my love for your Sister: the Sultana Valide opposed it, she forces charming Iohaime to be cruel to me, it may be against her will: but you may assure her, that it is her own fault if she be not Grand Sultana. This declaration made with all the earnest∣ness of a tender and passionate Lover, so surprized him, that it was a good while before he could answer him. The Sultan could not tell what to make of this. What? (said he) will you too declare against my love? These words uttered with some vehe∣mence, brought Achmet out of the confusion he was in; and hiding as well as he could the jealousie and de∣spair which the Emperors love for his Princess filled his soul with, he reco∣vered himself so well as to say, Your passion, Sir, honours Iohaime too much, and I have too much respect for your Highness, to contradict your desires; but I am afraid of creating some mis-understanding between you and the Sultana Valide,
by assisting your love. You know, Sir, that your Mother is positive in her opinion, and will be obey'd; if she does not approve of your kind∣ness for my Sister, and comes to hear of my negotiation; she will never pardon me, or Iohaime, and by re∣moving me from you, will render me incapable of serving you. The Grand Signior, who was pre-possessed by his love, made him a thousand prote∣stations to protect him, and free him from all that he apprehended: and conjuring him to pity his affection, cast him into a strange confusion. This Favourite had two things to choose, which were more cruel to him than death; on one side he saw him∣self in danger of losing his Masters favour, whom he infinitely esteemed, if he refused to serve him in his love; and on the other hand, he was forced to speak against his own interest, in behalf of the most dangerous Rival in the world: for the Grand Signior was not only considerable for his high birth, and the possession of the great∣est Empire on earth; but he was furni∣shed
with qualities that rendred him very acceptable. This Prince is ca∣pable of being strongly ingaged, and his conduct has manifested that he is very constant in love, his soul is great, and royal, his humour is chearful, so∣ciable, and familiar, but not indiffe∣rently with every body; for he can be grave on occasion, and that with so much majesty, as imprints an uni∣versal awe: his shape is not very ad∣vantageous, but it was straight, be∣fore he fell from his Horse one day in leaping a ditch in hunting, which hurt him on the left side, and makes him a little crooked. He has the finest eyes that a man can have; his mouth is good, his complexion is a little gross, and not very smooth, since he had the Small Pox; his beard is of Chesnut colour, like as his hair; his gate is grave, and though his constitution be somewhat tender, yet he is very vi∣gorous: he is very skilful in the use of the Bow, and the Musquet; he is exceeding generous, and when he has any War in hand, lays aside all his pleasures though he loves them ex∣cessively.
The knowledge of so much desert did strangely alarm Achmet, however he resolved to promise the Sultan any thing rather than lose the opportunity of seeing the Princess, who was as impatient to impart her discontents, and the Grand Signiors addresses, to him. The first moments of their interview (which was in the Gardens of the Seraglio) were taken up with tears of joy to see one another again. The rest of the time was im∣ployed in expressing all that two per∣fect Lovers could say to one another, after a long absence. They acquain∣ted one another with the Emperor Mahomet's love, and contrived what they should do to hide their own: but they could not find any way to be soon happy, and to protect their love from the storm that threatned it in the Seraglio. The Sultans passion was an impediment to their felicity. Ach∣met was forbid to own that he knew Iohaime's birth, and she durst not de∣clare that Fatima was not her Mo∣ther; so that they were obliged to keep a secret that contributed to
their unhappiness, They concluded that they ought not to put the Grand Signior in despair, lest they should want a pretence to see one another; and after a thousand reiterated pro∣testations of inviolable fidelity, Ach∣met took his leave of her, to go and give Mahomet an account of his nego∣tiation, who waited for his return with all the disquiet of an impatient Lover. He told him that he found more difficulty in perswading his Si∣ster, than he imagined he should; and that her fear of displeasing the Sultana Valide made her refuse the ho∣nor which his Highness offered her; but that he hoped in time to render her more flexible, provided he might have the liberty of conversing pri∣vately with her sometimes. The Emperor embraced his Favourite, and promised him his favour on all occasi∣ons that might require it. In the mean time Achmet and Iohaime, who abused the Sultans credulity, to carry on their love, had new subjects of complaint, and were once more for∣ced to suffer the torments which Lo∣vers
feel in long absence. Mahomet Coprogli sent his Son with a powerful Army against the Bassa of Aleppo, and Prince Soliman Amurath who preten∣ded to be the lawful successor of the Ottoman Empire. This second sepa∣ration afflicted him more than the first; he could not resolve to go, with∣out discovering his passion to his Mo∣ther, and making her promise him that she would assist him, and oppose Prince Mahomet. Fatima perceiving her Sons despair, promised him all that he desired, and told him she would endeavour to make him happy; and that if he would write to the Prin∣cess Iohaime, she would deliver his Letters to her, and send him her an∣swers: But she required of him that he would trust her to mannage his af∣fairs with the Sultana Valide, lest he should provoke the Grand Signior, who would have reason to be angry, if he should come to know his falshood. These assurances did a little compose Achmets mind; he marched against the enemy with more courage, and fought them so successfully, that he
defeated them; and he took the new Prince Soliman Amurath and the rebel∣lious Bassa prisoners: and his good fortune was such, that the Sophy of Persia, who intended to besiege Baby∣lon, being informed that Achmet was coming to its relief, left his enter∣prise imperfect. After this expediti∣on he returned glorious, and trium∣phant to Constantinople, where all the applause that he met with, did not please him so much as the hope of seeing his Princess. But this joy la∣sted not long; for fate envying his felicity, soon put an end to it: he ho∣ped to have laid all those Laurels which love had animated him to win, at the feet of Iohaime: but the Sultana Valide apprehending the consequences of her Son Mahomets passion for Io∣haime, to keep him from seeing her, had confined her to a secret apart∣ment, pretending that she was sick, and was to bathe her self privately. The sorrow and melancholy that ap∣peared in Iohaime's countenance, made her pretended sickness probable enough. The report of her being
sick, soon spread abroad, and Achmet heard it before his Mother could have time to disabuse him, by telling him the true cause of her feigned indispo∣sition. She loved her Son too well to let him continue in his mistake, be∣lieving that since she had discovered more important secrets to him, she ought not to let him be ignorant that nothing troubled Iohaime but his ab∣sence. By this means she comforted him a little, but could not quite cure him of the melancholy which the im∣possibility of seeing his Princess put him into. In the mean while the Sultana Valide endeavoured to take off the Sultans thoughts from Iohaime, by making him fall in love with some other beauty. She found none so ca∣pable of ingaging him as a young Can∣diot, named Eugenia. She was a Greek, and a Christian, and was born at Re∣timo a Town in Candia, from whence she was taken away very young, and made a Slave, when the Turks made their first descent upon that Island, and took, and sacked Retimo in the reign of Ibrahim. She changed her
name into that of Zachi, which sig∣nifies dear, or favourite, in respect of her beauty, which gave place to none. Her stature was moderate, but so just, that it could not be higher or lower, without losing some of its grace: her complexion was admira∣bly white and smooth: her eyes were so lively and sparkling that one could not discern their colour: her mouth and teeth incomparable: her hair of the finest black that was ever seen: her neck and arms as one would wish them: her min and behaviour were so agreeable, that it was impossible for Sultan Mahomet, notwithstanding all the pre-possession of his soul, not to yield to so many charms. He found Zachi so handsome and so witty, that he could not keep himself from show∣ing that Iohaime had not so much in∣slaved him, as to hinder her from having some influence on him. Eu∣genia was strictly charged by the Sul∣tana Valide to neglect nothing that might ingage the Grand Signior to love her; but the Sultans own merit, and good qualities prevailed more
with her than this command. So ac∣complished a beauty as Zachi finds no great difficulty in the conquest of so tender a heart as the Grand Signiors. With this new Mistress he diverted the melancholy that Iohaime's sick∣ness had caused: but unhappy Ach∣met, who could love none but his Prin∣cess, grieved almost to death that he did not see her: and to increase his sorrow, the Grand Visier his Father, who thought of nothing but the good of the State, and of making his Son capable of being hereafter necessary to his Master, without reflecting on Achmets amours, or giving him time to contrive any thing, sent him into Dalmatia, to make War on the Vene∣tians, who were at the same time in∣vaded in Candia. His obedience to his Father, and his own glory, obliged him to sacrifice his Love to his Duty: therefore he went away without any other comfort, than that of writing a Letter to his Princess. His Mother promised him to deliver it into her own hand. Without staying for an answer he went to besiege Clissa, where,
as I have already told you, he beha∣ved himself with extraordinary cou∣rage. Fatima was not very punctual in delivering her Sons Letter, but at last she sent it to Iohaime, who found it to this purpose. Fate, the enemy of my joy, and repose, hinders me from seeing you, my Princess, and I go a great way off from you, to seek death, which alone can put an end to my pains: my duty takes me against my will from the place where my love would detain me. I know not at my de∣parture what your thoughts are; but if you continue the same to me, I presently know what I ought to be. Iohaime received this Letter with such sorrow, as is easier to imagine than express; she could not restrain her complaints and tears from break∣ing out, just when the Sultan passed un∣der the window where she was, not knowing that she was in this Apart∣ment, which in a very remote quarter looks into the Sultana's Garden. He was wholly taken up with his new
passion, which led him to Eugenia. The Princess blinded, with her tears, did not see him, but the Grand Signior hearing some body sigh, looked up, and discovered Iohaime. This sight both moved his compassion, and sur∣prized him to see her there whom he believed to be at the Sultana's private baths, whither no man, not so much as the Sultan himself ever comes. His flame which was not quite extingui∣shed, was presently kindled again with more heat than before; and for∣getting his design of visiting fair Za∣chi, he endeavoured to learn of Io∣haime the cause of her sorrow, and why she was lodged in so solitary a place. She wondering to hear her self named, and knowing the Sultans voice, notwithstanding all that he could urge to her, retired from the window without speaking to him. This behaviour of hers so raised Ma∣homets curiosity, that he ran to the Sultana Valide's Apartment, and ve∣ry furiously asked her where Iohaime was, saying he would see her imme∣diately. The Sultana taking notice
of her Sons disorder, and vehemence, answered him very calmly, that he might be easily satisfied; and adding flattery to this assurance, desired him to tell her, whence his suddain curio∣sity proceeded. The Prince who lo∣ved and respected his Mother ex∣tremely, being a little appeased, re∣lated to her what had hapned to him. The Sultana was much surprized at this adventure, not being able to guess at the cause of Iohaime's affliction: but it was necessary to satisfie the Grand Signior, who challenged her pro∣mise, and would needs know why Io∣haime was removed under pretence of sickness. This question strangely perplexed the Sultana, who now saw the secret, which she had particular reasons to conceal, in danger of being discovered: but at last she told him, that being informed of his love to Io∣haime, who for some reasons which she conjur'd him not to inquire farther in∣to at present, could not possibly come to be Sultana; she had removed her in hopes of abating his passion by her absence, and engaging him some∣where
else: but since her caution pro∣ved to no purpose, he might see her if he pleased; and that she believed when he once knew the obstacles of his love, he would continue it no lon∣ger. Then she gave him her hand, and bid him lead her to Iohaime's Chamber, who was in such confusion, that she never thought of hiding Ach∣met's Letter. The Sultan seeing it on a cushion, snatched it up, and having read it, he turned briskly to the Sultana Valide, with his eyes spark∣ling with anger, and jealousie: Well Madam, said he, was it perfidious Achmets love then, that was the in∣vincible obstacle of my passion? do you betray me to favour the Grand Visiers Son, who by abusing my goodness, kept a correspondence with her whom I always took to be his Sister? And you, ingrateful wo∣man, continued he, addressing him∣self to Iohaime, Could the love of a Slave make you so firm, and con∣stant in your denials to me? but I know how to be revenged on your contempt, and the treachery of
your base lover. Then fury and grief not suffering him to say any more, he would have gone away from them to have satisfied his rage by some cruel action or other, when the Sultana Valide who was astonished at the discovery of the intrigue between Achmet and Iohaime, immediately re∣flected that it was necessary to disa∣buse the Sultan, and prevent his re∣sentment of the deceit that had been put upon him. She staid him by the arm, and with tears in her eyes desi∣red him to hear her. Then she told him that Iohaime was his Sister, and why she had concealed it from him; conjuring him to own her and love her as he ought to do. Anger and jealou∣sie now gave place to reason, and ten∣derness; and nature spake more in Iohaime's behalf, than all that her Mo∣ther could say. He immediately re∣lented, and wondered he had not sooner found out the meaning of those secret agitations that were caused by nearness of blood. He embraced his Mother, and his Sister, giving marks of a most pure and violent inclinati∣on,
and a very particular esteem of her virtue. He promised her that since she loved the Visier Azem's Son, he would not hinder their happiness: and from thenceforwards he addres∣sed himself more assiduously to fair Zachi who was owned as Sultana, as soon as she was perceived to be with Child. He loved this Princess so ten∣derly, and respectfully, that he has always contrived his secret intrigues, to which he is much inclined, with such caution, as to avoid giving her any cause to be jealous. In the mean time valiant Achmet hazarded his life against the Venetians, at the Siege of Clissa, the Capital Ci∣ty of Dalmatia; from whence the Ot∣toman Army was forced to retire: which afforded him leisure to return to Constantinople. He knew nothing of what had hapned in the Seraglio, in his absence, because the Grand Signior having a mind to surprize him pre∣sently at his return, had charged Fa∣tima not to send him word of any thing. When Achmet came to wait on him, he received him with open
arms, and looking more chearfully than he was wont; after he had ask∣ed him some questions about the War, he took him aside, to tell him that he was not only obliged to him for his diligence in serving him, and exposing his life for his glory; but that he was more particularly behold∣en to him for the good offices he had done him in his love, which had suc∣ceeded according to his wishes: for at last, dear Achmet, continued he, I am conqueror; your Sister Iohaime is no more cruel to me, and I enjoy those delights in her that make me perfectly happy. He accompanied this discourse with such transports of joy, that unfortunate Achmet believed him. His colour changed, and his heart was quite overcome with grief: all the respect he had for the Emperor could not hinder him from yielding to his infirmity; and his strength failed him so, that the Sultan seeing him rea∣dy to sink down, was afraid he would have died upon the place: when, not to torment him any longer, Can You Achmet, said he, holding him up,
faint away, when the time you have so ardently wished for is arri∣ved? the Princess Iohaime is still faithful to you, and may yet before night, assure you her self that she loves you more than ever. Nothing less than this could have recalled amo∣rous Achmet from death. But he was in doubt still whether he should be∣lieve the Grand Signior; he could not flatter himself with such hopes, or imagine which way such a change should happen. The Sultan soon con∣vinced him by expressing himself more clearly: he told him how he found out the secret of his love, and the mystery of his Sisters birth, which had been so long concealed from him; and without any more delay, that ve∣ry night concluded the marriage be∣tween Achmet and Iohaime. He sent to acquaint the Grand Visier with it, and celebrated his Favourites marri∣age with extraordinary magnificence. Thus were these two Lovers rendred happy, and for many years tasted the sweets of a consummate love. This alliance which according to
the maxims of the Ottoman Emperors, ought to have removed Achmet Copro∣gli from the supreme Ministry, by an extraordinary event proved the mo∣tive, that obliged the Grand Signior to slight the policy of his Predeces∣sors, who rather chose to marry their Daughters and Sisters to simple Bassa's, than to their Grand Visiers, lest they should make use of that honour in the frequent Seditions that molest their Empire; and secretly contrive the destruction of the Males of the Impe∣rial Family, that by their alliance they may have right to pretend to the Crown. The Emperor Mahomet by confer∣ring the charge of Visier Azem on his Brother-in-law, shewed that a Prince ought not to be a slave to Policy; that he is above Laws and Customs; that he should not submit to them any far∣ther then he finds them advantagious to his State and Glory; and that he is always at liberty to reform them, or establish new ones, when there is occasion, or necessity requires it. He could not have made a better choice
to supply the first charge of his Em∣pire; and though he did not find as much experience in Achmet Coprogli, as in his Father, at least he met with the same zeal for his service, the same courage in the highest undertakings, and the same genius and resolution in the greatest affairs. As soon as Achmet was invested in his new Dignity, he shewed the great∣ness of his soul, and the strength of his wit; for as young as he was, he was no more surprized, or confused in this place; the burthen of which so few Subjects are vigorous enough to support, than if he had the experi∣ence of the ablest Politicians, and greatest Statesmen. He followed his Fathers foot-steps so exactly, that no body could perceive any other change in the administration, than that it de∣scended from the Father to the Son; and that one was as expert as the other, who was the greatest, and most judicious Minister that ever ma∣naged the affairs of the Ottoman Em∣pire. This young Minister therefore imi∣tating
his Father Mahomet Coprogli, acted every thing with wonderful pru∣dence; he at first accustomed him self never to let either Malice, Melancho∣ly, Anger, or Haste, which are the four dangerous shelves of ready and and subtil wits, to have any influence on his resolution. He is always me∣thodical in his discourse, judicious in what he writes, sincere in his proceed∣ing, punctual in his promises, secret in his orders, quick, and ready to en∣gage, and very constant in his reso∣lutions. His good qualities made the other Visiers and Bassa's of the Di∣van jealous of him, who could not endure that a young man should be preferred before them, whom they were obliged to own as their Superior, and to submit their opinion to his. The most powerful and discontented of those who pretended to the Digni∣ty of Grand Visier was Rustan Bey, Bas∣sa of Babylon. He had great intrigues at the Port, and abundance of Crea∣tures among the Spahies and Ianiza∣ries that were at Constantinople, whither the Sultan was not returned since the
death of the Visier Azem. He enga∣ged them underhand to mutiny, and endeavour by threats to oblige the Grand Signior to name another Grand Visier; but the Emperor as soon as he was out of his minority, made himself absolute among them; and after the example of Sultan Amurath his Unkle, often came abroad to see them exer∣cise. By this means he shewed that he had more courage, and resolution than his male-content Subjects were willing to allow him; and that the Sultana Valide, and the Visier Mahomet Coprogli had given him a more heroick education than any Ottoman Prince ever had before him. That great and faithful Minister taught him to behave himself like an Emperor, and to make use of his Sovereign power. The Sultan therefore had a mind to practise his lessons, and imploy his policy in main∣taining the choice he had made of his Son to succeed him in his charge, and keeping the mutineers in order. He was not ignorant of the mischievous consequences of Seditions; and that it is difficult to appease them, when
the people and the Militia are united in a Rebellion. He concluded with the Grand Visier that it was necessary to gain the chief leaders of the Spa∣hoes, by distributing mony among them, to oblige them to withdraw their Troops from the Ianizaries fa∣ction. These two sorts of Militia, as we have elsewhere mentioned, have been always opposed to one another; nor was it difficult to divide them. The Spahies being appeased by the Visier Azems liberality, not only laid down their Arms, but promised also to re∣sist the Ianizaries attempts; who on the other side fearing the Grand Sig∣niors menaces, and hoping to be as well rewarded as the Spahies, if they returned to their duty, declared that they were ready to punish those that were guilty, This submission caused the Sultan immediately to leave Adri∣anople, to come and quiet the trouble at Constantinople, by taking advantage of the Spahies zeal to suppress the se∣ditious. He assembled the Divan, whither he came himself with all the Bassa's and Officers of the Port, and
the principal of the City; and with some sharpness told them how much it displeased him, that they should con∣tradict his actions, and that the Iani∣zaries should go about to impose laws on him. He spoke with so much Ma∣jesty, that he strook an awe into the most insolent. At the same time he gave order to seize the Bassa of Baby∣lon, who was the chief author of the Sedition, the Aga, and the most cri∣minal Officers of the Ianizaries, and some of the principal inhabitants, causing them all to be strangled; and threatned to cashier the whole body of the Ianizaries, if ever they com∣mitted the least disorder. This proceeding seemed the more rigorous to these Troops, because they expected more favourable usage; but they durst not complain. The Grand Visier in the mean time in con∣formity to his Fathers maxims, thought it necessary to employ the Ia∣nizaries, that they might have no lei∣sure to mutiny again. He intended to continue the Siege of Candia, but he would first make an end of the
Transylvanian War, which Ali Bassa managed with no great success: and he was preparing himself to march with the Ianizaries, and Spahies, when he was informed that the Sophy of Per∣sia was about to attaque Bagdet. This news changed the face of things, and made the Sultan send an Aga, and a Chiaux to Vienna, to propose a Peace to the Emperor. These Envoys met not with that satisfaction that the Vi∣vier Azem wished. The Emperor gave them to understand, that the Princi∣pality of Transylvania, which was the cause of his difference with the Sul∣tan, was a member that had been se∣parated from his Estate, and that his Highness could not without injustice think of obliging him to quit his pre∣tensions to that Province, and to de∣sert Prince Chimin Ianos, who had put himself into his protection: and that he could not agree to the dismantling of Serinwar, unless the Grand Signior would demolish the Fortifications of Waradin, and some other places. This answer did not please the Grand Visier, who was no less careful
than his Father had been, of his Ma∣sters glory, and industrious to enlarge his Dominions: but hearing for cer∣tain that the Sophy marched against Bagdet, he saw it was necessary to tem∣porize now: therefore he sent orders to Ali Bassa, the General of the Ar∣my in Transylvania, to continue the overtures of Peace. This General at the same time received the news of the taking of Chimen Ianos by Michael Abaffi, who succeeded Count Barelay, and was protected by the Port in his pretences to Transylvania. The death of Chimin Ianos, whom Abaffi caused to be beheaded in Prison, as Chimin had treated his first Competitor, faci∣litated the Conquest of the Province, and favoured the Grand Visiers designs. Ali Bassa immediately sent a Courrier to him to know what he should do in this conjuncture; but Achmet sent him word again that he should observe the orders he had received: so that he pressed the Emperor to send Deputies to the Port to negotiate a Peace be∣tween the two Empires. In the mean time the Ottoman Army made conti∣nual
inroads into Hungary, and the Im∣perial Troops did the like in the Grand Signiors Dominions. But the Turks being tired with this tedious skirmish∣ing War, threatned the coming down of the Grand Signior himself with a formidable Army to invade Hun∣gary, if the Emperor did not very sud∣denly conclude a Peace; which made him dispatch Doctor Perez to the Di∣van. The Grand Visier, whose drift was to prolong the Negotiation till his own affairs were in a better po∣sture, dismissed him, with order to tell his Master that he should send his Agats to Themidwar, to treat there with Ali Bassa, and the Cappigi Bassa: but hearing that the Sophy for fear of being invaded by the Mogol, had gi∣ven over his enterprize on Babylon, he commanded General Ali not to recede from the first conditions which he had proposed in order to the conclusion of the Peace. The Emperor finding the Sultans propositions unreasonable, and that the Turks continued their Incursions, believed, the Divan, whatever it pre∣tended,
had no desire to terminate the War: therefore he began to look about him betimes, for fear of being surprized; foreseeing that it would not be long before the Grand Visier would fall upon him; who, as soon as he had put the particular affairs of the Ottoman Empire into order, resol∣ved to pursue the enterprize which his Father began, and was forced to leave unfinished by death. After he had rigged a powerful Navy to encounter the Venetians, and the Christian Prin∣ces, whose Forces he apprehended at Sea, he prepared to march against the Emperor, to let his Master see that he was as expert as the old Generals, who proud of their long command, and age, flighted him as a young man, and raised disadvantageous stories of him. He ordered the Bassa's of Alba∣nia, Natolia, Buda, and some others, to draw towards Hungary with their Troops, and desired the Sultan to stay at Adrianople, and to permit him to go and exercise his Authority, and give proofs of his valour. He led with him the old bands of Ianizaries, and
Spahies, placing the Mutineers in the Forlorn Hope, that they might be cut off in this War, which he hoped to finish in a short time, that he might turn all the Ottoman Forces against Candia. But while he marched to∣wards Hungary, his Fleet which he set forth to scour the Sea, and succor Canea, which was distressed by the Venetian Army, was not so successful as he expected: it shun'd ingaging the Venetian Fleet, which would have fought to have prevented the relief of Canea. The same Fleet however pur∣sued Turkish Gallies in the Ar∣chipelago so briskly, that it took ten Saiques, gave chace to four great Vessels that followed a Caravan of Alexandria; and being come up with them, took three, and several Saiques that carried abundance of persons of quality of both Sexes, who were go∣ing on Pilgrimage to Mecha. The news of this disgrace did more inflame the Grand Visiers courage, who made long marches to arrive at Bel∣grade, where the body of the Army expected him under the conduct of Ali
Bassa, who was newly made Visier of Hungary. The approach of this great Minister, and the arrival of the Bas∣sa's of Bossina, Silestria, Waradin, Aleppo, and the Beglerbeg of Natolia, so terri∣fied the Emperor, that he presently commanded the Baron de Goez, one of his Deputies, to divert the dreadful storm that threatned the Empire, by granting several of the demands which Ali Bassa made in the Grand Signior's name. Ali acquainted the Grand Visier upon what terms the Em∣peror was willing to purchase Peace: that he consented that Michel Abassi who was under his Highnesses prote∣ction, should be acknowledged Prince of Transylvania, and promised to withdraw his Garrisods out of some places, and to demolish the Fort of Serinwar: but Achmet had no mind to go back now he was so forward, and had made such preparations for the War; thinking it below him to make Peace on any conditions, either less advantageous to his Master, or less glorious for himself, than the Vi∣ctories that seemed to attend his
Arms; and for this reason, not being satisfied with what the Emperor of∣fered. He asked over and above, two millions for the expences he had been at, with a Tribute of an hun∣dred thousand Rixdollers a year for the Kingdom of Hungary, which he resolved to make wholly tributary to the Ottoman Empire. Besides this, he would have the Emperor give free passage for what Troops the Grand Signior pleased to send into the Vene∣tian Territories. These proud demands made the Emperor despair of the accommoda∣tion, he had hitherto flattered him∣self withal. He perceived that the Grand Visier would not let the Iani∣zaries return to Constantinople, till their fierceness and insolence were abated by the toils of a War, which through the animosity of both parties would undoubtedly prove very bloody. Achmet Coprogli being informed of the Emperors continual preparati∣ons for War, was glad to meet with resistance in such an Enemy, whose defeat would augment his
glory, and convince the world that he was as able in the Camp, as in the Divan; and could not only advise like an Oracle, but could command also like a great Cap∣tain.
THE HISTORY of the Grand VISIERS. The fourth Book. THE Emperor seeing his Com∣missioners return without any effect of their Negotiation, made no question but that the Visier Azem would endeavour all he could to come and besiege him in Vienna. Therefore he fortified that City, that it might be in a condition, if need were, to resist the Ottoman Forces, implored the assistance of all the Po∣tentates of Europe, and with four distinct Armies secured the heredita∣ry Provinces of the Empire. The
Grand Visier on the other side aimed at some considerable Expedition, and having determined what to do, pas∣sed the long Bridge of Essek, and sate down before Newhausel. He immedi∣ately invested the place, and defea∣ted some Troops which Count For∣gate, and Balsi, and Marquiss Pio, would have put into it, then he summoned it according to the custom of the Turks, who do so to all places they besiege. But Count Forgats the Go∣vernour having given such an answer to his summons, as made him find that fair words and splendid pro∣mises were not sufficient arguments to perswade him to surrender a place which the Emperor had intrusted him with: he planted so furious a Battery as soon made breaches wide enough to invite the Turks to an as∣sault, in which great numbers of them were slain by the defendants. But the Grand Visier pressed the Siege so vigorously, that the Governour was forced to yield the place upon com∣position; and the Articles were so advantagious, that several of the
Officers, and the chief of the besieged knowing to what necessity of surren∣dring the Town was reduced, and what multitudes of their Enemies had perished before their Walls in so small a time, were of opinion at first that the Grand Visier readily consented to whatever Count Forgats demanded, with design to break his word, and to have it the sooner in his power to revenge the loss he had sustained du∣ring the Siege: but the event shewed that they did him wrong to suspect he could be guilty of a baseness so much below the greatness of his soul, though otherwise such actions are very com∣mon among the Turks. Achmet Co∣progli has always profest himself an enemy to treachery, and thinks him∣self concerned in honour to keep his word on all occasions. The Gover∣nour of Newhausel was the first that found this to be true; the good usage he received from the Grand Visier con∣strained him to be just to his vertue and desert, and far from what his Officers apprehended, to thank him for the complement he made him, up∣on
his generous defence of a Town which seemed incapable of holding out against so powerful an Army. Count Forgats being marched out of Newhausel, the Visier Azem made his entry into it, and at the same time dispatched an Officer to carry the news to the Grand Signior; but de∣signing to make an entire conquest of Hungary, to accomplish it without shedding of blood, for ruining the Country, he bethought himself of issuing out a Proclamation, that all the places that would submit to the Ottoman Empire, should be exempted from Contribution for six years, at the end of which each house should pay but a Rixdoller. This did not succeed so well as he expected; how∣ever he possessed himself of Schinta, Novigrad, Levens, and some other pla∣ces of less importance, with which he ended the Campagna, that he might refresh his Army, and be at leisure to look after the affairs of the Port, which he still took care of, not∣withstanding the War. To this end he had Courriers continually on the
way, who informed him of all that passed, and carried messages from him to the Sultan, who was then at Adri∣anople, where he made publick rejoy∣cings for three days together for the Victories of his chief Minister, and concluded them with the death of his principal Nectangis or Secretary. His Highness caused him to be beheaded upon the advice he had from the Visier Azem, that he was corrupted by the Emperors Ministers, from whom he had received a very considerable sum of money, which was found in his Coffers; being not only a certain ar∣gument of his Crime, but a mark of Achmet Coprogli's faithful correspon∣dence in all parts. The season of the year which obliged the Visier to re∣treat, did not hinder him from send∣ing Succors to Canea, and Recruits to the Troops that were in Dalmatia; so that at the same time that he had undertaken another War, he pressed the Venetians in two several places, to show the Christian Princes, that the Sultan could maintain more Armies than one against his Enemies, and
that he did not at all fear the great preparations they threatned him with; being advertised that Count Serini did very much distress the Troops that wintered in the conquer∣ed places, and along the River Traag, and Dravus. He composed three small Armies of Tartars, Moldavians, and some Turkish Companies to wast Moravia, and Silesia, and to make in∣roads as far as Presburg, the Capital City of Hungary, by that means to di∣vert Count Serini, who by the Empe∣ror, and the Diet at Ratisbon was no∣minated Generalissimo of the Hungarian Forces. But neither these Forces, nor the extremity of Winter, could hinder this Hero from taking Berne∣zet, Raboscha, Seques, and several other places which the Turks had conquer∣ed. He made himself Master of Pa∣lanka, and Peez, a populous trading Town; and leaving his Army under the conduct of Count Horlac, he be∣sieged and took Tainskirken, and at∣tacked the Bridge of Essek, where he met with a vigorous resistance, which however could not keep him from
burning that, and many Magazines which the Turks had along the River Dravus. After this he undertook the Siege of Canisia, a place of great im∣portance. The Grand Signior hearing of this Siege, was resolved to go in person and relieve this Town, and stay the course of Count Serini's conquests; but the Visier Azem dissuaded him from his design, representing the danger he exposed himself to, and the mis∣chievous consequences of his absence from Constantinople; where the people being provoked at the punishment the Sultan had inflicted on the chief of the City, who conspired against him, were ready to rise, and spoke of ma∣king one of his brothers Emperor. The Grand Visier too had a mind to finish the War he had so happily be∣gun, and was unwilling that his High∣nesses presence should rob him of his glory, and be thought to have effect∣ed more than all his industry; yet the care of his own glory was not the on∣ly motive that caused him to divert Sultan Mahomet from this expedition,
the affection and zeal which he ever had for his Masters service, at this time prevailed over all other consi∣derations, knowing the violence of his nature, and the greatness of his courage, he feared he would engage himself too far into danger, and that he would receive more prejudice by the enterprizes of the Mutineers at Constantinople, than advantage by the conquest of the whole Kingdom of Hungary. Nor did he doubt but that he should finish the Expedition suc∣cessfully, without the assistance of the Captains and old Generals that were in his Army, who out of jealousie op∣posed his design, and hindred him from advancing his Conquests so far as he might have done, if he had ta∣ken less heed to their counsel, which he rather chose to follow, and pro∣ceed slowly, than to hazard any thing upon his own account. Being infor∣med of all Count Serini's exploits, who nearly distressed Canisia, and as vali∣antly repulsed Sultan Mahomet's For∣ces, as his Grandfather did those of the Emperor Soliman, he took the
Field to prevent him from joyning Canisia to the other conquests he had made during the Winter; but the death of Ali Bassa obliged him to sus∣pend his intention of repulsing the enemy, to allow him those Funeral Ceremonies which his great services to the state deserved. Ali was one of the greatest, and most expert Captains of the Ottoman Em∣pire: he bore Arms first under Sultan Amurath, and behaved himself so well in the Persian War, that the Em∣peror in recompence gave him one of his Sisters in marriage, and made him Bassa-General of his Armies. He had gained such reputation, that his power made the Grand Visier Mahomet Coprogli jealous of him, and resolve to take away his command of the Army in Transylvania, as we have already men∣tioned; and he advised his Son to take heed of him as one that might well be his Competitor for the charge of Grand Visier: but equitable Ach∣met perceiving the extraordinary me∣rit of this brave man, respected his virtue and age, which was threescore
and ten; and instead of following the politic cautions of his Father, submitted often to his advice, and ex∣tremely deplored his death, which was also lamented by the Grand Sig∣nior. After he had rendered him all the Offices that the Mahometan Law required, he pursued his march to Canisia. His Army consisted of se∣venty thousand men, whose approach forced Count Serini, Count Hohelac, and Strozzi who were joyned with him, to raise the Siege, and retire into the Isle of Serin. Their retreat was but just time enough, for as soon as they were gone the Turks arrived, and posted themselves in the same places that the Christians quitted. The Grand Visier having put sufficient relief into Canisia, sent Ismael Bassa with twenty thousand men to pass the River Mur at the place where it joyns with the Dravus, that by getting that passage, he might have free entry in∣to Stiria, Carinthia, and Croatia; but Count Strozzi valiantly defended the Pass, and performing the part of a gallant Souldier, was slain with a Musquet Bullet.
In the mean time the Emperor im∣patiently expected the Succors he had desired of the Christian Princes. The Pope, the Princes of Italy, and the King of Spain, had promised him large sums of money, for which he had great occasion, but they made no haste to send them. Sweden and Lo∣rain gave him hopes of men, but he heard nothing of their coming; so that he despaired of receiving any of the Succors he looked for time enough except those of France. The King on this occasion, as on a thousand others shewed himself to be the most Christian, and the most zealous of all Princes for the good of Christendom; for when Count Strozzi whom we spoke of, who was sent from his Imperial, to his Most Christian Majesty, had represented the necessity the Emperor was in, the King granted all that he desired; and not at all satisfied that they should limit the Succors to two thousand Horse, and four thousand Foot, that they should think to bound his liberality, and hinder him from giving more splendid marks of his ex∣traordinary
generosity, and zeal for Religion. This incomparable Mo∣narch could not keep himself from telling his Courtiers, that he had ra∣ther they were in Hungary than at the Louvre; and that if the Dauphin his only Son were old enough, he would send him to this War. The chief of the Court, and Kingdom were ambi∣tious of serving as Volunteers under Count Coligni, whom the King chose to be General, making the Duke of Feuillade his Mareschal de Camp. The Duke of Bouillon great Chamberlain of France, was the first that begg'd leave of his Majesty to make this Campagna, his example was followed by his Brother the Count d' Auvergn, the Chevaliers de Lorain, and de Rohan, the Dukes of Saubieze and Brisac, the Marquess de Guitery, Master of the Wardrobe, the Marquises de Ragny, Villery, Castelnau, Seneçay, Bethune, and Estrade; the Counts de Saux, and Ca∣naples, the Chevaliers de St. Agnan, and Coaslin, and several others who pre∣pared themselves to signalize their valour on the bank of Raab, where by
and by we shall see them defeating the most formidable Enemy of Chri∣stendom. The news of the Troops that were to come to the Emperors assistance being brought to the Grand Visier, he resolved to advance his Conquests be∣fore their arrival. Ismael Bassa whom he commanded to gain the passage over the River Mur, having been re∣pulsed, as we said before by Count Strozzi, sought a more favourable place, and besieged the Fort of Serin, which commanded all the Country about it. Count Nicolas Serini did all he could to make the Enemy retire, and perhaps had effected it, and for∣ced them to give over their enter∣prize, if Achmet Coprogli, who ear∣nestly sought an opportunity of dis∣puting the glory of a victory with this General, whose reputation was so great, that the Turks trembled at his very name, had not arrived in the Camp, with the Bassa's of Bossina, and Albania, followed by a body of twenty thousand men, having made another body of the rest of his Army, which
was employed in another place, His presence animated the Souldiers, who were discouraged by the stout resist∣ance of their Enemy, and the toils they indured in the Siege. They were ashamed not to follow their General, who exposed himself to the greatest dangers, and would have gone to the assault himself, if the crowd of the Officers of the Army had afforded him any room. They strove who should first take the Fort, and having at last carried it, they put two thou∣sand men whom they found there in Garrison to the Sword, inraged that such an handful should presume to resist an Army of forty thousand men. The Grand Visier caused this Fort to be razed; the demolition of which he had before in vain deman∣ded of the Emperor, because it awed the Ottoman Garrison in Canisia. Af∣terwards he marched against little Comora, and took it by Composition; and hearing that Count Souches one of the Imperial Generals had defeated the twenty thousand Tartars, Mol∣davians, and Valachians, whom he
sent into the high Hungary, at Serne∣vers. He determined to extend his vengeance to the very Gates of Vien∣na, to waste all Austria, and to be∣siege the Emperor in the Capital Ci∣ty of his Empire. To this purpose he approached Sarvar a considerable place on the River Raab; but seeing no likelihood of forcing it suddenly, and being informed that the imperi∣al Army advanced to hinder his pas∣sage, he resolved to prevent it, and marched in haste to possess himself of the Bridge of Kermen, a Town on the same River, and in his march took the Town of Ergevart; but he met with a vigorous resistance when he came to the Bridge where he intended to pass his Army. Count Montecuculi the General of the Imperial Troops, and Count Hohenlac, General of the Confederates, foresaw that the Grand Visier would choose this passage as the most commodious, and were come thither to make it good: but they would have been forced to have quit∣ted it, if a party of Count Coligni, Ge∣neral of the Auxiliary French Troops
Cavalry had not arrived when the Turks were forcing the Bridge. This General, who according to the order he had received from the Generalissimo, had hastned his march to joyn the Imperial Army, advanced with some Volunteers, and a party of his Guards, and for almost two hours together withstood all the fire and attempts of the Ottomans. Then the Hungarians who were deserted by the Germans, seeing themselves seconded by the French, took heart, and fell upon the Enemy, who was forced to seek a pass two Musket-shot lower, where the French Horse still behaved themselves gallantly, and drove back the Ottoman Army, which lost there abundance of Souldiers and Officers, and among the rest the Bassa of Bossina, who was slain fighting in the formost Ranks. The Visier who would not shrink from the resolution he had taken, impedi∣ments increasing his thirst of victory, persisted obstinately in his design of passing the Raab. Therefore he went up higher towards St. Godard, a little Village, now famous for the action
that happened there, whither he was followed by the Christian Army, which he galled with Cannon-shot all night, while he in the mean time held a Council of War, where it was concluded to swim over part of the Cavalry, and pass the rest over a bridge, which was made under co∣vert of the Artillery between St. Go∣dard and Glostorff. Ismael Bassa of Buda had the conduct of this enterprize, he passed at the head of six thousand Ia∣nizaries and Spahies, and the flower of the Ottoman Army. The Grand Visier commanded him to make a retrench∣ment on the other side of the River, to amuse the Christians, while he pas∣sed the body of his Army in another place, that they might charge the Im∣perialists on both sides: but Ismael be∣ing gotten over to the other side, in spight of the Germans resistance, could not withhold his Souldiers from assaulting and defeating Count Horlac's Troops that disputed the Pass with them. After which he posses∣sed himself of their post, where he re∣trenched himself, after he had put
them to flight, taken their Cannon, and cut off above two thousand heads. He presently sent the Grand Visier word that he was master of the Pass, and that if he would advance with the rest of the Army, he might cut the Imperialists in pieces. Upon this advice Achmet caused more Troops to pass over to him, who not having room enough to put themselves in or∣der to fight, were attacked by the French; and the Cavalry too being in the same distress, were not able to re∣sist the onset of the illustrious French Volunteers: so that the first Ranks turning their backs, they were all so disordered, that they betook them∣selves to flight, and threw them∣selves into the Raab, where they were drowned in sight of the rest of their Army, and their General, who not being able to assist them, did all that a great Captain could do to animate his Souldiers, and make them renew the Fight, that they might revenge the defeat of their companions; but they were seized with such a panic fear, that they gave back instead of
advancing. The Visier in vain re∣presented to them how much they were concerned to repair their loss, for they persisted in their disobedi∣ence. He went himself before them with his Simitar in his hand, promi∣sing them victory, and great rewards if they would go where their honour called them, and conjured them to follow him; but seeing this did not prevail, he added threats to his in∣treaties, and upbraided their base∣ness. His fury carried him so far, that he had like to have perished in sight of his disobedient Army, and not able to suppress his indignation any longer, he killed three Officers with his own hand, whom he in vain called by their names to follow him, pursuing two more, who cried out to him that they came to make War on the Transylvanians and Hungarians, and not to fight with the French. This brave General finding there was no remedy, caused his Troops to retreat into a secure place, and he with his followers only retired into a quarter apart, to shew how he contemned his
own Army. He sent with a great deal of civility to the Christian Ge∣nerals to demand several Captains, and some Bassa's, and chiefly Ismael who perished in the Fight, which la∣sted nine hours; offering whatever they pleased for their ransom, if they were Prisoners, and sent back all the Christian prisoners that were in his Camp. After the Battle, the two Armies attempted nothing conside∣rable, but stood upon their guard on∣ly. The Turkish Officers and Ca∣ptains being ashamed of their disobe∣dience, desired their General to let them recover their credit by some Siege, or any thing but engaging the Christian Army: but the places they proposed to besiege were of so little importance, that he reproached their cowardize, and flight before an hand∣ful of men tired with a long journey; and told them he would have no more to do with Souldiers who dis∣graced the Ottoman Empire, and by their baseness sullied the glory of their Ancestors.
After this Declaration he sent the Grand Signior word of his loss, and the disobedience of his Troops, and ad∣vised him to renew the Peace between the two Empires, to prevent his being exposed to a second disgrace: all the Divan was of his opinion. The Sultan sent him order to conclude it, and gave notice to the Emperors Resi∣dent, that to stop the progress of the War, they should renew the Confe∣rences that were held at Themiswar. The Resident immediately sent away a Courrier to advertise Prince Lako∣wits the President of the Emperors Council of War, who willingly en∣tertained the proposition, and nego∣tiated so secretly with the Visier Azem, that the Peace was published before it was thought to be treated of. All the world was surprized at this suddain Peace; the Imperialists were of opinion that it was opportunely concluded: but it is certain, that if it had not been made so hastily, and they had then pursued the Turks when they were discouraged by their losses and disorder in the Battle of S. Godard,
the rest of Hungary and Transylvania might have been recovered, which the Sultan without doubt would have surrendered, to finish a War that im∣ployed the best part of his Forces, which he wanted to oppose the Sophy, who made new attempts on Babylon, and the Provinces bordering on Persia, to preserve his Conquests in Candia, from whence the Venetians were dri∣ving him; and to appease the trou∣bles which the revolt of the Gover∣nour Chazan Bassa had raised in Egypt. All Christendom having taken Arms to assist the Emperor, would have made great advantages by the continuation of the War against the common Enemy, and particularly the Commonwealth of Venice would have forced him wholly to quit his design upon Candia. There can never hap∣pen so proper a conjuncture to humble the Sultan's pride. All the Potentates of Europe were ready to unite against him. His own Dominions were di∣sturbed with intestine broils; the So∣phy and the other Princes of Asia were about to declare War against him.
The Venetians had a strong Fleet at Sea. Every thing seemed to contri∣bute to his ruine. But the Emperor by a mistaken policy took false mea∣sures, which in the consequence fell heavy not only upon himself, but the common interest of Christendom; for he concluded such a Peace as left the Sultan at liberty to assemble all his Forces against Candia; which proved afterward to be the loss of that Island. Whereas, had his Im∣perial Majesty comprehended the Ve∣netians in his Treaty, it might on the other side have turned as much to the advantage of that Commonwealth. This proceeding gave likewise great offence to the most Christian King, who had so generously assisted the Emperor against the Ottoman power, in the preservation of his Hereditary Countries, which at that time his Imperial Majesty was not of himself in condition to defend. The French were but ill requited for their pains, particularly by the Confederates, who shamefully left them as soon as they saw them engaged with the
Turks; insomuch that Count Horlac the Confederates General, not being able to make them stand, re∣tired into a Wood, where he was found after the Battle foaming with rage, to see some of our Captains and Volunteers covered with their own, and their enemies blood; who asked him what became of his Troops, and why they would not partake of the honour of the victory, The generosity of our Souldiers which deserved the acknowledgment, and friendship of the Germans, received so much the contrary, that they would not allow them so much as victuals and forrage; so that the Officers were forced-to use threats, to get necessa∣ries for the subsistance of their Troops in their return to France, whi∣ther they led them, the Proclamati∣on of the Peace leaving them no more to do in Hungary and Germany. Achmet Coprogli was afraid he should have been forced to have relinquished many of his Masters pretensions; but seeing how easily the Emperor was satisfied, he managed the Sultans
interest as well as he could, and sub∣scribed to Articles which he at an∣other conjuncture would never have agreed to. He sent them presently away to his Highness to be ratified, and in the mean time he retreated to Belgrade, where he dismissed the Asian Troops, to go and Winter in their own Country, and sent those of Eu∣rope to Winter in Bossina, that they might be the nearer to Dalmatia, which he intended to attacque the next Campagna. Nothing now remain'd for him to do but to return to Constantinople, where his friends and the people impatiently expected him; but he would not set forward without the Grand Signior's order, and till he had received the ratification of the Peace. It was the more welcome at Constantinople at this time,Octob. 22. 1664. because it fell out at the birth of the Sultan's Son, who by the death of his Brother was look∣ed on as Chas Adas, which is as much as the eldest Son, and Heir of the Empire.
The first Article of the Peace, was, that the Emperors should send Em∣bassadors to one another, who should bring the Ratifications, and presents usual on the like occasions. The Grand Signior pitched upon Mahomet Bassa, and sent a rich Vest by him to the Visier Azem, whom he should find at Belgrade, and receive the Instructi∣ons of his Embassie from him. Ma∣homet acquitted himself faithfully of his Highnesses Commissions, and at the same time that Achmet received from him the marks of his Masters gratitude and affection, he was in∣formed of the death of generous Count Serini. This news so surprized the Grand Visier, that he broke off his conversation with Mahomet Bassa, to learn the particulars of that sad acci∣dent, which no relation hitherto has given a clear account of, as I find by some secret Memoires which have more truth in them. It was told the Ottoman General, that his victorious Arms having for∣ced Count Serini to raise the Siege of Canisia, he retired into a Fort of his
own name, which he had built, ex∣tremely dissatisfied that this enter∣prize, as well as several others before had succeeded no better for want of necessary assistance; and that his vex∣ation for the loss, and raising of the said Fort, and the ill usage he recei∣ved from the Emperor, and the Impe∣rial Diet, caused him to retire into one of his Country houses, to com∣fort himself in the tranquillity of a private life, for the inconstancy of his fortune, and the injustice of the Court; where those who held the first rank, as being the most power∣ful, and considerable persons in the Empire, not satisfied with hindering the Diet from choosing him Genera∣lissimo of the Army, which command justly belonged to him, still continued their design of destroying him, to sa∣tiate their envy, and free themselves from their apprehension that this He∣ro would one day shew his resentment of their ingratitude. But not daring to attempt his life openly, with their Arms in their hands, their Court-trea∣chery pursued him in the midst of the
Forrests, where, as he was wont to do, diverting his melancholy with Hunting, he was killed with a blow he received in the chase of a prodi∣gious great Wild Boar, which he had already wounded; to whose fury the authors of his death falsly attri∣buted his murther, and accordingly contrived the relations of it; endea∣vouring so to palliate the enormity of an action which it was their interest should be eternally concealed. This recital had a contrary effect to what was reported. Generous Ach∣met considering the hard fate of va∣liant Count Serini, who may well be ac∣counted the greatest Hero of this Age, far from rejoycing at the fall of so dangerous an enemy, was so touched at it, that all the satisfaction he rea∣ped from the Grand Signior's obliging expressions, which Mahomet Bassa in∣formed him of, could not keep him from shewing his grief, and lament∣ing the unhappy end of a Captain who had so obstructed the progress of the Ottoman Arms, to that degree, that he was angry with the neigh∣bouring
Turks for making Bonfires when they heard of it. The Grand Visier having learned the Sultans intentions, dispatched Ma∣homet Bassa, that he might arrive at Vienna, at the same time that Count Lesbley, whom the Emperor sent to the Port, should come to Adrianople, where the Grand Signior was. Then having commanded the Bassa's of Bossina and Albania to have their Troops ready to pass into Dalmatia with the Sultans first orders, he began his journey to Constantinople, where he met with the applauses due to his great conduct, and invincible courage. The Em∣peror Mahomet received him with open arms, and sufficiently manife∣sted his kindness for, and esteem of this great Minister, who far from abu∣sing his favour, would have made use of it, to obtain pardon for those Of∣ficers who disobeyed him when he pressed them to fight, and would hardly suffer the Sultan to put five or six of them to death, for an example to the rest: not but that he was as sensible of their baseness as of the
bravery of the French, whose courage he commended in the Grand Signior's presence, and testified how much he valued them, by his kind reception of, and civility to Monsieur de la Haye, then Embassador of France at the Port, whom he entertained three days to∣gether in his house, treating him with more respect than was ever shewn to any Embassador before. The Grand Visiers return gave the Grand Signior the freedom of divert∣ing himself with Hunting, and his Women; for leaving all his affairs to his care, which he had looked af∣ter in his absence, he retired to one of his pleasant Country Houses, which the Turks call Chioufti, not far from Constantinople, where Achmet Co∣progli staid to send relief to Canea, which was still distressed by the Vene∣tians, and to see the Sultan's Revenues paid, and replenish his Treasury, which was exhausted by the Wars. That of Candia was incredibly expen∣sive, all the Ammunition and Re∣cruits that were sent thither were lit∣tle enough; and the innumerable For∣ces
that had been consumed in it, had made but a very slender progress: therefore he considered how he might put a speedy end to it. He applied himself diligently to put the affairs of the Port into such a posture, as might permit him to go thither him∣self; and the conquest of this Island seeming to him the most glorious that he could ever make, he promised himself both good success in his expe∣dition, and immortal renown, not only among the Turks, who knowing the importance of the Kingdom of Candia, obstinately contended for the mastery of it twenty years; but also among all other Nations, who would admire the valour of the Defendants, and the constancy of the Besiegers. Nor did he doubt of effecting more by his presence than all the Generals that had been sent thither before had done. His design was to finish the War by taking the Capital City, which he resolved to besiege with all the vigour and pains that can be ex∣pected from a Captain perfectly instru∣cted in the art of War. He com∣municated
his intentions to his High∣ness, and remonstrated to him that he ought not any longer to oppose his departure from Constantinople. The great preparations he made were soon known to the Venetians, who on their side disposed themselves to resist them; but not finding them∣selves strong enough, they sent Em∣bassadors to implore the assistance of all the Christian Princes. In the mean time all things being ready for the Grand Visiers Expediti∣on, he parted from Constantinople with the Grand Signior (who for some rea∣sons you will learn hereafter, never returned thither since) and followed him to Adrianople, and from thence to Larissa, where he took leave of his Highness to go to Thebes, waiting for the union of the Troops he was to lead. As soon as they were assembled he caused them to march to Napoli di Romania, which place he chose for the general Rendevouze, and then went to meet his Wife Iohaime, and Fatima his Mother, who would needs accom∣pany him in his voyage. He was
glad of having the advantage of her counsel, whose wit, and courage was above her Sex. With these two persons who were so dear to him he embarqued at Malvezie, and set sail for Canea, where his arrival animated the besieged, who were closely pres∣sed by the Venetians. At his first coming he forced the Enemy to retire, and after he had visited the place, took a general review of all the Troops that were in the Island, and those that he brought along with him, and then with a small party went to view the old Town of Candia, and to take no∣tice how the former siege was dispo∣sed. The Venetians being advertised of his approach, sallied out, and re∣pulsed him; but his design being to end this tedious, expensive War, by taking the chief City, he soon re∣turned with a more considerable body of men, that he might with more safety view the Country, and the out∣works of the place, about which he pitched a new Camp, and drew lines for a more regular Siege than the former; the execution of which he
found very difficult; for not having been truly informed of the Forces of the Town, and the situation of the Country. He saw it would cost him more pains, and time, than he expe∣cted it would. However not at al discouraged by the difficulties he met with, he carried on the works with such diligence, that the besieged were quickly reduced to employ all the industry of their Engineers to se∣cure them from the Mines which he continually sprung, and all the strength of their Souldiers to resist the assaults of the Turks. Never was any place so vigorously attaqued, and so stoutly defended. This being one of the most famous Sieges that ever was, several Writers have at large related it; therefore I shall not trouble the Reader with an useless repetition of what he may find elsewhere, but on∣ly succinctly mention what the story of the Grand Visier will not suffer me to omit, without specifying all the assaults and skirmishes that happened at it.
This General, besides the wonder∣ful resistance of the besieged, had no less dangerous enemies to encounter with at this Port, who did him all the ill offices they could with the Grand Signior, and by making use of this troublesome conjuncture of af∣fairs, endeavoured to destroy him. They represented to the Sultan, that the length of the Siege of Candia pro∣ceeded from the Grand Visiers want of courage, whose Army was power∣ful enough to subdue all Asia, or the greatest Empire in the world; but that his cowardize made him protract the time, that the Christians might have leisure to assemble their Forces, which would at last oblige the Ottoman Army to quit the conquest of an Island that had exhausted the strength of the Empire, and his Highnesses Treasures: that such an affront would be irreparable, and an eternal disgrace to the Musulmans, and would certainly happen through the base∣ness and weakness of the Grand Vi∣sier, who out of a vain presumption had undertaken the continuation of a
War he could never end honourably. Thus these envious persons omitted nothing that might induce the Grand Signior to recal and ruine him. The too credulous Prince provo∣ked by the Grand Visiers ill success, who incessantly sent for Recruits, be∣lieved all that was said against him; and without any regard to his invio∣lable fidelity, or the high rank he held in the Empire, which made him subject to the malice of the Courtiers, without considering that those Mini∣sters who are most affectionate to, and zealous for the services of their Prince, and the good of the State, are always most exposed to envy. He took a resolution which would have deprived him of the ablest, and best of all his Subjects, if Achmet Coprogli's prudence had not equalled the Sultans cruelty, and injustice. He sent this brave General word that he should suddenly put an end to the Siege, which his rashness had prompted him to undertake, and in a very short time either send him his Head, or the Keys of Candia.
This order was very peremptory, and sufficient to have shaken the firmest Courage. The Grand Visier had great reason to think himself very rigor∣ously and unjustly dealt with; his fi∣delity and zeal for his Master, and the hazards his life was so often ex∣posed to for his glory, deserved bet∣ter usage, and might have inclined him to revenge himself, and shew his resentment by abandoning his Army, which would undoubtedly have pe∣rished, if he had sought to secure himself by going over to the Venetian side, as he might have done: but ho∣nour having ever been his only ob∣ject, he never so much as entertained a thought that was prejudicial to his reputation. He answered the Sultan very submissively, yet in such terms as shewed the greatness of his soul; and that it was not the fear of death he was threatned with that made him hasten a conquest, which he under∣took for the augmentation of his Do∣minions, and glory: that he never had any other end in it, and that if his Highness could reap any benefit
by his death, it was in his power to satisfie himself when he pleased: that as to the Siege of Candia he ho∣ped to finish it, if he would allow him time, having been deceived by a false account of the state of the place. Achmet imparted the Grand Signiors command to his Mother Fatima, and having consulted together, they con∣cluded that this blow proceeded from the persecutions of his enemies at Court: and soon after they were con∣firmed in their opinion by the Cou∣riers which they sent continually to the Port, to bring them news of all that passed there. They found that some Courtiers who had insinuated themselves into the Grand Signiors fa∣vour, had attempted to disgrace him, and had succeeded in it. However he did not much trouble himself, be∣ing assured that his conduct would ju∣stifie him, and that the detractors would be punished for their calumnies by their own remorse, and the Sul∣tans anger, who would in time disco∣ver their treachery. He continued to press the besieged, who received
great assistance from the King of France, under the conduct of the Count de la Feuillade, who was accom∣panied by the Count de St. Paul, the Duke of Chasteau Thierry, the Sieurs de Caderousse, de Villemaur, and many more Gentlemen and Officers, who came to shew the Turks that they could overcome them as well in Creet as in Hungary. And the sallies of these brave men put the Turks almost in despair, who were incouraged by their Generals presence. He went from quarter to quarter to animate them, and exhort them to do their duty. He caused new Candia which the Turks built after the taking of Ca∣nea to be demolished, that he might make use of the materials in his works, and by depriving his Troops of a safe retreat, force them to se∣cure themselves by their valour, al∣ways telling them that they must ei∣ther conquer or die. But while he endeavours to become master of Candia, Constantinople was filled with tumults raised by the male-contents of the Empire, who
seeing the ill success of the Grand Signiors Arms in this Island, and that several neighbouring Princes were ready to declare War against him, resolved to make use of this opportu∣nity to revenge his Highnesses con∣tempt of them, and prevent the pu∣nishment that was due to their Rebel∣lion; in which they engaged the Ia∣nizaries, who remained at Constanti∣nople, to guard the Town, the Sultan, and the Seraglio. The Mutineers threatned to depose the Emperor, and to set up Prince Soliman his Bro∣ther in his room. The absence of the Visier Azem strengthened this Sediti∣on, which all the Sultan Valide's pow∣er could hardly appease. The Sultan was then at Adrianople, and was so dis∣pleased with the Inhabitants of Con∣stantinople, that he would not so much as take notice of their earnest solici∣tations of him to return thither. He declared openly that this proud City should no longer be the Imperial Seat, since she had rendered her self un∣worthy by her frequent disorders. The people, and the Ianizaries, who
for the most part have their Families at Constantinople, were extremely pro∣voked by this reproach. And if Prince Soliman had been among them, they had certainly proclaimed him Emperor: but he was in the Grand Signiors power, who not being so bar∣barous as his Predecessors, would not practise their inhumane policy of securing the possession of the Empire by the death of all their Brothers. Far from being so cruelly cautious he allowed his three Brothers an honour∣able freedom, and suffered them to employ themselves in exercises agree∣able to their high birth: yet when he went from Constantinople he took Soliman along with him. This Princes Mother Maiama was dead, she did all she could to place him on the Throne; which is partly the cause that the Sultan is jealous of him. His good qualities render him beloved by all the world, especially by the Souldiers, who are not igno∣rant of his vast courage. His impa∣tience to give some proofs of his va∣lour made him inconsiderately desire
his Brother to let him accompany the Grand Visier in the Candian War, which his Highness thought not fit to grant; and the Visier Azem convinced the Sul∣tan that it concerned him not to trust this young Prince with Arms, which he might one day turn against him, but to keep him where his actions might be better observed: not that he gave him this advice to exasperate him against his Brother, but he knew the Souldiers inclination to Soliman, who was of an active, undertaking spirit, and capable of raising great troubles in the State, if he should af∣ter the example of the Ottoman Prin∣ces, endeavour to free himself, and affect the Empire. Mahomet who had never seriously made these reflections, and did not at all distrust Soliman, suf∣fered him to live at liberty; but the young Princes imprudence, in repi∣ning at his Brothers refusal, opened the Sultans eyes, and made him re∣reflect on what the Grand Visier had re∣presented to him. The Sedition that happened afterwards at Constantinople, caused him to watch Soliman's beha∣viour more narrowly.
In the mean time Prince Soliman mi∣strusted nothing, Ambition was not his predominate passion, he loved hunting as well as the Grand Signior, always following him to that sport, and sometimes he went alone. But this exercise did not so take him up, but that he was well enough pleased with another, which is the usual em∣ployment of people of his age. His Brother was the most amorous Prince in the world, nor was he less inclined to gallantry himself; but he loved to keep it secret, not affecting to make a noise with his pleasures. He long sought for an object worthy of his kindness; and at last Zizim Morat Bassa by an extraordinary adventure furnished him with such an one as he desired. The Sangiac of Smyrna, who was akin to this Bassa, had sent him a very pretty Slave, which he bought of a Corsair Tartar, and brought up with a great deal of care, to make a Present of her to the Grand Signior, according to the custom of the Go∣vernors of Provinces, and Cities, who by this means, acquire, and preserve
his Highnesses favour. The Sangiac Sinan who looked on Zizim Morat as his Patron at the Port, desired him to present her to the Sultan, who was then at Adrianople, where he intended to establish the Seat of the Empire, as Soliman the first of that name sur∣named the Magnificent had done be∣fore. The Bassa deferred the acquit∣ting himself of Sinan's Commission till the Grand Signiors return to Larissa, where he spends most part of the year, as well for the beauty of the place, which is the finest in all Thessaly, as for the convenience of Hunting in the great Forrests about it. He was an intimate friend of Prince Soliman, who a few days after came thither with his Brother. Zizim Morat told him he had a Present to make to his Highness, which would without doubt be well received; but that it must be kept secret, lest the Grand Sultana should come to hear of it, who would hate him mortally if he should know that he preferred a new Fa∣vourite to the Grand Signior; then he described the young womans beauty
to him, which made Soliman desirous to see her, before she was delivered to the Emperor his Brother. The Bas∣sa not dreaming of what would hap∣pen, carried him home with him, and shewed him the fair Slave, with whom he fell desperately in love. He made no secret of it to Zizim, but told him with a great deal of joy, that she was absolute mistriss of his heart, and conjured him to give him a proof of his friendship, by letting him have the young Slave. The Bassa used strong arguments to the contrary, and told him that he could not betray the trust the Sangiac of Smyrna reposed in him, without being at the same time false to the Grand Signior, who would punish them both if he came to know it. But amorous Soliman answered his arguments with so much force, and eloquence, convincing him, that it might be easily kept secret, since the Sultan was ignorant of it, and the absent Sangiac could never discover it, that at last friendship surmounted all other considerations, and he granted his request. Soliman embraced him a
thousand times, and having expressed how much he was obliged to him, they contrived how they should con∣ceal this Beauty from the Sultan, that he might not find out Soliman's trea∣son, and Morat's falshood. They could think of no better way than to keep her in a Country house which Zizim had in the pleasant Valley of Ianica, heretofore the delicious Tempe, wa∣tered by the famous River Peneus, be∣tween the Mountains of Ossa and Olympus. In that Country there is a Forrest, the same that Virgil speaks of, where the Grand Signior often hunts, and Soliman with him, who then vi∣sits the fair Zulemai, without being taken notice of. This lasted some time, during which Soliman's life was as happy as Zulemai could make it, who loved him, and wanted no charms to engage him. She was per∣fectly well shaped; her complexion was so bright that it dazled those who beheld it, her hair was brown, her eyes black, and full, her mouth little, her lips juycy, her teeth white, and well set: she had a sweetness in
her chin, and the midst of her cheeks that became her wonderfully when she spoke. Her neck was well shaped, as also her arms and hands; her car∣riage was noble, her speech pleasing, and her humor the best in the world. Soliman was tall, and strait; his face round, his complexion smooth, and white; his forehead large, and high, his eyes blue, and smiling, his nose a little aquiline, his mouth pretty, his min great, his humor magnificent, and his nature very generous. His incli∣nations are like the Grand Signiors, but he is a little more impatient and quick. His soul is noble, and extreme∣ly grateful, and his temper so com∣placent, that he easily gains the friendship of all men. These two Lovers freely enjoyed the pleasures of mutual love, but one day chance brought the Sultan to Zizim Morat's Country house, where the Prince was abroad hunting in the For∣rest. The Grand Signior being thirsty, came alone to this house to refresh himself, and there seeing the Bostangi's or Gardeners Daughter, he liked her
very well. The good man presently found who he was, and told his Wife Zabra of it. They were both over∣joyed to see that their daughter plea∣sed the Sultan, and commanded her to use all her art to engage him, and deserve his favour, their good fortune depending upon it. They endeavoured to conceal Zulemai from the Grand Signior, fearing her beauty would eclipse Abdimai's, with whom he was so well pleased, that he desired them to take care of her, and let no body else see her, promising to come and visit her often. The good peo∣ples joy appeared in their blessing of Mahomet, and throwing themselves at his feet, they gave him thanks for the honour he did their Daughter, who they hoped would bring forth a Prince, that should be the support, and strength of the Musulmans, and should spread the Law of their Prophet over all the earth. When the Grand Signior was gone, they char∣ged Abdima not to tell any body what had happened, and to take heed of letting the Sultan know when she
saw him, that Zulemai was in their house. Abdima who had no less wit than beauty, obey'd their commands, being convinced how much it concer∣ned her to do so. In the mean time Prince Soliman continued his visits, and the Emperor his; but it was im∣possible for them both to go so often to the same place without meeting there at last. Mahomet has ever had a grea∣ter esteem for the Grand Sultana Zachi than usually the Sultans have for their Wives, and avoids doing any thing that may make her jealous, who loves him so tenderly, that she follows him where ever he goes, and seldom leaves him but when she lies in. Therefore he was glad of having a Mistress whom the Sultana could not find out, and whom he might visit under pretence of hunting. This was the reason that kept him from remo∣ving Abdima from Zizim Morats house; but the Sultana Zachi who often went hunting with the Grand Signior, obser∣ving that he always lost himself in the Forrest, she believed he had some de∣sign in his wandering, and caused a
slave to go after him afar off: by which means she learnt that he went into a house on the edge of a Wood, whither she fail'd not to follow him the next time she saw him go that way. Prince Soliman was got thither before the Emperor, and was already with the charming Zulemai, when the Bostangi of the house seeing the Sultan at the gate, made all the haste he could to hide them. The Grand Sig∣nior was no sooner entered into the Chamber where he was wont to di∣vert himself with the fair Abdima, but he was informed of the Grand Sultana's arrival He presently ima∣gined that she had followed him to surprize him, and therefore he thought of hiding Abdima from her, that she might not be exposed to her jealousie. To this purpose he would have open∣ed the Closet where his Brother Soli∣man and Zulemai were: but old Zabra apprehending he might like Zulemai better than her Daughter, offered to dispose of her in a more secret place. Mahomet on the other side fearing the Sultanas sudden coming would prevent
them, would not let Abdima go out of the room, and commanded her Mother to open the Closet. Prince Soliman hearing the Emperors voice, believed his love was discovered, but thinking he might do his Mistress some harm in the first transports of his fury, he endeavoured to keep the door fast, by putting his Dagger into the lock. The Sultan observing Za∣bra's delay, snatched the key from her; and not being able to undo the lock, broke open the door. The first thing he saw was his Brother Soliman, with a Dagger in his hand, which so surprized him, that he never minded Zulemai, who was behind him. At first he fancied that Soliman courted the Gardeners Daughter, and had hid himself in that place with a design to murder him, as was probable by the posture he found him in. Rage min∣gled with jealousie, and fear present∣ly seized on his soul, and made him draw his Scimitar to have killed Prince Soliman, who could not have avoided the mortal blow, if the Sul∣tana had not come into the room, and
laid hold on Mahomet's arm, who was no less astonished to feel his arm held back, than to hear Zulemai shreek, when she saw the danger her lover was in. The Sultana Zachi having disar∣med the Grand Signior, soon guessed why he would have killed his Bro∣ther, when she beheld Zulemai, belie∣ving her to be the cause of his losing his way so often in the Forrest; and that having found Soliman courting his Mistress, he would have slain him. She took his astonishment at the sight of Zulemai to be affected, and threat∣ned to punish her for being the cause of such disorder; but the Sultan com∣prehending her meaning, after he had commanded Soliman to be seized on, protested he had never seen her be∣fore, and to justifie what he said, sent for the Gardener, who without mentioning the intrigue between the Emperor, and his Daughter, who was opportunely hid, related the story of Zulemai, and Soliman, who confirmed it, and discovered the other particu∣lars of his adventure to the Sultana. She easily believed the Grand Signior,
who assured her, that finding himself thirsty as he was hunting, he came thither to refresh himself with the water of an excellent Fountain in the Garden, that while they fetched him some water, he went into that room, and hearing a noise in the closet, his curiosity made him open it, where he found Soliman with a Dagger in his hand, just coming out to murder him; which he was endeavouring to pre∣vent when she held back his arm. The Sultana being satisfied with this Relation, never suspected Mahomet's fidelity, but requested him to pardon his Brother, and accept of his justifi∣cation, as she had of his. The Grand Signior was so displeased at his Brothers falshood in depriving him of this beautiful Slave that with great difficulty he promised the Sulta∣na not to resent it, and gave him leave to live in the Seraglio at Constantinople with his Mistress, whose removal from his Highnesses sight was no little sa∣tisfaction to Zachi. Soliman's confinement to the old Seraglio, which is the usual Prison of
the Ottoman Princes that come not to reign, was rendered less insupport∣able by the company of his beloved Zulemai: but his disgrace had like to have caused great disorders. It was reported that the Sultan would have killed him with his own hand, at which the Town of Constantinople, and the Ianizaries who love Soliman, were extremely alarmed: They knew not the particulars of the adventure, and told the story much to the Grand Sig∣niors disadvantage, with whom they were dissatisfied. They accused him of cruelty, and as they are wont to do, took hold of this occasion to raise a Sedition, under pretence of preser∣ving the lives of the Sultans Brothers, whom they required to be delivered into their hands. The Sultana Valide who by experience knew the danger of those tumults, thought the best way to appease the Mutineers, was to go to Constantinople, where she hoped to have some influence on the Inhabi∣tants, and the Ianizaries, who have ever been very respectful to her. This Princess was somewhat dissatisfied
with her Sons carriage towards her, who slighted her advice, and repined to see her continue in that authority which she had exercised since the be∣ginning of his Reign. Besides, the Grand Sultana looked enviously upon her, and could not endure she should be more absolute than her self. The Sultana Valide who always loved her Son extremely, was glad of an occa∣sion of doing him a considerable ser∣vice, and of absenting her self from the Port. Therefore she parted from Adrianople with a train suitable to her quality, and made a magnificent en∣try into Constantinople, where she en∣deavoured to quiet the people, and the Ianizaries, and to divert them from requiring the Grand Signiors Bro∣thers to be delivered to them, fearing they would make Prince Soliman, for whom they had a particular kindness, Emperor; she promised them that no violence should be offered to the young Princes, and protested she would sooner die her self, than suffer any attempt to be made on their lives. In order to which she not only
took them into her protection, but assured them she would not stir out of the Seraglio, till the Grand Signior came back to Constantinople, where the Peo∣ple, and the Souldiers desired he would make his constant abode: but the Sultan would not hearken to his Mothers solicitations, persisting in his resolution of not returning thi∣ther any more, in which he was con∣firmed, by being informed that the Grand Visier fomented the Sedition of the Ianizaries in that City, and en∣couraged them to place Prince Soli∣man on the Throne. These Impo∣stures were affirmed with so many cir∣cumstances, that how good an opi∣nion soever his Highness ought to have had of his first Ministers fideli∣ty, he could not choose but believe them: yet to have a convincing proof of the Treason he was accused of, and to put his obedience to the utmost trial, he ordered him to send him the Seal of the Empire, which he had need of, and to bring back the rest of the Troops as soon as he could. The disorder at Constantinople increasing
every day, enraged him so much, that in the heighth of his anger he repented of his past credulity, and clemency; and to take away all pre∣tences of revolt, sent an express com∣mand to the Sultana Valide to strangle his Brothers: but this order being discovered to the Ianizaries, was im∣mediately spread over all the Town, where the people joyned with the Souldiers to besiege the Seraglio; threatning the Sultana terribly if she executed the Grand Signiors command. This wise Princess had much ado to appease them by letting them see Soliman, Bajazet, and Orchanes, and shewed themselves very sensible of her kindness to them; especially So∣liman, who still respects her as much as if she were his own Mother; and not without reason, for she has sa∣ved his life twice. She abhorred her Sons inhumanity, and sent him word, that her affection to him, and care of his preservation and glory, kept her from obeying his orders, ince it was certain, that if she should put his Bro∣thers to death, the Ianizaries would
endeavour to revenge their murthers on his own person. She put him in mind of his Father Ibrahim, and his other Ancestors, who perished in the Factions of the Militia, and the peo∣ple; and conjured him not to occasion his own ruine by that of his Brothers, whom she desired him to look upon as innocent, and not to think that the honour they had to be allied to him rendred them criminal, or engaged them in any seditious tumults. More∣over, she upbraided him severely for his cruelty, which was so contrary to the education she had given him, and that good nature which had hitherto made him detest the barbarous Ma∣xims of his Predecessors. In the mean time the Grand Visier knowing that the Grand Signios dis∣pleasure proceeded rather from the ill condition of his affairs at Constantino∣ple, than from any real anger; and that the Selictar his Favourite had, to satisfie his hatred, caused him to send this injurious order. He was no more concerned at it than at such another which he received before; and only
let the Sultan know by Iacup Bassa, that he had still fifty thousand men left to finish his Expedition; and that he un∣derstood himself better than to give over the conquest of a place which he hoped to reduce into his Highnes∣ses power in a little time, notwith∣standing the malice of his enemies, who hindered him from sending the Succors he demanded; and that he was ready to deliver the Golden Seal to whom soever he should judge wor∣thy of it, as soon as he pleased to give him further notice. After this he endeavoured to hinder the besieged from receiving any relief, but in vain; for the Duke of Beaufort arrived at the Island with a Fleet of fourscore Ships, and landed an Army of twelve thousand men, which our invincible Monarch sent to Candia, moved by his own generosity, and the request of Pope Clement the Ninth, and the Ve∣netians, when their Embassador came to demand the Marquess of St. Andr Montbrun, of his Most Christian Ma∣jesty, to succeed the Marquess de Ville, whom the Duke of Savoy had recal∣led,
in the command of the Venetian Infantry. The Duke of Navailles, who was General of the Army, had no sooner landed his men, but he gave order to attack the Grand Visier in his Tren∣ches; he was followed by the Duke of Beaufort, and his Nephew the Chevalier de Vendosme, who at the head of a great many Officers, and illustri∣ous Volunteers, marched in good or∣der to charge the Enemies, who pre∣pared to resist them as vigorously, as they had before defended themselves from the attempts of Monsieur de la Feuillade: but the Turks found this last encounter much more violent than the former. They could not withstand the Kings Musqueteers, commanded by Monsieur Colbert de Maulevrier, and the Count de Mont∣brun, with the rest of the French Troops; and they began to give ground, when the Grand Visier per∣ceiving their disorder, went from rank to rank, encouraging them to continue the Combat, which they were ready to have quitted. On the
other side the Duke of Navailles be∣haved himself like a great Captain, and an experienced General. The Admiral the Duke of Beaufort expo∣sed himself to the greatest dangers, without any care of his person. The Chevalier de Vendosme, though not above fourteen years old, signalized his courage in the formost ranks. The Duke of Chasleau Thierry did wonders at the head of his Regi∣ment; and his Brother the Chevalier de Bouillon following his example, re∣ceived a bruise in his Belly, which forced him to leave the Fight. These brave men, and the rest of the Volun∣teers animated the Souldiers to fight like Lions; insomuch that the Otto∣man General seeing his men yield to the French, who advanced to drive the Ianizaries from their Post, cau∣sed the Mines to be sprung, which he had made to stop the progress of the Christian Army. The horrid noise and fire which rose all at once in the midst of the French Troops, surprised and scattered them. Their General, and the Duke of Beaufort, did all they
could to rally them; but not being seconded as they were promised by the Town, they were oppressed with numbers, and forced to retreat, and reimbarque after the death of the Duke of Beaufort, who had perfor∣med all that could be expected from a Hero. Many Officers and Gentle∣men of Quality perished in this en∣gagement, but none was so deplored as this great man. The Grand Visier seeing these dan∣gerous enemies retreat, doubted not but that the besieged, who wholly re∣lied on the French Succors, were infinitely discouraged. He chose out ten thousand of his best Souldiers to make an assault at noon-day, and to let the Venetians see that he was per∣fectly informed of the condition of the Town. He spoke so resolutely to his men, and promised them suc∣cess with so much confidence, that they behaved themselves at this time more couragiously than ever: but they were entertained so warmly by the Christians, and so bravely repul∣sed, that their General interpreted
their vigorous defence to be the effect of the gallantry of those French who staid to see the event of the Siege, and to hold the place to the very last. However he renewed his assaults so often, and the Forces of the besieged diminished so fast, that the Generalis∣simo Morosini, seeing there was no probability of preserving the City, was constrained to capitulate, and surrender on very advantagious con∣ditions, considering the miserable state the Town was reduced to. It was agreed on that the City, and all the Island of Candia should be delivered to the Visier Azem; that the principal Forts, together with the little adjacent Islands, which were in the Venetians possession, and all their other Islands in the Archipe∣lago, and the other Seas, should re∣main in the Commonwealths power: that they should keep the Fort of Clissa, and the other places they had conquered in Dalmatia, and Albania: that neither party should be obliged to give the other any sum of money, upon any private pretence or title
whatever: that the Generalissimo of the Venetian Troops might carry from thence three hundred pieces of Can∣non, with all the warlike Ammuniti∣on, and Provisions that were there: that the Souldiers should march out with their Arms, and Baggage: that the Inhabitants who would not stay there might go whither they pleased with their Families, and Goods: that the Christians might take with them all the Reliques, and other things that belonged to the Church: that all Prisoners should be freed on both sides: and that there should be an inviolable Peace between the two Nations. All these Articles being drawn up, were presented to the Grand Visier, who presently signed them, though they were somewhat too advantagi∣ous for a place that could hold out no longer; but he had urgent reasons that obliged him to grant these con∣ditions, and to hasten the conclusion of a Peace. He had news from Con∣stantinople that the troubles continued there, which he fear'd would be very
prejudicial to the State, and the Grand Signior: besides, he apprehen∣ded that the fresh Succors which the King of France, and the Pope were sending under the Conduct of the Mareschal de Bellefonds, might retard the taking of Candia, which would be more inconvenient to him than all the favourable clauses that he gran∣ted to the Christians. Therefore he received the Keys of the place with great satisfaction, and gave him that brought them a Purse full of Sulta∣nines, and sent rich Presents to the Venetian General; who not to be be∣hind-hand with him in Magnificence, sent him an handsom service of Ve∣netian Glasses, and several other cu∣rious things, which the Grand Visier received very civilly, and gave a considerable sum of mony to those who brought them. The Venetians being retired, he made his entry into Candia, whither the principal Officers of his Army came to complement him: he recei∣ved them with a great deal of mode∣sty.
I expect not, said he to them, any rejoycing or extraordinary pomp here in a place that has cost us so dear, over whose ruines we ought rather to weep. His astonish∣ment increased at every step he made in the Town; and the desolation he met with every where augmented his good opinion of the Christians, who had so valiantly defended the City so long after it was in so wret∣ched a condition. After this he bountifully rewarded his Souldiers, and dispatched a Courrier to Adriano∣ple, to give the Grand Signior notice of the taking of Candia; and to let him know that he was now ready to give proofs of his Fidelity which had been suspected; and that in a short time he would be at Constantinople with fifty thousand well disciplin'd men, to reduce and punish those who had slighted his Highness, and had made use of his absence, to mutiny, and disturb the Empire. This unex∣pected news was exceeding welcome to the Grand Signior, who lived in
strange apprehension of the tumults which daily increased at Constantino∣ple. He thought he could never enough commend his first Minister, whom he fully absolved, notwith∣standing all the ill impressions of his enemies; declaring openly, that Achmet Coprogli was the prop of the Ottoman Empire; and that none but he was capable of such brave Expe∣ditions, or could have so happily en∣ded a Siege that had lasted five and twenty years. He sent him the Ra∣tification of the Articles of Peace, with a rich Cimarr embroidered with Gold, and a Scimitar; the Handle, Guard, and Scabbard of which were set with Diamonds, and Stones of inestimable value; withal assuring him that he would receive the Cheva∣lier Molino kindly, whom the Repub∣lique designed to send to him with Presents for himself, the Sultana Va∣lide, the Great Sultana, and the chief of the Port. He likewise gave him notice that he had nominated Com∣missioners to go into Dalmatia, and
other places where their presence would be necessary to regulate the bounds of the Venetian Territories, and to remove all difficulties that might hinder the conclusion of a firm and lasting Peace. The Visier Azem having procured this Peace, omitted nothing that might establish it, and punctually per∣formed all that he promised. He was so careful not to violate the Treaty with the Venetians, and to shew the sincerity of his intentions, that he caused some Turks to be impaled for abusing the Christians at Sud, con∣trary to his Proclamation, that they should do them no wrong upon pain of death; and treated the Prisoners that were in his Army very civilly, and set them at liberty, after he had given them several marks of his ge∣nerosity. When he had ordered all things necessary for the conservation of the Island of Candia, he prepared to march with the rest of his Troops to Constan∣tinople, where the news of his Con∣quests,
and design to chastise the Mu∣tineers, quickly calmed the Sedition; and those who had been most active in it, provided for their safety by flight; which obliged the Sultan, who might perhaps apprehend the Visiers approach with so powerful an Army, to order him to send forty thousand men towards Mecha, and Medina, to punish the incendiaries that were retreated thither, that they might disturb the remotest Provinces of the Empire, where they had ta∣ken away the rich Offerings which the Grand Signior sent to Mahomet's Temple; and had slain the Officers, and Ianizaries that carried them. Achmet Coprogli obeyed the Sultans commands so exactly, that the Cri∣minals soon received the punishment they deserved, and yet marched on to Constantinople, where the Sedition was not so well laid, but that there was still a secret Faction among the Iani∣zaries, against his Highness, and the Grand Visier. The Emperor adverti∣sed him of it, that he might hasten
his march to that City, when his pre∣sence was absolutely necessary. When he arrived there, he was of opinion that the surest way to put an end to the Tumults, was, to remove the Garrison which corresponded with the people, to appoint new Troops to guard the Town, and the Seraglio, and to employ the others at a distance, where they might not be able to plot against his own, and the Sultans Au∣thority. But before he would under∣take a new War, he advised the Grand Signior to maintain a good understand∣ing between himself and those Prin∣ces who might oppose his designs. From thence he took occasion to com∣mend the extraordinary valour of the French, assuring him that they only had retarded the taking of Candia, as they had before stayed the progress of his Arms in Hungary; and inflamed him with a desire of conracting an alliance with the King of France, and sending an Embassador to him to im∣plore his friendship. The Sultan be∣ing convinced of his Ministers expe∣rience
and judgment, agreed to his proposition, and resolved to follow his counsel; and not long after dis∣patched Soliman Mutafaraca into France, where he was magnificently received, and was incredibly surpri∣sed when he beheld the Majesty and Greatness of the incomparable French Monarch, to whom he presented a Letter stuffed with the most splendid Titles that ever any Ottoman Empe∣ror had given to another Potentate. This Embassador staid some time at Paris, and after he had admired the Politeness and Glory of the French, he returned laden with rich Presents to give Sultan Mahomet, and the Grand Visier an account of his Embassie. This great Minister perceiving that Peace rendered the Ianizaries and Spa∣hies every day more insolent, like a good Pilot, apprehended a tempest in the midst of a calm, and was consi∣dering how he might remove them from Constantinople, when the troubles of Poland furnished him with an ex∣pedient.
This Kingdom was disturbed by the Factions of some private men, who sought to settle their own autho∣rity, during the vacancy of the Throne, by the voluntary abdication of King Cazimir, who being tired with the cares that attend Royalty, put it into his Subjects power to elect another King. Several Princes pre∣tended to be chosen, but none so ear∣nestly as the great Duke of Moscovy, who had a mind to place this Crown on his Sons head. The Succors which he had assisted the Polanders with to repulse the Tartars, who broke into their Territories with a vast Army, seemed to countenance his pretensi∣ons. He fancied that the under hand dealings of Dorosensko, the General of the Cossacks, would gain him all the voices of the States; but the Electi∣on of Prince Michel Wicloveski convin∣ced him that the Faction of Sobieski Great Mareschal of Poland, was the most powerful, as tending to the good of the Kingdom: wherefore finding his expectations frustrated, he quit∣ted
the Polish Interest, thereby mani∣festing that his own ends had obliged him to embrace their Party, more than the alliance between them: but he was not the only man that was de∣ceived of his hopes: Dorosensko was so concerned, and took the Great Dukes part so far, that he could not conceal his resentment. He was one of the most powerful, and ambitious men in the Kingdom, and could not endure to see Sobieski made Grand Mareschal. His jealousie made him seek all means to lessen his Rivals authority, opposing whatsoever he undertook; and Sobieski's siding with the Nobility, whom their own, and Countries interest permitted not to choose the Prince of Moscovy, was sufficient ground for Dorosensko to form a contrary Faction, and to fa∣vour the Great Dukes design by gain∣ing as many voices for him as he could: but finding this project did not succeed, and that the new King cherished the vertue and merit of So∣bieski, whom he looked on as an in∣vincible
obstacle to his ambitious pur∣poses; and besides, perceiving him∣self suspected to be an enemy to the State, and fearing he should be puni∣shed as a disturber of the publick Peace. He resolved to secure him∣self by Rebellion, and to raise his for∣tune by betraying his King and Country. In order to this he endea∣voured to gain the chief of the revol∣ved Cossacks that inhabit the Vkrain, which in the Sclavonian tongue signi∣fies the Frontiers. He had a great deal of power there, and many friends whom he perswaded to revolt. To carry on his enterprize the better, he went to Constantinople to solicit the Grand Signior to make himself master of this Province. He represented to him, that this was the way to keep all the Polanders in subjection, who so often diverted his Forces, and to get the Kingdom it self when he pleased; promising to put the best places into his hands, provided his Highness would send an Army to assist him. The Grand Visier was glad of this pre∣tence,
not only to employ his Troops who mutinied through idleness, but to require satisfaction of some inju∣ries which the Sultan had received from the Poles. Therefore he ordered the Tartars to be ready to joyn the Army which he sent under the con∣duct of the Bassa's of Natolia and Bos∣sina; and at the same time comman∣ded the Bassa's of Albania, and Roma∣nia, to march with the Hospodars of Moldavia, and Walachia. The approach of such considerable Forces made Poland tremble. King Michel got together about fifty thou∣sand men to withstand this invasion: but notwithstanding all his precauti∣on, and resistance, the Turks made themselves Masters of Caminieck, which was ever accounted inexpug∣nable, and of the whole Vkrain: and doubtless they would not have stop∣ped there, if the preparations of the Persian Sophy had not interrupted their progress, and caused the Visier to re∣cal the Ottoman Troops to oppose him, in case he should declare War against
the Grand Signior. Thus this King∣dom obtained a Truce which he broke the next year, to continue the War, and force the Poles to pay the Grand Signior the Tribute he deman∣ded. The death of King Michel hap∣pening at this time, seemed to open the way to the designs of the Turks, if they had known how to make use of so favourable a conjuncture to have extended their Conquests. They as∣sembled their divided Troops, that they might form a more considerable body of an Army; so that being uni∣ted, without comprehending the Walachians, and Moldavians, they a∣mounted to about two and thirty thousand men under the conduct of three Generals, the chief of which was Soliman Aga, who commanded the Ianizaries, Vssain Spahiler Agasi, or the Colonel of the Spahies comman∣ded the Horse, and Caplan Bassa led the Forces of the Asiatique Provin∣ces. They thought of nothing less than by taking of Leopold, which re∣fused to pay contribution, to advance
farther into the Country. But the Grand Mareschal Sobieski General of the Polish Army, not thinking fit to expect them, resolved to hinder their progress, though he was much inferi∣or to his enemies in strength. He caused the General of Lithuania to joyn him with his Troops, that they might stop the passage of the Turks, who had retrenched themselves in a very strong Camp, as well by situa∣tion, as by the Works, and Fortifica∣tions they had raised about it. The Turkish Camp was raised on all sides, being bounded the South by Downs, and steep Rocks on the side of the River Niester, over which they had laid a Bridge, with an Half-moon at the end of it, to defend it towards Caminieck, which is about four leagues off. On the East it was covered by the Castle of Cotzchin, with which it had communication, by means of a little Bridge over some flowed ground. On the North it was strengthened by a Trench, and an Horn-work: and on the West it was
raised in form of a Terrace, and di∣vided by a large depth from another small Camp of the Moldavians, and Walachians, the Turks never suffering any strangers to incamp with them. The Great Mareschal being arrived at this Camp the ninth of October, 1673. planted two Batteries of Can∣non, to answer the enemies who fired continually. After this he wrought so far on the Hospodars or Walachia, and Moldavia, who came not to the War, but through a forced obedience, as to perswade them to desert the Turks as soon as the fight began: but the Hos∣podars fearing their correspondence would be discovered, and their de∣sign prevented, retreated the night following, leaving part of their Troops to the Poles, who immediate∣ly seized on their Post; when Gene∣ral Sobieski advancing to observe the enemies posture, and finding there was a great disturbance in their Camp, caused without doubt by the departure of the Walachians, and Mol∣davians: he thought it expedient to
make advantage of their disorder, and without more delay, brought the Lithuanian Foot to force the Camp in the weakest place, ordering his Horse to cover them and oppose the enemies sally, while he attacked them in an∣other quarter: but when he saw that the Turks stoutly repulsed the Lithua∣nians, and made the Poles themselves give ground, he put himself at the head of the Palatine of Russia's Dra∣goons, and alighting from his Horse, in the sight of all the Army, went to the assault, in so difficult a place, that he had much ado to climb up to the top; from whence with a bravery no less admirable than that of Alexander the great, when he leaped into the Town of the Oxidracans: the Great Sobieski threw himself into the Otto∣man Camp, where he alone supported all the brunt; giving some of his va∣liantest Souldiers who followed him, time to level the bank, and fill up the Trenches, that the Horse might come in to their assistance. The Hus∣sars who are deservedly accounted in∣vincible,
since by perpetual Victo∣ries they have ever gloriously main∣tained their reputation, immediately incompassed their illustrious General, who dispatch'd all that came in his way; and having remounted him, they followed him into the midst of the Battle, where he faced the great∣est dangers, and dealing death on eve∣ry side, exhorted his Souldiers not to plunder yet, since the vast riches of the Camp would be assured to them by the Victory. His example was so prevalent, that the most backward of his men durst not shrink from their Leader; insomuch that the enemies after they had four hours together withstood a violent assault, at last dis∣obeyed their Generals commands, and endeavoured to save themselves by flight. Such a consternation seized on them, that above ten thousand cast themselves down the precipices; all the rest were put to the Sword in the Camp by the Poles: and some who thought to retire to Caminieck, were prevented by Colonel Miochenski, who
swam the Niester, and cut them off. This Defeat was so great, that out of two and thirty thousand, but fif∣teen hundred escaped, amongst whom was Caplan Bassa: the two other Ge∣nerals, Soliman and Vssain, were killed upon the place; the first of them ha∣ving the honour to be slain by the Great Sobieski, who encountering him in the heat of the fight, dispatched him with his Sword, and took his Scimitar from him, which he now wears himself. This Camp is fatal to the Turks. Osman, the first of that name was de∣feated there by the Poles, in the year 1621. commanded by young Prince Vladislaus, King Sigismund's Son, and Chodkieuiki, Lubomirski, and Sobieski, the Father of the Great Sobieski, now King of Poland. The news of this Victory was as unwelcome to the Sultan, and his Grand Visier, as it was the contrary to the States of Poland, who were met together to elect a King. They be∣lieved they could not bestow the
Crown on any one that deserved it more than he who had supported, and preserved it, when it was exposed a prey to its most dangerous enemies; therefore they offered it him as a just recompence of his desert, and vertue, and with one accord proclaimed him King: acknowledging him to be their lawful Prince, preferably to all other pretenders. The Grand Visier, who before this Defeat had rejected all overtures of Peace with Poland, now advised the Sultan to name his Deputies for a Treaty; but the difficulties that were raised as well by the Tartars as the Grand Signior, hindered the conclusi∣on of it. The Tartars, who cannot en∣dure to be at rest, and cannot live without War, required the Turkish Emperor to make the Poles agree with them about the bounds of their Ter∣ritories, which had been the occasion of a tedious War. The Sultan on the other side being unwilling to re∣store what he had usurped, would not relinquish his Conquests in Poland,
unless they would pay him a very considerable yearly Tribute. But the Great Sobieski being inve∣sted with the Sovereign Dignity, looked on the payment of Tribute as a mark of dependence unworthy a Diadem which owns no Superior Power, and rejected the Grand Sig∣niors Propositions, who soon took the Field, and advanced with the Grand Visier as far as Caminieck; where ha∣ving received news of the Sophies pre∣paraions, and the revolt of some Governours, he granted a Truce to the Poles, leaving Commissioners to treat with King Sobieski's Deputies, and returned to Adrianople: Though the Sultan suffered great losses in this War, yet it caused no great change in the State. The Grand Visier having pacified the Pro∣vinces, and allayed the tumults which the Miliia raised in his absence, ap∣plied himself to regulate the affairs of the Port, endeavouring to make the people sensible of the blessings of Peace, by easing them of the extra∣ordinary
taxes which the Sultan had laid on them, to defray the expences of the War, and to replenish his treasury, which was exhausted by it. This great Minister by his industry and prudence, has so gained the esteem and friendship of all the world, that he is no less respected by the Army, and the people, than the Emperor himself, whom he governs as he plea∣ses, having obtained an absolute pow∣er over him; which is not so much to be attributed to the Sultan's weak∣ness, as to his perfect knowledge of Achmet Coprogli's vertue, and desert, who at this time keeps the City of Constantinople in obedience, which is so dissatisfied with his Highnesses ill usage, that had it not been for his first Minister, and the Sultana Valide, it would lately have revolted, when the Grand Signior threatned to take away its priviledges. Nevertheless, what a version soever this Prince has for the chief City of his Empire, he would have returned thither, if the Grand Visier had not hindered him
for some secret reasons, which I may hereafter publish in the continuation of his Ministry, and the sequel of the History of the Ottoman Family, when I shall be furnished with new Memoires of the most curious affairs of the Seraglio, and the Grand Signior's Court where nothing is concluded without the advice of Achmet Coprogli. So that one may affirm that this Mini∣ster shares the Sovereign Authority, and is the supreme Arbiter of the powerfullest Empire in the world. But that which is wonderful in the preerment of this great man, is, that his vertue and merit is so universally known, that all Nations think him worthy of his good Fortune. FINIS.
END
The hard words of Chaucer explained.
A ,  give over. abidit, b. suffred. adode, received. adode, b. tarrying. abrayde, b. arose, recovered. abrayde, b. brake off, up-start. aeding, upbraiding. ablusions, l. cleansings. acale, d. cold. accesse, b. ague. accidie, l. wanhope. accoy, f. asswage. acoyed, f. panpered, made qui∣et. achecked, b. stayed. acheked, b. choked. ackele, b. cool. acloyeth, b. overchargeth. accoke, b. awy. acquite, f. match, to dispatch. adassed, b. abashed. adawed, b. awaked. adiacent, l. adjoyning. aduertence, l. audience: also mind, or thought. aduert, l. mark. adbentasse, f. coat of Armour. asye, f. fined. a, f. have trust. asscay, b. seare, stirre, assaule. asscey, f. sturdinesle, also seare. agasteth, b. skarreth. agiler, f. a market of men. agisted, b. commited, offended. agre, to please, to content. agredge, f. aggravate, to gather together. agrise, b. afraid. agrisen, b. aseard. * Alnath. alnath is a fixed Star in the horns of Aries, from whence the first mansion of the Moon taketh his name, and is called Alnath. alledgement, i. case. alledged, i. diminished. Alderan, a. a Star in the Neck of the Lion. Algate, b. notwithstanding, ever, forsooth, even now, altoge∣ther. alcali, a. Nightshade, salt wort. Algezer, Alegzra, a City in Spam, near the eights of Gibralter. als, d. also: as well. alessake, d. Maypole. Almagi, a. a work of Astro∣nomie, written by Ptolomie. alembic, a. a stillitorie. alures, f. walkes, alleyes. algonia, a. (canis minor) the greater dog starre. alswa, d. also. ally, f. b. kin. allen, f, allie. Alisandre, Alexandria in Egypt, now called Scanderia. Almurie, a. the denticle of Ca∣pricorne. algrism, a. (algebra.) The art of figurate numbers. alterate, l. chaunged. Almicanteras, a. the name of the Circles, which are imagi∣ned to pafs throw every de∣ all a boone, b. made request. allegeance, i. case. Allibatha, a. the Index of the Astrolade. allaundes, f. grey hounds. Amabriade, g. Nymphs, that live and dye with the Tress. Ama amyng, using a mixture of quick-lilver and metals. amate, d. daunted. ametised, f. quenched. amenused, f. diminished. amot, lovers favous. amortised, l. killed. Amphsbologies, g. forms of speaking, wherein one Sen∣tence hath contrary sences. ancelle, l. an handmaid. anigate, occasion. anhowde, b. hoover. Anelace, (Prolog) a falchion or wood-knife. Which I gather out of Matthew Paris, page 535, where he writeth thus; Quorum unus videus occiduam partem dorsi (of Richard Earl Marshal, then fighting for his life in Ireland) minus armis communitam, percussit eum in posteriora (loricam sublevando) cum quodam genere cultelli, quod vulgariter Auelacitus nuucupa∣tur, & laetaliter vulnerabat eum cultellum usque ad manubrium immergendo; which Aunelace was worn about the girdle∣steed of the Body, as was the pouch or purse: for thus, pag. 542. writeth the same Mat∣thew Paris; Inter quos Petrus de Rivalis primus in causam
vocatus apparuit coram rege in ha∣bitu clericali, cum onsura, & lata corona, analaceo tamen alumbali dependentè, &c. anney, b. annoy. annueller, f. secular. anoy, forethink. antiphoner, g. a certain service book. anhowue, to hover. anticlaudianus, a certain book written by one Alanus de Insu∣lis. antem, g. a song. appale, b. decay. appayre, b. decay. apparell, f. prepare. apaled, unpleasant. appeteth, l. desireth. append, l. belong. apoplexie, g. dead palsie. apposen, i. demand, object. aprentise, f. skill. aprise, b. adventure, or shew. aquiler, f. needle-case. arace, f. to deface. arblasters, f. Cross-bows. arrest, f. durance, quietness, stay, an assault, also he that tarieth still. aretteth, impute, layeth blame. aret, areest, f. quietness. arrest, f. standers, remainers. aretted, b. accounted. arere, f. behind. Argonauticon, g. A book writ∣ten by Apollonius Rhodius Alex∣andrinus, wherein he speaketh of Iason, and of them which went with him to Colchos to fetch the golden Fleece. argoile, f. clay. arret, i. to charge. aret, the sign Aries. arte, arest, stay. arist, b. arose. arke diurne, l. day. arke, f. compasse, bow. armipotent, l. mighty in arms. armonie, g. musick. arsnecke, i. Zanderacha, Orpin made of red Ceruse burned. arten, l. restrain. arted, l. forced. arted, l. constrained. ascaunces, as who should say, as though. asterte, let pass. assise, f. order. askes, d. ashes. astert, b. scaped, passed. aspect, l. face, or look. Asterlagour, g. an Allrolabe. * Astronomie, He that will be a Physician according to Ho∣mers Prescription, , that is, equivalent to any, ought to be skilful in Astronomy, and Magick natural. For if by Astronomy he be not able to judge in what state the Hea∣vens stood, and what their As∣pects were, when his patient sickened: and by Magick na∣tural to calculate his Nativity, thereby to know which of the heavenly bodies ruled most in his birth, he shall hardly, or but by chance, conjecture to what end his Sickness will sort. aswith, b. forthwith. asure, f. blew. asckance, b. as if, aside. ashate, f. buying. assised, sure, asseth, assent. asweued, b. amased. asterten, b. escape. assoile, b. answer, declare. as, how. as wis, b. as verily. attaint, f. tried. atamed, b. set on brooch. atterly, b. earnestly. attoure, b. towards, also attire. attoure, f. attire for women. at erst, b. in earnest. * Athalanta, was daughter to Gaeneus, who contending in running with them which did woe her, was at the last overcome by Hippomenes, who cast three golden Apples in her way, which stayed her in ta∣king of them up, and so she was overcome. athroted, d. choked. atwin, b. asunder. attempre, f. moderate. attenes, b. at ones. attwite, b. to make blame wor∣thy, to upbraid. * Athalus, That Athalus Asia∣ticus was the first Inventor of the Chess, Iohannes Sarisburi∣ensis in his Policraticon, lib. 1. chap. 5. doth witness, from whence (no doubt) Chaucer had it, as he had many things else, being a work full of vari∣ety and skill, and therefore justly commended by I. Lip∣sius. There it may appear, that Athalus invented the game called Abacus, the which word, as it hath divers signifi∣cations, so it is taken for La∣trunculorum Iusus, that is, the Chess play, as out of Macro∣bius and others may be pro∣ved. aureat, l. golden. aumener, b. cubbard. aurore, l. morning. augrim stones, a. pibbles to cast account withal. auntreth, b. maketh adventure. austrine, l. froward. autentike, f. of authority. aumer, Amber. autremite, f. another attire. auale, f. go down. auailed, assaulted. auaile, f. send down. auaunt, f. a brag, forward, apace, set forward. auaunt, f. forward, apace. auenant, f. agreeable, comely. auer, i. bribery, richess. awayte, watch, circumspection. awayte, d. watch by way. awayts, (insidiae) b. ambush∣ments. awayte, b. tarrying, watching, pending, secrecy. awarde, b. judgement. awhaped, b. amased, daunted. awhere, desire. awrecketh, b. revengeth. axes, b. the ague. ay, egg. ayle, b. ever. Azimutes, a. great circles meet∣ing in the Zenith, and passing all the degrees of the Horison. B. Bandon, d. company, sect, custody. bargenet, A song or sonnet. A kind of dance. bargaret, barme, b. lappe. bawsin, big, some say it is a Badger or Gray. baggingly, (tumide) disdain∣fully. baronage, f. lords. base. g. the foundation or ground of any thing. balais of entayle, f. precious stones engraved. baudrie, b. bravery. barmecloth, (limas) b. an Apron or safegard. bath, b. both. bale, b. sorrow. barbicans, b. watch Tours, in the Saxon Tongue, borough kennings. baudricke, f. furniture, a sword girdle. barkefat, b. Tanners tub. baselards, (siae) swords, dag∣gers. balke, d. scape, fault. baude, d. brave, bold, lusty. barbe, f. a maske or visard.
battelled, made with battle∣ments. bay, b. stake. balefull, b. sorrowful. babeuries, f. Antiquets. bane, b. destruction. bandon, i. company, sect. baggingli, (tumidae) b. swelling∣ly, disdainfully. bailli, f. government. baggeth, disdaineth. bayne, f. a bath. beausir, f. fair sir. belchier, f. good countenance. beed, continued. bearing, b. behaviour. bemes, Trumpets. bete, b. make, also abate, pla∣ced, also to help. beten, b. made. bedeth, b. offereth. behote, b. promise. beshet, d. shut up. benimmeth, d. bereaveth. beknew, learned out. behight, b. promised. belchose, f. fair choice. berne, b. bear, convey. bede, b. put, offer. besegeden, d. besieged. bete, b. help. behoteth, promiseth. bede, dwelled, continued. bewared, b. spent. bewrien, b. to bewray. belle, f. good. beest, f. a beast. bell Isaude, f. well spoken. behete, behight, b. promised. benison, f. b. blessing. bendes, f. bands. bey, b. obey. bent, b. a steep place. betressed, deceived. bewrowned, b. spoken in the ear. besien, b. trouble. bewri, b. declare. bend, b. a muffler or cale. beten, f. to make a band, to kindle. beliue, b. anon. besey, b. become. bereth, b. behaveth. belamie, f. fair or good friend. bey, b. buy. behete, b. promise. Belmari, Taken to be that Country in Barbary, called by Vassens, Benamarin. Besant, g. A Greekish Coin called Bizantium, as William Malmesbury saith, because it was the Coin of Constantino∣ple, sometime called Bizan∣tium. berne, b. to carry. beset, set packing. bewrecke, b. revenged. behew, b. guilded. becke, f. b. bill, beak. belt, b. girdle. betren, b. sprinckled; also wind∣ing about. betrassed, b. deceived, betrayed. bete, abate. bette, d. better, quickly. benes, b. bones. bemeint, b. lamented, bemoned. beyet, b. begotten. bismar, f. (bizarre) fantastical strangeness. birell, i. fine glass, also a kind of precious stone. Bialacoile, f. fair welcoming. bid, d. pray. bit, b. bad, commanded. bineme, d. bereave. bint, b. bound. bigin, bigot, f. superstitious hy∣pocrite, or hypocritical wo∣man. bittor, b. a certain water-foul. bidding, abiding. biker, b. a fray. bigami, g. twise married. blankemanger, f. custard. blew Euage, (cyanaeus) of blew colour. blith, d. merry. bliue, b. quickly, gladly. blin, b. cease. blasons, f. praises. blanch, f. white. blandish, i. sooth up. blande, l. flattering. blankers, f. white. blacke buried, Hell. bleine, b. a bile. blent, d. stayed, turned back, also blind. blee, b. sight, hew, favour, look. blend, b. blind, to make blind. bleue, leuen, tarry, abide. blinke, b. looking aside. blo, b. blew. blondren, d. toil, bluster. bode, b. message or news. bode, d. tidings; also, could, was able. bodeth, b. sheweth. boistous, f. halting; also plain, rude, great. bountie, f. goodness. bosche, l. a bush. boure, b. house. bone, f. b. good. borne, to burnish. bolne, b. to swell. bottome, f. bud. boun, b. ready. boote, b. help. bourd, d. a trencher, b. a table. bordels, f. brothelhouses. boote of bale, b. ease of sorrow. bord, bourd, b. jest. borace, i. soldar. bowne, b. ready. bolne, b. swelled. bole, a Bull. borrow, a pledg, a surety. borrell, d. plain, rude. bout, b. without. bote, b. did bite. borrell, f. attire on the head. bowke, b. the body, or belly, or the Stomack. bone, b. request. Bourd begon, Prologues. This Knight being often a∣mong the Knights of the Dutch Order, called Ordo Teutonicus, in Prussia, was for his Worthiness placed by them at the Table, before any of what Nation soever. If any desire to know the Profession of these Knights called Teutonici, it was thus: They having their dwelling at Ierusalem, were bound to entertain Pilgrims, and at Occasions to serve in War against the Saracens. They were apparelled in white, and upon their uppermost Gar∣ment did wear a black Cross. And for that this Order was first begun by a certain rich Almaigne, none were recei∣ved into the same, save on∣ly Gentlemen of the Dutch Nation. After Ierusalem was last taken by the Saracens, Anno 1184. these Knights re∣tired to Tolemaida; and that being taken, into Germany, their own Country. And when as there also the Peo∣ple of Prussia used Incursions upon their Confines, they went unto Frederick the Se∣cond, then Emperour, An∣no 1220. who granted them leave to make Wars upon them, and to turn the spoil to the maintenance of their Order. After this Conquest of Prussia, these Knights grew rich, and builded there ma∣ny Temples and Places of Residence for Bishops, who also were enjoyned to wear the Habite of the Order. Chaucer will have his Knight of such Fame, that he was both known and honoured of this Order.
braudri, b. graven work. braying, f. b. sounding. brawnes, b. sinews, muskles. brake, steel. braket, b. a drink made of wa∣ter and honey. braui, l. reward. brat b. a rag. braide, b. arose, awaked, took, brake out. brast, b. break. brayde, b. a burt, strange fare. brede, b. breadth. brede, a bride. bredgen, b. abridge. bren, b. branne. brede, abroad. brecke, (ruptura) d. a bruse, a breach. breme, b. (ferociter) fiercely. bretfull, b. top full. brige, breach. brike, b. astrait, or narrow. bronde, d. fury, fire. broke, b. enjoy, to like. broken, b. brook. brocking, b. throbbing. brotell, b. brickle. brocage, b. means, spokesmen. browded, b. embroidred. browke, b. to enjoy. burnets, f. hoods, attire for the head. bugle, b. black horn. bumbeth, b. soundeth. but, except. burled, armed. burdon, b. a deep base. burned, b. brightly filed, bur∣nished. burell, f. fine glass, a precious stone. burdon, f. a staff. burly brand, b. a great sword. burned, burnished. burnet, f. wollen. buxioning, f. budding. buxum, b. dutiful. buxumnesse, b. lowliness. byddeth, d. prayeth. byg, b. build. by rew, b. in order. bywoxen, b. made senceless, overwept. C. * Caere Inda, Some think it should be Caere Lud, that is, the City of Lud, called London. caleweyes, Calure, as Salmon, or other red Fish. canceline, f. chamlet. camysed, f. flat nosed. cankedore, i. woful case. call, d. (pulcbrum) bravery. callot, b. a leud woman. canell, d. a Sinnamon tree. carects, g. marks, prints. cardiacle, g. wringing at the heart. canon, g. a rule. caitisned, l. chained. cadence, l. proof. cassidoni, g. a stone growing in AEthiopia, which shineth like Fire. Ex Lib. de Naturae Re∣rum. capell, b. an horse. caroll, f. a song or dance. calsening, f. bringing any met∣tal into powder. catapuce, g. spurge. cameline, f. chamlet. calked, l. cast. * Ceruse, White Lead, the Composition whereof is thus: Fossa fiat in Terra: claudatur circumquaque muro paruo demum accipiantur laminae plumbeae oblongae formae qua∣drangulae, & projiciantur ex circumfuso super foveam: post∣modum projiciatur in fovea acetum forte, bullietque pro∣jectum super superficiem terrae, & vapor inde resolutus inficiet plumbum: post spacium vero vinus diei vel amplius rade ab illis laminis, quod illis adhae∣ret, & illud desiccae ad Solem, & erit Cerusa. certres, i. undoubtful signs. centure, g. the point in the midst of a circle. censing, b. casting the smoak, Frankincense. celerer, d. butler. cell, d. a study. chasteleine, f. a gentlewoman of a great house. chaunters, f. singers. chaffer, d. goods, wares. chauntepleure, f. that weepeth and singeth together. chapelet, f. a garland. charters, f. writings. chaffare, d. buying and sell∣ing. chalons, f. blankets, cover∣ings. champartie, f. maintaining a quarrel. chapiter, b. chief Rulers in Abbies. charge, hurt, harm. chekelaton, b. a stuff of Check∣er-work, made of Cloth of Gold. cheuisance, f. merchandise, de∣vise, a bargain. chees, b. chuse. chevice, f. redeem; also to ef∣fect. cheorte, f. love, jealousie, pity. chest, (subjectum) receptable. cheue, d. thrive. chest, (opprobrium) slaunder. cheuesayle, f. a gorget. chert, f. love. cherisaunce, b. comfort. cherts, f. merry folks. cheuesayle, f. a gorget. chike, a chekin. chincheri, f. nigardliness. chiuer, b. to shake. Christopher, l. a picture of a Man, carrying a Child on his shoulders over a River. chinch, f. nigardly. chirking, b. a noise, making a noise. chirking, (stridens) crashing. chite, b. chiteth. chilandri, f. a goldfinch. chiuancie, f. chivalry, riding. churliche, b. plain, homely. churle, b. slave. church Reues, b. Church-war∣dens. chymbe, d. the uttermost part of a barrel. citrination, perfect digestion, or the colour proving the Philosophers stone. citrine, f. yellow. citriall, i. a gitterne, or dulci∣mer called Sambuca. cierges, f. Wax Candles, Lamps. clarions, d. trumpets. cleape, b. call. clare, clari, b. wine and hony mingled (Vinum rubedum) d. red wine. clepen, b. call. clergion, g. a clark. clenched, b. fastned. cleuis, b. clifts, rocks. clergicall, g. learned. climbe, b. found. clip, clippeth, d. embraceth, kisseth. climate, g. a portion of the Fir∣mament between South and North, varying in one day half an hours space. clicket, b. an Instrument of Iron to lift up a latch. clotlefe, (personata) b. the great Burleaf. clomben, d. ascended. clum, a note of silence. cockney, b. a wisard, disard, fool. controue, f. devise.
controuer, f. deviser. * Constellation, the motion or inward working of the stars or heavenly elements, upon our earthly bodies. couercle, f. a cover, a lid. contemplance, l. private study. * Collect, Expans, years, and Roots, are terms belonging to the Tolitane Tables, and so be his Centres, his Argu∣ments, Proportionels, &c. Face and Tearme be dig∣nities belonging to the Pla∣nets. costei, d. to walk. convaile, recover. compere, f. d. gossip. commensall, f. a table compa∣nion. convention, l. a bargain. corare, f. overcome. costrell, b. a wine-pot. controuer, f. deviser. courtepie, d. a short gawber∣dine, or upper Garment. corrumpeth, i. stinketh, putri∣fieth. couth, b. known perfectly. cogge, a cogbote. columbine, l. dove-like. cordewane, f. dry leather. conteke, f. strife. costage, d. charge, cost. corigeth, l. correcteth. corven, d. taken, carved. couched, f. interlaied, under∣laied. couent, b. a number of thirteen Friars. con, d. know, be able. coitu, l. copulation. confecture, l. a medicine. coy, coyen, f. to quiet, to flat∣ter, also secret, dainty, nice. cop, d. f. top. conisance, f. knowledge. covine, b. deceit. connen, d. can. coagulate, l. curdled, joyned. colfox, b. a black or fearful Fox. corare, i. overcome. controue, f. to faine, to de∣vise. combust, l. burnt, scorched. coines, f. quinches. coynt, f. strange. counterpleted, b. controuled. corosiue, l. eating, wasting. commoning, l. part taking. coupe gorge, f. cut throat. corbets, f. d. places in wals, where Images stand. cornmuse, l. Musick on Cor∣nets. couenable, f. convenient. coulpe, l. fault. coure, b. kneel, stoop. commaunce, f. community. coilons, f. stones. coyse, b. joliness, niceness. coart, l. enforce. courfine, f. fine heart. compinable, f. fit for company. cope, f. a cloak. crampisheth, crampesh, d. gnaweth. crallit, b. engraven. creanseth, f. dealeth on credit. creance, f. faith or trust. crepusculis, l. crepuscles, or dawning. cresse, f. a rush. crispe, l. curled. Croiseri, b. they for whom Christ suffered upon the Cross. crocke, crucke, f. d. a cup, or stean, an earthen pot. crouched, b. blessed. crone, b. an old prating Wo∣man. crop, f. top. crouch, i. cross, bless. crowdest, d. thrustest. crosselet, f. a melting pot. crockes, d. locks of hair. croupe, f. buttock. crull, d. curled. curreidew, b. curry favour. cure bulli, f. tanned leather: eucurbite, l. a kind of long necked Glass. * Curfew, William the Con∣querour in the first year of his reign, commanded, That in every Town and Village a Bell should be rung every night at eight of the Clock, and that all People should then put forth their Fire and Candle, and go to Bed. The ringing of this Bell was called in the French Tongue Cur∣few, that is, Cover Fire. culpons, parts, or streiks; heaps. culleth, b. pulleth, enforceth. D. * Dan Burnell, Nigellus Wire∣ker, Monk of Canterbury, a Man of great Reading and Judgment, as Leland writeth of him, was not affraid to write of the faults of Curates, & the mis-spending of Church Goods; even to William Long∣shampe, Bishop of Ely, and Lord Chancellor of England, a Man of all Men under the Sun most malicious. He did write in Verse to the foresaid William, a Book, under the Title of Brunellus, called Spe∣culum stultorum; And this is it which Chaucer calleth here, Burnell the Ass. He lived, Anno 1200. in the Days of King Iohn. dawes, b. days, time. daweth, b. springeth, begin∣neth. daren, darreigne, b. attempt, challenge. daw, b. wax day. dare, b. stare. daffe, b. dasterd. dagges, (fractura) latchets cut of leather. dagon, (fractura) a piece or remnant. dagged, b. slitted. dates, b. accounts. dayned, f. vouchsafed. defayted, decayed, senceless. dere, b. hurt, grieve. deluge, l. a flood. deviant, l. far off, wander∣ing. definished, l. proved. desiderie, l. lust. debonairely, f. meekly. deis, b. a seat. debonaire, f. gentle, humble. deaurat, l. shining. denwere, b. doubt. destrer, f. horse of Arms. de pardeux, f. by God. debate, f. to fight. derne, (dirus) earnest, careful, secret. deintie, desire. decoped, d. peaked. demeane, f. behave. deficate, l. deified. deiden, died. deme, condemn. depe lowpe, (transparens) gi∣ving thorough light. deslaui, d. lecherous, servile, beastly. dey, dead; also  a dairy woman. demaine, f. toll, custom, pos∣session, also to rule. demoniake, g. possessed of a Devil. demin, b. Judge. dely, b. small. deuoire, f. labour, endeavour, duty. dent, b. stroke. demeane, f. complain, behave. delue, d. digg, ditch. deignous, f. disdainful. deuinals, l. wisards. defended, d. forbad, forbidden. dequace, b. dash.
dexe, a desk. defouled, shamed. defence, f. charge, forbidding. determinate, l. limited. dispaired, l. discouraged. dissentori, a kind of still. digne, l. worthy, mere; also lyth, gentle, yielding, also to vouchsafe. diuinistre, l. a divine. dike, b. ditch. diapred, f. diversified. diuinaile, (AEnigma) g. a riddle. dight, b. made ready, handled, used, also to cover. distance, l. discord, danger. dispended, l. wasted. dim, b. obscure. disheussd, f. barehairred. dite, b. a treatise. disconsolate, l. without comfort. disinal, l. (dies malus) unluckey. dispone, l. dispose. disparage, f. disgrace. distreineth, effecteth. disceuer, spend. distraineth, vexeth. diameter, g. a line dividing a∣ny figure into two equal parts. disease, b. vexation. disapered, l. vanished. discure, b. shew. diuerseth, l. turneth. disioint, b. jeopardy. dissoned, l. dissonant. docked, b. cut off. done houres, b. do servise to God. doleth, l. grieveth. douced, a pipe made of box, sounding most sweetly. domesman, b. Jugde. doughtie, b. slout. dortoure, f. dormitorium, a sleep∣ing place. domed, b. judged. dormant, l. unremoved. doced, f. a sweet Instrument. dole, b. sorrow. doluen, d. buried. donet, l. a book so called. dowtremere, f. fair wearing. dowle, b. deal. dow, b. give. dretching, delay. dreri, b. heavy, sorrowful. dretch, to stay, to hinder, to tarry, to dream. drnftie, d. itkfom, filthy. drerines, b. sorrow. drenched, b. overcome, drowned. drerinesse, b. heart-grief. dreint, b. drowned. dray, drey, dry. dri, drien, b. to suffer. droui, d. filthy. drugge, b. toyl. drurie, modesty, sobriety, com∣liness. drough, b. drew. drenching, taking in. drunkelew, d. given to drink, drunken. * Dulcarnon, is a proportion in Euclid, lib. 1. Theorem. 33. propos. 47. which was found out by Pythagoras after an whole years study, and much beating of his Brain: In thankfulness whereof, he sa∣crificed an Ox to the Gods; which Sacrifice he called Dulcarnon. Alexander Necam an ancient Writer, in his Book De Naturis Rerum, com∣poundeth this word of Du∣lia, and Caro, and will have Dulcarnon to be quasi sacrifici∣um Carnis. Chaucer aptly ap∣plyeth it to Creseide in this place; shewing that she was as much amazed how to an∣swer Troilus, as Pythagoras was wearied to bring his de∣sire to effect. duresse, f. hardness. dwale, (solanum soporiferum) d. nightshade, provoking sleep. dwined, d. dried, consumed. E. Ebracke, Hebrew. ebracke, Jews. ecclesiast, g. a churchman. ecliptike line, g. the circumfe∣rence of the circle, wherein the Sun finisheth his yearly motion. echen, eche, b. increase, draw out. echeth, b. helpeth. eft, b. again, soon. effunde, l. utter. effated, f. sorted, defaced. eftris, efters, entries, ways, galleries. egment, b. procurement. eigteth mow, d. may grant. elate, l. stour. elenge, b. strange. ele, help. eldeth, b. maketh old. elth, eld, old age. eluish, b. wicked, froward. empaired, much grieved. emplede, f. sue. embolfe cercle, g. the oblique circle. embosed, hanged out his tongue with weariness. emforth, after, according. emispere, g. half the compass of the visible heaven. emplaster, f. set out, paint: emprise, f. enterprise; also fa∣shion, order. enboled, b. swelled. enchafeth, (flagat) burneth. Eneidos, g. a work written by Virgil, of the travels of AE∣neas. endry, b. endure. engined, d. racked. enhansed, f. exalted. enhauncen, lift up, raise. engine, f. wit, devise. engluting, f. stopping. enbibing, l. sucking. enewed, renewed. enmossed, f. comforted. encontrewayle, f. prevent, to meer. encheson, f. cause, occasion. enchafed, f. heated. enpited, delited. enlangored, f. languishing. ensise, b. quality, fashion, order. entreteden, d. handle. entalenten, f. move, stir up. entaile, f. graved work. entremete, f. deal, meddle. entermined, l. undermined. entred, l. buried. entalented, f. ingrafted. enteched, f. defiled. entetched, f. qualified, spotted. entame, touch, handle. entailed, f. carved. entriketh, b. entrappeth. entriked, deceived; also min∣gled. enteched, f. qualified, or spotted. entremes, f. intermingled. enuelopt, f. wrapped. enuiron, f. round, round about. equinoctial, l. when the nights and days be all of one length. ernes, b. promise. erke, b. weary, loathing. erne, greatly. ernefull, b. sorrowful. * Eros, g. Whereas some Co∣pies have Heroes, some Her∣nes, and some such like coun∣terfeit word, whereof can be given no reason; I have set down Eros, i. Cupid: as most agreeing in my Opinion with the matter; which I gather thus: Lucian, in his second Dialogue bringeth in Cupid teaching Iupiter how to be∣come amiable, and in him, how lovers may be made accepta∣ble to their ladies; not by weep∣ing, watching, and fasting, nor by furious melancholick fits, but by comly behaviour. The words in the Greek, are thus much in Latin: Si voles ama∣bilis esse n{que} concutias AEgida,
neque fulmen geras: sed suavissi∣mum teipsum exhibe: & vestem sume purpuream, crepidas subli∣ga aur at as: adtibiam & ad Tim∣pana composito gressu incetle, & videbis quod plures te sequentur, quam Bacchum Maenades. So that the lovers of Eros, that is, Cupids Servants, do carry themselves comely in all their Passions, and their Maladies are such as shew no open di∣stemperature of body or mind: which mediocrity this Arcite was far from keeping. And whereas some will have us read Heroes, i. Noble-men; I cannot dislike their Opinion, for it may fitly stand with the sense of the place. erre, f. way. erst, b. earnest. escrite, f. a writing. esperance, f. hope. esplost, perfection. espiritueles, l. heavenly. essoine, f. delay. eth, b. easie. etymologise, g. to shew the true interpretation of a word. euin, b. equal. euin, b. upright. exiteth, l. moveth. exorcismes, g. adjurations. expleiten, f. make shew, coun∣terfeit. eyth, b. easie. ey, an egg. F. Fast, wedded. fare, f. gone. falding, a kind of course cloth. fare, faire. fay, f. truth. fast frets, full fraughteth. farce, f. paint. fage, a fable. fare, b. chear. farden, b. fared. famulers, l. helpers. falsed, l. deceived. fallas, l. deceit. fame, desame, slander. fassed, l. stuffed. faitors, i. deceivers, flatterers. fay, l. truly, also fidelity. fairy, b. a goodly sight, the place where Hobgoblins and Fai∣ries dwell. fantom, f. fancy, vain vision. falke, b. people, folk. faw, b. glad, joyful. fare, f. to go, also a stir. faunes, g. rustical gods. falsen, f. deceive. fantom, f. vain vision. facond, i. speech. fendli, b. ugly. ferne yeare, February. fetise, b. handsom. ferthing, b. a thin scale. fermerere, an overseer of cattel. fele, many, also feling. ferd, b. fared. fermases, g. medicines. * Fenne, Avicen divideth his Canons into partitions, which he calleth Fens. ferth, b. the fourth. fermentation, l. giving Life to the Philosophers stone. feled, known. fers, the queen in Chess-play. feture, f. handsomness. fend, b. devil. ferne, b. long time. feestlych, d. pleasant. fendish, b. divelish. ferly, b. strange. ferd, b. fared. felloun, f. deadly, cruel. fele, b. knowledge. fethered, b. shaked his wings. feffe, b. indue. feele, find. fele homages, f. faithful sub∣jection. fell, b. the skin. feest, b. mirth, joy. fere, b. a companion. ferth, b. the fourth. fete, b. fine. fine, l. cease. finance, f. end. flaming, red. flash of flames, sheaf of Ar∣rows. flaw, yellow. flay, did fly. flebring, b. flattering, slaun∣der. fleten, b. abound. flemer, b. expeller. flone, a arrow. flemed, b. daunted. fleming, conquest. flid, b. flie. flite, flight, b. chide. * Floreine, A Coin of the value of 3 s. 4 d. or there abouts, and such were called Florenes de Scuto. Others there were cal∣led Florenes Regales, contain∣ed within the price of 2 s. 10 d. q. flo, an arrow. flode, abounded, floreth. l. florisheth. floiting, f. d. whistling. fonden, labour. fonde, make, contend, to la∣bour; also to make a fool. fonge, b. take. fonne, b. fool: also to be foolish. fonnes, devises. fone, fine, l. make an end. fother, b. a Wain-load of twenty hundred weight. forstraught, b. daseled. fore, gone. forfraught, beset. forrei, f. to provide horse meat. forrage, f. fodder, course meat. forcer, f. copher or chest. forward, course, condition, promise. forwined, d. dried up. fordo, overthrown. for thy, b. therefore. forpined, consumed. forleten, forsake, broken off. forlete, forloine, rechase, terms of hunting. forleien, d. wander. fordo, b. kill. forleten, foryetten, let pass, neglected, forlorne. fortuna maior, l. Jupiter. forgist, forgiving. forth, theft. forwelked, (marcidus) d. dry∣ed up. forlaine, forsaken. fort, l. strong. forleteth, giveth over. forlyth, spoileth. forsongen, b. weary with sing∣ing. forge, f. work. foreyne, b. a Jaques. formel, his make. forfare, b. forlorne. fore, fared, gone. foredid, killed. foryede, b. overwent. fordo, undone, lost. fone, b. enemies. foison, f. plenty. foiterers, f. vagabonds. foothot, b. forthwith. fowlefaile, b. err greatly. folili, f. rashly. fomen, b. enemies. fongeth, taketh use. fownd, framed. foiles, f. leaves. frape, b. a company, a rabble. frained, restrained, also asked. fret, b. a circle. freneth, maketh strange noise. fret, f. fraught. frend, fremd, b. strange. freelti, b. frail. froy, from you. franks, f. french crowns. freten, b. devour. franchise, f. freedom.
freel, b. rail. freteth, f. rubbeth, chafeth. fret, f. turn, fraught. frouncen, d. f. wrinckling. fremed, b. wild, strange. fret full, set full. frened, b. strange. frounce, f. a wrincle. froise, (frixura) f. a Pancake, or Tansey. frounklesse, f. plain. fryth, b. a wood. fullich, fully. fulke, an hollow place. furll, f. cruel. fusible, l. that may be molte. fuir, i. fury. fye, defic. fined, l. ended. fish, the sign Pisces. fire leuin, b. lightning. G. Gabbing, b. lying. gadling, b. stragling. garnison, f. preparation. Garnade, Garnata in Spain. garison, f. a defence. gable, the fore front of an House. galoch, f. a kind of shoe. gaytere berries, (virga sangui∣nea) prickwood. gastnes, b. terror. gargoning, f. strange speaking. gab, b. prate or lye. *Ganilion, which betrayed the Army of the Christians, un∣der Charlemain, to the Sara∣cens, and was therefore torn in pieces with four Horses. galaxi, (lactea via) g. a tract of stars called Watling-street. gale, b. yawle. gale, b. flout, also chase. galpeth, b. belcheth. galiard, f. lusty, rollick. garison, f. to defend. *Gawyn, This Gawyn was Si∣sters Son to Arthur the great, King of the Britains, a most famous man in War, and in all manner of Civility; As in the Acts of the Brittains we may read. In the year 1082. in a Province of Wales, cal∣led Rose, was his Sepulchre found, and his Body, affirmed by many, to have been of the length of fourteen foot. galliens, Galens works. gate, occasion. gaudi, b. brave. gawreth, b. stareth. gawre, b. stare. gawde, b. a trifle. geri, mutable, also cruel. gerifull, gend, f. seemly. gere, b. jest, frensie. gergon, b. chattering, prating. geomancie, g. conjuration by circles in the earth. gent, f. d. comely, proper. gesseran, a brestplate. gipere, f. a bag or pouch. gippon, a doublet, or light coat. gigges, b. drabs. girde, b. strike. gigging, sounding. gigges, (garrulitas) babling. gite, a gown. gisarme, gasa, a certain wea∣pon. gipe, a coat full of pleits. gigges, bablings. giglotlyke, b. strumpet like. gladly, commonly. glapeth, b. glistereth. glede, b. fire, embers, flame, sparkles, ashes. gle, b. melody. glent, b. glanced, cast. gleire, b. white. glase, b. to glose. gleen, d. gon, slidden. gedes, imbers, also flames. gleue, b. a spear. glitteren, b. glister, shine. glitering, b. shining. glode, b. ascended. glowed, b. stared. glombe, b. frown. gloten, covering. glose, perswade. glose, b. flatter, also the exposi∣tion of a dark speech. glede, b. puttock. glowden, d. shined. glittren, b. shine. gnarre, b. an hard knot, as in wood; a short thick grub. gnast, gnash. gnew, b. gnawed. gnoffe, i. fool, chuffe, miser. gods sonn, b. that God sendeth. gods half, b. on Gods side. gorget, f. a throat. gore, (lacinia) a pleat or fold. golyerdies, f. ravenously mouthed. gowreth, b. stareth. gonfennon, f. a little flag. gonge, b. Jaques. gossomor, b. things that flye in the Air in Summer time like Copwebs. Goodmes, f. good time, or mood. gourde, b. a bottel, made of a gourd. golit, d. throat. gotysh, i. sottish. gore, an arbor under a gourd. goodlihead, gay shew. grame, i. sorrow, mishap, d. an∣ger. graythed, devised. grapenel, an Instrument with many hooks. graspeth, b. catcheth fast. gratch, b. apparel. grauen, d. buried. grant mercy, f. I thank you. graue, bury. graieth, b. to make trim. great see (Mar maggiore) anci∣ently Pontus Euxinus. grece, f. gray, gray amise of Russie Squirrels. greith, b. remove. grete, b. wepe. grenehed, rashness. gre, f. good part. grith, b. agreement. greues, b. trees, boughs, leaves, grass. gret, b. saluted. greyned, made. grede, b. cried. grint, b. grinded. grispe, d. gripe. grisely, b. abhominably, gastly, fearfully. grill, b. could. grofly, b. flat on the ground. groine, b. a froward look. growbed, b. digged. gruffe, b. groveling. groufe, gruell, b. pottage. guerdon, f. reward. guerdonlesse, f. unrewarded. guerring, i. brawling. gullet, d. a throat. gye, b. guide. gyre, b. trance. H *Harrolds, whereas in some books it is, my King of Har∣rolds shalt thou be; it is now corrected thus (my King of Harlots shalt thou be.) For so it is in the French Moralizati∣on of Molinet, 149. where he is called Roi des Ribaulds, which is the King of Harlots, or wicked Persons: an Office of great account in times past, and yet used in the Court of France. Of this office speaketh Iohannes Tillius in his second book De rebus Gallicis, under the title De Praefecto praetorio Regis. But more hereof when time shall serve in M. F. Thins Comment. halfe, d. a neck.
hasard, d. dising. haw, a yard, black, have. halfe, b. charge. haire, hair-cloth. hayes, f. hedges. haketon, f. a Jacket without sleves. hawberke, f. a gorget. halpe, b. helped. halke, (angulus) b. corner, valley. herne, haubergion, (Iorica) f. a coat of male. hate, b. benamed. habite, l. plite. harlotrise, b. bawdry. halt, b. held purpose. hauten, comely. haried, b. pulled. hayne, f. hatred. hafe, lifted. hace, b. hath. han, b. have. hawbacke, b. return. hardely, b. stoutly, also verily. hackeney, d. a trotting horse. hamled, d. cut off, abated. halow, hollow. halsing, b. embrasing. harrow, (apageis) away, away, fie, ie. happeth, b. covereth, embraseth. hauselines, (faemoralia) breches. hat, b. was called. hallowes, b. Saint. haulues, d. parts. hawtently, b. solemnly. halt, held, holdeth, judgeth. haunten, b. use. haunce, set out. hanceled, cut off. halt, b. performeth, holdeth. halteth, (trahit) draweth. hauoire, f. possession. henten, hent, b. catch. hele, heyle, b. health. hethen, b. mockery. hewen, hewed, b. coloured. hecled, wrapped. herbigage, f. lodging. held, accompt, accompted. hereid, b. praised, honoured. hewed, b. coloured. hew, hewis, b. colours, welfare, beauty. hestes, b. wills, promise, com∣mandements. heyne, b. labourer, drudge, heauen, b. to shove, to lift. hewmond, new roade. healed, b. covered, heard. heroner, a special long winged Hawk. hent, b. catched. herborow, d. lodging. heriyng, b. praise. herawdes, b. furious parts in a play. here and houne, hare and hound. helmed, b. defended. heale, hele, b. hold, cover. here and hace, b. hoarse and harsh. healed, heard. helded, b. holden down. herieth, b. praiseth. helest, did hold. hend, b. gentle. hernia, g. the disease called bursting. hote, hete, heten, d. vow, pro∣mise. *Heisugge, The Heisugge, cal∣led Curruca, is a little Bird in whose nest the Cuckow laieth her-Eggs, and when they be hatched, and grown to some bigness, they eat the Bird that bred them. hew, welfare. herden, did hear. heuen, b. rise up. hem, them. heth, b. brabes or such like. her, their. hete, d. was named. henters, b. catchers. height, b. were named. heepe, b. help. heraud, d. proclaim, set forth. hew, to hover. henten, b. to catch. hemisphere, g. half the compass of the visible Heaven. highest, maketh hast. hight, b. promised. hierdesse, b. berdwoman. hith, b. make hast. highten, b. promise. hip, b. the red berry on the brier. hidous, f. b. great. hite, hete, hote, d. is called. hild, b. powred. hidiously, b. fiercely, fearfully. holt, holden. hoten, b. called. horologe, g. a clock. hote the knot, make fast. hoppen, d. leap. howten, b. hallow. howgates, how. hore, b. white. holoure, b. horemonger. hostei, to lay siege. homicide, g. murderer. hoten, b. make an unpleasant noise. hopesteres, (gubernaculum te∣nentes) pilots. horde, b. heap. howselin, b. receive the Sacra∣ment. homager, f. subject. howuer, an hoverer. hold, with-held. houed, b. taried. hoker, b. stoutness, frowardness. horrow, (squalidus) beastly, base, sladerous. houe, b. lifted up, to hover, also a shew. horoscope, g. the ascendent of ones Nativity. hough, how. hostell, f. a town house. hote, b. promise, bid. hostilements, necessaries. hold, beholden. hostes hore, b. woods white. holt, d. a grove. hoting, d. promising. hurleth, f. falleth, maketh a noise. * Hugh of Lincolne, In the 20th year of Henry the Third, eighteen Jews were brought to London from Lincolne, and hanged for crucifying a Child of eight years old; which was this Hugh, whereof Chaucer speaketh, as may be proved out of Matthew Paris, and Walsingham. hurleth, (obstrepit) f. maketh a noise. hurtell, skirmish. hurtlest, carrieth, throweth. hurtlen, b. thrust. hulstred, b. hidden. hurtelen, b. provoke. humling, b. sounding. hyldeth, yieldeth. hyne, b. a hiend or husband∣man. hyed, heardman, Governour. hyerds, b. guides. I. Iape, Jest, a Word by abuse grown odious, and therefore by a certain curious Gentle∣woman scraped out in her Chaucer; whereupon her ser∣ving man writeth thus: My Mistress cannot be content, To take a est as Chaucer ment, But using still a Womans fashion, Allows it in the last Translation: She cannot with a word dispence, Although I know she loves the sence. For such an use the World hath got That words are sins, but deeds are nor. iambeux, f. armour for the legs. iane, half pence of Janua, or Ga∣ly half pence. iapedst, b. jested. iangleresses, b. brablers. ibet, stamped. ibete, set forth.
icond, b. learned. ich, b. my self. ido, b. undone, spoiled. idolaster, g. idolatour. iet, b. devise. iewry, the Jews street or sina∣gogue. iewise, reward by revenge, also a gibber. ifete, b. effect. ifere, b. together. ificched, f. fixed. ifounded, b. sunk. ifretten, d. devoured. igourd, fly. igrauen, d. buried. ihight, b. called, accompted. ihired, honoured. ikend, b. known. ilimed, taken. ilke, b. same. illusion, l. deceipt. imasked, f. covered. imeint, b. mingled. imped, b. grafted. impetren, l. intreat. incantations, i. charms. in a threw, b. quickly. innerest, f. inward. indulgence, l. pardon. ingot, the mass or wedge of gold after it is molten, as also the trough wherein it is molten. intermete, f. medle. incubus, l. the night mare. indigence, l. want. intremes, f. middle servise, in∣termingled. intresse, lining. i not, I know not. intermeting, changing. inome, d. taken. interual, l. distance of time. iniquitance, l. disquiet. induration, l. making hard. inde, f. azure colour. in hie, in hast. ithe, b. thrive. itwight, b. drawn. ineched, put in. inomen, d. obtained. inhild, b. infuse. iombre. b. joyn, jumble. ionglerie, d. jugling. iordans, b. double urinals. ioleming, d. joyful. iossa, turn. ioyeux, f. joyful. ipriued, searched. ipulled, smoothed. irayled, covered, spred. ise, beheld. isped, (expeditus) dispatched. ishad, b. scattered. isperi, g. Orizon. ishet, b. shut. ispended, l. considered. ishone, set forth. iswent, b. swinged. * Iustinian, In the eleventh Book of the Code, De mendi∣cantibus validis; where it is enacted, that if any shall beg, having no cause either by need, or maim, the same shall be examined and searched; and who so shall find him to counterfeit, and proveth the same, Dominium ejus conseque∣tur: and saith Bartoll. He shall be punished, Ad arbitrium Iu∣dicis. iuuentute, l. youth. iupart, b. adventure. iubeli, l. joy, gladness for free∣dom. iub, b. bottel. iudicum, l. book of Judges. iwri, iwrien, hidden. iwri, covered, hanged. iwimpled, d. mufled, hooded. K. Kalender, chief, first. kalends, preamble. keked, kiken, b. stared. Kenard, micher, hedg-creeper. kepe, b. care. *Kenelme, This Kenelmus king of the Mercians was innocent∣ly slain by his Sister Quendri∣da, whereby he obtained his Name of a Martyr. In the same place, for Mereturick we now read Mercenrick, which is the Kingdom of Mercia, as the Etymology of the word doth teach. For Rik in the Saxon Tongue signifieth a Kingdom, and Mercen, the marches or bounds of a coun∣try. So that Mercenrick is reg∣num Mercia, whereof both Kenulph and Kenelme were Kings. kele, b. to coole. kest, b. cast. kepen, b. to care kembe, d. deck. kemeling, a Brewers vessel. kernels, holes or corners in bat∣telments. kerueth, greveth. ken, d. teach, know. kers, (nasturtium) d. water∣resles. keuer, b. recover. kene, b. sharp. kend, b. made me know. *Kichell, A Cake which Hor∣race calleth Libum: Vt{que} sacer∣dotis fugitibus liba recuso: and with us it is called a Gods Kichell, because Godfathers and Godmothers used com∣monly to give one of them to their Godchildren, when they asked blessing. kith, b. acquaintance. kinrest, quiet rest. kithen, b. shew. kinds, kindels, (faetus) b. young ones. kirked, b. turned upward. kith, b. make known, shew, ac∣knowledge. kid, b. known, made known. kitheth, b. sheweth. kin, b. kind. knarri, b. slubby. kned, knit. knittest, setlest. knockeden, d. did knock. knopped, d. tied, laced. kon, b. can. koueren, f. to hide. L. Lake, fine cloth like lawn. largesse, i. liberality. lachesse, f. leysines. latered, l. laysie, loitring. laas, (laqueus) d. net or gin laude, l. praise. langorous, f. pining. lacke, dispraise. laft, lest off, enclosed. lacke, d. offence: also lie, to dispraise. lay, a song. lauen, b. draw empty. laudes, i. morning servise. languerth, i. languisheth. latonne, f. copper. lacert, i. sinew. layuers, (corrigiae) thongs. lay, b. law. laund, b. a plain between trees. lauender, i. f. laundress. laued, b. drew. lath, b. a barn. lasten, forsook. lasse, less. lach, f. lasie. larson, f. robbery. lacking, dispraising. lacken, extenuate, dispraise. Lettow, Lituania, part of Sar∣matia, joyning to Polonia. Leyes, taken to be Levissa, upon the Continent not far from Rhodes. lestis, temptations, lusts, plea∣sures. ley, a song. lees, leasing, also lost, release. lewde, b. ignorant. leue, beleve, live, releeve, grant, dear.
let, lete, b. leave forsake, leden, language. lene, b. lend. leueth, beareth. leuer, better. lech, b. a surgeon. leue, b. dear. lete, b. lest off, to leave. lends, (lumbi) d. loins. lettrure, f. book learning. ledge, d. lay. lessel, (umbraculum) bush or hovel. lele, right, lawful. leite, light. legends, l. tales. lere, d. to teach. leuer, lefe, d. wont. dear, wil∣ling, rather. leueth, remaineth. legisters, i. lawyers. leged, resident. lete, b. deemed, made shew, shewed. lease, praise. letting, leaving. leueth, relieveth, also taketh leave. lemes, b. flames, light. leotorne, a desk. legging, d. lodging. letest fare, b. makest shew. leuesell, a bush. lere, complexion, colour, skin. letargi, g. a drousie disease causing forgetfulness. lest, lust. * Litarge, f. white lead; The Composition whereof, as I find it in an old written book, is thus: Accipiter plumbum, & funditur in olla, & projiciuntur interius testae alterius ollae, & po∣stea moveatur olla fortiori manu, quous{que} commisceantur testae & plumbum, praeterea projiciatur illud totum, & illud est litargi∣rum: hoc modo preparatur plum∣bum ad plumbaciones ollarum. ligne aloes, a bitter kind of wood out of India and Arabia. licand, b. in good plite. limitation, i. circuit. liard, b. nimble. lich, lech, b. like. limaile, i. dust that cometh of filing. light, to make light. lith, lieth. lisse, f. end, limit, border. lisse, lees, release. lisse, b. ease. ligne, f. line. lith, (membrum) a lim. lifthalfe, b. left side. lith, lieth, also plain. liege, lege, f. lawful, true. lignes, liketh, yieldeth. litherly, b. slothful. liggen, b. lie. liart, b. gentle, lithe, smooth. liuen, b. beleeve. lithi, lethy, b. soft gentle. lissed, f. bounded. lisse, to have less, to wax less. lieges, f. subjects. lithe, b. to ease. lorrell, (lurco) devourer. lombes, lambs. loos, lose, f. praise, also order. lossell, d. crafty fellow. louedaies, arbicrements. loppe, b. a spider. lodemanage, skill of Naviga∣tion by stone and needle. lollar, b. a breaker of fasting days. louke, a fellow receiver. lorco, a devourer, a gulligut. Loi, Dunstan, Iulian, Ru∣nian, and what they were, may be known in the Le∣gend, Festival, and Votaries. louting, b. kneeling, honouring. longen, belong. lore, b. learning, knowledge. lorne, b. lost. losenger, f. flatterer or lier. londles, b. runnagates. loute, b. to bow or bend. lozenge, f. square. losengeri, f. flattery. loteby, companion, or love. loth, b. lothed. losenges, f. square figures. lore, b. lost. loode, led. losenge, f. square. lostheld, accompted lost. lodesmen, b. guides. lore, (ratio) regard, doctrine. low, fire, flame: also to allow, or like. lordeth, ruleth. lucerne, l. candel. lugge, b. pull. lushbrough, a base Coin in the days of Edward the Third. M. * Magicke, He meaneth this Physician was skilful in Astro∣logy, and could make his election of fortunate hours, wherein to minister his Poti∣ons to his Patient; and like∣wise that he was practised in Magick natural, as in making of Sigils or Characters stamp∣ed in Metal in their due times, fitted to that sign that govern∣ed that part of the Body wherein the Malady was; as the stamp of Aries for the dis∣ease in the Head, and of Leo for the Reins, &c. Hereof he speaketh in the third Book of Fame. And Clerkes eke which conne well All this Magick naturell, That craftely doe her entents, To maken in certaine ascendents Images lo, through which Magicke They make a man be whole and sicke. * Martes marke, A Skar or Cut which the Children born in his Regiment have, and that in some part of their face: but this good Wife of Bath will needs have two; one for the Character of her principal Planet, and the o∣ther, &c. maintenance, threatning. masteling, shining. mazeline, a mazer. manace, f. threaten. maladie, desease. make his beard, deceive him. malles, b. hammers, betils. maumetri, b. worship of false Gods. martirdom, torment. maskewed, fensed, fortified. makeles, b. matchless. mate, d. daunted, tame, mad, pined, consumed. maugre, f. despite. martereth, i. dieth. marke of Adam, mankind. malison, b. a curse. malleable, b. abiding the ham∣mer. marris, b. a fen. mailes, d. round rings. magonell, an instrument to cast stones. malt, b. melted. mansuete, l. gentle. maumet, mahumet, b. a toyl, bable, idol. mannish, (virago) b. stout. mauis, f. a bushel. make it, hinder it. maint, mingled. malt, melted. matire, f. matter. mani, g. madness. masday, b. holy day. maysondew, f. an hospital. malure, f. mischance. malebouch, f. wicked mouth. * Mercury crude, l. Quick-sil∣ver; for the killing where∣of I read thus; Argentum vi∣vum extinguitur cum forti ad∣mixtione salivae hominis, donec dispereat, & dico, quod si pro∣jeceris super ipsum aquam flu∣entem, si redierit ad primam dis∣positi
