C3776 R43092 26784831 109795
VIA LACTEA, or THE SAINTS Onely VVay to True Blessedness. Opened in a SERMON from MATTH. 5.8. ALSO, The Danger of neglecting Gospel-Sal∣vation, from Heb 2.3. By Thomas Cheesman, Master of Arts, and formerly a Member of Pembrook-Colledge in Oxford. With his Epistle to Vindicate Himself from those Absurdities of Method and Language, and little less then Blasphemies, with which he was abused by a Mercenary Pen, in the former Impression. London, Printed for the Vindication of the Author, and Satisfaction of the Reader. 1663.
TO THE READER. Courteous Reader, MY poor Labours in the Gospel have been of late so wretchedly abused, and falsely represented to the World, as that I have been in a manner constrained to Print these following Sermons, for a necessary vindication of my Ministry, from the contempt of those prophane adversaries, who would gladly lay hold up∣on any occasion to vilifie it, and load it with disgrace∣ful imputations. In partieular, that Sermon upon Mat. 5.8. Has been most barbarously handled, and contumeliously dealt with, for I dare appeal to any judicious auditor, which was present at the delivery of it, whither the counterfeit Copy can shew almost any thing true and genuine, save onely the Text; that ab∣surd Pamphlet, in which these unparalled forgeries are comprized, carries a fair and plausible Title, flattering the Reader into expectations of some rich spiritual treasure, but he which would take the paines to search,
shall find his deluded hopes entertained with nothing but dross and dung, the very excrements of a sottish distempered brain; in a word, the discourse is altoge∣ther wild, brutish, and extravagant, as if it were ambi∣tious to derive its pedigree from a pure frensie, and were calculated for Bedlam, rather then any serious Christian auditory, or were penned by an author who had pub∣liquely renonnced all congruity of language, and had professed himself a sworn Enemy both to reason and conscience, before he could be qualified for the work; and therefore Christian Reader, for the future, I desire thee neither to receive or give credit to any thing that shall come abroad in the like nature as mine But I shall dwell no longer upon this unpleasing subject, be it known for thy further satisfaction, that what is here Printed, is the same for the main substance of it, with that which was formerly Preached, without any considerable addi∣tion; concerning the whole, I shall venture to, say thus much, that there is the clear water of life drawn from the wells of salvation, though not presented to thee in a golden cup; wholesome food, though the dish be not artificially garnished; yet if thou be in the num∣ber of hungering and thirsting souls, such as relish the simplicity of the Gospel, thou wilt not stand upon nice∣ness or delicacy. I Intreat that thou do not onely read, but weigh and consider; never rest satisfied until the truths here contained have made some lively impression upon thy heart, so this and all other discourses of the like nature may build thee up in thy most holy faith, and bring thee nearer to God, which shall be the Prayer of him who would gladly approve himself a faithful Witness to the truth, Tho. Cheesman.
MAT. 5.8. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. HEre is a description of happiness, quite contrary to the expectation of Scribes and Pharises, who being strangers to the spiritual interpretation of the Law, did commonly teach their Dis∣ciples, that they need not doubt of obtaining Sal∣vation, if they did but lead civil lives; if they did but bring forth the fruits of moral honesty, and were exactly conformable to the Tradition of their Elders. But says our Saviour, Do not satisfie your selves with such an empty shadow of outward Tra∣ditional, and Ceremonial holiness; Know, it is the inward frame and disposition of heart, which you are principally engaged to regard, and look after; Blessed are the pure in heart, &c. though there are many persons zealous in the observation of super∣stitious customes, which their own fancy hath made choice of though they stand much upon clean Gar∣ments, and clean Vessels; Though they do much
for the purifying of the flesh, yet notwithstanding this their outward purity, they may be objects of Gods reprobating anger, they may be condemned to perish with the unbeleiving world, and fall short of eternal happiness; But blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. By heart here is meant all the powers and faculties of the inward man; so purity of heart doth imply an understanding free from error, a conscience void of offence towards God and towards man, a will freed from the Dominion of sin and Satan, affections clarified and refined from the dross of this present World. Blessed are they that are thus pure in heart, for they shall see God; that is, they shall enjoy him. Vision is commonly put for fruition in the Scrip∣ture, so in that place, Heb. 12.14. Follow Peace and holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord; that is, none shall enjoy him; no man without ho∣liness, shall be admitted to tast that fulness of joy, or bath in those Rivers of pleasures that are at the right hand of God; or else we may under∣stand it according to the more plain and familiar sig∣nification, and thus the pure in heart shall see God, in his work of creation, they shall behold him in the beautiful frame of Heaven and earth; every thing which they see, will put them in mind of their creatours wisdom, goodness, and power; they shall see him likewise in the works of providence, taking notice of his hand in every mercy, and in every judgement; and they shall see him present in all his Ordinances; but more especially they shall see him in the life to come; they shall see the bles∣sed person of Jesus Christ, who is the glass of the
Trinity, and in whom those who are pure in heart shall one day behold the fullness of the God-head dwelling bodily; this glass is of a transforming nature; for they which see it, shall be changed into the same likeness, from glory to glory. Thus much for the meaning of the words, the pure in heart shall see God, while they continue in this World, by an eye of faith; they shall likewise have a more clear immediate ravishing and refreshing vision of him, when they are perfectly glorified in the life to come. The Text may be divided into a Proposition, and a Demonstration. The Proposition asserts that the pure in heart are blessed; The Demonstration or Argument which the Holy Ghost makes use of in this place, to prove their blessedness, is taken from their seeing of God; blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. The principal Doctrine, resulting from the words, may be this, That the pure in heart, they, and onely such as they, are blessed; or, that true blessedness can never be obtained without purity of Heart. In the Prosecution of it, I shall first shew, what precious ingredients are required to make up this purity of heart. Secondly, why we should labour to get purity of heart. Thirdly, what means we should use to have our hearts purified. Fourthly, in what particulars this purity of heart will especial∣ly discover it self.
I. There are many things implyed or comprehen∣ded in this purity of heart. First, the justification of our persons; civilizing morality doth onely fur∣nish men with some sweet sented flowers, which may perfume their outward conversation, rendring it more acceptable to humane society, though still their hearts may continue as filthy and impure as ever they were before. Moral men commonly have a high conceit of themselves, and yet they may be abominable in the sight of God, as Solomon speaks, Prov. 30.12. There is a Generation that are pure in their own eyes, and yet is not washed from their filthiness; but no true purity can be effectually pro∣duced in our inward parts, until we come to be sprinckled in the blood of Christ, Rev. 1.5. Who hath loved us and washed us from our sins in his own blood. We can never be clensed from our sinful abo∣minations, until we be washed in the blood of that immaculate Lamb, which takes away the sins of the World; when the soul is brought into a state of ju∣stification, it is cloathed in the wedding Garment of Christs imputed righteousness, which is large enough to cover all its natural deformities, and then though it were never so black and filthy be∣fore, it presently appears full of amiable lustre, and shining excellency, bright, and clear, beautiful as an Angel, without spot or blemish in the sight of God. Secondly, Purity of heart doth imply a renova∣tion of our nature. We are all defiled in our very birth and conception; the poysonous Leprosie of Ori∣ginal sin hath spread it self over every faculty of the soul, and member of the body; therefore if ever we obtain any acceptable purity, this corrupt de∣praved
nature must be changed; hence is that Peti∣tion of the Prophet David, which you may read in Psal. 51.10. Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me. Tit. 3.5. we are said to be saved by the washing of Regeneration, and renew∣ing of the Holy Ghost. And the Apostle Paul like∣wise prays in the behalf of his Thessalonians, that they may be sanctified throughout, both in body, soul, and spirit, 1 Thes. 5.23. The soul and the spirit are here to be distinguished. The Spirit here sig∣nifies the most Noble sublime and Angelical part of man, comprehending his will, conscience and un∣derstanding; the soul, that signifies the inferiour fa∣culties of sensitive desires and affections, and the body that is the outward man, the instrument of the soul. In Ezek. 36.25, 26. you have an excellent Gospel promise, I wil sprinkle clean water upon you, and you shall be washed from all your filthiness, and from all your Idols will I cleanse you; a new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put with∣in you. Oh that men were generally more convinced about the excellency and necessity of this sanctifying work! Thirdly, purity of heart requires the casting out of defiling sins; all sin is of a very defiling nature, there∣fore its shadowed forth in the book of Leviticus, under the notion of a spreading Leprosie; tis compared likewise to the vomit of a Dog, and to that filthy mire which Swine delight to wallow in. But more particularly, sinful pleasures must be cast out of the heart. In the 47. of Ezek. there you read concerning the River of the Sanctuary, that is, the Doctrine of the Gospel, which is dispersed
amidst the wilderness of the Gentiles; and most places where it came, received a healing vertue from it, but in the 11 vers. the Miry places, and the Marishes thereof shall not be healed. By the Marishes and Miry places, some fitly understand those men & women that have given themselves over to sinful pleasures; these kind of persons are very unlikely to be healed by the waters of the Sanctuary; what gross defilement do many contract, while they let loose the raines to vile affections, and drown the masculine activity of their spirit in a loathsome pudle of sensuality! Also earthly-mindedness is ano∣ther sin, which must be cast out, if we desire to have a pure heart. When a thing is mingled with that which is of a superior nature, its thereby made more rich and precious, as when silver is min∣gled with gold; but if it be mingled with that which is of an inferiour nature, as silver mingled with lead, such a heterogeneus mixture doth debase and impoverish it; thus when the soul of man is as I may so speak, mingled with the graces of the spi∣rit, this makes it more Noble, exalting it to a higher degree of perfection. But if it be mingled with the drossy vanities of the world, this makes it base and vile. The Scripture tells us concerning the pollutions of the World, 2 Epist. of Peter, Cap. 2. vers. 20. and in James 1.27. saith he, This is pure Religion and undefiled before God, and the father, to visit the fatherless and the widows in their af∣flictions, and to keep himself unspotted from the world; the things of the world, they are a dirty defiling nature; they are like Pitch, tis hard to touch them and not contract some defilement or other. How
is it possible that that man should have a pure heart that can be contented from morning to night, to en∣tertain nothing but the world in his soul! John 17.15. (saith Christ,) I pray not that thou shouldest take them out of the world, but that thou shouldest keep them from the evil. Fourthly, Purity of heart requireth that we should adorn our selves with purifying Graces; First, Hope, 1 Joh. 3.3. He that hath this hope, purifieth himself even as he is pure. Raised expectations of fu∣ture happiness, should stir up in the soul strong and vigorous endeavours after present holiness; be∣cause a defiled heart, and a undefiled inheritance, cannot stand together. Secondly, Faith, thats a∣nother purifying grace; as you have it, Acts 15.9. Purifying their hearts by faith. Those which per∣swade themselves, that they doe believe in Christ; and yet their hearts are as carnal, and corrupt, as filthy, and impure as ever they were before, They may know that their faith is but a fantastick dream, or deluding shadow; there is nothing of truth no∣thing of reality in it: Faith having tied a marriage knot between Christ and the soul, layes a strong en∣gagement upon her, to keep her self chast and pure till the approach of her glorious Bridegroom, when she shall be taken into the everlasting embraces of his love. Thirdly, Repentance, that is another puri∣fying grace: Repentance pulls off the mask from the face of sin, causing it to appear in its proper colours; so that it hath no alluring paint nor coun∣terfeit dress, by which it should ensnare, or delude the soul any longer. Repentance fills the soul of a sinner with hatred and detestation against sin; ma∣king
him restless in his desire, till he can procure an universal divorce, and perpetual separation from it. Those that continue impenitent, can lye soaking in the mire of bloody, raigning lust, and yet not be sensible of the least defilement; but the truly peni∣tent soul is solicitous to wash out every spot and stain. Fourthly, Love that has a notable purifying influence upon the heart; Love chiefly stands in a reciprocal similitude of disposition. They that love God, will strive every day to have more and more of his likeness, of his picture they are ambitious to be beautified with the most plentiful participation of his image. They that love God, will endeavour for such a measure of holiness and purity as may dispose and fit them to maintain a refreshing fellowship and communion with God. You that can wallow in the fink of common profaness, without the least check or remorse of conscience, Oh! it is a sign you have not the least dram of true love to God. Fiftly, Puri∣ty of heart requireth that we should be consecrated, devoted and given up to the service of God. Men of drossy impure spirits look after carnal self in whatsoever they doe; they aim at nothing but the pleasing and gratifying of their flesh; thats the great end which they propose to themselves in all their actions; but those who have a pure heart en∣deavour to glorifye God by yeilding impartial obe∣dience to his Commands. They act according to the simplicity of the Gospel; walking in the plainess, candor and ingenuity of a gracious spirit. Pharisai∣cal Hypocrites, how ever they may cleanse the out∣side, yet their hearts are rotten and impure; be∣cause they onely serve God for by-ends and self re∣spects.
Sixthly, purity of heart requireth that we should resist vain thoughts, Jerem. 4.14. Oh Jerusa∣lem, wash thy heart from wickedness, that thou mayst be saved; what wickedness was this which must be washed away, lest it did hinder salvation? the holy Ghost tells you in the following words, how long shall vain thoughts lodge within thee! Those which indulge themselves in the harbouring of vain thoughts, must never look to have their hearts clensed; therefore when ever thoughts begin to rise in thy soul, com∣mand them to stand and undergo a serious exami∣nation; if they can shew a pass from the Scripture, let them go on, and be encouraged, but if they ap∣pear to be vain, idle, and impertinent, send them back to hell from whence they came, not giving them the least countenance or approbation. In the last place purity of heart requires that we should bridle immoderate affections. You know, water though it be never so fresh and pure, while it runs in its proper Channel, yet if it overflow the banks, it will quickly grow mudy and defiled; thus thy affections if they be kept within due bounds, and proper limits, they may be pure; but when once they overflow the banks of sobriety and moderation, they presently are defiled. Take heed therefore lest thy spirit be defiled by the irregular distempers and corrupt excess of joy, anger, carnal love, or other the like transporting violent passions. In the next place I proceed to shew why we should labour after this purity. 1. Because without this we cannot hear the word; so as to profit by it; If the stomack be filled with corrupt matter, the most wholesome food will
prove distastful; thus when the heart abounds with impurity, the most spiritual and heavenly truths that can be delivered, will scarce find any acceptable or savoury relish; those which cannot feed upon the word with such sweetness, delight, satisfaction, if they would seriously examine themselves, they may possibly find that they have defiled their con∣sciences by some secret way of sinning against God, and thats the reason why their hearts are so little af∣fected under the Preaching of those Gospel truths, which were formerly entertained with highest esteem, and were thought worthy of all accep∣tation. 2. Without this we cannot draw nigh to God in any other Religious duties. James 4.8. Draw nigh unto God, and he will draw nigh unto you; but how shall we be made partakers of this incomparable pri∣viledge? the former words direct us, cleanse your hands you sinners, and purifie your hearts you double-minded. Isaiah 1.16. wash ye, make ye clean, put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes; come now let us reason together, saith the Lord; there is no coming unto God, except we be first wash'd and made clean, Heb. 9.13. How much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal spirit offer∣ed himself up without spot unto God, cleanse your consciences from dead works, that you serve the li∣ving God? you cannot serve the everliving God in an acceptable manner, unless your consciences be clensed from dead works, and this can onely be done by the blood of Jesus Christ, who through the eternal spirit offered himself up without spot unto God.
3. We should therefore labour for purity of heart, because without this we can have no true peace; peace and purity go together. When God appears in his Majesty and Glory, when he ariseth terribly to shake the earth, and magnifies his excel∣lent power, working wonders amongst the children of men, this is the priviledge of those which are pure in heart, that they shall remain undaunted, because conscience will speak peace to them. Job 11.14, 15. If iniquity be in thy hand, put it far away, and let not wickedness dwell in thy Tabernacles; for then shalt thou lift up thy face without spot; yea, thou shalt be stedfast, and shalt not fear. So Psal. 51.7, 8. saith David, purge me with Hysop, and I shall be clean; wash me and I shall be whiter then snow; make me to hear joy and gladness, that the bones which thou hast broken may rejoyce; as if he had said, Lord, I have defiled my self by this bloody sin which I have committed, and because of my defilement, joy and gladness hath been banished from my spirit; but do thou wash me, purge me clean, and then the joy of thy salvation will be restored, peace will return again. Many they complain for want of comfort, for want of peace; let them consider whither there be not some sin or other that they harbour with allowance; for beleive it, one sin will fill the heart with bitterness, vexa∣tion, and galling perplexity. Sin is a Jonah that raiseth storms and tempests where ever it comes. Fourthly, We should labour for purity, because without this there can be no scriptural wel ground∣ed hope of getting to heaven. David saith, Psal.
24.3, 4. Who shall ascend into the Hill of the Lord? who shall stand in his holy place? hee that hath clean hands, and a pure heart, who hath not lift up his soul unto vanity. Those that live after the flesh, wallowing in all impurity, 'tis strange, that they should cheat themselves with such confident expectation of fu∣ture blessedness; The new Jerusalem is, Civitas Sancta, gloriosa, tota ex auro, tota gemmis et marga∣ritis decorata, (as Zanchy speaks) Consider that mag∣nificent description of this City, which is laid down in the Revelation, and then judge whether Goats and Swine are fit to be admitted to be its Inhabitants: A bare profession may give you admission into the Church Militant; but it is nothing but Scriptural ho∣liness, and real purity that can give you admission into the Church Triumphant; as for profane persons, however they may flatter themselves with vain hopes, yet while they continue in sin, every leafe almost in the Bible, stands as a flaming sword to keep them out of Paradise. Fifthly, We should labour after purity of heart, be∣cause without this, there can be no perseverance. Those whose Religion stands only in a glistering shew of outward profession, though they may seem stedfast and flourishing for a while, yet they will certainly fall away in an hour of temptation: What is the reason that so many have begun in the spirit, and ended in the flesh; so many with the Church of Ephesus have forsaken their first love? It is because their hearts were rotten, and corrupt from the be∣ginning; perhaps their heads were enriched with choice notions, curious speculations, and the like; but still they were strangers to purity of heart, they
looked upon Religion as that which could only afford matter of discourse, or did consist in dispu∣ting for opinions. Sixthly, We should labour for purity of heart, that so we may plentifully tast the goodness of God in all conditions; that is a very remarkable place, in Psal. 73.1. Truely God is good to Israel, even to them that are of a clean heart; Whatsoever Changes, Vicissitudes, and Revolutions, there may be in the world, yet the pure in heart shall experience the mercy and goodness of God. In the last place, We should labour to get purity of heart, because the very life of Christianity doth consist in this. In 1 Peter 3.21. Baptisme also now saveth, (not the putting away the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience towards God.) We must consider whether grace have enabled us to answer those solemn engagements, which our baptismal Covenant laid upon us; it is inward wa∣shing which doth principally denominate a Christian. Thus much for the reasons and motives, stirring up to labour after purity of heart. But in the third place, What must we do to get our hearts purified? First, Labour to be heavenly-minded; you may observe, the nearer things are to heaven, the more pure they are. Water is more pure than the earth, as being higher in its situation; Air is more pure then water, and the Fire is more pure than the Air, be∣cause it is nearest to the heavenly bodies. If thy heart were turned and taken off from the world, if it were more raised to converse with heaven, and things of an heavenly nature, this would mightily en∣crease the purity of it.
Secondly, Attend upon the word, John 15.3. Now you are clean, saith Christ to his Disciples, through the word that I have spoken unto you. So Psal. 119.9. Wherewith shall a young man cleanse his way? by taking heed according to thy word. And then get the spirit of grace to dwell in thy heart; that is the most effectual way to have the heart purified; the spirit is sometimes compared to water for its purifying nature, John 3.5. Except a man be born again; of water and the spirit, he can∣not enter into the Kingdom of God; by water here is not meant the Element of water made use of in baptisme; none can conclude baptismal Regenera∣tion from such a place of Scripture as this; no, but except a man be born of water and the spirit, that is, of the spirit that resembles water, compared to water for its cleansing vertue and efficacy; so likewise the Spirit is compared to fire, Mat. 3.11. John speaking concerning Christ, One cometh after me, greater then I, whose Shoe Latchets I am not worthy to unloose, he shall baptise you with the Holy Ghost, and with fire; that is, with the Holy Ghost, that doth resemble fire, so called from its refining vertue. In the fourth place I proceed to shew wherein this purity of heart doth discover it self. It discovers it self chiefly in these four things, an understanding free from error, in purity of Works, in purity of Words, and in purity of Worship. First, An understanding free from error; those that have a pure heart they will strive against Errors in Doctrine, as well as Errors in Practice; for if the head be once poysoned, the venemous influen∣ces of it will quickly distend to the heart, infecting
the very vitals of Christianity; corrupt opinions, and corrupt practices commonly go together; they that have purity of heart, will be filled with a love to truth. Secondly, Purity of heart discovers it self in purity of works; if there be a conformity to the Image of God in the heart, there will also be a conformity to the Law of God in the outward con∣versation; you may as well suppose the Sun to be without light, the fire without heat, and honey without sweetness, as that saving grace should be rooted in the heart, and not bring forth the fruits of holiness in the life, Mat. 5.16. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorifie your Father which is in Heaven; there∣fore those do miserably cheat their own souls, which boast as if their hearts were good, though they live in the dayly practice of gross and scandalous sins; a pure fountain would never send forth muddy streams, a good tree would never bring forth cor∣rupt fruit; if filthiness appear in the outward be∣haviour, you may certainly conclude that there is much more impurity in the inward parts. Thirdly, Purity of heart sheweth it self in puri∣ty of words, James 1.26. If any man among you seem to be Religious, and bridle not his tongue, but deceiveth his own heart, this mans Religion is vain. How can the heart be chast, when the words are loose and immodest? how can the heart be humble, when the speech is swelling and lofty? how can the heart be heavenly, when the discourse constantly runs out, and spends it self upon the things of the World? the words are still sutable to
that treasure which is laid up in the heart, Mat. 12.35. A good man out of the good treasure of the heart, bringeth forth good things; and an evil man out of the evil treasure, bringeth forth evil things. Fourthly, They that are endued with purity of heart, labour for purity of worship; they are Ene∣mies to Will-worship, they cannot endure to serve God in any way save that which he has appointed; they would not have the gold of the Sanctuary mingled with the dross of humane invention; tis the coruption and uncleanness of mens spirits, which makes them so violently contend for, and obstinate∣ly addicted to the observation of Idolatrous cu∣stomes.
HEB. 2.3. How shall we escape if we neglect so great Salvation. THe Apostle had told us, in the forego∣ing verse, that if the word which was spoken by the Angels, that is, the Law which was published upon Mount Si∣nai, by the subordinate administrati∣on of Angels: If that Word, the Law, were so sted∣fast; if it obtained full authority, so that every trans∣gression, every disobedience against it, received a just recompence of reward; If men were severely punish∣ed for transgressing the Law of Moses; how much more shall we be severely punished, if we sin against the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ! How shall we escape, if we neglect so great Salvation. I would willingly spend the short time allotted for the present exercise, in that discourse which might most conduce to general edification: And therefore I shall without further delay present to you this doctrinal point of Observation, from the words to be insisted upon, Namely,
Doct. That those which go on in the final neglect of that Salvation which is offered and held forth in the Gospel, they must unavoidably perish. In the Handling of the point I shall propose this ensuing method. First, I shall shew what this salvation is. Secondly, Why it is called a great Salvation. Thirdly, How many wayes men are guilty of neglecting this great Salvation. Fourthly, What are the causes from whence the general neglect of this great Salvation may pro∣ceed. Fifthly, I shall wind up all in some usefull appli∣cation. First, What this Salvation is. The word , properly signifies the preser∣vation of any thing or Person in a state of safety. But in the Scripture it is taken divers ways. First, It is taken for a Deliverance from some temporal danger or calaminity. Thus you have it in Exodus 14.13. When the Israelites were en∣compassed with an Army of Egyptians at their backs, and the Red Sea was before them, and that the murmuring of the people might be satisfied, Moses stands up, and bids them stand still and see the salvation of the Lord; as if he had said, Let not your hearts be troubled, let not your spirits sink under a load of discouraging fears, do not fall into the hands of unbeliefe; for that is worse than if you should fall into the hands of your enemies; but have a stedfast eye unto the God of Israel, and so take
notice what a seasonable and speedy deliverance he will work for you. Secondly, Salvation is taken for the providenti∣al care and power of God, whereby he will not let his people want those things that are needfull. Thus you have it, Psal. 78.22. When the Israelites murmured against God in the Wilderness for want of food, why saith the Psalmist, They trusted not in his salvation, they believed not in God, and trusted not in his salvation; that is, They trusted not in that wonderful providence of God which would certainly make a provision for them in their wants and difficulties, had they but patience to wait for it. Thirdly, Salvation is taken in scripture for the Author of salvation, Psal. 27.1. The Lord is my light and my salvation; whom shall I fear? so in Luke 2.30. they are the words of Simeon, Now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace, verse 30. for mine eyes have seen thy salvation, that is, I have beheld him that shall be the Author of salvation both to the Jews and to the Gentiles. Fourthly, Salvation is taken for that state of Glo∣ry and perfect Blessedness which the soules of Gods people shall enter upon immediately after the dissolution of their bodies. Thus you have it in Heb. 1.14. speaking there con∣c rning the Angels, Are they not all ministring spirits sent forth that they may minister for those which shall be the heirs of salvation? the heirs of salvation, that is, the heirs of future Glory. And Lastly, Salvation is sometimes Metonymi∣cally taken for the doctrine of the Gospel, because that is the only way which God hath ordinarily ap∣pointed
for the salvation of his rational creatures. And thus it is taken in the words of the Text, How shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation! I have finished the first Branch, and proceed to the second, to enquire why this is here called a great Sal∣vation. And First, It is so called because it doth concern our soules. Oh! that men were more deeply sensible of the incomparable excellency and preciousness that is in their soules! Why, Pleasure is a Dream, Honour is a smoak, Wealth is a deceitful shadow; Our soules are the onely jewels, that are worth the pre∣serving. If these be saved, no matter what is lost; and if these be lost, no matter what is saved. Alas! What would all the preferments the world can give, avail us if after the enjoyment of all, our souls should be swallowed up in a gulf of remediless torment? I tell you, and there is ground for it in the word of God, that the loathsome toad and the vene∣mous snake, they are in a better condition than the highest unsanctified Monarch upon the earth who shall be condemned to have his portion in this pre∣sent life. If you highly esteem those things or per∣sons which may be instrumental for the saving of your estates, or to save the life of your bodies; are you not infinitely much more engaged to set an high esteem upon the Gospel which God hath appoint∣ed to be the only instrument for the saving of your souls? Why, our time is here spent to very little pur∣pose, unlesse we do industriously promote the sal∣vation of our souls. We live here in vain unless that short time which is allotted for us to continue here
upon the earth, be wisely improved to prepare us for an everlasting enjoyment of God in heaven; it had been better for us that our bodies had never lived the life of nature, unless a life of grace here, dispose our soules for a life of Glory hereafter. Those which lay out all their care to cherish frail perishing bodies, and in the mean time neglect their soules, they goe the ready way to plunge both body and soul in everlasting ruine. For oh sinner, dost thou not know, that at the Resurrection thy body shall be in the same condition with thy soul? when they are reunited together, they must be both com∣panions in joy, or companions in torment. But, when the care which we lay out upon our bodies, is nothing, if compared with the care which we lay out upon our soules, we go the ready way to save both, to make both eternally happy; that is the first reason, it is called a great salvation be∣cause it concerns our soules. Secondly, That salvation which the Gospel brings, is therefore called a great salvation, be∣cause it is often bestowed upon the greatest Sinners. There is no person so deeply defiled with the pollutions of the world, or grown so black with the guilt of high and hainous sins, but that the Gos∣pel can furnish him with a robe of imputed Righte∣ousness large enough to cover all his spots, and stains, to conceal all his shame and nakedness in the pre∣sence of God. No person hath so much run upon the score of divine justice, but the Gospel can bring him ac∣quainted with a Surety which is able to discharge his debt, and pay the utmost farthing. Never yet
did any sinner come to Christ, and Christ refused to save him, meerly upon this account because his sins were too great to be pardoned; there never was a∣ny had occasion for such a complaint; No, the greatest sinner in this congregation may be encouraged; Those which for many years together have continued slaves to the Prince of darkness, those which have spent the flower of their age, in the service of sin, and making provision for their lusts, those that have trifled away their time, that have abused the patience of God, that have trampled un∣der foot the riches of his goodness, that have resisted the work of grace, and grieved the Spirit, why yet if they will accept Christ, and come up to the terms of the Gospel, they shall not miss of a full salvation. Thirdly, This is called a very great salvation in regard of the great price which was laid down to procure it. God scornes to sell salvation to any crea∣ture; it is therefore freely offered unto us; we may have it without money, and without price; Oh! but it cost Christ full dear; it cost him no less than the shedding of his own precious Blood, the least drop of which was more worth than the whole frame of this material world; if all the mountains had been turned into gold, and every blade of grass on the face of the earth, had been changed into a precious Jewel, and all this laid together had been offered up to procure the salvation of but one single person, yet it would not have been accepted. Fourthly, This is a very great salvation if we consider those great benefits that are comprehended in it; why, this salvation, it doth comprehend Adoption, Justification, and Eternall life. The benefits are ex∣ceeding
great; though men are naturally born ves∣sels of wrath, and fire-bands of hell; why yet the Gospel shews them how they may get into a state of peace and reconciliation with God. The Gospel shews them how they may have their sins forgotten and forgiven; how they may have their persons justified, and their natures sanctified, that they may be made meet to be partakers of an inheritance with the saints in light. Fifthly, This is called a great salvation because it brings a great revenue of Glory to the excellent Name of God: God is more glorified in that salva∣tion which is extended to sinners in the Gospel, than by any thing else; why, here in this Salvation the riches of his wisdome are discovered, his justice is satisfied, his grace and love are exalted, his mer∣cy sparkles forth to the greatest advantage.
And then in the sixth place, It is a great salvation if we consider its everlasting nature. Those that are once effectually called, and justified, though they may fall under the merit of condemnation, yet they shall never be brought into a state of condemnation; they that are once the children of God, shall so remain for ever; for the gifts of God are unchangable; they shall sure enough be kept by the mighty power of God through faith unto salvation. They that are once made partakers of this Salvation, though they may be encompassed with trouble, why yet their graces are safe, their comforts are safe; Christ, their head, their hope, and all is safe. This is the salvation concerning our soules, being bestowed upon the greatest sinners, having a great price laid down to purchase it, comprehending great bene∣fits, bringing great glory to the name of God, and being of an everlasting nature, justly called a very great Salvation. I haue finished the second thing proposed, and come to the third, inquiring how many ways per∣sons may be guilty of neglecting this great Salva∣tion. And first, men are guily of neglecting this great Salvation when they will not obey the Gospel; whosoever lives in the practice of any known sin, in a state of open rebellion against God, presuming to out-face the Sun of Gospel light, (Oh that God would powerfully speak to his heart, and effectually convince him of it!) this person is guilty of neglecting this great Salvation. Why sirs, why doth the great God of Heaven speak to poor wormes here upon the earth, unless it be that they should obey him? and how can persons more evidently discover that they despise the Gospel of Christ, then when they will not give up themselves to be ruled and governed by it? when they will not suffer it to have any transforming or reforming efficacy upon their hearts, & when they peremptorily refuse to live up to the purity of a Gos∣pel conversation; but though the word be never so much Preached, yet they still wallow in their fil∣thines; the Swearer, the Sabbath-breaker, the Perfidious person, the Scorner at an holy life, will still be the same, say the Preacher what he will. If Gospel Ministers call upon the Drunkard to be sober, and watch least he be drowned in the next intemperate cup of Wine, and he be snatcht away by death in the midst of his sin, as many others have been in the like condition, before him: why
yet he will not be prevailed upon, to break off his revelling courses. Though Ministers would fain per∣swade the covetous wretch to seek after the King∣dome of God, and to lay up treasure in Heaven, and to look after an inheritance of a better nature then the World can give, why yet he still remaines a slave to unrighteous Mammon, he still continues rooting like a Swine in the earth. Though they call upon the lascivious person to put on the Ornaments of chastity, and to possess his vessel in sanctification and honour; why yet when they have spoken all that can be spoken, the Whore must still be followed, and Christ be rejected. Alas! Friends, meer nomi∣nal Christians, by their wicked conversation they are a perpetual reproach to the name of Christ. Cyprian brings the Heathens in his days, thus up∣braiding the Christians, Quare in ore semper evange∣lium, evangelium, cum tua vita ab evangelii praeceptis discrepat? Why is the Gospel so much in their lips, when there is nothing of Gospel purity that appears in their lives? Why? you may be sure that Ministers were not sent that they should be as musical Instru∣ments to gratifie the ears of the people with plea∣sant sounds, nor to feed the wanton curiosity of nice critical hearers with choyce refined notions; Christ did not send his Gospel that it should onely furnish men with matter of discourse and empty speculations; No, but the holy Apostle tells you why the Gospel was sent, Tit. 2.11, 12, 13, 14. The grace of God that brings salvation, hath appeared to all men; to what end? why, Teaching us, that
denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, and righteously, and godly in this present world, looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God, and our Saviour Jesus Christ, who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purifie to himself a peculiar people, zea∣lous of goodworks. Secondly, men are guilty of neglecting this great salvation, when they will not lay to heart the things of the Gospel; when they count it a burthen to be engaged in meditating upon them, when they will not consider nor allow the Gospel any room in their serious thoughts, but rather do what they can to banish and cast it out of their minds; how can you more evidently discover that you despise a thing, then when you do not judge it worth the thinking upon? Oh! how many are there, that melt themselves into luxury, and wantonness, rufling it out into pride and bravery, and wasting their precious time? yet they never took any successful care for their im∣partial souls; they never set apart one hour seriously to consider how they might provide for their ever∣lasting state. Alas! what will become of those men? do they not think that they shall taste of Death as well as others? and then how can they look their Judge in the face? I beseech you sinners, take notice of the indispensible necessity that lies upon you to practice the duty of consideration. Is Christ before you, is grace and a crown of glory before you, and
will you not consider? why is Death ready to seize upon you, is the judge at the door, and yet will ye not consider? why, have you any better things to consider upon then the Gospel doth afford? what is not a God and a Christ, is not the state of your souls worth the considering upon? why, Crowns, and Kingdoms, Lands, and Lordships, they are but toys and trifles, but chaff and stubble, dross and dung, if compared with those everlasting things; and yet will you not be perswaded to consider? Alas! doth not Conscience tell you that you can en∣tertain wanton, and covetous, and revengeful thoughts from morning until night, and that is no wearisomeness to your spirits; and have you no lei∣sure, no time to think how you may make your peace with God, and procure the pardon of your sins? That is the second; Men are guilty of neglecting this great Salvation, when they will not meditate upon the Gospel. Thirdly, Men are guilty of neglecting this great Salvation, when they will not put forth their strength to work out their own Salvation; when they resolve to be at no further cost for the saving of their souls, then the laying out of a few cold customary desires, and sluggish wishes; why con∣sider what work you have to do, if ever you will en∣ter into life; you have a dark understanding to be enlightned, an hard heart to be softned, a stubborn will to be subdued, defiled affections that must be cleansed, strong corruptions that must be mortified, violent temptations that must be resisted, and can
all this be done, while you sleep in the bosome of brutish security, and slothful negligence? why, doth not the Scripture tell you that if you will be sa∣ved, you must strive to enter in at the straight gate? for many shall seek to enter and shall not be able; you must wrestle with Principalities and Powers, so run that you may obtain, and fight the good fight of faith, that you may lay hold upon eternal life; and do such expressions as these, give the least encou∣ragement to sloath. Oh! that men should take more paines to get a morsel of bread, then they do to get an immortal Kingdom of glory! that they should go to bed late, and rise early, and eat the bread of carefulness, as if they never could take too much pains for the getting of earthly riches! yet think every hour too much that is spent for the things of eternity; those which will not put forth their strength in working out Salvation, they are guilty of neglecting it. But in the fourth place, what are the causes from whence the general neglect of this salvation may proceed. Why, first ignorance, many are so ignorant, as that they do not understand the common termes of Christianity; though Ministers do cloath their mat∣ter in the plainest and most familiar expressions, yet they hear all as if the discourse were delivered in an unknown language.
Secondly, another cause is unbelief, why men neglect this great Salvation; though they have a com∣petent measure of knowledge, yet they do not be∣lieve the Gospel of Christ to be true, they dont hear∣tily believe that tis the word of God, though per∣haps with their tongues they may profess to believe as well as others, least they should be shamed by the company with whom they converse yet in their hearts they have no stedfast perswasion concer∣ning the truth of these things; if there were not so much unbeleif, men would be a great deal more di∣ligent in working out their Salvation. Multorum fides natat in labris, dum nulla est in cor∣de, aut vehementer languet; (as saith Cyprian) many pro∣fess to have faith, when nothing but the works of infidelity appear in their lives. Thirdly, Hardness of heart, that is another rea∣son; men are hard enough by nature; but by custom∣ary continuance in sin, and by grieving the spirit, and by slighting the means of grace, they grow har∣der; so that their hearts will not be broken under the threatnings of the Law, nor melted under the promises of the Gospel; A broken heart can no more neglect the Gospel, than an hungry man can neglect his food. But Fourthly, The greatest cause of all in the ge∣nerality of men, is earthly-mindedness; they are so taken up with the things of the world, that they have no leisure to think of heaven; their thoughts
are earthly, their project and endeavours are earth∣ly, their affections earthly; head, heart, hand, and all conspire to carry on those designs, on which their temporal advantages do especially depend. You know in Mathew 13.22. those hearers that are compared to the thorny ground, they received the word, but the cares of the world, and the deceitfulness of riches, choaked the word, so that it became unfruitful; they were never the better for it. If a person goes aside to consider about the matters of his salvation, presently some worldly business or other steps in and interrupteth his thoughts. The young man in Matthew 19. was very fair for heaven; yet notwith∣standing the world that was a bar to him; for saith the text, he went away sorrowful, because he had great possessions; Christ and the world, they are contrary Masters, and they set their servants about a contrary work; therefore none can serve both of these together. I come to the first and last thing, which is to wind up all in some usefull application. And first, If those which neglect the salvation of the Gospel, must unavoidably perish: then let all take heed how they do attend and give ear to the preach∣ing of the Gospel. For first, there is much of God and Christ in the Gospel, there are thousands, amongst the glorified saints and Angels, blessing the Name of God for ever for that which they met withal in the preaching of
the word; if it were possible that sin should be com∣mitted in heaven, that would be greater than sin here committed upon the earth; therefore the sin of the fallen Angels was the greater, because com∣mitted in a place, where God was pleased to make speciall and extraordinary discoveries of his pre∣sence; the more of God there is in any thing, the greater is their sin who abuse it; there is more of God in the Gospel, then there is in all the works of the Creation and providence. Secondly, We should have a care, least we be found guilty of neglecting the Gospel, because that is the conduit, which God hath appointed to convey the choicest blessings to the hearts of his people; Those that live under the faithful and powerful dispensations of the Gospel, let them know that they enjoy the greatest priviledge, which they are capable of receiving in this life. Oh then what shall we think of those poor soules, which have continued for many years, and are grown gray-headed under the preaching of the Gospel, and yet are never the better for it! every Sermon hath been like a shower of water, falling upon a rock, making no impression at all. Thirdly, Therefore do not neglect the Go∣spel, because it is very quick and lively in its work∣ing; it will quickly bring men into a state of Salvation, or else sinke them deeper into perdition, Heb. 4.12. the word of God is quick and powerful (saith the Apostle) and sharper
than a two-edged sword, and pierceth even to the dividing asunder of the soul and spirit: Math. 3.10. Now the Ax (saith he) is laid unto the root of the Tree, and every Tree that bringeth not forth good fruit, is hewen down and cast into the fire; The Ax is laid to the root of the Tree; When was that? Why, when John the Baptist came preaching repentance, because the kingdome of God was at hand; the preaching of the Gospel was at hand; though the tree was barren before, yet it might stand still, and not be cut down; but now when the powerful ministration of the word cometh, ei∣ther close with the Gospel and be saved, or else refuse the Gospel and perish, So Mar. 16.15, 16. Goe (saith Christ) and preach the Gospel to every creature. He that beleeveth, and is baptized shall be saved; and he that beleeveth not shal be dam∣ned. Fourthly, therefore we should not neglect the Gospel, because it is that by which we must be judged at the last day. Heathens that never heard of Christ, they shall not be punished for not be∣leiving in him; for obligation unto duty doth ne∣cessarily presuppose the promulgation of a Law; but as for those that have lived under the Gospel, with∣out controversie they shall be judged according to the Gospel; what would many a person give to know how it shall speed with him in that great and notable day, when the Heavens shall pass away with a mighty noise, and the Elements melt with fer∣vent
heat, when all the beauty and bravery of the World, shall sink into a bed of ashes? what would many a man give to know how he shall speed then? why, the Gospel tells you; those which the Gospel doth condemn now, they shall be condemned then; and they that are acquitted by the Gospel now, they shall be acquitted then. Fifthly, All that neglect the Gospel, they are near to a curse, &c. There is a clear place for it in Heb. 6.7, 8. The Earth which drinketh in the rain, that cometh oft upon it, and bringeth for Herbs, meet for them by whom it is dressed, receiveth a blessing from God, but that which bringeth forth briars and thornes, is rejected, and is nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be burned; the meaning of it is briefly thus, the good soyl are those honest hearers which re∣ceive the word, and bring forth fruit, and receive a blessing from God; but that which bears briars and thornes, the bad ground, is those hearers which receive the word, hear as many Sermons as others, yet they bring nothing forth but briars and thornes, repining and murmuring against the purity and truth of Gospel-Ordinances; these are rejected, and are nigh unto cursing. Then in the last place those that do neglect the Gospel, it will deeply agravate their condemnation. The Sodomites that were consumed with fire and brimstone from Heaven, you will say they were great sinners, and yet Christ tells us plainly, it will be more tollerable for them at the day of
judgement, then for those that neglect the Gos∣pel. Secondly, if it be so dreadfull to neglect the Gospel; then endeavour to receive the Preaching of the Gospel, as Christ hath appointed; receive with meekness that ingrafted word which is able to save your souls. I shall onely name these three. 1. Receive it with reverence and attention, as those which must give an account to the Lord of Glory for every Sermon which . 2. Receive it with thankfulness; we give  for the shining of the Sun, and for the dropping of the clouds, and for fruitful seasons;  seldome do we break forth into  Christ, for the unspeakable benefit of his Gos¦pel! 3. Receive it with an holy hunger, and  after it; as new born Babes desire the  Milk of the word, that you may  thereby. FINIS.
