C3855 99826396 30799
A DISCOURSE OF THE Nature, Use and Advantages OF TRADE. Proposing some Considerations for the Promotion and Advancement thereof, By A Registry of Lands. Preventing the Exportation of Coyn. Lowering the Interest of Money. Inviting Foreign Families into England. From Slender Hints, Men serious and discerning, May gain Experience that is worth the Learning. LONDON: Printed, and are to be Sold by Randal Taylor, near Stationers-Hall, 1694.
A DISCOURSE OF THE Nature, Use and Advantages OF TRADE. WHEN fallen Man was driven out of Paradice, the heavy Charge impo∣sed on him was, that in the Sweat of his Face he should eat his Bread: And he who first was made of Clay, must receive his Nourishment and Sustenance from the Earth.
His Body must be daily coveting the Necessaries of Life; and his Mind as earnestly pursuing the Vanities and Superfluities thereof. Thus thro' the whole Course of Humane Life is mankind destined to Labour and Trouble, as the sparks fly upward; And all his Industrious efforts after the good things of this World, determined in Vanity and Vexation of Spirit. 'Tis true, in the Infancy of the World, Men contented themselves with the Natural produce of the Earth; and it sufficed them to injoy such Fruits and Benefits thereof, as that Portion of Land where their Lot fell did properly afford them. But when the Inhabitants of the Earth began to Increase and Multiply; those who had first gained the Possession thereof, and assumed to themselves a distinct Propriety and Right therein, had excluded the succeeding Race of Men, from all other Livelihood and Subsistance, but what was subordinate to, and dependant on such Proprietors, who having Power and means to support them, did thereby claim a Right of Dominion over them. Then Men began to build Cities, and consti∣tute Societies, and propose to themselves esta∣blish'd Laws, and Rules of Government and Commerce. And as Men were more and more
dispersed over the Face of the Earth, they dis∣covered, That the Productions thereof were va∣rious in some Places and Countries, from those of others. That some Countries abounded in Corn, Cattel and Woods: Some in Drugs, Spi∣ces and Balsoms: Some in Minerals, Gems and Precious Stones; and severally produced things of different kinds and Natures. And hence Man's restless mind became Trans∣ported, with a fond desire of possessing and try∣ing all things. And tho' an easie Portion of Natures Bounties did suffice to Answer the ends of Life; yet the Treasures of the Universe were not sufficient to satisfie the Pride of Life, or give content to the unaccountable desires of bound∣less imagination. What Men could readily possess and injoy, were of little Esteem, and soon became indiffe∣rent; but things Novel and of difficulty to be acquired, were accounted valuable; even Apes and Peacocks, if but far fetch'd and dear bought, were thought Creatures of Ornament and Di∣version. And those Commodities which one Country did most readily part with, were as ear∣nestly coveted and sought for by another. Mens Curiosities increased with their discove∣ries, and their Inventions were wrackt, to find
out Arts and ways of Building Ships, wherewith to Plow the Ocean, and descry the remotest parts of the Earth, and searching after the hid∣den Treasures thereof. The Use and Nature of all those Secrets, were industriously inquired in∣to, and Mens contrivances were set on Work, to make those things desirable for Ornament or Luxury, which were no way needful for com∣mon Use. Kings and Princes had their Crowns and Scep∣ters beset with Gold and Precious Stones; their Palaces and Thrones supported and Adorned with Marble, Ivory and Cedar; their Chambers Beautified with the Choicest Paintings and Car∣vings; their Beds and Furnitures inriched with the costliest Tapestries and Imbroideries, and their Cloaths and Linnen sweetned with the No∣blest Perfumes; their Tables Replenished with all those Delicacies, that Art and Nature could contribute, to indulge and gratifie the Nicest Appetites. Every subordinate degree of Men in propor∣tion to their Abilities studied to imitate, if not outvie each other in profuseness: And those of the meanest condition, were only deficient in Power, not in good Will, to be as vain Glorious and Extravagant as the greatest.
Nevertheless, There are excellent ends in all the instances of Natures Varieties and Producti∣ons thereof, differing in so many several Coun∣tries, from each other; and the indefatigable Labour of Men, in their Anxious Endeavours, to possess and injoy them. And all those excel∣lent Arts and Inventions that have been studied, to improve and apply them, to the several pur∣poses of Curiosity and Delight; have Created most infinite and profitable occasions of Traf∣fick and Commerce: And the various measures and methods of making all things subservient to Man's Use or Pleasure, are so many Providential circumstances of susteining those Millions of Peo∣ple, that might Starve for want, had they not opportunities of Ministring to those that abound in Plenty. There is much of Innocency and Ingenuity in many Arts and Sciences; in the various Manu∣factures and painful Imployments, whereby the greatest part of mankind support themselves, in the Exercise of their several faculties; their busi∣ness keeps them free from Passions; they are ge∣nerally sedate and composed in their minds; and in their Recesses from their Labour, they eat their Bread with chearfulness.
Since therefore Man is placed in a Sphere of Activity, and either of Choice or Necessity, will always be contriving and acting something, more or less significant, to busie or profit him∣self withal. I hope it may not be improper, to offer some short Reflections upon a Subject mat∣ter, wherein the greatest part of mankind are so industriously concerned and imployed. Now the great Ends and Use of Trade and Commerce, are for our mutual accommodation, whereby such occasional interchanges of one thing for another, become a just measure of property, betwixt Man and Man; the chief in∣ducements and motives thereto, being created from a desire of Pleasure or Profit. Thus, when Men are possessed of some things, wherewith they are satiated; they either sell them for Money, or exchange them for some other thing, without regard to any gain there∣by, or any other end, but that of pleasing their own fancy. Sometimes Men part with such things as they can well spare, for what they have a great∣er need of, for their present accommodation; but without any design of enriching themselves thereby; but the principal part of Trade, con∣sists in such sort of Commerce, in the disposal whereof, men propose to themselves some gain∣ful
advantage. And from the various opportu∣nities of Men's ministring to each others pleasures or necessities, is the great Concern of Trade, sup∣ported and maintained. And the Principal Advantage and Foundation of Trade in England, is raised from that Wealth which is gained out of the produce of the Earth. The Proprietors whereof having a greater pro∣portion of Lands, then they alone can manage to advantage, are thereby induced to let out the same to Tenants, who by Contracts and Sti∣pulation with their Landlord, do render some cer∣tain Rent for what they Hold and Injoy. Hence the painful Husbandman becomes in∣terested and concerned to imploy his utmost la∣bour in the Cultivation of the Earth, and impro∣ving every species that may be gained thereout, and turning the same to profit. The Surplus and Benefit whereof beyond the Rent reserved to be paid, being properly his own, and becomes a competent Livelyhood to Himself and Fa∣mily. And from this Labour of the Husbandman, are derived many other Improvements of Trade, in the disposal of those Treasures which he hath raised out of the Earth by his Industry and Pains.
His Corn gives Trade and Imployment to the Miller, the Baker, the Maulster and the Brewer; besides his several other Grains, and Seeds, and Fruits, and Herbs, which imploy and support as many several Callings: By his Grass he in∣creases and nourishes all sorts of Cattle, and they support the Butcher, the Tanner, and many other Trades; His Wooll gives Trade to the Clothiers; His Milk, and Cheese, and Butter supply the Markets with necessary Food; His Timber is imployed in Building; His Clay in making Brick and Tile; His Mines of Iron, Lead, Tin and Coals, besides many other particulars, too tedious to be enumerated, give maintenance to an infinite variety of Trades and Manufactures, that in a wonderful manner depend upon, and are subordinate to each other; All which are to be accounted as so many flourishing Branches, derived out of this Principal Stock of good Hus∣bandry. Thus we see how great a part of the People of this Nation, who have no Propriety in the Soil thereof, yet by Cultivating and Improving the same to the best advantage, and applying the produce thereof, to be imployed in Manu∣factures, and transferring the same from one to another in a way of Traffick and Commerce,
obtain a distinct and peculiar Interest in the Ge∣neral Wealth of the Nation, by the several Be∣nefits accruing to themselves, and greatly con∣tribute to the Weale-Publick. As Land therefore is so principal a Fund of Trade, it may not be improper to consider, whe∣ther it be not the Interest of England, That the Lands of Ireland should be improved as much as may be, that out of the produce thereof, the great advantages of Trade and Commerce may be equally incouraged, and promoted there here. And that England and Ireland should have one joynt Interest, and by uniting the strength of both, they should become thereby considera∣bly more powerful. For this is certain, that Eng∣land has sustained no prejudice by uniting the Dominions of Wales to it; Nor is London the poorer, because several Towns in England have fall'n into a great way of Trade, and thereby grown Rich; For in the one case, the Wealth and Trade of England is greatly increased and advanced, by the addition of so much more Land to it, and of so much more Traffick and Commerce that is gained out of the produce of it; and so many more Hands and Purses are thereby rendred contributary on all emergent occasions, to the assistance and support of the
Publick Government. And in the other Case, Lon∣don, as it is the Metropolis, and the Principal Seat of Majesty and Government, of the Administra∣tion of Justice, and directing the Laws and Me∣thods of Trade, it is sure to partake in a plenti∣ful measure of all the Benefits and Advantages that may arise from the increase of Trade in any other places under the same Dominion and Go∣vernment: But Time and Experience only can be able to remove and over-rule the mistaken pre∣judices, and private interests, that too unhappily obstruct at present so just an undertaking. Another Foundation of Trade is created from the Fishery of the Seas, the particular advantages whereof, having been truly represented in seve∣ral Discourses set forth on that Subject; I shall only make mention of it in this place, and could wish that so certain and continual imployment for Seamen, and so great an occasion of Trade and Commerce, may receive a publick and last∣ing Establishment. And from these Two Fundamentals of Trade, is derived the great opportunity of Traffick from mutual Commerce, where Merchants buy Com∣modities purely to sell again, or exchange the Commodities of one Nation, for those of ano∣ther,
for no other end, but that of their own private Benefit and Profit. By which medium of mutual Commerce, the Riches of our own Country are not only com∣municated to infinite numbers of Families at home, through whose hands our Native Produ∣ctions and Manufactures do pass, before they are finally disposed of, but the Surplus, which is trans∣ported to the remotest parts of the habitable known World, does not only maintain a Cor∣respondence with Mankind, and tends to the civilizing the unsociable Tempers of many bar∣barous People, but accommodates our own Na∣tion with much of their Treasures, and very much helps to support our Navigation, wherein consists our greatest Safety, Strength and Honor. From hence it is observable, how unprofita∣ble the institution heretofore was of lazy Monks and Fryars in this Nation; How little of Religi∣on, and less of Charity there was in such Endow∣ments, where the fat of the Land was devoured by a Generation of People, that were no way serviceable, or instrumental towards the Publick Good, whereof every Man's Experience cannot but be a Self-conviction And whoever compares the State and Condition of England, Holland and France, since they have applyed themselves to
Trade and Navigation with that of Spain, or any other Nation that is less conversant in Mer∣chandize, cannot but acquiesce in this Truth, that nothing can so effectually maintain and sup∣port the Power and Glory of a Nation, as Traf∣fick and Commerce. The intent therefore of this Discourse is not to instruct Men in their particular way of Trade, how to manage the same to the best advantage; for every Man's own Experience, is the best di∣rector for such purposes; and every Man's pri∣vate Interest is the strongest persuasive to the pro∣motion of his own Concerns. I shall only propose Three General Conside∣rations wherein Foreign Trade may be benefici∣al, or injurious to the Nation. The Chief De∣sign of this Treatise being to represent several Instances, whereby the great advantages of Trade in this Nation are obstructed and prevented, for want of such provisions in the Law, as may be reasonably wished for, and endeavoured towards the promotion of so great a Concern. And First, it must be allowed, that all sorts of Commerce that incourages the Manufacture, or at least, the disposal abroad of such Com∣modities as are of our Native Growth, and are not necessary to be consumed at home, are of
General Benefit, and ought to be promoted Secondly, All such Commerce as brings in no more than is carried out, tho' it do not enrich the Nation, yet it is beneficial, in respect to those Families that gain a profitable Livelihood by transferring so many Commodities from one hand to another. Thirdly, Such Commerce as in it self is unpro∣fitable to the Nation, yet if it procure to us col∣lateral advantages that are profitable, it may be allowed; but such Commerce as serves purely to the support of Luxury, and tends in all other Respects to the impoverishment of the Nation, is as much as may be to be restrained by Law. Trade, therefore having such peculiar Excel∣lencies, That it is a just and certain measure of acquiring a Property in any thing, and is com∣municable to all, in proportion to their Quali∣fications of Industry and Ingenuity. That it is a an Universal Method of transferring Wealth from Hand to Hand, whereby Millions of People are imployed and susteined; and Men's necessary Oc∣casions are thereby mutually supplyed, without the violent and inhumane contrivances of Rapine and Force; And that it is the greatest Security and Preservation of our Publick Honour and Welfare.
It may not be improper to reflect on such Im∣pediments as have obstructed Trade, and pro∣pose some Considerations, whereby the same may more effectually be advanced. Now as the produce of Land is a principal Foundation of Trade; And the good management of Land gives the greater Life and Vigor to Trade: So it must be consider'd, that Money is the com∣mon Standard and valuation of most Commo∣dities in Traffick and Commerce; And if such Money be wanting when Commodities are ex∣posed to Sale, a great part of Trade is prevent∣ed thereby; the Command of ready Money gi∣ving more easie and quick Dispatches and Re∣turns in Trade, then can possibly be effected without it, wherefore it is our Publick Interest, that Coin should be continually passing from one to another; in the disposal whereof, there is al∣ways something of Gain to both Parties, having their ends in Traffick, tho' in different Respects. And since all Men cannot imploy their Mo∣ney in Trade, but that the impediments of Birth in some that are above it; Of Age in some that are past it; Of Sex in others; And in some that of Sloth and Idleness render them uncapable of disposing their Money in a way of Commerce; it follows of consequence, That unless some
proper incouragement be contrived for such to lend their money to others, that can and will Trade therewith; so much Trade will be want∣ing in the Nation, by how much money lies hoarded up in Chests from those impediments. So that, notwithstanding the great advantages of Trade, whereby all Persons are under a possi∣bility of improving their Fortunes, in propor∣tion to their Parts and Industry; yet there will be a great deficiency in Trade, where Land can∣not be safely transferred from one to another; and Money cannot as freely be laid out, or lent, without Mens apprehensions of being Cheated and defrauded. Thus, a Person being indebted, but not being able to Sell or Mortgage his Land for payment of such Debt, may under such circumstances, be compared to one of the Wheels of a Clock that is Rusty, and thereby impedes the whole Mo∣tion. As where a Gentleman may owe 1000 l. to several Tradesmen? to pay which, he would gladly Sell, or Mortgage his Estate; and a third Person, who has a 1000 l. lying by him Dead, would readily lay it out in a Purchase or Mort∣gage, could he do it safely. In this Case here are three Evils: The Person indebted would
gladly pay, could he be able to Raise the Mo∣ney; but by reason of the disparagement and distrust that is upon him and his Estate, he is forced to fence with his Creditors for two or three years; in the mean while, his Creditors Prosecute him with chargeable Suits; and ha∣ving extended the Gentleman's Estate, he is for∣ced to break up his House and abscond, his Fa∣mily Ruined, his Estate Wasted and Untenanted by mismanagement; and so much Trade as would have arisen from the Produce thereof, wholly lost, and that Estate which was worth 2000 l. at first, will not perhaps suffice at last, to pay the Creditors their Debts and Char∣ges. The Creditors are likewise injured, for want of their present Money; which in two or three years time, in a course and circulation of Trade, might have passed to some advantage, more or less, through the hands of a thousand Persons. The Monied Man is no less injured, having so much Money lie Dead so long, without ma∣king any Benefit thereby. So that, unless some Provision in the Law may be found out, to make men safe and easie in their Purchases; so much Trade will be lost in the Nation, as shall from time to time be obstru∣cted;
where Men cannot readily dispose of their Estates to Answer their conveniences; since all Sales and Mortgages imply a necessary occasion of laying out so much Money; no Man ever parting with Land for Money, on purpose to hoard it up; tho' many hoard up money, for want of an opportunity to dispose of it. And here it may be considered, for promo∣ting the Credit, and securing those Priviledges which Land is justly Intitled to; whether Publick Taxes that are laid on Land, might not much better be laid on the produce thereof, by way of Excise, and by easing those few that are the Proprietors of Land, to lay it on those many that raise their Estates out of the produce of Land, since every Burthen that is supported by few hands, feels much heavier than what is su∣steined by a Land Tax; being like the digging and cutting up the Roots of Trees for Fuel, which might more safely and conveniently be gained from the Branches. For, suppose a Tax were laid on Iron, Lead, Tin, Salt, Wool, Leather, Tallow, Corn, Hay, and on Plate, Glass, Brick, Earthen Ware, Pa∣per; and many Manufactures in this Nation,
which pay no Customs or Taxes. [The Burthen of such an Excise would be susteined by so ma∣ny Persons, that it would be insensible; and the Price and Credit of Land being hereby support∣ed, Men would more readily bestow their Mo∣ney in the Purchase, as well as their Labour and Pains in the improvement of it. Another Consideration may be concerning money, which is not only the just valuation of all Commodities, but it is also valuable in it self, upon its certain and constant intrinsick Worth; and is to be accounted a part of the Wealth of the Nation. Every occasion therefore, of exporting it in Specie, without bringing in as profitable a Re∣turn of money in a circulation of Trade, tends to the impoverishment of the Nation, and brings a manifest decay on Trade; Money being as ne∣cessary for the carrying on of Trade, as Nerves and Sinews are for the motion of the Natural Body. For, if there be a scarcity of Money, there will be a deadness of Trade; even amidst the greatest plenty of Commodities; as may be seen in those Countries, that have no other ac∣commodation for disposing their Commodities,
but by Exchanging and Bartering one Merchan∣dize for another; wherein there is much of dif∣ficulty and trouble, with little Profit; and is mostly undertaken for necessity sake. And it is an unhappy mischief, where the in∣trinsick value of our money, by exceeding of other Countries, gives an incouragement to such Exportations; as if our money being three pence in the Crown better than in other Countries. A Foreign Merchant should export a thousand pounds of our Coyn into France, and by New coyning it there, get five per Cent. and then bring over a thousand pounds worth of Wine, and having sold it here, he then exports another thousand pounds, and by new coyning it there, should get five per Cent. more; hereby two thou∣sand pounds are exported, never to be retrieved; and one hundred pounds are gained thereby, besides the Profits in the Commodity sold here; so that, unless some Provision may be made to prevent such advantages in exporting our Coyn, a great part thereof, will inevitably be drawn in∣to Foreign parts. From whence it may be questioned, whether it be not of publick concern; when a proper
opportunity presents to new Coyn all our Mo∣ney; with such regard had to the Allay of other Countries, that it shall not be the Interest of any to export it, for the sake of new Coyning it elsewhere. It may likewise be considered, whether the Advancement of Trade is not greatly prevented, by the unaccountable humour of having so much Plate in every Family; which if turned into Coyn, would infinitely promote the Gene∣ral Trade; but while it remains in Plate, is of no more publick Benefit, then if it were Buried in the Bowels of the Earth; while so many other Manufactures are neglected, that would other∣wise be imployed to supply the Use and Orna∣ment of Plate. Another consideration may be concerning the interest of Money; which with great Reason and justice, ought to be limited to such a Rate, as may be consistent with the circumstances of Bor∣rowers; whereby they may be inabled to An∣swer their own ends in borrowing, as well as the others gain in Lending.
As if it be, a Country Gentleman that bor∣rows on a Mortgage; his end is, chiefly to pre∣vent the present Sale of his Land, in hopes of some favourable opportunity, to pay the Debt some other way; and having occasion to bor∣row one thousand pounds, sets out threescore pounds per annum; which he could have sold for so much Money, and lays by the Profits every year, to pay the Interest. Now, if he pays but four per Cent. for Interest; perhaps, he may raise for∣ty pounds per annum, clear of all charges, out of the sixty pounds per annum, wherewith to pay the Interest; but more than that, he cannot hope to clear out of threescore pounds per an∣num: Nor if the Lender had purchased the same Estate, could he have made clear of all charges, more than forty pounds per annum; so that, it is plain, that four per Cent. is the full value of the increase of money, with respect to Purchases and Mortgages; and consequently, if he pays two per Cent. more than he can raise by the benefit of the money borrowed, he must run insensibly in Debt; and the Cankered excess of Usury shall devour the Gentleman's Estate in a competent time, at two thirds of the real value, be the Gentleman never so Painful and Industrious to prevent it. It is therefore most clear, that no
Man can with a good Conscience take more In∣terest on any Security by Mortgage, then the Profits of Land will answer on a Purchase. Or if One thousand Pounds were lent to a Tra∣der, unless he can have it at 4 l. per Cent. as it is Lent in other Countries, he can neither afford to buy so dear by 1 l. per Cent. nor Sell so Cheap as forreign Merchants if he pays 2 l. per Cent. more for his Money, and consequently, must ei∣ther be beat out of his Trade, or forgoe so much of his reasonable Profits, as upon any contingent Losses, may hazard his Undoing, while the Len∣der secures a certain exorbitant Gain out of the unprofitable Returns of the unsuccessful Mer∣chant: Or if the Trader by purchasing his Mo∣ney at too high an Interest, do therefore inhance the price of his Commodity, the Generality of the People become the Sufferers thereby. Such a dead weight, and of so pernicious con∣sequence, is the payment of 2 l. per Cent. more than the common Interest in Foreign Countries; that in bearing too hard upon the Merchant, it overwhelms his Trade, and destroys all that Traf∣fick in his Ruine, which might have been carri∣ed on by him, and by his means, derived with
good advantage to many others, or else infor∣ces him to inhance the price of his Commodi∣ties, to the oppression of the Subject, which is a publick Grievance, and ought in no sort to be indulged for the particular Benefit of the Selfish Lender. Nor will there be any Severity or Injustice in restraining the Interest of Money to 4 l. per Cent. since Foreign Nations that cannot pretend to have more plenty of Money than England, do con∣stantly Lend at 4 l. per Cent. or under, as being convinced, that it is an adaequate Interest for the Use of Money, where a proportionable share of the Profit of such Money, is as justly due to the Borrower, imploying the same in Trade, as to the Lender for the usu-Fruit thereof. Live and let Live, is an honest and usual Say∣ing in Trade; And if the unconscionable Usu∣rers, insatiable Thirst after ungodly Gain, will not permit him to say so. The Law may with great Justice compel him to do so; For wherever common Convenience or Necessity requires any thing to be done for the Publick Welfare, every Man owes a conformity thereto, and many be re∣strained by Law from doing otherwise.
Upon this Reason is grounded, the Statute di∣recting the price of Bread and Beer, to be limi∣ted from time to time according to the price of Corn. And all Ingrossers, Regraters and Fore∣stallers are prohibited to Trade in a way so in∣jurious to the Publick; and one Weight and one Measure is required to be observed in Buying and Selling, to prevent the crying Evils of Ex∣tortion and Oppression, whereby Men are inhi∣bited from making any private Gain to them∣selves, that is inconsistent with the common Convenience of the Publick. There are many Arguments that may be brought against the cursed Vice of Extortion, whereof excessive Usury may be accounted a principal Species; but such as will not be con∣vinced by these two plain Instances of Lending upon Mortgages, or in Trade, will be very deaf to any other perswasions with, but the compulso∣ry obligation of Law, which is well known to have had a good effect in reducing Interest from Eight to Six per Cent. For which benefit the Na∣tion might have waited long enough, if the Usurer's Conscience had still remained a Law to himself.
And since the General Use of Trade was never intended to be an occasion of inriching one Man by the impoverishment of another, but to be a universal support to Mankind, by a medium of Traffick and Commerce, to communicate and impart to each other, the conveniences of Life, the Law has frequently interposed to oblige per∣verse and refractory Men to comply with such Rules and Measures in Trade, as have been thought most conducing to the General Good of a Nation. Nor will it excuse to say, Men are not com∣pelled to take up Money at Interest, and if they find they cannot afford to give 6 l. per Cent. for Money, they may forbear to carry on a grea∣ter Trade then their own Money will enable them to undertake; for the Government having an Interest in the promotion of Trade, is conse∣quently interested in the welfare of every Person that may be instrumental thereto; and is con∣cerned to see them, not only accommodated, but as much as may be, incouraged in all things tending to the advancement of Traffick and Commerce.
Thus the Law requires Inn-keepers to accom∣modate Travellers at a reasonable price; and the like constraint is by Law on Butchers, Brewers, Bakers, and others, to Sell their Victuals at a reasonable Price; and yet these Persons have as much, and as good a Propriety in their respective Commodities, as any Man has in his Money; And it might as well be said, that Men are not under a necessity to buy of the Butcher, for that they may kill their own Victuals, if they please: But Money being as Essential to Trade as Victu∣als are, to the support of Life; and the Publick Interest, being alike concerned in the circumstan∣ces of both Cases; they both fall under the same Reason in the Law, and are equally subject∣ed to the same Considerations and measures of Justice. A further Consideration for the improvement of Trade, may be by a reasonable endeavour, to multiply our People; For as Land cannot yield its utmost increase, but through Men's Labour and Pains; Nor can such increase be im∣proved to the best advantage, but by the appli∣cation of many hands: And since there are ma∣ny parts of England uncultivated, that would
maintain Thousands of Families in way of Farm∣ing; And Ten times as many Thousand Fami∣lies would be maintained in Subserviency, out of the Trade and Manufacture that would necessa∣rily arise from the produce of such Farms. It fol∣lows then of Consequence, that the Nation is de∣ficient in the want of so much Wealth and Plen∣ty, as might be gained by the increase and assi∣stance of so many Thousand People. To effect which great advantages, the Gentry of England may please to bethink themselves, how much it is there Interest to reside in those Countries where their Estates lye; and may, if they please, consider how much it is their Duty by a tacite condition annexed to that Estate, that is descended on them from their Ancestors, by their Example: Authority, Incouragement and assistance, to preserve good Government and good Husbandry among the many inferior People in their Neighbourhood, by which means, and by repealing such rigorous Laws, as drive our Peo∣ple beyond the Seas; and by putting the Laws in execution against those many that live idly in and about London, and elsewhere, who sub∣sist mostly by Stealing, or Cheating, or such like indirect Courses, many such persons would be
glad to forsake their present Habitations, and wicked course of life, and returning to their own Countries, betake themselves to a way of Hus∣bandry. Another defect, is the Imprisonment of Men's Persons for Debt, which seldom or never pro∣cures the payment of what is owing, and yet many an unfortunate Man, who by reason of his Poverty, could no longer continue a Master, might, if he had his liberty, become a useful Ser∣vant, and thereby contribute something to the Publick; But while he continues in Prison, he is not only unserviceable to himself and his Creditors, but unprofitable and buthensome to his Country, in respect of that Charity that is thereby diverted from the Sick and Infirm, in relieving these Walking Ghosts, or Men halfe buried alive, while the Nation is deprived of the Service and Benefit of those Thousands of People that Labour under such hard circum∣stances, to which they are subjected by a barba∣rous Inhumanity, indulging Revenge, purely for Revenge sake. But I rely not on either of these Expedients, for I fear there is too much infatu∣ation in the World, to expect any such Con∣duct in the one Case, and too little Charity to expect so much good Nature in the other.
The most effectual Remedy therefore may probably be this. To Grant one General Free∣dom and Priviledge for all Persons and their Families, to come into this Kingdom, and en∣joy the benefit of our Laws, equally with all other our Native Subjects, upon some solemn Declaration to be by them subscribed, and to be inrolled, whereby they shall promise an entire submission and subjection to this Government, and take the Oath of Allegiance, which would be a sufficient Caution and Ceremony to intro∣duce them amongst us, without imposing any other Test upon them; That being principally intended and provided to secure us against those that were to be admitted to Offices of Trust, wherein they might have some Influence on the Government: But as to the Trading part of the Nation, it was never apprehended necessary to apply a Caution so extraordinary towards such; Nor can it be prudential to create Dif∣ficulties, that may obstruct the Trade and Wel∣fare of the Nation, where there is more of Hu∣mour than Necessity requiring it; And perhaps it is not without great Offence, that so myste∣rious and Religious a Duty should be made sub∣servient to Secular Ends and Purposes.
From what has been thus represented, in as short a Discourse as the Subject matter could be well comprehended; may be drawn these Ob∣servations. That Trade does contribute in a very great measure, to the Honour, Strength, Wealth and Preservation of our Government. That the principal Foundation of our Trade, is derived out of the Land and the Sea. That the produce of the Land and of the Sea is improved by Manufacture and Merchan∣dize. That the Multiplicity of People increase Ma∣nufacture and Merchandize. That Money is the principal medium, where∣by People promote Trade. That Land which is a Substantial valuable and lasting Fund; being made a safe and rea∣dy security, whereon Money may be borrow∣ed
at a reasonable Interest: A great part of the Coyn that lies Dead, would more freely be dispersed, in a Circulation of Traffick and Commerce. FINIS.
