C4122 15580067 103916
A FORM OF PRAYER, And Solemn THANKSGIVING TO Almighty God FOR HIS MAIESTIES Late Victories over the Rebels; TO Be observed in all Churches and Chapels throughout the Kingdom, upon Sunday the Twenty sixth of this Instant July. By His Majesties special Command. LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill deceas'd: And by Henry Hills, and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1685.
A FORM OF PRAYER, AND Solemn Thanksgiving to Almighty God, To be used publickly on Sunday the 26th of July in all Churches and Chapels throughout the Kingdom, for His Majesties late Victories over the Re∣bels. ¶ The Service shall be the same with the usual Office of the Day in all things; except where it is in this Office otherwise appointed. ¶ Both the Morning and Evening Prayer shall begin with these Sentences. I Exhort,1 Tim. II. 1, 2, 3. that first of all suppli∣cations, prayers, intercessions and giving of thanks be made for all men; for Kings, and all that are in Authority; That we may lead a quiet and peace∣able life in all godliness and honesty: For this is good, and acceptable unto God our Saviour.
1 S. John I. 8, 9.If we say, that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us: but if we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to for∣give us our sins, and to cleanse us from all un∣righteousness. The Order for Morning-Prayer. ¶ In stead of Venite exultemus, the Hymn following shall be said or sung; One Verse by the Priest, and another by the Clerk and People. Psal. cxv. 1.NOt unto us, O Lord, not unto us: but unto thy Name be the praise, for thy lov∣ing Mercy, and for thy truths sake. xxx. 13. cxlvi. 1.O my God, I will give thanks unto thee for ever: yea, as long as I have any Being, I will sing praises unto my God. lxxi. 17.For great things are they, that thou hast done: O God, who is like unto thee? cxxvl. 3, 4.The Lord hath done great things for us: yea, the Lord hath done great things for us, whereof we re∣joyce. lxxxiii. 2.For lo, thine enemies made a murmuring: and they that hate thee did lift up their heads. lxxxiii. 5.They cast their heads together with one consent: and were confederate against thee. ll. 2.The People stood up, and their Rulers took counsel together; against the Lord, and a∣gainst his Anointed. ll. 3.They said, Let us break their bonds asunder▪ and cast away their cords from us. lxii. 4. lxxiv. 9.Their device was to put him out, whom God hath exalted: yea, they said in their hearts, let us make havock of them altogether. lxxxiii. 4.They said, Come, and let us root them out, that
they be no more a people: and that their name may be no more in remembrance. But salvation belongeth unto thee, O Lord:Psal. III. 8. the help that is done upon earth,lxxiv. 13. thou doest it thy self. Through thee have we overthrown our enemies:xliv. 6. and in thy Name have we trod them under that rose up a∣gainst us. There is no ing that can be saved by the multitude of an host:xxxiii. 15. neither is any mighty man delivered by much strength. A horse is counted but a vain thing to save a man:xxxiii. 16. neither shal he deliver any by his great strength. I will not trust in my vow it is nor my sword that shall help me.xliv. 7. But it is thou that savest us from our enemies:xliv. 8. and puttest them to confusion that hate us. If the Lord himself had not been on our side,cxxiv. 1. (now many we say:) if the od himself had not been on our side, when men ose up against us. They had swallowed us up quick:cxxiv. 2. when they were so wrathfully displeased at us. But God hath shewed us his goodness plen∣teously:lix. 10. and God hath let us see our desire up∣on our enemies. Praised be the Lord: who hath not given us over,cxxiv. 5. as a prey unto their teeth. They are brought down, and fallen:xx. 8. but we are risen, and stand upright. There are they fallen, all that world wickedness:xxxvi. 12. they are cast down, and shall not be able to stand. Give thanks, O Iu,lxviii. 26. unto God the Lord in the congregations: from the ground of the heart. Thy God hath sent forth strength for thee:lxviii. 28. stablish the thing, O God, which thou hast wrought for us.
Ps. lxxx. 17.Let thy hand be upon the man of thy right hand: and upon the son of man, whom thou ma∣dest so strong for thy self. lxi. 7.He shall dwell before God for ever: O prepare thy loving mercy, and faithfulness, that they may preserve him. xvii. 7.Shew thy marvellous loving kindness: thou that art the Saviour of them, that put their trust in thee from such as resist thy right hand. vil. 9.O let the wickedness of the wicked come to an end: but establish the just. xl. 19.Let them that seek thee be joyful and glad in thee: and let all such as love thy salvation, say always▪ The Lord be praised. cxv. 1.Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us: but unto thy Name give praise, for thy loving mercy, and for thy truths sake. Glory be to the Father, &c. As it was in the beginning, &c. ¶ Proper Psalms. IX. XXI. ¶ Proper Lessons. The first, Num. xvi. Te Deum. The second, the Epistle of St. Jude. Benedictus. ¶ In stead of the Collect for the Day, shall this Thanks∣giving which follows be used, For peace and deliverance from our Enemies. O Almighty God, who art a strong tower of defence unto thy servants against the face of their enemies; we yield thee praise and thanksgiving for our deliverance from those great and apparent dangers, wherewith we were lately encompassed. We acknowledge it thy goodness, that we were not delivered over, as a prey unto them: beseeching thee still to continue such thy mercies towards us, that all
the world may know, that thou art our Saviour and mighty Deliverer, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. ¶ In the end of the Litany after the Collect (We hum∣bly beseech thee, &c.) shall this Thanksgiving, For re∣storing publick peace at home, be used. O Eternal God, our heavenly Father, who alone makest men to be of one mind in a house, and stillest the outrage of a violent, and un∣ruly people, we bless thy holy Name, that it hath pleased thee to appease the seditious tumults, which have been lately raised up amongst us: most humbly beseeching thee to grant to all of us thy grace, that we may henceforth obediently walk in thy holy Commandments; and leading a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty, may continually offer unto thee our sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving for these thy mercies towards us, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. ¶ In the Communion Service in stead of the Collect for the day, shall be read, O Almighty God, who art a strong tower, &c. as before in Morning Prayer. ¶ The Epistlo, 1 S. Pet. II. 11.—17. ¶ The Gospel, S. Matth. xxii. 15.—22. Then went the Pharisees, &c. ¶ In the Offertory shall this Sentence be read. Whatsoever ye would,S. Matth. vii. 12. that men should do unto you, do ye even so unto them; for this is the Law and the Prophets.
¶ After the Prayer, For the whole state of Christs Church, &c. shall these following Prayers be used. O Lord, our God, who by thine Infinite Power and Wisdom dost govern all things, we adore and magnifie thy great and glorious Name, confessing, that to thy good Providence over us we entirely owe both our Being and our Preservation. We are here before thee this day to make this humble Ac∣knowledgment, as every one of us for himself in particular▪  us together in the name of this whole Nation; to which both now of late, and heretofore thou hast vouchsafed so many great and publick Deliverances. Thou art our God, who hast so often, and so wonderfully defeated the eus of ambitious, restless, and bloodthirsty men: to whom hadst thou gi∣ven us up for a prey (as our sins most justly de∣served) our Blood would have been spilt like Water upon the ground; we must have lost all that is dear to us in this World, and we should have been overwhelmed in a De∣luge of Sects and Heresies, of Wars and Confusions, of which we could not have ex∣pected to see any other issue, than the final Ruine and Destruction of this Kingdom, and thy Church amongst us. O our God! how gracious hast thou been unto us all; and to many of us even against our own wills! How much better hast than pro∣vided for us, than we our selves could, or would have done, hadst thou left us in the Hand of our own foolish Counsels! Into thy blessed Hands, O God, we entirely surrender, and give up our
selves, and whatever concerns us; beseeching thee to be still the same gracious God to us, and to our posterity after us. And the better to prepare and qualifie us for the continuance of thy Care, and good Provi∣dence; Enable us by thy Grace to live like a People, whom thou hast so often, and so won∣derfully Redeemed; not following the Dictates of our own unruly Lusts or Passions, nor li∣stning any longer to those that go about with Lies, and slander the Footsteps of thine A∣nointed; but studying every one to be quiet, and to do our own Business, fearing God, and honouring our King, and loving one another, and hereby adorning our most holy Profession; that so being delivered from our Enemies, and from the Hands of all that hate us, we may serve thee without fear in Holiness and Righte∣ousness before thee all the days of our life, to the glory of thy Name, which is exalted far above all Blessing and Praise, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. GRant, Lord, we beseech thee, that the Course of this World may be so peaceably ordered by thy Governance, that thy Church may joy∣fully serve thee in all godly Quietness, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
¶ The Hymn, Not unto us, O Lord, &c, appointed at Morning Prayer in stead of Venite exultemus, shall now also be used before the Psalms. ¶ Proper Psalms. CXVIII. CXLIV. ¶ Proper Lessons. The first, 2 Sam. xxii. Cantate Domino. Ps. xcviii. The second, 2 S. Pet. II. Deus misereatur. Ps. lxvii. ¶ In stead of the Collect for the Day, shall the Thanks∣giving, For peace and deliverance from our enemies, be used, as in the Morning Prayer. ¶ Immediately before the Prayer of St. Chrysostom shall these Collects be used, viz. The Thanksgiving, For restoring publick peace at home, (as in Morning Prayer.) ¶ A Prayer for our Enemies. FAther of Mercies, and lover of Souls, who art kind unto the Vnthankful, and to the Evil, and hast commanded us also to extend our charity even to those that hate us, and despite∣fully use us: We beseech thee, as to accept our Prayers, and Praises, which we have this Day offered up unto thee in behalf of all that are Faithful and Loyal in the Land; so also to en∣large thy Mercy, and Pity, even to those that are our Enemies. O most wise, and powerful Lord God, in whose Hands are the Hearts of all men, as the Rivers of Water, to turn them whithersoever thou wilt; Work mightily upon the Minds of all Parties amongst us. Turn the Hearts of the Children to the Fathers, and the Disobedient to the Wisdom of the Iust; and so make them a ready People prepared for the Lord. Thou that fittest between the Cherubim, be the Earth never so unquiet; thou that stil∣lest the Raging of the Sea, and the Noise of his
Waves, and the Madness of the People: Stir up thy Strength, and come, and help us. Let the Wickedness of the Wicked come to an end: Take away his Vngodliness, and thou shalt find none. Let the fierceness of Man turn to thy Praise; and the Remainder of Weath do thou restrain. To this end take from them all their Prejudices, and all their Passions; their confi∣dent Mistakes, their carnal Ends, and their se∣cular Interests. Open the blind Eyes, that they may see (at least in this their Day) the Things which belong to their Peace, and wisely conside∣ring thy Work, may say, This hath God done; and so hear, and fear, and do no more wickedly. Soften the most obdurate Hearts into a meek, and humble, and docible Temper, that they may no longer resist the Truth. Bow down the stiff Neck, and the iron Sinew, to the gentle and easie Yoke of thy most holy Law. Take away the Brow of Brass, and the Whores Forehead; and make their Faces ashamed, that they may seek thy Name. Sweeten (if it may be) the Gall of Bitterness; and loose the Bands of Iniquity; and guide their Feet into the Ways of Peace: And thus redouble, O Lord, upon us the Joys of this Day, that we may not onely triumph in the Disappointment of their wicked Imagina∣tions, but with thy holy Angels in Heaven re∣joyce for their Conversion: Which great Bles∣sing with the most ardent Affections of our Souls we beg of thee, for thy tender Mercies sake, through the Merits, and Mediation of Ie∣sus Christ, thy blessed Son, our onely Saviour, Amen.
GRant, Lord, we beseech thee, that the Course of this World may be so peaceably ordered by thy Governance, that thy Church may joy∣fully serve thee in all godly Quietness, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. FINIS.
