C5003 R26032 9318111 42743
A Physico Medical ESSAY, CONCERNING ALKALY and ACID, SO FAR As they have relation to the Cause or Cure of DISTEMPERS; WHEREIN Is endeavoured to be proved, that Acids are not (as is generally, and erroneously supposed) the Cause of all or most Distempers; but that Alkalies are. TOGETHER With an Account of some Distempers, and the Medicines, with their Prepa∣rations, proper to be used in the Cure of them: AS ALSO A Short Digression, concerning Spe∣cifick Remedies. By JOHN COLBATCH Physician. LONDON, Printed for Dan. Browne at the Black Swan without Temple-Bar, MDCXCVI.
To the Right Honourable Sir HENRY BELLASIS, Lieutenant-General OF His Majesty's Forces. Honoured Sir, DEdications are at this time grown so much in Fashion, that a Book which appears in the World without one, is scarce look'd upon by any body; people thinking that the Author, who
omits a thing so generally practised, is altogether destitute of a Friend who is capable of protecting and countenancing him; and for that very reason only, let the merit of the Book be never so great, few people will give themselves the trou∣ble of Reading any more than the Title Page alone. To prevent which, and at the same time to manifest my Gratitude for the manifold Favours you have been pleas'd Generously to heap upon me, I have presumed to prefix your Name to the following Essay. I cannot flatter my self so far as to think there is any thing in it worthy to entertain a Person of Your
Parts: But since it comes from one who is filled with a sense of Gratitude, I have some reason to hope, that it may meet with a kind Acceptance; I very well knowing, that small things have sometimes a Value set upon them, especially when they are made the Offerings of Respect, Esteem, and Gra∣titude. It would be too great an Honour to me, to tell the World with what readiness you have appeared to Serve me at those times when I have stood most in need of your Assistance: For which I cannot better ex∣press my Gratitude, than by a silence full of Admiration: For let me say never so much,
I should still fall short of my Duty. This Piece is properly Yours, it being under Your Umbrage that I have been enabled to Write it. And if, out of Your wonted Genero∣sity, You shall be pleased to cast a favourable Aspect upon it, it will afford the greatest satisfaction to him, who is, Great Sir, Your most Obliged, and most Obedient Servant, JO. COLBATCH.
TO THE READER. IT may be much wondred at, that I should in the least pre∣sume to meddle with this Sub∣ject, that hath already been handled by so many very Great men. But when it shall be well considered, in ow much different a manner I have eated upon it, from what hath een hitherto done, I question not ut by the generality of Mankind,  shall be very easily excused. And
though there may be many imperfecti∣ons met with: Yet when the design of the thing (it being to undeceive peo∣ple in a Matter, upon which depends the Health and Welfare of all) shall be well lookt into; I doubt not, but by the candidly ingenious, my Under∣taking will be well approved off: Though I expect to meet with a great number of Carpers, especially a∣mongst those, who by long custom, and for want of due consideration, have embraced a contrary opinion to that of mine. It is scarce possible for a man to converse with a Person that is ill, let the Distemper be what it will, e∣specially those, who have any smat∣tering in Physick, which most peo∣ple now a days have, but they pre∣sently
tell you, that their blood is so very acid, that unless that acidity can be corrected, it is impossible for them to be well: And accordingly they pre∣sently flye to the use of Alkalious Me∣dicines, as Powder of Pearle, Cor∣ral, Crabs eyes, or something of the same nature, and if they send for a Physician, which few people do, till they have first used a vast Farrago of Alkalious Medicines; and if the Physician chances to take the same method, that they themselves had before done, they presently cry out, we have already taken such vast quantities of the beforementioned Me∣dicines, that unless you can think of some more generous and efficacious Alkalies, the Acids complained off, are not to be mortified: Which has
put men to great shifts either to find out new, or to disguise the old ones: yet after all, the Patients expectation has been frustrated, their Distempers not being to be cured, by Medicines of that Nature, but on the contrary either to be exasperated, or so con∣firmed, that they will scarce ever ad∣mit of a cure at all, especially if the Distemper be a Chronick one. I must confess, that I my self have formerly been a stickler for Alkalies, (being carried away by the common vogue of Mankind) and seeing the insufficiency of common Alkalies, have put my self to great expence, besides a vast deal of trouble, to Volatilize Salt of Tartar, &c. till at last I was fully satisfied, by daily obser∣vation, that Alkalies, though never
so exalted, would do me very little, if any service at all in the cure of most Distempers. There are some particular prepa∣rations of Steel and Antimony, some of which I have given an account off, the which giving as Alkalies, and as they are generally believed to be, did me very great service. But since I have well examined them, instead of Alkalies, I find them to be most noble Acids, and the Distempers cured by them, did not (as I formerly sup∣posed) proceed, from any abundance of acid Particles in the Blood or Juices. But on the contrary from Alkalious ones, as I suppose, most Distempers do, and as I have endeavoured to make appear by many Observations. I expect a great many will cry out
as some have already done, that this Man was bred an Apothecary, and shall he pretend to be a reformer in Physick and Surgery. To which I answer, that their Charge I own, confessing my self to have been an Apothecary, and was bred up under a man (though other∣wise a very honest and just Person) that was not the greatest Master in his business. I taking notice of my Masters imperfections, applied my self, for four years of the time I lived with him, to diligent Study, in order to become Master of those things, I was sensible my Master could not teach me, And after I had well considered, and in some measure, be∣come a Master in Pharmarcy, which is the Foundation, upon which the
Practice of Physick is built: I was at last induced to look into the Body of Physick it self, and though I don't pretend to absolute mastership, yet I shall endeavour, and think my self oblidged in Duty, both to God and Man, to improve my small Talent to the best advantage I can, let Carpers say what they will. The greatest part of my time, I lived in Worcester, and although I kept an Apothecaries-Shop, yet my Dependance was wholly upon my own Practice, the success I had in which, is sufficiently known in that Country. And for a Character, I desire no other or better, then the generality of those People will give me, of whom I know not one, that can or will speak amiss of me, for any thing, but my
coming away from them, and leaving such flourishing, thriving business, that scarce any man of my Age ever had before me. For which many of them have blamed me. But the rea∣sons of my leaving that place, are best known to my self. And since I have been speaking concerning my own being bred an A∣pothecary, I shall enlarge a little upon that subject, giving a short account of the necessary qualifications of one of that Profession, and then shall leave every body to judge, whether a man so qualified has not made a large step, towards being a good Physician. First, An Apothecary must be very well acquainted with the Vegitable Kingdom, not only to know the faces of Plants, but their Natures and
manner of Operation upon Humane Bodies, otherwise, how can he tell how to handle them, so as to make his Compositions as they ought to be. And indeed every Physician supposes the Apothecary so qualified when he Pre∣scribes to his Shop; for in his Bill, he seldom directs the method of making his Medicines, but only orders such and such Medicines, knowing or at last supposing them (for every Phy∣sician ought to be well satisfied in the Abilities of an Apothecary, before he prescribes to him) to be before hand skilfully prepared. For let a Phy∣sician Prescribe like an Angel, if the Apothecary through his ignorance in his business, be destitute of good and well prepared Medicines, both Phy∣sician and Patient are frustrated in
their expectations, the which I am affraid to frequently happens. Secondly, He must well under∣stand the Nature and Operation of Minerals and Mettals, which is not to be learnt in the Dispensitary, nor any other way to be attained, but by much reading and hard labour in the fire. Thirdly, He must understand the Nature of Animal Bodies also, amongst which is comprehended that of Man, there being scarce a part of whole Body, but what is sometime or other to be used as Medicine: But before it is used, the Apothecaries skill is for the most part required for its preparation, in order to which, he ought first of all, very well to under∣stand its Nature.
All the forementioned qualificati∣ons, and a great many more, are mul∣titudes of Apothecaries in England endowed with: And to the Honour of the Apothecaries of London, be it spoken, I have generally found the meanest Shops in that Eminent City, better fraited with good Medicines, then any of the most Eminent in all Holland, or the rest of the Low-Countries. I might add a great deal more on the behalf of that noble Profession, which although, I my self have left it off, yet still have a high value and esteem for it, and think an honest and skilfull Apothecary, is as serviceable in the Common-wealth, and deserves as much incouragement, and is as highly to be valued, as any man what∣soever.
The Famous Ettmuler, was not ashamed to own, that he served eight years to an Apothecary. Yet for all that, he afterwards became one of the eminentest Physicians of Europe. And for ought I know, the loss of him at the Age he died, from whom so much might rationally have been expected, deserves as much to be lamented, espe∣cially by Physicians, as the loss of any one private man. I have not given a full account of those Distempers I have treated on, but given some short hints concerning them, so far as was necessary to clear my way as I went. I have in the following Essay, made reflections upon the Practice of some particular men only, my design not being in the least, to reflect upon
that Noble Society, or Body of Men, or any Member of them, I mean the Colledge of Physicians, whom I own to be the Glory of our Nation, and of the whole World, and for whom I have the greatest reverence and re∣spect imaginable. I don't pretend to be the sole Au∣ther, or first broacher of this Doctrine of Acids, in the cure of Distempers, it having long since been the opinion, of some of the most happy Practiti∣oners in the World, and is at this time embraced, by several of the greatest men, that perhaps our age affords. I wrote this Essay at a place, (during the first three Weeks of the Siege of the Castle of Namur, in which time, we had not many wounded men, brought to our Field-Hospital) where I had
not the oppertunity of consulting Books, nor had I the benefit of coming at my one Papers, wherein I had from time to time set down my Observations upon this Subject: For want of which I have only made use of those that oc∣curred to my memory, which is a very treacherous one, and so they are not so numerous nor exact as I designed them: But however for some reasons I am willing to venture them abroad as they are, they not being in the least designed to entertain the Learned, but to undeceive the Multitude. I don't pretend to be so great a man, nor to deserve so well of Man∣kind as Helmont, Paracelsus, &c. have done, yet they treading out of the common Paths, and acting upon dif∣ferent Principles, from the rest of
Mankind: They did not want those, who maligned and hated them, and used all the opprobrious Language in the World against them. Therefore why should I, who don't in the least pretend to have arrived to those great Perfections, that they had attained to, take it amiss to be abused and evil spoken of. Authority has in great measure, blinded some mens understandings, and sealed up their eyes. There being still a sort of men, that pay too sub∣missive a deference to ancient Opini∣ons, tho' never so contrary to reason, that they will not open their eyes to see or understand the truth. There are still men who write against most known Truths, as against the gravity and Elastick force of the Air, and
other things of the same Nature. This Doctrine of Acids, and that I former∣ly wrote concerning the Cure of Wounds, are likewise of the number of those that are unfortunate, meerly for want of being born old and with a venerable Beard. When a Book (says the Famous Malbranch) is first to appear in the World, one knows not whom to con∣sult to know its destiny. The Stars preside not over its Nativity: Their influences have no operation on it; and the most confident Astrologers dare not foretel, the divers risques of fortune it must run. Truth not be∣ing of this World, Caelestial Bodies have no power over her; and whereas she is of a most spiritual Na∣ture, the several positions or combina∣tions
of Matter, can contribute no∣thing, either to her establishment or ruin. Besides the judgments of men are so different in respect of the same things, that we can never more hazardously and imprudently play the Prophet, then in presaging the happy or unfortunate success of a Book. So that every man who ventures to be an Author, at the same time throws himself, at the Readers mercy, to make him, or esteem him, what he pleases. But of all Authors, those who encounter with prejudices, ought most infallibly to reckon upon their condemnation. Their Works sit too uneasie upon most mens minds, and if they escape the passions of their ene∣mies (which I have not done) they are obliged to the Almighty
force of Truth for their pro∣tection. However time will do every man Justice, and Truth, which at first ap∣peared a Chymerical and ridiculous Phantasm, by degrees, grows sensible and manifest. Men open their eyes and contemplate her, they discover her charms and fall in love with her. The Books that encounter with prejudices, leading to Truths through unbeaten Paths, require much longer time than others, to obtain the reputa∣tion their Authors expect them. And I find it but too true in my self, that all those Writers who combate with prejudices, are much mistaken if they think by that means, to recommend themselves to the favour and esteem of others. Possibly some few, will speak
honourably of them when they are dead. But whilst they live, they must expect to be neglected (I speak experimentally) by most people, and to be despised, reviled, and persecuted, even by those, who go for the wisest and most moderate sort of men. There is nothing but Truth con∣tained in my Novum Lumen Chyrurgicum, and I did think that I should have been put into a condition this Summer, to have made it evi∣dently appear. But instead of that, I have been abused and delivered up into the hands of my enemies, to do with me as they pleased. My Novum Lumen is built upon a pair of Medicines, the which as yet I think not fit to make publick, but here lyes my misfortune, common
to all those, who make new Discove∣ries. A great many believe the Truth of what I have said, and that my Medicines are capable of perfor∣ming what I have promised for them. But amongst the number of those, who are so ingenuous as to believe matter of fact, a great many say, this man was not the Author, others that they have the same Medicines, and some that they imparted them to me. As for these Gentlemen, I can very easily excuse them, I very well know∣ing that it is the Nature of most Men, not to allow any Person the honour of his own Discoveries, they thinking that thereby, their own Glory is eclipsed. But there are another sort of Men, whose Interest, will not give them leave to embrace
the Truth, and for the same reason they do what in them lies, to keep others from so doing. And the greatest part of Mankind not being judges in my cause, any further then their eyes direct them, and it being altogether impossible, that there should be any great number of Specta∣tors, by which means I am evil spoken off by many, upon no other grounds, then because an interested party have told them, that I have pretended to what I can't perform. I expect the mouths of my ene∣mies will be opened very wide against me, but I have already born so much, that I can with a great deal of con∣tentedness bear with the greatest in∣dignities that can be offered me: My great satisfaction being, that I have
peace in my own breast, having pro∣posed nothing but what tended to the good of Mankind: And very well knowing, that if my Medicines are faithfully and skilfully used, they are capable of performing much more then I have promised for them; but the best Medicines unskilfully used, or with a design that they should not suc∣ceed by prejudiced Persons, may be brought into disgrace. The following Essay I humbly offer to the candid Readers serious consideration, nothing doubting but that it will meet with a favourable reception from some few. And I must needs say, that I more value the good Opinion and good Word of one candidly ingenuous, then all that can be said against me, by ten thousand
clamarous ill-natured Persons. I have endeavoured to act and behave my self so, as to deserve no mans ill Word; but if I am abused and my Un∣dertakings misrepresented without any just cause, I shall never break my heart about it, I very well know∣ing that the justice and integrity of my Undertakings, will one time or other be made appear. From my House in St. Anns Court, in Dean-Street, near Soho-Square, October the 12th. 1695.
A Physico Medical ESSAY, &c. CHAP. I. Of the Small Pox. THE first thing I shall be∣gin with, is the disuse of Alkalies in the Small-Pox, that fatal Distemper to three King∣doms, and even all Europe: In that, by the means of it, God was pleased to deprive  of a Prin∣cess, whose worth was such, that a value sufficient can never be set upon it, and whose loss suf∣ficiently be lamented. It is a common practce, both
of Nurses and the generality of Practitioners, as soon as they perceive the least Symptoms of this Distemper, to give either Gascons, Countess of Kents, Lapis de Goa, or some other Testaceous Powder, which are known Al∣kalies. The one Party as they pretend to drive the Malignity from the Heart; the other to cor∣rect the Acidity which they con∣jecture (for beyond conjecture they can't go) to be in the blood. In the subsequent Discourse, I shall endeavour to shew, upon what false suppositions both Parties go. For the first sort, it will not be worth while to spend much time about them, by reason e∣very one will readily grant,
that they generally act upon wrong and mistaken Notions. For, for any Malignity to be lodged in the Heart, more than any other part, is altogether im∣possible, by reason that the Blood moves ten times at least faster through the Heart than any other part, the Lungs ex∣cepted: For the Cavities being large, no Stagnation is to be feared, and so by consequence no danger. If there be any danger of the Malignities setling any where, it must be in those parts where the Vessels are very small, and the Blood moves but slowly, which must be near the extream Parts. For the second sort, who give
the same Medicines, but with quite different Intentions; I shall endeavour to prove, that their suppositions are altogether as false and groundless as the sor∣mer. They give their Alkalious Medicines, to correct the Aci∣dity they suppose to be in the Blood, and which is, as they pretend, the occasion of all the ill Symptoms that attend People in the Small-Pox: Now I could never hear of any one, that by Analyzing the Blood of Persons in the Small-Pox, that could e∣ver find the least footsteps of Acidity in it; though on the contrary it doth appear, after many trials, that the Blood of such Persons, doth more abound
with Alkalious Particles, then that of sound People: So by consequence, the giving of Al∣kalies in this case must be at least superfluous, if not highly per∣nicious, and as I have frequently observed, and shall instance in some particulars. The cause of the Small-Pox, common with most other Fe∣vors and acute Distempers, I suppose to be, from a quantity of such Particles, being some way or other admitted into the Blood, which being of a quite different Texture from that of the Blood, and so not capable of being mixt with it, causes a hurry and disor∣der there, which is what I
Nov. Lum. Chyr. elsewhere observe, to be the occasion of both continued and Sympto∣matick Fevers. Now it is well known, that a Fever always precedes the Eruption of the Pustles in the Small-Pox: And when the Pustles are well come out, that is, when the He∣terogeneous or Particles of a different Texture from those of the Blood, are thrown out to the Surface of the Body, then the Fever ceases. Now to assist Nature in throwing those Heterogeneous Particles out of the Blood, to the extream Parts, which they pre∣tend to be mightily hindred, by a great quantity of Acids in the
Blood, they give repeated, and large quanties of Testatious, Alkalious Powders, and other Diaphoreticks: Which indeed seldom fail of answering their Intentions, in throwing out large quantities of Pustles, even more than Nature is able to supply or bring to maturity; and if she doth chance to cope with them, is the only occasion of spoyling so many angelick Faces, as we every day observe. But the spoyling of Faces is not all, for besides the throwing out of so great a quantity of Pustles, by breaking off the Globules of the Blood, when it is brought to the Cataneous Glands, instead of those Glands separating the Ex∣crementitious
Serum, which in a State of Health, is all or most part of it, to be carried off by sweat or insensible transpiration, but at this time to supply the Pustles till they are brought to maturity. I say by breaking off the Globules of the Blood, when it is in its confused State, Serum and all together; the Ex∣crementitious Serum only, ac∣cording to the Rules of Nature, ought to be separated, those Glands being so many strainers, adapted to receive into them the Serum only, and not the least drop of Blood, when it is in its natural State, and its Globules un∣broken. I can liken the separation of the Serum from the Blood, by
the mediation of the cutaneous Glands, to nothing better, then to a mixture of oyl and water, made by continued agitation, when that compound mixture seems to be one intire white liquor, tho' with good eyes or a good glass, the oyl may be seen floating in the Water in small Globules, as the Blood doth in the Serum, as I elsewhere Nov. Lum. Chyr. observe: Yet this mixture of Oyl and Water, let it be done never so exactly, if it be poured into a funnil, lined with brown Paper, wet before hand, the Pores will be so disposed, as to let all the Water run through, though not the least Particle of the Oyl; yet if there be some
Alkalious Salts, boyled with this mixture of Oyl and Wa∣ter, the Globules of the Oyl will be so broken, as to pass readily with the Water, through the forementioned brown Pa∣per, which before it would not in the least do. In like man∣ner the Globules of the Blood being broken, by the means of Alkalious Medicines, toge∣ther with too great a quantity of Alkalious Particles, being be∣fore admitted into it, is by that means made capable of being received into the Cutaneous Glands, which is the only oc∣casion of those purple spots upon the surface of the skin, not only in the Small-Pox, but
other Fevers, which spots sel∣dom or never fail of being the certain Prognosticators of future Death. But this is not all, for by the foresaid breaking of the Globules of the Blood, by Al∣kalious Medicines, these small broken Globules, getting into the small Meanders of the Brain, hinder the Motion of the Animal Spirits, through the Nerves, and so cause Deli∣riums, and all those fatal dis∣orders of the Brain, that are but too frequently seen. Likewise the Blood not be∣ing capable of being contained in its proper Channels, is the occasion of violent Bleeding at
the Nose, bloody Urine, &c. which are none of the best Symptoms, but what too fre∣quently happen by the afore∣said means. Besides breaking of the Glo∣bules of the Blood, and causing the ill Symptoms before-menti∣oned, with many others, I don't think fit here to enumerate: By their Diaphoretick quality, there is so vast a waste made of the Serum of the blood, that there is not a sufficient quantity left, to supply and bring to maturi∣ty, those many Pustles, (even more than Nature designed) that those Medicines alone had thrown out: So that about the ninth, eleventh, or thirteenth
day, for want of a sufficient quantity of Serum to supply them, the Pustles fall, and the Acrid corrosive matter, being absorbed into the Blood, causes secondary Fevers, which often∣times prove of very dangerous consequence. I might expati∣ate a great deal more, but I design brevity. It may be said, you have gone far enough in condemning the ordinary Practice, as to the use of Alkalies and Diaphoreticks, not having substituted a better and safer Method and Medicines in their room: but not too fast, that follows in its proper place. The Small-Pox, is a Distem∣per, that requires the giving of
as few Medicines, as in any Distemper whatsoever, unless in some extraordinary cases: But yet I think it the most unreasonable thing in the World, that People (as is the common practice in this case) should be left to the sole ma∣nagement of old Women and Nurses; which thing alone, I verily believe, has been the destruction of more people, than the Sword it self. And although but very few Medi∣cines, as I said before, are ge∣nerally necessary, yet the eye of a careful, skilful Physitian, and that from the beginning, is as convenient as in any Di∣stemper whatsoever, that he
seeing Natures operations, may also see the fit time, when to give the Medicines requi∣site. I confess I have heard some people complain, that such a Physitian has had so many Fees, and never wrote one Bill for them; for such people, let me tell them, that they complain without cause, for in many cases, especially in this, the Physitian deserves his Fees better for not writing at all, then for so doing. I own my self to be a pro∣fest Chymist, and in many things, though not all, a Dis∣ciple of Helmont, and know nothing in this World, so de∣lightful to me, as Chymical
Operations: Yet in this case, nor indeed in scarce any acute Distemper, do I judge Chy∣mical Medicines to be abso∣lutely necessary, though many of them may do well, and are sometimes to be used: But I don't know any reason we have to flye to elaborate Preparations, when Nature has provided Medicines ready to our hands. Acids are the things skilfully and timely gi∣ven, which I have seen, not only by my own, but by o∣ther Great mens Practice, to be the only safe, effectual, and seldom or never erring Medicines in this Distemper, so that they are rightly timed,
and given with discretion; and why should we flye to Acids Chymically prepared, when as I said before, Nature has provided to our hands, Oranges, Lemmons, Cittrons, Limes, and a great many more, not necessary here to mention, which for the most part answer our Intentions, so that they are skilfully gi∣ven, by an experienced hand. And as, I hope, I have given sufficient reasons to disswade the use of Alkalies and Dia∣phoreticks, from the many direful effects that daily at∣tend their use, so I hope to give as cogent ones to en∣force the use of Acids, from
the laudable, good effects, I have seen from them; for in five hundred (at least) Pati∣ents, that I have had of all Qualities to do with, in this Distemper, in Worcester and London, where I have been called in at the beginning of the Distemper, I do not know that I have had one that has died or been disfigured; nay, some that have been brought into very ill circumstances, by the precedent use of Testaci∣ous, Alkalious Powders and Diaphoreticks, I have retriev∣ed from the jaws of impen∣ding death, by the use of fit and proper Acids.
It may be wondred at by some, that I make a difference between Testacious Powders and Diaphoreticks, when the Testatious Powders, especially the compound ones, as Gas∣cons Powder, Countess of Kents, Lapis de Goa, &c. are accoun∣ted Diaphoreticks, and indeed are so: But the reason why I do it, is, because for the most part besides the said Al∣kalious Powders, other more forcible Diaphoreticks are also given. I having in short given some hints concerning the cause of the Small-Pox, I need not again repeat them, so I shall immediately proceed to
the method I take in the cure of it, which being according to Natures dictates, is short and easie: For Nature in per∣forming her Operations, makes short and easie cuts, it being in the cure of Diseases, as in finding out and giving an ac∣count of the Phaenomena of Nature by Phylosophical Dis∣quisitions; they that go upon the fewest Principles, general∣ly discover most of her se∣crets, and are capable of gi∣ving the best and most rati∣onal account of them: Where∣as they that are clogged with multiplicity of Principles, and wandring in tedious, long, and uncouth Paths, thinking there∣by
to get admission into Na∣tures Cabinet, after they have spent much time, and taken a great deal of pains, at last fit down as wise as when they began, and not one jot the wiser. First of all, when I come to a Patient who has the Symp∣toms of the Small-Pox upon them, which are so well known, even to Nurses, that I need not spend any time a∣bout them. In the first place, if there be any manifest signs of the Stomachs being op∣pressed and clogged with vis∣cous Matter, as generally it is, I first of all give a gentle, easie vomit, suitable to the
age and constitution of the Patients, and after that hath done operating some Syrupus E Meconio, or any other pro-Opiat in due proportion. Af∣terwards, to allay the hurry and disorder in the Blood, oc∣casioned by the intromission of Hetrogeneous Particles, which Nature is endeavouring to throw out: And to confirm the Texture of the Blood, so as to enable it to rid it self of its enemy, I give large quan∣tities of any of the following Julips. Take of fresh juice of civil Oranges six Ounces, Barly Water one quart, double refined Sugar
as much as is sufficient to make it grateful, or to those Palats or Stomachs (which are very few) to whom juice of Oran∣ges is ungrateful. Take of juice of Lemmons, or Lime juice that is not musty, four Ounces, Barly Water one quart, Cinnamon Water half an Ounce, Syrup of Rasberries as much as is sufficient to make it grateful: Or, Take of Barly, Cinnamon Wa∣ter one quart, juice of Lem∣mons four Ounces, Syrup of Wood-Sorrel three Ounces, mix and make a Julip. O any of these Julips, I give my Patients to drink
as oft and as freely as they please: Drinking likewise small Beer with juice of Oranges in it, in as large quantities as they please. But during the whole course of the Distemper, all sorts of flesh ought to be avoi∣ded. To poor people, instead of the aforesaid Julips, and to save charges, I order them large quantities of small Beer, acidulated with Oyl of Vitriol, or instead of that Vinegar or Verjuice Posset drink, to be drank frequently, and in large quantities. But if in the beginning
or at any other time, I find the Brain very much di∣sturbed, and the Patient de∣lirious, I for the most part find it absolutely necessary to let Blood, and that in a good quantity; and then to flye to the use of more powerful Acids, giving the following Julips in large quantities, which presently calms the violent Motion nd Agitation of the Blood nd Spirit, and sets ll to rights in a small ime. Take of Barly, Cinamon-wa∣r one quart, Syrup of Ras∣erries three Ounces, Volatile
Spirit of Vitriol one Dram and half, or mix and make a Julip. Take of Barly, Cinnamon∣water one quart, Syrup of Ras∣berries three Ounces, Gas Sul∣phuris as much as is sufficient to make it sharp: Or, Take of Barly Water one quart, Epidemick Water two Ounces, Syrup of Wood Sorrel three Ounces, sweet Spirit of Niter or Vitriol two Scruples: Or, Take of red Rose Leaves six Drams, put them into an earthen or glass Vessel, pour upon them one quart of boy∣ling Water, let them stand co∣vered for some time, then pour on them two Scruples of Oyl of Vitriol, or Oyl of Sulphur pe
Campanam, when cold, strain out, and add as much double refined Sugar as is sufficient to make it grateful. If at any time, I find my Patients Spirits languid and low, I then give three or four spoonfuls of the fol∣lowing Cordial at due in∣tervals. Take of Aqua Mirabilis, Epi∣demick Water, of each three Ounces, Spirit of Citrons half an Ounce, Balm Water eight Ounces, Syrup of Gilliflowers one Ounce and half, mix and make a Julip.
By this method, I have brought my Patients through the Distemper, without so much (almost) as the least uneasiness, or even confining themselves to their Beds, and without the least fear of a secondary Fever, which is that, which frequently proves of most fatal conse∣quence. After the Pustles are quite gone, I then take care to purge them well for five or six times, with gentle and easie Purges, after each Purge, giving an Hypnot∣tick: After that I have done Purging, for some time I give corroborating,
strengthning Medicines, to confirm the Texture of the blood and Juices, and bring them to their natural State, by which means I prevent ill accidents, that sometimes succeed the Small-Pox. I have not given a full History of this Distemper, that being contrary to my design, but endeavoured to deter people from the use of those Methods and Medi∣cines that have proved fa∣tal to so many, and to ad∣vance a better and safer Me∣thod and Medicines in their room: Yet I would not have people, wholly to rely upon the Method I have here
set down, but always have a Physitian by, to obviate any unusual Symptoms, that may chance to appear contrary to what general∣ly do, and where life lies at stake, people can't be too cautious. But if the good old Woman and Nurses, in spight of all that can be said, will be still tampering, I must needs say this, that if my Method were exactly followed by every body from the beginning, with∣out any variation, I verily believe that there would not one in ten die, that have formerly done by the use of Alkalies and Diapho∣reticks.
As I have before en∣deavoured to explode the use of Alkalies, and to give my reasons for so doing, so I shall now endeavour to give some reasons for the Method I take, with the great use of Acids in this case. As I have before observed, I judge the cause of the Small Pox, to be from an intromission of Heteroge∣neous, or Particles of a dif∣ferent Nature and Texture from the blood into it; by the means of which Parti∣cles, the blood is put into a very great hurry and disorder, in order to throw off its
enemy, and that the place that Nature designs the discharge of these Particles by, to be the cutaneous Glands. Now the incon∣veniencies, that I observed to attend the use of Alka∣lies, were the throwing out of more Pustles than Na∣ture designed, the destroy∣ing of the Globules of the blood, and a waste of too great a quantity of Serum. I had before forgotten to mention one dismal effect of Alkalies and Diaphore∣ticks, and that is by de∣stroying or breaking the Globules of the Blood, in∣stead of regular Pustles be∣ing
thrown out to the Sur∣face of the Skin, the divided broken Globules are to∣gether with the morbifick matter thrown out, as in the case of—and so causes an Erispelas or St. An∣thonies Fire, which seldom or never fails of proving fatal. Now I almost defie any one to say that he ever observed such Symptoms as these, if Acids were from the beginning used. For Acids are of that Nature, that they confirm the Tex∣ture of the Blood, which is that red substance, wherein is contained the
Byolyenium Nov. Lum. Chyr. or Lamp of Life; by so doing, Nature is ca∣pable of throwing out the extraneous Particles, in a way suitable to it, and without the inconve∣niencies that attend the o∣ther method: For the Texture of the Blood be∣ing confirmed, and mov∣ing regularly and Natu∣rally in its proper Channels, the morbifick Particles are only thrown out, and such a quantity of Serum left, as is sufficient to supply the Pustles and bring them to maturity without any danger of their flatuing, and the acrid
Matter; being again ab∣sorbed into the Blood, and causing secondary Fevers: Besides the Globules of the Blood being kept toge∣ther unbroken, there is not any danger of their being extravasated, and causing those fatal purple Spots. Nor of being thrown out together with morbifick Matter, and so causing an Erisipelas or St. Anthonies Fire; neither are Hemoragies at the the Nose, bloody Wa∣ter, &c. in the least to be feared, nor by being admitted into the small Meanders of the Brain to
cause Deliriums, and those o∣ther Symptoms that attend it. I might expatiate up∣on continued Fevers and some other acute Distem∣pers: But that would be to be guilty of Tau∣tology: For I assign but one general cause of them, though I own that the ex∣traneous Particles, causing them, may be somewhat different, and according to the different size of the extra∣neous Particles, the parts affected may be different; as in the Small-Pox, the size of the Particles are such, as to fit them to be thrown out by the cu∣taneous
Glands to the sur∣face of the Skin; in other Fevers they are thrown out, sometimes one way, sometimes another, ac∣cording to their size. For instance, sometimes they are thrown out by critical sweating, sometimes by Urine, sometimes by the Glands of the Mouth in spitting, and so on, ac∣cording to the different dis∣position of the Particles causing the Distemper, be∣ing fitted to be discharged through the Pores of dif∣ferent Parts: And which ever way we find Nature enclined to do her work,
we must assist her in it, but not spur her on unless she be too sluggish, but must not, upon any account whatso∣ever, hinder or thwart her in her Operations. In most continued Fevers, I have found Alkalies equally pernicious, as in the Small-Pox; and Acids equally ad∣vantagious, the which I shall instance in one or two par∣ticulars. After I came out of Flan∣ders last year, being ninety four, having discoursed with a certain Physitian about a Fever that had that Summer raged in London, and of which many died; he told me, that
when he found his Patients un∣der such and such circumstances, that he as much gave them up for dead, as if a Dagger were run through their Hearts. I asked him what those Symp∣toms were, that rendred his Patients circumstances to be so very dangerous? He replied, That when he found them de∣lirious, and had Spasmes and Convulsions of the Nerves. I enquired of him, what Medi∣cines he gave? He told me, a Composition of Gascons Powder, Virginian Snake Root, &c. which was what he solely relied on, and which is the same or of the same Nature, with what is generally given in those cases.
I asked him whether he had ne∣ver found his Medicine service∣able to him? He ingeniously confessed, that when his Pati∣ents were under the aforesaid circumstances, it never did him any service at all. I again asked him why he did not vary his Method? His reply was, It was a most noble Alkaly and Alexipharmick, and what was generally used, and there∣fore he did not think fit to vary from an Established Method. A few days after, I was cal∣led into a Gentlewoman, exactly under the same Circumstances before related, she being deliri∣ous to the highest degree, had violent Spasmes and Convulsions
of the Nerves, and all other Symptoms of a Malignant Fe∣ver. Of her Life I did not de∣spair, and by the plentiful use of proper Acids, all Symptoms soon vanished, and in a weeks time, she was fit to go abroad. Besides this, I could instance a hundred cases of the same na∣ture, but I design brevity. I must own, that other Di∣stempers may be complicated with the Small-Pox, and other continued Fevers and acute Di∣stempers, or from a different con∣stitution of the Air, &c. unusual Symptoms may appear, in which cases a general method must not be relied on, but recourse must be also had to proper Specificks.
CHAP. II. Of the Scurvy. I Am now come to treat up∣on the disuse of Alkalies in the Scurvy, that reigning Di∣stemper, which few people are altogether free from, and is by most men accounted incurable, or at least, it for the most part proves so. But here I expect the cry of all Mankind against me; What! say there is no Acidity in the Blood in the Scurvy? What! is it but an Acidity in the Blood that is the occasion of the break∣ing
out of Scabs, Pimples, Blotches, &c. upon the Skin? What! but a sharpness and Acidi∣ty in the Blood, occasions those wandring Pains, and a thousand other Symptoms, that people labouring under that Distemper complain of? My Friends, have a little pa∣tience, and I will presently make it appear to you, that those Symptoms are not occasioned by Acids, but from Acrid, Lixi∣vious, Alkalious Particles, which I doubt not to evince by plain matter of fact. First of all, by a Chymical Analysis, it doth appear, that the Blood of Scorbutick Persons, hath by much a greater quanti∣ty
of Volatile, Alkalious Par∣ticles, then that of sound Per∣sons, besides which some quan∣tity, more or less, of a Lixivious fixt Alkaly, which, for as much as ever I could find, the Blood of sound Persons is altogether destitute of. And by the way give me leave to add this. It is my opinion, that if Physitians would give themselves the trouble of Chymically Analyzing the Blood of Persons in all Distem∣pers, and making nice Obser∣vations of the different substan∣ces to be obtained from it: By that means the cause of Distem∣pers would be certainly known, and by consequence the cure of
them much more certain, then now it is. But that I may return to my business. Another considerable Argu∣ment, besides that beforemen∣tioned, to prove that the Scurvy hath its rise from Alkalious sub∣stances in the blood, and not from Acids, is this which fol∣lows. I have been frequently told, by some Seamen and Surgeons, that have been long Voyages at Sea, especially towards China and the Indies, that of a hundred Men that have been in a Ship, not two of them but have been almost eaten up with the Scur∣vy, their Skin squallid and full of blotches, their Gums eaten
away, and their Teeth ready to drop out, Pains and Aches all over their bodies, &c. and yet upon their landing at Cadiz or thereabouts, where are plenty of Oranges and Lemmons, upon eating large quantities of them, in one Fortnights time, at far∣thest, scarce one hath failed of being perfectly cured. This is not a bare relation of one or two Persons only, but what is generally agreed-upon and al∣lowed by all people. Although these moderate Acids plentifully used, may have such effects in that hot Country, yet I have not observed that in our cold Climate, they have al∣ways, always I say, the same effect,
because in slight cases, they ge∣nerally do very well; yet in more stubborn ones we are forced to have recourse to more powerful penetrating ones. As for Alkalies, I don't be∣lieve that ever any one was cured by them of this Distemper, al∣though I have known some Peo∣ple that have taken a vast farrago of Testacious Powders, &c. without any good effect at all, which afterwards has been done in a small time, with a small quantity of proper Acids. Before I conclud, I shall insert a Preparation of Antimony, the which I have found of extraor∣dinary use, in the most inveterate Scurvies.
Take of white Flowers of Anti∣mony eight ounces, Volatile Spirit of Tartar two pound, put them into a large Bolt-head, and digest in a gentle heat in Balneo, for fourteen days, then take out the Bolt-head and let it cool by degres, when cold, decant the clear Tincture from the Feces: Then put the decanted Liquor or Tincture into a long Cucurbite, fit a head to it exactly, and with a gentle fire, destill off the one half, the remaining part keep for use, in a Bottle well stopped with a glass stopper. That which comes over by Distillation, may be kept for the same use. To make the Volatile Spirit of Tartar.
Take of very fine and clean Rhenish Wine, Tartar twenty pound, put it into an Iron-pot, fit to the said Pot, a Moors-head made either of Iron or Copper, the which fix to a large Worm fixed in a Tub of Water; fit a very large Recipient to the end of the Worm. Lute all the joynts except that of the Receiver, with very good Lute, and when the Lute is very well dried, make a very gentle fire under your Pot at first, which in∣crease by degrees, and continue as long as any thing will come over; then let the fire go out, undo your joynts and take out the Caput Mor∣tuum; which Calcine to Greyness, in a large Crucible; then put three pound of the calcined Caput Mor∣tuum into a long Cucurbite, then
pour upon it, all the Spirit that came over, being before hand freed from the fetid Oyl that came over with it, by running through a Funnel, lined either with wet brown Paper, or Cot∣ton: Put on your Head, which lute very well with a wet Bladder, then put to a Receiver, which lute also very well, and with a moderate fire, draw off one half of the Spirit. Pour out that which remains in the Cucur∣bite as useless, and put in two pound more of the Calcined Caput Mor∣tuum, upon which pour the Spirit before drawn off, and with a gentle fire draw off one half, whick keep for the aforesaid use. It being a noble, volatile Spirit of Tartar, and is as noble a Menstruum as most I have met with, not only for this use, but several others.
Of the aforesaid Tincture, I use to give about four, six, eight or ten drops, according to the age and strength of my Patients, Morning and Evening, in about half a pint of strong Infusion or Decoction of Juniper Berries, without any precedent Purgati∣on; this Medicine performing that office, where there is occa∣sion; it answering every thing that is generally said of a true Panacca; sometimes working by Vomit, sometimes by Stool, and sometimes by Urine, but mostly by a gentle Diaphoresis or Sweating: And I have once known it to cause a Salivation, without any of the ill Symptoms that usually attend it, when
raised by Mercurial Medicines. Whoever hath a mind to see more of this Tincture, may read Glauber Op. Mineral. Par. Prim. from whom I had it, though I have something varied from him. I have found it of great use, not only in the Scurvy, but many other Chro∣nical Distempers, as Rheuma∣tisms, Sciaticas, Dropsies, &c. and by some few Observations that I have made, I believe it may do great things even in the Gout it self. Before I conclude, I shall mention one Objection more against my opinion, made to me by several, and that is, that a more than ordinary saltness,
is to be perceived in the Blood of Scorbutick Persons, and this saltness they take to be an Acidity: But if they would but enquire a little narrowly into the matter, in∣stead of finding it to be an Acid saltness, on the con∣trary they will find it to be, a Lixivious, Alkalious one.
CHAP. III. Of the Gout. I Shall here make only some few Observations concern∣ing the Gout, it being cousin German, to that of the Scurvy. Though I must confess the Gout to be a Distemper I have not had much to do with, but by that little I have seen of it, I am fully convinced, that it is not from Acids, as is general∣ly said, that, that troublesome Distemper is occasioned. I have observed considerable large Nodes, in which are some∣times
contained a hard chalky substance, and of which I have seen large quantities extracted, which by many experiments I have found to be as much an Alkaly, as either Crabs Eyes, Corral, Pearls, &c. the which I suppose no man will deny. Now it being granted, that the matter contained in the aforesaid Nodes, to be an Al∣kaly, how is it possible for this Distemper, to proceed from Acids, when in those very parts where the Distemper most violently rages, there should be produced such large quantities of an Alkalious sub∣stance. For if the Distemper pro∣ceeds from Acids, as 'tis generally
agreed upon, the Patient need not clog his Stomach with Alkalies as is generally pra∣ctised, there being a Remedy already placed in the part af∣fected: And I verily believe, that the only reason why this Distemper has been accounted amongst the Opprobria Medicorum, has been from the mistaken Noti∣ons, they have had concerning it. But if men will still persist to assert, that this Distemper pro∣ceeds from Acids, and at the same time own the chalky sub∣stance before-mentioned, which is only the Morbifick Matter indurated, to be an Alkaly, they must tacitely believe the Doctrine of Transmutation,
though openly they are ashamed to own it, and will laugh at, and ridicule those that do. But this is not all, for suppose the Acid Matter causing this Distemper to be transmuted into a chalky, alkalious sub∣stance, the Distemper must ne∣ver more pretend to come in or near the part, where this substance is lodged, it being placed as a Centry to guard it off: Nay, the Blood at times, must all, or at least, great part of it, pass through the Part or Parts, where this chalky sub∣stance is lodged, by which means a man would think, it should be sufficiently guarded from any more growing Acid;
and so by consequence, when the chalky Nodes are once set∣led, people have not the least reason for the future, to be in fear of the return of their Di∣stemper: The contrary of which a great many honest Gentle∣men to their sorrows experi∣ence. So that a man would think, that these very Nodes alone, were sufficient, if there were no other reasons to be given for it, to satisfie any man, who is master of his reason, that Acids are not, and that Alkalies are, the cause of this Distemper. And if the Blood abound with too great a quantity of Alkalious Particles, the giving of Alkalies must be preposterous, is being to
add Fuel to the Flame, which instead of quenching or extinguishing, makes it so much the greater. It may not be amiss to take notice, that few peo∣ple are troubled with the Gout, but those who drink large quantities of Wine or some other generous Liquors, abounding with vinous Spirits; so that the Blood and other Juices, being impregnated with the said vinous Spirits, these Spirits meeting with the volatile, alkalious Salt, of which, even the Blood of sound Peo∣ple, is never destitute: By the means of which Salt, the vinous Spirit is coagulated,
and turned into that sub∣stance (or somewhat like it) which Helmont calls his Offa Alba, which coagulated substance, not being capa∣ble of moving with the Blood and Juices through the small Vessels, causes ob∣structions and violent pains, and in time, by the additi∣on of other gross, terre∣strious Particles, into the beforementioned chalky sub∣stance. By the foresaid coagulati∣on of vinous Spirits with the volatile Alkaly of the Blood, may a very good reason be given, for the Generation of the Stone in the
Bladder and Kidneys: And Mr. Boyle tells us (being what Helmont had before done) that having ob∣tained some Stones of a certain Lythotomist, he put them into a Retort, and exposed them to a strong fire, and found that the better half consisted of vo∣latile, alkalious Salt, like unto that obtainable from Hu∣mane Blood, and a con∣siderable quantity of hea∣vy Oyl, so that it is plain, that the Generation of the Stone, is not from Acids, but Alkalies. From which may be in∣ferred, that it is not, from
the Acidity of Rhenish Wine, that makes the drinking of it pernicious to Gouty People, but from its abounding with spiri∣tuous Particles, more than most other Wines.
CHAP. IV. Of Rheumatisms. THIS is another of the Distempers generally said to proceed from Acids in the Blood; but very falsly, as I hope fully to make appear; I having had to do with multi∣tudes under this Distemper, and that (thanks to God) with very good success. I. shall not trouble my self to investigate the original cau∣ses of this Distemper, which are various, that being foreign to my design; but shall imme∣diately
proceed to the business I have undertaken. First of all; Having by the fire analyzed the Blood of Rheumatick Persons, I have found it to abound more with Alkanious Particles, than that of sound Persons; but not the least grain of any Acid sub∣stance in it; from which alone it may readily enough be in∣ferred, That it proceeds not from Acids, but, on the con∣trary, from Alkalies. But it may be Objected, From whence proceeds that syziness and viscosity of the Serum, which is generally ob∣served in the Blood of Rheu∣matick
Persons, if not from Acids? For we know that Milk, which is a sort of Serum of the Blood, let it be in never so fluid a state, by the addition of any Acid, though never so gentle, a great part of it will be immediately congulated and turned into Curds. To which I Answer, That the foresaid Objection is alto∣gether invalid; the viscousness that is observed in the Serum of the Blood, being quite diffe∣rent from that of the Curds in Milk: Though there are those substances contained in Milk, that are fit to make both Blood and Serum; but Milk is a much more compound liquor than
the Serum of the Blood; so the comparison being made be∣tween subjects so vastly diffe∣rent, it is of no validity at all. But suppose the comparison between the two Liquors good; What agreement is there be∣tween Curds, and a substance like unto Gelly? None at all that I know of: But if instead of curdled Milk, they had made the com∣parison between the inviscated Serum and Hartshorn Gelly, they had been in the right on't; for indeed I know not any two subjects more fit to be compa∣red together. But then this comparison will not in the least prove the inviscation of the
Serum to proceed from Acids, but on the contrary from Al∣kalious Particles; for every body that knows what Harts-horn is, know that the reason of its ma∣king a Gelly, is from its abound∣ing with volatile alkalious Salts. And for the same reason it is, that Calves Feet, Izing-glass, Ivory, &c. make Gellies. By what I have said, I hope, I have freed Acids from occa∣sioning the viscousness of the Serum of the Blood in Rheu∣matisms; which viscosity if it can be once taken off, every one knows that the Distemper immediately vanishes. But this is not to be done by Alkalies, that ever I could see, although
I have given them in large quantities. But it is expedi∣tiously to be done by proper Acids, such as the before-men∣tioned Tincture of Antimo∣ny, &c. and Calibiats. But here I expect that Peo∣ple will think that I have caught my self in a trap, when I bring in Calibiats amongst the num∣ber of Acids, when they are generally owned by all Man∣kind to be Alkalies; to confirm the truth of which, they tell you it is plainly manifest, that filings of Iron will make as great an Effervescency with all sorts of Acids, as any of the Alkalies I have mentioned; therefore it is plain I must be
much in the wrong, in reckon∣ing Calibiats amongst the num∣ber of Acids. From this difficulty I shall endeavour to extricate my self, and likewise to prove, That Iron or Steel, until it be con∣verted into a Vitriol (and every body will allow Vitriol to be an Acid) cannot act upon the Blood or Serum to cause any alteration in it, nor so much as any way enter into the Veins or Arteries. It is the Custom of Skilful Practitioners, before they give Steel Medicines, to enquire of their Patients, Whether they are sensible of any Acidity in their Stomachs; in which part
I do allow Acids oftentimes to abound, and that exorbitantly. If they are sensible of any Acidity there, it is then found necessary to give Iron or Steel, without any Preparation at all, by reason that by the means of the Acids in the Stomach, it is turned into a Vitriol, and so made capable of being carri'd into the Blood, whereas in such cases, if it hath been be∣fore satiated by a precedent Pre∣paration, it hath little or no effect at all. On the other hand, if there be no sensible Acidity in the Stomach, Iron or Steel being given Unprepa∣red, are carri'd off by Stool, without the least alteration, or
any part of it being admitted into the Blood. All or most of the Prepara∣tions of Steel that I know of, that are good for any thing, are performed by the means of Acids, which tend to the divi∣ding of their parts, and turn∣ing them into a Vitriol. Now according to the difference of the Acids used, the result is a different sort of Vitriol, which hath different operations: But on the contrary, Alkalies do so lock up the Body of Iron, as to make it unfit to be taken as Medicine, by reason of its ex∣traordinary hardness and firm∣ness of Texture.
The Preparations of Steel I generally use are, that which goes by the name of Dr. Wil∣lis's Preparation of Steel, and is now almost every where to be had; which altho it be grown common, is, for all that, no despicable Medicine; and that which follows. Take of filings of Steel, or rather Iron, very clean and free from dust, one pound and half, Sal Armoniac two pound; make the Sal Armoniac into very fine Powder, then mix them well to∣gether in an iron or stone Mor∣tar, then put the mixture into a moist Cellar, and let it stand a week. Then put it into a very
large Crucible, which cover with  piece of Tile, afterwards put the Crucible into a Charcoal Fire, which increase by degrees, till the Crucible be almost red hot; af∣ter it has continued in this state about an hour, take away the Fire, and let your calcined mat∣ter cool by degrees; when cold, take it out of the Crucible, and make into fine Powder in a glass or stone Mortar, then put it into a Bottle with a wide mouth, which stop with a glass Stopple, and keep in a warm place. These two Preparations pro∣perly given, and with conve∣nient Vehicles, I have known
of very great use in Rheuma∣tisms. And the last, when all other Medicines have proved ineffectual, has never once fail∣ed me in the most inveterate Obstructions of the Menses in Women. Besides the forementioned Preparations of Steel, I have frequently found Cinnaber of Antimony, or even common Cinnaber, mixt with a due proportion of Gum Guaiaci, and given in large quantities, to be of great use, not only in con∣firmed Rheumatisms, but even in Sciatica's of long standing, by the means of which alone I have known many cured.
I did formerly believe Cin∣naber of Antimony, and com∣mon Cinnaber to be Alkalies; but since I have more nicely inquired into it, I find that by a peculiar management, a large quantity of an acid sulphuri∣ous Spirit may be obtained from it. Before I conclude upon this Head, it will not, I suppose, be amiss, to observe one thing more about the Preparation of Steel before-mention'd, and that is, that whilst it is kept dry, and in a Powder, it is one of the greatest Deoppilatives or openers of Obstructions ima∣ginable: But let it be put in∣to a Cellar, and run per deli∣quium,
which it will do in a few days, fifty or sixty drops of the said Oil per deliquium, given twice a day in a strong De∣coction of Oak Bark, I have of late found never to fail me in stopping a seminal Flux, which all People will allow has hi∣therto been found as difficult a thing to do as any whatso∣ever. Some People having told me, that they supposed the Stipticity to proceed from the Decoction of Oak Bark only, I have purposely tried it alone, and altho I own Oak Bark to be a Noble Stiptic, and to do Wonders, the Decoction being taken in at the mouth, and by way of Clyster, in common,
simple Diarrhea's, and even sometimes in bloody Fluxes; yet in the case before-men∣tioned it would do nothing at all; but adding some drops of the Oil of Mars to the De∣coction, it had soon the desired effect.
CHAP. V. Of Consumptions. I Have little to say upon this Subject, but that I have seen great numbers of People under this Circumstance, to whom have been given large quantities of Alkalies, and all sorts of Balsamics, and those things called Pectorals, with∣out the least advantage in the world; tho I have seen others who have had the manifest signs of a confirmed Phtisis or Consumption, who by the plen∣tiful use of proper Acids, have
been reduced from a state of dying, to that of perfect health. My Reasons in short, ac∣cording to my best Observati∣ons, for the use of Acids, and the disuse of Alkalies, are as follow. The Globules of the Blood by reason of so great a quanti∣ty of Acrid, Alkalious, Lixi∣vious Particles, being mixed with it, being broken and con∣fusedly mix'd with the Serum are, together with the Serum, admitted into the small Glan∣dules of the Lungs, and not being capable of being dis∣charg'd, cause Inflamations there, and by consequence Hectick Fevers, which always precede and accompany a
Pthisis or Consumption. Now by the use of Alkalies and Bal∣samicks, these extravasated Globules are so far from being thrown out, and the depraved state of the Blood from being altered, that instead of it, the state of the Blood is made much worse by Alkalies; and by Balsamicks the Pustles oc∣casioned from the extravasated Globules being admitted into the small Glandules, are brought to Suppuration, the ne∣cessary consequence of which is an Ulceration, and when so tender a part as the Lungs are, is once Ulcerated, he must shew himself an Artist indeed that can heal such Ulcers.
Now proper Acids being given in due time, confirm the Texture of the Blood, and reduce the Serum to a state of fluidity, by which means the Fever and Inflamation of the Lungs are taken off, and the extravasated Globules of Blood, by means of a thin Serum, as∣sisted by its quick motion in that part, when in a fluid state, are by degrees carried off, and so the Pustles disappear. But it may be Objected, How comes it to pass, that the broken Globules of Blood, you so often mention, come to be admitted along with the Serum into the Glands of several parts, and that they cannot by the
same reason be carried off to the parts designed, along with the Serum or Lympha, as it is stiled, when it once comes into the Lymphatick Vessels? To which I Answer, That when they are first admitted into the Glands, I mean the broken Globules, coming just out of the extremities of the Arteries, and being then very hot, the sides of them are lax, and so in some measure capable of being compressed or squeez'd together; but being once ad∣mitted into the Glands, the motion of the Serum from them, through the Lymphatick Vessels, being very slow, they soon grow cool, and so more
firm; and by reason of the different figure of these broken Globules from the Pores, by which the Serum is to pass from the Glands to the Lym∣phatick Vessels, they are not suffered to pass through with the Serum, as in the foremen∣tioned instance of the mixture of Oyl and Water, so that the Globules being extravasated and without motion, corrupt; from which corruption pro∣ceeds all the ill symptons I have mentioned to accrue from the broken Globules of the Blood being admitted into the Glands. But to return to the business of Acids; to confirm the truth
of what I have said, besides my own Observations, I re∣member Riverius, that famous Practitioner, somewhere says, That he hath several times cured a confirmed Pthisis or Consumption, by giving only of large quantities of Conserve of Red Roses, well Acidulated with Oil of Sulphur per Campa∣nam. And now I am speaking of Oil of Sulphur per Campanam, give me leave to add an ac∣count that Helmont gives of it in his Arbor Vitae; which altho it hath not any immediate re∣lation to the Point in hand, yet may be pertinent enough to shew the good effects of Acids,
in keeping the Blood in a good Texture, and by that means prolonging Life, and preserv∣ing us from Diseases. Moses, who perhaps understood the Mysteries of Nature as well as any man, and who was guided by an unerring, infallible Spi∣rit, says, that in the Blood is contained the Life. Now the Texture of the Blood being confirmed, and its Globules whole, must go a great way towards the prolongation of Life: But on the contrary, the Texture of the Blood being spoiled, and its Globules bro∣ken, (which they are by Al∣kalies) must in great measure shorten Life, and occasion Dis∣eases.
In the Year 1600. says Hel∣mont, a certain Military Man, being burthen'd with a great number of small Children, made his Complaint to me that he was 58 years of age, and that if he should chance to die, his Children must go begging from door to door. He ask'd of me something, whereby his Life might be preserved. I being then a Young Man, and commiserating his Condition, I considered with my self, that a lighted Match of Brimstone would preserve Wine from Corruption; therefore I con∣cluded with my self, that the Acid Oil of Sulphur did neces∣sarily so contain this Flame of
Sulphur, and all the Smell of it, that it self was nothing else, meaning the Acid Spirit or Oil, but the Fume of Sulphur it self, imbibed by its Mercu∣rial Salt. Last of all, I was confirmed that the Blood was the Wine of our Lives, and that being preserved, if it did not occasion long Life, it would at least in some measure be prolonged, by our being guard∣ed from Diseases, and free from Pains. Wherefore I gave him a Pot full of the Distilled Li∣quor or Oil of Sulphur, and likewise taught him the man∣ner of Distilling the said Oil from kindled Brimstone. I furthermore bid him, that eve∣ry
Meal, in the first draught of Beer he drank, that he should take two drops of the said Liquor, and by no means ex∣ceed it; I being satisfied that two drops did contain a large quantity of the Fume of Sul∣phur. The Man followed my advice, and at this time walks about the Streets of Bruxels, being Sixteen hundred forty one: And which is more than all, for the whole Forty years he never laboured under any Distemper, although once by a Fall upon the Ice, he broke his Leg near the Knee, yet all the time he was under Cure, he was free from a Fever. He con∣tinued slender and lean, and
although in want of all Neces∣saries, lived to be thus Old. The Name of this Old Man is John Mass, who served in the Bed-Chamber of the Bishop of Ypre, when Count Egmont and Horne were beheaded, and was at that time Twenty five years of age. The Truth of this Relation need not in the least be doubt∣ed, the Man being alive and well when it was wrote. By which Instance it is plain, that Acids are not the Cause of Diseases, but Preservatives a∣gainst them; and whatever is a Preservative from Distem∣pers, by the same parity of rea∣son must be of use to repel
them, when we labour under them. A signal Instance of which, I remember I have somewhere read of a Person who purpose∣ly suffered himself to be bitten by a Viper, in order to try the good Effects of Monsieur Char∣ras's Volatile Alkalious Salt of the same Animal, in preventing and taking off the Symptoms that attend the Biting of the said Creature. The Volatile Salt and other Antidotes were in large quantities given, but all in vain; for instead of allay∣ing, the Symptoms so increa∣sed, that nothing less was to be feared, than the loss of the poor Man's Life. To the best
of my remembrance, nay, I think I may be positive, that it was in the Wrist where he was bitten; but for all the Vo∣latile Salts, and other Antidotes, in a very little time his Arm was swelled so big, and so high, that Amputation could do him no service; nay, all the By∣standers, which were many, gave him up for dead. At last a certain Person advised the giving of him large quantities of only so simple an Acid as Juice of Lem∣mons; which immediately abated the Symptoms, and re∣trieved him from all manner of Danger.
We live in an inquisitive Age, wherein People have more sense than to take things upon trust: The obtaining of the Blood, both of well and distemper'd Persons, is no dif∣ficult matter; and I desire no greater justice to be done me, than that People would them∣selves Experiment the truth of what I have said: And if after trial it be found that the Blood of persons in any of the before∣mentioned cases, hath any thing of Acid in it, I will own my self in the wrong. But shall never take the least notice of such scurrilous Answers as I have been used to, nothing of that nature being in the least
valid with me, that is not con∣firmed by well-attested Expe∣riments. The CONCLUSION. IT is, I suppose, allowed by every body, that Sea-Salt is an Acid, and for that very reason only it is, that we who eat such large quantities of Flesh are not able to live with∣out it. For all sorts of Flesh abounding with large quanti∣ties of volatile Alkalious Salts, if the said Alkalious Salts were in some measure locked up and mortified by the means of
Sea Salt, or which is all one, that which is the product of our English Brine-pits, they having their saltness from the same origine, which is Currents of Water passing through great Rocks of Salt; which late discoveries have made appear to be both in England and many other parts of the World: As for instance, one in Cheshire, whose Vein is Twenty Yards thick, and may be traced for a great many Miles together; which very Rock alone is suffi∣cient to Impregnate almost an Ocean of Waters. There is some reason to be∣lieve, That the People before the Flood did not eat Flesh,
but liv'd altogether upon Vege∣tables, as Fruits, Herbs, and Roots; which, I suppose, was one great reason of their Longe∣vity. And it may be observed that in Herefordshire, and o∣ther Countries abounding with Fruit, the People are longer Liv'd than in those Countries that want them. Now had the Antedeluvian People eaten Flesh as we do now, I can't imagine what they would have done for Salt; for supposing Dr. Burnet's Hypothesis true, (the which I think there is not the least reason to doubt of, his Arguments to prove it being to me Unanswerable) I sup∣pose their Rivers must have
been altogether void of salt∣ness; and how they could come at salt any other way, consi∣dering the state of their Earth, I can't imagine: And for them to have eaten Meat without Salt, must necessarily have greatly prejudic'd their healths, and shortned their lives. For we have seen in the late Irish Wars what destruction and de∣solation was made in our Ar∣my by eating Meat without Salt, of which at one time there was a scarcity, whole Re∣giments having been swept a∣way together with Fevers and Fluxes. But the Antedeluvian People living upon Vegetables, they had no need of Salt, there
being a sufficient quantity of Acidity in them to confirm the Texture of their Blood, and preserve them from Diseases. Since I have been mention∣ing Sea Salt, I shall make bold to trouble you with a relation of a strange and accidental Cure wrought upon a Person in a Tympanitis, given over as Incurable by the most eminent Physicians of England, by barely immerging her two or three times over Head in Sea Water. The Person was Daughter to an Eminent Citizen of Wor∣cester, she had labour'd under a Tympanitis Three or Four years; her Father applied
himself to most of the Emi∣nent Physicians for advice, but all that they could do sig∣nified nothing. Her Father who is a Corpulent man, has several times told me, that her Abdomen was swelled so big, that his Cloak would not lap round her, and she was then not above Ten years of Age. It happened one Morn∣ing that her Mother, Two Brothers, her self, and a Maid∣servant, were Bitten by a little Dog they had in the House, which was grown Mad. Ad∣vice was presently given by Dr. Johnson, an Eminent Phy∣sician then living in Worcester, That they should all go to the
Salt-Waters to be dipp'd; ob∣serve by the way, the efficacy of Salt-Waters in preventing the dreadful symptoms that at∣tend those People Bitten by Mad Dogs: The Mother, her Two Sons, and Maid-servant, were prepared to go, but she did not design to take her Daughter with her, supposing her not capable of living till she came to the Journeys end. The poor distressed Child see∣ing them all going away with∣out her, called to her Father, telling him, He took care of every body else, but valued not what became of her; up∣on which her Father being mo∣ved with compassion, was re∣solved
she should go, let the event be what it would. Ac∣cordingly she was carried down, and when it came to her turn to be dipped, it was as much as two men could do to immerge her over Head: After they were all dipped, they were carried to an adja∣cent House and put to Bed; she had not been in Bed many Hours, but she called for a Pot, and pissed several Quarts, even more at that one time, than she had done of some Months before; and when they re∣turned to Worcester, which was within few days, she run out of the Boat herself to her Fa∣ther without any help, when
she had not been able so much as to stand of a year or two be∣fore. To be short, without any other help, she was per∣fectly cured of her Tympanitis, and is now a Tall, Slender, Healthy Woman, as any I know. I have mentioned this thing because I find it not any where taken notice off, and may be of service to others. Nay, I am told that a certain obscure Person in Herefordshire, has Cured several by the same me∣thod, to his own great Advan∣tage, and withal says, that it never once failed him. I must beg the Lady's par∣don for writing this Relation
without first asking her leave; but since I have no other end in it but to serve Mankind, I doubt not but I shall be easily excused. Helmont positively says, and as I my self have found it true, That Spirit of Sea Salt, which is an exalted Acid, is a certain Remedy in the Strangury; which is a Distemper general∣ly said to proceed from Acids; which if it doth, instead of being Cured it must be high∣ly Exasperated by Spirit of Salt, the contrary of which I have frequently Experimented. Helmont somewhere else says of it, Est namque Acidissimus, nec sibi par habet remedium extinguen∣dis
ardoribus Urine, etiam presente in Vessica Calculo. I remember that not long since an Eminent Physician told me, That bare Juice of Lem∣mons would sooner take off the Heat of Urine, in People that are, as we commonly call it, Clapp'd, than Emulsions, or any of the things commonly used; which since I have found true; and have also found that the Urine of such Persons a∣bounds more with Volatile Al∣kalious Salt, than that of sound People: Upon which I have been induced to try, whether the Acid Spirit of Guaiacum, which that Wood affords in large quantities, would not
be more prevalent in the Cure of confirmed Poxes, than the bare Infusion or Decoction of the said Wood; the which in conjunction with Cinnaber of Antimony, or common Cin∣naber, and Gum Guaiaci, or else with the before mentioned Tincture of Antimony, has seldom failed me in Curing the most confirmed Poxes without Salivation. I am very apt to believe, that if the rectified Acid Spirits, obtainable from most, if not all Woods, were made use of, they would be found to be great Specificks in most Distem∣pers, especially Chronical ones.
And since I have mentioned Specificks, I do own that it may be rationally enough Ob∣jected, That my Doctrine of A∣cids does mightily thwart with that of Specificks; since there are many Specificks that are neither Alkalies nor Acids, yet seldom fail of Curing Distem∣pers, as rationally to be suppo∣sed to proceed from Alkalious Particles abounding, as any whatsoever. To which I Answer, That I have only brought my Do∣ctrine of Acids upon the Stage, as a general one, in opposition to the general and pernicious Doctrine of Alkalies. For should I deny the Doctrine of
Specificks, I must deny matter of fact, which is what I shall never do, till I am totally de∣prived of my Reason. There is a little Herb called Paronichia cum foliis Rutaceis, or Whitlow Grass, with leaves like Rew; the which the Honourable Mr. Boyle recom∣mends as a Specifick in the King's Evil: Which Herb I have immerged both in mode∣rately Acid and Alkalious Li∣quors, yet could not perceive any Luctus or Effervescency; yet I have known it do wonders in the forementioned Distem∣per, and that without having the least sensible Operation: I shall instance in one particular.
A poor Woman in Worcester having one only Child of about Ten years of Age, who by Weaving of Bone-lace main∣tained both her Mother and her self: The Mother of the Child came one day to me making a great complaint that she was undone? I asked her the cause of her complaint; she told me, her Child who kept her in her old Age from Begging, had for Two Years had Scrophulous Tumors in and about her Privities, and that about Three Months be∣fore, one of the said Tumors began to Ulcerate, and that now the Ulcers were crept in∣to her Body, which made her
uneapable of Sitting. I went immediately with the poor Woman to see her Daughter, and found what she said was true, the poor Girl being the most miserable spectacle I ever saw. I remembring what Mr. Boyle had said concerning Paronychia; and being suffici∣ently satisfied that there was not the least reason of doubting the truth of any thing he had said, when he related it as mat∣ter of Fact upon his own Know∣ledge; I was resolved to try it upon this Girl; I first of all Purged her Three or Four times with Calamelanos, Rezin of Jallap, and Cremor Tartar; I afterwards gave her Two large
Handfuls of the said Herb dried, ordering her to put it in∣to Two Gallons of small Beer after it had done working, and let it stand Six Days, and then to drink it for her constant Drink: She continued to take it for about Two Months, in which time, without applying any thing to the Ulcers, save Clean Cloths, both Ulcers and Tumors vanished, and she con∣tinued well till I left Worcester, which was two years after the Cure was performed, and is so still for ought I can hear, I having several times enquired after her. Another Instance of the Operation of Specificks, with∣out
their being either Alkalies or Acids, is that frequently ex∣perimented Decoction of Mer∣cury, after having been Boyled for a considerable time in Wa∣ter, has been found not to have lost the least Grain of its former Weight, or imparting either Taste or Colour to the Water; yet this Water in which the Mercury has been De∣cocted, has not failed of killing and bringing away Worms, when other Celebra∣ted Medicines have failed. Likewise Crocus Mettalorum, and some other Preparations of Antimony, being barely in∣fused in Wine, without losing the least Grain of their Weight,
or imparting either Smell, Taste, or Colour, to the Wine in which they are in∣fused, yet never fail of giving the Wine a violently Emettick Quality. I my self have at several times poured above Twenty Quarts of Canary upon one and the same Ounce of Crocus Mettalorum Powdered, and found that the last Quart, was as violently Emettick as the first; altho after nice trial I could not find that the Powder was diminished one Grain in its Weight, or had, as is before-observed, caused the least sensible Alteration in the Wine.
The Cortex, that Noble Specifick in all Intermitting Fevers, I don't apprehend to perform its office as it is ei∣ther an Alkaly or Acid; though being mix'd with A∣cids, it performs its work much better than without them. It is a general complaint against that Noble Medicine, and is the only occasion of deterring some People from the use of it, That being gi∣ven in never so large quanti∣ties, especially in Quartans, it only puts off the Fit for a time, but does not totally eradicate the Distem∣per, it returning after a cer∣tain
period. To obviate which inconvenience; I have been advised to give it after the following manner, which sel∣dom or never fails of pre∣venting the return of the Distemper. Two Hours before the Fit, I give a gentle Emet∣tick; after that has done Working, an Opiate; when the Fit is over, I give the quantity of a large Nutmeg of the following Electuary with the Decoction, and re∣peat it every Four Hours, for Five or Six Days, order∣ing my Patients to eat some∣thing of easy Digestion, with∣in an Hour after each Dose:
After the expiration of Five or Six Days, I give it only first in the Morning, and at Five in the Afternoon for a Week, Eating something af∣ter each Dose. Take of Pick'd Peruvian Bark One Ounce, make it into a very fine Powder, and with good Syrup of Lemons, as much as is sufficient, make an Electua∣ry. Immediately after each Dose of which, I give about a Quarter of a Pint of the following Decoction:
Take of Pick'd Peruvian Bark Half an Ounce, Gentian Roots Two Drams, Centaury Two Pugils, Spring-Water Two Quarts; Boyl to the Consumption of One Half, when Cold strain out and keep for use. By this Method, I have known Three or Four Ounces of the Cortex perfectly Cure Quartans without any Re∣lapse, after People have ta∣ken a Pound or more after the common Method, which has only put by the Fits for a time.
The Reasons, as I appre∣hend, why this method of giving the Cortex should be more prevalent than that com∣monly taken, are, the Parti∣cles of the Cortex being very firm, the Medicine being ta∣ken, and the Patient Fasting Three or Four Hours after it, it slides out of the Sto∣mack into the small Guts, and so on; the small Guts being empty, there is not pressure enough to squeeze but a very small quantity of it into the Lacteal Vessels; so that the greatest quantity of it is carried away as Ex∣crement: But the Patient eat∣ing something of easy Di∣gestion,
within so small a time as an Hour after it, that eaten, is turned into Chyle before tho Particles of the Cortex can be carried off, and the Chyle being of a Vis∣cous Nature, retains the small Particles, and carries them along with it into the Blood; so that the Blood is more impregnated by one Dose this way given, than with Twenty Doses without pre∣sently eating after it. As a confirmation of the truth of what I have said concerning the firmness of the Texture of the Particles of the Cortex; if you boyl it never so well, the clear De∣coction
will not Gure a Quo∣tidian or Tertian Ague; where∣as the Cortex after it hath been well Boiled, being re∣duced to Powder, and gi∣ven after the foresaid man∣ner, will cure a Quartan. It would be a great Bles∣sing to the Commonwealth of Physick, if there were a faithful Record kept of all the Cures wrought by Sim∣ple Medicines, by which means Physicians might ar∣rive to a certainty of Curing more Distempers than that of Agues; which thing I never expect to see, so long as te∣dious nonsensical Compositi∣ons are depended on.
I don't remember that any of the Ancient or Modern Botannick Writers, have men∣tioned the Leaves of Assara∣bacca to have any other qua∣lity besides that of a violent Purger by Vomit and Stool: But Mr. Pitt, a late Emi∣nent and Learned Apotheca∣ry of Worcester, my singular good Friend, told me, that he found it to be one of the most noble Purgers of the Head, that he ever met with, having a different Operation from any other Medicine that he ever met with; that the Snuffing up of Three, Four, or Five Grains of the Pow∣der of the dried Leaves at
Night going to Bed, would on the Morrow, without di∣flurbing rest that Night, but rather causing it, occasion the discharge of a vast quan∣tity of Serous Matter from the Glands of the Nose; nay would sometimes last for Two or Three Days, without be∣ing in the least a Sternuta∣tory. By the repeated use of this Powder alone, I have known the most violent, con∣firmed Head Aches imagina∣ble taken off, after they have eluded the efficacy of the most Noble Celebrated Ce∣phalicks: But this ought to be taken notice of, That
whoever takes this Medicine must confine themselves to their Houses, and keep as warm as if they had taken the most violent Purge. I have been told by a cer∣tain Gentleman, who uses a great quantity of the Pow∣der of this Herb amongst his poor Neighbours after the aforesaid manner, that he was once induced to use it in a Deafness of long stand∣ing; he gave the Patient Four or Five Grains to Snuff up into each Nostril every Fourth or Fifth Night, and ordered that Three Grains should every Night with a Quill be blown into each Ear; and
in a Fortnight's time the Party recovered his Hearing as well as ever in his Life. I could expatiate a great deal more concerning simple Speci∣fick Remedies. But what I have already said is enough to satisfie the World, that I allow the Doctrine of Specificks; nay I think it ought to be la∣mented that it is not more Cul∣tivated. I have been told by some In∣telligent Persons, who have much conversed with the Na∣tives of West-India, that the Do∣ctrine of Specificks is mightily Cultivated by those Barbarous People, by which means they have arrived to a certainty in
Curing most Distempers, and that to see People of One hun∣dred and twenty and a Hun∣dred and thirty Years of Age, is as common a sight, as in Eng∣land to see People of Sixty. Now what a shame is it for us, who live in a Learned and In∣quisitive Age, to be outdone by those Barbarous and Illite∣rate People; nay, for ought I know, the greatest part of our Skill we had from them, or a People altogether as Ignorant. The Physicians of Europe are not arrived to so great a certain∣ty in any one thing, as in the Cure of Agues; And who may we thank for that but the Poor Indians, who imparted to
us the use of their famous Bark? From whom had Hypocrates, that Father of Physicians, his Skill, but by Collecting the common Observations; the which only it was that made him so very famous throughout the World. But the state of Nature being in a great mea∣sure altered in that long track of time since he lived, and the difference of our Climate from that wherein he lived, makes that his Observations don't al∣together hold good with us. So that if we will arrive to any certainty in our Art, we must make nice Observations of our own.
Helmont in his Treatise of Fevers says, Quis que Artificum fa∣cit, quod promittit, Statuarius nempe Statuam, Calciarius Calcios indubiè parat, solus autem Medicus nil au∣det ex arte spondere suâ, quia Niti∣tur Fundamentis incertis, per acci∣dens duntaxat, subinde, atque do∣losè proficuus. Which in English is, That there is a certainty in all Professions, but that of a Physician; and it is altogether our own faults, for want of due Observation, that we act upon such uncertainties as we do. But to return to the business of Acids; What great bene∣fit does Mankind, in general, receive from Mineral Spring-Waters?
All of which are al∣lowed to be Acids; and ac∣cording to the difference of the Acid contained in them, they have different Operations. Some of them, as Acton, Epsome, Dul∣lidge, Northall, &c. abounding with Aluminous, as well as Vi∣triolick Particles, work by Stool. Others, as Tunbridge, Astrop, Ilmington, &c. Abound∣ing with Vitriolick Particles only, are Alteratives, and are generally carried off by Urine. The Bath-Waters, abounding with Nitro-Sulphureous Parti∣cles, have a different Operati∣on from any of the former, but are generally carried off by Urine, tho sometimes by sweat.
There is scarce a Person la∣bouring under any Chronical Distemper, or ill habit of bo∣dy, (whose Fortune or Business will permit them) but at the proper season are sent to one of the forementioned Places; and I verily believe, to our no great Credit, that more Peo∣ple are freed from Chronical Distempers by the use of Mi∣neral Waters, than by all o∣ther Prescriptions: Though I am very well satisfied, that Mineral Waters, not being pro∣perly taken, do frequently a great deal of mischief. Besides the service done to Mankind by drinking of Mine∣ral Waters, what advantage does
accrue to many People labour∣ing under some sort of Nervous Distempers, &c. by merely Bathing themselves in the Ni∣tro-Sulphureous Hot Baths. There is also a new way of Sweating, by the means of the Volatile Acid Steams arising from the evaporating Brine, in the making of Salt at our Eng∣lish Salt-pits, lately invented by Mr. Henry Hodges of Droyt-Wych in Worcestershire, by the means of which, several very great things have been done, even in cases where the Bath, Common Hummums and Bag∣nio's, have proved altogether ineffectual. I am sorry that I am at a place where I cannot
procure a number of Experi∣ments to insert in this place, which might be of service to Mankind: But to supply the place of them, I shall add something done in a little Bath∣ing-House I erected of my own, wherein I imitated, if not out∣did, the way of Sweating at Droyt-Wych; but my many Avo∣cations hindred me from the prosecuting of it. I procured a quantity of the Virgin Salt, from the Salt-Rock in Cheshire, and as I had occasion, I dissolved a conve∣nient quantity of it in Spring-Water, making a Brine as strong as that obtainable from the Brine-Pits; with this Brine
I filled a large Iron Pot, which had Pipes of Wood went from it to a little Room over head, made convenient for People to Sweat in: Under my Pot I made a fire, which both warm∣ed the Room and made the Brine to boyl, and from the boyling Brine arose such quan∣tities of Steams as filled my Room, which, when it was warmed and full of steams, was fit for use: I had, beside the large Pipes which supplied the whole Room, several others of different lengths, by the means of which I more forcibly conveyed the Steams to any particular part. By this way of Sweating, I have known a
Gentlewoman Cured, as wa also one at Droyt-Wych, of an Inveterate Leprosy, which had eluded the Efficacy of all other Medicines and Baths. It rarely failed taking off the most vio∣lent Old Aches and Pains. In all Relaxations of the Nerves and Tendons, I have never met with any thing compara∣ble to it. To be short, I found it as good as the Bath in most things, and in many out-did it; and I believe Mr. Hodges, computing the time he has used the way of Sweating at his Brine-Pits, and the number of People he has had, can pro∣duce a greater Catalogue, and more considerable Cures
wrought, than hath been at the Bath. I hope by the means of Ex∣perimental Philosophy, so hap∣pily begun and encouraged by that Admirable and never-suf∣ficiently to be valued Mr. Boyle, to see the Art of Physick arrive to as great Certainty and Per∣fection, as other Arts and Sciences are arrived to. For, as I before observed, by Chy∣mically Analyzing the Blood and Juices, both in their Natural and Morbid state, we may arrive to some certainty in the Knowledge of the Cause of Distempers; which I am afraid we have hitherto been greatly ignorant of; and when
once the Causes of Distempers are throughly known, the Cure of them will be no difficult matter. I shall conclude in the Words of that Industrious Philosopher by the Fire, Helmont, in his Trea∣tise De Lichiasi: In nostris furnis le∣gimus, non esse in Natura certius Sci∣endi genus ad cognoscendum per cau∣sas radicales & constitutivas rerum; quamdum Scitur quid, quantumque in re quaque sit contentum. Ita quidem ut cognitio & connexio cau∣sarum, non constent clarius, quam cum res ipsas ita recluseris, ut co∣ram prodeant ac velut tecum loquan∣tur. Siquidem entia realia, dun∣taxat stantia, in suis primor dialibus,
& succedentibus seminum Princi∣pius, adeoque in verâ entitate Sub∣stantiali dant notitiam & proferunt causam cognoscendi Naturam Corpo∣rum, Mediorum & extremitatum. Quippe sunt causa generationis, ex∣istentiae & permutationis, secun∣dum ipsorum radicem, quoniam (teste Raimundo) utcunque Logi∣cus habeat profundum ingenium Ar∣gumentabile, aut Naturale, de re∣bus extrinsecis: tamen nunquam per aliquam rationem quae venit ad sensum, poterit directè cognoscere, nec judicari, cum quali natura, aut virtute, per fortitudinem intrinse∣cus, habeat Multiplicatio grani, crescere super terram, nisi pro si∣militudinario, ab observatione de∣sumpto. Nec sciet unquam, quo∣modo
semen in terra pullulet, cre∣scat, & coligat fructum: Nisi cum doctrina experimentali prius in∣traverit in nostram Philosophiam Naturalem, & non Sophisticam, sermocinalem illam, quae nascitur Logicis, per diversas praesumptiones Phantasticas: qui cum prognostica∣tionibus sequelarum, contra vim Naturae, faciunt multos pertinaciter errare, in Sophisticatione mentis. Quia per nostram Mechanicam Sci∣entiam, intellectus est rectificatus, vi experientiae, respectu Oculi, & verae notitiae mentalis. Imo experi∣entiae nostrae, stant supra probationes Phantasticas Conclusionum; ideo∣que nec eas tolerant: Sed omnes alias Scientias ostendunt Vivaciter intrare in intellectum. Unde dein∣ceps
intelligimus per Naturam, in∣tus illud, quod est, & quale est. Quia per talem Scientiam, Intel∣lectus stut denudatus Superfluitati∣bus & erroribus, qui ipsum ordina∣riò removent à veritate, propter praesumptiones & praejudicata, cre∣dita in conclusionibus. Hinc enim nostri se direxerunt ad intrandum per quamlibet scientiam, (in om∣nem experientiam) per artem, juxta Naturae cursum, in suis uni∣vocis principiis. Spagyria enim so∣la, est speculum veri intellectus: Monstratque tangere, & videre ve∣ritates, earum, in claro lumine. Nec fert argumenta logicalia; quia nimis remota, & longuinca, de claro lumine. Ideoque habet tabula smaragdina: Per hoc genus
demonstrandi, fugiet à te omnis ob∣scuritas, & acquiritur tibi omnis fortitudinis, fortitudo fortis, vin∣cens omnia subtilia, & solida pene∣trans, propterea vocor Hermes Trismegistus, habens tres, (id est omnes) Partes Philosophiae, atque totius mundi Telesmon; Haec ille in∣ter orare ergo, & pulsare, suppo∣nitur Medium in Naturalibus, quae∣rendi per ignem. FINIS. ADVERTISEMENT. I Design (God Willing) in a short time to Publish a Compleat History of Human Blood, both in its Natural and Morbid State.
BOOKS Printed for, and Sold by Daniel Brown, at the Black-Swan and Bible with∣out Temple-Bar. NOVƲM Lumen Chirurgicum: Or, A New Light of Chirur∣gery. Wherein is Discovered a much more Safe and Speedy way of Curing Wounds, than hath hereto∣fore been usually Practised. Illu∣strated with several Experiments made this Year in Flanders. Novum Lumen Chirurgicum Vin∣dicatum: Or, The New Light of Chyrurgery Vindicated from the many unjust Aspersions of some un∣known Calumniators. With the Addition of some few Experiments made this Winter in England. Both by Jo. Colbatch, Physician.
