D492A 99825694 30080
The Hunting of the Fox. A NEW SONG. To the Tune of, Now the Tories that Glories, &c. I. HEy Jouler, Ringwood, and Towzer, Ho Smoaker, Drunkard, and Fly; Sweet-lips, Light-foot, and Bowzer; Brave Bowman, Lofty, and Cry; And Four and Twenty brave Couple, To make a Pack for the Downs, Sure footed, and your Limbs supple; The Scent's hot yet on the Grounds. The Old White Fox is got loose again; We think he's gone to ketch Goose again: His Cubs they sculk and desert amain. Come let's beleaguer their Holes: For they're past Evil; to th' Devil We'll send 'em with thread bare Souls. II. They have left the City, 'tis pity, And their damn'd Party i'th' Lurch: If to be Hang'd, 'twould be pretty, For Treason 'gainst King and Church. For Sink-ports, Venus and Juno; For Champian, Thunder and Spark; Let Swift beat for Caralino, And Noser wind 'em i'th' Dark. Like Wasps and Flies, they would bite us; As Wolves do Sheep, they would treat us; Like Crockadiles, they would eat us; They thirst for Innocent Blood: Then never scruple, but graple For King and Country's Good. III. Round the Demantion o'th' Nation, Beat all the Banks on the Shore; And some leap o're the main Ocean, If they are gone before. O surround 'em, confound 'em, From Sea-Port to City-Walls; If there they venter to shelter, Zounds, tear 'em out of their Holes: For making Church into Stables, And vaumping Kings up of Baubles, And forging Plots out of Fables, And seizing Kings in a trice; That the crooked Piper, might vapour Like Rat amongst Fifteen Mice. IV. Scoure the Globe to the Axels, From Pole to Pole then retire, And center at Mother Creswels; The Fox us'd to Harbour there: There, there both Wives, Whores & Virgins, He had them all at his Call, T'oblige his Captains and Surgions, 'Till better Occasions fall. At Oxford late all his Cubs and He, To the Exclusion did all agree; Could not budge further, till sign'd & free. Yet Rowley rouzed the Rump, And sent 'em all to Pegg Trantams; And Tapsky's worn to the Stump. V. Oh, Swift's returned, and Noser, Their Hoofs are batter'd with Greet: The Game shews by the Opposer, He's lodged in Aldersgate-Street. Come ring a Peal with a Courage, The Grains o'th' Tap makes a Train; He lurks in the Hole to make Forrage Of all that uses his Name. We'll fetch him out with Mandamus, And hang him with Ignoramus; There's none but Rebels can blame us: More Pardons let him not hope; For all his Squinting and Blinking, He must to th'Hatchet or Rope. LONDON, Printed for J. D. in the Year, 1682.
