e3572 r30446 11322663 47450
An EXACT ACCOUNT OF THE King's March to ARDEE, And of His forcing the Irish to Abandon the Pass of the River Boyne. And of what hapn'd in the Passage, as also of the Irish Army's Retreat towards DƲBLIN, and of our Army's Pursuit of them: WITH AN Address presented to the King. WHen the Irish were so easily forc'd from so strong a Pass as that be∣twixt the Newry and Dundalk, which might have been maintain'd a long time by some hundreds of Resolute Men against some Thousands, there was but little Reason to believe they would have show'd much Courage or Resolution in keeping their Post at Ardee, where they gave it out they would stay and give the King Battel; the late King James being then with about Twenty thousand Men. But no sooner did the advanced Part of our Army appear, but they immediately abandon'd their Camp there, and fled to the other side of the Ri∣ver Boyne, where our Army was to pass about Two Miles above Drohedagh. There they were very advantageously Encamped, and seemed resolved to do their utmost to hinder the Passage of our Army. King James had drawn together the Body of his Men, which consisted of about Fifteen thousand Men to guard that Pass, and went from Regiment to Regiment to harangue them into Courage to oppose us. The River at that Place is not very broad, not above Pistol shot over, nor deep, being fordable in several Places; and besides, the Enemy had planted about Twelve or Fourteen Field Pieces to hinder our Passage. On Tuesday last, being the First of July, the King advanc'd with a detach'd Body of Horse to view the Place, and the Enemy playing from the other side with their Can∣non and small Shot, three or four of ours happened to be kill'd, and a Cannon Bul∣let of about six pound weight, happened to grase on his Majesties right Shoulder, and it was so providentially order'd, that it carried away a piece of his Coat, and touched only slightly on the Skin; which his Majesty was so little concern'd at, that he call'd for another Coat, and continued some time after on Horsback: This was in the Morning, and after Breakfast his Majesty having been on Horsback from Two a Clock that Morning. When his Majesty came into his Tent, he was presently dress'd, which he bore with great Courage, without any appearance of Vanity or Affectation. The same Bullet kill'd the Prince of D' Armestad's Horse. The next Morning he was on Horsback again. Count Schomberg having past the River in another place, with a con∣siderable Detachment of Horse and Dragoons, forced the Enemy from their Retrench∣ment, and secured the Passage for the rest of the Army, who immediately past it over. The Enemy is retired towards Dublin; and that Wing of our Army that first past the River, is gone in pursuit of them.
The ADDRESS Presented to the KING at Belfast in Ireland, on June the 16th, 1690. To the King's Most Excellent Majesty; The Humble Address of the Presbyterian Ministers, and Others of their Perswasion in the North of Ireland. UPon the first Appearance of your Glorious Undertaking to Rescue these Nations from Popery and Slavery, and afterwards the Settling your Majesty on the Throne, with so small Opposition, and so Universal Satisfaction; we judged our selves bound to Adore the most High God, for inspiring you with such Heroick Zeal, and signally blessing you with such marvellous Success, which we humbly represented to your Majesty last Summer, at Hampton Court, by some of our Num∣ber commissinated by us, and which your Majesty was graciously pleased to accept. And now upon this present Enterprize in expo∣sing your Sacred Person for Rescuing poor Ireland from its present Miseries, when its delivery must be effected from no lower Hand; We cannot sufficiently express our Sense of your Majesties continued Heroick Zeal in prosecuting the same blessed Design, as well as to bless God who continueth to incline your Great Soul to such an Undertaking: And our trust in God is, that the same Divine Hand that overcame all Difficulties at your first Entring into England, will further appear upon your happy Arrival in Ireland, in giving Success to your Arms, in Ruining the De∣signs of Antichrist, and Advancing the Interest of Christ in this Nation, and giving a further Lustre to that Glory which the Soveraign God hath alrea∣dy Crown'd your Majesty withal. Great Sir, as for our Principles in Conscientious Loyalty, we most humbly offer, That it is generally owned, even by those of other Perswasions, who have known us, that under the various Changes of Government, since the late Rebellion in Ireland, (wherein we have had our large shre in Sufferings, as well on account of our Loyalty under Usurpers, as of Non-conformity since) we have given undoubt∣ed Proof of fixed Loyalty, which also his Majesty King Charles the Second, was pleased to own by his Conferring upon us divers Testimonies of his Princely Favour. And Sir, we cannot but with all humble Grati∣tude acknowledge, That your Majesty hath been graciously pleased to augment the same Princely Fa∣vour both as to the Subsistance of necessitous Ministers in this poor wasted Country (not able to maintain them) and also that by your auspicious Influence we have a Prospect of our Religious Liberty, without some Snares that attended the same in the late Reigns; which Royal Bounty to us will engage those of our Number now in Scotland to return, which will prove a special Means of more fully plant∣ing this Province with such Protestants as will be endeared to your Majesties Government, and a Bul∣wark against the Irish Papists. All which Favours we hope (through the help of God) to improve in a continued Loyalty to your Majesty, and in such a De∣portment as shall not be justly Offensive to any, but so far as is possible, will live peaceably with all Men. May it please your Majesty, we do in most hum∣ble manner make bold to plead an Interest in your Royal Favour, not only as we are already (and when further incouraged will more appear) the most numerous Body in these Parts, maintaining the true Protestant Principles; but as we are most firmly de∣voted to your Majesties Service, the full Testimony whereof was given upon your Majesties first Ap∣pearing in this great Cause, both upon our early Ad∣dressing your Majesty pon your first Arrival in Eng∣land, and afterward by our publick Asserting your Majesty to be our only lawful Soveraign, and by our putting our selves in all the readiness for farther Service, that our Circumstances (not having the Necessaries of War) would admit, whereof the De∣fence of the City of London-Derry, and divers A∣ctions in other Places, were Instances, and real De∣monstrations of our fixedness to your Majesty, and will be in this present, as in all future Emergencies, and that not only for Conscience sake, as to our undoubt∣ed Soveraign, but also from an indeared Affection to your Sacred Person, as the great Pattern of Pie∣ty and Sobriety to all your Subjects, and the Lineal and true Successor of that most Illustrious and Re∣nouned Family, ever dignified by espousing the Cause of Christ, which to us is above all. That God would more and more multiply his Blessings upon your Majesties Person, and the Person of the Queen your Royal Consort, and make your Majesty always the choice Instrument in his Hand, for supporting his Interest, and suppressing universal∣ly abounding Profaneness, preserving your Sacred Person in all Dangers, more and more enriching your Majesty with Faith in God, and Courage to en∣counter all Difficulties yet in your way; and that after a long and happy Reign on Earth, you may enjoy the Everlasting Crown hereafter, is, and al∣ways shall be the Prayers of Your Majesties most Humble, truly Faithful, and most Obedient Subjects and Servants This Address was presented to the King at Belfast in Ireland, the 16th of June, 1690. by ma∣ny Ministers. His Majesty received it graciously, and Ordered 1200 l. to be paid them for their present Support. London, Printed for R. Baldwin, near the Black Bull in the Old-Baily. 1690.
