E3622 19639528 109260
An Exact and true Relation of the many se∣verall Messages, That have passed between His Excellency Sir THO. FAIRFAX, and the Marquesse of Worcester, Governour of Ragland-Castle, touching surrender thereof. Together, With A Copy of the Propositions sent to the Ge∣nerall from the Marquesse of WORCESTER, out of Ragland-Castle, and his Excellencies Refusall to treat on them. Also, The Names of our Commissioners appointed to treate with the Enemy, upon the Propositions sent to them from the Generall. Certified in a Letter, to a Member of the Hono∣rable House of Commons, on Tuesday, August the 18th. 1646. And commanded to be forth∣with printed and published. London, Printed for Fra. Coles, in the Old-Baily, August 19th. 1646.
An Exact and true Relation, &c. SIR, IN my last I acquainted you with the Generals leaving of Bath, and comming in person to the siege before Ragland, where he was entertained in the army with great acclamations of the soul∣diers: After which, he sent a summons into the Castle, to which a dilatory answer (though not an absolute deniall was sent; a civill Reply was made unto it: And after a dayes consideration thereof, the Marquesse tooke occasion to write a calme Letter unto the Generall: Expressing how much he did respect the Generals Family, and what long acquaintance he had with his Grandfather: In conclusion, invited to have some Propositions sent him, which were accordingly sent: The Con∣ditions were honourable for the souldiery, but as to the Marquesse to submit to the mercy of the Parliament. The Marquesse having considered of the Propositions, remained doubtfull, whe∣ther the Parliament would confirme what the Generall should grant, in case they should agree, to which the Generall returned him an answer; assuring him, That what he concluded of would be performed. Whereupon, Thursday, August 13. the Marquesse sent out a Drum, desiring leave to send out his Commissioners, Fri∣day at 10 of the clocke: Whereupon (he sayes) his Excellencie should see he would not be an obstruction to a peace: which we conjectured was as much as to say, He would send a positive an∣swer to our Propositions: And thereupon the Drum was returned with a safe conduct for the Commissioners comming forth, and a
cessation of armes from 10 of the clocke till three. The Commissi∣oners appointed on our part to meet theirs, were, Colonell Birch, Master Herbert, one of the Commissioners of Parliament residing in the army, and Major Juliday; whose Commission was to re∣ceive what they should deliver, and to present it to the Generall. I shall now give you an account how near our approaches are made unto the Castle: That which is our maine worke, is about 60 yards from theirs, and that's the most. We have planted 4 Mortar peeces, each of them carrying Granado shels, 12 inches Diameter, and 2 mortar peeces planted at another place, carrying shels about the like compasse: So that in case the Treaty doe breake off, we are then ready to shew by what extremity they must expect to be reduced. This we are very confident, that the Granadoes will make them quit their workes, and out-houses, and solely betake themselves into the Castle; which indeed will be a worke of time before we shall be able to undermine it, in regard we must mine downe the hill under a moate, and then their works, before we can come to the Castle; yet we conceive it feasible to be done with some losse. Our Engineer, Captaine Hooper, a painfull and honest man (proceeding as he hath begun) with exact running tren∣ches (which are made so secure, as if they were workes against a storme) will (with Gods Blessing) come within 10 yards in few dayes, and then I beleeve we shall make galleries, mines, and many batteries: The Generall is every day in the trenches, and yester∣day appointed a New Approach, which the Engineer of this Ar∣my, who is now returned from Worcester is to carry on with all expedition: He has already broke the ground, throwne up ap∣proaches of about an hundred yards in length and circuit, and is within 60 yards of under part of their workes. During the Parley yesterday, which held from Nine till Two, they permitted us to come to their Workes, stand close to their Stockadoes and trenches and discourse with them, so little do they regard our knowledge of their Workes they are so strong: The Propositions sent out by the Marquesse yesterday, were as high as ever any Garison yet propounded, to which the Generall returned a short and positive Answer, letting his Lordship know his Propo∣sitions deserved no answer, and as for himselfe, he must expect no
other conditions but to submit to the mercy of the Parliament, and gave him time till this day at Ten a Clocke to receive his finall Answer; We are all perswaded if he could but have leave to go beyond Seas, the Souldiers having honorable conditions, he would submit, and were it not better to grant a man of 84. yeares those termes, that probably will be in his grave before the affaires of Parliament will give leave to call him to triall, and thereby save the lives of many an Officer and Souldier that have adventured their lives in the Parliaments Cause (and may yet do them great service) to gaine this old mans Carkasse at so deare a rate. Colo∣nell Rainsborow is already come to the Leagure, and his Regiment and Colonell Hamond's this day expected: The Marquesse hath this Morning sent forth word that he will treate upon the Gene∣rals Propositions: Whereupon the Treaty is appointed at Master Oates his house about a mile and halfe from Ragland, where it is to begin this afternoone at Two of the Clocke. The Generals Commissioners are Colonell Morgan, Colonell Birch, Master Herbert one of the Commissioners of Parliament in the Army, Quartermaster Generall Grasvenor, Liutenant-Colonell Ash∣field and Major Iulida: By the next you shall heare further from Uske. Aug. 15. 1646. Your assured friend and Servant, W. C. Here followes the severall Messages and Replies. Sir, I Doe so much confide in your Honour, as that being at stake con∣cerning leave to send to His Majesty, I will at this time forbeare to make further motion in it: Only one thing which is extraordi∣nary, I offer to your consideration for the just cause, besides my Allegeance of my reasonable request: which is; That upon His Majesties promise of satisfaction, I am above twenty thousand pounds out of purse, and if I should doe any thing displeasing un∣to him, I am sure all that is lost, and no benefit to the Parliament. If you knew how well knowne I was in Henry Earle of Hunting∣tons time, unto your noble Grandfather at Yorke: I am assured I should receive that favour at your hands that safely you might
affoord. God knowes, if I might quietly receive my meanes of subsistence, and be in security with the Parliaments approbation, and freed from the malice of those Gentlemen that are of the Committee within this County, I should quickly quit my selfe of the Garrison, for I have no great cause to take delight in it. I have that high esteeme of your worth, noblenesse, and true judgement; that knowing you will offer nothing ignoble or unworthy for me to doe, as the case stands with me: I desire to know what Con∣ditions I may have, and I will returne you present answer, and in the meane time rest: Aug. 8th. 1646 Your humble servant, H. Worcester. Sir Th. Fairfax Reply. My Lord. ACcording to your Lordships desire, I have returned you Con∣ditions, such as may be fit and satisfactory to the souldierie: To your Lordship and Family, I have granted quiet and securitie from all violence of any that belongs to me: I would perswade your Lordship not to feare any ill, or disrespect from the Commit∣tee of this County (I shall easily reconcile that party) or that they will doe any thing, but as they shall receive order from the Par∣liament. By this meanes you are at liberty to send to the Parlia∣ment, and upon a present surrender, and submission to their mercy and favou, your Lordship cannot but thinke to receive better termes for your selfe, then if you stand it out to the last extremity; when besides the hazard of your person, and of those in your Fa∣mily (which I doe presume are deare to you) and the spoile of the Castle, which cannot be avoided in extreme undertake against it. Your Lordship hath no reasen to expect better then the Marquesse of Winchester received; who in making good Baling, house to the last, narrowly escaped in his own person, lost his friends subjected those that escaped to great frights, and hazard, his House and estate to utter ruine, and himselfe to extremity of Justice. Touching your Lordships twenty thousand pound, your Lordship hath iberty to sollicite about that, by the same hands your Lordship shall give an account of the surrender to His Majesty. I desire your Lordship
upon Receipt of these to dismisse my Trumpeter, and to returne answer by one of your owne. August 10th. T. F. The Earle of Worcesters second Message. Sir, THe difficulty of resolution by the souldiers and Officers (other then I thought) causeth my request for your patience in not gi∣ving you full Answer to the conditions you sent me yesterday; but as soone as I shall obtaine it, you shall not be long without it. But one thing, and that of moment, I desire to be satisfied in; whether if any conclusion should be made, that afterward I shall be left to the mercy of the Parliament for alteration at their will and plea∣sures; and if it be so, I shall endeavour in vaine to study more about it: For example, in my Lord of Shrewsbery his Case, and divers others, how Conditions have been broken, doth a little affright me: I know by your will and consent it should never be; but souldiers are unruly, and the Parliament unquestionable, and therefore I beseech you pardon my just cause of feare, and I will rest: August 11th 1646. Your humble servant, H. Worcester. Sir Thomas Fairefax Second Reply. My Lord, I Have perused your Letter of this Eleventh of August. As to your scruple wherein you desire to be satisfied (so far as I un∣derstand it) I can only give you this Resolution, that what I grant, I will undertake shall be made good: As to the instance you give in my Lord of Shrewsberies Case, the Actors in that breach (who were none of my Armie) have received their censure, and by this time I beleeve the execution. But here, if any Conclusion be made while I stay, I dare undertake there shall be no such thing, or if any, there shall be reparation. August 11th. 1646. T. F.
The Earle of Worcesters Third Message. Sir, FOr the better Accomodation of these unhappy differences, if you please that there may be a Cessation of Armes and work∣ing, and to engage your Honour for the returne of my Commissi∣oners to morrow by Ten of the Clocke, they shall waite upon you in your Leagure, where they shall vindicate me for being the only obstruction of the generall Peace: So in expectation of your sud∣daine Answer: I rest, August 13. 1646. Your humble Servant, H. Worcester. Sir Thomas Fairefax Third Reply. My Lord, HAving not yet received in any of your Letters a direct Ans∣wer to the Conditions I sent you; I have no grounds or con∣sideration for such a Cessation of Armes and working, as in your Letter you desire; But if it be your purpose to returne your Ans∣wer by Commissioners, I shall by the houre you mention, appoint Commissioners of mine owne to receive the same in the Leagure as you desire, and engage my selfe for the safe returne of yours, not exceeding sixe Commissioners, and as many servants: And in or∣der to this, I shall be content there be a Cessation of Armes and working, from nine of the Clocke to morrow morning, till two in the afternoone: August. 13. 1646. Your &c. T. F. I Appoint Colonell John Birch, Thomas Herbert Esquire, Commis∣sioners of Parliament for the Army, and Major  Tu∣liday, or any two of them Commissioners on my part, to receive such Answers or Returnes as are or shall be made or offered by the Com∣missioners of the Marquesse of Worcester, for or concerning the Ren∣ditiou of the Castle and Garrison of Ragland for the use of the Par∣liament.
Given under my hand and Seale at Uske the fourteenth day of August. 1646. T. F. Sir, HAd I not thought you had been in the Leagure, to the end that Propositions from the place in answer to yours, might have been first presented unto you, and to avoid delaies, which I thought your side would best like of, it was resolved to send Com∣missioners together with our Propositions; but considering it was otherwise, I have sent you such as I am advised unto, to take into your consideration, and because there is some addition to yours, I would have been glad you had heard the just Reasons thereof, to the end you might not have been perswaded to slight them with∣out just cause; your pleasure for the ordering of businesse, I, at your leasure expect, and if you please, the dismission of this Messen∣ger: and so rest, August 14. 1646. Your humble Servant, H. Worcester. My Lord, I Have perused the Propositions sent out by your Commissi∣oners, which I find such as deserve no Answer: I have offered your Lordship and the rest conditions which you may yet have if you accept in time: If there be any thing in them obscure, need∣ing explanation, or wanting circumstantials, for the better per∣forming of the things intended therein: I shall be willing to ap∣point Commissioners on my part to treate with yours to that pur∣pose, upon those Propositions of mine, provided you send Com∣missioners instructed with power to treat and conclude and re∣turne your resolution herein by sixe of the Clocke this Evening. August 14. 1646. Yours &c. T. F. FINIS.
