F1243 R20666 12680020 65623
Imprimatur, HEN. MAƲRICE. June 7. 1687.
AN ACCOUNT OF THE Life and Death OF THE Blessed Virgin, According to Romish Writers. WITH THE Grounds of the WORSHIP paid to Her. AND A PREFACE in Answer to the Apo∣logy for the Contemplations, &c. By a Lay Hand. LONDON: Printed by H. Clark, for Thomas Newborough at the Star in St. Paul's Church-Yard, 1687.
To J. C. D. D. Author of the Contemplations, &c. and the Apology. SIR, I Present You here with A Short Account of the Life and Death of the ever blessed Virgin, collected from Authors truly Catholick, and zealous Devoto's; such, as in all likelihood, had long ago performed your Eight Acts of Special Devotion to∣wards her. If I could have got my self to have made some Resolutions, some Affe∣ctions, Praises, Versicles, Responses, Les∣sons and Anthems, to have turned Psalms of David from our Lord to our Lady, and composed some hobling Hymns, with a Covenant at the last, I am persuaded this Book might have passed for a Second Edi∣tion with some Alterations, of Contempla∣tions on the Life and Glory of Holy Mary. There is so near an Affinity between the
Doctrines of them both, the Authors are so very like, the Matter and Substance of them is so very much the same, that I think I have sufficient claim to your Pa∣tronage; and may reasonably shelter my self under the Protection of your Apolo∣gy, which will serve for the one, as well as the other: and I cannot but congratu∣late the good fortune of my Book, that it was born with its Defence ready made. To give you my judgment freely on the matter,  verily believe your two Books are a more fair and full Exposition of the Doctrine of the Council of Trent in this Point, than what our Representer, Mr. de Meaux, or his Vindicator have given us; be∣cause the Universal Practice of your Church is concordant with, and corre∣spondent to Your Principles, but by no means to Theirs. For what an intolle∣rable injury must there be done to plain natural sence, what extreme violence must there be used, to pull and reduce to a plain Ord pro▪ nobis, such noble and exalt∣ed flights, such vast, exuberant, seraphical and supereminential strains, as are every where to be met withal in the Authors of the Virginal Sodality?
And thou, O most glorious and powerful Mo∣therContempl. pag. 86. of God, pity me, and protect me; for thou art highly acceptable to God, canst obtain Mercies, and wilt procure a Mission of Angels to relieve me, that my Soul may rejoyce in thy fulness and bounty. Wherefore (for the same reason) now forIbid. ever, I chuse thee, O glorious Mother of Jesus, to be my Patroness, Advocate, and Adoptive Mo∣ther, admit me, O powerful Queen of Angels, amongst thy Clients: Suppress my Enemies; Ma∣nage my Cause in the Court of our Requests, &c. —And thou, O Mother of Mercy, dost stillPag. 99. sollicit my Cause at the Throne of thy Son's boun∣ty, art watchful over my motions and dost compas∣sionate my failings. Help, quicken, triumph over my weak desires. Take me into the Arms of thy Pity. Suffer not the Image of Jesus to be razed forth my Spirit, since I have been redeemed, washed and watred with the Blood of Jesus, taken forth of the Centre of thy Amorous Heart. Ʋnto thy Custody I commit and recommend myPag. 101. self, with all the powers, passions, and motions▪ of my body and mind; and all living and dead; hum∣bly intreating thee, through all thy Mercies and Merits, Priviledges and Power, and by whatever is dearest unto thee, that we may be admitted to
be thy Children, Servants, and Devotees; that we may be protected, directed and assisted, and comforted by thee: and that by thee, we may be presented to God the Father who created us, &c. You will scorn, I think, to have such Sentences as these (and greater yet than these, if I had leisure to select them) re∣duced to a poor Ora pro nobis. But your com∣fort is, that those dry, insipid Ora pro nobis∣Gentlemen are but very few in number, and dare hardly shew themselves but in the Days and Kingdoms of Conversion. But for a couple of Unreasonable Men, commend me to the Modern Opposers of your Contemplations, the one a FriendlyApology, Pag. 13. Trimmer, (Speculum B. Virg.) the other an open Vigilantian (Answer to a Catholick Misre∣presented). With the first, joyn all those Misbelievers, who will not away withIbid. sound and wholsom Meats, unless they be also toothsom, who so trim in this great Point of Christian Piety towards the Holy Mother of Jesus, as to reduce the whole Design of the Worship of Saints to a bare Admiration, Commemoration, and Imitation of their Virtues; as if the Veneration of the Saints, and our Mediation of Intercession,
directed mediately or immediately untoPag. 14. them, were not in themselves Christian Ver∣tues, or that the Practice of these Vertues were not due by us, to their high rank, &c. The only way to be revenged on this unreasonable and fearful Trimmer (that I can think of) will be to prove in any to∣lerable manner the truth of the foregoing Period; and the least that he can do, will be to break his Speculum all to pieces; it may be something else. And next, for that other open Vigilantian,Apol. p. 16. to come and thank you civilly for pub∣lishing, in English, & Permissu Superiorum, your seasonable Treatise, I think it was nothing but a rude affront, for it was in∣deed to thank you for Nothing, since nei∣ther the Design nor Draught was new or singular: i. e. the Doctrine and the Practice delivered in your Book, was from all An∣tiquity, and Universal; if this were made but good, it wou'd crack the heart-strings of that open Vigilantian, which would be a sufficient punishment for his injurious dismembring the very Style of the Contem∣plations,Pag. 18. in a most weighty Article. Though, after all, some of your Friends are apt to
think, that the inserting those words [in the Soul of a pure Creature] which you com∣plain so much of, for being left out, will make your Cause never the better, if not somewhat worse; for that Vigilantian thought it but reasonable to enquire, what greater Titles, what more glorious Attri∣butes, you could bestow on the Eternal Son of God in our Nature, than you had bestowed on his Virgin-Mother, although but a pure Creature; and the Question, for ought I see, is like to be yet unanswer∣ed. And therefore, let us leave these two troublesome people, who seem to have no manner of taste or relish of this kind of Virginal Devotion; and are so wholly taken up with that fanciful way of wor∣shipping one God in simplicity and truth; that I believe if the truth were known they have neither of them in all their lives suffered one Ecstatick Introversion in con∣templation of the Grandeurs of Holy Mary. Your Books, Sir, I find, are made up of two parts; 1. Reasoning. 2. Authority. For the first, I have nothing to say to it; I believe your Reasons are as good as any that can be brought in defence of such Worship,
and such Practice. And, if I did not think you would take it amiss, I would thank you again and again for that part of your Apology. For the Authoritative part, I con∣fess I am not so well satisfied with it, and it shall be the work of the remainder of this Epistle, to shew how little reason you have to be so, in relation to the three or four first Centuries; and here I am in very good earnest, and cannot help expo∣stulating with you, and others your Wri∣ting Brethren, in the Name both of the Learned and Unlearned of our Nation. Bishop Bonner could not allow a Heretick to be a Gentleman; and Card. PallaviciniApparat. cap. 7. says, that whereas, since the Reformation, there have been a very great number of Catholicks, ex∣ceedingly renowned both for their Piety and Learning; the Heresie could not shew even one famous for the first, and not many for the latter. I'm afraid that a hundred years hence, Hereticks will be born without Noses, and shall not be able so much as to learn to read: But had not rage and fury blind∣ed the eyes of that Jesuit, he might have found a thousand, and ten thousand too, dear both to God and Men, both for their
Piety and their Learning. It is very well known how quickly that dawning of Learn∣ing in the World, about the end of the 15th Century, brought forth the Reformation; and it is as well known, how kind the Daughter has since proved to the Mother. And envy must confess, that England has made as great improvements in all Arts and Sciences, and advanced Learning of all kinds, as far as any Nation in the World besides has done. But what is this (you will say) to you? I answer, Very much. It lies upon you very hard, to ac∣quit your selves either of profound igno∣rance in Books, or extreme disingenuity, in imposing spurious, scoundrel, and ex∣ploded Tracts, for genuine and approved. What greater rudeness and affront can you put upon a Nation of so exact a judg∣ment, so critical a taste, and such abun∣dant reading, as the English is, than to think you can foist your wretched stuff upon them, for old authentick Records? But this is your way, and this is your ad∣vantage, that if but one ignorant Reader is seduced by these false Authorities, you have gained one; and if you gain none,
you lose nothing; for disingenuous and unfair dealing in the methods of convert∣ing, is so frequent, that a right Catholick stomach never so much as rises at it, much less is in any danger of revolt. I am tempted to pursue this Subject somewhat farther; but I will restrain my self, and set about my work immediately, which shall be to shew, that of all the Au∣thorities you have alledged in defence of your Doctrine, for the three first Ages, ei∣ther the Books from which you have them are confessedly spurious, or exceeding doubtful; or if the Books be genuine, the Citations are nothing to your purpose. To begin therefore with the Testimo∣nies of the first Age; the Holy Scriptures, which are cited abundantly, are most of them such as prove, what no body denies, as that Mary was the Mother of Jesus, herApol. 90. excellent Faith, admirable Purity, pro∣found Humility, perfect Obedience, Fide∣lity and Obsequiousness, Fortitude and Patience, ay, and whatever else you please that is truly excellent, we are ready to be∣lieve, tho' sometimes not from the places brought by you: but why should you say
she is stiled the Spouse of the Holy Ghost, because, Matth. 1. 20. that which is born of her is of the Holy Ghost? how do the EvangelistsAp. 89. recommend to us her fervent practice of Ecstatick Prayer, because Acts 1. 14. These all continued in Prayer and Supplication, with oneP. 90. accord, with the Women, and Mary the Mother of Jesus and with his brethren? but how does that submissive resignation of the humble and obedient Maid, Luke 1. 38. Behold the handmaid of the Lord, be it unto me according to thy Word, prove the amplitude of the spi∣ritualP. 91. power of Holy Mary, in the Empire of Grace and Divine Favours, suiting to her illustrious Prerogatives, Vertues, and Merits? where is the stupendous efficacy of her single Fiat, be it done, in those words? J. C. D. D. of the holy Order of St. Francis, will tell us; As God's Fiat, in the beginningIbid. of Nature, was a demonstrative Mark of his pro∣per Omnipotency, in extracting the whole Fabrick of the World, with all its Moveables and Orna∣ments, out of a meer nothing: So Mary's Fiat, in the beginning of Grace, is an evident token of her appropriated plenitude of Power, proportioned to her fulness of Grace, co-operating with the al∣mighty source of all goodness, gives a being, with
all connatural parts and perfections, to Jesus. Commend me to J. C. for making the most of a thing: but this it is, to have ones head stuffed with the Conformities of St. Francis. Well, but the efficacy of herPag. 92. Mediation of Intercession to God, for Mor∣tals, appears manifestly, in her sollicitous request to Jesus, at the Marriage-Feast in Cana of Galilee, Joh. 2. 3. The Mother of Jesus saith unto him, They have no Wine. Had I been J. C. of all places in the whole Bible, I would never have singled out this pas∣sage, to shew the efficacy of her Mediation of Intercession, because of the answer im∣mediately following, V. 4. Woman, what have I to do with thee? Ay, but hold, says J. C. Did not our blessed Lord, for the in∣suranceIbid. of our protection by Holy Mary, and of her effectual mediation to himself for us, give a most ample instance, in his voluntary subjection and obsequiousness to her Commands, from the Age of 12. to 30. Luke 2. 51. And he went down with them to Nazareth, and was subject to them? Now, to speak the truth, I can see no great mat∣ter in these plain words, and if there be any thing in them extraordinary, it is cer∣tainly
as applicable to St. Joseph, as the Bles∣sed Virgin, and therefore J. C. took care to translate them to his purpose, Jesus went down with Mary, to Nazareth, and was sub∣ject to Her. But this is no usual fraud of the Adversaries of the Catholick ChurchAp. p. 18. to lop the Sacred Scriptures themselves, thereby to support a drooping Party and Passion; No, not this, to speak of! the Party indeed we have to deal with, does not droop very much, but certainly the Cause does, that wants such supports as these. In the next place, the application of the 44th (with us the 45th) Psalm to the Virgin Mary, upon the Autho∣ties of Athanasius (Serm. de Deipara) and Greg. Nazian. (Traged. de Ch. Patiente) is hardly to be endured, when the literal sence of it is so suitable to the love of So∣lomon to his Egyptian Lady, and the Mysti∣cal, to that of our blessed Lord to his Spouse the Church. But if these two pie∣ces (of which I shall speak in their proper places) were sufficient to authorize your applying that Psalm to the Virgin, yet whatP. 93. shall authorize you to construe, Vultum tuum deprecabuntur, by, Shall pay homage to this Di∣vine
Mother, and set it down as the words of the Psalmist? nothing that I know of, but Quidlibet audendi libertas pro Sancta Matre Ecclesia. And thus I have done my Obser∣vations (for I do not pretend to answer or confute the reason of the Authorities al∣ledged here, or elsewhere) on your Scrip∣ture Quotations. And truly if this be the Use that is to be made of it, I think it rea∣sonable, it should be withholden not from the Laity alone, but Clergy also. The first Authority, purely humane, isApolog. 94. the honourable Testimony of St. Andrew the Apostle, who stiles her an Immaculate Virgin, in these words, It was necessary that Christ, born of an Immaculate Virgin, should restore that Life Everlasting which all had forfeited. Here is nothing in this Citation but what we all agree very well in; but the Autho∣rity of the Piece we think very question∣able, and because it is made use of, upon other occasions, by your Writers, and the Putney Convert, I will give you some of the Reasons, for which we think it not authentick. Sixtus Senensis says nothing of it, but gives us warning to be cautious in such matters (quoting Eusebius for it) as
relate to the Acts and Passions of the Apo∣stles, and says that in the Acts of St. An∣drew, there are abundance of ridiculous stories, about Egeas, and Maximilla, &c. Possevin and Bellarmin think there is all the reason in the World to believe the Passion of St. Andrew genuine; 1st. Because no body had questioned it. And how should they, when it had not long been made com∣mon, by the Translation of Cardinal Sirlet, Gentian Hervet, and another, from the Greek of Simeon Metaphrastes, at the request of Lip∣pomannus Bishop of Verona, from whom Su∣rius took it? 2. Because it has nothing of Novelty in it. If the Church of Rome will let Sp. Sanctum, procedentem ex Patre, in filio permanentem, pass for the Doctrine of St. An∣drew, I have nothing to answer. Let them chuse which they please; for that of Ba∣ronius,Martyrolog. 30 Nov. saying it had lately crept into some Copies, and was not in a great many others, will not go far with us, barely upon his credit. 3. Because the famous Hymn, Sal∣ve Sancta Crux, was undoubtedly taken from this Passion of St. Andrew. That it might very well be, and yet the Passio S. And. ne∣ver the more genuine, unless it could be
proved, that this Hymn were 15 or 16 hun∣dred years old. 4. Because Johannes a Lo∣vanio, Aloysius Lipomanus, and the Correctors of the Roman Breviary, think it a very ge∣nuine Piece. To this Bellarmin shall an∣swer, namely, that he knew a great Man, (that will go for two sure) that call'd this Passion in question: and farther, that it was very vigorously disputed by grave and learned Men, before it could pass. 5. Petrus Damiani, (who died 1072.) and St. Bernard, in a Sermon on the Vigil and Feast of St. And▪ (which Labbe knows not if it be his or no) cite this Piece as authen∣tick. We have nothing to say to this, but that it might pass for true in the days of St. Bernard, and before. But the Question is, If it be the Presbyters of Achaia, as is pretended. To the Reasons aforemention∣ed, Labbeus adds the auxiliary forces of hard words, and vile injurious reproaches on the Protestant Authors that had exposed this Piece as spurious, and indeed it is all the Arguments that he has brought, both in this and other Points, against their Cri∣ticks. And whoever shall turn over that Jesuits Books, cannot chuse being concerned
to find a man of his laborious industry and learning, so agitated by the rabid Spi∣rit of his Order, as to pass all bounds of moderation, and good manners, towards men of learning, though differing from him in their judgment. We are more obli∣ged to Monsieur du Pin, a late French Author, both for his candor and good nature, whose words I will set down at full concerning this present Matter. Opinions are divided about the Acts of the Pas∣sionNouvelle Bib∣liotheque, p. 47. of St. Andrew, written by the Presbyters of Achaia, which are in Surius's History of the Saints, Nov. 30. Baronius, Bellarmin, and some other Catholick Criticks receive them, but a great many more reject them. The Ancients knew no other Acts of St. Andrew, than such as were corrupted by the Manichees, of which St. Au∣stin, Philastrius, and Pope Innocent the first make mention, and which Gelasius puts into the number of Apocryphal Books: But it is cer∣tain,Du Pin, 47. that those were not the same with these we are now speaking of; and it is yet as certain that these latter Acts of the Passion of St. Andrew, were never cited by any that lived before the 7th or 8th Century. Such as Remigius Autissiodorensis, who died
about 900. Petrus Damiani, 1072. Lanfranc, St. Bernard, and Ivo of Chartres. By which we see we cannot be assured of the truth of it. Thirdly, Not only the Mystery ofP. 4. the Trinity is explained in these Acts, in such a manner as we may well suspect they were made since the Council of Nice; but they also teach the error of the latter Greeks concerning the Holy Ghost, saying he proceeds from the Father, and abides in the Son. I know it is pretended, that there are Manuscripts in which this passage is not found, but who can tell whether these passages were not rather blotted or left out of some Copies, than added or put into others. And therefore this Passion ought at least to be looked upon as a doubtful thing, and such as St. Jerome says we may not make any use of, to prove any matter of Faith. Thus far that learned person, and we thank him for his ingenuity. And has J. C. D. D. or any of his Writing Bre∣thren, any thing material to say to all this? when they have, let them quote, Aloys. Lipom. e Presb. Achaiae again, but not before. But setting aside the Authority of these learned people, let any ingenuous,
any uninfected man, set himself to read this Piece, and if he do not find enough to make him suspect it, I am very much mi∣staken; there he will find Egeas tellingSurius, Nov. 30. St. Andrew how the Principes Romani, the Ro∣man Emperors had ordered the Christian Religion to be rooted out. After great disputes, Egeas puts Andrew in Prison, but upon the hearing of it, all the People of the Province come to the Apostle, and would have broken up his Prison, and freed him, and were hardly restrained by St. Andrew from going presently to kill Egeas; but he preached a Sermon of Pas∣sive Obedience (for which I don't find they laugh'd at him) to the people, and so the Pro-Consul escaped. Amongst other things, St. Andrew tells Egeas, that Christ had sent him to that Province, where he had converted a mighty number of people from idolatry. Ay, says Egeas, I know you have; there is not a City in all Achaia whose Temples are not quite forsaken and empty since your preaching: and therefore I'll make you sacrifice first, that all who have been seduced by you, may return to their old Worship. Is there
any thing likely in all this? Did the people use to gather together so early in defence of Christianity, against their own Governors? Were not the Christians the hate and scorn of all the World? Were not the Judges and Governors forced to restrain the rage of the common people, in their prosecutions of the poor Saints? and how come all things so mightily changed in Achaia? that all the Heathen Temples should in a manner be quite deserted in so little a time, will not easily be believed, by any who understand the state of those times. After St. Andrew had hung upon the Cross two days, Egeas came, at the cla∣mor of his own Brother Stratocles, and 20000 followers, to take him down; but the good Apostle prayed to Christ, that they might not be able to do it, and as many as stretched out their arms to try, stupebant, and could not. What follows, seems to me, to be done purely in imitation of Joseph of Arimathea, and is thus: How a certain woman, called Maximilla, an honourable person, (Sena∣trix, to answer to ▪ Luke 23. 50.) a chaste and holy Matron, (to answer to Jo∣seph,
a just and honourable man) as soon as she knew the Apostle was dead, came to the Cross, and with all reverence, took down the Body of the Apostle, and buried it with Spices and Oyntments, and laid him in a Sepulcher, which she had prepa∣red for herself. At this Egeas was in burn∣ing wrath, and ordering a Bill of Com∣plaint (an Indictment of Riot, against the Peace of his Sovereign Lord) to be drawn up to the Emperor, against Maximilla, and 20000 of the People, was, in the midst of his anger, caught up by the Devil into the Air, and thrown down headlong into the midst of the forum, and died presently. Whose Estate his Brother Stratocles would never touch, because his Brother had pol∣luted it with killing the Apostle. These things were done in Patrae of Achaia, Ʋbi praestantur adhuc gloriosa ejus beneficia, us{que} in praesentem diem. And this Example so terri∣fied all the Country, that they turned Christians immediately. I hope our English Missionaries, after this, will be so ingenu∣ous as to lay aside the Passion of St. Andrew. Your next Authority is fetch'd from S. Pe∣ter's Liturgy, of which Sixtus Senensis, Posse∣vinus,
and Bellarmin, say not one word; and Labbeus says enough to let you see he is persuaded it is none of his; and thinks it so plain, that there is no need of consult∣ing Protestant Criticks for Arguments a∣gainst it, but I would not have the Reader think he calls them Protestant Criticks; no, Allophylos bacchantes consulere, Profanos Criticos, Alastoras Haereticos, Beelzebub Deum Accaron con∣sultum ire, are the best words they can get from him. But let us hear what Card. Bona says on this matter, Rer. Liturg. l. 1. c. 8. About the end of the last Century, Gulielmus Lindanus, from Card. Sirlet's Copy, put out the Liturgy of S. Peter, Gr. and Lat. with a learned Apology for it: but whoever shall read it carefully, will, with me, confess, that nothing can be concluded hence, but that Peter, by word of mouth, or writing, delivered a Liturgy to the Church of An∣tioch first, and then to that of Rome: but that this (which he says Sirlet found in Apulia) should be it, he by no means proves; and no body will believe it who can di∣stinguish truth, from falshood; For if this were S. Peter's Liturgy indeed, how comes it to pass, that the Roman Church, which
amidst so many storms of Persecution, hath carefully preserved his Relicks, and Epistles, should yet neglect this noble For∣mula of Sacrificing? how comes it, there was nothing seen of it for 1500 and more years, in the Catholick Writings? and thus that Cardinal goes on at a mighty rate, but because the afore-mentioned Ellies du Pin, Doctor of the Sorbon, and at present in great repute with the Church of France, hath dispatch'd this business effectually, and made use of Card. Bona's Arguments, and because I find I grow tedious, I will take leave to translate a short Chapter of his, which will give you full satisfaction in the point of Liturgies, and will also be an∣swer to your third Citation out of the Li∣turgy of S. James, Minor. Of Liturgies falsly attributed to the Apostles, Page 21. We need only to reflect a little on the Celebra∣tionNouvelle Bibl. of the Eucharist in S. Paul's Epistle to the Corinthians, and on what Just. Martyr, and others of the first Ecclesiastick Writers have deli∣vered down on that Subject, to be persuaded that the Apostles and their Successors celebrated the
Sacrifice of the Mass, with great simplicity. This is what has been observed by all who have written on the Liturgies, who agree, that Mass was, in the first days, performed without much Ceremony, and a very few Prayers made use of; but that by little and little both Prayers and Ceremonies en∣creased, to conciliate the greater reverence to the Sacrifice. At last the Churches ordered and set down in Writing, the manner of Celebrating, which was called the Liturgy. And the reason of their differing, proceeded from their conforming to the several Ʋsages and Customs of several places. And because men are naturally carried to change something in their exterior part of Worship, there have therefore many things been added from time to time to these Liturgies. This Remark alone, may suffice to let you see, that the Litur∣gies which carry the Apostles names, and Evangelists, are truly none of theirs; but to prove it invincibly, we need only exa∣mine them one after another. The Liturgy, or Greek and Latine Mass, attributed to S. Peter, and published by Lindanus, 1589. from Card. Sirlet's MS. which was not very old, and which has since been printed at Paris by Morellius, 1595. cannot be S. Peter's, for the follow∣ing
reasons. There is mention made of S. Sixtus, Cornelius, and S. Cyprian, (the last of which died 258). The Virgin Mary is there called the Mother of God, , a term which was not in common use be∣fore the condemnation of Nestorius. [Card. Bona in his Defence of S. James's Liturgy, quotes Evagrius, and Theodoret confessing that the ancient Fathers both called the blessed Virgin , and believed her to be so. But certainly S. Cyril of Alexandria, who was present at, and a great part of the Church of Ephesus, in 41, did not be∣lieve the Apostles S. Peter and S. James to have ever called her so, when he says in his Epistle, about the . The admirable Disciples have deli∣vered us down this Faith, though they have not made mention of the word or term . Therefore S. Cyril did not know of any Liturgy of S. Peter or S. James, where  is mentioned. But this by the way, and now to Du Pin again.] The Canon of the Latin Mass, which S. Gregory says was made by a Scholasticus, i. e. a learn∣ed Man, of the fifth Century, is there in∣serted
entire: besides, it has Prayers in it, taken out of Gregory's Sacramentary, S. Ba∣sil's, and S. Chrysostom's Liturgies. There they pray for the Patriarch, a term not known before the end of the fourth Century, and for the most Religious Emperors. In a word, had this Liturgy been S. Pe∣ter's, the Church of Rome would have made use of it, and it could not have been un∣known for so many Ages. These reasons made the learned Card. Bona say this Li∣turgy was spurious, and had certainly been composed by some Greek Priest lati∣nized, because it was taken partly from the Greek and partly from the Latin Litur∣gies, and then was christened S. Peters, either to gain it more Authority, or be∣cause it contained a great part of the Ro∣man Liturgy. The Ethiopick Liturgy, that bears the Name of S. Matthew, is visibly supposi∣titious; there they pray for the Popes, for Kings, for Patriarchs, and Arch-bishops; the twelve Apostles are there invoked; there they mention the four Evangelists; speak of the Synods of Nice, Constantinople, and Ephesus; there they sing the Nicene Creed
with the Particle Filioque; there they men∣tion Athanasius, Basil, and S. Gregory, the Epact; Golden Number, and Trisagion, by which we see this Liturgy was of latter date. There remains no more but the Li∣turgy attributed to S. James, which Men of Learning have taken pains to defend, but to no purpose; for though it be an∣cienter, than those we have examined, since it is cited by the Council in Trullo, after the fifth General Council, [held ac∣cording to Petavius, 707.] Yet however, we cannot say, that S. James was the Author, or that it was made in his time. For, 1st. the Virgin is in this Liturgy call'd the Mother of God; the Son and Holy Ghost are said to be Consubstantial with the Father; terms which were not in use in S. James's time, for if they had, is it credible, that this Authority would not have been alledged in the Coun∣cils of Nice, Ephesus, and Constantinople? . We find here the Trisagion, and the Glo∣ria Patri, which were not commonly used in the Church, till the 5th Century; for though you should prove they were used
before, yet you must own, that it was not the common custom of the Church so to do. 3. There they pray for such as were shut up in Monasteries; but who can say there were Monasteries in S. James's time? 4. There is mention made of Confessors, a term not used in the Divine Offices till a great while after S. James, even in Card. Bellarmin's own judgment. 5. This Litur∣gy speaks of Temples, and Incensing of Altars, and does any one believe, there were such things so early? 6. The whole Liturgy is full of Citations out of S. Paul's Epistles, most of which were written after the death of S. James. And one cannot fairly say with Card. Bellarmin, and Bona [and Labbe] that these things were added to S. James's Liturgy; because there is no manner of likelyhood, people should add so many passages; and besides, the Cere∣monies throughout the whole, do by no means agree with the Apostles days. Thus far du Pin, and I hope you will either cre∣dit or confute him. I durst not for my life venture any Authors with you, but genuine Catholicks, and therefore I have not so much as looked on Perkins, Cooke, Ri∣vet,
Aubertin, Blondel, or Daille, with several others, for fear you should apprehend any foul play. And now I leave you and your Bre∣thren to consider on the Liturgies, and pass to your last Citation out of Dionysius the Areopagite; not that I intend any thing against the words, but to let you see how little reason you have to believe those Books which pass under Denis his Name, to be his, notwithstanding you have a great many learned Men on your side. Sixtus Senensis, and Possevinus, are positive in the point, and so is Bellarmin, although the first acknowledges that Cardinal Ca∣jetan, and the third Constantine Council, believed otherwise, and the latter, that Valla and Erasmus [quidam scioli] thought otherwise; O great Apollo! who would not pass for a Dunce, when Valla and Erasmus pass for Smatterers! But Cardi∣nal Pallavicini, Lib. 1. cap. 23. has thrown the latter as low as a Man can go, but at the same time he falls himself into the lowest degree of contempt, with eve∣ry understanding Reader. Ph. Labbeus has, I know not how, obtained of him∣self,
to be indifferent in the case. And Casimir Oudin, a late ingenious moderateSupplement. de Script. Ecc. Paris, 1686. Critick, lays the matter down so fairly and plainly, that though he does not expresly say it, yet you may easily con∣clude his opinion of the Book to be, that it is spurious. But Du Pin has done the business effectually, and therefore I will not grudge the pains of making an ab∣stract of his judgment, from the Reasons following. 1. The manner of these Books first ap∣pearingDu Pin, p. 90. looks suspicious; they were un∣known to all antiquity, and at last pro∣duced by the Severiani, Hereticks, in a Conference held with the Catholick. Bi∣shops at Constantinople, in the Emperor's Palace, in Five hundred thirty two, to support their Errors by. But what do the Catholicks say to this? How can you shew us, (say they to the Hereticks) that these Testimonies you say are Dionysius his, are so indeed? had they been so, they could not have been unknown to blessed Cy∣ril. But why do we mention St. Cyril; for if St. Athanasius had believed them to be St. Denis his, would he not have made
use of that Authority, to prove the Con∣substantiality of the blessed Trinity, a∣gainst the Blasphemies of Arius? but now since none of the Ancients has cited them, how can you prove them to belong to Dionysius? thus that Council argued then; but afterwards, finding nothing in the Books repugnant to the Faith, they were admitted for genuine. But Du Pin could not find that the Council had taken care to answer their own Arguments and Ob∣jections. To this he adds, that they are wholly omitted by St. Jerome and St. Au∣stin, whose purposes they would have served very well, had they known them. 2. The Style and Method are very dif∣ferentDu Pin, 92. from the way of Writing in the first and second Age of the Church. The Style is puft, affected, and unnatu∣ral; the meanest simplest things are am∣plified extravagantly; the Periods are artificial, and his Reasons ranged in great order, which looks more like a Phi∣losopher, writing at leisure, and with pre∣meditation.
3. The Subject of these Books does not at all agree with the times of St. Denis. The Christians in the first Ages were taken up in three sorts of Works, in making Apologies for their Religion, in Letters of Instruction to the Faithful, and ex∣horting them to Martyrdom; and last∣ly, in writing against Hereticks. Now the subject and design of Denis all along is clear another thing: it is to speak of My∣steries in the most exquisite and curious manner possible, to explain them by Plato's Principles, and in the Terms of that School, not to propose them with the simplicity of the Ancients, but to find out all sorts of Difficulties, and answer them; to raise Questions, more nice than useful, concerning the Nature of God, and the different Orders of Angels. He explains the Trinity clearer than Atha∣nasius himself; he rejects dextrously the Errors of the Nestorians, Eutychians, and Anthropomorphites; he speaks of the Church as flourishing, and in peace, and makes no mention of Martyrs or Persecutions. In the last Chapter of the Hierarchy, he defends the Baptism of Infants by an∣cient
tradition. We say (says he) here∣upon, that which our Bishops (taught by ancient tradition) have delivered down to us. Tradition must needs be very ancient in St. Denis his days. He describes the Ceremonies of Solemn Bap∣tism, such as were in use when the Church was freed from Persecutions, with a great deal of pomp. He speaks of Temples built expresly, in which there was a Sanctuary separate from the other parts, of incensing of Altars, and Ceremonies used about the Energumeni, Catechumeni, and Penitents. He speaks of Monks, and describes their way of Con∣secrating. He dedicates a Book to Ti∣mothy, and quotes in it an Epistle of Igna∣tius, now Timothy was dead, and Onesi∣mus in his place, when Ignatius wrote his Epistles. He cites and explains the Go∣spel, and Revelations of St. John, as Ca∣nonical and Authentick, which was not received for such (the Revelations that is) for some Ages after; and St. John had hardly written them in Denis his life∣time. He quotes the Epistle of Ignatius to the Romans, written a little before his
Martyrdom, which was in Trajan's time, 108. when all agree that Denis himself suffered in Domitian's time, unless those who to reconcile this contradiction have lengthened out his days to 109 and 118, without any good grounds; little think∣ing that the lower they removed him, so much the nearer they came to the truth. He quotes a Passage out of one Clement a Philosopher, which is found in the Eighth Book of Clemens Alex. Strom. that lived in the Third Century. I am weary of confirming the spuriousness of Dionysius. He who is not satisfied with what is already set down, must read Du Pin himself, who has treated this matter so fully, and yet in short, that he has left nothing to doubt of. And thus I have dispatched, I think, your honourable Testimonies of the First Age, by shewing, that there is not one of them genuine, and authentick, even in the judgment of Authors of your own Com∣munion. Your Testimonies of the Second Age are fetch'd indeed from genuine Au∣thors, but I will leave any man to
judge how fairly you have represented them. The first is a Passage out of Irenaeus, which you have given us by halves, and therefore I will set it down at full, as I find it, Lib. 5. cap. 19. in a barbarous translation. As the one (Eve) was sedu∣ced, by the words of the Devil (per An∣gelicum sermonem) to fly from God, pre∣varicating his word, so the other (Mary) was told by an Angel, (per Angelicum ser∣monem evangelizata) that she should bear God, obeying his Word; and as the one was seduced to fly from God, so was the other induced to obey God; that the Virgin Mary might become the Advo∣cate of the Virgin Eve (not as you have translated it, of the guilty Children of Eve) and as Mankind was bound over to death by a Virgin, it might be also by a Virgin loosed: the Virgin-obedience of one being fairly set against the Virgin∣disobedience of the other. If Irenaeus means to be understood literally, as you seem to think, I should not doubt to say he was grosly mistaken; for it was certainly the obedience of Christ Jesus,
God-Man, alone, that could be fairly set against the disobedience of our first Parents, and by whom our debt was paid, and we set free from the bonds of Everlasting Death; but take the whole parallel in any tolerable sence; and make what you can of Advocata. If you want any farther satisfaction about this Citation, I refer you to A Di∣scourse concerning the Worship of the blessed Virgin, and the Saints, Printed 1686. where you may find it, as also on your fol∣lowing one out of Tertullian, where you may find the true translation of the La∣tin words, set down by you, (Apol. pag. 97.) which you seem to be utterly igno∣rant of. Your third Quotation is out of JustinApology for Contempl. p. 97. Martyr, where you say (Apol. pag. 97.) he doth in express words vindicate this Age of the Church, from the imputation of Atheism, impos'd by Pagans, for the Practice of Saint-Servitude, acknow∣ledging the Fact, but denying and re∣futing the Crime, in that Christians give them, not Divine, but only Saint-Wor∣ship, Just. Martyr, Ap. 2. Good God! that
ever any reasonable creature should be thus imposed on! the Christians cal∣led Atheists, for practising Saint-Ser∣vitude! acknowledging their Saint-Wor∣ship, but denying it to be a fault! distinguishing betwixt latreutick, and dou∣leutick Worship! let me live and die a barbarous Monk, if I know what to say to you; or if I am not ashamed at my heart to confute a D. D. in a mat∣ter so plain. Had the modern Saint∣Worship prevailed in Justin Martyr's time, the Christians had never been called or thought Atheists, for many good rea∣sons. But Sir, when I have given you the true translation of the Passage in Justin, I will leave you to the instru∣ction and correction of your Superiors, if you are ignorant of your mistakes; but if not, to the checks of your own Conscience, and to the punishment you owe to violated Truth and Honesty. Al∣though (says the Father) we profess our selves Atheists, with respect to those whom you look upon as Gods; yet not in respect of the true God, the Parent and Fountain of Wisdom and
Righteousness, and all other Excellen∣cies and Perfections, who is infinitely free from the least contagion or spot of Evil. Him, and his only begotten Son, (who came from him and taught these things both to us, and to the compa∣ny of good Angels, who follow and are conformable to his Will) and the Spirit of Prophecy (i. e. the Holy Ghost) we worship and adore, honouring them in Truth, and with the Highest Rea∣son, &c. We are now come to the Testimonies of the Third Age, St. Cyprian, Eusebius Alexandrinus, (whom I cannot in all my Catalogues of Authors discover) Origen, and Methodius; of the three first I shall say nothing, because I think they have said nothing themselves; when their Passages are produced, you may receive satisfaction, but because abundance of your Modern Authors have quoted St. Cy∣prian de Caena Domini, and think it very ancient at least, as Mr. Sclater, and the Convert of late, in Reason and Au∣thority. I shall shew you in short, in what esteem it is held by your own Au∣thors.
Bellarmin disowns it, but will have it an Ancient and Learned Au∣thor's. Labbeus places it where it should be, with Arnoldus Abbas Bonaevallis, who flourished about 1160. O wonderful An∣tiquity! a little more than five hundred years old! Casimir Oudin, gives him the same place, and so does Du Pin. And this is the grave Gentleman that is brought in, to be an Author of the Third Century. Of Methodius, the last, but only Testimony of this Age produ∣ced in words by you, I have this to inform you, that Sixtus Senesis, and Bellarmin say nothing of this Piece. Pos∣sevin likes it well. Labbe gives it us in the Edition of Combesis, 1644. but passes no judgment on it. Du Pin says it was never cited by the Ancients, nor num∣bred up by Photius; but yet has some∣what of his style, only more swelling, and more full of Epithets; he explains the Mysteries of the Tinity▪ Incarna∣tion, the Divinity of the Word, (whom he calls Consubstantial to the Father abundance of times) the Trisagion, and the Virginity of blessed Mary even after
her bringing forth Jesus Christ, and Ori∣ginal Sin, so clearly, that there is rea∣son to doubt, if nothing was added to this Sermn after its first composure. But let us see what Reasons Casimir Oudin, Pag. 22. can bring for his fathering this Piece on one Methodius, Patriarch of Con∣stantinople,Supplem. in the Year 840. 1st. This Oration was pronounced in some great Council, or Assembly, where abundance of Bishops were met (whom he calls Honourable Fathers and Bre∣thren) to celebrate that Festival with great joy; which agrees very ill with the times of Persecution, in which Me∣thodius the Elder lived, under Diocletian and Maximian, by whom he was mar∣tryed, 302 or 303. but all things agree with the times of Methodius the Youn∣ger. 2ly. The Oration has in it, (speak∣ing to Christ) Thou art the True Light, of the True Light, very God, of very God, which plainly alludes to that Ex∣pression in the Nicene Creed, before the making of which Methodius was long dead. 3ly. He plainly falls upon Nesto∣rius, and confutes his Heresie at every
turn; he affects on purpose to call often on the Virgin Mary, by the Name of Mother of God; but Nestorius his Here∣sie was condemned an hundred and thirty years after Methodius his time. 4ly. There is so near an affinity between this Ora∣tion and the rest of Methodius Junior's Works, that an Egg is not liker an Egg; and Oudin instances in some parti∣culars. 5thly. The Author thus speaks, Before Thee there was no other God, the Son of God the Father, and after Thee there shall be no other Son Consub∣stantial to the Father; which very term argues the Author to have lived after the Nicene Council, therefore not Methodius. Thus have I finished what I engaged for, as to the Testimonies of the three first Ages, and though I intended to take the Testimonies of the Fourth Age, into some kind of examination also, yet be∣cause I find I have already taken too much liberty, I will ease both you and my self, when I have told you, that St. Basil has three Liturgies which go under his Name, and Cardinal Bona, says Goar, (who wrote learnedly on Liturgies) complains how
hard it is to discern the genuine andBona Rerum. Lit. l. 1. c. 9. true Text of St. Basil, from the Additions made by later hands; he says the like also of St. Chrysostom's Liturgy, so that you must not be too confident. Cardi∣nal Bellarmin passes the censure of light∣ness on Gregory Nazianzen's Tragedy, Chri∣stus Patiens, out of which you had your Quotation, and pray remember it is Poe∣try. The Epistle of St. Hierom. 10. ad Paul. & Eustoch. is expresly rejected by Possevin. The Sermon de laudibus Mariae, out of which you cite your Testimony, is rejected by Petavius, and Labbeus, as none of Epiphanius's. And lastly, the Sermo de Sanctiss. Deipara you cite under St. Athanasius's name, is cast by, for abun∣dance of reasons given by Baronius, and Bellarmin; Oudin, shall shut up all. De San∣ctissimaSupplem. p. 32. Deipara Virgine—Opus de quo dubi∣tant Baronius & Bellarminus, sed Spinel∣lus & Maraccius fulcire, atque Athanasio vindicare conantur; hoc ordinarium est valde Devotis, ut inter extases suas (Ecstatick In∣troversions) non habeant gustum: sed indiscri∣minatim omnia approbent satisfacientia suis ex∣taticis excessibus uti hac in parte contigit Spi∣nello
& Maraccio (& J. C. D. D.) Ma∣rianis Devotis. All the English I shall give this, is, that it is a Specum for J. C. D. D. of the Holy Order of St. F∣cis, made by one Cafimir Outin, a friend∣ly Trimmer. And now, since I have been all this while clearing honest Authors of the spu∣rious Brats laid to their charge, it is but fit I should let you know, that the follow∣ing Piece is none of my own, but a learn∣ed and renowned French-man's, which I have drest up in English, with some little alteration of the style, and addition of some little matters. If you shall think fit to answer either the Preface or the Book, you must only clear the Authorities I have been calling into question, and there's an end. For I affure you, I intend to make no other Answer to you than Mr. W. of Oxford does to his Opponents, viz. by tran∣slating The Conformities of St. Francis, by honest Batholomew of Pisa; and when that's answered, I'll write the Life of Pope Alex∣ander the Sixth, with a Discourse at the end, of the Continency of the R. Clergy; and then a Discourse of the Church-Govern∣ment
under Donna Olympia, in which I shall make out, that the Worship or Ado∣ration paid to her Brother-in-law, Pope Innocent the Tenth, was somewhat more than Saint-servitude. Thus, Sir, (beseeching you, in the Name of God, and for the sake of common Chri∣stianity, to propagate no more this Do∣ctrine and this Practice, so grievous and afflicting to the Reformed World; and which makes our Holy Religion the Scorn and Scandal of all Jews, Turks, and Infidels) I remain Your humble Servant.
AN ACCOUNT OF THE Life and Death OF THE Blessed Virgin. ALL the Service that is paid to the Blessed Vir∣gin, is founded (as they love to speak) upon the greatnesses of Mary, i. e. upon the glo∣rious Privileges she received from God in her Conception, Birth, Life, Death, Resurrection, and pre∣tended Assumption: Of these her Greatnesses we find no mention at all in Holy Scripture, and I am persuaded there is some mystery and secret reason of Divine Pro∣vidence in the silence of the Evangelists, who tell us no∣thing of the Birth, the Life or death of the Mother of Jesus Christ, she appears but in four or five passages of the Gospel, from the birth of our Saviour; and even some of them are such, as make not much for her great∣ness.
Such, for example, is that which happened at the Marriage in Cana of Galilee, where undertaking to in∣form our Lord there was no more Wine left to entertain the Guests, she receiv'd an Answer, to our thinking, very hard: Woman, what have I to do with thee? mine hour is not yet come. And like to this is that other passage of the Gospel, where she stood without with his Brethren, with purpose he should come and speak with her. But to those who brought the Message, he returned this An∣swer, Who is my Mother, and who are my Brethren? and went not, that we know of. This does not very well agree with that profound Respect, and reverend manner of Deportment, with which (they say) he treats her now in Heaven. This silence of the Evangelists, proceeds, unquestionably, from the same reason, for which it pleased God to conceal the Body of Moses heretofore; to wit, that the Israeletes might not find it out, and make an Idol of it. So God was pleased the Evangelists should say no more of her, than was necessary to teach us the Mystery of the Incarnation; that Men might not (with any shew of reason) Father on his word, those horrible Superstitions which he foresaw and knew Papism and false Devotion, would one day introduce into the World. But the Evangelists have got nothing by this their Si∣lence of the Birth, the Life and Death of Mary. We know them very well without their help. We have divined and discovered all. God knows how, indeed, but so it is, we have a compleat History of the whole. 'Tis true, it is so fabulous, and in some places so shame∣less, that even the Legends of Latona, Mother of Apollo and Diana, or of Rhea, called the Mother of the Gods, cannot possibly be more. In the design of making her a Goddess, and allotting her a Worship, very near to that
we pay to Jesus Christ, there is nothing great and consi∣derable in the Birth and Death of our Lord, the Son, that Papism has forgot to imitate and attribute to the Mother, excepting that they have not dared, as yet, to say, She was conceived of the Holy Ghost. Let us there∣fore see a short Abridgment of this Legend, which the Greeks (who were always notable Men at Invention) first began, and to which the Latins (scorning to stay behind) put the finishing hand. First then, we have happily learn'd, (but you must not ask me how, or from whom,) that the Father of the Blessed Virgin's Name was Joachim, who was of the Royal Line, her Mothers, Ann. Which Ann had twoBaronius in apparatu An∣nal. Sisters, the one called Mary, and the other Soba, all three Daughters of Matan the Priest; for it was neces∣sary that the Royal and the Priestly Line should concen∣ter and meet in her, who was to bring forth him, who is our Priest and King. From Epiphanius's time, JoachimHaeres. 78. 79. and Ann, have gone for the Father and Mother of the Blessed Virgin: But Revelation (like a Snow-ball) still goes on encreasing, and we have found, since John Da∣mascene'sJ. Damascen. 1. 14. de Or∣thod. fide. cap. 15. time, who lived in the Eighth Century, that this Joachim was the Son of one Barpanther, who was the Son of Panther. 'Tis true, these Names are not usually found among the Jewish Genealogies, nor are of Hebrew extract; but what was that to John Damascene, who neither understood a word of Hebrew, nor thought himself oblig'd to such exactness? We are also told, toNiceph. lib. 2. cap. 3. whom the Sisters of this Ann were married, and also what Children they had. Mary, the Eldest, was mar∣ried in the Town of Rethlehem, and was the Mother of Salone the Midwife. Soba, that was the second Sister was the Mother of Elizabeth the Mother of John Baptist, and Cousin German to the Virgin Mary.
Ann, the Wife of Joachim, that was to be the Mother of the Mother of the Saviour of the World (the Mother, I say, of her that was to be called our Goddess, our Re∣deemeress, our Comfortress, (for strange things, you know, must have strange Names) our Advocate, our Refuge, the Salvation of Christians, the Perfection of the Divinity & Trinity) received all manner of Tokens of the future Greatness of the Child she was to bring into the World. She was Barren many years after her Marriage, & because they could not find in whom the fault lay, they were both of them cruelly asham'd; and the High Priest Isachar rejected the Offerings of Joachim, as of a dry and cursed Tree, saying to him with Indignation, Cursed is every one that begetteth not a Male Child in Israel. Baro∣nius (that understood these things too well, not to knowPseudo-Hie∣ronym. ad He∣liod. & Chro∣mat. that no such Man as Isachar was at that time High Priest, and that they did not use to reject the Offerings of such Men as had barren Wives,) durst not adopt this passage of the story, although he does the rest. But till his time, none ever dar'd to call this History into question, but it went for certain an undoubted truth, upon the pretended Authority of St. Jerome. They add farther∣more, that Joachim, covered with confusion for the affront the High Priest had offered him, resolved never to go home again; and that Ann, depriv'd of the com∣fort of her Husband, betook herself to her Prayer, that God would please to send him back, and to take away this her reproach. And hereupon it was, that Bernardin deMariate Part 2. Ser. 3. Pel∣bart. de Te∣meswar. in Stellario l. 1. part. 1. c. 11. Bustis made that pious and ingenious Application of the words of Moses, to Joachim, and Ann. In the beginning God made Heaven and Earth: By Heaven (says he) we must understand the Virgin Mary, the Lady of the World. And God said, Let there be Light: That is (says he) Let Mary be begotten, and be born. Poor
Joachim, overwhelm'd with grief, went and hid him∣self in the Wilderness, where continuing forty days in Prayer and Fasting, an Angel at last appeared to him, and promis'd him the Birth of Mary, giving him this for a Token, that in going home, he should meet his Wife at a certain Gate of Jerusalem, called the Gilded Gate. Ann at the same time pouring forth her Prayers and Tears, was got into the Holy of Holies, to get as near as she could to the Throne of God. Indeed, no Woman yet had enter'd into that Sacred Place, and even among Men, it was the privilege of the High Priest alone to do it, and that but once a Year, on the great Feast of Pro∣pitiations. But what might not shee do, who was to be the Mother of the Virgin? And who should have dar'd to shut the door against her? Hither then the Angel came, and declar'd to her the Birth of Mary, and order'd her to go and meet her Husband in such a place: It was the Angel Gabriel that perform'd this Office, as Bernar∣din de Bustis, and Batholomew of Pisa, Authors of sovereign and unquestionable Authority, both assure us: Who add moreover, That he received this Commission of God with Joy incredible; and that returning into Hea∣ven, the whole Quire of Angels set themselves to Dance and Sing for Joy, having learned of him the approaching Birth of Mary, who was to be their Queen. Hitherto the Virgin, and our Lord, are on the square, each of their Births annunciated by an Angel. Her Conception, in the next place, was alike Miraculous; for, (besides that Joachim and Ann, were both of them past the age of having Children) it was Immaculate, i. e. Mary also, as well as Jesus, was Conceived with∣out Original Sin. The Church knew nothing of this Mystery, for Eleven or Twelve hundred Years, when certain lazy Canons of Lyons set themselves to invent
this Fancy, whom St. Bernard labour'd to Confound,Ep. 174. ad Can. Lugd. but without any great success. The devotion to the Virgin daily increasing, it was found very convenient She should be exempted from the Law, common to all the Children of Adam. 'Tis true indeed, that all the Fathers, St. Augustine, Ambrose, Chrysostome, Remigius, and the rest, were of another opinion, as Melchior Ca∣nus, the Learned Bishop of the Canaries, proves, from their Citations: But we are to appeal, it seems, from them, as incompetent Judges in this Case, though their Authority be very good in any other. The Jesuite Sal∣meron,In Eq. ad Ro∣man. cap. 5. . Disput. 51. does all he can, to Invalidate their Testimony and Authority. He says, That Proofs drawn from Au∣thority, are not altogether sure: That the greatest part of Fathers, cited against the Immaculate Conception, deserve not to be heard; and that, at last however, God had not revealed all things to all Men: That the Fathers were Ignorant of this great truth, the revela∣tion of which was reserved for these latter Ages of the World. This is no place to give you an account of the terri∣ble Bickerings there have been, upon this score, for many Ages, and even in this of ours, between the Jacobins, and Cordeliers, i. e. Dominicans, and Fran∣ciscans. The former maintaining, with Thomas Aqui∣nas, that the Virgin was conceived in Original Sin: The latter, with Scotus, that She was conceived with∣out. And although the Popes have never formally and in express words, decreed it to be an Article of Faith, yet they have defined it as a Truth, which no Man can oppose without great Rashness. And it has been for∣bid to the Dominicans, to Preach, deliver their Opini∣on, or Teach in publick or private, directly or indirect∣ly, any thing against the Immaculate Conception of
the Virgin, since which the worship of Her has exceed∣ingly encreased; every Body almost hath chosen Her for their Patroness, and whole Kingdoms have put themselves into Her Protection. Nor is this a place to refute this Extravagance in, al∣though it very well deserves to be refuted, since it smells strongly of Profaneness, in that it deprives our Saviour of the Honour and Advantage of having been the only One that was Conceived without Sin; and of being the Redeemer of the World without Exception. For if the Blessed Virgin was without both Actual, and Original Sin, I do not see how She stood in need of either Remission, or Redemption, and She contributed nothing to Her self, or to Her own Salvation, by bring¦ing Jesus Christ into the World. We must not here forget, that Papism, agreable to the spirit of Error by which it stands, has not failed to heap Fable upon Fable, and to establish this Immacu∣late Conception, by many a lying Miracle, and many a false Vision. Saint Briget has defin'd this Contro∣versie many a time and oft, and the Virgin Mother has revealed it to her frequently, that She was Conceived without Original Sin, and many Miracles have been wrought to that purpose. But that which is as pretty, is, that the Dominicans have also had their Saint and5 Book. Rev. the 13. and Book 6. cap. 49. Tom. 2. O∣pusc. Tract. 31. c. 5. Prophetess, to maintain She was conceived in Origi∣nal Sin, and that was Catharine of Siena, whose Reve∣lation is upheld by Cardinal Cajetan, as much more Creditable than that of Briget; for that Catharine had been Canonized in due and formal manner, when there was a lawful Pope, and so acknowledged over all the World, whereas Briget was Canoniz'd by Benet the IX.Pius the II. in a time of Schism, when no body kn who was the true Pope, or whether there was any such at all.
The Dominicans not contented with St. Catharine's Revelation, would also have some Miracles to establish their Opinion on; and I believe there are few in the1507. World, that have not heard of the famous History of the Dominicans of Bearn, (and here in England, by the name of the History of Jetser) who took upon them to prove by Miracles, the Conception of the Virgin, to have been in Sin, against the Cordeliers. Four of these Men, undertook to deceive and cheat a wretched simple Novice of their Convent; and one of them ap∣peared to him like a Spirit, telling him, that the Order of Dominicans was most unjustly hated, because it taught after St. Thomas, that the Virgin Mary was Conceived in Original Sin: but that their Enemies the Franciscans, were sufficiently tormented in Purgatory, and especially among the rest, Alexander of Hales, and John Duns Scotus, for teaching the contrary: The Virgin Mary her self in like manner appeared to him, (that is to say, a Fryar in her Habit) and Imprinted on his Right Hand (by way of Vision) one of the Wounds of our Lord, her Son, which the Monk (without a Vision) did really and indeed feel, to his very great pain; and very well he might, for the Virgin-Monk had pierced his Hand through with a great Nail. But in wounding him She gave him some Lint, and Rags made of our Saviours Swadling-bands whilst they abode in Egypt, and assured him from her own self, that She was Born in Original Sin. But the Monks, not satisfied with this, gave to our young Novice, (who was indeed a very stupid Block-head) a mighty strong sleeping Potion, which deprived him of all manner of Sense, and Understand∣ing, and in this Fit, imprinted other four Wounds up∣on his Feet, his Hand and Side, with Aqua Fortis, to imitate the Wounds of our Saviour, and the Marks of
St. Francis. Being come to himself, they made him believe, he had been in an Extasie, during which the Blessed Spirit had imprinted on him these four new Wounds. They gave him also very frequently strange Drinks to make him Foam, and struggle against Death, as Jesus Christ had done before him. Hitherto the poor Wretch had never doubted of the truth of all this, but believed in good earnest, that he had had true Visions from Heaven, and Apparitions of the Virgin. But now at last, began to suspect there must be some En∣chantments, Witchcraft, and Illusion in the case; and therefore (after he had been thus Martyr'd several Months) makes his escape from the Convent, to the Magistrates, where he discovered all the Mystery. Langius a Monk, in his Chronicle, in the Year 1509. adds, That they made an Image of the Virgin, and fill'd the Head of it with some red Liquor, which distil∣ling from the Eyes, She was reputed thereby to weep Blood. They coloured also an Host with Vermilion, and Flesh-colour, as though it had been turned into Flesh; and all this to persuade the World, their Doctrine of the Conception, was true. Four of the Dominicans were hereupon seised, Francis Vulchi, that counterfeited the Spirit; Stephen Boltzhorst Preacher, whose Office was to vent these Visions in the Pulpit, with J. Vetter, Prior of the House, and H. Stenieker, Receiver; who were all Burnt over against the Convent, in the Year aforesaid. This Story did not serve a little, towards the disabusing of the Switzers, some time after, when they reform'd themselves, in matters of Religion. The Monks, to whom Heaven, in these latter days, revealed the notable Circumstance of the Immaculate Conception, have also, by the same Spirit of Revela∣tion, learnt the very day when it was. It was on the
eighth of December, and She was brought forth theHer Birth. eighth of September following; this we know, because we know what Age the Virgin was of when She lay Inn of our Saviour: And knowing precisely the Year of our Lord, we know also the Year of his Mothers Birth. Not that the Gospel says a letter of her Age, but that's all one. We have found it in NicephorusLib. 2. c. 2. ex Enodo Antiochedo. Callistus, an Author that may compare with any Legen∣dary in the World, and who, by consequence, shall have as much Credit as a true Evangelist. We have found, I say, in this Historian, that the Virgin was just Fifteen, when She brought forth Jesus Christ. She was Born at Jerusalem, in Joachims own House, that stood pretty near to the Pool of Bethesda, of which St. John, in the 5th. of his Gospel makes mention. For so says our old Friend, J. Damascen, who was SaintedL. 4. c. 5. de Orth. fide & Orat. 1. de Nat. Virg. for having been a Martyr for the Worship of the Vir∣gins Images. Others (and Tostatus for one, on Mat. 2.) say, She was Born at Nazareth, or Seppharo, Three Leagues from thence; but where ever it was, it is cer∣tain, that the whole Universe was moved at it: The Angels (as they did some time after for the Son) De∣scended in Troops from Heaven, chanting out Hymns, and most Melodious Songs, in honour of the Spouse of their Eternal King. The little holy Maid her self, (ha∣ving the use of her Reason as soon as She was Born) found also mighty Consolation, and exceeding great Pleasure in it. And, which is a greater Wonder yet,Pelbart Stel∣larium lib. 5. part. 1. art. 3. this Heavenly Melody is every Year repeated, on the same day. And by this Musick, the day of her Birth, which had long been undiscovered, came to be reveal∣ed, to a very Contemplative Saint, who had heard this Musick every 8th. of September, and wondered what the matter was; (as a Wiser Man than he, might very
well do) and therefore on a time, in one of his Rap∣ture Fits, begged of God, that he would reveal this matter to him; and was answered, that on this day, the Glorious Virgin was Born; and thus has the Mother gotten the start of her Son. She was even with him, in having Armies of Coelestial Spirits to celebrate the day of her Birth; but this yearly Repetition of the Angels Harmony, has given Her the advantage: For I don't know any Book that says, they do as much for Jesus Christ. It may be, some Devoto of the Virgin, jealous of the glory of his Queen, may find something less in the Birth of Mary, than in that of Jesus Christ, because he hears of no new Star, that accompanied her Birth, as one did his. But this only serves to betray his want of reading; for had he seen but one Theophilus, a cer∣tain Historian (of whose Age and Authority, it would be to no purpose to inquire, for no body can give you an account, but however of very good Credit in this Case); he could have told him, that on the Birth-day of the Virgin, the Light of the Sun was doubled; that the Moon received such an augmentation of Light, that she seem'd almost to equalize the Sun, so that the little Cloud that is wont to obscure her, disappeared on the night of this Nativity; and round her Globe shone (as it were) a great Star, of an extraordinary Fire, and Lustre. I think, this was another kind of Star, than that which appeared to the Wise Men in the East, which seemed to be but a pittiful flying Meteor in the Air, in comparison with this. An Angel gave the Name of Jesus before the Child was born, and an Angel did as much for Her, and the name of Mary was of Heavens choyce; and it was also Mystical as well as that of
Jesus, for Mary, or Miriam, in the Hebrew, signifies the Star of the Sea. Not that any Jew, or Rabbi, how pro∣found soever, ever understood this Etymology, but that it was revealed to our Legendaries so to signifie; that by vertue of it, she might succeed to Venus, who was the Morning Star before, and President of the Sea, ha∣ving a kind of right thereto, by Her extraction from the Froth of it: For, as Salmeron the Jesuite says, asTome 3. Tract. 4. the Star that is called Hesperus, and Lucifer, directs and conducts the Sailers to the Port, so the Mother of Mes∣siah succours us in all our Dangers, that we may arrive at the Port of the Grace of God, and Life Eternal. Common Seamen have another kind of opinion of her Power, in respect of Ports and Havens, in this World too. After the Birth, next comes her Education in herNiceph. l. 1. cap. 7. Damasc. ubi supra. Cermanes Const. in En∣comio B. Vir∣ginis. tenderest years, the Scriptures say nothing of this nei∣ther, but we have lost nothing by that, for we learn elsewhere. That Ann, to obtain her of God, had, as Hannah heretofore had done for Saemuel, vowed her to his Service: And that when she was weaned and three Years old, she was presented to the High Priest, who received her as a precious Jewel, and Lodged her in the Sanctum Sanctorum, where before stood the Ark of the Covenant, and where he himself alone had right to enter, once a Year. Zachary, the Father of St. John Baptist, was (it seems) High Priest, and made no such unnecessary Scruple as these, How should I intro∣duce a little Girl, into a place where I my self can en∣ter in but once a year? How can I, in the most sacred and august Partition of the Temple, bring in a Bed, a Nurse, and little Child, with all that's necessary in such a case? And what shall become of all the Impu∣rities inseparable from the Infant Age? But being a
Prophet, and knowing the Mystery of all, he received her without any stickling. Thither she was brought accompanied with troops of Virgins with flaming Tor∣ches in their hands, and there was brought up for eleven years, the Angels all the while supplying her with nourishment. After eleven years, the Priests assembled to consult what they should do with this di∣vine Virgin, and at last concluded, to commit her to the Guardianship of St. Joseph, of whose vertue and con∣tinence they were very well assured. 11 and 3 make 14, and at 14 she was affianc'd to Joseph; 3 months after, the Angel came with the Salutation, she conceived of the Holy Ghost, and was brought to bed at 15. An unbelieving Jew, would make a great many odd exceptions to this History, he would say it was a thing unheard of in the Mystery of Religion, to introduce, to feed and bring up a Girl in the Holy of Holies, where ordinary Priests themselves durst never enter. He would tell us that Women, were they never so pure, were never admitted into the Temple beyond the place called the Womens Court. He would say, it was very strange the Rabbins and ancient Doctors should mention no such thing as this, either to recount or refute it. He would add moreover, that in the Catalogue of High Priests, he could find no such Man as Zachary, the Father of John Baptist. Indeed, these difficulties have put our Catho∣lickCosterus Me∣dit. 3. de prae∣sent. Virg. Doctors to no small trouble; and now they rather chuse to say, that round the Sanctuary there were little Chambers, where Recluses and Religious Maids were bred up, and worked for the Temple, to whose care the Education of little Mary was intrusted: But our old devout Gentlemen heretofore, never concernod them∣selves with any Scruples or Objections of Unbelievers, but in great simplicity swallowed all for truth, upon the
word and authority of Saints, such as J. Damascn Cano∣nized, and consequently made Infallible, at least by the tacit consent of the Church. And who can forbear belie∣ving a History that has gotten some twelve hundred years upon his head? For Gregory Nyssen reports this: AndIn Natalib. Chr. tom. 3. though he reports it only as an Apocryphal History, yet the Church has since made it as good as Canonical, by an universal Belief of it. The Blessed Virgin consented to live with Joseph, in shew of Marriage, but in effect, in pure Virginity, for she told him secretly, that she had made a Vow of Cha∣stity, and withal advis'd him to do so too. But notwith∣standing her Vow, which seem'd to determine her ne∣ver to become a Mother, she quickly after became so, by the operation of the Holy Ghost. And here, the Doctors are in great trouble to know, of what it was, that the Virgin conceived, and formed the Saviour of the World. Some believe the Holy Ghost took three drops of her Heart-blood, and disposed them in their place, to make the Body of our Lord. Salmeron, thoughTome 3. tract. 9. he reject this Opinion, yet allows it to be a devout reli∣gious Contemplation. But he himself is of another mind, which I cannot give you in his terms, no more than I can the Opinions of other Authors upon this Occasion, because they search into the Mysteries of Generation so profoundly and exactly, and examin them in such a gross and naked manner, that even the chastest and most deli∣cate Translation of their Latin into English, would not fail to wound (or at least disorder) our Imagination. It would be worse yet, if I should recite any thing out of a Book, that was current in the last Age, (and it may be, is in being now) intituled Proto Evangelium, sive de Natalibus Christi, & ipsius Matris V. Mariae, and Fathered on St. James. Here we may find enough to make the
most shameless Prostitutes to blush; upon occasion of one Salome a Midwife, who would not believe a Virgin had brought forth, but would needs be as curious in her way, as St. Thomas, doubting of the Resurrecti∣on, was afterwards, in his. One William Postell, in the preceeding Age, made the discovery of this Horrible Gospel, God knows whence. But is it not a pretty ready way, to bring the True and Sacred Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ into contempt? I will pass over all the impertinent tales with which they charge the Life of the Blessed Virgin. The care she took to keep the Fore-skin of our Lord, at his Cir∣cumcision. The pains she was at to gather all the Blood and Water that fell from his hands, and feet, and side, upon the Cross; and in particular, the care she had to keep the Nails that fastened him thereto. I will pass over all this (I say) and a hundred such like things, to come to the last and greatest action of all, her Assump∣tion into Heaven, because it is one of the principal Stories on which the Worship of the Blessed Virgin is establish'd. Thus then the Gentlemen report the matter. The Blessed Virgin lived upon the Earth after herPelbart, who lived in the Year 1471. and dedicated his Book to Pope Sixt. IV. Son, till she was Fifty Eight years old, as some say; Sixty Three, as others; and others, more by a great deal. At last she Prayed very earnestly to her Son, that she might depart from this place of Pilgrimage on Earth, and be gathered unto him; who thereupon sent an Angel to her, promising that within three days he would take her to himself. Together with this News, the Angel delivered her a branch of Palm that he brought from Pa∣radise, and told her, she must have it carried before her Bier to her Interment; he gave her also a Suit of Mourn∣ing which her Son had sent her. Of this Angel she de∣manded two things; first, that she might be buried by
all the Apostles. Secondly, that when her Soul depar∣ted from her Body, it might meet with none of the Devils, or Malign Spirits. Upon which last demand, the Angel said unto her, Madam, why are you afraid to meet the Devil, whose Head it is that you have bruised? However what you ask, you shall have: You shall meet with no Devils, and the Noble Apostles shall Inter you. Upon this the Angel re-ascended into Heaven, environ'd with a great Light. And suddenly the branch of Palm that he had brought, and left in the Virgins hand, became exceeding bright, of a lively shining Green, and every leaf thereof as glorious as the Morning Star. To free you from all manner of doubt in this matter, St. Cosmus Vestitor (from whom honest Pelbert says he took this History,) tells us, he saw himself a little piece of this Branch, which retained to his days, a lustre, equal to a very bright Star. The Virgin, full of Joy at this good news, assembled all the Virgins and Saints together, and gave them to understand her Death was now at hand, comforting them thereupon. At the same time was St. John the Apostle Preaching at Ephesus, and in the middle of his Sermon, comes me a clap of Thunder, and a white Cloud, that whisk'd him through the Air, and set him down at the Door of the Virgin Maries House; where being en∣ter'd, he and the Virgin embrac'd each other, with abundance of Tears, and Mary recommended to his care, her Burial. At which words, the good Apostle threw himself down upon the Earth, and with a great deal of passion cry'd out and said, Alas! My God, My God, Why dost thou lay this sore affliction upon us, to take away this Holy Mistress of our Religion, the Mirror of Sanctity, and our only Consolation? As he was thus lamenting, the Blessed Virgin shew'd him the shining Palm, and the
Mourning Suit her Son had sent her, and order'd him to take great care this Branch were carried before her Bier. St. John desir'd with all his heart, that all the Apostles might accompany him at this Solemn Action, and immediately the Apostles, that were scattered in all the corners of the Earth, were carried through the Air on white Clouds, and set down before the House, where entring in, and meeting with St. John, they were mar∣vellously astonished, but after Salutations, he explained the whole Mystery to them, upon hearing of which, they were overwhelmed with grief, and entering into Maries room, adored her, in the Angels Salutation, saying Ave Maria, gratia plena, &c. to whom the Virgin replied saying, God preserve you, the chosen Disciples of my only Son. After a great deal of homage & adoration paid unto her by the Apostles, she received the Communion, recommended her Spirit to her Son, kneeled down upon the ground, lift up her Soul to God, and disposed herself to give up the ghost. About the third hour of the Night, Jesus himself, with the nine Orders of Angels, the Assembly of Patriarchs, Prophets, Martyrs, Con∣fessors and Virgins, came down from Heaven, and stood about her Bed, the whole Coelestial Army singing Songs and admirable Hymns to the honour of Mary, Jesus himself beginning, and saying, Come my chosen, come, and I will place Thee on my Throne. To whom the Vir∣gin answered, Lo, I come, as it is written in the Volume of the Book, that I should do thy will, O my God; and the reupon render'd up her Soul into the hands of her Son, who bore it away with him to Heaven. When the Soul was gone, the Body made shift of itself to say, I I give thee thanks, O Lord, for that I am thy glory; remem- Me, because I am the work of thy hands, and have kept what you committed to my charge; upon which the Body be∣came
so luminous, that the Maids who were preparing it for Burial, and could touch it very well before, could not so much as look upon it. Now when all things were ready, and the body to be taken up, the Apostles made abundance of Complements and Ceremonies, offe∣ring the Places of Honour to one another round, with great civility; but at last it was agreed, that Peter and Paul should carry the Corps, John should go before with the Palm, and the rest of the Apostles should fol∣in couples. As they were going forward, Jesus Christ march'd over them, with all his Angels, covered in a Cloud, and joyning Voices with the College of Apostles, they made an admirable Consort; and at the same time, a most sweet and fragrant Odour was spread through all the Region of the Air, on all hands. The Jews at this sight, being fill'd with rage and ma∣lice, thought this a very fair opportunity to rid their hands at once, of all the Apostles of Jesus Christ, there met together; and gathering together, the High Priest himself advances first, and most profanely lays his two hands upon the Bier, to stop them; when lo! imme∣diately they both withered, and were torn of at the elbows, and there hung on each side of the Corps, whilst the rest that followed him, were struck with blindness. The miserable High Priest made a lamentable howling for the loss of his hands, and for extreme anguish that he felt. But Peter told him honestly, there was no way to save himself, but by kissing the Bier where the Body of Mary lay, and making Profession of the Christian Faith, which he quickly did, and both his hands were imme∣diately fastened on again. A little after, Peter gave him one of the Dates that grew on the Branch of Palm, to rubb his Followers eyes with, who thereupon reco∣vered their sight. And now, without any further mo∣lestation,
they were come to the Vale of Jehosophat, where they found a Sepulchre hewn out of a Rock, and altogether like that of Jesus Christ; there they laid the Body of the Virgin, and continued three days in their Devotions at her Tomb. At the end of which, a bright Cloud shone all about the Sepulchre, the Voices of Angels ecchoed out from every quarter, a sweet smel∣ling Savour was spread throughout the Air, and all the World was seiz'd with ravishing astonishment. Jesus descended with his Angels, and having saluted his Apostles, said unto them, What Glory, and what Honour, think you, ought I to bestow upon my Mother? To which, with one consent, they answered, It seemeth just unto thy Servants, O Lord, that as Thou hast vanquished Death, and reignest from Generation to Generation, so also Thou shouldst raise the Body of thy Mother, and set her at thy right hand for evermore. The Soul of Mary presently appeared, and our Lord said to it, Arise my well beloved, the Tabernacle of Glory, thou art fair, my dear beloved, and there is no blemish in thee; as thou hast no spot, so shall thy Body never see corruption. And thus were things carried, according to the report of Pelbart of Temeswar, a grave Author, whom Father Crasset, a Jesuit, hath very lately cited abundance of1 Part. tr. 1. quaest. 13. pag. 103. times, (in his Book of True Devotion to the Virgin, Prin∣ted in 1679.) as worthy throughly to be believed; and Pelbart himself tells us, he had them from the Writings of St. Cosmus Vestitor Othersreport these matters a little otherwise, in the business of the Virgins Tomb, which (they say) stood open three days, by reason St. Thomas was absent, who earnestly desir'd (it would not be very fair to ask of whom he desir'd this, or how he came to know she was dead, but desire he did,) the Consolation of seeing the Body of Mary, which yet was not granted
him, for he came, and found the Sepulchre was empty, and in the midst of it, a Spring of Manna boyling up. O God! what face is this, to forge so silly a Romance, for which there is not in good History, the least foundati∣on? For in a word, in all this Rapsody, there's not a sylla∣ble of Truth: And yet this is the bottom of the Worship and Adoration paid to the Blessed Virgin, and of the Feast of her Assumption. 'Tis not my business to confute this Story of the Assumption, here; let it suffice, at present, that I adver∣tise you, it was unknown to all the Ancients for the first four Centuries. That passage in the Chronicle of Eusebius, is acknowledg'd by Men of Understanding, to be false and spurious; as likewise are the Pieces attribu∣ted to St. Austin and St. Jerom; together with the false Dionysius, who wrote between Four and Five Hun∣dred, at the soonest. In a word, the Men of sense and honesty, even among the Romanists, do at this day look upon the Assumption, as an idle business, but I must not tell the People so. The Church of Paris seems to have declar'd openly against it; for by an Ordinance of the Cathedral Chapter of Nostre Dame, the First of August 1668, it was decreed, that such a certain long Sermon, or Homily, that had been read in the Quire the first Canonical hour, for many years last past, on the Fifteenth of August, the Feast of the Assumption, every year, should be read no more. (This Sermon, you must know, established the Assumption both of Body and Soul, and was added by I can't tell who, from the Year 1549. or 1550.) and that henceforwards should be read, what was usually read out of the Martyrology, taken from Ʋswardus.
Now the passage in Ʋswardus, which the Chap∣terWho lived in the 9th. Cent. and Bishop of Paris, ordered to be restored to its place, has these words: The Sleep or Death of Mary, the holy Mother of God. Although her Sacred Body is not found on Earth, yet the Church, who is a pious Mother, celebrates her blessed Memory, not doubting in the least, but that She died according to the con∣dition of all Mankind. But the Church being deli∣berate in her Judgments, hath rather chosen to own she knows not where this Sacred Temple of the Holy Ghost is hidden by the Providence of God, than teach any thing herein either Vain or Apocryphal. These were the words, that were taken from the Service of the Feast of the Assumption, to thrust in a certain Ser∣mon that taught just contrary; saying, the Church look'd upon the Assumption of the Blessed Virgins body and soul into Heaven, as a thing very sure and certain. Claudius Joly, Canon of the Church, and one of theC. Joly de verbis Usuar∣di dissertatio. J. Launoii de controver∣sia super ex∣cribendo Martyrolo∣gio. Commissaries, deputed to Examine this Affair, hath made a Dissertation thereupon. And the Learned Mon∣sieur de Launoy, has given his Judgment on the same Subject, in whose works one may find enough to con∣found this Story of the Assumption, and answer Baronius and the rest, who look upon it as a point of Faith, or at least a Sacred History, that no body must touch, or offer once to disbelieve. What we have hitherto seen of the History of the Blessed Virgin, and on which the Worship that is paid to Her is founded, is but a little part of the Chronicle of the Mother of God. She has done more Miracles since her Death, than Jesus Christ and all his Apostles did in all their Lives, in all the World; and we have huge great Volumes of them, some of which I cannot forbear giving you for a taste, because the Worship of
the Blessed Virgin is exceedingly Built, and Established on them, and because they are at this day thought the efficacious and powerful Arguments to defend their Su∣perstition. And F. Crasset, Jesuit of repute, thought so to be sure, when in Answer to the Author of Sober advice to the Indiscreet Devotos of the Virgin—He makes this Use of them. In the number of these Fables, I put the establish∣ment of Places of Devotion, where the Virgin is parti∣cularly Worshipped, where She works great Miracles, and whither Her Devotos go on Pilgrimage; the repu∣tation I say of these Places, and their Holiness, is found∣ed on such Fables, as I verily believe Pagans would blush to own. Such, for Example, is that on which is founded the famous Worship of our Lady of Mount Serrat. We are told, the first Count of Barcelona had an exceeding handsome Daughter, but possessed with a Devil, whom the Count one day carried to a holy Man in the Neighbourhood, call'd Frier John Guerin, to the end he should exorcise the Devil, and deliver his Daughter: He did so, and for fear the Devil should re∣turn again into her, he advised the Count to leave her there some little time in his keeping; to which the Count consented, and accordingly left her. Frier John being alone with this handsome young Lady, (and not being able to quell his own Devil) became enamoured of her; and in short, Ravilh'd her first, and after∣wards Kill'd her, at the instigation of a Devil disguised like a Hermite. After this, being guilty of these de∣testable Crimes, away he goes to Rome, there confesses himself to the Pope, who ordered him for Penance, to return to Mount Serrat upon all four, like a Beast as he was; and not to speak a word, nor offer to get up up∣on his Legs, till a Child about three Months old should
bid him rise, and tell him God had pardoned his of∣fence. Seven years after this, the Count of Barcelona was a Hunting, when some of his Men found out this Friet in a Den, all over hairy like a Bear, whom they took and Chained, and brought away with them to the Castle of Barcelona, where he was tied up in a Sta∣ble like a Monster. The Count a little after made a great Feast, and to divert his Company, or∣dered the Monster to be brought forth; whom as soon as the Earl's Child saw, that was there in its Nurses Arms, it said distinctly these words: Rise up upon thy Feet, Frier John Guerin, for God hath pardoned thy Of∣fence. And immediately the Frier came to himself, be∣gan to speak, and tell the whole Story. Upon which the Count told him, that since God had pardoned him, he could do no less. But however, he desired to know where he had buried his Daughter, that he might take up her Bones, and bury them in his Fathers Sepulchre. The good Frier conducted the Count's Servants to the place where he had Interr'd the Lady, and opening the Ground, they found her (Would you think it?) alive and well, as fresh, and as handsome as ever, excep∣ting a little kind of streak like a Scarlet Thread, about her Neck, in the place where he had cut. The Maid spoke, and told them she owed her Life to the Blessed Virgin, to whom she had been Consecrated, and who preserved her (and indeed it was so) Miraculously. There they built a Convent, of which this young Lady was the Abbess, and Frier J. Guerin, the Confessor, Near to this place, in a certain Grotto, was found anFerreolus Locrius lib. 4. c. 25. Mariae Augustae. Image of the Blessed Virgin, exceeding bright and lu∣minous, and perfumed with excellent Sweets, which was discovered by Angels Melody, that were worship ping it in the Cave; this Image, they that found it,
were for carrying away, but when they came as far as the place where the Lady had been buried, it grew so hea∣vy on their Hands, that they were glad to leave it there with all their Hearts. There they built a Chappel over it, although it was a very desert place, and mighty incon∣venient for the Pilgrims resorting thither; and this is the rise of that famous Chappel, where so many Mi∣racles and famous Things have been done. The Devotion of our Lady of Liesse, is founded on a Tale, no less ridiculous than the former, though it be something less horrible. We are told, that a certain Prin∣cess, Daughter to the Soldan of Egypt, in the time of the Holy Wars, (the Original of all Romances) came to visit three Gentlemen of Picardy, that were Prisoners at Grand Cairo, and demanded of them the Picture of the Blessed Virgin. Not a Man of them understood a bit of Painting, but however one of them promised her Highness what she required; but being put very hard to fulfil it, the Virgin delivered them from their Con∣cern, by giving them her Picture from Heaven her self. The Princess upon this, found means to break their Prison, and escape with them, and passing an arm of the Sea, they laid them down to sleep in a Wood, and waking in the Morning, found themselves in Picardy by a Fountain, where they built the Church of our Lady of Liesse. But of this kind, there is nothing in the World more Renowned, and at the same time more Absurd, than the History of the famous Chamber of our Lady of Lo∣retto. This is the very Chamber of the House of Joa∣chim and Ann, in the City of Nazareth in Galilee, in which the Virgin Mary was Born. (Our Legendaries should consult with one another, sometimes, for before we heard She was Born in Jerusalem, with a great deal
of Punctuality.) In this Chamber She received the Salutation of the Angel, in this Conceived the Saviour of the World, and in this bred Him up till He was Twelve Years of Age. The Apostles, after the Death of Jesus Christ, observing carefully what a world of Miracles were wrought in this Chamber, judged it very conve∣nient to build a Chappel there, and Celebrate the My∣steries in it, that is to say, to sing Mass in it; and Saint Luke the Evangelist, who was as good a Painter as Physician, drew with his own hand the Picture of the Virgin, which is there to be seen to this day. This Chappel was frequented with a great deal of Devoti∣on, whilst the Christians staid in Galilee, and especially in the time of the Croisades, or holy Wars, but the Christians being chased away, and the Devotion at this Chamber beginning to cool apace, the Angels took it on the 9th. of May, in the year, 1291. (says Turselin, very exactly) and brought it throught the Air into Dalmatia, distant from Galilee about Six thou∣sand Miles; as those who have cast it up tell us, upon whom let it rest. There the Angels set the Chamber or Chappel down upon a Hill, in view of the Adria∣tick Sea, between two Towns, the one called Tersactum, and the other Flumen. At the first, there was a mighty concourse of devout People, that came upon the fame of this great Miracle, but their Zeal continued not; and the Virgin not finding there, the honour she expected, or∣dered the Angels a second time to take the Room, and passing the Adriatick Sea, to Transport it into Italy, and set it down in the Territory of Recanati, in the midst of a Wood, belonging to a certain Lady (for without a Woman in the case, there can be no great Miracle) called Loretta, that owed the Diocess, or Territory of Recanati; which accordingly they did.
This new Miracle of the second Transportation of the Chamber, rekindled Mens devotion for the Virgin, and there was old flocking to it from all Quarters, but the Situation of the Chappel was an occasion of a great many Robberies and Villanies committed on the poor Pilgrims, by reason that the Woods afforded shelter to the Rogues, who upon all occasions Sallied out upon them, and retir'd into the same securely. The Angels therefore thought it fit, it should be taken from amidst this Wood, and removed a little farther, to a Moun∣tain that belonged to two Brothers; which Brothers in a short time, made a very profitable business of it, by the great resort of Pilgrims, and the rich Presents that were made, but not being able to agree in the division of the Spoil, the Virgin was very angry, and thought they were unworthy of the honour She had done them, and therefore ordered the Angels to transfer it to ano∣ther place; up then they took it the fourth time, and set it in the High-way, where now it stands and works such Miracles. The People of Recanati came to see this Miraculous Room; and finding it set upon the Ground without any manner of Foundation, were greatly afraid it would fall down, and therefore built about it a huge and mighty thick Wall, which stands at this present to be seen. But no body could tell from whence this House came, till a long time after, when the Blessed Virgin appeared in a Dream to a certain Man, an intimate Friend and Servant of Hers, and re∣vealed the whole matter to him, as I have been rela∣ting it. This Man declared the same to a certain Wise and Understanding Person of that Country, who thought it convenient, to depute sixteen Grave and Cre∣ditable Men, to go to Nazareth in Galilee, and take Cognizance of the matter of Fact. Away they went,
taking the Measure of the House at Loretto with them, and came safe to Nazareth, where they found an empty space, where the Virgins House had stood, and nothing left but the Foundations, of which these Sixteen took the Length and Breadth, and finding them to agree most exactly with the Dimensions of Loretto-House, they were sufficiently convinced; but besides, they found an Inscription on the Wall hard by, attesting that such a Church had stood there heretofore, and was Mi∣raculously carried away. And thus this truth was laid open as manifest as the Light, by the Testimony of al∣most a Jury and half of able Ambassadors, and this we find written in the Registers of that House, and hung up in a Table in the Chappel, to be seen by all Co∣mers. This is in effect, an Epitome of Tursellin's greatTursellin's Historiae Laure tanae, lib. 1. History of this House, who amplifies the Matter very curiously. This Jesuit's Book was Printed with Privi∣ledge from Pope Clement the VIII, with the general Approbation of the greatest Doctors at Rome, such as Raynaud, Bovius, Spondanus, and others, who refer us to this Book as a Piece, that is able to ease us of all manner of Doubts, that may rise on this occasi∣on. And will the time then never come, when Men will re∣assume that Shame they have so long renounc'd? How is it possible they can in Earnest, propagate such Im∣pertinences as this? Cui bono, To what end and purpose is it, that a House must jump from place to place thus through the Air? Who does not see that this is an In∣vention ne who is not the Father of Truth, to up∣hold those lamentable Superstitions, of which that Blessed Maid is made the Object? It may be convenient here to observe, that this pre∣tended Transportation is said to have been made, at the
end of the Thirteenth Century, when the Saracens had entirely chased the Christians out of Palestin: And yet St. Antonine, A. B. of Florence, one of the hardiest Re∣lators, and greatest Admirers of Fabulous Miracles, and strange things, that perhaps the World ever had, says not one word of this Matter; and yet he should have known, being an Italian, and living within 150. years of the time assigned for this great Wonder, and one that would have believed it, if he had but once heard on't. Another Saint also of the same Order, (a Dominican) and same Country, to wit, Vincent Ferrier, that lived according to Bellarmin's Account, 1410. or as others say, in 1440. in a Sermon (amongst his Works) on the Feast of the Assumption, says expressly, that our Ladies Chamber is still at Nazareth, and yet according to the History, it had been then in Italy, above 100. years; And was it not possible that great Saint should not know as much? But thus it is, The Fable was at first invented without any Conscience, without any Shame, or indeed, without any Discretion; God so permitting it, for the father evidencing this great Truth, that we might more easily see on what grounds all this kind of Worship is founded. But now for a Sample or two of Miracles. We are not to doubt, but as She is the most Glorious, She is also the most Holy, and by consequence, the humblest of all Women. But Papism has made Her a very pattern of Pride and Ambition, always aiming at Divine Honours; angry with all that pay them not, severely Punishing those that offend Her, and Recom∣pensing amply all that are peculiarly devoted to Her, and working Miracles perpetually, for nothing but to acquire Adoration, and Honour to Her self. To esta∣blish this Adoration, they have made such a Romance
of the Blessed Virgin, that no good sober Heathen would have done the like to his Minerva or Diana, Goddesses of Chastity. For Example. What more could any Servant of Ve∣nus or of Flora, Goddesses of Prostitution, say of their Deities, than has been said of Mary, when they make her marry St. Dominick. This Saint was in a Cavern, where he was doing Penances, alas! for the Albigenses of Tholouse, covered with gore and wounds of his own inflicting. To him the Virgin appeared, accompanied with three Women, each of them being attended with fifty other Women; these were (Oh horror to relate!) this three Person of the Holy Trinity, that made upAlanus redi∣vivus p. 2. c. 3. the Nuptial Equipage and Pomp, when the Virgin was to marry Dominick; and coming to him, Dominick (said she) my Son, my dear Husband, because thou hast valiantly fought against the Enemies of the Faith, lo I am come to succour thee, I, (I say) whom thou so oft has call'd upon. Then the three Queens that accompanied her, lift up St. Dominick from the ground, where he lay half dead, and the Virgin received him into her embra∣ces, kissing him lovingly and tenderly, and withal opened her breasts and let him suck, till he was perfectly reco∣vered. In what a hot and furious imagination was the impudent Monk, think you, when he wrote these hor∣rible things? Came he not reeking from his damn'd de∣bauches, to commit these foul impurities to paper? I appeal to all Persons in the Roman Communion, of pious Minds and chast Thoughts, nay, to all the Ado∣rers of the Blessed Virgin, that have any sense of Vertue, any touch of shame, to all such I appeal for my just indignation against this. Alanus de Rupibus, (for he it is that reports these things, and that writes of the like abominable intercourse betwixt the Virgin
and himself says, he was usually tempted of the Devil, once in every seven years, and in one of these fits, he had like to have cut his own Throat forIdem ibid. part 2. c. 4. despair; but at Mid-night the Virgin came into his Cell, and after a great deal of discourse, drew out her Breasts, and milk'd them on the wounds the Devil had made, and cured them perfectly. Afterwards she married her Servant in the presence of Jesus Christ, and a great many Saints there present, giving him her Vir∣gin Ring, made of her Virgin-hair. After this, she put about his neck a Chain or String, made likewise of her hair, with a hundred and fifty Precious-stones, ac∣cording to the number of Beads in the Virgins Psalter or Chaplet. After, she gave him a sweet Kiss, and let him suck her Virgin-Breasts, which he doing very greedily, seemed to have all his Body bedewed with a sweet Li∣quor; and this favour, he says, she afforded him fre∣quently. Another Story tells us, that one Eustochium a Religious Nun, having begg'd of the Virgin to see the Child Jesus, she found him laid upon the straw, where she fell to kissing and embracing him so ardently, that she thought she should have died for pleasure, on the place. Another young Maid, about Fourteen, a devout Servant of the Virgins, having ask'd the same thing, Mary gave him into her arms, who embrac'd, caress'd and kiss'd him with such violent transports of love, that her very heart was cleft asunder. Fair warning, one would think, to young Maids! Has either Alcoran, or Jewish Talmud, Stories so lewd and so abominable as these? Yet these are the Authors, whose Authority F. Crasset has within these six last years, renewed and re-established in his Book! But what is the design of these tales? Why, 'tis to establish the Worship of the Blessed Virgin; for St. Dominick had ne∣ver
been her Husband, but that he invented the Rosary, otherwise call'd the Virgins Psalter, compos'd of a hun∣dred and fifty Beads, of which there are fifteen Pater Nosters for God, (and well they can spare them too,) and and one hundred thirty five Ave Maria's for the Virgin. And for the same reason was our Friend Alan favoured, because the Rosary-way of Worship beginning to decay, he did what in him lay to revive it. And for the two Virgins obtaining the favour to Kiss Jesus Christ in the Flesh, even to Swooning away, why was it, but because they were devoted to the Service of the Virgin in a more peculiar manner? Now, that you may not think these fearful Examples are but few in number, you must know there are abundance of them in all the Authors that F. Cras∣set quotes and admires. Hautin, a Jesuit like himself, re∣ports a History from Surius, of the Marriage of the Vir∣gin Mary with one Herman, surnamed Joseph, (because they were both of them married to the Virgin,) to whom the Virgin came, accompanied with two Angels, one of which began to speak and say, To whom shall we marry this Young Man? To Mary, replied the other, at which they commanded Herman to draw near: Poor Herman knew not what in the earth to do; Love prick'd him on, and Shame-fac'dness pull'd him back; for thoughHautin An∣gelus Custos c. 4. numb. 3. before-times he had had particular intimacy with the Blessed Virgin, yet he could never hope to see himself advanc'd to such a degree, as to be married to Her. Caesarius also, whom F. Crasset quotes as a very sincereCaesarius l. 7. c. 13, 18, 32, 52. Author, relates the Story of a Soldier that fell in love with his Captain's Wife, and following the advice of a good Hermit, saluted the Virgin a hundred times a day, who to recompence this civility, offered herself to him like an exceeding handsom Woman, saying, I will be thy Wife, come kiss me, and forc'd him to it. In the
same Author, we find the Virgin Mary kissing and em∣bracing Monks very liberally: Some she watches over whilst they sleep: others she wipes the face of, whilst they sleep, with her Handkerchief. And had I not rea∣son to say the Chronicles of Diana and Minerva were more chastly deliver'd down, than those of the ever Blessed Mother of our Lord? After these savours, it would be vain to produce any more, or others; but you may be assured there is no sort or kind, with which the Devoto's to the Virgin have not some time or other been graced. She has kept them in their Sicknesses; She has given them their Sight; She has delivered them from extreme dangers both by Sea and Land, from Thieves, from Fire, from the Gibbet, from Prisons, and from Death itself; for many have been raised from the dead, only because they or their Parents have been religious Worshippers of the Blessed Virgin. Read but Chronicon S. Ʋ. Deiparae, where you shall find a thousand Instances. If one should collect together all the deliverances God hath wrought from the beginning of the World, to this day, they would not make a History to compare with those wrought by our Lady of Loretto, Mont Serrat, Liesse, Hall, Moyenpont, Aspremont, Ardiliers, and a hundred more, and all to persuade Us, that the Virgin is mightily pleased to see Herself adored, and that she is at a stand sometimes to find out what Favours to bestow on her peculiar Ser∣vants. But that which is most abominable, is, that these Fables would persuade Us, that the Service of the Vir∣gin is of greater benefit to Us, than that of God; and that, provided a Man dedicate himself to Her Service, let him be otherwise never so wicked a Villain, yet he need not despair of his Salvation. It was one of these
profane Visions St. Brigit pretended to have had, and which F. Crasset hath mustered up afresh, to the intent you should not think those Opinions were at all alteredPart 1. tr. 1. qu. 10. p. 77. since those days, 1370. Sinners (says he) being her Sub∣jects, make up her Crown and Glory, and 'tis for that she loves them, with the tenderness and sweet compassion of a Mother, let them be never so wicked, as a Mother pittieth her Children, though they have lost their sences, and are become mad; and this is what she has revealed to St. Brigit.Brig. Revel. book 6. c. 10. Know Thou (quoth the Mother to the Daughter) my dearest Child, that there is no Man in the World so lewd and curs'd of God, that is entirely for saken of him whilst he lives; no Sinner so desperate, but may return, and find mercy with him, provided he have recourse to Me. St. Bonaventure is of the same mind, and expresses himself in these comfor∣table words: O Mary, be a Man never so miserable a Sin∣ner, you have the soft compassions of a Mother for him; you embrace him, and hug him close in your bosom, and never will forsake him, till you have reconcil'd him to his formidable Judge. 'Tis with design of persuading us to believe these comfortable Truths, that F. Crasset musters up a whole Chapter of Examples of the wickedest Men that possibly can be, that yet have been saved, by preserving theirUbi supra. pag. 36. devotion for the Blessed Virgin, amidst all their impieties, entire. Such a one is that of Theophilus of Adanus, a City of Cilicia, who having been depos'd of his Arch∣deaconry, for no great good, gave himself over to the Devil, for spite and anger, by the help and means of a Jewish Magician whom he served. He renounced Mary and her Son, and gave the Devil a Scroll signed with his own Hand; after which he became intolerably despe∣rate and mad for what he had done: But in these Ago∣nies of Mind and Soul, a glimpse or ray of hope appeared
to him, that Blessed Mary could deliver him from this evil, and straightways thereupon he goes to her Church, and prostrates himself before her Image: Which failed him not at this time of need, but reconciled him to God, and forced the Devil to give him back his Bonds again. To this, F. Crasset thinks fit to add such another,Pag. 90. part 1. taken from Caesarius; of a young Gascoign Soldier, who after he had wasted all he had in the World, gave him∣self up to Satan, and renounced Jesus Christ; but do whatever the Devil could, he could not be brought to renounce his Mother, and this obtained his Pardon for that horrible Crime; down he threw himself before the Image of the Virgin Mary, which had the Image of Jesus in her arms, and heard this Dialogue between them. The Virgins Image said, O my sweet Son, have mercy on this Man: The Son's Image answered, Why Mother, what would you have me do with this Wretch, that hath renounced Me? After this, the young Man saw the Blessed Virgin (that is to say, her Image) prostrate herself to little Je∣sus, and demand again his Pardon, whom Jesus lovingly took up, (and 'twas very much for a Child of his big∣ness,) and said to her, I never yet refused my Mother any thing she ask'd; I grant it for your sake, and yours alone. Would one believe, that a Jesuit should have the confi∣dence to furbish up such ridiculous things as these, at this time of day, in such an Age as ours? I had often heard this Story told by Protestants, to shame the Papists; but I never thought it would have been produced at this time, by a Renowned Jesuit, in honour of their Religion, and that too in Paris, the most frequented City in the whole World. But to put you past all doubting of this Truth, F. Crasset tells us, that Caesarius says, that this very Gascoign was alive in his time, 1222. and that no∣thing was more sure, nor better attested, than this famous
Story. And for the credit of Caesarius, the same good Father tells us, he was of the Order of Cistercians, and lived above four hundred years ago, and was, as Tri∣themius the Abbot tells us, a very Learned, and a veryPag. 105. Honest Man, and one that stuck to his rule very close. You may judge (says he) of the sincerity and credit of this Man, by what he says in his Preface to his own Works, God is my Witness (cries he) that I am not the Inventer of any thing I have reported in my Dialogues. And who alive can help believing him, after this Protestation? Therefore take, in short, another Story of Caesarius's tel∣ling, of one Beatrix a Servant in a Convent, who being debauch'd by a Priest, got out of the Convent, and lived in a Bawdy-house fifteen years, during all which time, the Virgin Mary took her shape, and constantly supplied her place; so that no body perceiv'd her absence, and her Reputation suffered nothing all the while; and all this, because she had, as she was going out, prayed to the Virgin, and (giving her the Keys of the Convent into her hand) had said, Madam, I have served you as devoutlyCaesarius l. 7. c. 35. as I possibly could; I give you here your Keys again, and am able no longer to withstand the temptations of the Flesh. This tends to the same end with all the rest, namely, to let you understand, that, break God's Commands, or doCrass. p. 90. whatever you please, serve but the Blessed Virgin, and all is well. Pelbart of Temeswar, another of F. Crasset's great Au∣thors,Stell. Coronae. l. 12. c. 3. tells us, there was a certain Woman that plaid the Whore with a Neighbor's Husband of hers, whose Wife finding his roguery out, pray'd to the Virgin to confound that wicked Creature that had debauch'd her Husband from her Bed; but it was found, that this im∣pudent Harlot had still the grace, every day, to say seven Ave Maria's, and therefore the Virgins Image answered
the complaining Wife, and said, She of whom thou speakest, offers me Praises that are very agreeable to me, and whilst she does so, I assure you Mistress I can never hurt her, but on the contrary, will preserve her from disgrace; however I promise you, I'll see and convert her. And this is the way to Proselyte to the Virgin, those who trample God's Commandments under foot. If you would have any more Stories, to prove that the Worship of the Virgin separate from that of God, is a sure way to Salvation, you may find them, in greatCrasset. p. 94. plenty, in Father Crasset. There you may see the Virgin keeping them, that keep not God's Commands; and how a Bird having learn'd to cry Ave Maria, and being seized on by a Hawk, scream'd out but Ave Maria, and the ravenous Hawk immediately left her. And likewise, how the Devil, being in the Air, and spying a Christian that was not upon his guard, came swooping down upon him, like a Bird of Prey; but as soon as he heard him pronounce, and devoutly call upon the Name of Mary, he was fain to pull in his horns (I meant his talons) and be gone. There you shall see her taking a great deal of pains to raise from the dead, Rogues that had liv'd in nothing else but wickedness, & died without repentance; only to give them leisure to Confess, and do some trifling Penances, and then again depart in peace. It is the same Father Crasset, that tells from Surius, the History of a Citizen of Rome, called Andrew, so insufferably de∣bauch'd, that he bore no token or mark of Christianity upon him, but that he was an Admirer of St. Caesarion Martyr: As Andrew lived, so he died like a Reprobate, without any tokens of Repentance; but at the Inter∣cession of Mary and Caesarion, he arose from the dead to Confess, and do Penance, and returned from whence he came.
Pelbart of Temeswar (that never sticks at any thing) tells us of a Robber on the High-way, (that used nevertheless to Fast every Saturday in Honour to the Virgin) who at last being caught in the Fact, was Beheaded on the spot; his Head in falling from his Bo∣dy, cried out thrice, Confession, Confession, Confession, upon which they fetch'd a Priest, who came and set his Head again upon his Shoulders, to whom the Thief reported, that as soon as his Head was cut off, the De∣vils had seised on his Soul to drag it into Hell, but that the Virgin hindred them, not permitting the Soul and Body quite to separate, till he was Confess'd; and that he had obtained this Grace, for Fasting every Saturday to her Honour: And this serves to support two Articles of Popery, the Invocation of the Virgin, and the necessity of Confession. But if we will not believe Pelbart, nor Father Crasset, neither will we Hereticks be persuaded, that a Rogue rose from the dead. In the same place, you read how that the Soul of a Soldier kill'd in Fight, in the Service of the Emperor Sigismond, continued in his Body many years after the Flesh was rotten and worn off. The Blessed Virgin not permitting the Soul to part before Confssion, because he had been all his Life time Her peculiar Servant. An∣other Miracle there is, of which Pelbart himself was an Eye-witness. A certain wicked Villain fell into the Danube, and was under water three days, where he heard a Voice say to him, Thou deservest well, O Wretch, to lose thy Life, and be Condemn'd for ever for thy Sins, but because thou art a Servant to the Vir∣gin Mary, thou shalt be delivered from this danger, that thou may'st go and be Confessed; and up he came, though he could not Swim a stroke, and came and Con∣fess'd to Pelbart himself, who tells you this Story. 'Twas
from the Man his own self (says Father Crasset) that this Religious Pelbart heard this History; and you must either believe this Penitent was an Impostor and Cheat, (and I pray take heed of wronging such a Pickled Youth) or else that Pelbart was a wicked Man, and took delight toPage 135. impose upon the belief of the soveraign High Priest of Rome, (to whom he dedicated his Works) and all the Faithful. Or else you must believe this Story for a certain truth, and consequently that the Virgin does preserve some∣times her Servants from everlasting Damnation, after Death. And in the same Page, this worthy Jesuit says, That Caesarius the Cistercian, that lived about 400. years since, and made 12. Books of Dialogues upon Miracles and Apparitions in his time, sets down many Examples of this nature; how Dead men were saved from Dam∣nation by the Virgins means, obtaining Grace for them, to return to Life again to do some Penance. If I would drain those Springs (as Father Crasset does) of Pelbart, Caesarius, Bernardin de Bustis, Vincen∣tius Bellovicensis, St. Antonine of Florence, and the rest, I could make a monstrous great Volume of these Fables, that tend to the establishing the necessity of Worship∣ping the Blessed Virgin, but this small number drawn from Father Crasset, is as good as if I had heaped up all together, with a great deal of Pains and Trouble. For by this, we Protestants may see, how far we are to trust those Catholick Doctors, who would have us be∣lieve, their Service and Religion has for many years last past, been cleansed and purified from all these vain and idle Popular Superstitions. When Father Crasset, a fa∣mous Jesuit, (though Monsieur Arnaud call him the Wretched Jesuit Crasset). A Jesuit, I say, in the City of Paris, where Popery is most refin'd; in the Face of Monsieur, the Bishop of Meaux, and other Catholicks,
averse from the vulgar Superstitions. When he, I say again, renews and revives these Silly and Impertinent Fables, with the approbation of his Society, his Arch∣Bishop, and his King. And if the great Man at Rome,Of Louis le Grand. should in a good Humour, think fit to say, this Book of Father Crasset, is composed with so much Learning, in▪ such a Method, and with such a Discretion, as is proper to instruct the Readers clearly in few words, and to extort even from the unwilling (such as Monsieur de Meaux, and Monsieur Arnaud) a confession of the Catholick Faith. (In this point) If he, I say, should but say thus much, I would fain know why it would not be as Authentick a Book, as the Catholick Exposition of Monsieur de Con∣d. And are we (in good earnest) secure, it never will be so? Will a better Friend to the Jesuits, never possess that Chair? And if there do, may he not do as much for such a Book as this of Father Crassets, as the present Pope has done for Monsieur de Meaux's? And must the Faith of Christ be at such uncertainties? This surely is not building on a Rock, but on the Sand, that every Wave can wash away at pleasure. For if every Pope ca ake an Exposition of the Catholick Faith, Authentical, (And if every one cannot, how can any one?) I do not see but we may have as many several Faiths, as there are Casualties and Diseases in the Weekly Bill. THE END.
Books Printed for Tho. Newborough, at the Star in St. Paul's Church-Yard. THE Travels of Monsieur de Thevenot into the Levant, in Three Parts, viz. Into I. Turkey. II. Persia. III. The East-Indies. Fol. R. Manii, Commentaria de Rebellione Anglicana ab Anno 1640. usque ad Annum 1685. Pars Prima. Octa. A Paraphrase with Notes, and a Preface on the Sixth Chapter of St. John, shewing that there is neither good Reson nor sufficient Authority, to suppose that the Eucharist is discoursed of in that Chapter, much less to infer the Doctrine of Transubstantiation  it, Quarto. Wholesome Advices from the Blessed Virgi her in∣discreet Worshippers. Written by one of the Roman Communion. Humanity and Charity of Christians. A Sermon Preach∣ed at the Suffolk Feast, November, 30. 1686. by W. Claget. D. D. The Present State of the Controversie between the Church of England, and the Church of Rome.
