F583 15364044 103517
The Gentle Lash, Or the VINDICATION Of Dr FEATLEY, a knowne Champion Of The PROTESTANT RELIGION. Also Seven ARTICLES Exhibited against him. With his ANSWER thereunto. Together with the said Doctor his MANIFESTO and CHALLENGE. PLAUT. Istic thesaurus stultis in lingua positus est, ut maledicant me∣lioribus. IMPRINTED, 1644.
The Gentle Lash. O That wee had Faith but strong enough to exorcise these quotidian devis, so weekely appearing in our Diur∣nals, Mercuries, and Continuations: who pretending to maintaine the cause of Religion, scandalize both it and all goodnesse, with malitious Lyes: whose anonomous Reporters have even sold themselves to the Presse, to a∣buse the Peace of this poore distracted Church and Kingdome: whose audacious Pens bedabbled in the Gall of bitternesse, set forth presum∣ptuous things, maligning Princes, and speaking evill of Dignities, who ayming at the confusion of the Church, strike at her very Pillars, cast∣ing their venomous Froth upon their Names, whose able and Religious Quils have vindicated the true Protestant Religion, from the dirty ca∣lumnies of learned Hereticks. Generation of Vipers! who hath be∣witched you? who hath infauated you to betray Religion for five shil∣lings a sheet, and to vent so many weekely pennyworths of impiety to poore deluded People, whom your teachers have brought to this de∣gree of blindnesse, that they will not see? How many of the most lear∣ned and religious Divis of this Island, passively submitting to the Ordinances of men, and committed to the Mercy of a Prison) have your printed (and shamefully permitted) scandals, defamed and slandered, rendering them as odious to the ignorant, as you are to the wise; main∣taining, nay, even deifying those whom you call, your Holy Pastors, whose helpe (God be praised) we never wanted against the Argumens of Bellarmine, Stapleton or Fisher whose Net we eare had bin too cun∣ningly said for them to have escaped?
Nor can I here forget that debt the Church of England owes to the sound and learned labours of that Reverend Champion of our Prote∣stant Religion, D. Featley, which shall remaine in our Church as lasting Monuments of his able Piety, whilst Learning, and Orthodox devotion find a Friend; whom, at this time (suffering Imprisonment, for his loyalty to his Conscience and his Prince) your impious, saucy, and sa∣crilegious quills (as full of venome as the pen out of which Demosthenes suckt his death) have vilified and traduced with such calumnious false∣hoods and malicious injuries, my hasty and impartiall Pen, shall take the boldnesse here to vindicate. To which end, you shall first understand what the person is; secondly, what his charge. He is a man, whose life and doctrine need no Advocate; whom de∣traction it selfe could not mention, without addition of some Epithets of respect; nay, concerning whom the very Diurnalls (whose nature and property is to Lye) could not for their owne credits but acknow∣ledge an honourable truth: some styling him a grave, some a good, and others a famous Doctor: And indeed, to conclude him in a word, no object for any evill passion but Envy, and a Subject for no discourse but what ends with Admiration. He is a man, whose profoundnesse in lear∣ning encouraged the Houses of Parliament to commit the translation of S. Pauls Epistles to his Review, Marginall Annotation, and Exposition: whose soundnesse of Doctrine invited the same Authority to make choice of him, for the answering of a Popish and scandalous Pamphlet, inti∣tuled, A safeguard from Ship-wrack; both performed with solid judge∣ment and singular fidelity; that extant, this ready for the Presse. By which Authority, he was likewise chosen a Member of the Synod, or Assembly of Divines, for the composing of some differences, and settl the peace of the distempered Church, in these His Majesties Domini∣ons. As touching his charge, it was unhappily occasioned by a Message sent him from His Majesty, (whose Chaplaine in ordinary he is) which commanded him, no more to joyne in that Assembly, being convented without His Majesties consent, and therefore without full Authority; whereto returning his answer in a Letter unseal'd, to the most reverend Father in God, the Arch-Bishop of Armagh, a chosen Member likewise of the same Assembly, now at the University of Oxford; the Letter was intercepted, opened, and falsly transcrib'd, whereunto the malicions pen∣man, adding what would most, by wronging him, advantage the Cause,
delivered the Originall to the Messenger (with hopes to intercept the Answer) and dispatcht the false Transcript, to the Committee for Exa∣minations: whereupon a Serjeant at Armes was sent for the Doctor, who having, in his examinations, refused to consent to every Clause in the Scot∣tish Covenant, was forthwith committed prisoner to the Lord Peters house in Aldersgate street, where now he remaines as chearefull as a good Conscience, and as poore as the severest censure of Authority, can make him. But when the Lyon is downe, how every Curre will barke! Him, whom of late these Sycophanticall Diurnall-mongers had in so good esteeme, whilst he concurr'd in some things with them whom they have in Admiration, him now they worry with their temporizing pens: who render him to the world no better then (to use their owne words) a Prevaricator, a Court-spye, and a Traytor to the Assembly, tryumphing in the Sentence of his downefall, and mingling the bitter Cup of Justice, with the Exuberance of their own Gall and Vineger. The Doctor (say they) hath his Livings sequestred, his Estate secur'd, his bookes seiz'd upon, and himselfe Imprisoned: Spolia ampla refertis. The onely Truth, that Pamphlet is guilty of: sed quo cecidit sub crimine? What was his charge? What was the heynous crime that moved to such a Ruine? A Letter sent to the Arch-bishop of Armagh, an elected Mem∣ber of the Assembly; whom all the world admires and honours, unlesse some within the Line of Communication, who are more worthy to unty his shooe, then to judge of his Abilities. But what evill hath he done? He acquainted this worthy Member, by that Letter, with some passages in the Assembly, requiring his judgement in some things there controver∣ted, concerning matters of Faith. Proh nefandum! Indeed, his very pre∣sence in the Assembly (as farre as I see yet) was his greatest fault. Yea, but he sued covertly for a Deanry: Yea, that was a fault indeed, to sue for something, which they are now endeavouring to make nothing, to purchase a house that's pulling downe. Put case, he did so. Is it a Crime to provide a plaister for a Sore that is now a breeding? Clypeum post vulnera, is folly: but ante vulnus, is Providence: They that aime at the Ruine of the whole body, will be impatient at the Preservation of a Member. Is it a great fault for a Servant to begge of his Master, and none at all for Subjects to begger their Prince?
Perfect Diurnall, page 83. You have bin often told of ome rotten Members in both houses of Parliament, and yee may see further, there are the like rotten Members in the Assmbly of Divines &c. Another Truth. Alas, we know, that too well, or else the Head had never bin so carefull to preserve it selfe. But tel me, what is the cause of rottennesse, in a Member? Is it not the restraint of the influence from the noble part? Some Members there are amongst us, from whom the free operations of the Animall spirits are by accident a while obstructed, through the Malignity of the spleene; others whose obstinacy is not capable of their naturall operation, but resist all influence from the Head: Tell me, if thou hast Philosophy, which of these are most in lining to rottennesse? But you that so malige these Members; say; which of your faction have lifted up a hand against the common Enemy? which of them have struck a blow but against a Cushion or an Houre glasse? Whilst these men∣bars whom you so revile, have with their well ar'd Arguments laid the Enemy on his back, whilst these Membrs you so Rabsekize have borne the burthen of the day, and alwaies have bin active in the true Religions Cause, and maintained the Truh that Schisme hath so struck at: Had your Members bin sound and able, they would have shewen more action, and not like cowards have run away to New England, when old England was on fire, nr crept into widows houses whom they de∣voured under the pretence of long Prayer: Had those Members in rot∣ten, you so term, I fere the Truth ad found but poore Champions; This ragious Member (whom you so revile) lookt the Lyon in the very face, nay when he ror'd, he trembled not; whose holy Table; when all turn'd Altars, was no mveable: stood he not up for the true reformed R∣ligion in the Kingdomes both of England and France? Did not he oppose Arminianisme when it was in its fullest Ruffe? And when the Crime was capitall to speake against it, were his lipps sealed? yet this man hath your black mouthd malice (which blasphemeth the servants of the most high God) reviled and stled by the Name of Rotten. But take heed, and rememer Nestorius the Hereticke, how he died. Yea but he sed whose tongue rotted in his mouth. with the Assembly to undermine their proceedings, and gave intelligence to the adverse party, &c,
Indeed, he joyn'd with the Assembly, so long as they joyn'd with the Truth; And when they undermined it, he countermined them. Had he swallowd the Covenant whole, and bin for sworne in some particulars, he had bin as sound a Member as the best. They had past as Birds all of a browne Feather, and had founded a new Truth, not upon the pious con∣fession of Peter, but upon the perjurions denyall of his Master. But he gave intelligence of the proceedings of the Assembly: I never heard before, that Synodicall decisions were arcana imperii, or opera tenebrarum, the secrets of a Kingdome, or the workes of darknesse. Truth seekes no corners, nor is impatient of discovery. Veritas nihil eubescit, nisi abscondi. But in∣telligence was given to the adverse party: Whom meane yee, the King? or his evill Councell? A well justified Consultation fears neither: if the King be not the defender of the Faith, why doe you stile him so? if he be, to whom should injured Truth appeal, but to her chiefe defence and pro∣tector? But the Doctors guiltinesse of thse crimes appear'd in a letter to Oxford intercepted, which was brought to the Committee for examinations. And had that Letter a name subscribed? no: The true Letter had, viz.  which the Counterfeitor being a meere English-man, took for a Sheep-marke, and omitted it. But for the substraction of two letters, he added mny words and owes the Doctor nothing; The Originall (which carried his errand to Oxford) spake nothing of the five times vo∣ting him out of his Living at Lambeth; not a word, that He was a constant visiter of the Kings prisoners in London, or Lambeth; recommended no suit of his for a Bishopwrick, as the false Diurnall reports. But as the Divell, so his Children sometimes repeat a truth, to the end they may abuse it; This Hackney Pamphleter relates a businesse (though not to the purpose, yet to his owne purpose, which is to wrong the Doctor) and sayes, that his Barne at Acton, was burn, by the Parliaments Souldiers, but in the 84 page he poysons it with a Lye avouching that there was no Corne in it, and that he suffer'd no considerable losse by it, whereas it appeares under the hands of severall able and honest house-holders and vestry men of Acton, that his losse amounted to the summo of 211. li. subscribed the 1 of October, Vide ce infra. 1643. Varlets! when your shuffling and interfering Truths are so faulty, how damnable are your through paced Lyes? This onely by the way: but to returne to the purpose,
page 84. The Doctor at the Assembly past his vote with the rest upon debate of the Scot∣tish Covenant, for the quite extirpation of Popery and Prelacy. To see, how two aiming at one end, may proceed in two contrary courses; The Divell uses to take from the Truth, this tri-obular newes-Merchant adds to it: Two travelling contrary wayes, may meet at the Antipodes. He that takes from the Truth, and adds to the Truth, may meet in Hell as well as in their hellish intentions. The Extirpation of Popery and Prelacy. For the first, His resolution is a perpetuall vote and his action a continu∣all execution. For the second, I call the whole Assembly of Divines, some of the Peeres, and divers of the House of Commons to witnesse your stupendious Lye. But the Divell hath taught you this curious point of Sophistry to argue, a male conjunctis ad bene divisa. As for the extirpation of Popery, he hath acted what others have but voted; But for the clause of prelacy, your Idols shall be judges upon what reasons he dissented. First, at his Ordination he tooke an Oath to obey his ordinary. Secondly, at his In∣stitution and Induction he swore Canonical obedience to the Bishop of the dioces. Thirdly, his Benefice being of my Lords grace of Canterburies peculiar, he tooke an Oath to maintaine the priviledges of the See of Canterbury. Now how this Covenant in that particular can be consistent with the three former oathes, or how any in the Assembly that takes it, can be guiltlesse of perjury, let every good conscience judge. Besides, how is God mockt in our very prayers, when that mouth which (as it is required and by an unrepeald Act of Parliament commanded) every day beseech∣es him to send downe the dew of his blessing upon all Bishops and Curates, shall ipso facto sweae and vote the utter Extirpation of Bishops, whom it prayes for. Mercurius Brittan. p. 47. It was mentioned before, who was intelligencer to speake of passages in the Assembly, now a word more of it. That grave D I meane D. Featley, that hath correspondency with the Bishop of Armagh, confesseth in his letter to him, that he all this while dissembled with the Assembly.
How uninterrupted boldnesse wil turne to brasse-browd imudence. That Letter this Mercury speaks of was surely  on the back of that Bull which was lately sent from the Pope, Credat judaeus Appella. And why did not this Mercury, to raise his Pamphlet a penny higher, Print that Letter and Bull both together? Come, come, your owne As∣sembly knowes, you lye; and if the Cause were not kept burning with such Oyle, it would goe out and stink, and your historicall credit would soone run into a Premuniri. Did not our D. long before the being of this abused Letter openly and plainly declare himselfe to divers of this Assembly against some of their unwarrantable proceedings? Did not he really confesse his nonconcurrence, and feare his noncontinuance with them? Is this dissembling? Continuation Numb. 55. D. Featley (you heard of) received a just reward for his Perfidious∣nesse, and seeming compliance with the Parliament and Assembly, that he migh the better betray all their counsells and consultatinus to them at Oxford: his livings were bestow'd upon M. White and M. Nye. These gentlemen you may see can content themselves, each man with a part of these livings, though the D. was not satisfied with the whole, but solicited very importunately by his letter to the Bishop of Armagh at Oxford to have a deanry bestowed upon him. Ab asino majore discit minor rudere. This Intelligencer hath conn'd his Lesson well, and hath got that perfectly by heart, which the other formerly had imperfectly written; only he plays the Shimei and adds a little rayling, and unlesse i be for that, deserves but a Gentle Lash. This letter hath very strange luck: mentioned by so many and none doe it the honour to print it? If it be the Originall, I feare it goes against your consciences to print a truth: why doe ye not corrupt it in the presse then, and make it speake as the Oracles did, by instruction and subornation? If to relate some  passages, and to call so great, so sanctified a judgement in to aid, be trea∣son or prevarication, why does not your Hangman execute that history which made him erre by the example of S. Ierome, who at a Synod at Ierusalem acquainted Damasus (then Bishop of Rome too) with some Synodicall proceedings, requiring his judgement thereof? Had our Doctor ever taken an Oath of Alligance or secrecy to the Assembly, his discovery might have been blameable: But having taken that Oath to his
Majesty, he had a Warrant both as a Subject, and a Servant to discover any thing, which by consequence might be derogatory to his Govern∣ment. But the Doctors two Livings troubled you, and I feare, more then the want of them does him; And why not two Livings, as lawfuly as two Lectureships of as great a value, besides a cure of Soules? Aske the Assemb∣ly, whether it be expedient to hold two Sequestrations, for a fuller sup∣ply? some of them though never so white, will turne red and blush. But how religiously our Doctor behaved himselfe in his Livings, both Acton and Lambeth will tell you, not I. And what Hospitality the Reve∣nues thereof produced, Newington will informe you. And time may tell you, whether the new Incumbents bring not the yeare about with fuller purses. But he sues for a Deanry too: How appeares that? By his Letter: Heare then the precise words of the Letter. I understand that the Deanry of Westminster, and a Prebendary of Canterbury are now voyd, and in the Kings gift: If you thinke meet, you may put in, in the first place for your selfe, and in the second for your friend: Now the covetous Mystery lyes in the last word, friend. And you, by the spirit of Revelation must unfold that Mystery: well, be it so: Then grant him to have the spirit of Prophefie too, to sue so; who fore-seeing a Ship-wrack here, catched at a planck to keepe him from sinking. Now having viewed his offence with one eye, cast your other up∣on his punishment, and being impartiall, tell me, , whether the proportion they carry be Mathematicall. And, to conclude, call to mind but Plato's Apologie for Socrates; or Chrystostome and Athanasius for themselves, in which there are instances given of the best men in all ages, who notwithstanding have received hard measure, and beene con∣demned as Dlinquents in Synods & popular Assemblies, or IEROME of PRAGVE, that noble Confessor, and Martyr his oration in the Synod of Constance: and laying all things together, this nsulter upon the downefall of him (who hath stood up so many yeares for the Truth) if his Conscience be no feared with a hot Iron, will turne his present Gall into future hony, and his unchristian Censure, into a Christian Commi∣seration.
VVEE whose Names are here under written, in∣habitants of the Parish of Acton, in the Coun∣ty of Middlesex, being requested by Doctor Daniel Featley, Parson of the parish of Acton as aforesaid, to certifie the time of burning the Barne, wherein the Tyth-Corne lay belonging to the said Parsonage, and of the value of it: We doe upon certaine Knowledge and true informa∣tion certifie al those whomit may concern, that the said Barn, being full of Corne, besides three Bay of Stabling, built by the said Doctor himselfe, all valued at two hundred and eleven pounds, or thereabouts, as it was then prized by some of the parishioners appointed to that purpose, were all burned downe to the ground, the tenth day of November last, by the Parliaments Forces then quartered in the said Town. And wee further certifie that this losse fell above five weekes after the death of M. Henry Leerewood (to whom the said parsonage had bin farmed, and when the said parsonage was in the Doctors hands, before he had farmed it to any other. In witnesse where∣of we have hereunto subscribed our Names the first day of October, 1643. Iohn Needler. Thomas Needler. Edmond Biddle. George Colle. Henry Colle. The Marke  of VVilliam VVels.
THE PRINTER To The READER. AFter I met with these gratefull lines written with the silver Pen of Theiomusus Laureatus, in defence of him, who hath written and Printed so much in defence of the Doctrine and discipline of the Church: A friend of his, since his confinement to Pe∣tri vincula, visiting his desolate house at Lambeth, found there those, who in Sylla the Dictators dayes werè tearmed Sectores bo∣norum, but now sequestrators, rifling the Roome, and plundring the study and garden, and robbing him of choycer Flowers out of the one, than Emmenes or Tulips out of the other. Among which he culled these which I offer to thy view; and if, as stolne waters are sweet, so stolne flowers are the sweeter, these cannot but please thee: for they are snatched out of the Harpies talons and now steale to the presse. Accept this posie for the present, and I hope e long to present thee with a Garland of the like.
SPONGIA, OR, Articles exhibited by certaine Semi-Sepa∣ratists indicted at Sessions, against Daniel Featley, D. D. before the Committee for plundered Ministers, Together with his Answer thereunto. Tertul. Veritas nihil metuit, nisi abscondi. AFter Doctor Featley had waited divers weekes, upon the Committee for plundered Ministers; at the last, March 16. 1642. he was called into the Exchequer Chamber, to answer seven Articles put in against him, when and where M. White, being in the chaire, having the said Articles before him, demanded as followeth. Did not you D. Featley in a Sermon say, that it was blasphemie and ignorance, to speake against bowing at the Name of Jesus, and that all those that pull downe the Railes from the Communion Table, or speake against them, or oppose the Ceremonies of the Bishops, are of the seed of the Serpent? &c. There is no name of Bishop at all in the Articles, nor of other D. Fe ceremonies, then the ceremonies of the Church established by Law or Canon, but I have read in Aristotle, that there is a fallacie called, Sophi Elen Fallacia a pluribus iuterrogationibus sub una, when one single answer is expected to a double or treble interrogation. That I may not be intangled in such a nt, I shall desire you M. White, to propound the Articles distinctly, and severally, and then I will answer them pun∣ctually. But before I hold up sptemplicem clypeum, to ward off your
seven-fold stroake, I am constrained to make a motion to you that some order be taken, that I may safely wait upon this Honou∣rable Committee▪ For, animam meam in manu mea porto; I cannot go and come, without evident perill of my life; besides, jeering, and rayling at me, by those of my accusers sect, in a most unchristian, and uncivill manner; the grounds of my feare are these. The next day after the bloody Fray at Lambeth, as I landed at the staires, there a souldier that stood Sentinell, one Alexander Bag∣wood holding his Musket at my brest, charged me before divers of the Parish, that I was he who kindled the late fire; of which words of his I tooke present witnesse, and promised to call him to an ac∣count for them; on the Tuesday following, one of the Souldiers of Captaine Andrews his Company, being asked when they meant to leave the court of Guard at Lambeth, said, they meant not to go away, till they had made an end of me: this Tho. Addams testifieth upon he Do∣ors life ught by e . Oath. On Wednesday being the Fast day, one of Kennigton told a Gent. my neighbour, that she heard the souldiers speke amongst themselves, that they had missed their mark, and that they did look for me, if they could have met with me. The Munday following, one of the Pa∣rishioners sent me word, that a Gent. in her hearing, reported, that some of Captaine Andrewes his Company said, that they had a War∣rant to Plunder me. In these regards, I humbly desire, that according to the custome of all Courts in this case, I may have a protection both for my person, and estate, during my attendance here. I know no such thing as you speake of, therefore answer to . White. your charge. The D. being somewhat moved, that so necessary a motion for the safety of his life should be so sleighted, after a little pause to recollect himselfe, went on in his speec, as followeth. Hoc uno die plus vixi, quam oportuit, this is the first day in all my life, that I ever heard Articles read against me in any Court Ec∣clesiasticall, or Temporall, or Committee of Parliament. For, what the Prophet Ieremie spake in another case; I have neither lent 5. 10. on usury, nor men have lent to me on usury, yet they curse me: I may true∣ly
say in this, I never drew Articles against any, nor had any till After  wae  ed for  Chann and aft for M. Foreb last of: for M: White Dorch ster. Heb.  now drawne against me: yet they seeke not only my Living (which, I heard in Westminster hall, was designed already for one M. Putie) but (as you heare) my life also. But my comfort is, that the like hard measure hath beene offered to the Prophets of God, and Mi∣nisters of Christ in all ages. * Nay the prince of our salvation was conse∣crated through afflictions; and give me leave to apologize for my selfe in the words of the blessed Martyr S. Cyprian, nec mihi ignomi∣niosum est pati a meis, quod passus est Christus, nec illis gloriosum facere, quod fecit Iudas. All the favour that I shall desire is but this, for as much as all humane lawes ought to vaile bonnet to divine (as Io∣sephs brethrens sheaves bowed to his) that you will not receive an ac∣cusation 1 Tim. 19. against an Elder under two or three witnesses, and those not lia∣ble to just exceptions. I beseech you to take notice of it, the Apo∣stle saith not, condemne not an Elder, under two or three witnesses, for so no other man by the Law of God might be, in case of life; but receive not an accusation against an Elder; and Calvin yeelds a good reason for it, cur hoc singulari privilegio presbyteros munit? respon∣deo, Deut.  hoc esse necessarium remedium adversus hominum malignitatem: nul∣li enim calumniis, & obtrectationibus magis sunt obnoxii, quam pii docto∣res; qui, quamvis exactefungantur suis partibus, utneminimum quidem er∣ratum admittant, nunquam tamen mille reprehensiones effugiunt; at{que} hic est astus Satanae, alienare hominum animos a ministris, ut doctrina paula∣tim veniat in contemptum. Why doth the Apostle arme Elders with this singular priviledge above other men, that no accusati∣on may be admitted against them but under two or three wit∣nesses? I answer (saith he) that this is a necessary remedy against the malignity of men, for no men are more subject to calumnia∣tions, and back bitings, then godly doctors or teachers; who though they acquit themselves never so well in their function, that they cannot be taxed with the least errour, or fault therein: yet they can never escape a world of calumnies. And this is the cunning of Sa∣tan, to alienate mens minds from the Ministers of God, that so by degrees he may bring the Word of God into contempt. As for the Articles, forex suo indicio; the contriver of them suffi∣ciently
discovereth himselfe; the very Articles themselves shew that they were patched together by a Tailor of two names, who is the accuser by the name of Ambrose Glover, but brought for a witnesse by the name of Ambrose Andrewes: he had time enough to have stitch∣ed them better, for he confesseth that he had beene about them this twelve moneth; yet how miserably are they botched? there is neither method, nor order, nor coherence, nor sense in them. In the first Article, there are two distinct Articles comprised, in the second six, in the third five, in the fourth two, in the fift three, and to fill up the number; th first is repeated againe in this fift, in the sixt there are two, in the seventh five, in which Article also there is most eloquent Non sense; The keyes taken from the Church and left in such hands (who left them?) as have laid them by, untill they became rustie: so that Sodomie, Murther, Felony, Pillage, and Plunder, is daily committed without punishment, as if Sodomie, Murther, &c. were ever punished by the Ecclesiasticall Courts, or power of the keyes, for which all men know, men are arraigned and condemned at the Assises and Sessions. Leave these speeches and answer punctually to the Articles. In generall, I answer negatively to them all, so farre as they con∣taine White. atley. any offensive matter or criminall, punishable either by the Law of God, or man, civill, Canon, municipall, or common. In particular to the first, which is. The first Article. He suffereth new Cermonies, as standing up at gloria patri, which many of his Parish prastise, and preacheth for bowing at the Name of Iesus; and doth bow at the Name of Iesus himselfe, and said, that it was blasphemie and ignorance for any to speake against bowing at the Name of Iesus. Answer. Standing up at gloria patri is no new Ceremony, or ge∣sture;  it hath beene used in Colledges, Cathedrall Churches, and Chappells of Noble men, and some Parish Churches for a long
time. It is a commendable custome to expresse some outward reve∣rence in that Doxologie, wherein the Three Persons of the most Glorious Trinitie are named: yet doe I not hold it a matter of ne∣cessity but indifferency; and therefore as S. Ambrose, when he was at Millaine, fasted on Saturday, because such was the custome there; but when he was at Rome, fasted not, because there they had no such custome: so if I come to a Church where such standing is used, I joyne with them in it, but if I come to any other place where it is not used, I sorbear it, that I may give no offence, either way. Howso∣ever the best is, my Informer chargeth me not with bringing in this gesture, or pressing it, but onely with suffering some of my Parish to use it. What power have I to prohibit them? or what Law of God or man forbiddeth this gesture, in saying or singing, Glory be to the Father, and to the Sonne, &c? It is forbidden by the Law, in that it is not commanded. M. W D. Fe By your favour that is no good inference (such a thing is not com∣manded, Ergo it is forbidden by the Law) for indifferene things are such as neither are commanded, nor forbidden; The standing up at the Gospell, the Nicene creed, and that of Athanasius, the sitting downe in Pewes, or Galleries at Sermon, the preaching in a high Pulpit, with Steps, Mats, Pulpit-cloth, and Cushions, and an houre Glasse, are no where commanded; will it therefore follow that they are forbidden? To instance also in the Law of God, though it be true in matter of substance of Religion and points of Faith or manners, and generally in all things necessary to , that what soever is not commanded is forbidden, yet in matter of circumstance, of time, place, hbit, or gesture, or something that belongs to the exterior acts of Gods worship onely, that maxime holds not; for example, the setting the Psalmes to be sung to such unes, and plaid upon such instruments, as are mentioned in the title of the Psalmes, the keeping Fasts on the fift and seventh Zac. 7 10. 10. moneth, celebrating the feasts of dedication, the reading Chapters intermingled with Psalmes, in such or such a number, or order; the lecturing on such or such dayes of the weeke, the receiving the Communion thrice a yeare, or once a moneth, the covering the
Communion Table with a linnen cloth, or silke carpet, the stan∣ding of Godfathers and Godmothers at the font, nay to have a font in every Church, or to use such formes in christening, marria∣ges, and burials, as now we use, are things not commanded by the law of God, will it follow therefore that they are forbidden? By  this reason I might argue against them, who in other Churches sit aet gloria patri (which it seemes M. White you approve of by your practise) or kneele, neither of these gestures are commanded. Ergo they are forbidden? or they are forbidden, in that they are not commanded. Here one of the Members of the House of Commons being present, said, Doctor you forget your selfe, you thinke you are in the schooles, or words to the like effect: whereupon the D. desisted from prosecuting any more that point, and proceeded to his answer, to the bowing at the Name of Iesus. For bowing at the Name of Jesus: Upon occasion of a Sermon preached by a punie Divine at Lambeth in my absence, who said  that Lambeth was the most superstitious place that ever he came in; for whensoever he named Jesus, they either bowed the head, or knee, or put off their hatts, which he affirmed to be a popish inno∣vation and Idolizing. I the next Lords day after, at the earnest in∣treatie of the prime gent. of the parish, in my Sermon apologi∣zed in this manner, both for the Canon of the Church, and the practise of our parish. First, that bowing at the Name of Jesus was very ignorantly termed by him an innovation: for besides the Ca∣non in B. Bancrofts time, confirmed by the royall authority of King Iames of blessed memory, there was an Iniunction for it, 1o. Elizabethae, and the most exquisitly learned and most Orthodox Doctor of the Reformed Church, Hieronimus Zanchius saith, it was a most ancient custome of the Christians so to doe; and before him S. Ierome, who flourished in the yeare of our Lord 390. in his com∣ment upon these words of the Prophet Esay, to me every knee shall bow, testifieth that in his time there was mos ecclesiasticus Christo genua flectere: &c. Secondly, that it could be no idolizing, to bow at the Name of Jesus, for that: Idolum being derived from  video, is properly the object of the eye, not of the eare: which argument
God him selfe useth, to deterre the people from Idolatry. You heard D 12. the voyce of the words, but saw no similitude, onely ye heard a voyce v. 15. 16. Take heed therefore unto your selves, for ye saw no manner of similitude on that day, lest you corrupt your selves, and make any graven Image, the simi∣litude of any figure. Thirdly, it is one thing to (bow to the Name of Iesus, another thing to bow in or at the Name of Iesus, as it is one  thing to kneele at the Communion Table, another thing to kneele to the Communion Table; it is one thing, adorare ad scabellum ejus, to worship towards his footstoole, which is commanded in Scripture, another thing adorare scabellum pedum ejus, to worship his footstoole, which is flat Idola∣try. To how to the Name of Iesus, whether we meane thereby the sylla∣bles, or the sound, is grosse superstition: but to bow in, or at the Name of Iess is not so. Now what the Canon prescribeth & we in obedi∣ence Can thereunto practise, is, when in the time of divine service, the Lord Jesus shal be mentioned, to doe lowly reverence to his per∣son, testfiing by this outward ceremony, and gesture, our inward humility, and christian resolution, and due acknowledgement that the Lord Jesus Christ is the true eternall Sonne of God, and onely Saviour of the World, in whom alone all the mercies, graces, and promises of God to mankinde for this life, and the life to come, are fully and wholy comprised. In this manner & to this end, in the time of divine service, to bow to the person of our Sviour in or at his Name Jesus, I said, was so far from being an Ido∣latrous ceremony, that to affirme it to be Idolatry in this sense, was no better then blasphemy, which I proved by this Syllogisme. Whosoever maketh Christ an Idoll is a Blasphemer. But he that saith, it is Idolatry to bow to Christs Person in or at his name Iesus, makes Christ an Idoll; Ergo he that saith that bowing to the person of Christ in or at his name Iesus is Idolizing, is a Blasphemer; Howsoever, say I had said (which I utterly deny) that it was ig∣norance and blasphemy to speake against bowing at the Name of Iesus, the words may very well be justified. M. VVhat! will you maintaine, that it is ignorance and blasphemy to speake against bowing at the Name of Iesus?
I will maintaine it, for thus I frame my argument. y. To speake against the text of the Holy Ghost is ignorance, and blasphemy. But bowing in or at the Name of Iosus, is the text of the Holy Ghost. Phil. 2. 10. Ergo speaking against the bowing in or at the Name of Iesus, is ignorance, and blasphemy. It is true; that there is some question among learned Divines, concerning the meaning of the Text, whether it be literall or figu∣rative, whether by bowing we ought to understand corporall and externall bowing of the knee, or inward bowing of the heart. Et adhuc subjudice lis est. But all agree in this; that some bowing in or at the Name of Iesus, is here both warranted and commanded, to speake then against it simply and absolutely, without any distinction of meaning, or M. was  manner of bowing, is not onely grosse ignorance, but direct blas∣phemy against the divinely inspired text of Scripture. d The second Article. Whereas the Communion Table did stand in the middle of the Chancell, but is new removed and is set at the East end of the Chancell, and three ways compassed about with Railes, the said Table standing di∣vers steps high, and hee boweth towards the East end of the Chancell: he likewise preacheth for the ceremonies, and calleth them innocent ce∣remonies, and calleth the Surplice a spotlesse garment, and refuseth to give the Sacrament to such as will not come up and kneele at the Railes. Answer. For the Communion Table, I never gave order for the . placing or displacing it, it standeth as it did when I came first to the Parish. Only once M. Woodward, when he was Church-warden, about 20. yeares agoe, brought it downe to the middle of the Chancell, and compassed it about with a most decent and usefull frame at his owne charge but the parishioners (finding the standing of it there to be very inconvenient, partly because it stopt up the passage from
Lees Isle to Hawards Chappell, partly because it debar'd 30. or 40. at least from hearing the Preacher) with publike consent removed it to the place where it first stood time out of mind, and is the fit∣test place for it to stand in, that the communicants may best both heare and see the Minister at the Communion. For the steps in the Chancell, at a publike meeting of all the  parish, it was proved that the Chancell had for above 60. yeares such an ascent as now it hath, and that by reason of store of corpses lately interred there, it could not be levelled without great wrong to the dead, and danger to the living from the stench. For the frame about the Communion Table. It was made for 3 foure reasons especially, 1. That we might come as neare as might be to the example of Christ and his Apostles, who at the first insti∣tution of the Sacrament received it about a table, 2. that the com∣municants might according to the Rubrick draw neare to the holy ta∣ble, 3. That the Communions might be with more facility & decent order celebrated and in more convenient time finished then be∣fore they could be, 4. That irreverent abuses might be prevented, as the comming in of dogs, catching at the consecrated elements, and ill manner'd peoplesthrowing their hats and cloaks, & sitting upon it. In these regards, when, upon the receipt of an order from the house of Common aainst innovations, I assembled the whole parish together to put in execution that order, and asked them concerning this frame, they cryed all with one consent, it is no innovation, let it stand, let it stand. For bowing towards the East. If they meane thereby bowing to∣wards 4 the Communion Table, at comming into the Church, and going out, though some men of good account in the Church both approve, and use it, yet neither I, nor my Curate ever doe so. But true it is that, as my pew is made, I kneele towards the East, as in the pulpit I doe towards the North, and at the Communion Table towards the South, but without any manner of superstition; some way I must bow, and I understand not but that it is as lawfull to bow or kneel towards the East, after the manner of all christians in the primitive Church, as well as towards the West after the manner
of the Iewes, o it be not done with any opinion of holinesse, or de∣votion to any part of the heaven, but in honour to him who made heaven and earth. For the ceremonies. According to an order made by the House of eeres, I have (as my text led me) sometimes preached for such . decent ceremonies as are established by law, and commanded to be used in the Rubrick of the booke of Common Prayer: but for any new popish ceremonies I have mainly opposed them, and could ne∣ver be brought, neither by perswasions, nor by threats, nor by pre∣sentments, or citations, from the chancellour of Winton, or Arch-deacon of Surry, or his officiall to turne the Communion Table Al∣tar-wise. Nay I preached a Sermon professedly against such changing it, or calling it by the Name of an Altar. For the Surplice. I said that it was a decent vest, and had beene u∣sed 6. many yeares before popery crept into the Church or there was a whore of Babilon, and therefore ought not to be tearmed her smock. For refusing to give the Communion. If I had repelled any from the Communion who refuse to kneele at the receiving that holy 7. Sacrament, I conceive, with submission to better judgements, that the Rubrick of the booke of Common Prayer estblished by law would beare me out in it, where we finde these formall words, the minister shall deliver the Communion to the peple in their hands kneeling. Yet the truth is, I never repelled any for not kneeling: onely I re∣member that a prachant youth a prentise to Ambrose Andrewes comming to the Railes refused to kneele and when I admonished him thereof that he should not give scandall to the communicants who were all upon their knees, but conform himselfe to the humble gesture prescribed by the Church, and he notwithstanding would not so much as bow a knee, I passed him for the present: but when afterwards he presented himselfe againe at the same communion, and I saw teares in his eyes, I came to him and demanded of him whether he came prepared, and refused to kneele meerely upon scruple of conscience, and when he seriously affirmed that he did so, I gave him the communion, and wished him to come to me the next day to take away his scruples: and when he cae, because Andrewes
his wife had said before many, that this apprentice of hers could make a better Sermon then I; I examined him in points of Cate∣chisme, and sound him tardy and ignorant enough. The third Article. He preacheth for Organs, shewing how necessary they are to be in Chur∣ches, and hath preached against prayer ex tempore, and saith of such pray∣ing, whereas such were never in, so they are ever out; and the said Doctor preacheth but seld ne to his people, having two great livings, yet he pressed hard for 2 s. 9 d. in the pound of his parishioners, untill it came neere the commencing of a suit at law to prevent him. Answ. For Organs. I remember that commenting upon that text  of the Apostle, Col. 3. 16. admonishng one another in Psalmes and hymnes and spirituall songs, I said that some noted upon the word Psalmoi derived from  tango to touch, that psalmes properly sig∣nified such songs as were made to be sung, and plaid upon the lute, harpe, or some such like instrument: & hereupon inferred the law∣full use of instrumentall musick, vhich though I conceived to be no very strong argument, becaused rawne from a meere etymologie: yet for the doctrine it selfe, I held it very sound and good, that it is lawfull to proise God as well with instrumentall as vocall musick. And for Organs in particular, I said they were not to be accounted popish, for S. Ambrose and S. Austine commended the use of them in the Church in their time, & at this day the protestants use them both in the low Countries, and in England; and for the Pope he hath none in his Chappell: yet his Majesty hath in his, as his pre∣decessors had before him. Howsoever I am sure that no man can testifie that ever I undertooke to shew how necessary Organs be; I doe not hold them necessary, but very lawfull, and of good use both in the Kings Chappell, Cathedrall Chutches, Colledges, and elsewhere. The law forbiddeth them, for the Act of Parliament forbiddeth M. W any to use any other forme, or manner of Prayer, Service, or Sa∣craments;
then is there expressed. I deny your argument, and my reason is, an Organ is no manner atley. or forme of singing, or service, but a meere instrument wherewith we stir up our affections, the more to praise God, and sing more tunable, and delightfully. As a sword is no forme or manner of fighting, a toole is no forme or manner of working, a knife is no forme or manner of cutting: so neither is an Organ, Lute, or Harp, any forme or manner of singing, or praysing God, but an instru∣ment onely, wherewith we pray or praise, or sing more melodi∣ously White -plus- the se∣dtime. & gracefully; & sith it is evident, that no Organ or other mu∣sicall instruments are any types of Christ, or parts of the abrogated Law of Moses: I am yet to learne, why we may not as lawfully use Organs in our Churches, as King David used them in the Temple; 150. 34 Praise God with the sound of the Trumpet, praise him with the Psalery and Harpe, praise him with the Timbrell and Pipe, praise him with the string∣ed  instruments and Organs. For praying ex tempore. I never condemned it absolutely, but 2,  contrariwise when I preached at Lambeth, upon these words of the Apostle, The spirit maketh intercession withsighes and groanes which can∣not be expressed. I much pressed the use thereof, especially when ac∣cording to our Saviours precept, we retire into our closets, and pray to our Father in secret; but I found fault with some carelesse preachers in our dayes, who came into the Pulpit at publike Fasts, and pre∣sumed without any premeditation to pray many houres ex tempore, in which their prayers they used much Battologie and vaine repeti∣tions against the expresse commandement of our Saviour, & exclu∣ded his prayer, which is the perfect pattern of all prayer. The words of my Sermon transcibed verbatim, are these. They expunge the Lords prayer, and doe not at all rehearse before or after it their owne, how long soever they make them. Whereas the Reformed Churches generally conclude their prayers, before Sermon with the Lords prayer, partly in opposition to Papists, who close up their devotions with an Ave Maria, partly to supply all the de∣fects and imperfections of their owne these leave out that sancti∣fied forme of prayer, in which, it being the quintessence of all
prayer, one drop is more worth, and hath in it more vertue, be∣ing powred out in Faith, then an Ocean of their conceived abor∣tive prayers, in which they are never out, because indeed never in, neither can they easily make an end, because they never knew how to begin. For my seldome preaching. Besides ten distinct bookes, and some of them of no small volumne, which I have published in the defence of the Orthodox Protestnt Religion, against Atheists, Papists, and Arminians, I have beene a constant preacher in Eng∣land, and in France, for these 32 yeares at least. This last yeare I have preached sometimes twice and sometimes thrice in a weeke, though not so often at Lambeth as I used to doe, partly by reason of my at∣tendance two moneths at Court, by command of the then Lord Chamberlaine the Earle of Essex, partly in regrd of a double taske recommended to me, from some Members of the Honourable House of Commons: the former writing annottions upon all S. Pauls Epistles, the latter, an answer to a treatise of a Popish Priest, Intituled, A safegard from Shipwrack; the former ready for the Presse; the latter Printed with the approbation of the House. Onely this is true, that I have very seldome or never preached at Lambeth Church this yare in their hearing; for five of them have not beene at Lambeth Church at divine prayer these 9 months, for which their delinquency, I humbly desire that according to the To mot Wh tur dea Statute they may pay their 2d to the poore, for every Sunday and Holyday they have beene absent from their Parish Church. For my two great Liings. They were I confesse good Livings, if I might have my : but frst for rent of houses, and the tenth part of he cleare gaines of Merchants and Artificers (according to the Statute of K Edward the sixt) I never received a peny, and for the land in the Parish, whereof there was wont formerly to be 1000 acres in tillage; tere are now not above 120, the Parishio∣ners turning their a rable land (the tenth where of was worth at least 4s per acre) into pasture for cow-keeping, for which I receive ac∣cording to the custome but 4d per acre, yet out of these I pay to the King and my Curat, and other chargs, 100 l per annum.
For 2s 9 per pound. I never demanded it of any man, nor receive any more from them who live in the greatest, and fairest houses of Lambeth (and have not land there) then two pence for their oblati∣on at Easter; so little doth the food of their soules stand them in. Howbeit thus much truth is in the Article, that when the Min∣sters and Ciizens of London referred the great difference betweene them concerning Rent of houses to the rbitration of his Majesty, and a proposition was made to all the Suburbs & parts ad oyning, that they should likewise submit all controversies concerning their tithes to his Majesty, for the preventing of litigious suits as well in spirituall Courts, as at common aw. I being sent to, appea∣red with the rest, and under my hnd and seale bound my selfe to stand to his Majestis Order: but the prishioners by the advice of M. Holbourne, refused to submit to the sa n, and so nothing was done. The fourth Article. The said Doctor in a Sermon preached the 25 of July, 1641, said, that all those that pull downe the Raile from the Communion Table, or speake a∣gainst the, and oppose the ceremonies of the Church, are of the seed of the Serpent, and enemies to God. Answ. I said no such thing, but describing the seed of the Ser∣pent, I said, they were his seed, who did the workes of the Divell, as our Saviour concludeh them to be the children of Abraham, who doe the workes of Abraham: now the workes of the Divell are all manner of workes of iniquitie, impuritie, or impiety: iniquity, as exaction, extortion, oppession, sacrisedge, &c. impurity, as whoredome, adultery, incest, &c of impiety, as prophaning the Lords , nd his Sanctuary, breaking into Churches, and without any authority fro the lawfull Magistrate, plucking up Pwes and Railes, and pulli downe Organs, and defacing all the Ornaments of the Church, and Monuments of the dead. And for this just reproofe of outrages committed in the Church, I have
good warrant, both from the Law of God, and an Ordinance of both Houses of Parliament. The words here alledged by the accu∣ser, I never spake in terminis, prout jcent: yet, if their testimonies, though not upon Oath, may beare downe my bare negation, let them stand as they doe, there is nothing in them, but may very well be defended. For I speake not of any Popish Ceremonies, but of such Ceremonies as are established by law in our Church, and are no way repugnant to the word of God; those who not ignorantly, but ilfully oppose such rires and Ceremonies, and continue in their opposition to the true Church of God, they are the seed of the Serpent and enemies to God. For Christ commandeth us to hold them for heathens and publicans, who refuse to heare the Mat. 17, Lu. 1 Church, and he saith, He who heareth you, heareth me, and he who heareth me, heareth him that sent me: and the Apostle in the Epistle to the Hebrews, Obey them that hav the rule over you, & submit your selves, for 13.  they watch for your soules as they that must give account, that they may doe it with joy and not with griefe, for that is unprofitable for you. The fift Article. The Doctor said in a Sermon, that bowing at the Name of Iesus was used, till Cartwright that Arch-heretick and those that followed him opposed it, but Q. Elizbeth crushed Marprelates brood, and put Penry to death, and Udall in prison till he dyed: and because they would not bow their knees, she bowed their backs in the Starchamber. And further said, that the State had sae long and done nothing, but unlesse something be done, wee are all undone; a Fowle that sitteth long and doth not hatch, her egs are ad∣dle; and a woman alwayes conceiving and never bringing forth, what com∣fort can she be to her husband? Answ. Concerning Cartwright, and Penry, &c. and the contents of this whole Article, they are arrowes shot at randome, no time or place is expressed where any such Sermon should be preached by me: and therefore I conceive, under favour of this Honourable Court, that I am not bound to answer them. But I would willing∣ly
heare from my accusers, what was the Text upon which I delive∣red this doctrine, how I divided it, and from what branch or part I made any such inferences, or uses: if they cannot shew this, as I know they cannot it will evidently appeare that these men came to Church, not as Bees to gather hony, but, as spiders, to suck some juice, which they might turne to poyson. Yet I will not deny, that in some sermon it is possible, I might in∣veigh against Cartwright, and Martine Marprelate, and Penry, that Arch-schismaticke, and Barrow, and some others of their sect, whereof some were deservedly censured in the Starchamber, and o∣thers sentenced to death. Have you any more to say to this passage? te. Nothing, but that to my best remembrance I used not the word ley. Arch-hereticke, but Arch schismaticke; and for the rest, I never heard it till now to be criminall, to alleadge a true story or narrati∣on, out of the life of Q. Elizabeth, and the Chronicles of England. Here one of the Committee said, but doth the Chronicler of England, or the Writer of the life of Q. Elizabeth, say, that she bowed downe their ob∣n:  r, & udg sus∣y of f the rs s. tley. backs? He doth not say Q. Elizabeth bowed downe their backs, but he saith, that she by the Lords of the Starchamber fined them, and im∣prisoned some of them; and that by her Judges she condemned Penry and Barrow to death. I spake therefore within compasse, when I said she bowed downe their backs. But whereas it is objected that I should say the State sate long and had done nothing, it is as farre from truth as common sense; I never uttered any such words, I have by me the copie of that Sermon, wherein the similitudes of a Fowle sitting and never hatching, and of a woman conceiving and never bringing forth, are to be seene and read, but nothing that tendeth that way. The doctrine was generall, that lawes served to little pur∣pose without execution, or good intentions  actions, for acta laudantur, & omnis laus virtutis est in actione, the particular ap∣plication to the State was not mine, but theirs; and if by the State they meant the Parliament, they deserve the just censure thereof. The formall words in that Sermon transcribed out of the Originall
are these: Dictum Sexti Pompeii, non acta laudantur, if a Hen sitteth and never hatch, or a woman be ever breeding and never bring forth, what profit is by the one, or comfort from the other? Habemus senatus consultum sicut gladium in vagina reconditum, we have good Laws against Recusants, Brownists, Drunkards, &c. but these Lawes are like a sword lockt fast in the scab∣bard, the Magistrate needs will or strength to draw it out; exe∣cution is the life of the Law, if something be not done, we are all undone. Howsoever date & non concesso, if one witnesse in the affirmative mustsway more then a hundred in the negative, who yet were present at the sermon, and heard all passages, and remember those very similitudes of a Hen, and of a woman, and yet not these of the State sitting long, let it be so. I confi∣dently affirme, that there is no malignity or offensive matter in the speech, if it betaken with the antecedents & consequents; for Sextus Pompeius would very faine have had that very act done, which he spake of to the Pylot, and a Hen that sitteth up∣on her eggs would hatch them, if it were in her power; and the cause why they come to no good, is in the eggs, because they are addle, not in the Hen; and questionlesse a woman in travaile striveth what she is able, and would with all the veines in her heart be delivered if she could possibly by any meanes: there∣fore if I had spoken those words (which I never did) for nei∣ther I, nor any other man, to my knowledge, calleth the Parli∣ament the State, but the assembly of the three estates) the mean∣ing in that place could be no other then this, that by reason of the great distractions in the Kingdome, and divisions betweene the Members of both Houses, though they had sate long and desired nothing more then to settle Church and Common-wealth in Peace: yet little hitherto could be done.
The sixt Article. When the Doctor was demanded what moneys he would give or lend to the King or Parliament, he used delayes in giving an answer, and at last would doe nothing; and further, being demanded by one of his Pa∣rish whether it were good to lend; he answered him, it was not safe for him to give or lend. Answ. I never denyed to give or lend to the King and Parlia∣ment,  but it is true, that seeing contrarie commands, both published in Print from His Majesty and the high Court of Parliament; I desired at the first that the Collectors would repaire to the Knights, Ladies, and others of the chiefe ranke of the Parish, and shew me what they gave or lent, which they refused to doe: but when they came a second time unto me, I ap∣poynted them to meet me at the Vestry the Tuesday following, and there I would resolve them, but they never came unto me, yet certified that I denyed to give or lend, and would have cer∣tified also that I disswaded others; but M. Clay, one of the Col∣lectors, struck that clause out, saying, there was no reason to certifie that as from me, which they never heard me speake, but onely another man, was said, could affirme as much. To the ac∣cusation it selfe, of not lending money, my answer is, that when Colonell Urrey was at Action, he lay in my Parsonage house, and his Souldiers not content with such Corne and Hy as they received from my Farmer at their owne price, deman∣ded the keyes of the great Barne, and had them in their hands for foure dayes; in which time, through the carelessenesse of one of the Souldiers that lay in the Barne, (if not purposely) the stack of Corne was set on fire, and the whole Brne and two stables were burned downe to the ground, the losse there∣of estimated by divers of the Parishioners, was 211 pound at the least. Besides this, when the maimed Souldiers were placed
in the Savoy, my whole stipend was layd out towards the buy∣ing of beds for them. In which consideration, I conceive that this honourable Committee will hold me excused from any further gift or loane, I being not presently furnished with mo∣ney, and having no temporal Living, nor Ecclesiasticall Digni∣tie, Deanery, Archdeaconry, or Prebend. For that one of the Parish, whom they affirmed I disswaded 2.  from lending to the King and Parliament, I desire that he may be called face to face, in the meane while I offer this Certificate under his owne hand. Meeting D. Featley about S. Ma∣garets Hill, by and by after M. White, M. Goad, and some o∣thers, were appoynted for Lambeth Parish, to see what the Inhabitants would doe upon the Propositions; after other discourse, I demanded of D. Featley what he thought of it, he replyed, that he thought the businesse would speed the worse, because they had made choice of such men as were not beloved in our Parish, nor came to our Church: But whereas it is reported, that D. Feately should disswade me, or any other to my knowledge, it is falsely suggested, for beyond my ability I freely lent 38 li. per me Neariah Mormay. The seventh Article. The said D. said in a Sermon, the 4. December, 1642. are not these resisting times, wherein authority is trampled upon, Gods true Ministers despised, all Lawes neglected and contemned, the keyes ta∣ken from the Church, and left them in such hands as have layd them by untill they become rustie and of no use, so that Sacriledge, Where∣dome, Sodomie, Murther, Felony, Pillage, Plunder (and what not?) i daily committed without punishment and is not the whole tenure of the Gospell against that, which is preached almost in every Pulpit in Lon∣don, who doe nothing but cry Arme, Arme; Fight, Fight, Blood, Blood,
Battel, Battel, Kill, Kill, and they pretend they fight for Religion, and the priviledges of Parliament, and the right of the Subject; but he said, the wise have lost their wisedome, and the physitian his kill, and the re∣medy is worse then the disease. Answ. To speake nothing of the incoherent Non-sense in this Article, where it is said, the keyes were taken from the Church, and . Featly. left them in such hands as have layd them by: I say, that none of the particulars alledged in this Article are found in that Sermon; true it is, that in another Sermon preached at a Fast, I inveighed against the great disorders committed in the Church & Com∣mon-wealth, by such. who made advantage of the present distra∣ctions, promising themselves impunity by reason that the keyes of the Church now grew rustie through disuse, & the temporall sword was otherwise imployed. All that I spake in the Sermon here objected was this. There is no Ecclesiasticall Discipline at all exercised for Laymens usurping upon the Priests functi∣on, and handicrafts mens handling the word with their blacke and impure hands, for preaching Hereticall, Schismaticall, and blasphemous Doctrine, for Adultery, Incest, and filthinesse not to be named, no punishment of Ecclesiasticall censure now in∣flicted: And the tenure of the Gospell runs thus, feare God and honour the King, speake not evill of the Ruler of Gods people, curse him not, no not so much as in thy thought; whereas they publikely in the greatest assemblies speake evill of digni∣ties, and slander the footsteps of the Lords anoynted, and compare our Religious and most gracious Soveraigne, my Master, Quo nihil immensus mitius orbis habet, to wicked Tyrants and persecuters of Gods Saints. The Scripture every where ex∣horts us to peace and reconciliation, Revenge not your selves, but give place unto wrath, for vengeance is mine, I will repay it saith the Lord; render to no man evill for evill, nor rebuke for rebuke: be not overcome of evill, but overcome evill with good: seek peace & ensue it, let righteousnesse and peace
kisse each other, O pray for the peace of Ierusalem, they shall prosper that love it: if it be possible have peace with all men: and blessed are the peace-makers, for they shall see God: and follow after peace and holinesse, without which no man shall see God: but their preaching is nothing but horrentia martis arma, Arme, Arme, Kill, Kill, thunder with the Cannon, Plunder, &c, And for the last words pretended to be spoken by me in that Sermon, viz. the wise have lost their wisedome, and the physitian his skill, and the remedy is worse then the disease, they are very unfaithfully related, for I uttered them not posi∣tively, but suppositively, and divisim not conjunctim. The pas∣sage transcribed verbatim out of the originall is this. Though divers remedies have beene applyed to the maladies above mentioned, yet the remedies have hitherto proved, in the e∣vent, worse then the diseases; an evident argument that either the wise physitians faile in their skill, or the malady is grown incurable, or God giveth no blessing to their method of curing. Concerning the witnesses, and the just exceptions to be taken against them, let the testimony under the hand of the Clerke of the peace, and the certificate of the Parish, under the hands of the Churchwardens and Vestry be read; All which I humb∣ly submit to the wisedome and justice of this Honourable Committee, preferring a like petition to that which the Ro∣man Orator tendered for poore Roscius Amerina, that you would be pleased to afford this cause so noble, gracious and equitable a hearing; that my adversaries who daily associate themselves with those souldiers, against whom I have strong presumptions, that they seeke not onely to deprive me of my Living, but my life, may never have cause to glory, Eum, quem militum gladiis non potuerunt, vestris sententiis jugulasse. At the next sitting of the Committee on Thursday last be∣ing the 23 of this instant moneth of March, 1642. M. White, whether he thought the other Articles frivolous and of no con
sequence at all, or whether he and the Committee rested satisfied with the answers formerly given, it is not certainly knowne, but on this day he pretermitted diverse of them, instanced only in a branch of the first, and of the fourth, and two of the fift, and one of the sixt, and two of the seuenth; and because the D. denied them all, he called in witnesses to prove them, and required the D. to take legall exceptions against them, if he had any. To prove that the D. should say it was ignorance and blasphemy to speake against the bowing at the Name of Jesus; Iohn Goad (and Ambrose Andrewes, were produced: to prove that he said in a sermon the 25 of Iuly 1641, that all that pul downe Railes and oppose the ceremonies of the Church, are the seed of the Serpent, Edward Searles, and Edmond Rayner, a ship∣wright, Because he said, he was as much the Lords an∣nointed as the King. commonly called the ancient King, were produced: to prove that he called Cartwright an arch Hereticke, and that the state had sate long and done nothing, and that the keyes were taken from the Church, and laid in such hands as laid them by till they became rusty, & that he inveighed against the London Preachers, who do nothing but cry arm, arm, fight, fight, &c. Thomas Sharpe and Iohn Clerke were produced, who also both testified to the first article concerning bowing at the Name of Jesus. Lastly, to the sixt article only M. Neariah Mormay was produced. When the witnesses appeared, the D. first proposed some interrogatories to them, and after tooke exceptions against them, both in generall, and particular. The interrogatories he propounded to them, by M. White, were these; First, at what time the Sermon was preached, which is mentioned in the first Article, and likewise when the Sermon was preached that is mentioned in the fift Article. Item, upon what text such sermons were preached, and what they remembred else in those sermons, to which they all could answer nothing. Whereupon the D. desired that the Committee would give no credit to such loose and indefinite testimonies, especially
against the originall sermons written in his booke, from which, it is well knowne, he never used to vary. This authenti∣call originall wherein there was no blot, scratch, or rasure in the places, to which the Articles had reference, the D. ex∣hibited; but M. White would not looke upon it, though in o∣ther Courts, and namely the high Commission and Star Cham∣ber, and Councell table, where 'Sermons have beene que∣stioned, the undisproved originall hath beene alwayes pre∣ferred before broken notes taken by ignorant and illi∣terate men. The exceptions hee tooke against the witnesses in generall, were, that competent witnesses, especially a∣gainst an ecclesiastial person & D. of Divinity ought to be men of good ranke & quality, at least without any taint or brand on them, such as are free from all malevolent affections to their pastors: for the rules of the law concerning witnesses to be admitted are these: In teste attendenda, status, dignitas, fidei puri∣tas, et morum gravitas; item cujus conditionis, cujus opinionis fu∣erit, et ne forte aliquis contra praefatum pastorem inimicitias habu∣erit: Item testes absque ulla infamia aut suspitione aut manifesta macula esse debent. That the witnesses here produced are not so qualified, I desire the certificate of the vestry, under their hands (which I have here to shew, and there are divers of the said Vestry here present to make it good) may be read; but M. White said, he would take no papers (yet he tooke both the Ar∣ticles, and other notes, and informations against the D. from his adversaries) nor would permit the D. to read it, The cer∣tificate was as followeth: we the parishioners of the parish of Lambeth, doe certifie that Iohn Goad, Ambrose Andrewes, alias Glover, Edward Searles, and Westmall Burrell, of the said parish of Lambeth, are disaffected persons to the discipline and li∣turgie of the Church of England established by Act of Parli∣ament, have openly depraved the booke of Common Prayer, some of them doe not come to the Church at all and stand indicted as delinquents at Sessions and Assises, and that they
are accounted turbulent persons, and sowers of strise and contention. This certificate being refused, the D. required that the re∣cord he had from the Sessions might be read and considered of; this, after M. Harper the Church warden had testified before the Committee, that it was subscribed by the hand of the Clerk of the Peace, and that he himselfe saw him write it, was admitted for an evidence: the record followeth. At the generall quarter sessions of this yeare, for the county of Surry, holden at Gilford, on Tuesday next after the feast of the translation of Thomas the Martyr in the 18 yeare of his Majesties raigne that now is. Iohn Goad of Lambeth, Ambrose Andrewes of the same, Edward Searles of the same and Iohn Hopkins of the same, were by the Jury of the high Con∣stables of the County indicted for not repairing to the pa∣rish church of Lambeth, to heare divine service and the common prayers of the Church, by the space of 12 sundayes, but did voluntarily and obstinately absent themselves from the same, contrary to the statute in that case provided. Ita testor Tho. Foster, clericus pacis Com. Sur. In particular, I except against Io. Goad. That he is a man who stands indicted at the Sessions, ex record, supr. 1. That he hath spoken often, as he cannot deny, much in dero∣gation of the booke of Common Prayer, as namely, against di∣verse 2. passages in the Letany, the crosse in baptisme, and the forme of absolution in the visitation of the sick. That he is a breaker of the Sabbath himselfe, and causeth his servants to worke upon that day, as he did on the 28 of 3. November last. To the former two exceptions, Goad could an∣swer nothing; but to the last, he said, it was in case only of ne∣cessity; but the D replyed it was meere covetousnesse, and no necessity at all, as his neighbour Andrew Bartlet an ancient ve∣stry man would testifie against him, whom the D. earnestly de∣sired to be called in, he being ready & waiting in the next room,
but hee could not obtaine it of M. White to have him cal∣led. Item against Ambrose Andrewes. That he stands indicted as is abovesaid. 1. That he likewise, as Goad, hath spoken much in derogation of 2. the Common Prayer book, and hath not come to the prayers and Sacrament at Lambeth these nine months at least, as the Reader, Clerke, and Sexton, and Church-wardens also were ready to testifie, That whilst he came to Church (as he did formerly) he fre∣quently 3. disturbed the Preacher, he usually talked and laughed in the Sermon, jeering at the Minister, and once when the D. himselfe preached, spake aloud in his sermon, saying; It is time thou hadst done already, and other such contemptuous and dis∣gracefull words; for which by the statute 10. Mariae Sess. 2. he is, if it be proved against him by two witnesses, to be com∣mitted without baile or mainprise to the Goale; the two wit∣nesses, said the D. are here present to testifie it, Richard Hooke, & William Chapman. but M. White would not have them called in. That when his wife had said before one of the neighbours, that 4. at Lambeth Church they had nothing but pottage, and that they must goe to London for rostemeat, & that the Church was no better then a barne or stable; and that neighbour reproved her for it, her husband, the said Ambrose Andrewes, said, he would iustifie and maintaine what his wife had said. Item, against Edward Searles. That he stands indicted at the Sessions: ut supra. 1. That he confessed that the cause of their preferring Arti∣cles 2. against D. Featley, was to stay the prosecution of a bill a∣gainst him the said Searles at Sessions, and said, that if the D. would take off the indictment, th articles against the D. should soone be with-drawne: this is testified by Tho. Pibus and an∣other. That this Searles is a Blasphemer of the holy Scripture; say- 3.
nancy against the Parliament, and the proceedings thereof; saying openly in his preaching, that our State had sate long and done nothing, comparing themto a Fowle that sitteth long and hatcheth not, whose eggs be addle, and to a woman that alwayes conceiveth and never bringeth forth, who can be no comfort to her husband; and hath not onely not given or lent to the present necessary preservation of the Kingdome, but declared to others that it is not safe to give or lend to the Parliament, and hath openly preached that these are resisting times, and that the keyes are taken from the Church, and left in such hands as have layd them by till they be rustie, and that the whole tenure of the Gospell is against that which is preached commonly in London, where Arme, Arme, Blood, Blood, Fight, Fight, is commonly preached; and they pre∣tend they fight for Religion, and priviledge of Parliament, and the liberty of the Subjects, but the wife have lost their wisedome, and the physitian his skill, and the cure is worse than the disease. All which the Commons in Parliament assembled, taking into consideration, for the provision of a Godly, Learned, and Orthodox Divine for the said Parish, and for fit maintenance for such an one, doe Order, that the said Church and the profits thereof, be forthwith Seque∣stred, &c. Die Martis, II Iulii, 1643. The Order for sequestring the Parsonage of Lambeth from D. Featley, being put to the question; It was resolved nega∣tively. H. Elsinge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. Notwithstanding this resolution of the house of Com∣mons, in justification of D. F. a substitute of M. Whites of Dor∣hester, who beares his character in his name, stretched his Che∣varel conscience so farre, that to gratifie some Schismaticall Separatists at Lambeth, read a Paper upon the 9. of November
last, in the Parish Church of Lambeth on the Lords day, in which D. F. is charged with the Articles above mentioned, formally in terminis (which were rejected by the house of Commons, as partly idle and frivolous, partly false and scan∣dalous, and the D. cleared and acquitted of them all) and they made the ground of the sentence of Sequestration, pronoun∣ced against him September 29. Now sith a Judge cannot justly pronounce different sentences, and give divers judgements upon the selfe same evidence, neither is it possible after a cause is fully informed and sentenced, that the same party should be both guilty, and not guilty of the same Delinquencies numero: And forasmuch as the sentence above mentioned, whereby the D. is cleared, acquitted, and absolved, is upon Record, and may be seene by any who shall search for it, in the authenticall Register of the Acts of the house of Commons: It followeth necessarily and unavoydably, that D. F. not onely remaineth still Rector of Lambeth (as he is styled in the very forme of Se∣questration) but also standeth rectus in curia. As for the Letter to the Primate of Armagh, intercepted, wherewith alone he is charged in another Declaration, it is answered above: It was no Letter but an unsealed note drawne from D. F. by a wile, See the Gentle Lash. it discovers no secrets at all, nor layes any imputation upon the Assembly or Parliament, and is so farre from containing any offensive matter, or subject to any just exception or censure; that the close Committee who exactly perused it, and tooke a Copy of it, sent the true originall to the Primate of Armagh at Oxon, who hath it in his keeping.
The Doctors Manifesto and CHALLENGE. Whereas a false and scandalous report is bruited by the Semi-separatists and Anabaptists, and readily entertai∣ned by divers Zelots of the new Reformation; that I, who have preached and printed so much against Popery heretofore, now in my old dayes being ready to leave this world, have fal∣len away from my holy profession, and am in heart a Pa∣pist, there being found very many popish bookes in my study. And because I have learned from the mouth of S. erome, that though other wrongs may be put up and answered with silence, committing the revenge thereof to the righteous Judge, inju∣stissime judicato justissime judicaturo: yet, that in suspitione haereseos reminem oportet silere, that no man ought to be silent when he is charged with Heresie. I have thought fit to make knowne to all whom it may concerne, that being chosen Provost of Chelsey Colledge, I have under the broad Seale of England, a Warrant to buy, have, and keepe, all manner of popish bookes, and that I never bought or kept any of them, but to this end and pur∣pose, the better to informe my selfe to refute them; and for my judgement and resolution in poynt of Religion. I professe before God and his holy Angels, and the whole world, that what I have heretofore preached, written, and Printed, against the errors, heresies, Idolatry, and manifold superstitions of the Romish church, is the truth of God, and that I am most ready and willing, if I be called thereunto, to signe and seale it with my blood. And whereas I am certainly informed, that divers Lectu∣rers and Preachers in London and the Suburbs, who have entred
upon the labours of many worthy Divines, and reaped their har∣vest, doe in their owne Pulpits, after a most insolent manner, in∣sult upon them; demanding, where are they now that dare stand up in defende of Church Hierarchy or booke of Common Prayer, or any may oppose or impugne the new intended Reformation, both in doctrine and discipline of the Church of England? I doe here protest, that I doe and will maintaine by disputation or writing, against any of them, these three conclusions. First, that the Articles of Religion, agreed upon in the yeare 1. of our Lord, 1562. by both houses of Convocation, and rati∣fied by Q. Elizabeth, need no alteration at all, but onely an Or∣thodox explication in some ambiguous phrases, and a vindica∣tion against false aspersions. Secondly, that the Discipline of the Church of England, e∣stablished 2. by many lawes and Acts of Parliament; that is, the government by Bishops (removing all late innovations and a∣buses in the execution thereof) is agreeable to Gods Word, and a truly, ancient, and Apostolicall Institution. Thirdly, that there ought to be a set forme of publike prayer, 3 and that the booke of Common Prayer (the Calendar being reformed, in poynt of Apochryphill Saints and Chapters, some Rubricks explained, and some expressions revised, and the whole correctly Printed, with all the Psalmes, Chapters, and allegations out of the old and new Testament, according to the last translation) is the most compleat, perfect, and exact Li∣turgie now extant in the Christian world. DANIEL FEATLEY. FINIS.
