G99 99825753 30140
cartoon panel Behold Two Crafty Iesuits fighting, Only to draw a Zealous Knight in, I Charge ye keep ye Peace cartoon panel Whom striving to apease their brangle, That weak Old man does basely strangle. Oaes Berry Watching A Green cartoon panel See how they veiw him with delight, Whilst Ladys dance and Pispot spright. Was it not politickly done. B cartoon panel By watchful sentrie th' are not seen, For th'Devil thrusts his Paw between. Hem Hem. C D cartoon panel Tis strange though how his joynts are bended, In Chair; and then againe extended. Stretch out his Leggs E cartoon panel Our Towns They burn our goods they plunder, By such sly tricks, 'twill make you wonder. Ie∣suits dis∣guis'd Trap. Trap Cum Cruce. F Sr. W.W. Stop Theife. cartoon panel You'l wonder more how they durst venture, For killing King; to signe Indenture. We deliver this as or Act & Deed. To the Use of Doctor O. This Indenture Tripartite made ye 24 day of Aprill 1678 R.M. cartoon panel Behold their Generall, a stout Tory. Peters's fayme was only Glory. L•t Genl. Bellai Lead up ye Pilgri∣ms Lutt. Genl. Peters. We'le give no quarter cartoon panel Powis might hope to mend his fortune, What Staffords end was, we are certain. We want our Pay. Pay Mr: Genl. Stafford. Goe to ye Treasurer my baggs are empty There's Pardons plenty Dispen¦sations. Par∣dons. Bulls. The Popes Treasure. cartoon panel Their Chancelor nere studied Law, Their Major General Campe nere saw. Majr Genl. Ratcliffe. Where's our Commissions Ld Chancellr. Arunde On Langhornes Table Bedloe saw them. G cartoon panel The pious Pilgrims inclination, Was to pervert, and damn this Nation. Spanish Pilgrims PLENARY INDUL∣GENCE. To Cross ye Seas w'have made a Vow But none knows how. cartoon panel And Irish Tory with black Bill, Wou'd kill us all; if we sit still. Irish Army lies Incognito. H Where were these Bills made At Bilboe & Salamanca. A True Narrative of the Horrid Hellish Popish-Plot. To the Tune of PACKINGTONS POUND, The First Part. The Contents of the FIRST PART. How Sir Godfrey is Kill'd, his Body they hide, Which brought out in Chair, a Horse-back do's ride: How Jesuits disguis'd, our Houses do Fire; How subtly they Plot, and King's Death Conspire; Of divers Great Lords drawn in, to their Bane; An Army of Irish, and Pilgrims from Spain. I. GOod People I pray you give ear unto me, A Story so strange you have never been told, How the Jesuit, Devil, and POPE did agree, Our STATE to destroy, and Religion so old. To murder our KING, A most Horrible Thing! But first of Sir Godfrey his Death I must sing; For how e're they disguise it, we clearly can see, Who Murder'd that Knight no good Christian could be. The truth of my Story if any man doubt, W' have Witnesses ready to Swear it all out. II. AT Somerset-house there is plain to be seen, A Gate which will lead you into the Back-Court, This (1) Place for the Murder most fitting did seem, For thither much People does freely resort: His Body they toss'd, From Pillar to Post, And shifted (2) so often, 't had like t'have been lost; To watch with (3) Dark Lanthorn the Jesuits did go, But never mistrusted our Honest (4) Bedloe. The Truth of my Story, &c. III. LEast such close Contrivements at length might take Air, When as his dead Body corrupted did grow, They carried him out in (5) Invisible Chair, And set him a (6) Horseback to ride at So-Hoe. His own (7) Sword to the Hilt, To add to their Guilt, They thrust through his Body, but no Bloud was (8) spilt; T'have it thought he was kill'd by a Thief, they did mean, So they left (9) all his Money, and made his (10) Shooes clean. The truth of my Story, &c. IV. TO shew now th' excess of Jesuitical Rage, They this Loyal City to ruine would bring, 'Cause you Citizens are so Religious and sage, And ever much noted for true to your King; T' your Houses they go, With (11) Fire and with Tow, Then (12) pilfer your Goods, and 'tis well you scape so; Y'have seen how they once set the Town (13) all in flame; And divers times since have attempted the same. The truth of my Story, &c. V. BY (14) Bedlo's Narration is shewn you most clear, How Jesuits disguis'd into Houses will creep; In a Porter or Carman's (15) Frock they'l appear, Nay they will not disdain to cry Chimney-sweep; Or sell you Small-Cole, Then drop in some hole A Fire Ball, or thrust it up by a long Pole; But I now must relate a more Tragical thing, How these Villains conspir'd to murder our King, The truth of my Story, &c. VI. AT the (16) White-horse in April there was a Consult, Where Jesuits a (17) Covenant wickedly frame; The (18) Death of our Sovereign was the Result, To th' which at least (19) Forty all signed their name, They wou'd not do that, I' th' place where they sat, Trusty Oates must (21) convey it, from this man to that; To make sure work, by (21) Poyson the Deed must be done And Stab'd with a (22) Dagger, and (23) Shot with a Gun. The truth of my Story, &c. VII. FOr fear at St. Omers, their Oates might be miss'd, Th' agreed with a Devil t' appear in his place. In a Body of Air, believe't if you list, Which squeek'd just like Oats, and mov'd with the same grace; 'T cou'd Lie, it cou'd Cant, Turn eyes like a Saint. And of our great Doctor no feature did want. Thus Forty might Swear they (24) saw Oates ev'ry day, But true Oates was here, and the Devil saw they. The truth of my Story, &c. VIII. FRom Father Oliva (26) Commissions did come, To raise a great Army much Treasure is spent: Th' Old Man was resolved to take Post from Rome, To ride at the Head of them was his intent; Lord (27) Bellas' was fit, Who can deny it, To Command in his place, When's Gout wou'd permit; Lord (28) Stafford was fittest to trust with their Pay, Old (29) Ratcliff to range them in Battel Array. The Truth of my Story if any man doubt, W' have Witnesses ready to Swear it all out, IX. TH' High-Treasurer's place the Lord (30) Powis did please, Men of desp'rate Fortune oft venture too far; Lord (31) Peters wou'd hazard Estate, and his Ease, And Life for the Pope too, in this Holy War; Lord Ar'ndel of Old, So Warlike and bold, Made choice of a (32) Chancllor's Gown we are told. All these did Conspire with the Lord Castlemaine, Whose Plot was to catch his old Dutchess again. The truth of my Story if any man doubt, W' have Witnesses ready to Swear it all out. X. GReat store of wild (33) Irish both civil and wise, Designed to joyn with the (34) Pilgrims of Spain, Thirty (35) Thousand being ready there all in good guise, Had vow'd a long Pilgrimage over the Main. To arm well this Host, When 't came on our Cost, (36) Black Bills forty thousand, are sent by the Post, This (37) Army lay privately on the Sea Shore; And no man e're heard of them since nor before. The truth of my Story if any man doubt, W' have Witnesses ready to Swear it all out. My Witnesses I bring, and produced the Record, D'ye think th' are Perjur'd? 'Tis false and absur'd, Wou'd th' Godly hang Papists for Interest or Pique? Wou'd a Doctor Swear false for Ten Pound a Week? FINIS. Authors Quoted. (1) Hil Tryal, pag. 16. (2) viz. 4 Times, p. 18.16. (3) See the same Try. p. 18. (4) The same, pag. 31. (5) The same, pag. 69. (6) The same Tryal, p. 20. (7) The same, pag. 35. (8) Ibid. (9) Ibid. (10) See the Coroners Inquest. (11) See Dt. Oates's Narrative page 22. (12) Ibid. (13) See the Piller near Lon∣don Bridge. (14) Read Bedloes Narrative. (15) See Dr. Oates's Narrat. page 68. (16) See Ireland's Tryal, page 19. (17) Ibid. (18) Ibid. (19) The same Tryal, pag. 26 (20) The same, page 20. (21) See Dr. Oates's Narrat. page 21. (22) The same, Narrat. p. 47. (23) See Pickerings Tryal, page 23. (24) See St. Omers Certificate (25) See Jesuits Tryal, p. 47. (26) See Dr. Oates's Narra∣tive, p. 58. (27) Ibid. (28) Ibid. (29) Ibid. (30) Ibid. (31) Ibid. (32) Ibid (33) See Lords Journal and Langhorns Tryal, page 20. (34) Ibid (35) See Lords Journal, p. 54. (36) See Colemans Tryal, p. 23. (37) See Lords Journal and Langhorns Tryal, as above. Some Notes on the Picture  prevent Popish Cavils. A. Read Greens Tryal, page 16 and 17. B. This is the famous Spright with the Chamber-pot, which did as cer∣tainly appear to the Popish Ladies, when they danc'd about the Body,  'tis certain, it did afterwards appear to some True Protestant Ladies in the same place. C. Hem, was the watch-word to Perry to open the Gate. See his Tryal, page 19. D. and E. We may well suppose, the Devil help'd them when they pass'd invisible so close by the Centry: and we may be more assured, they could not without some Diabolical Art make him (after so many days being dead) bend his Legs to sit in the Chair, and then to stretch them out stiff again, as he was found on Prim∣rose-Hill. F. The Jesuits most ingenious Game of Trap, which to understand you must read Bedloes Narrative of the Fires, p. 16. and 17. Read it throughout: 'Twill shew you plainly, how the Papists burnt London; or if you desire to be confirm'd in so nece∣ssary a belief by an undeniable Autho∣rity, read the new Inscription on the Monument, and that on the house in Pudding-Lane, which were purposely design'd to convince all the World of this Truth, and safely to convey it to Posterity. G. See Langhorns Memoires, and L. C. J. Answer to Bedloes Articles. H. The Dr. does not tell us, where these forty thousand Bills were made; but our reason tells us, that 'twas ve∣ry necessary they should be hamme∣red as privately as possible (for fear of Discovery) and therefore Bilb and Salamanca, may pass far more probable than London or any Town in England.
