G922A 99827999 32426
The Goddesses Glory: OR, THE Loyal Lover Wounded By their splended Beauty. To the Tune of, Walking beneath the Shades. This may be Printed, R. P. I. WHen the soft winds did blow in the fair flourishing Spring, Where silver Streams did flow, and the sweet small Birds did sing: The Hills Enamell'd were, With fragrant Flowers fair, pleasant and gay: Through shades and groves I went, Then with a full intent to gather May. II. A pleasant Flow'ry plain, at length I there did espy, Where a young Female Train, made a most sweet harmony; On Lutes they play'd and sung, VVhich were most sweetly strung, all the long Day, The which did charm me so, That I forgot to go to gather May. III. Clorona she was there, whom the young Swains do adore, And Floramella fair, with many youthful Nymphs more; The one for Beauty bright, Cast such a splendid light, out-shin'd the day, I ask't who she might be, Straight it was told to me, the Queen of May. IV. There was none could compare with her among all the rest: The Tresses of her Hair shaded her white snowy Breast: Long did I stand and gaze, VVords cannot speak her praise, being so gay; Then I thought in my mind, That I should never find more sweeter May. V. The Harmony they made, my yielding Fancy did move; So that I was betray'd in the sweet Raptures of love: Their Voices soft and sweet, Did with their Musick meet, as they did play; Thought I, I'de rather be, In their sweet Company, than gather May. VI. No man felt greater smart than I, in all the whole Earth, Being deny'd a part in their sweet innocent Mirth: The Nymph that wounded me, VVould not to that agree, but said me nay; Fair Flora was her name; I wisht I ne'r had came to gather May. VII. They were Array'd in white, with their fine Kerchers of Lawn; But e're the gloomy Night, her sable Curtains had drawn, Homeward they did repair, And left me VVounded there, where I did stay, Being perplext in mind, Knowing not where to find the Queen of May. FINIS. Printed for I. Deacon at the Angel in Gilt-Spur-street, without Newgate.
