H1321 12043849 53069
A CHRONICLE OF THE Late Intestine War IN THE THREE KINGDOMS OF ENGLAND, SCOTLAND and IRELAND. WITH The Intervening Affairs of TREATIES, And other Occurrences relating thereunto. As also the several Usurpations, Forreign Wars, Differences and Interests depending upon it, to the happy Restitution of our Sacred Soveraign K. CHARLES II. In Four Parts, Viz. The COMMONS WAR, The DEMOCRACIE, The PROTECTORATE, The RESTITUTION. By JAMES HEATH, Gent. The Second Edition. To which is added A Continuation to this present year 1675. Being a brief Account of the most Memorable Transactions In England, Scotland and Ireland, and Forreign Parts. By I. P. LONDON: Printed by I. C. for THOMAS BASSET, at the George neer Cliffords-Inne in Fleetstreet. MDCLXXVI.
To the most Illustrious and Magnanimous, GEORGE, Duke of Albemarle, Earl of Torrington, Ba∣ron Monck of Potherige, Beauchamp, and Teys: Captain-General of all his Majesties Land-forces, Garrisons, Forts, and Castles within any of His Majesties Kingdoms or Dominions; Master of the Horse, Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter, and one of His Majesties most Honourable Privy Council. May it please your Highness, I Presume to offer your victorious hands this Fragment and minute Portion of Time, from the encou∣ragement of that Axiome, That by Moments Approaches are made to Eternity, to which the Duration of your Glory is most adaequate and Commensurate. I am most humbly conscious that this Historiola, this piece of a Chronicle, is a most incompetent and incon∣gruous Present to Your Highness; and of all the meanest and vilest that ever obtruded or excused themselves to Princes, the most unpardonable. But such is the Fate of this way of writing, and upon this Subject, that whoso∣ever shall dare to increase our Annals, must either injure your Greatness by intitling you to his Endeavour, or else disoblige his Nation, who owe and own their Laws, which is more than their History, to your Prudence and Puissance. Besides (Great Sir) the Genius that walkt and wan∣dred in the contexture and account of this War, like the Ghost of murdered persons, never left importuning and urging me to address its groans to you, the Vindex and A∣venger of that blood, which hath been so barbarously and
unnaturally spilt. Your Highnesses blessed Conduct traced and overtook the guilt of the late Sanguinary times, and Expiated those dire Effusions. You have reconciled our Review to those abhorrences, and with innocence given us the Representation of the Impiety of the late Age: You have given Form and Beauty to the Chaos of our Confu∣sions, made the lineaments thereof in its derivation to Posterity lovely and amiable: from a ghastly and mangled Spectacle, not to be owned or known by our selves, you have perfected and concinnated it to its proportions; and from a Medly of our Distractions, brought forth a Beauti∣ful Rationale We doubt not to evince to your Ma∣jesty, that his Excellency and the Ar∣my under his Command, &c. have complied with the O∣bligations for which they were raised; The Preservation of the Pro∣testant Reli∣gion, the ho∣nour and happiness of the King, the Priviledges of Parlia∣ment, the Li∣berty and Propriety of the Subject, and the Fun∣damental Laws of the Land. Vide Declaration of the Ar∣my, May 1660.. And now under that your Highnesses Signature, this little Chronicle is ambitious to pass, and to commend it self to the world. I would not be guilty of so much vanity, as to pretend in this Address any respect or regard to your Renown and Fame, raised beyond the reach of our most exalted praises, as being the same with the Miracles your High∣ness hath instrumented: the highest Transcendencies of Language do with advantage disappear into silent Exta∣sies, and our Raptures convert into the Forms of Blessing, and lose themselves in Adoration. Besides, the Oracle, the Wisdome of the Kingdome in Parliament, hath engros∣sed all the utterance of Gratitude, in their publick Ac∣knowledgments, transcribed into the sacred Records and Rolls of that supream Court. So Heaven was pleased not onely to sum up the ver∣tues and felicities of all the Generals in our Civil Wars, integrating and accomplishing the Loyalty, Conduct, Cou∣rage, Success, Renown and Triumphs, contra-opposed and divided among them, in your Heroical person, making you the Compleat Compendium, as well as the absolute Con∣clusion of the menage thereof (which to your Honour and Memory shall be eternally celebrated,) but also to center the general hope and confidence in your single Vertue, to unite, or at least cement and amuse different Parties and Perswasions to an acquiescence in your Resolutions and Designe, and then at last to Crown them with universal Satisfaction, Content, and Delight; the three Nations be∣ing inspired with One voice, and gratulatory Shout, at your Redemption of us from Slavery.
But while I please my self and the Reader with the memory of that ravishing Kindness, I forget I do displease your Highness with this rude and tedious Boldness, which I would religiously avoid. May you graciously be pleased to vouchsafe a Reception of this Essay to the honour of the Times you have made, wherein Truth hath recover∣ed her Reputation, and dare maintain it, (and it is the onely justifiable part of the ensuing Work, as far as Hu∣mane Frailty may be indulged;) while I doubt not but mine (and the General) Prayers to Heaven shall be ac∣cepted for Your and your Posterities long Temporal, and endless Eternal Felicities. Your Highness's Devoted and most Obedient Servant, JAMES HEATH.
THE PREFACE TO THE READER. THe custom and obligation which lies upon all publick Writings to bespeak the benevolent and favourable judgement of those who shall vouchsafe them their perusal, doth with great advantage, like the auspicious invocation of a Deity, assist those humble, and submiss acknowledgments I am bound to render of the ensuing Collections. It is most certain, that Books of this nature bring an Imputa∣tion of their own, like original guilt, with them into the World, and that it is an impossible labour to wipe it off, though the felicity of former times, and debonarity of their manners, have transmitted a few more innocent, and less obnoxious Histories to a most piacular and guilty Posterity; but the crimes with which the Current of our Annals are imbittered, and the effects thereof, —Odium, Timor, Ira, Voluptas, —Nostri est Farrago Libelli. those many animosities and irreconciled Feuds, besides the depravity of the late age, leave such a dreadful prejudice upon this attempt, that like the atcheivement of the Augaean labour, nothing but Rivers of Oyl can asswage or mitigate and purge the distemper. And that course I may presume to have steered, saving in that parricidial Fact, the abhorrence of the world, an impiety of such a magnitude, that it cannot be heightned by any aggravation, no more than lessened by any excuse, as Sir Heneage Finch ex∣cellently observed; indeed, such an unmeasurable wickedness, save that it filled up the measure of its iniquity, as infinity of time can never parallel, unless such unex∣ampled and unfortunate Vertue and Innocence dare appear again: and therefore to clear and free the Nation, and expiate the infamy of that treason, the individual persons of that Conspiracy are marked and branded with their Character. As to other persons, I have used the severest cautions I could, that I trespassed not upon their name, by any wrong, sinister, single, or injurious report; nor willingly at all, but where such account was of great evidence, light, and satisfaction to the subject discoursed of. I must confess, as Sir Walter Raleigh said, Truth may be followed too neer, both to persons, time, and place; like Diana, she must not be seen naked, and prophaned by a full view; and many are yet living, who are very unwilling to hear their story: I have therefore piously abstained (without most just and notorious rea∣sons) from thrusting my Pen wilfully into such matter, to the wounding of any mans Reputation, considering what the same Satyrist wisely adventured, — Experiar quid concedatur in illis, Quorum Flaminia tegitur cinis atque Latina. As to Actions, I have not indiligently traced and examined all relations of them; but such is the variety thereof, that I flatter not my self with the hopes of giving ge∣neral
satisfaction: nor would my designe allow me to be copious or particular in every mans merit; if I should have discharged that Debt of Glory, I should have undone the Credit of this modest and plain-meaning History. I have used for my better di∣rection herein, whatsoever Authentick accounts I could procure; and particularly I am obliged to the Honourable Sir Lewis Dyve, for his exact and elegant Narra∣tive of the Irish War in 1649, under the conduct of the most noble the Duke of Or∣mond; as also to several other Noble hands for divers small Pieces relating to this Work, on whose difficult and perplexed Contexture I could otherwise neither safely nor fairly have adventured. That is part of my defence for this undertaking: for I suppose the honour of such Personages placed beyond the reach of Calumny▪ and as to the rest, which shews its Birth and Production by a distinct and discernible stile, I can justly alledge the most known and approved Authorities; and for the publication of it in this manner, and at this time, the fortune of a former Impression, and importunity for this, as the first Essay of this kinde in English, that can lay claim to the prosperous veracity of the times. The great wonder of our Revolutions is not yet over, and the Vnderlings of the last Age, who were born during the Rebellion, as yet in a Maze, and astonisht at the Event and Issue of our Troubles; nor can be settled in that Allegiance which was a stranger to their Nativity. That therefore such, and future Posterity, might be fully in∣formed of the state and nature of the Quarrel, and be more satisfied with their vo∣luntary obedience (to be improved now by this seasonable account of the dispute thereof through the last twenty years) I have endeavoured a perfect Relation in this Series of the War, and succeeding Affairs. And I will here onely mention, for the advice of future times, and as a necessary Memento to the present, what evils and mischiefs (even to the brink of destruction) the popular Cheats of Religion and Liberty have most terribly effected. I will not instance the successful Artifices of the Vsurpers, which wanted not any the smallest plausible ingredients, till their Conspiracy came to a powerful consistency, and was able to vindicate and intitle its Treason to the authority of the Law. If this could have been foreseen or prevented, there had scarce been twenty guilty persons in the Nation, whereas a considerable number are now obnoxious to the Government, upon the score of those prevailing and thriving Grandees, who offered the World to their Adherers, and gave them the unjust possession of their impious Conquest. The whole Work is divided into four parts, as well for the more distinct and clear perceivance of each form and shape of the Anarchy, its interests and peculiar relative Affairs, as for a rest and pause to the Reader, who would otherwise be wearied with a hudled continuance of such Confusions. I will adde no more: for I think it unne∣cessary to engage further in the matter, or anticipate the Contents of this Chronicle (which name it onely pretends to, as a Iournal or Day-book of Time) but having once more requested the most favourable acceptance and censure thereof, and that the Reader will please to measure the Failures and Errours of it by its abstruse, obscure, and intricate Conveyances, which admitted of no certain, full, and infallible know∣ledge (as agreed on by all hands) the particulars claiming to the grand success and sum of every Action for their belief, to bid him happily VALE.
Reader, HAving promised a short Abstract of those vast sums of Money the Long Parliament and their continued Usurpation drained out of the Purses and Blood, I may say, of the English people; I found in the Progress of the Account, that it would exceed all Arithmetick, and belief to the Reputation and Credit of History: yet because I would not totally disappoint Posterity, I will give them the Items, and let their leisure and compu∣tation reckon the Sums, if they can find numbers for it; but I fear I shall not count half of them. Imprimis, The Corban of the Cause, Publick Faith-money, supplied with Composi∣tion-Money for Delinquents Estates: which was finis principalis, one of the first ends of the Work. The Fees of the two Speakers (and their Clerks) of the Lords and Commons House of Parliament, for Pardons of Delinquents, is 35 l. for every man whose Estate is 100 l. per annum, and upward. Ten thousand men so compounding and paying, amounts to 2000000; and is Twenty hundred thousand pounds; being 200 Waggons loading of silver, every Waggon loading being 10000 l. of silver. Divide 10000 men in ten parts; as thus: One thousand men, Delinquents, whose Estates are betwixt one and 200 l. a year, every man paying but 200 l. two years Revenue, amounted to 200000 l. a year. The second thousand men, whose Estates are betwixt two and 300 l. a year, paying two years Revenue, comes to 400000 l. The third thousand of Compounders, whose Estates are betwixt three and 400 l. a year, and so paying, amounts to 600000 l. The fourth thousand Compounders, whose Estates are betwixt four and 500 l. a year, pays 800000 l. The fifth thousand Compounders, whose Estates are betwixt five and 600 l. a year, pays 1000000 l. which is 300 Waggons loading of silver, every Waggon loading being 10000 l. in silver. The other five thousand Delinquents paying as the beforementioned five thousand Compounders, amounts to 8000000 l. that is, 800 Waggons of silver, 10000 l. being a Waggons loading. All which is a Mass of Money, yet but a small sum to the moneys brought in as followeth. First, Head-money: Secondly, Plate lent upon the Propositions. Thirdly, Money raised for the Rebels Lands, and Adventurers account. Fourthly, Money for the Weekly Meals, for a Meal for one day in the week. Fifthly, Money lent upon Ordinances of Parliament. Sixthly, Fifty Subsidies. Seventhly, The Twenty, and Twenty and Fifth part of Lands and Goods. Eighthly, Excise, a Monster, whose Receipt was like the Abyss. Ninthly, Customes. Tenthly, Sequestration of all the Delinquents Lands, since the War began. Eleventh, the Kings Revenue, and Committee-money. Twelfth, Money for Newcastle-coals. Thirteen, Money raised for his Excellency of House-keepers, and some other Commanders in the like nature, besides Plundrings, & what hath been taken going out of the Land, & to the King. Lastly, Monthly Taxes upon all the Lands in the associated Counties, and the Cities of London and Westminster, besides what they took for Contribution in their Garrisons, &c. which came to 60000 l. a month, and so given in, if not more, and by the year amounts to 720000 l. and in five years comes to 3600000 l. and is 360 Waggons loading of silver, at 10000 l. a Waggons loading. (And this higher afterwards) This in five years time amounted (besides the Customs and the Kings Revenues, and Eccle∣siastical Profits sequestred in their hands) to neer 20000000. But he that is able to reckon what the Sales of the same lands of King, Queen, and Prince, Bishops, Deans and Chapters, the Nobility and Gentry, as Delinquents, together with the Monthly assessment at the same time of 100000, and 120000 per mensem, come to, Erit mihi magnus Apollo. I mention not Decimati∣on, nor the Piedmont-Sacriledge, nor other slier Artifices of Cromwel, nor the Prize-money, &c. But if an estimate be taken of their gettings by their spending, let that almost insuperable debt left upon the Kingdom, and discharged by the King upon his Return, be the unenvied testi∣mony thereof. Vale.
A CHRONICLE OF THE CIVIL WARS OF ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, and IRELAND. THE FIRST PART: BEING The Commons War. NO higher or greater cause can be assigned for this War (setting aside the sins of all Times and Nations, to which the Justice of Heaven is seldome long a Debtor) but the fate and catastrophe of Kingdoms and Monar∣chies, which do at certain periods of time taste of that vicissitude and mutability, to which all other sublunary things are more frequently subjected. The secondary causes of it, are so many and so un∣certain, so variously reported and believed, that it would spend much of the paper allotted to this History in ascertaining them. There∣fore to contain and keep within the limits of this designment; something onely shall be said of them, that was obvious to every eye, not savouring of partiality or affection. Many disorders and Irregularities no doubt there were in the State, contra∣cted through a long and lazy peace, bolstred up with an Universal trade, which procured a general wealth, the Parents of Wantonnesses; the excess of Nati∣onal riches being but as the burden which the Ass carries, and mistakes for pro∣vender; people being onely the better able to sustain their future misery, with their present plenty. These conceived abuses in the manage of the State (like ill humours, where they finde an equal resistance, or over-power of nature,) sunk and descended upon the Ecclesiastical Regiment, too impotent to sustain those general assaults which were given it.
No storms or tempests can be raised or maintained below, without the Cele∣stial influences, or disturbances in the upper Region; nor often are there any Commotions or Wars among or in Nations, where Religion, which ought to be the peaceablest and most innocent perswasion, is not the Primum Mobile, the great mover of the Machine of Destruction. Quantum Religio potuit suadere malorum? Nothing from abroad could any way break off that continued series of peace we had so long enjoyed; we had made the Nations round about us to wonder at, and to dread the putting forth of that strength which had been matured and ripened by the sunshine of so great a prosperity, so many years together, while the world about us was hurled into the confusions of Ruine and War, ready to become a prey to the next potent Invasion. Distractions and Confusions about Church-Ceremonies.Strange moreover it is, That the miserable Distractions and Confusions which ensued, should be derived from no greater beginnings then a few Ceremo∣nies in the Church; that War, which stands upon none, should be founded and fixt upon them: and yet nothing more certain can be charged with the guilt of so much misery as these Kingdoms so long suffered under; but the Cavils, Discontents and disputes about them. A grudging there was for many years before, in the Raigns of Queen Eliza∣beth and King Iames, in whose days, and at his first assumption to this Crown, a Conference was before him managed by the Reformists about them,In a Conference about them, justified by K. James. where that learned King so justified the use of them, that for a while all oboques against them were silenced, and the Church and State enjoyed its greatest bles∣sings of Peace and Uniformity. Nor was there much noise about them in the beginning of the Raign of King Charles; but towards the middle it began to threaten a storm, in the year 1635. towards the conclusion whereof, some Uproars and Commotions were raised,Fresh Com∣motions about them, raised by Pryn, Bastwick, Burton, and Lilburn. decrying those Ceremonial Rites used and practised in the Church; such being the ushering in by a general murmur, what was plainly and distinctly declared in the beginning of the year 1637. (from whence this Chronicle takes its rise,) by Mr. Pryn, Dr. Bastwick, and Mr Burton; seconded and asserted by that famously known person, Iohn Lilburn. These men, though questionless from different grounds and respects (as this age hath lived to see by Mr. Pryn, who proved a great and happy instrument in the Kings Restitution, and consequently, the resettlement of the Church) printed several Books against the aforesaid Ceremonies; for these Books they were apprehended (which were charged also to be full of Invectives against the Bishops and Episcopal Government) and were severely censured in the Star-Chamber, to the exasperation of a great part of the Kingdom. All Pillori'd and Crop'd.They were all three sentenced to be set in the Pillory, and to have their ears cut off, Mr. Pryn to be stigmatized on both cheeks, each of them fined five thou∣sand pounds apiece to the King,Pryn stigma∣tized: they are fined and im∣prisoned. and to be imprisoned during the Kings pleasure; which was accordingly executed in every point of the sentence, and as valiantly and stoutly undergone by these sufferers, who after they had stood in the Pillory (three thereof being set up in the Palace-yard at Westminster) were sent to re∣mote Castles in the adjacent Isles of Guernsey and Iersey; from whence, as we shall see hereafter, they were brought back to London. I may not dis-joyn the story of Iohn Lilburn from theirs, though divided by time,Lilburn whipt at Carts tail. he suffering the year after, being whipt at a carts tail for imprinting and vending several Books of the same purport and contents against the Bishops. This man proved a great trouble-world in all the variety of Governments af∣terward, being chief of a faction called Levellers: he was a great proposal-maker and modeller of State, which by his means was always restless in the Usurpa∣tion. He died a Quaker; and such as his life was, such was his death. This year also Dr. Williams then Bishop of Lincoln, and Dean of Westminster, formerly Lord Keeper, relapsed again into the Kings disfavour, for some disho∣nourable
words uttered against the King, which were taken hold of, and pro∣secuted in the Star-Chamber,Bishop Wil∣liams fined 10000 l. where he was fined ten thousand pounds; though his enemies would rather have had him resigned his Bishoprick and Deanery: but he was of too great a spirit to relinquish either of them, as being places conferred on him by Patent from his bountiful Master King Iames; and so chose to pay the aforesaid fine, which upon a new score was soon after doubled. These harsh proceedings against him so exasperated his mind, that in the troubles ensuing he openly sided with the Parliament. In effect, this whole years revo∣lution, as to matters of importance, was concerned in Episcopacy. But this smoak and smother in England concerning Ceremonies,Troubles break out in Scot∣land. broke out into fire in Scotland; these petty and particular discontents here, being blown up there into a National dislike and abhorrence of them; so that this here, was but the forerunner of that conflagration there, which afterwards laid waste Three Kingdoms. And because of the remarkable and strange eruption and effects of it, I think fit to give those Scotish Troubles their particular Narrative, con∣next and intire together: Which here follows. The Troubles and Tumult in Scotland, about the Service-Book, Book of Canons, High-Commission, and Epis∣copacy. THe great and long designed Union of the two Kingdoms of England and Scotland had taken its desired effect,England and Scotland Uni∣ted. by the assumption of King Iames the Sixth to this Crown; and the National feud between the two people thereof well allayed, if not wholly extinguished; being both as one body under one supream Head and Governour. That King,Scotland well setled. at his departing from that his Native Kingdom, had left it in a very flourishing condition, as ever it boasted of; the State well provided for by wholsom Laws, and the management thereof committed to the prudent∣est and most honourable of the Nobility, the Church-Regiment under a godly and a learned Orthodox Episcopacy, reverenced and well accepted by the people. All things both in Church and State being well ordered, supported and maintained by that accession of power and greatness to their Soveraign in this Kingdom, that Nation continued in a firm and unvariable quiet till about the middle of the Reign of King Charles the first of blessed memory, by whom, as also by his Royal Father,Endeavours for conformitie in Discipline. several endeavours were used for the better strength∣ning and perpetuating the Union aoresaid, by conforming the Discipline of that Church to the pattern of this. Religion being the most sure and indissol∣vable tie and mutual security. In the time of King Iames, those memorable Five-Articles were made by the Assembly at Perth,Articles of Perth. whereby the High-Commission, the Book of Canons, and other Rites and Ceremonies were introduced and established. By King Charles the First, the Book of Service or Common-Prayer was endeavoured likewise to be brought in,Common-Pray∣er endeavoured to be intro∣duced in Scot∣land. it having constantly been used for twenty years before in his Ma∣jesties own Royal Chappel in that Kingdom, before his Majesties Ministers of State, and the Nobility and Gentry attending them. And now all things appeared Retro sublapsa referri, to precipitate into Con∣fusion and Disorder; the period of that peace was come, which had so long blest that Kingdom. Not that really and singularly that Book was the cause of those Commotions, but accidentally ministring the male-contents of that King∣dom an occasion of revolt and disloyalty: For the seeds of that Sedition were sown by the Plotters of the Covenant, which was afterwards so magnified un∣der the pretence of Religion, long before any of the grievances or pretended in∣novations in Religion complained of by them were ever heard amongst them.
The Kings Re∣vocation cause of Tumults.The true Original of these Tumults, was a Revocation made by King Charles the first, of such things as had passed away in prejudice of the Crown, especi∣ally by some of the late Princes in their minorites; by this course some of the principal Contrivers of this Covenant, found their Estates within the danger of the Laws: And though the King, to rectifie that proceeding of his, had made appear his clemency, in waving all the advantages which the Laws afforded him, not one of his Subjects being damnified by the said Revocation; yet for all this, the principal persons laboured a disaffection to the Government, lay∣ing the envy of procuring that Revocation upon the Prelates,Laid upon the Bishop. who in this were as innocent as the thing it self; onely because they hoped, that the very name of Church-men or Religious persons, should in the point of Faction have that operation with their followers, which they conceived the Church or Religion it self might have had, if they could have seen how to have perswaded them, that by this Revocation either of them had been endangered. Other things there were relating to the Ministers themselves, the Gentry, and their Farmers, who paid the Tythes to the Nobility; being the burthen of Impropriations: This the King thought to remedy by granting out a Commission to a great number of the prime of all estates and degrees, to relieve, if they should see cause, both the Ministers and others who suffered by that grievance: This Commission was called,Commission of Superioritie and Tythes. The Commission of Superiority and Tythes; which effe∣cted, as to the agrieved, its intended effect, and for which all possible thanks were rendred to his Majesty Nor were the most of the Nobility unsensible of the advantage by this means to matter of profit, but they fretted privately for being robbed of that Lordli∣ness over the Clergy and Laity, which by right of Tythe they enjoyed; and therefore had recourse to the former fetch of making the Bishops (when in∣deed it was obtained by the importunity of Clergy and Laity) the Procurers also of this Commission. Honours and Titles adde to the Troubles.The last ingredient to this bitter Cup, which was prepared in Scotland for the three Nations, was matter of Honour and Title: For the King going to his Coronation there in 1631. a Parliament being called to honour the same (where∣in an Act passed, that gave his Majesty power to appoint such Vestures for Church-men which he should hold most decent; and another for ratifying all Acts heretofore made concerning the established Religion, and the liberties and priviledges of the Church) his Majesty finding some principal men who were suitors at the same time for the Dignities aforesaid, dissenters to the confirma∣tion and allowance of the said Acts, did not confer such expected Honours, but passed those by, and justly advanced more Loyal persons; at which they then muttered, but mutined not till his Majesties departure. Libels tax the Parliament.Then they with Seditious private Libels, taxed this Parliament with preva∣rication and obliquity in their proceedings, as if it had been pack'd; and also, that the voyces were not truly numbred, but that some Acts were past without plurality of Votes. This being sifted by the Kings Privy Council there, the Author was known, who fled; but the principal engager, the Lord Balmerino,Libeller fled. Balmerino apprehended. was apprehended. His Father had been raised by King Iames to his Barony and Fortune, but for the most ungrateful of Treasons, was condemned by his Peers: His Son at his time fell into the same crime and condemnation; but both, by their Majesties favour and clemency, restored to Life, Honour, Liberty and Estate. But all these devices could not serve their turn, without Religion, and such specious pretences were pleaded, to the subversion of the Government; there∣fore the Service-Book opportunely offering it self (though in 1616. at Aber∣deen, a piece very like it had passed by the General Assembly (onely altered in some places, lest in totidem verbis, some factious spirits might have misconstrued it as a badge of dependance of that Church upon England, to the prejudice of the Laws and Liberties) and by their own Bishops afterwards, and revised by the King, who observed many of that Nation reverently here to use it; and also that it had been read in the Koyal Chappel in Scotland, as aforesaid) being
enjoyned to be read on Easter-day, 1637. in Edinburgh, but deferred for some reasons, though no opposition appeared then, till the twenty third of Iuly; on that day such a Tumult and Riot happened,Strange Tumult abut reading Common-Pray∣er. the heads of the vulgar being se∣cretly prepossest (as deep waters run smoothest till they come to some breach) as for everlasting notice and memorial of so paltry an introduction to the grand∣est and miraculous change, and subversions which followed, it is here briefly, though satisfactorily transcribed. ON the Twenty third of July, being Sunday, according to publique warning given the Sunday before, the Service-Book was begun to be read in Edin∣burgh, in St. Giles Church, called the Great Church; where were present (as usual) many of the Privy Council, both the Archbishops and other Bishops, the Iu∣stices, and the Magistrates of Edinburgh. No sooner was the Book opened by the Dean of Edinburgh, but a number of the vulgar, most of them women, with clap∣ping of their bands, cursing and outcries, raised such a barbarous hubbub in the place, that none could bear or be heard. The Bishop of Edinburg, who was to Preach, stept into the Pulpit, which is immediately above the place where the Dean was to read; intending to appease the Tumult, by putting them in minde of the sacredness of the place, and of the horrible prophanation thereof: But then the rabble grew so enraged and mad, that if a stool aimed to be thrown at him, had not been pro∣videntially diverted by the hand of one present, the life of that Prelate had been en∣dangered, if not lost. The Archbishop of St. Andrews, the Lord Chancellor, with divers others, offering to appease the multitude, were entertained with such bitter curses and imprecations, that not being able to prevail with the people, the Provost, Bailiffs, and divers others of the Council of the City, were forced to come down from the Gallery on which they usually sit, and with much ado, in a very great Tumult and confusion thrust out these disorderly people, making fast the Church-doors. After all which, the Dean proceeded to read Service, which was devoutly performed, being assisted by the Lords and the Bishops then present: Yet the clamor, rapping at Church-doors, and throwing of stones in at the Church-windows by the rabble with∣out was so great, that the Magistrates were constrained to go out and use their endea∣vours for to appease the multitude. After a little pause and cessation, the Bishop of Edinburgh Preached; and after Sermon done, in his going from Church, was so invironed with a multitude of the meaner sort of people cursing and crowding him, that he was near being trod to death, if he had not recovered the stayrs of his Lodg∣ing, where he was again assaulted, and was like to have been pulled backwards, if the Earl of Weems from his next Lodging, seeing the Bishops life in danger, had not sent his servants to rescue him; who got the Bishop almost breathless into his Chamber. In other Churches the Minister was forced to give over reading: And so that Morning passed. Between the two Sermons, consultation was held how to suppress those out-ra∣ges; and 'was so ordered, that the Service was quietly read in St. Giles & other Churches in the afternoon: But yet the rabble intermitted nothing of their madness;The Rabble continued their madness. for staying in the streets, at the comming home of the Earl of Rox∣borough, the Lord Privy Seal, with the aforesaid Bishop in his Coach, they so fiercely assaulted him with stones, that he had like to have suffered the death of the Martyr St. Stephen; so that if his footmen had not kept the multitude off with their drawn Swords, their lives had been very much indangered. Thus the Reformation began there with such terrible profanations of the Lords day, and of the Lords House; an ill omen, what in future would be the conclusion; and this done by the same many-headed Monster, that in like man∣ner began the troubles in England; nor ever was the Union more perfect and streight, then in such mischiefs. To prevent and redress these ills,Proclamation against them. the Privy Councel set forth a Proclamation, thereby discharging all concourses of people and tumultuous meetings in Edin∣burgh under pain of death; at which time the Magistrates of the said City, before the Council-Table, professed their detestation thereof, and profered their
utmost power in the discovery of the principals in that uproar;Magistrates profess a dete∣station, but soon joyned with them. though they afterwards shamefully failed in their promise, and appeared among the chief of the Covenanters, even while they were glozing with the King and the Archbi∣shop of Canterbury in England, by letters full of duty and affection to his Maje∣sty, and his Churches service. All businesses of note for a time seemed to be hushed and calmed, by reason of the long Vacation, (which in that Kingdom beginneth always on Lammas∣day) and the Harvest, which drew all sorts of people from Edinburgh, except the Citizens, so that all was quiet till the ensuing October, and then the conflux of all sorts soon enlivened the tumults again; the Ministers who undertook the reading of the second Service-book,Ministers re∣cant reading Service: Pe∣tition against it, and thereby endanger insur∣rection: Pro∣clamation to depart the City, removing Term, and seizing a Libel. publiquely relenting their forwardness, and recanting, and reneging it, and to that purpose presented a Petition, de∣siring it might not be imposed on them: this being backt with such an Uni∣versal rendezvous of all sorts, gave the Council the fear of an Insurrection; for prevention whereof, a Proclamation again was published, which under pain or Rebellion commanded all persons, except they should show cause of their further stay about their particular affairs, to depart the City, and return to their Houses; Seconded also with another, whereby his Majesties Council, and Session (which is the Term) were declared to be removed from Edinburgh to Dundee; and a third for seizing and discovering of a certain seditious Book against the English Ceremonies, which second book was ordered to be publique∣ly burnt upon the seizure. Another Insur∣rection. Bishop of Gal∣loway in dan∣ger.These Proclamations were next day overtaken with another Insurrection: For on the 19 of October, 1667. the Bishop of Galloway, and Sir William Elphinston Lord chief Justice of that Kingdom, being appointed by the Lords of the Council to examine witnesses in a Cause depending before them, passing through the streets to the Council-House, were suddenly encountred and sur∣rounded with an enraged multitude; the Bishop hardly by the means of one of the parties in that Suit getting safe to the Council, where, through the like irreverence to that Tribunal, he could find no Sanctuary, being threatned in∣stantly with death. Upon report of this outrage,Traquair and Wigton came to his relief with no less danger. the Earls of Traquair and Wigton came with their followers to his relief, where with much ado they got entrance, but found themselves in no better case than the Bishop, the peoples rage being thereby the more increased. The Lords and the Bishop being thus beset, sent privately to the Lord Provost and Bailiffs of Edinburgh,They send to the Provost and Bailiffs of E∣dinburgh for relief, who were as bad or worse used. for relief; who sent them word that they themselves were in the same condition, if not worse, if the Lords attempted not to appease the people, who had forced them in their Council-House, for fear of their lives, to subscribe a Paper then instantly presented them, which contained three par∣ticulars. First, that they should joyn with them in opposition to the Service-book, and in petitioning to the King. Secondly, that by their Authority they should restore Mr. Ramsey, and Mr. Rolloch, two lately silenced Ministers. Thirdly, that they should restore one Mr. Henderson a silenced Reader; which three persons were notable Ringleaders of the faction; three most important grounds for so fearful a Commotion. A Conference, but in vain.Thereupon the Lords resolved to go and confer with the Magistrates, and either by their authority or perswasion to reduce the people to obedience and reason; but all in vain: for at their return re infecta to the Council-Table again, they were set upon, the Earl of Traquair being troden down,Traquair tro∣den down. losing his white Staff, the Ensign of his Office of Treasurer, with his Hat and Cloak, and so with much ado got back again to the Council; who seeing the impendent danger from the fury of the people, were forced to apply themselves to some Noblemen who were of the faction, by whose influence upon and respects from the people, they with the aforesaid Bishops were conveyed to their respective dwellings; but the Provost was pursued with threats, rayling and danger, unto the yard of his own house. This Mornings storm being blown over, another Proclamation was made against further unlawful Assemblies, and meeting in the streets of that City,
under the most severe pains the Laws in those Cases had provided;Another Pro∣clamation a∣gainst unlaw∣ful Assemblies: but not regard∣ed. The Rabble pe∣tition. but so little regard was thereunto given, that the next day they demanded of the Lords what they had demanded of their Magistrates; and to that purpose two Petitions, as well from the Rabble, as also now from greater hands, the chief Citizens, Gentry, and Nobility, were presently tendred to the Lord Chancel∣lour of that Kingdom, which imported the whole substance of the present Commotion; the English Service-book still bearing the burthen: Withal in this last petition, making their greivances swell, adding their dislike of the book of Canons, to their former distast of the Service-book; so one demand ushered in another, till they had nothing to ask, but what they resolved to take: the parallel of our troubles. These petitions were afterwards sent up to the King,Their petition sent to the King, who by Proclamation resents the af∣fronts of his chief Mini∣sters. who by a Proclamation resented the injuries and affronts done his Royal Au∣thority, by those attemps upon his chief Ministers, and also declared his firm intentions to maintain the Protestant Religion, commanding also all persons to forbear further meetings and petitions of this nature, upon pain of treason. But this Proclamation was encountred with a Protestation made by the Earls of Hume and Lindsey,Hume and Lindsey justi∣fie the matter. two great Covenanters, who avowed therein the whole action, with a resolution added to adhere to them to the last, requiring also some of the Bishops to be removed from his Majesties Councel, and such other more unreasonable expostulations, which yet came short still of those that they made afterwards, their number and power still increasing their peremptory and haugh∣ty designes upon the Government. Soon after, this sedition began to arm it self, and assume another name; they of the faction took the authority of the Kingdom to themselves;Four Tables. erected four Tables, as they called them, of the four ranks of Noblemen, Gentry, Burgesses and Ministers, out of all which was formed one general Table, that was supreme. This Table, after some consultation and reports from the other, resolved upon a Covenant to be taken throughout the Kingdom,A Covenant resolved on. which for substance was the same with that Solemn League, afterwards taken in England; onely Bishops in express terms were not therein then abjured, but implicitely no doubt included, and more plainly, their sitting in civil Judicatories. The King was most highly incensed against this Usurpation of his Royal Au∣thority,The King high∣ly incensed thereat. especially at the obtruding this Covenant, wherewith the greatest part of the Nation were already infected, and others through compulsion and force scared into a compliance with it, though with a great deal of stir and reluctan∣cy: Wherefore to obviate the imminent danger it threatned, the King dispatcht away the Marquess of Hamilton as his Commissioner to that Kingdom,Hamilton sent unto Scot∣land. to apply some present remedy to the distemper; he being a person of great honour and influence on that Nation. Before his arrival, of which the Covenanters had timely notice, they made the more hast to engage the people against any accommodation: Nor did they with the usual respect entertain the Commissioner; but after some few days stay, after some overtures by him made on the Kings part towards them,They slight him, and his demands of them, particularly their deserting and relinquishing their Covenant, he received a slighting answer, that they would descend to no particulars of their part, till a general Assembly should be called: But as for the Covenant, they would sooner part with their lives, than abate a syllable of it; and resolved never to hear more against it:and strengthen themselves. And thereupon new guards were by them clapt upon Edinburgh Castle, the Watches of the City multiplied, and the Mini∣sters began to convert all their Sermons into Libels, warning the people to take heed of Crafty Compositions, when they were resolved against any. These difficulties caused the Commissioner to repair to London, having first received order to publish the Kings Declaration against the supposed Popery; and removed also the Term, for the further satisfying of the City of Edinburgh, back thither again;Term returned to Edinburgh. which indeed was for a while magnified by the Citizens as an Act of favour, but presently was undervalued as a trick to cajole them; so instructed by those who grudged the King any esteem or love in the minds of his people.
By Declarati∣on, Service and Canons dispen∣sed with.The Kings Declaration, bearing Date Iune 20. 1638. was soon after pub∣lished; which contained his dispensation of the Service-book and Canons, with a promise of calling a general Assembly and Parliament with all convenient Ex∣pedition; requiring his subjects to contain themselves in their duty, and not further to hearken to any Rebellious suggestions. The Covenan∣ters protest a∣gainst it.As soon as the Herauld had proclaimed it, the Covenanters were ready. upon a Scaffold there erected, with a Protestation against it; (having before possest the People, that if this Declaration were hearkened unto, it would bring un∣doubted ruine to their Religion, Laws and Liberties) which they publiquely read, importing some new additions to their former demands, and cavils at the uncertainty of the Kings intentions in the matters declared. Hamilton ha∣ving given the King an ac∣count of af∣fairs, is sent again and en∣ters a Treaty.The Marquess Hamilton being arrived at London, gave the King an account of the whole business; and according to his new instructions, returned back again by their appointed time, the 15th of August, 1638. and entred presently into a Treaty with them about the manner of calling the General Assembly; which they would not hear of, but that a General Assembly should be immedi∣ately called; and of the due Elections thereto, when they were met, them∣selves should be the judge: For otherwise there would of necessity be some pre∣limitations, which the freedom thereof might not suffer. Upon this Emergency all things growing worse and worse, the Marquess was forced upon another journey to consult the King (the Covenanters con∣cluding,He returns to England, hath power given him to satisfie the Scots if possible. that if he returned not before the 21 of September, they would of themselves Indict this Convention) who concluded of giving that Kingdom the utmost satisfaction; and with a Commission to summon this Assembly re∣turned: But the day after, the Covenanters, contrary to promise, made an Election in one of the Presbyteries Adjacent, of themselves; whereas through∣out the Kingdom, according to the directions of the Tables, Lay-Elders and Ministers were chosen together; a thing never seen before in that King∣dom. The Assembly at Glasgow.This Assembly, the Source of those calamities which afterwards embroyl'd and enslaved that Nation, was held at the City and University of Glasgow, in November 1638. in which they so carried and packt the Elections, that there was scarce one Dissenter from those Resolutions they had profest in their Cove∣nant. The Bishops were Totally excluded from sitting or voting therein,Bishops exclu∣ded: They pro∣test against it. but were cited to compeer as offenders, and answer their charge. Against these proceedings, and the illegality of the constitution of this Assembly, they first protested, and tendered their reasons, but they would not be admitted for such; so that the Lord Commissioner seeing no hope of Justice, Law, or Reason, or Loyalty taking place there, at seven days end dissolved them by a Proclamation;They continue fitting, not∣withstanding a Proclama∣tion to dissolve them. which they took no further notice of, then only by opposing another Protesta∣tion, wherein they declared, that the Assembly ought not to be, nor was as dis∣solved, until such time as those ends so often before expressed were fully attained; and so proceeded in their Session. Strange and desperate was the Pride of this Assembly, far beyond the Popes infallible Councils, taking upon them to be the Supreme Judicatory on earth, above all Laws and Parliaments, and King himself, as Christs Council; and that if the Judges and other Ministers of State should not obey their Command∣ment, they might proceed to sentence of Excommunication against them: Which was effectually put in practice afterwards against the Bishops, and their adherents, before they armed themselves otherwise against their Soveraign. Yet notwithstanding, they did pretend that the King, should he be satisfied of the equity and lenity of their proceedings, would no doubt comply with them in the matters they Petitioned for; which more exasperated his Majesty than all the Violations and Usurpations of his Authority. Arguile owns the Covenan∣ters.The Earl of Arguile, who had hitherto kept fair with the King, and was one of his Privy Council there, now owned the Covenanters, and professed his adherence to their cause. It is believed he was one of the first that stirred in this unfortunate business, and that therefore the better to satisfie him, the King
after the first Pacification, made him a Marquess. More certain it is, he was the last that suffered in it, as in the conclusion of this Chronicle will appear. I have insisted the longer on this story, because the general Commotions that followed it, ran almost the same parallel in their respective commencements in the three Kingdoms; and to shew, that neither prudence nor arms, both which were seasonably applyed, could stop or prevent those judgements of Con∣fusion and Ruine, which soon after ensued this Tragical Prologue in a misera∣ble catastrophe. For the Scots presently began to arm,The Scots arm. having first sent to the French King▪ craving his aid and assistance; which was readily proffered them by Cardinal Richlieu his chief Minister of State, who was supposed to have fomented the quarrel from the very beginning, to quit scores with the King of England for siding with the Rochellers in the beginning of his Raign. But before any blood was drawn, came over the Queen-Mother,Queen-Mother arrives. whom the generality of the people took for a Prognostick or ill Omen of a War, or some Rupture approaching. Many scandals were raised against the King for her ad∣mission hither; but all things were gone too far beyond the contribution of her advice, to make her guilty of our troubles: However, she seemed the Comet that did portend and foretel them, the like Commotions having happened for some years past in the places of her residence. The Scots towards the end of the year 1638,The Scots have a competent Army. had gotten together a compe∣tent Army, raised by the Authority and Ordinance of the aforesaid Assembly, for the pretended defence of the Kingdom, its Religion and Laws. Nor did the King neglect the affairs of that Kingdom, but was arming here in England, with all the speed his Purse would afford; which was then in a low ebb: Yet by the Loans of the Nobility, Gentry and Clergy, he had raised a gallant Army,The King rai∣sts an Army. with which he marched towards the borders. Over this Army the Earl of Arundel was made General,Arundel Ge∣neral-Hamilton commands the Fleet. the Earl of Essex Lieutenant-General of the Foot, and the Earl of Holland Lieutenant-General of the horse. A Fleet also was rigged and well manned, and set to Sea under the command of the aforesaid Marquess Hamilton, which soon after came to an Anchor in the Frith neer Edinburgh.A Declaration by the King. The King being thus in readi∣ness, Emitted another Declaration, wherein he taxed the Scots with seve∣ral rebellious Libels, for their Protestations against his commands, for usurp∣ing his Authority, and for refusing the Oath of Allegiance and Supre∣macy upon account of their having taken the Covenant; reiterates his resolu∣tions of maintaining Episcopacy in that Kingdom, and lays the blood (if any were spilt in that quarrel) upon themselves as Rebels, whom he ought not lon∣ger to suffer to proceed in those undutiful and destructive courses, but hoped to reduce to their former and due Obedience.The Assembly answers. To which the 22 of March the said Assembly reply by an Ordinance, wherein, after expostulating the Kings De∣claration, they curse themselves if they intend any harm to England; concluding their War to be meerly defensive, and grounded upon the natural and Civil Law. Anno Dom. 1639. THe King set forward with his Army, and in April came to York, and in May to Barwick, where both Armies came in view one of another. When the King was at York, the Earls of Roxborough and Traquair,The Earls of Roxborough and Traquair Commissioners from the Cove∣nanters. two formerly of his Council, and Officers of State, came to him as Commissioners from the Covenanters, under pretence of Treating with the King; who wanting their due Commission, and being suspected to have been sent on an errand purposely to tamper with the English Lords; and to perswade them of the honest intentions of the Scotch Nation, were therefore for a while committed,Committed and released. but soon after set at liberty; having in part effected their errand, and insinuated a good opi∣nion
of their proceedings, withal begot an intelligence and correspondence with some of the Peers, who before were well inclined to their cause. This ap∣peared soon after in the English Councils of War, where the first Gallantry and Resolutions of the Principal Commanders were seen to flag and abate, and dis∣solve into more soft and pliable dispositions to peace. The English Army being far superiour in Arms, men, and bravery, was en∣camped near Barwick, and the Scots at Dunslo; when by mediation of the per∣sons aforesaid,A Treaty be∣gan, and soon ended. a Treaty was begun (which ended presently in a short-lived Peace,) upon several Articles, which being not performed on the Scots part, are needless here to repeat. In the mean time, the Parliament of Scotland, accord∣ing to the Kings Proclamation when he also summoned their Assembly, met on the appointed 15th of May, and was prorogued till the last of August;The Parlia∣ment of Scot∣land prore∣gued. at which time they sate four days, and therein formed four demands for the King. The Assembly also sate a little before, and abolisht Episcopacie, the Liturgy, and the Book of Canons,The Assembly abolish Episc∣pacie. with the High Commission, &c. These things coming to the Kings knowledge, together with a Pamphlet pre∣varicating the conditions of the late Treaty, their Letters to the King of France for aid, their new Provisions for Arms, their levying of Taxes of ten marks per Centum, and continuing their Officers and Fortifications, induced him by his new Commissioner the Earl of Traquair to command the Adjournment of the Parliament until the second of Iune next ensuing,Their Parlia∣liament ad∣journed. upon pain of Treason. Against which Command the Covenanters declare, and send a Remonstrance to the King by the Earl of Dumfermling and the Lord Loudon,They send the Earl of Dum∣fermling and Lord Loudon with a Remon∣strance. the Chan∣cellour of that Kingdom afterwards; who coming without Warrant from the Kings Commissioner Traquair, were sent back again. Whereupon Traquair, a person suspected to have abused his trust, comes himself, and advising with Ha∣milton, they both propound to the Council, the affairs of Scotland being so de∣sperate, whether it were not more expedient the King should go himself in person into Scotland, than to reduce them by Arms: which after many politique considerations, was Resolved in the Affirmative, That nothing could reclaim them to their duty, but force of Arms. This again brought the Earl of Dumfermling and the Lord Loudon to London, with two other Commissioners; where before the King again, they insisted upon the justification of their inno∣cence, and withal desired that the King would ratifie and confirm their proceed∣ings, and that their Parliament might proceed to determine of all Articles or Bills brought to them, to the establishing of Religion and Peace: But instead of an Answer to their requests, the King charged them with the aforementioned Libel, and their Letters and Intelligence held with the French King, which then came to English light, and were known by the Characters to be the writing of the Lord Loudon,Loudon com∣mitted, and re∣leased. who was thereupon committed for a short time, but released upon the mediation of the Marquess Hamilton. After his release, he and Dum∣fermling presented their Assemblies and Parliaments Remonstrance to the King; and the Commissioner returned also, and gave a full account of the state of that Kingdom. All three of them being admitted unto the Council together, the matter was there managed with so much anger and sharpness, that the King and the Scots were more exasperated against one another than before. The P. Elector Palatine came into England.The Prince Elector Palatine, the Kings Nephew by the Queen of Bohemia, a∣bout this time came into England, having utterly lost his interest in the Palati∣nate, by the late defeat given him there, by Count Hatsfield the Emperours Gene∣ral, where Prince Rupert, so famous afterwards in our Wars, and the Lord Cra∣ven, were taken: he staid not long here, but departed again, and was taken at Lions by the French,Departed, and taken by the French. Released; and returning nto England, was allowed 8000 l. per annum. having past so far undiscovered: he was soon after released, and returned into England, where by the Parliament he had 8000 l. a year as∣signed him out of his Uncles the Kings Revenue; till after His Murther, he de∣parted home upon the Articles of Munster-Treaty, by which he was restored to his Dignities and Sovereignty, being conveyed hence in 1649. in a man of War to the Brill in Holland.
This year was signalized also by a famous Sea-fight between the Flemings and the Spaniards in the Downs.A Sea-fight bet∣ween the Flemings and the Spaniards. Don Antonio Ocquendo was Admiral of the Spa∣nish Fleet, which consisted of seventy Sail of great Ships and Gallions, on which were put aboard, as the report went, twenty five thousand men designed for the service of the Spaniard against the Dutch of the one side, and the French on the other, and were ordered to be landed at Dunkirk with money for the paying of his Armies then afoot. On the 17th of September, they were met by the Vice-Admiral of the Holland-Fleet,The Hollan∣ders worsted. who engaging them in the Chanel, was wor∣sted; but getting to windward, kept near them, continuing firing to give Van Trump, then before Dunkirk, notice of their approach. Betwixt Dover and Ca∣lice the two Dutch Fleets joyn, and attaque the Spaniard (the English Fleet under the Command of Sir Iohn Pennington looking on the while) who being sore bruised,But in conclu∣sion become Victors. was forced to the English Coast, where the Spanish Ambassadour desired they might be protected for two Tides by the Kings Ships; but that could not be allowed, for the Kings Neutrality between both. Whereupon, in the night, some part, with the most of the Treasure, and fourteen Ships, got safe to Dunkirk; the rest, Van Trump being recruited with an hundred Ships in an instant almost of time, set upon and dispersed, sinking and taking, and strand∣ing very many, so that few escaped home. This was the second luckless Ar∣mado of the Spaniard, on which the malecontents of this and the Kingdom of Scotland, grounded many false and scandalous surmises against the King. To return again to Scotland,An ill Omen. where I may not omit one fatal passage. On the 19th day of November, being the Anniversary of his Majesties Birth, part of the Walls of the strong Castle of Edenburgh fell down; which was likewise in∣terpreted for an ill Omen: such another, though more unhappily, and nearly significant,Lord Estrich, Col. Ruthen and others sent to repair E∣denburgh-Ca∣stle, they were resisted by the Covenanters. was that of the fall of the head of his staff at his Tryal, be∣fore the pretended High Court of Justice. For the repairing of these ruines, the King sent the Lord Estrich, Col. Ruthen and others, who were resisted by the Covenanters, as men not qualified for the service. No hopes for these and other reasons being conceivable of treating, and per∣swading the Scots to obedience, a Resolution was taken vigorously to prosecute the War commenced the year before; to which purpose it was debated at a Ca∣binet-Council, where none were present but the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, the Earl of Strafford, and Hamilton; and there agreed that a Parliament must be cal∣led in England and Ireland; and that in the mean time, for the speedy raising of money, the Nobility, Gentry, and Clergy should subscribe what sums of mo∣ney they would advance to this service for the present occasion, till the King could be otherwise helped by Subsidies.The Nobility, Gentry, and Clergy assist the King with mo∣ny for the car∣rying on of the War. To this purpose the Earl of Strafford first subscribed twenty thousand pounds, the like did the Duke of Richmond, and the Nobility according to the several values of their Estates. The Clergy granted four shillings in the pound in their Convocation, which presently fol∣lowed, to be paid for six years together; only the City of London were refracto∣ry, and could not be induced to lend one farthing to the carrying on of that War. By these Loans (however) of the Kings Loyally affected Subjects, he was again in a formidable posture; and the Earl of Strafford, besides his own per∣sonal disbursments,Supplies from Ireland. had procured four Subsidies, to maintain ten thousand foot and fifteen hundred Horse, from the Parliament of Ireland he had newly cal∣led; for which he was honourably brought into the House of Peers in the Par∣liament of England; whither by his Majesties call from his Lieutenantship of Ireland he was then arrived, to assist the King with his prudent Counsels. Sir Thomas Coventry, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal,Lord Keeper Coventry di∣eth. dieth the tenth of Ianu∣ary, after he had for fifteen years behaved himself in that place like a wise and honest man. Sir Iohn Finch,Succeeded by Sir John Finch. Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, succeeds him; of whom more anon.
Anno. Dom. 1640. A Parliament summoned.THe 13th of April, this year, being the 16th of the Kings Reign, a Parliament was summoned at Westminster; at the opening whereof, the King ac∣quainted them with the affronts and indignities he had received from his Scotch Subjects,They favour the Scots. whom he spared not to call Rebels; which was somewhat resented by the Members of the House of Commons, who out of dislike of Episcopacie here, did not much favour that War against them, which by a nick-name was then called Bellum Episcopale. Therefore upon the Kings desires to them for a supply of money, by which he might be enabled to reduce the Scots, they presently started their old grievances; which caused a debate, whether the King or the Subjects should be relieved first; for so they made the Scotch War the Kings personal and distinct business. Are backward in assisting the King with mony.This alteration, and the apparent unwillingness of the House of Commons to advance any mony except their previous desires (viz. of clearing the proper∣ties of the Subject, and the establishing of the true Religion, and Priviledges of Parliament) were confirmed and granted by the King, reduced his Majesty to a present necessity and dilemma, either of complying with the Scots, or to take mony as he could raise it, by his own credit and Authority, to subdue them: for there was no hopes in the Parliaments delays. And this was the true Reason of the dissolving that Parliament,Are dissolved. which happened May the 5th, to the great grief of all good people, who were sensible of the Kings difficulties, and the approach∣ing evils. The Convocation of the Clergy sate at the same time, and were continued beyond the Parliaments dissolution, though contrary to practice and custom; where,The Convocati∣on of the Cler∣gy sit, and as∣sist the King with mony. as before is said, they contributed and confirmed the Grant of the fifth part of their Ecclesiastical Livings for six years, towards the carrying on of the War against the Scots. I may not omit the concession of the King in this affair to the Parliament, wherein he offered upon the granting of him some Sub∣sidies, to remit and acquit his claim of Ship-mony, and other advantages of his Prerogative. They make new Canons in op∣position to Po∣pery and the the Scotch Co∣venant.At this Convocation some new Canons were made, with Salvoes and dispen∣sations for some which had been strictly heretofore enjoyned, but especially and mainly for Episcopacie; and the Doctrine of the Church of England in opposi∣tion to Popery, was hereby established by the Oath of &c. As likewise in oppo∣sition to the Scotch Covenant. This Convocation ended May 29. none dissent∣ing but Dr. Goodman Bishop of Glocester,Bishop Good∣man dissents, who since died a Roman Catholique, and owned that faith. As a testimony of the sincerity of the Arch-bishop of Canterbury in the Protestant Religion, I shall here insert therefore a passage re∣lating to these Canons:And is admo∣nished by A. B. Laud. Upon the Bishop of Glocester's refusal thereof, the Arch-Bishop would have proceeded to the Censures of the Church im∣mediately, and therefore gave him, according to the Canons, three admoni∣tions one upon the neck of another, that he should forthwith subscribe: and if he had not been whispered, that so weighty a matter required deliberation and distance of time, he would there have suspended him from his Dignities and Office. This Noble Prelate, for these and the like vigorous actings both in Church and State, fell into the obloquy of the male contents, the Chief of whom were the Nonconformists, then called Puritans, who abounded in London; the most whereof, upon a distaste taken from the censure of Mr. Pryn, Dr. Bastwick, and Mr. Burton, did mightily maligne him; so that on the ninth of May, a Paper was posted upon the Exchange,Tot said A. B. Libelled, and his house as∣saulted. animating Apprentices to rise and sack his house at Lambeth next Monday; which they were the more forward to do, because it was rumoured, that he was the first instigator of the King to dissolve the last
Parliament: But he had intelligence of their designes, and provided to receive them. According to their appointed time, in the dead of the night they came, to the number of five hundred, and beset his house, and endeavoured to enter; but were quickly beaten off, and glad to retreat, having in some measure vented their anger against him in railing and scandalous language (such as the streets were full of before in scattered Libels) and breaking his glass-windows. The day following,Some of the factio im∣prisoned, and rescued. Bensted a Seaman hang∣ed. many of them upon enquiry were apprehended and imprisoned, but three days after forcibly rescued from thence by their Companions, who broke open the Prison-doors; for which one Bensted a Sea-man was apprehend∣ed, and hanged afterwards in St. Georges-fields, and his head and quarters set upon the several Gates of the City. The Scotch Parliament now sat again, and were more violent in their pro∣ceedings than before:The Scotch Army advance towards En∣gland. Henry Duke of Glocester bn. The Earl of Northum∣berland Gene∣ral of the Kings Army. Earl of Straf∣ford Lieut. General. The King comes to Northaller∣ton. for having notice of the discontents in England, they presently advanced with their Army thitherwards, about the same time that the Queen was delivered of a Son, Henry Duke of Glocester (of whose decease we shall speak in its place.) The King, to be in a readiness to receive them, had also appointed an Army, of which he made the Earl of Northumberland General, and the Earl of Strafford Lieutenant-General; but the Earl of Northumberland fal∣ling sick, he himself sent away part of the Army under the Command of the Lord Conway, and advanced out of London with the remainder, and came in person to Northallerton. During his March, the Lord Conway had but ill suc∣cess. He had drawn about 1200 Horse and 3000 Foot to secure the Passes upon Tine near Newborn; So far was the Scotch Army advanced under the Command of General Lesly, (Earl of Leven, an old Souldier in the Swedish Wars) better armed, intelligenced, and provided than the last year: on the 27th of August, Lesly desired leave of my Lord Conway for his whole Army to pass to the King with their Petition; which he, as before, avowed to be the honesest, loy∣allest, and innocent thing in the World;Newborn-sight, Aug. 29. Gen. Lesley, Earl of Leven engageth with the Lord Con∣way, and ∣eats him. but was refused and stopped. Thereup∣on three hundred Scotch Horse attempted to cross the River, and were therein repelled by the shot of the English Musquetiers, who were placed under the shelter of a Breast-work. This was no sooner done, but the Scots with nine pieces of Ordinance, which they had placed on the side of the River, and blind∣ed them with bushes, plaid upon those breast-works; which so affrighted the English Infantry, being raw Souldiers, and not used to the noise and execu∣tion of Canon, that they presently forsook their Posts, cast down their Arms and fled. Instantly the Scotch Horse with their General himself advanced, but were handsomely welcomed by Commissary-General Wilmot, who with the Cavalry, which consisted mostly of Gentlemen, very stoutly stood to it, till they were over-born by number, and galled with great Bullets, and so forced into a disorderly retreat. Here were slain two or three Gentlemen of Quality, among which was Cornet Porter, Son to Endymeon Porter of the Bed-chamber, with some fourscore and odd of common Souldiers. The Lord Conway,Sir Jacob Ashley deserts Newcastle; that and Dur∣ham render themselves to Gen. Lesley. after this defeat, carried himself the first news of it to the King, that it might not be told by others to his prejudice; and Sir Iacob Ash∣ley Governour of Newcastle, knowing the place not tenable, deserted it, sinking the Ordnance in the River; so that upon Lesleys approach, both that Town and Durham rendred themselves into his hands. These losses accelerated the Earl of Strafford into those parts, who having the supreme Command of the Army therefore conferred upon him, and know∣ing his Honour and Reputation to be embarqued in this business, resolved to put it to the decision of the Sword, which he was as well able to manage as his Pen: Challengeth the Lord Conway for the disaster at Newborn,The Earl of Stafford com∣plains of the Lord Conway. before the King, as if his ill conduct had occasioned it; who as stoutly denied it, laying the fault, as indeed it ought, upon the rawness of his Souldiers. In Scotland the Earl of Haddington, who commanded as Major-General the Forces raised, and to be raised in Lothian, having recovered from the Soul∣diers of Berwick Garrison the pieces of Ordnance which Lesley had left behind
him at Dunslo,The Earl of Haddington the Scots M. G. with 20 Knights and Gentlemen slain at Dun∣glass. and brought them to Dunglass, was the next day slain, with twenty more Knights and Gentlemen, in the midst of his Court, by the stones that flew from the Vault neer adjoyning, which was then blown up with the Magazine that lay in it. Though the Earl of Strafford was so eagerly and intensly bent on fighting with the Scots, yet with the King (who was loth to run that hazard, not knowing how to recruit himself, if he were worsted, unless he should condescend as much or more to his English Subjects in Parliament) those Martial resolu∣tions soon abated, to the regret of that Noble Earl, whose safety as well as glory consisted in driving the Scots out of this Kingdom. So that though the King had declared them to be Rebels and Traytors by Proclamation,The Scots pro∣claimed Tray∣tors, and the Kings Royal Standard set up at York. The Scots peti∣tion the King, and are an∣swered by the Earl of Lane∣rick. and commanded that publick Prayers should be put up against them in all Churches, and had set up his Royal Standard at York; yet now he was contented to treat with them, and to that end received from them a Petition stuft with their grievances; to which he returned answer, by his Secretary of Scotland, the Earl of Lanerick, That he expected their particular demands; which were tendered to him with∣in three days after, and imported his Majesties calling a Parliament in England, without which there could be no satisfying redress for them. Thay had like∣wise published sometime before their marching into England, a Declaration in∣tituled, The intentions of the Army; which signified that they would not lay down their Armes, till the reformed Religion were setled in both Nations upon sure grounds, and the causers and abetters of their present grievances and troubles were brought to publique Justice, and that in Parliament. In order to the speedy accommodation therefore of this quarrel, Twelve of the Nobility who were there with the King, by name, Hertford, Essex, Bedford, War∣wick, Mulgrave, Bristol, Bullingbrook, Say, Mandevil, Howard, Paget, and Brook, drew up a Petition to the King, and had it delivered: after which, others of the same contents were brought from London and other places of the Kingdom, which unanimously agreed in this, That nothing could satisfie the people, nor relieve their grievances and pressures, but a Parliament. The Lords of England sum∣moned to ap∣pear at York. They agree to call a Parlia∣ment.This the King willingly assented to, and in part condescended to other of the Scots demands; and for the present summoned the Lords of England to ap∣pear at York, where accordingly they met; and on the first day of their sitting in Council, it was agreed that a Parliament should be called, to convene the third of November next. And in reference to the Scotch business, and the poor oppressed Northern Counties, where both the Armies that Summer had quartered, (the Bishoprick of Durham being then taxed by the Scots at three hundred and fifty pound, the Country of Northumberland at three hundred pound a day) it was also resolved that a Treaty should be had; and thereupon sixteen En∣glish Lords, whereof eight were Earls, the other Barons, should meet with so many of the Scotch Nobility; and the place was assigned at York; which was refused, as not safe enough for the Scotch Commissioners, by reason of the pre∣sence of the Lord Deputy Strafford, who had proclaimed them Traytors in Ire∣land, and against whom they had matters of high Complaint:A Treaty of peace at Rip∣pon. And so it was resolved it should begin at Rippon. The English insist on a Cessation: The Scots re∣fuse, and pro∣pound 4 Praeli∣minaries.The first thing the English insisted on, was a present Cessation; but the Scots objected against that, and said that other things were more expedient to be first considered: For as they would obey the Kings command in advancing no fur∣ther, so would they not go back again till they had accomplisht the business they came for; and therefore propounded four Praeliminaries to be resolved on, which were concluded on and agreed to. The Earl of Strafford ad∣viseth the King to fight them,At the first of these, That the Scotch Army should be paid and maintained out of the English purse, the Earl of Strafford was highly incensed and enraged, being so dishonourable a thing to the Nation; and therefore would have per∣swaded the King to give him leave to fight them, no way doubting but that he should be able to drive them presently into Scotland again, though accounted then far superiour in Discipline and Souldiery to the English Army.
But the affair of the Treaty was so far advanced, for the reasons aforesaid, that there was no fair way of receding, if the King had been powerful enough to have combated them,But in conclu∣sion, as some made no scruple; so that on the 16th of Octo∣ber, the English Commanders, some through fear, others out of compliance with the major part, agreed to the ensuing Articles, which for an envious remark I have transcribed. First,These Articles were agreed on. That there be a Cessation of Arms both by Sea and Land from this pre∣sent. Secondly, That all Acts of Hostility do thenceforth cease. Thirdly, That both parties shall peaceably return during the Treaty, whatever they possess at the time of the Cessation. Fourthly, That all such persons who lived in any of his Majesties Forts beyond the River of Tweed, shall not exempt their Lands which lye within the Counties of Northumberland, and the Bishoprick, from such Contributions as shall be laid upon them for the payment of eight hundred pound per diem. Fifthly, That none of the Kings Forces upon the other side of. Tweed, shall give any impediment to such contributions as are already allowed for the competency of the Scotch Army, and shall fetch no victuals nor forage out of their bounds, except that which the inhabitants and owners thereof shall bring voluntarily to them; and that any restraints or detention of Victual, Cattel or Forage, which shall be made by the Scots within those bounds for their maintenance, shall be no breach. Sixthly, That no recruit shall be brought into either Armies, from the time of the Cessation, and during the Treaty. Seventhly, That the contribution of eight hundred and fifty pounds per diem shall be onely raised out of the Counties of Northumberland, Westmerland, and the Bishoprick, and the Town of Newcastle; and that the not payment thereof shall be no breach of the Treaty, but the Counties and Towns shall be left to the Scots power to raise the same, but not to exceed the sum agreed upon, unless it be for charges of driving, to be set by a Prizer of the forage. Eighthly, That the River Tweed shall be the bounds of both Armies, (excepting always the Town and Castle of Storkton, and the Village of Egyshiff;) and the Counties of Northumberland and the Bishoprick, be the limits within which the Scotish Army is to reside, having liberty from them to send such Convoys as shall be necessary onely for the gathering up of the Contribution which shall be unpaid by the Counties of Northumberland and Cumberland. Ninth and Tenth Articles of private injuries. Eleventhly, No new Fortifications to be made during the Treaty against either Party. Twelfthly, That the Subjects of both Kingdoms may in their trade of Commerce freely pass to and fro without any stay at all▪ but it is particularly provided, that no member of either Army pass without a formal Pass under the hands of the Gene∣ral, or of him that commands in chief. This was the sum of that unlucky Cessation, which was afterwards at London concluded in a Treaty soon after the sitting of the Parliament, who in February next paid the Scots off, giving them the stile of their dear brethren: which much pleased them, but the money which accrewed by an arrear of 124000 l. was a great deal more acceptable. And thus with their pay and dismission out of this Kingdom, I dismiss them for this time from any further Narrative, and look home to our own affairs in England. The Parliament sate down on the third of November,The Parlia∣ment set, they question seve∣ral Bishops and Iudges, and vote down Monopolies. and immediately fell to questioning several chief Ministers of State, Bishops and Judges; pretending thereby both to satisfie this Nation and the Scots: Monopolies also were voted down, and much more good was promised and expected from the Parliament. The principal of those Grandees that were accused, was the Earl of Straf∣ford, against whom Mr. Pym is sent from the Commons to the Lords, with an
Impeachment of High Treason;Mr. pym sent from the Com∣mons to the Lords with an Impeachment of high treason a∣gainst the Earl of▪ Strafford, he is committed and Sir George Ratcliff sent for out of Ire∣land. Dr. Williams Bishop of Lin∣coln released, Mr. Pryn, Dr. Bastwick and Mr. Bur∣ton received by the Londoners in pomp. Sir John Finch Lord Keeper, and Francis Windebanck Secretary of State charged with high trea∣son, they with∣rew. John James a Romish Catho∣lique stabs Iu∣stice. Howard in Westmin∣ster-Hall whereupon he was sequestred from sitting as a Peer, and his Privado Sir George Ratcliff was sent for out of Ireland, by a Ser∣jeant at Arms. Soon after, the aforesaid Earl was committed to the Usher of the Black Rod, and so to the Tower, in order to his ensuing Tryal; yet he obtain∣ed the assignation of Councel, and a Sollicitor for the better managing his de∣fence. The Bishop of Lincoln contrariwise was released out of the Tower; and Mr. Pryn, Dr. Bastwick, and Mr. Burton returned from their kind of banishment in great pomp and bravery, (attended by many hundreds on Horseback, with boughs in their hands, to London) for the Tide was turned, and ran strong the other way. In the interim, the Lord Keeper Finch, and Sir Francis Windebank Secretary of State, both charged with no less than High Treason, wisely withdrew them∣selves into Forein parts, and weathered the storm that would have sunk them. One Iohn Iames, the Son of Sir Henry Iames of Feversham in Kent, and of the Romish Religion, audaciously adventured to stab Mr. Howard a Justice of Peace, in Westminster-Hall; the said Mr. Howard being about to deliver to the Committee for Religion a Catalogue of such Recusants as were within his li∣berty. The House of Commons now Voted the Assesment of Ship-mony (about which there had been so much ado, and so many contests) together with the Opinions of the Judges, and the Writs for it, and the judgment of the Exchequer a∣gainst Mr. Hambden, to be all illegal: and the Arguments of the two Justices, Crook and Hutton, shewing the illegality thereof, to be Printed; and also order∣ed a Charge of High-Treason to be drawn up against eight others of the Judg∣es. Which business of Ship-money being made so accessary to our ensuing Troubles, I have thought fit to insert these Records concerning the same. The Case, as it was stated by the King to the Judges: CHARLES REX, The Case of Shipmoney stated.WHen the good and safety of the Kingdom in general is con∣cerned, and the whole Kingdom in danger, Whether may not the King by Writ under the Great Seal of England, command all the Subjects in this Kingdom at their charge to provide and furnish such number of Ships, with Men, Victual, and Munition, and for such a time as he shall think sit, for the defence and safeguard of the Kingdom from such danger and peril, and by Law compel the do∣ing thereof, in case of refusal and refractoriness? And whether in such cases the King is not sole Iudge both of the danger, and when and how the same is to be prevented and avoided? Their Opinions. The Iudges opi∣nions there∣upon.MAy it please your most excellent Majesty, we have according to your Majesties command severally and every man by himself, and all of us together, taken into serious consideration the Case and Questions, signed by your Majesty, and en∣closed in your Letter; And we are of opinion, that when the good and safety of the Kingdom in general is concerned, and the whole Kingdom in danger, your Majesty may by Writ under the great Seal of England command all the Subjects of this your Kingdom at their charge to provide and furnish such a number of Ships, with men, victual, and munition, and for such time as your Majesty shall think fit, for the de∣fence and safeguard from such a danger and peril, and that by law your Majesty may compel the doing thereof in case of refusal or refractoriness. And we are also of opinion, that in such case your Majesty is sole Iudge both of the danger, and when and how the same is to be prevented and avoided. This was signed by all the Judges but Justice Hutton and Justice Crook, whose Arguments were against it for Mr. Hambden, who was sued for not paying the Twenty Shillings Taxed upon him for Shipmoney.
DEcember 27th, 1640. Resolved by the Commons,Shipmoney vtd ille∣gal. that the Charge impos'd upon the subjects for the providing and furnishing of Ships, and the Aes∣ments for that purpose, commonly called Shipmoney, are against the Laws of the Realm, the Subjects right of property, and contrary to former resolutions in Par∣liament, and to the Petition of Right. Resolved, That the Extrajudicial opinions of the Iudges published in the Star-chamber, and inrolled in the Courts of Westminster, are in whole and in every part of them against the Laws of the Realm, the Liberty of the Subject &c. This was also so resolved by the Lords, and by the Parliament ordered, That a Vacat be brought into the Parliament-house of all those Records concerning Ship-money. Which was accordingly done, February 27. the same Year, the 16 of the King. Die Veneris 26 die Februarii, 1640. UPon the report of the right honourable the Lords Committees appointed to consi∣der of the way of vacating of the Iudgment in the Exchequer concerning Shipmoney; It was ordered by the Lords spiritual and temporal in the High Court of Parliament assembled, that the Lord Keeper, or the Master of the Rolls, the two Lord chief Iustices, and the Lord chief Baron, and likewise the chief Clerk of the Star-chamber, shall bring into the Vpper House of Parliament the Record in the Exchequer of the Iudgment in Mr. Hambdens case concerning Shipmoney,The Iudgment of the Exche∣qr aginst Mr. Hambden vacated. and also the several Rolls in each several Court of the Kings-Bench, Common-Pleas, Ex¦chequer, Star-chamber, and Chancery, wherein the Iudges extrajudicial Opinions in the Cases made touching Shipmoney be entred▪ and that a Vacat shall be made in the Vpper House of Parliament of the said several Records. And likewise the Iudgment of Parliament touching the illegality of the said Iudgments in the Exche∣quer, and the proceedings thereupon, and touching the illegality of the extrajudi∣cial Opinions of the Iudges in the said several Courts concerning Shipmoney, be an∣nexed and apostiled unto the same: And that a Copy of the Iudgment of Parliament concerning the illegality of the said Iudgment in the Exchequer, and the said ex∣trajudicial Opinions of the said Iudges concerning Shipmoney, be delivered to the several Iudges of the Assize: And that they be required to publish the same at the Assizes in each several County within their Circuits, and to take care that the same be Entred and Enrolled by the several Clerks of Assizes. And if any entry be made by any Custos Rotulorum, or Clerk of Assize, of the said Iudgment in the Ex∣chequer, or of the said Extrajudicial Opinions of the Iudges, That several Vacats be made thereof per judicium in Paliamento, by judgment in Parliament. And that an Act of Parliament be prepared against the said Iudgment and extrajudicial Opinions in the proceedings touching Shipmoney. Vacatur istud Recordum & Judicium inde habitum per considerationem & judicium Dominor. spiritual. & temporal. in Parliam. & irrotulamentum eo∣rum Cancellatur. The two Iustices Arguments also against it were likewise Printed and pub∣lished. They likewise ordered a Committee to draw up a Charge against the Archbi∣shop of Canterbury;Mr. Hollis delivers a Charge against the A.B. Cant. the Scots do the like: he is vo∣ted guilty of high treason, and committed. which was done, and delivered to the Lords by Mr. Hollis; which was seconded with another from the Scots Commissioners: upon which he was committed to the black Rod, and ten weeks after voted guilty of High treason, and sent to the Tower. The Parliament having thus removed these men, and growing every day more and more upon the affections of the people, they began to hammer upon
the Bill for Triennial Paliaments,The King signs the Bill for Triennial Par∣liaments. which soon after passed both Houses; and to the universal content of the Kingdom, was signed by his Majesty; for which the Parliament, by the Lord Littleton Keeper of the great Seal, gave him their most humble and hearty thanks. Some former Overtures and Propositions had been made by the Dutch Am∣bassadors of a Marriage between the Princess Mary the Kings eldest Daughter, and William Prince of Aurange; which upon the arrival of the said Prince, was afterwards accomplished,The Houses op∣pose Bishops temporal juris∣diction. being well approved of by both Houses; by the lower whereof, a Vote passed against Bishops temporal jurisdiction; which was afterwards framed into an Act, passed the Lords, and was confirmed by the King, who in all things (saving his Honour and Conscience) complyed with the desires of this Parliament. The Earl of Straffords Tryal.Now came the Earl of Straffords Tryal, which after various debates about the Place, was appointed in Westminster-Hall: the King, Queen, and Prince, had a place built for them; the Nobility had seats at the upper end of the Court; the Commons in a Committee sate below; several of whom, as Mr. Pym, Mr. St. Iohn, and others, managed his Accusation: the Earl of Arundel was Lord High Steward, and the Earl of Lindsey Lord High Consta∣ble. The Charge or Impeachment consisted of Twenty eight Articles; all which he so learnedly and warily answered, defending himself with such sinewy Eloquence, and warded the points of his accusation so dexterously, that the Lords could not find the guilt which the Commons so highly exclaimed a∣gainst, as the greatest treason imaginable.Sir David Fowls and Sir William Pen∣nyman wit∣nesses against the Earl; the last of whom wept. Among other witnesses, Sir David Fowles, and Sir William Pennyman ap∣peared against the Earl; the first of whom the Earl declared was his enemy, and the latter, a Member of the House; of whom it was observed, that having testifyed against the Earl, he could not abstain from weeping. Anno Dom. 1641. THe Commons seeing they could not condemn him by this proceeding, they betook themselves to another, by Bill of Attainder; which conceding the matter of Fact sufficiently proved against him at his Tryal, and by the Testimo∣ny also of the Parliament of Ireland, who had prosecuted him there for the said offences,He is condemn∣ed as guilty of high treason. condemned him as guilty of high treason. This Bill stuck for a while with the Lords, till the Tumults coming down and stopping their Coaches, and menacing to post up the names of those who favoured him un∣der the name of Straffordians,The faction make a hideous cry of Iustice. The King with much reu∣ctancy signs the Bill of At∣tainder. with an impetuous cry of Iustice, frighted many of the Peers to assent to the Bill, which yet passed but by the plurality of seven voices against him. No sooner was it past there, but the Commons pre∣sented it to the King for him to sign; who very much declined it▪ but being over-perswaded by the dangers that were represented as inevitable consequents of his refusal, and being also desired by the said Noble Earl himself to give the Parliament content, though through the mediation of his own blood; His Majesty after advice with the Bishops, did pass that fatal Bill, which pro∣ved the Ax against his own life. I cannot pass the Tragedy of this excellent States-man▪ without a very nota∣ble remarque,A notable re∣marque concer∣ning Sir Alex∣ander Carew. which hath received credit from the mouthes of many honora∣ble persons; twas this: At the time of the passing the Bill of Attainder in the House of Commons, Sir Bevil-Greenvile, and Sir Alexander Carew, sitting together, they both serving for the same County of Cornwall, Sir evil bespoke Sir Alexander in such-like words: Pray Sir let it not be said, than any member of our County should have a hand in this minous business, and therefore pray give your Vote against this Bill. To whom the other instantly replyed: If I were siere to be the next man that should suffer upon the same Scaffold, with the same Ax, I would give my consent to the passing of it. And we have seen how exactly and in
every circumstance this presagious saying of his was afterwards verified and ac∣complished. It is observable,Those Bishops that consented to the Earls death escaped not the fury of the times. moreover, that none of all the Bishops that were advised with by the King, in reference to his satisfaction concerning the Earls death, escaped the fury of that Parliament and the times; he only excepted, as the King himself notes in his Book, who counselled him by no means, not for any considerations or reason of State or Time whatsoever, to act against his con∣science; but that obeying the Dictates thereof, he should refer the Issue to God: which Counsel had it been followed, doubtless those miseries which en∣sued presently after had, never befallen him nor his Kingdomes; the Earl being indeed one of the chief Pillars and Basis of his Authority and Government, without whose ruine the Grandees of the Faction knew they could not effect or accomplish any thing; such an absolute, rare, honest, and loyal master-piece of Reason and Prudence, (so much strength of spirit to quicken his undertakings joyned therewith) the age present saw not, and well will it be for the next if it may compare and parallel him. Thus far to the memory of his most useful life; we must also parentate something to his lamented and most causeless death, from which, as we shall see in the conclusion of this History, he had a most honoura∣ble Resurrection here. On Sunday May 2. was solemnized at Court the marriage between the young Prince of Orange and the Princess Mary.Prince of Orange war∣ries the Prin∣cess Mary. Sir Dudley Carleton the Earls Secreta∣ry brings him word of his Majesties ha∣ving passed the Bill of At∣tainder. Before we attend the Earl to the Stage, it will not be unworthy the Readers patience, to observe Sir Dudley Carleton, the Earls Secretary, bringing him the news of the Kings passing the Bill of Attainder: the Earl believing the King would not have done it, arose from his chair, and lifting up his eyes to Heaven, clapt his hand upon his heart, and said, Put not your trust in Princes, nor in the sons of men, for in them there is no salvation. A design was laid for his escape, if we may believe Sir William Balfore Lieu∣tenant of the Tower at that time, whose report upon examination was, that the Earl sent for him four days before his suffering, and endeavoured to perswade him to connive at his escape, promising to reward him with twenty thousand pounds, and his Daughter in marriage to Balfores Son. The said Balfore say∣ing further, that he was commanded to admit Captain Billingsley to march in∣to the Tower with an hundred men, for the better securing of the place; but the said Billingsley coming he was denyed entrance by Balfore: whereupon the Earl expostulates with the Lieutenant, of the danger of opposing the Kings command; Balfore answering, that a design of his escape was discovered by three good-wives of Tower-street, that peeping in at the key-hole of his door, they saw him walking with Billingsley, and heard them advising thereon, and of a Ship to be in readiness for him below the River. On the 8th of May, 1641. the said Earl was brought to the Scaffold on Tower-Hill, where were present some of the Nobility, Sir George Wentworth his Brother, and the Archbishop of Armagh, to whom principally he directed his Speech (which being so publique,Life in Mr. Lloyds Me∣moires. and transmitted by so many pens, cannot certainly fail posterity) and with much Christian resolution, was offered there as a Sacrifice to popular fury, heightned and enraged by the artifices and de∣signs of some innovating principal Leaders to the following breaches and Rebel∣lion. To sum up all our misery in the total of this noble person, the same day the King signed the Bill for his Execution, he signed also another for the con∣tinuing of this Parliament till they should dissolve themselves; the only lasting monument of all our troubles. The Scots having thus obtained their aims against this honourable person,The English Army disband, the Scotch re∣ceive a vast sum of money, and return home. The King vi∣sits his Parlia∣ment of Edin∣burgh. The Earl of Leicester made Lord Lieutenant of Ireland. whom they termed the enemy of their Country, and having received a vast sum of money (blood, and the price of blood together) were now pleased up∣on the disbanding of the English Army, to march home and disband also, as was before intimated; having first obtained of his Majesty a grant to be present at the next sitting of their Parliament at Edinburgh; which his Majesty conde∣scended
to, and in August came thither, having before his departure constituted the Earl of Leicester Lord-Lieutenant of Ireland, in the place of the Earl of Strafford; but through the Rebellion, and other contingencies and reasons of State falling out, he never went over in that quality, though preparations were made both here and there in order to his Government. On the seventeenth of May, divers of the Kings chiefest Officers of State, fear∣ing they might likewise be subject to the same destructive change with the Earl of Strafford, resigne their places; viz. The Lord Cottington Master of the Wards, to the Lord Say. Doctor Iuxon then Bishop of London, resignes his office of Treasurer of England, to five Commissioners. Marquess Hertford was also sworn governour to the Prince, in the stead of the Earl of Newcastle. The Earl of Pembroke displaced from being Lord Chamberlain of the Kings Houshold, and the Earl of Essex ordered to succeed him. Upon the Kings going for Scotland, the Parliament was Adjourned till the 20 of October;The Parliament adjourned. The faction en∣creaseth and grows strong. during which recess, and his Majesties absence, the ill humours of discontents gathered amain. The Faction was strengthened at home, by open and avowed correspondencies, which became publique in menaces and threatnings against the remaining disorders and abuses in the Government. The Ax had but tasted of that blood, of which it soon after glutted it self; all persons of all Ranks and Conditions, King, Archbishop, Duke, Marquess, Earls, Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, Ministers, Mechanicks, suffering under its edge. A re∣markable thing, the parallel of it being no where in our English Chronicles: But so the Noble Earl of Straffords blood was expiated, and his innocency atten∣ded with the like victimes. The Parliament now met together after their adjournment, the King being still in Scotland,The King set∣tles the affairs of Scotland. where he so ordered affairs by his indulgence and bounty, that it was verily thought upon his departure, he had not left a malecontent in that Kingdom: to the confirmation of which opinion, the Scots were not wanting themselves; it being their complement, grown to a publique expression, that his Majesty departed a contented King, from a contented people. The Parliament at Westminster had scarce yet sat in a full House from their Ad∣journment, curiously prying into the Errors and male-Administration of the Government here, but the fearful news came of a horrid Rebellion broke forth in Ireland.A Rebellion in Ireland. It seems no sooner that careful diligent eye of the Earl of Strafford was first distorted by the Scotch affairs, and after put out and extinguished by the English envy, but the Irish resumed their wonted desires after liberty, which they never yet attempted upon a less foundation than a total Massacre, and ut∣ter extirpation of the English in that Kingdom; so that in effect, however the Parliament threw the odium of that Rebellion there upon the King, Question∣less it can be no where imputable ab extra, from without, but from their un∣warrantable proceeding against the said Earl, whose name and presence alone would have been sufficient to have prevented it, or his wisdom and power able to have suppressed it. This affrighting news when the Kingdom was already in a trepidation, la∣bouring with its own fears and pretended dangers, soon brought the King from Scotland,The King re∣turns from Scotland, and is magnificent∣ly received at London. with all possible haste to London; where, notwithstanding those trou∣bles, he was most welcomly, and as magnificently entertained; the Citizens on Horseback with Gold-chains, and in their several Liveries, in Rayles placed along the streets, chearfully receiving him; the sober part of the Nation not valuing the Irish troubles, if the King and his Parliament should but happily agree: if the breaches could be but closed here, there was no doubt of stanching the wound there. But it was otherwise meant by the faction, who added that conflagration as fuel to this; suggesting to the multitude, that what was acted against the Protestants there, was likewise intended to be put in Execution here; the Authors of one, being also so of the other; sinisterly traducing
the King as inclining to Popery,The faction sanderously charge the King and Arch-B. Cant. with in∣clining to Po∣pery. Walker an Iron-monger thows a Libel into the Kings ; he is imprioned. Sir Richard Gurney Lord Mayor of Lon∣don. which they point-blank charged upon the Archbishop of Canterbury; which imputation diffused it self afterwards upon the whole Order. This torrent of the multitude was swelled so high, even at this reception of the King, that one Walker an Iron-monger, as his Majesty passed from Guild-Hall (where he was most sumptuously feasted at the City-charge, Sir Richard Gurney being then Mayor) threw into his Coach a scandalous Libel, Intituled, To your Tents, O Israel: which indignity the King complained of, and thereupon Wal∣ker was put in Prison; yet afterwards he Libelled a great deal worse, both in Press and Pulpit. But since the settlement of the Church, he procured a law∣ful Ordination. I mention this man, as the shame of that zealotry which so fu∣riously commenced this unnatural War. The first business transacted with the King by the two Houses, was an ac∣count of the Irish Rebellion; the King having acquainted them in a short Speech of his composure of the Scotch troubles, and soon after conjuring them to joyn with him in the speedy suppressing of the Irish,Most of the Irish Nobility revolted: Sir Phelim Oneal their chief com∣mandr. whose dangers grew every day greater, Iobs Messengers perpetually bringing over worser and wors∣er news from that Kingdom, where most of the Nobility were confederated in that horrid revolt, having made Sir Phelim Oneal (the chief of the family of Tyrone, the late famous Rebel there in the latter part of the Raign of Queen Elizabeth, and bred in Lincolns-Inn, and then a Protestant, but turned a bloody Papist, though a most sneaking and silly Coward) the supreme Com∣mander of their Forces, which then were raised in great numbers throughout all the Provinces. Deep waters run stillest,A full account of the Irish Rebellion, and proceedings of the War there. and with the least noise; so was it with this Plot. It was very strange that a designe of such vastness, of so great mischief and hor∣rour, should be concealed among a multitude that were concerned in it: But this devilish secrecy was imputable onely to the ancient irreconciliable malice of the Irish against the English, whose yoke sundry times they had attempted to shake off; not for any oppression they were under, but out of a natural desire of being Lords and Masters of their own liberty. But nevertheless it pleased God that it came in the very nick of the execution of their Plot to be revealed by one of that Nation, or otherwise that Kingdom had been in danger to be lost, as Sicily was from the French, by a sudden massacre. The chief Instrument in carrying on this horrible Plot,Roger Moor the chief in∣strument in the plot. was one Roger Moor, descended of an ancient Irish family, but allyed to most of the Gentlemen of the English Pale: He made several journeys into all the four Provinces of this Kingdom, communicating his intelligences from forrain Popish Courts, and the transactions of their Priests and Fryars there, to the encouragement of this Revolt. Another of the greatest confidents and complices in this designe, was the Lord Viscount Gormanston,The Lord Vis∣count Gor∣manston one of their com∣plices. of the English Pale, which generally sided with the Rebels, (as being inoculated into Irish stocks, and were Papists generally) though against all opinion of the Council, for that they had been such enemies to the Earl of Tyrone, in his grand Rebellion. But the menacing speeches, and denunciations of the English Parliament against Papists in both Kingdoms, especially in this, where they threatned a total extirpation, cannot be denyed to be one, if not the principal cause why they made this defection from their Country and Allegiance. The 23 of October was the day pitcht upon for the general rising; and the Lord Macguire, Col. Mac Mahon, Col. Plunket, and Capt. Fox, Hugh Birn and Roger Moor, were appointed for the seizure of Dublin-Castle; which would at once have done their work: those persons (with a competent number of men to their assistance) came one day before to Town, and had conference to∣gether at the Lyon-Tavern near Copper-Ally, where one Owen O Conally an Irish Gentleman, but a retainer to Sir Iohn Clotworthy, was admitted, and by Mac Mahon informed of the conspiracy. After a large drinking to their next
mornings success,Owen O Co∣nally discovers the Plot. Iuice Par∣sons and Sir Jo. Borlace double their Watches. O Conally privily repaired to the Lord Justice Parsons, (to whom, and Sir Iohn Borlace the other Justice, the Government was commit∣ted after my Lord Straffords death: The Lord Dillon was likewise named and constituted; but to avoid the jealousie, and grudgings thereat, the King had disauthorized him) and very disturbedly and confusedly, by reason of the drink, and his horrour at the story, revealed the chiefest part of it. It was thereupon advised by the said Lord Justice, for a fuller and certainer account, to send him back again to the said Mac Mahon, commanding him to return that night again to him; which he did from the said Tavern and company (who would have kept him there all night) by pretending to ease himself; and thence leap∣ing over a wall and a set of pales into the streets. In the mean time the Lord Justice Parsons went to the Lord Borlaces house, and there assembled a Council, by the coming of Sir Thomas Rotheram, and Sir Robert Meredith; who resolved first to attend the return of O Conally, who in his way to them had been seized by the Watches, which by the order of Justice Parsons had been doubled and reinforced, and the Castle of Dublin manned and guarded very stoutly. But by the diligence of one of the Lord Parsons ser∣vants, who was set expresly to walk the streets, and attend the motion of Co∣nally, he was found in the Constables hands, and brought before them, where being recovered from his distemper, he gave a perfect narrative of the Treason intended; and that when the Conspitators had gotten the Casle and the Ammu∣nition and Stores, &c. they would batter the Chimneys, and then the Houses of the Town, till it yielded, and then kill all the Protestant Inhabitants; and that the like would be executed the same time in all parts of the Kingdom. Mac Mahon and Mac-Guire, their Lodgings watched. Mac Mahon and his men af∣ter some resi∣stance are scu∣red, and con∣fess the Plot. The Lord Mac-guire seized.Upon this discovery, the Lords ordered the Lodgings of Mac Mahon and Mac Guire to be set and watched; but upon further advice, they sent before day and seized Mac Mahon. He and his man at first made some resistance with drawn swords; but seeing he was overpowred, yeilded, and being brought before the Council, confessed the whole Plot, adding, that it was impossible for them to prevent it; and that it was true, they had him in their power, and might use him as they pleased, but he was sure he should be revenged. He was the Grandson of the Rebel Tyrone. The Lord Macguire was next seized; but the other four got away in the dark, by the aid of some of the Townsmen: and of all those that came up in numbers to the City, and left their horses in the Su∣burbs, of which the Council had notice betimes, and seized some of them, and got notice thereby of the owners, there were not (by the slack pursuit of the Inhabitants) above thirty, (and those servants, and inconsiderable per∣sons) that were taken. Mac Guire and Mac Mahon were committed to the cu∣stody of the Constable of the Castle. The Council warn the people of the Rebellion by Proclama∣tion.The same day, October 23. the Councel emitted a Proclamation, giving no∣tice of the Rebellion, raised by some evil affected Irish Papists: which character, at the instance of the Lords of the English Pale, and to give them content, in whose Loyalty at present rested the hope of the Kingdom, was changed into this discrimination, The evil affected of the old Irish in the Province of Ulster. But notwithstanding, soon after they absolutely declared themselves for the Rebels; having by their temporizing in this manner, gained a great quantity of Arms from Dublin, and then refused to appear there at the summons of the Council; giving themselves the name of the Confederate Catholick Army. The Lord Blaweys House, Wife and Chil∣dren surprised. The Newry sur∣prized, with several other places of strength.The same night, the 23 of October, the Lord Blawey arrived at Dublin with the news of the surprizal of his House, Wife and Children by the Rebels of the County of Monaghan; and the day after, Sir Arthur Tyrringham brought news of the suprizal of the Newry; which was seconded with notice of the like seisure of Fort Montjoy, Carlemont, Torages, Carick, Mac-Ross, Cloughouter, and Castle of Monaghan, being all of them places of considerable strength, be∣sides a multitude of other Houses of strength, Castles and Towns filled with British Inhabitants, who by immuring themselves, and not joyning in a Body, were ruined easily one after another, whereas otherwise they might have been
able to have defeated this barbarous Enemy.The Rebels take Dundalk, & be∣siege Tredagh. They commit horrid Massa∣cres in sundry places. These successes were obtained under the ensigns and Conduct o Sir Phelim O Neal, Turlough O Neal his brother, Rory Mac Guire Brother to the Lord Mac Guire, Philip O Rely, Mulmore O Rely, Sir Conne Gennys, Col. Mac Brian, and Mac Mahon; who with their torces advancing Southwards, took in Dundalk, and besieged Tredagh; the Lords of the Pale publiquely joyning with them, Viscount Gormanstone being made Lord General thereof; Hugh Birn Lieutenant General, and the Earl of Fingale General of the Horse. Every day and hour came Tydings of the most horrid massacres committed in the Counties of Down, Fermanagh, Monaghan, Antrim, and Armagh: those that escaped to the Sea-Towns, the Inland being all lost, pe∣rishing there by their hard and starving march, both hungry and naked, and pestring the few Garrisons of Colrain, Carick-fergus and London Derry; and of the multitude of those that got to Dublin, not one in five survived the want and tire of their journey; insomuch that some being over-driven by the Rebels, have been forced to leave their Infants and young Children in the High-ways, which were knocked on the head by them. Nor was this calamity all; such as got shipping for England were most of them drowned, and others three moneths at Sea, the winter and that season of the year was so rude and tem∣pestuous; while the Rebels gloried in their successes and cruelties, and this ex∣traordinary displeasure of the Almighty towards these their causless Adver∣saries. That I may not pass this doleful subject without some particular testimony of their barbarousness, I will instance that inhumane murder at Portnedown Bridg, where in the very beginning of the Rebellion at several times they forced 1800 men,1800 Prsons drowned. women and children with pikes and halberts off that Bridge into the Ri∣ver, and drowned them all: soon after which, there were such ghastly appari∣tions seen, and such screeches of revenge heard, that the Irish inhabitants were forced to remove their Creats or Hovels out of the dreadful noise and clamor thereof. In sum, there was never such a Diabolical Fury, Treachery and Per∣fidiousness in the world, which consumed in five moneths time no less then 150000 persons;150000 Per∣sons destroyed in the Province of Ulster only in five moths time. Sir Phelim Oneal defeatd at Dudalk. Dublin in great streights. nay, some good Authors have reckoned more in that one Pro∣vince of Vlster. Sir Phelim O Neal & his party cruelly upon their defeat at Dundalk and other places, wreaking their revenge upon such innocent persons, as from the beginning of the Rebellion they had kept in miserable durance and captivity. Dublin was now in great streights and frights; which the miseries of those poor Wretches that made it their refuge, rendred more dismal. The whole Irish Army consisted but of 2000 Foot and 1000 Horse, and so dis-joyned, that there was as much danger of embodying them, as staying there where they were, (for seven Companies of Foot had been lost, with their Garrisons, al∣ready, to the Rebels, most of the Souldiers being Irish. Nor was there any money in the Treasury; onely 3000 l. destined to pay a publick debt in Eng∣land, was stopt for present use; by which means a Regiment was raised for Sir Henry Titchburn,A Regiment raised for Sir H. Titchburn, another for Sir Charles Coot. Expresses sent to the King, the Lord Lieu∣tenant, and the Parliament. to reinforce the Garrison of Tredagh, into which the Lord Moor now Earl thereof had opportunely put himself with his Troop of Horse; for the Townsmen were false and wavering: Sir Henry arrived safe thither in two days march from Dublin, November the 4th. Another Regiment was raised for Sir Charles Coot, who was to be Governour of the City, now in great fear and despair; for the Rebels were near it on every side: this Regiment was made up mostly of those men who came stript and despoiled out of the North, and who lived to see themselves revenged of the Irish. Applications were like∣wise made, and Expresses sent to the King, then in Scotland; to the Lord Lieutenant the Earl of Leicester, and both Houses of Parliament at Westminster, who readily voted a potent relief; but by their debates and quarrels with the King, on purpose retarded it, till all was near lost in that Kingdom; the envy whereof they loaded upon his Majesty, than whom no Prince could e∣ver be more affected with the sadness of such a calamity, I may not omit that Owen O Conally, who was sent with the express to the Parliament, was rewarded
by them according to the desire of the Council of Ireland with 200 l. in money,Owen O Co∣nally rewarded with 200 l. in money, and a pension of 200 l. per anum. The Earl of Ormond Lieu. Gen. marched to Dublin with divers other Captains. and 200 l. a year pension, till lands of inheritance could be setled on him. The Earl of Ormond was now marched to Dublin, with the title of Lieu∣tenant-General; and a Troop of 100 Curasiers compleatly armed; Sir Tho∣mas Lucas, and Captain Armstrong, old Souldiers, and Captain Yarner, arrived out of England, as did Col. Crawford, for whom a Regiment was raised, as Troops for the other; 600 Foot had been also provided under the conduct of Major Roper, to march as Recruits to Tredagh, at the instance of the Gover∣nour; and accordingly on the 27th of November they begun this short Expedi∣tion, accompanied with 50 Horse of the Earl of Ormonds under Sir Patrick Weems; but by ill conduct, and loytering in the way, and the unexpertness of those raw foot-Souldiers, they were of a sudden in a mist attaqued by a body of the Rebels near Iulian Town-bridg, and there being deserted by the horse, most shamefully routed; three of the Captains with all the English, except 100 that escaped with Major Roper to Drogheda,Major Roper with 600 Foot to Tredagh. With 50 Horse under Sir Pat. Weems, sur∣prized by the Rebels and routed. being cut off: The news whereof arrived to the Governour, just as he was returned from the place of his disappointed meeting with them the day before, by reason of their delayed advance. Proud with this success, as with the taking of Mellefont-house, the Mansion of the Lord Moor, which had been stoutly defended, they made sure of Tredagh, and drew their orces about it; whereas had they marched for Dublin, where they had too many friends, and whence Sir Charles Coot was marched into the County of Wicklow to repress the insolencies of the Birns and Tools towards the poor English, from whom they had taken Carews fort, and possessed them∣selves of the chief Gentlemens houses; they might have carried both places. At Wicklow Sir Charles executed some murderous Irish;Some Rebels executed at Wicklo. Luke Tool encoun∣ters Sir Charls Coote, and is pu to flight. The Lords and Gentry of the English Pale declare for the Roman Catho∣lick Religion. but being caed to Dublin, he was encountred by Luke Tool, and 1000 Irish, whom he quickly made run into a Bog, with some loss, and came safe home. Now the Lords and Gentry of the English Pale plainly discovered them∣selves, and, as is touched before, assisted in the siege of Tredagh; and thereby Lemster and Vlster became United in this Rebellion, in which Munster was not engaged till December. (At this time also they emitted their Declaration, wherein they decared for the exercise of the Roman Catholick Religion, their Rights and Priviledges, and the Kings Prerogative; and justified their taking arms to those purposes, by the example of the Scots, who had obtained their demands thereby: And next, they presume to face Dublin, theatning to encamp at Clantarfe very near the Harbour thereof, which they intended to stop from receiving any succours, but at the approach of Sir Charles Coot they fled thence, and the Town was pillaged, and some part burnt, for that they had robbed a Barge, and some of the goods were found in Mr. Kings house, who with Luke Nettervil, and others had now encamped themselves again at Swords within six miles of Dublin with 20000 men, and had possessed the Castle of Artain and other places within two miles thereof: At Castle-Lyons and Rath there lay 2000 more, who came out of Caterlagh, Kings County and Kildare, under Roger Moor. This was on the East-side: on the South-side lay the Birnes and the Tools, who had lodged themselves in Castles near the Sea-side, and some Villages at the foot of the Mountains,The Rebels in Lemster 20000 strong. so that their Forces now in Lemster amounted to 20000 men. About this time the Naas and Kildare were taken, as were Trim and Ashbey in the County of Meath, by the Rebels; and no better news was to be hoped for or expected: besides, now the market of Dublin could not be supplied, the ene∣my every where so encompassed it. Sir Simon Harcourt ar∣rives with a Regiment at Tredagh.Tredagh nevertheless held out gallantly, till the arrival of Sir Simon Harcourt with his Regiment out of England, and some supplies of money; and more men and arms were daily expected; which deceiving the opinion of the Rebels, so disheartned them, after many fruitless attemps made upon that Town, that they broke up their siege, and marched Northwards; but in their way Sir Henry Titchburn sallied out and overtook them, and gave them a defeat; and pursuing
his success,The Rebels are disheartned, and defeated by Sir Henry Titchburn, who recovered Dundalk. Sir Phelim O Neal escapes to Ulster: Sir George Monro reco∣vers Newry, and do's the Rebels much damage. recovered Dundalk again by storm; while Sir Phelim O Neal hard∣ly escaped over the River, and fled back to Vlster, where Major-General Sir George Monro, who commanded the Scotch forces (whose Plantations fared no better than the English, when the Irish had once mastered ours) lent the Parlia∣ment by agreement at Edinburgh, in revenge of those spoils and massacres com∣mitted, made the same bloody havock and waste, and in the beginning of the next year took in and recovered sundry Towns and Castles, particularly the Newry; which, with the like successes of Sir Simon Harcourt and Sir Charles Coot in Lemster, had almost flag'd the hearts of the Irish, and made them willing to a Cessation. Leave we that Kingdom in a forlorn, miserable, bleeding condition, and cast an eye homeward. The King soon after his return, to rest and vacate himself a little from the toil and burden of business, retired to Hampton-Court, whence notwithstanding, the importunity of his affairs straight recalled him to his Court at White-Hall, where he was sundry times tumulted by a numerous rabble out of London,Tumults from London af∣front the King and Court. crying out No Bishops, with other affronting language to the King himself, as they passed by the Court-Gates to Westminster, where Col. Lunsford (then nominated to be Lieutenant of the Tower, but not confided in by the Citizens no more than others appointed to that charge, till Sir William Balfour had possession thereof) and some other Gentlemen, drew upon them, and wound∣ed some of them; which so exasperated them, that the next time they came down armed, and in greater numbers, to the terror and affrightment of the parts adjacent to the Court: an ill omen or presage of those dire revolutions which followed. The beginning of these uproars were like themselves, at first tumultuary, and consisted of the rabble onely; but the kind reception they found from some Parliament-Members, who tacitely encouraged their rude clamours, and smiled upon their numbers, moved Citizens of the best quality to joyn with those Club∣men; and now they began to marshal their multitudes into rank and File; the eminent zealots, some of them Aldermens fellows, being right-hand-men, or else placing themselves in the intervals like Officers; and upon their return by night, which was the usual course, carried Links in their hands, like right boute∣feus, to light their Complices and Partakers in this monstrous Riot: So that the danger appearing in a method and form, the dire prognostick of Battalia, and flighting the opposition of a Corps du Guard erected over against Scotland-yard,Sir William Mason heads the Gentlemen of Grays-Inne to White-Hall, prostering them and himself to his Majesty as a guard for his person. which was maintained by the Trained Bands of St. Clements and St. Martins; the Gentlemen of the honourable Society of Grayes-Inne, under the leading of Sir William Mason, in good order ranked two and two, marched from their ran∣dezvouz at Covent-Garden to White-Hall, and proffered their Loyal Service to the King, as a Guard to his person, against those formidable tumults. They were received by the King with all respect and acknowledgements of this seasonable tender; which manifested that Law, Reason, and Civility were disengaged from the Rebellion: but the Kings sudden remove dispensed with their Duty.The King re∣ceives them with respect. The Tumultuous rabble counte∣nanced by some Grandees of the faction. Whereat the King is much troubled. The King, sensible from what quiver this Arrow came, and not longer able to endure these indignities, which he had so often moved the two Houses, though in vain, to prevent or punish, resolved to seize on those Grandees who principally abetted those tumults, and also had had a deep hand in the Scotch troubles, (having intercepted Letters of correspondence between them and the Covenan∣ters) the untoward Issue and Event whereof (as whereby his English Subjects had presumed to obtain by tumults the same demands) lay yet heavy on his heart, and boded the fame conclusions. Taking therefore with him a Guard of his own domestick Servants, and some Gentlemen casually then in the Court, late in one of the Christmas-nights,He demands five Members of the House of Commons and the Lord Kim∣bolton. he came to the door of the House of Commons, and entred, and demanded five members thereof, (as also one of the House of Peers, the Lord Kimbolton) viz. Mr. Pyns, Mr. Hambden, Mr. Holles, Mr. Strod, and Sir Arthur Haslerig; but they having notice of the Kings coming to this purpose, by one Langrish a Ser∣vant
of the Queens, had time, and but just enough, to withdraw themselves into Westminster-Hall, where they lay hid in the Kings-bench-Court, until the business of that night was over, and then betook themselves into London to the Guild-Hall, whereto the House not long after adjourned it self in a grand Committee, for their safeguard and security. The House vote it a breach of priviledge.This attempt of the King, the House presently voted a breach of priviledge; and ran so high as to complain of evil Councellours about the King, demanding the persons of those who gave that advice to the King: Nay, so highly did they insist upon and urge this violation of their freedom, that all the King could do, gave them no satisfaction, though he endeavoured to excuse it; so that it con∣tinued their plea throughout the War: But how it was retaliated upon them both by themselves and Oliver, in the several Exclusions and Forces afterwards put upon that House, needs no particular indigitation. They accuse se∣veral Bishops as guilty of high Treason. They are Com∣mitted.Having therefore got this claw against the King, they resolve to revenge them∣selves on the Bishops; some of whom they suspected to be the chief instruments in that business: Particularly, to gratifie the City, (whom they had wholly devoted at their service) who might see the Parliaments readiness to comply with their clamours against that Venerable Order, Twelve of these the Com∣mons accused to the Lords as guilty of High Treason, whereof ten were com∣mitted to the Tower,The Irish are proclaimed Rebels. and two to the Black Rod. At the same time also the Irish were proclaimed Rebels; thirty Proclamations hereof being onely Printed, for some reasons of State the King reserved to himself then, though afterwards when the Parliament among other things taxed him with this, he gave them a full and satisfactory answer, as not willing to make the Irish desperate, and utterly undo his Protestant Subjects, who were (as then) far too weak to withstand so potent a Rebellion, which the King was willing so far to comply with the Parliament as to declare it so. For the number of them, he said it was the request of the said Lords Justices of Ireland there should be but twenty, as many of themselves well knew. The King de∣clares his charge against the five mem∣bers.Like wise to satisfie the Parliament about that business of the five members, he now declared his charge against them, which consisted of several things rela∣ting to intelligence held with the Scots, while declared Traytors. That they trayterously endeavoured by many foul Aspersions upon his Majesty and Government, to alienate the affections of the people, and to make his Majesty odious to them. That they trayterously endeavoured to subvert the fundamental Laws and Go∣vernment of this Kingdom, and to deprive the King of his Regal, and to place on Subjects an arbitrary and illegal power. That they endeavoured to draw his Majesties late Army (in the North) to dis∣obedience to his Majesties command. That they invited the Scots to invade England. That they trayterously endeavoured the subversion of the rights and very being of Parliament. That for the compleating of their trayterous designes, they have endeavoured as far as in them lay, by force and terrour to compel the Parliament to joyn with them in their trayterous designes, and to that end countenanced and raised the tumults against the King and Parliament. That they had trayterously conspired to levy, and had actually levyed war against the King. The Parliament imprisons Sir Edw. Herbert.This was (as I said before) declared by the King; but in hopes and order to accommodation (this course being thought a good expedient thereto) was laid aside, and not prosecuted: But the Parliament left it not so, imprisoning for a while the Kings Atturney, Sir Edward Herbert, demanding those evil Coun∣cellours that gave this advice against the five Members to punishment. The Tumults in∣crease, and the King retires to Hampton-Court.Herewith the Tumults so increased about White-Hall and Westminster, that the King, Queen, Prince, and Duke of York, were forced for security of their persons, to retire to Hampton-Court; being necessitated to take sufficient forces of his Courtiers for his guard.
About this time there was a false rumour raised,A rumour con∣cerning the Lord Digby. Col. Lunsford committed. The Scots in∣terpose them∣selves, the Parliament demands the Tower and the Militia. by the Lord Digbies passing through Kingston neer London, of a plot to raise Horse against the Parliament; whereupon Col. Lunsford then with him, was committed to Prison, and this story improved into a calumny against the King. The Scots now interposed themselves betwixt the King and Parliament, though siding clearly with the Parliament, having by Treaty agreed with them to send over 2500 men into the North of Ireland, upon the English pay. Through their thus taking of their parts, the Parliament flew high now in their demands, requiring the disposal of the Command of the Tower, and the management of the Militia; which being refused, they desisted not, but on the 26 of Ianuary Petitioned the King for them both; to which the King by several reasons an∣swered in the nagative. Now again they insisted upon it, as also upon the bu∣siness of the five Members, still to exasperate the people (who cryed out against Popish Lords and Bishops sitting in Parliament) to which the King answered as before, and declared his readiness to pass an Act of general Pardon, to take away all suspition from the five Members. Several Petitions were presented to the Parliament from the Countries about the foresaid matters,Buckingham∣shire-men peti∣tion in behalf of Mr. Hamb∣den. and one from the Buckinghamshire-men to the King him∣self, in vindication of their Countryman Mr. Hambden. To this Petition the King demur'd, intent onely on the Irish business, whose miseries pierced him to the quick, being neither able effectually to relieve them, the Rebels being Ma∣sters of the chiefest places there; nor to put any thing here in a way o forward∣ness thereto,The King leaves Hamp∣ton-Court, the Queen and Princess of Aurange take ship for Hol∣land. The Parlia∣ment vote the Queen a Tray∣tor. through the cross proceedings and difficulties of his affairs here. The King was departed from Hampton-Court, in company with the Queen and his Daughter the Princess of Aurange to Dover, to see them shipped for Hol∣land. Whither the Queen conveyed away most of the Crown-Jewels, which she pledged for money and Arms for the King her Husband, and for which she was afterwards voted a Traytor, the Parliament being doing it at her depar∣ture. Now he returned straight to Greenwich from thence, having the Prince in his company, to Theobalds. Still the difference widened more and more ac∣cording as he removed from London, to which he was importunately desired to return by both Houses, by the Members thereof who continued sitting; though the Grandees of the Faction were well contented with what distance he kept from them, as rendring their pretended Jealousies and Fears more and more cre∣dible to the deluded people. From Theobalds, the misunderstanding still in∣creasing betwixt the King and two Houses, he removed North-ward, first to Royston, thence to Newmarket, and in conclusion to York; having received and answered several Messages from the Parliament by the way. The principal difference between the King and them was the Militia;The Militia, the principal difference be∣tween King and Parlia∣ment. this was disputed betwixt them; the King claiming it as an unseparable right of the Crown, and the Houses urging the management of it for present satisfaction and safety, and had thereupon nominated Officers; which designation the King disallowed. And now the rupture was visible. I have thought fit therefore to insert both the Commission of Array, and the Ordinance of the Militia, they seeming to be as the Challenge to the War en∣suing, though they both are here inserted out of order of time. CHarles by the grace of God,The Commission of Arry. King of England, Scot∣land, &c. to our most dear Cozens Henry Earl of Hunting∣don, and William Earl of Devonshire; and also to our beloved and trusty, Henry Hastings Esquire, Son of the said Earl of Hun∣tingdon; Henry Barkley, George Villiers, Thomas Burton, Baro∣nets; Henry Shipwith, &c. Knights; Henry Hasting of Humber∣ton, &c. Esquires; and the Sheriff of our County of L. for the
time being, greeting. Know ye, that we willing to take care and pro∣vide for the safety and defence of Our Self and Kingdome, and our Lieges thereof, according as our duty is, and by Gods good favour resolving to resist the malice of our enemies, if they sall presume to invade this our Realm of England: Have appointed you, or any three or more of you, to array and trayn all and every person and persons in arms, bowmen, &c. dwelling within your said County, within liberties and with out; and that you cause to be Armed all such as are able of body, and sit to bear them, who have of their own wherewith to arm themselves, viz. every one according to his estate or condition, to rate and proportion accordng to your advice and discretion, or of any three of you; and to distrain all those who have Lands and Possessions, and through debility of body are unable for service, causing them to find according to the quality of their Lands and Goods, what Arms conveniently and reasonably (saving their condition) they can bear; and to provide men at Arms, armed but with Bows and Arrows, so that they who shall stay and continue at their own home in their County for the defence of this our Kingdome against our enemies, shall receive no wages nor expences for this their stay at home aforesaid: and that you like∣wise dispose and cause to be disposed the said men so Armed and Arrayed, into Regiments, Troops, and Companies, or other Divi∣sion as you shall see convenient. And we have assigned you, or any three or more of you, whereof you the said Earl of Huntingdon, and in your absence you the said Earl of Devonshire, or you Henry Hastings, son of the said Earl of Huntingdon, to be one of the said men at Arms, and Bowmen, so arrayed and trained, as well to the Sea-Coasts as to any other places, where, and as often, and as need shall rquire, to expel, overcome and destroy our said enemies, from time to time, in any eminent peril, to command and lead. And we have likewise Commissionated you or any three or more of you, to cause Muster or Musters of the said men so armed and arrayed to be made, and to supervise them, as oft as occasion shall require. And also to proclaim, ordain, and diligently examine, and see that all, and every such men at Arms, armed men, and Bowmen in such Musters, be armed with their own, and not others wea∣pons, upon penalty of loosing them; those onely excepted who are to be armed at the charge of others. And to arrest, take, and in our Prisons to put all, and every of those who in this behalf you shall find enemies or Rebels, and to continue them in such Prisons until they shall be thence delivered by Law. And therefore, as straightly as we can, upon your Faith and Allegiance which you owe us, we enjoyn and command you, that forthwith upon the sight of these presents, that in the best and safest manner you can, you▪ arm and array your selves; and that before you at certain days and places which you shall judge most convenient and expedient, and of least hindrance to our people, you cause all men dwelling in your County by whom the Array and Arming may be best effected and compleated, to be called and come together, there and then to be arrayed and armed; and them so arrayed and armed, to keep in the same array. And fur∣thermore,
that you cause Beacons to be set up in the usual places, by which the several Counties may in fit time be fore-armed against the coming of our Enemies. And the same men so arrayed and armed in imminent danger, in the defence of the Kingdom and Country aforesaid, from time to time, as well to the Sea-side, or to other places where need shall require, you cause to be led and conducted, or some of you, of whom you the aforesaid Henry Earl of Hunting∣don, or in your absence, you the aforesaid William Earl of De∣vonshire, or you the aforesaid Henry Hastings, Son of the said Earl of Huntingdon, we will to be one, do cause to be conducted as aforesaid; so that through default of defence, array or conduct of the aforesaid Souldiers, or through your negligence, no hurt or damage be done to the aforesaid Country, as far as to your power it can be letted. And we streightly command all and every our Earls, Barons, Knights, Mayors, Bailiffs, Constables, Ministers, and others our faithful Liege-people of our County aforesaid, as well within Liberties as without, by vertue of these presents, to be counselling, aiding, and assisting to you, and every one of you, in all and singular the Premises. And we likewise Command you the said Sheriff, that at certain times and places which you or any three or more of you as aforesaid shall appoint, shall cause to convene before you all such men in the County aforesaid, by whom the Array, Assesment and Appointment, can best be effected and compleated; and to de∣tain those in Prison, who for their Rebellion shall happen thither to be committed. In witness whereof, we have caused these our Letters to be made Patents. Witness our self the 11th day of June, in the 18 Year of our Raign. Per Ipsum Regem. The Reader must know, that this Ordinance of the Militia was framed in February, and declared to be a Law, whether the King should give his Royal assent or no, in March ensuing; and several things done at that time in the seve∣ral Counties, in pursuance of it: So that it long precedes the Kings Commission of Array, though for dignity sake I have here Postposed it. The Ordinance of both Houses of Parliament, for Ordering the Militia of the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales. WHereas there hath been of late a most dangerous and desperate design upon the House of Commons,An Ordinance of Parliament for ordering the Militia. which we have just cause to believe to be an effect of the bloodie Councels of Papists, and other ill-affected persons, who have alrea∣dy raised a rebellion in the Kingdom of Ireland; And by reason of many discove∣ries, we cannot but fear they will proceed not onely to stir up the like rebellions and insurrections in this Kingdom of England, but also to back them with forces from abroad: It is ordained by the Lords and Commons, now in Parliament assembled, that shall have power to assemble and call together all and singular his Majesties Subjects within the County of as well within Liberties as without, that are meet and fit fothe Wars, and them to train, exercise and put in readiness, and them after their abilities and faculties well and sufficientlie, from
time to time, to cause to be arrayed and weaponed, and to take the Muster of them in places most fit for that purpose. And shall have power within the said Countie to nominate and appoint such persons of quality as to him shall seem meet to be his De∣putie-Lieutenants, to be approved of by both Houses of Parliament. And that any one or more of the said Deputies so assigned and approved of, shall in the absence or by command of the same have power and Authoritie to do and execute within the Countie all such Power and Authoritie before in this prsent Ordinance contained. And so shall have power to make Colonels and Captains, and other Officers, and to remove out of their places, and to make others from time to time, as he shall think fit for that purpose. And his De∣puties, Colonels, Captains and other Officers, shall have further Power and Authority to lead, conduct and employ the persons aforesaid, Arrayed and Weaponed, as well within the County of as within any other part of this Realm of England, or Dominion of Wales, for the suppression of all Rebellions, insurrections and inva∣sions that may happen, according as they from time to time shall receive directions by His Majesties Authority, signified unto them by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament. And it is further ordained, that such persons as shall not obey in any of the Premises, shall answer their neglect and contempt to the Lords and Commons in  Parliamentary Way, and not otherwise, nor elsewhere; and that every the powers granted as aforesaid, shall continue until it shall be otherwise ordered or declared by both Houses of Parliament, and no longer. John Brown, Clerk Parl. How contrary to any Law, Practice or Precedent of any Parliament, this Ordinance was, I refer the Reader to examine in his Majesties Answer to it. The Parliament send several Papers to the King.Many Messages and Answers, and Papers past betwixt the King and the Parliament, which though out of their order, we shall present at one view in∣tire in this Place; this History not allowing every one a particular room. Those of the Kings were less strained, yet more elegant then the Parliament's: the great ingredients and most substantial part of their Addresses were Jealousies and Fears; with which the King was constantly baited, for want of more solid Argu∣ments, and which no reason could rectifie or dispel, being irrefutable, because in∣existible; it being like fighting with a shadow, which canot be driven away. They protested all along, that if his Majesty should persist in the denyal of the Militia, the Dangers were such as would indure no longer delay, but that they should be forced to dispose of it by Authority of Parliament, and must resolve so to do, as it was by them propounded: Desiring, that for the safety of his person and people, in much jealousie and Fear, he will be pleased to reside in or neer London, and to continue the Prince at St. Iames's, or any other Houses neer London, to prevent the Jealousies and Fears of the people. Affirming, That by the Laws of the Realm the power of the Militia, of raising, ordering, and disposing thereof in any place, cannot be granted to any Corporation by Charter, or otherwise, without consent of Parliament; and that those pars of the Kingdom that have put themselves in a posture of defence, have done it by direction and Declaration of Parliament. The King much troubled with those unreasonable Papers, replyed, that he was so much amazed at this Message,The King is much troubled thereat, and answers. that he knew not what to answer. You speak of jealousies and fears, said he; lay your hands to your hearts, and ask your selves whether I may not in earnest be disturbed with jealousies and fears; and if so, I assure you this Message hath nothing lessned them. For the Militia, I thought as much before. My last answer being agreeable to what in Iustice or reason you can ask, or I in honour grant, I shall not alter in any point. I wish
my residence near you might be safe and honourable, that I had no cause to absent my self from Whitehal; Ask your selves, whether I have not? I shall take that care of my Son, which shall justifie me to God as a father, and to my Dominions as a King. I assure you upon mine honour, I have no thoughts but of peace and Iustice to my people, which I shall by all means possible seek to pre∣serve, relying upon the goodness of God for the preservation of my self and my rights. This quickned in the Parliament a resolution that the Kingdom be put pre∣sently into a posture of defence,The Parliament declare their resolution of putting the Kingdom into a posture of de∣fence. The Earl of Warwick made Admiral of England. The King an∣swers the Par∣liaments Decla∣tion with ano∣ther. and a publique Declaration thereupon to be made. They talkt of advertisements and extraordinary preparations of for∣raign Princes by land and Sea. In order to this, the Beacons were made up, new Sea-marks set up, much riding, posting with packquets, whispering and tales telling. The Earl of Northumberland, Admiral of England, is comman∣ded with all speed to rigg the Kings ships, and equip them forth-with for the Sea: And because of his indisposition, that charge is conferred on the Earl of Warwick, against whom the King took great exception; one very affectionate to the Cause which then first began to be in every mans mouth. The Declaration aforesaid was carried to Royston, whither the King was removed from Theobalds, by the Earls of Pembrook and Holland, who deliver∣ed him the substance of it: to which he returned in a most polite Declaration also, and verbally told the Lords, that for the Militia, he would not trust his wife and children with it for an hour; that it was never asked of any King: That to their Fears and jealousies he would take time to satisfie all the world, hoping that God would in his good time discover the bottoms and secrets of all plots and treasons, and set him upright with his people. The substance of his Declaration was this. That he had little encouragement to Replyes of this nature, when he is told of how little value his words are with them, though accompanied with Love and Iu∣stice: That his honour ought not to be wounded under the common stile and impu∣tation of evil Councellours: That he had formerly declared his faithful affection to the Protestant Profession, his whole life answerable in practice; which should ra∣ther be acknowledged by them, than any designe of his framed and declared to alter it in this Kingdom; calling God to be witness, and wishing that the judgement of Hea∣ven may be manifested on those that have or had any such designe. Concerning his sense of his good Subjects in Ireland, what had he not done in his Messages to both Houses, offering his own person ready to venture for their preservation and redem∣ption, being to give God an account of his interest in them? Denyes any designe of forcing the Parliament by his Army; and other particulars of the Petition, of passes granted Col. Leg, my Lord Jermins Pass, as likewise the Lord Digbies. And as for advertisements from Rome, Venice, Paris, the Popes Nuncio, the Kings of France and Spain, He is confident o sober man in the Kingdom will believe that he is so desperate or senceless to entertain such designes, to bring the Kingdom to de∣struction, and bury his name and posterity in perpetual infamy. He adds in conclu∣sion, could there yet want evidence on his part to joyn with his Parliament? Look back upon their own Remonstrance in November last of the State of the Kingdom, which valued his Acts of Grace and Iustice at so high a rate, that it declared the Kingdom a gainer, though it should charge it self by Subsidies and Pole-money six millions of pounds, besides the Contracting the Sents demands of two hundred and twenty thousand pounds. Nay more, he hath passed those Bills for the triennial Par∣liament, for relinquishing his Title to impose upon Merchants goods, and his power of pressing of Souldiers; for suppressing the Court of Star, Chamber, High-Com∣mission, regulating the Council-Table.He offers a free Pardon to his people, and pro∣pounds a r∣ciliation. Are these but words? The Bills for the Forrests, the Stannery Courts, the Clerk of the Markets, the taking away the Vote of the Bishops, nothing but words? what greater earnest can be given, than the Bill for the continuance of the Parliament? The length of which he wishes may never alter the nature of Parliaments. And for a perfect reconciliation with his
people, he offers a free pardon. Nor doth he repent of his favours done them, but will meet them in an honourable way, to add more, with the greatest readiness and kindness, for the peace, Honour and Prosperity of the Nation. This seemed satisfactory to the unprejudiced and sober; but prevailed not at all with the factious and giddy multitude, and less with their Chiefs and Abetters, who now emit the Ordinance for the defence of the Kingdom, which is resolved to be no whit prejudicial to the Oath of Allegiance and Supre∣macy; and next, that the Kings Commissioners of Lieutenancy over the re∣spective Counties are illegal and void: That their Ordinance for the Militia is to be obeyed as the fundamental law of this Kingdom▪The faction set forth another Declaration concerning the Militia. and prepare ano∣ther Declaration to that purpose. As the King removed North-ward, his mind went South-ward, though the Showers gathered there, which soon after came down in a storm. But it is a question whether if the King had returned, his influence had not dispelled and dissipated them▪ which thickned presently together, and resisted that light which Majesty dispenced in many after-gratious offers and condescentions, till the setting of it, after a big and fatal revolution. The King sends a Message to the Parliament concerning Ire∣land.Therefore he sends another Message to them from thence, that he means to take up his residence at York; conjures them to dispatch the business of Ireland; and if calamities increase upon his Protestant Subjects there, he shall wash his hands before all the World from any imputation upon him. He saith, that as he hath been forward to retract any thing intrenching upon them, so he expects an equal tenderness in them towards him, in any unquesti∣onable and fundamental priviledge. That his Subjects be not obliged to obey any Act, Order or Injunction, to which his Majesty hath not given his consent. And therefore requires that they presume not, upon pretence of any Order or Ordinance (to which his Majesty is not a party) of the Militia, or any other thing, to do or execute against the laws: he being to keep the laws himself, and his Subjects to obey them. They plead the priviledge of Parliament.To this all the reply they made was, That to have their Vote questioned or con∣tradicted, is a high breath of priviledge of Parliament: and a Committee was by them appointed to examine where and by whom this Message was counselled: and as the total of all this absurdity, they justifie their last Declaration in every par∣ticular. The King knowing what the Parliament drove at chiefly, to render him suspect of favouring Papists,The King pro∣claims against Papists. being at Stamford, published a Proclamation for putting the Laws in due execution against Papists: this somewhat abated the charge which his enemies laboured to fix on him for this particular, though they wrested this also, giving out that it was a time-serving policy, and that nothing less was intended. The Yorkshire Gentry desire a right understan∣ding between King and Par∣liament.What the two Houses did ambiguously supplicate, the York-shire Gentry did cordially beg of the King, desiring by such expedients as his Majesties own judgment should dictate, a right understanding betwixt him and his Parlia∣ment, to whom they would likewise address themselves. The King returned a gratious answer, with thanks; tells them that he is not mistaken in the confi∣dence of their affections,The King re∣turns a gratious answer. nor will he ever deceive their expectations from him: But as to the prayer of the Petition, the alone way of a good understanding, was for the Parliament to consider of his Message of the 20th of Ianuary, that the Militia be setled by Act of Parliament, explained in his Answer to their Petition for it; and wishes them in the sence of those, to apply themselves to the Parliament for the good of All. He resolving to go for Ire∣land, sends a Message to the Parliament.The King was now resolved, since he saw how slowly the Irish business pro∣ceeded, for the dispatch of that Rebellion to pass over thither; and to that pur∣pose sent a Message to the Parliament from York: From which expedition they disswade the King, and in lieu of using the Magazine of Hull for that service, desire it may be sent to the Tower of London, to supply that, almost exhausted;
guessing indeed that the King intended to possess himself of it:Sir John Ho∣tham admit∣ted into Hull. but they preven∣ted him, by Sir Iohn Hothams admittance into the Town, standing affected to their Cause, before the coming of my Lord Newcastle to the same purpose. Thereupon they again petition the King in the matter of the Militia,The Parliament Petition the King for the Militia: they insist upon the dangers of Popery. as to his Forts and Magazins, inserting the old standing matter of Popery, in rela∣tion to some Jesuits whom the King had reprieved. To this Petition the Kings Answer was, that he wondred why a Garison was put into Hull without his con∣sent, and Souldiers billeted without Law, contrary to the Petition of right, and that they could mention to him the transferring of his Magazine without reason or judge∣ment:Hull is Garri∣son'd, and the King is troub∣led that they should Petition him, and at the instant carve at their one pleasures. he would know why he might not be thought sufficient to impower and intrust any person of unquestionable honour and worth with the custody of a Fort, Town, or Magazine of his own; when they were so confident as to commit it without his knowledge or consent to Sir Iohn Hotham, though he doubts not but it will be rendred to him when he shall demand it. Hopes that they will not do in this case, as they have done in the Militia; petition him, and make themselves the Carvers: and tells them, that if they attempt any thing herein without his con∣sent, he will hold it as an act of violence against him, and so declare it to all the world. For the Priests,He excuseth his repriving of some Isuites. he refers them to the Law and their Sentence, the time of his Reprieve granted them being expired. But in that answer to his expedition into Ireland, they court him there with a Compliment of their fear of the danger of his person,The Parliament refuse to be go∣verned by Com∣missioners in his Majesties absence. besides the interruption of the proceedings of Parliament. Though to the first, they were more afraid of that force he should raise to accompany and attend his person; and as to the second, the distance lay onely in their averseness to an Accommodation: until they were nearer in duty and affection, the proximity of his person availed not: but they would in no wise endure to hear of being governed by Commissioners in his Majesties absence, because it was presumed there were more then enough of themselves already, that looked like such things in his presence, if not more Soveraign and imperious than such could be. To this Reply the King rejoyns, that he looks upon them as his great Coun∣cil with great respect, but also upon himself as not dprived of his understan∣ding, or devested of any right he had before the Parliament assembled: he cal∣led them by his Writ and authority, to give him counsel; but did not resign his interest and freedom, nor will subject himself to their determinations; nor hath he dissented at any time without his reasons given with candour and con∣science; and though a Major part may bind them in their consultations and opinions, yet he holds himself free to dissent from them. Anno Dom. 1642. NOw this great controversie of the Militia came to be decided; and what had been bandyed with so many words, to be summed up and stated in the case of Hull, and the Magazine there, which the King as before had refused to be translated any otherwhere than for his own accommodation in the service of Ireland:The King re∣solves to pos∣sess himself of Hull. besides, the County of York added their instances to the Kings resolu∣tion, requesting him, as well for his own as the publike safety, it might be con∣tinued where it was. Therefore to end the dispute, and ascertain the matter without any further contest, the King resolved to go and possess himself there∣of, taking with him a Guard onely for his person, which consisted of his me∣nial servants, and the Gentry adjacent thereabout. On the 23 of April his Majesty came before the Town,But is denyed entrance by Sir John Hotham, who stood on the Walls, and eard himself proclaimed a Traytor. when, contrary to all expectation, especially of the King, the enterance was denyed him, the gates being shut against him, as Sir Iohn Hotham then upon the Walls of the said Town peremptorily told him, by Authority of Parliament, by whose trust he kept it; nor by any means, after a long Parley and perswasion, would admit
the King into the Town, unless under certain disloyal and undutiful limitations, which the King so abhor'd, that moved with just indignation, he caused Hotham instantly and before his face to be proclaimed Traytor; a name that stuck to him or all sides, and was his Sentence long before his Execution; and which, (in such very heynous matters not usual) reached the life of his eldest Son also. But because his late Majesties own Sacred Pen hath so compassionately delivered his story, it will be rudeness to that blessed Prince, and barbarity to Sir Iohn Hotham, to rake further in his ashes than what we shall have occasion for in the depositing them after Execution. The Duke of York and Prince le∣ctor bring in the Town, are suffered to de∣part.The Duke of York and the Prince Elector Palatine were gone into the Town the day before, and were now after some deliberation suffered to go out again; who came to the King, then in a very great discontent retreated to Beverly, whence he sent Letters to the Mayor of Hull, which signified to him his Majesties displeasure and resentment of the affront done him; thereby also warning him and the Garrison (which consistd of a thousand men) not to partake with Hotham,The King re∣treatd to Be∣verly, writes to the Mayor and Garrison of Hull. but to lay down their arms and receive the King, who would rather enlarge than lessen and diminish their Charter and Priviledges. After this Message, he likewise dispatched another to the Parliament, re∣quiring the Town and Magazine to be delivered to him, and that his honour be repaired by some signal and remarkable Justice upon Hotham;And to the Parliament for Itice against Hotham. that injury so closely ying at his breast, that till satisfaction be given him therein, he can in∣tend no other business whatsoever, as portending those undutiful actions which afterwards succeeded: This is, saith he, to make me worse in condition than the meanest Subject, since I cannot enjoy my own; 'tis time therefore to examine how he lost them, and to try all possible ways by the help of God, the Laws, and his good Subjects, to recover them, and vindicate himself; concluding, that if he fail in the reducing of the place, he is the first Prince in Christendom that hath done so; and prays God to bless him in these resolutions. Te Parlia∣ment order the Lord Lite∣nant of Lin∣coln to up∣press all Forcs raied against Hull.This was answered no otherways, but by a Command to their Lord Lieute∣nant of the County of Lincoln to suppress all Forces that should be gathered and raised against the said Town of Hull, and presently expedite the Ordi∣nances of the Militia framed by themselves, having rejected that of the Kings own appointment, and drawn by his Council, though not a word in answer a∣gainst it to satisfie him; excluding all persons named by the King in his draught, and committed the trust and power thereof for two years,Sir Richard Gurney Lod Mayor  Lon∣don, sent to the Tower. to such in whom they confided. Soon after they seized upon Sir Richard Gurney Lord Mayor of London▪ whom for an example to other Loyal Magistrates they sent to the Tower of London; not long after which usage he deceased. The Parliament Authorize Sir John Hotham to raise the Trained Bands.Sir Iohn Hotham is also impowered by the Parliament to Summon the Trayn∣ed Bands of the County to his assistance; which through the factiousness of others, and his own menaces, he compassd; and having them within his reach, to prevent the King of any supply of Arms thereabout, he disarms the Country∣men, and dismisseth them. The King sm∣mons the Gn∣try of York, for the security of his Person.Herupon the King Summoned the Gentry and Free-holders of the County of York, to whom he complains of all those lawless proceedings of the Parlia∣ment and Hotham, to the danger of his person, which he thinks fit to secure by a guard from among them; reiterates his Protestation to the Lords then that wre with him, some of whom were sent from the Parliament, and continued there, that he intended not to raise a War, or embroyl the Kingdom; but since he had so lately received such an indignity so neer his residence, it could not be interpreted other than an Act of Prudence, to provide this way for his safety; that being the onely end in this designe: Which publike Declaration was at∣tested by all the Lords to be his Majesties intention. The Parliament Conclude the K. intendeth War.Now had the Parliament the occasion they waited for; no Salvo's or Pro∣testations on the Kings part would serve turn, but it was taken for granted hat the King intended War, and therefore they proceeded presently to put the peo-into a posture of War, by vertue of their late Ordinance of the Militia, to
rescue the King from his evil Counsel,They take up Arms nder preence of rs∣cuing the King from his evil Cousel, and prohibit all re∣sort to the King. who had engaged him in a War against his Parliament. I will not wade further in this Question, Who began it? be∣cause his Majesty on his dying Royal word, hath asserted it by this undeniable proof, Who gave the first Commissions? In order to this open Hostility intended, they prohibit all resort to the King, save of those in his special service; and Command the respective Sheriffs to seize all other than such, as the disturbers of the peace, and to raise the County-power against them; who were so divided in themselves by contrary com∣mands, that no difficulty remained to the near ensuing rupture; sides being ta∣ken and avowed, every man on his guard, waiting for the first blow, and prepared to return it as his judgment or fancy led him. To bow up this ani∣mosity into fire and fury,They publish a Rmonstrance. next comes out another Remonstrance from the Par∣liament, the Daughter of that which was presented to the King at Hampton-Court; that taxed the male-administration of the Government till the calling of the Parliament, this recited all their complaints from the very first day of their sitting to the date thereof; their dispute of the Militia, the business of the five Members, &c. and so brought the state of their quarrel into one entire body, that their Partisans, by such a heap of grievances, i not by the weight of them, might without more scrutiny own them, and stand by their Caus. This miss'd not of a plenary and satisfactory Answer from the King;Which is an∣swred by the King. but Hands had no Ears; the Faction was busie and employed in arming themselves, like Caesars,The avie the Scots to their . write and fight together; solliciting also in the mean time their dear Brethren the Scots to their party, whom though the King so lately had obliged, and vouchsafed them a particular account of his intentions throughout all these unhappy transactions, summed up in a Letter to his Privy Counsel in that Kingdom,Th Scos pre∣tend a zal for his Maje∣sty, bt dea for the Parlia∣ment, and have their thanks. which after communication begot a Protestation from that Kingdom of all the Loyalty and affection imaginable, with many serious expressions of their thanks, and gratitude to his Majesty, whose Royal word in the concerns both of Church and State, they deemed a grievous sin to doubt or question: Yet nevertheless presently after they declared themselves in favour of the Parliament, in a large manifestation of their most cordial affection to them, with as many more good words as they had received Pounds; and in conclusion, order the said Privy Council not to meddle with any verbal or real engagement for the King against the Parliament of England, but to keep close to their Covenant and their English brethren. For all which kindness the Parliament claw them again, and returned them thanks by their Commissioners resident in London. But this Remonstrance did not reach all the matter;Te Parliament set forth ano∣ther Remon∣strance, which the King an∣swers. therefore out comes a third, comprehensive enough; which the King likewise answered. It will be te∣dious to recite them, because little new matter in them, only more passionately written, as bordering betwixt the Gown and the Sword, which was as good as half drawn already. As the last essay for an Accommodation,They send him 19 Propositions to York. that the people might see the Parlia∣ment would leave no way untryed, Nineteen Propositions are sent to the King at York, which in strict terms comprised the licentiousness of all their former Papers. To these if the King assented, as they withal Petition him to do, they promise to make him a glorious Prince. For the Answer to these by the King,The King re∣turns an an∣swer to them. I refer the Reader to the Kings book, where the vncivility and unreasonableness thereof is justly censured; though the reply he made to them presently after their tender, was so argumentative and honest, that it stumbled many of their friends, and confirmed the Kings good Subjects in their Loyal integrity. All hopes being now lost of this Paper-scuffle,The King is assisted by the Yorkshire Gentry. the King addresses himself to the Gentry and Commonalty of the County of York (the populacy being those on whom the Parliamentary pretences so greatly operated) and declares to them the same resolutions he had formerly made, desiring to undeceive them of those opinions the Parliament had instilled every where; and chuseth out of them a guard of Horse, and a Regiment of the Trained Bands, as a guard to his
person; which they cheerfully undertook, and did Duty in that quality: Here he also found an addition of many worthy Gentlemen and Nobles ready for his service. The Ldors affect the Par∣liament.The City of London was likewise as affectionate for the Parliament, having profered their service, which was accepted, to secure the two Houses. This caused the King to send a Letter to the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen,The King writes to the Lord Mayor & Court of Alder∣men: they prsist: the King sends out his Commis∣sions of Array. forbidding them either to levy Arms, or raise money upon that account. But seeing them to persist in the same courses, he first sends out his Commissions of Array to the respective Lord-Lieutenants and their assistants, according to the Statute of 5 H. 4. and other subsequent Records, which by the Parliament (on the question) were resolved to be against Law, and the liberty of the Subject, &c. And then summons his Lords and Privy Council attend∣ing him at York, and declares that he will not require any obedience from them, but by the Laws of the Land; charging them not to yeild obedience to any commands illegally imposed by others, and that he will defend them and all others from the Votes of Parliament. Lastly, that he will not engage them in any War against the Parliament, except for necessary defence against such as invade him or them. And publisheth a General De∣claration, in∣viting all his loving Subjects to assist him.Then came out his general Declaration, where after he had fully unmasqued the pretences of the Parliament in their project of Liberty and Religion, he ex∣cites all his loving subjects, according to their Oaths of Allegiance and Supre∣macy, to contribute their aid and assistance for the opposing and suppressing those Trayterous attempts of such persons as would destroy his Person, Honour, and Estate,Promiseth 8 l. per cent. and his Lands, Parks, and Houses, for se∣curity. and engage the Kingdom in a Civil War: Dclaring, that who∣ever shall bring unto him Money or Ammunition, Horse and Arms, for his or the publique defence, shall receive 8 l. per centum interest, to be assured out of his Forrest-Lands, Parks, and Houses. And then issues out a Proclama∣tion shewing the Legality of his Commissions of Array.Proclaims the Legality of his Commissions of Array. To all these the Parliament respectively answer; justifie their proceedings, and promise to use the money advanced for the Irish service, according to the first designation of it, though herein they failed abundantly, converting the most part of it to their own use and necessities.The Parliament justifie their proceedings. Though the Parliament was intent on the business of levying Arms, yet se∣veral Patriots of both Houses did what they could to perswade to an accommo∣dation; amongst whom Sir Benjamin Rudyard was one of the chief,Sir Ben. Rud∣yard and other Members of Parliament earnest for an accommodation. who all along warned them of the miseries of a Civil War; and what a shame it would be to them in after-times, and so consequently to all Parliaments, if when the King had condescended so far, they should proceed to the effusion of blood upon so unnecessary a quarrel. He dyed soon after the first blood was drawn; and that speech of his on his death-bed is very remarkable: Mr. Pym, and Mr. Hambden (the Grandees of the then Faction) told me,Mr. Hamb∣den, (saith he) That they thought the King so ill beloved by his Subjects, that he could never be able to raise an Army to oppose them. Which mistake of theirs, cost many thousand lives. On the contrary also, many elaborate vehement Speeches were made by Mr. Pym and other Grandees, to encourage the Citizens to stand fast to the in∣terest of the Parliament; and the City was not wayward to such councels. Isaac Penington was Mayor;Mr. Pym, and Isaac Pening∣ton Lord M. of London, as violent for a war. a busie stickler of the Faction; and many of the Court of Aldermen were little better affected: the Common Council were ge∣nerally of the same temper; and indeed the greatest number of the people in∣habiting the said City were alike disposed. Now the Militia was on foot: every where the Parliaments Cause had the precedency of affection,The Militia set on foot. their Ordinances being obeyed like Acts; wherefore the King prohibited by Proclamation any Levis or Musters of his Subjects any where in England without his command, and sets on foot his Commission of Array; which the Parliament likewise inhibit to be obeyed any where: but neither of them signified any thing to those that were bent and inclined to each Cause; so that the preparations for War, both of Men, Horse, Money and
Arms, went on very fast, especially on the Parliaments side at London, where all persons of all ages and Sexes contribute so excessively to the furtherance of the War,The iament borw money o he publick Faith. that the sum which it amounted unto is almost incredible. This money was borrowed upon the credit of the PVBLIQVE FAITH, by an Ordi∣nance of Parliament; a name much adored then, and as much contemned and hated afterwards. The King finding how the pulse of these distracted Kingdoms did beat,The King  for  peace. gi∣ving symptoms of some violent disease and distemper approaching, redoubled his instances to the Houses for peace, adjuring them to prevent that blood-shd now so threatning and imminen; and they regst the like entreaties and stations upon him (but not bating an ace, or receding a tittle from ther  Demands) so that there was no hopes or likelihood of a Pacification. Nor wanted there Artifices to uphold and maintain this Credit and Autho  which the Parliament had gained over the City,Several fti∣ous rumours raised against the Kings friends. their Purses and Affections: they were told, and that in solemn Assemblies, that the evil Counsellors about the King intended the abrogation of their Cities Charter; and if they prevailed, would expose their Wives and Children to Rapine, Violence, and Villany, and the wealth and riches of the City; a prey to desperate and necessitous persons: All which while they continued in the Parliaments protection, they should have no cause to fear. With these preparatory discourses and incentives,The London-Miniters and Citizens too violent for the Faction. the War was presently ushered in; nay, the Citizens were ready to court it, as the certainest way of safety. Add we also the encouragements of the Ministers of London, to the other incitations, who were so violent in their crying up the Cause, that even meer Children became Volunteers, forsook their Parents, and followed the Camp. Thither also are we now come: For from the Kings leaving his Court at York, with an intent to encourage his party in the Commission of Array, and stitle the Ordinance of the Militia, we cannot call his removes a Progress, but Expe∣dition; and indeed it was a perfect War levyed, though at such distances, that the twilight of peace was preserved only by his hovering neer the Solstice of his Kingdom, the midland, without engaging the confines of their Association; which if he had done speedily, it is probable we had not seen that night of confusion that followed in his setting and declination. His Majesty therefore having again called the Gentry of York together at rendezvous, protested his unwillingless, as well as unprovidedness for a War; desiring (if he should be thereunto compelled) their assistance in the maintain∣ing his most just Cause; and then departed for Lincolnshire to Newark,The King at Newark, he sends to the Lord Wil∣loughby of Parham to defill from aid∣ing the Rebel∣lion, and re∣turns to York. whither he had sent before his Letters Mandatory to my Lord Willoughby of Parham, charging him to desist from raising, levying, or exercising any forces within that County, by vertue of his Commission from the Parliament; wherein ne∣vertheless he had proceeded. Here the King convened the Gentlemen of this County, and made to them the like Protestations; and having received some small supplies, returned back again to York. At the same time the Parliament were listing men apace, and appointing their General, and the Superior Officers of the Army. His Majesty about this time meeting with some oppositions from the Earl of Stamford,The King causeth the Earl of Stam∣ford to be pro∣claimed Tray∣tor. Lord-Lieutenant of Leicestershire for the Parliament, was pleased to proclaim the said Earl and his adherents Traytors; to the great dissatisfaction of the Parliament. On the other side,Sir John Lu∣cas proclaimed Traytor by the Parliament, and committed. Insurrections happening in Essex, the Parliament send down Sir Thomas Barrington and Mr. Grymstone to quell their Tumults, where they seize Sir Iohn Lucas and his Lady at Colchester, commit them to the Goale; send his eight Coach-horses to General Essex; and in order to Sir Iohns Tryal, he is proclaimed Traytor, sent to London, and committed prisoner to the Gate-house. Iames Lord Strange,James Lord Strange Im∣peahed of High Treason by the Parlia∣ment. Son and Heir of William Earl of Derby, was likewise
by the Parliament impeached of High Treason, for that he upon the 15th of Iuly last, did at Manchester in the County of Lancaster summon and raise Forces for the service of the King: They further charging him with being the death of Richard Percival, a Linnen-webster; and cause their said Charges to be pub∣lished in the Churches of Lancaster and Chester. Sir John By∣ron worsted by the Parliament-Forces, and declared Rebel.Sir Iohn Byron raiseth some Troops in the County of Oxford for the King, and being suddenly surprized by the Parliamentarians, sustaineth some loss; and by them he and his Associates are declared Rebels. He then marcheth to Worce∣ster, which Town he seizeth for the King.He marcheth to Worcester, and taks it for the King. At York the King made the Marquess of Hertford Leiutenant-General of the Western Counties, intending forthwith himself to set upon Hull (whose stores he had designed once to have made a Magazine for Ireland, to reduce those Rebels; which he had often declared to the two Houses;The Marquess of Hertford, L. G. of the West for the King. but they would by no means consent to it) but upon deliberate advice he past by it, onely making one at∣tempt neer it, to shew his just indignation, and to satisfie his Honor, where he lost unhappily some twenty men, and marched directly into Nottinghamshire. The King at∣tempts Hull with  and sts  Standard at Nottingham.About the beginning of August, he came to Nottingham-Town, and on the tenth of the same month published his Royal Proclamation, commanding and enjoyning all his Subjects to the Northward of Trent, and twenty miles Southward, to Rendezvous at Nottingham the 23 of that instant; where he, according to the purport of his Proclamation, set up his Standard, and where ap∣peared five or six thousand men.The Earl of Lindsey Ge∣neral for the King. After a view and Muster of these Royal Volunteers, the King proceeded to the nomination of a General, who was the Right honorable the Earl of Lindsey, General formerly for the Rochel-Expedition; and the Parliament made Robert Earl of Essex their Captain-General,The Earl of Es∣sex Captain-G. for the Parlia∣ment. the Earl of Bedford General of the Horse. Essex about this time departed from London in great state and magnificence. The King leaves Nottinghamshire, and marched into Staffordshire, thence into Leicestershire,The Earl of Bedford G. of their Hre. carssing the Gentry all the way he went; so into the Confines of Wales, and sat down at last in Shrewsbury, where after he had a while rested, the Gentry,Essex departs from London in state. Freeholders, and Inhabitants of that County, with other additions out of Wales, being assembed, he made this Oration, which for its excellency, and because it contains the truth of the quarrel,The King in Stafford-shire and Leicester∣shire. is here inserted. GENTLEMEN, His Oration to the Gentry, Freeholders and Inhabitants.IT is some benefit to me from the insolency and misfortunes which have driven me about, that they have brought me to so good a part of my Kingdom, and to so faithful a part of my people. I hope neither you nor I shall repent in coming hither; I will do my part that you may not, and of you I was confident before I came. The resi∣dence of an Array is not usually pleasant to any place, and mine may carry more fear with it,Wherein he pro∣miseth to have a tender re∣spect to his Subjects. since it may be thought (being robbed and spoiled of all mine own, and such terrour used to fright and keep all men from supplying of me) I must onely live upon the aid and relief of my people; but be not afraid: I would to God my poor Subjects suf∣fered no more by the insolence and violence of that Army raised a∣gainst me (though they have made themselves wanton even with plenty) than you shall do by mine; and yet I fear I cannot prevent all disorders; I will do my best. And this I promise you, no man shall be a looser by me,Choosing rather to melt downe his own plate, Sell or Morgage his Land, than to oppress them. if I can help it. I have sent hither for a Mint; I will melt down all my own plate, and expose all my Land to sale or morgage, that if it be possible, I may not bring the least pressure upon you: in the mean time, I have sum∣moned
you hither to do that for me and your selves, for the main∣tenance of your Religion, and the Law of the Land (by which you enjoy all that you have) which other men do against us. Do not suffer so good a Cause to be lost, for want of supplying me with that which will be taken from you by those who pursue me with this vio∣lence. And whilst these ill men Sacrifice their Mony, Plate, and utmost industry to destroy the Common-wealth, be you no less liberal to preserve it. Assure your selves, if it please God to bless me with success, I shall remember the assistance that every particular man here gives me, to his advantage. However, it will hereafter, (how furi∣ously soever the minds of men are now possest) be honour and comfort to you, that with some charge and trouble to your selves, you did your part to support the King, and preserve the Kingdom. With those expressions, to which his actions agreed, he so won the affectios of that County,The King at Shrewsbury with 6000 fot, 3000 ho, and ar 2000 Dra∣gooners. and the adjacent, that before the middle of October▪ which was about three weeks after his first coming to Shrewsbury, with a small party, rather than any force or Army, he was grown to a compleat strength, consisting of about 6000 foot, 3000 brave horse, and almost 2000 Dragooners. From thence, having issued out Warrants for Horses and Cats, in order to his removal, he marched along within view of Coventry,He marcheth  o Co∣ventry. but made no essay or attempt upon it; not intending to lose any time in sitting down before it, un∣less the Town had been freely surrendred to him. From thence he came to Sou∣tham, not many miles distant from their Lord General. This March of his struck some terror into the City of London it self,The Londoners . though all their Army was then in a readiness, and attending the King; therefore the Trained Bands were speedily raised for a guard of the City, and fortifications, such as the time would allow, were ordered to be forthwith made round it; acording to which Order, many hundreds of men were set on work, who were soon alter seconded by the several Companies and Parishes in London and the Suburbs, as also by the Wives and Maids, who followed a Drum in rank and file, with a Rampier-basket between two of them, until a regular Line and Circumvalation, taking up twelve miles in circuit, was quite finished. Windsor-Castle was at this time garrisoned by the Parliament,Cl. Ven go∣verns Wind∣sor-Castle for the Parliament, where Bark∣sted commands . Col. Ven being sent down with twelve Companies of foot, in one whereof Barkstead the Regi∣cide commanded, it being his first military employment as Governour. Divers Citizens suspected for their affection and loyalty to the King, were also at this time secured. And the association of the several Counties first projected and begun, and mony and plate raised for the Parliament: in so great danger did the Cock-sure Grandees of the Faction then see and find themselves.The Parliament  of the Counties. Indeed the Kings design was London, which at the approach of such an Army would put his friends in a capacity to appear for him, and facilitate and end the War in its begining, which the King passionately desired. But considering that it was dangerous venturing to be inclosed between the Army and the City, with their entire forces, he resolved to face about, and fight the Earl of Essex first, who having garrisoned several places, and lessened his numerous Ar∣my, was advancing after him. Portsmouth was now taken by Sir Iohn Merrick,Fortsmouth and Southsea Castle taken for the Parlia∣ment by Sir John Merrick. having first surprized South∣sea Castle, and held it for the Parliament: Colonel Goring being forced to yeild it, the Town being commanded by that Castle, before the Marquess of Hert∣ford could come to the relief of it, being then besieged in Sherburn by the Earl of Bedford; Goring,Goring goes to France. according to agreement, passing for the present over into France. The Earl of Essex advanceth into Worcestershire, while the Kings Army staid still at Shrewsbury, expecting forces out of South-Wales; to prevent the con∣junction
of whom, Essex sent a party of Horse under the command of Colonel Sands and Colonel Feinnes, betwixt whom and Prince Rupert and the Lord Byron, happened a smart encounter in the lanes neer Worcester City,A smart skir∣mih near Worcester. Major Dou∣glass kill'd. Worcester Garriso'd for the Parliament by the Earl of Essex. where at first the Parliament-Army had the better; but Prince Rupert falling in the Rear, forced them to leave their design. Colonl Sands was mortally wounded, his Major Douglass was killed, with the loss of threescore men; nevertheless Essex hastily advancing, the Royallists quitted Worcester, which thereupon was Gar∣risoned for the Parliament. While the Earl of Essex staid here about settling the Militia, the King passed directly away from Shrewsbury, (where he had coyned money out of the Plate freely brought him by the Gentry) towards London,The King coins his plate into money. having got the start of Essex, who thereupon doubled his haste after him. The King therefore resolved to fight him, and staid at Keynton, whither next morning came the Essexians. Edge-hill fight Prince Rupert commands the right Wg of the Horse. The Lord Wil∣mot Commands the left ing. The Earl of Lindsey Gene∣ral for the King. The Earl of Es∣sex General for the Parlia∣ment. Their chief Commanders were Colonel Ramsey, Sir William Bal∣four, Sir Phi∣lip Stapleton, and the Lord Fieldng.On Sunday, Octob. 23. the King in Battalia descended from Edge-hill; whence with a Prospective-glass he viewed the Parliaments Army; and being asked what his Majesty thought of them, he answered: I never saw the Rebels before in a body; I am resolved to fight them: God and good men assist my righteous cause. The King had the advantage both of the ground and Wind, his Army drawn up in very good order; his main Battel of Foot winged on both sides with a number of brave Horse; but those on the right, where Prince Rupert commanded, were the most choice and couragious. The other Wing was led by the Lord Wilmot, Lieutenant-General of the Horse; the Battel by the Earl of Lindsey General of the field, on foot in the head of them, with a half-Pike in his hand. In the whole Army, were very many expert and valiant Commanders: all the distrust was in the Welch Infantry, who at first beginning were somwhat skittish. In this posture the King marched into the Vale adjoyning, called The Vale of Red-Horse, a name sutable to the colour that was that day bestowed on it: which Essex having notice of, he presently drew his Army out of Keynton Town, where he quartered that night, and put it into this order. He himself, as the other General, on foot at the head of his Infantry, which made up one entire body, op∣posed himself to the Kings; on the left Wing stood Col. Ramsey a Scotch man, with five Regiments of Horse; on the other Sir William Balfour, and Sir Phi∣lip Stapleton, who commanded the Generals Life-guard of Horse, that fought stoutly; and behind them, as a Reserve, was placed the Lord Fielding with his Regiment of Horse. Prince Rupert ovrthrows Col. Ramsey. Col. Essex kill'd.Both Armies thus facing one another, the fight began with the exchange of Artillery; which doing no great execution on either side, Prince Rupert fell with fury upon Col. Ramsey, and utterly overthrew him, so that that whole Wing fled with speed towards Keynton. The Foot placed neer to that Wing seeing the rout and slaughter, threw down their Arms, and fled also; of which Colonel Essex's Brigade was the greatest part. The Colonel being thus forsaken, put himself into the battel, and was of great service afterwards that day, till he was shot in the Thigh with a Bullet, of which he soon after dyed. Prince Rupert following the chase to Keynton-Town,Prince Ru∣pert's mistake. fell there on the Waggons Essex had left behind him, and returned not to the Field, (which else had been totally the Kings) until Colonel Hambdens Regiment,Col. Hambden comes to assist Essex. and some other Forces which were coming to joyn with Essex, forced him with their Canon out of the Lanes wherein he continued his pursuit. (The Earl of Carnarvan seconding the same mistake, through heat of Courage.) On the other Wing,Lord Wilmot worsted by Sir Wil. Balfour. E. of Lindsey mortally woun∣ded; his Son the Lord Wil∣loughby taken prisoner. Sir William Balfour had put my Lord Wilmot to it, and had beat him from his ground; so that the Kings Foot on that side were left naked, and both Front and Flank attaqued by Foot and Horse. The main Battel was here joyned: Balfour breaking in pieces two Regiments of the Kings, had opened the way to the Standard. Here the Earl of Lindsey was mortally wounded, performing the part of 2 valiant man, as well as an expert General; and his Son the Lord Willoughby coming in to his rescue, taken prisoner.Sir Edmond Verney slain. Sir Edmond Varney the Standard-bearer was slain under it: But another brisk charge being made upon Balfour, and fresh supplies
coming into that part so distressed;The Kings Standard ta∣ken, and rescu∣ed, by Sir John Smith, whom the King there∣fore Knighted. the Standard taken by Essex, and in the hands of one Chambers his Secretary, was rescued by Sir Iohn Smith, whom the King after the battel Knighted, and made him a Banneret for his noble service; and the Parliamentarians were repelled again. It was neer evening, and both Armies stood at a gaze; Horse being drawn, as in the beginning of the fight, on both sides of the Foot, neither of them at∣tempting any more on either part:Both Armies divide. The King re∣treats. Earl of Essex marcheth to Warwick. The Victory doubtful on ei∣ther part. Banbury Gar∣risoned by the King. Solemn thanks given on both sides. The Parliament reward the Earl of Essex with 5000 l. Slain on both sides neer 6000. On the Kings side, the Lord Aubig∣ney, Col. Mun∣ro, &c. On the Parlia∣ments, the Lord St. John, Lieu. Col. Ramsey. Earl of Essex marcheth to∣wards Coven∣try, the King by Ayno to Banbury, to Oxford, and towards Lon∣don. Commissioners from the Par∣liament tender Propositions, on∣ly to prevent the Kings in∣tentions, and to gain time for Essex to re∣cruit: a notable Skirmish at Branford, where the King met with the Regiments of Col. Hollis, Col. Hamb∣den, and the Lord Brooks, 300 Parlia∣mentarians slayn, among whom Lieu. Col. Quarles, as many taken prisoners. the Royalists knew that Essex had received an addition as aforesaid under Hambden, and so were stronger in Foot; the Es∣sexians likewise knew that Prince Ruperts Horse, which were the best, were as good as fresh and untouched, and they had tasted of their Gallantry. In this consultation they stood till night, when the King retreated to the place from whence he descended, the side of Edge-Hill, where with the Prince in his Coach he passed that night, his Army keeping great Fires; and in the morning march∣ed his Foot away, while the Horse stood in Battalia towards Ayno. The Earl of Essex lodged that night on the place where the fight was, and then (not with∣out fear and discouragement) marched to Warwick, leaving the King to pursue his way for London, which was the thing by this fight he attempted to hin∣der. The Victory is questioned by either part: the King was denyed it, because he left the field, and the dead to the disposal of the enemy, and marched away. That was answered, that it was agreeable to the Kings designe, which was no more than to make his way free for London aforesaid; and expedition was requisite. It is denyed also to the Parliament, for that they lost somewhat more men, and more Standards, and received a confess'd defeat in one part of the Army: But the main was, that they durst not offer to set upon or impede the King in his March the next morning, but go away far enough from him to Coventry, and thereby lost Banbury (wherein was a well-appointed Garrison) to the King; which was a remarkable Trophee of his Conquest. However, both parties gave God solemn thanks (on days set apart) for their success and victory; the Parliament adding other to their General for his va∣lour and good conduct in that business, and presented him with 5000 l. for a reward of his service. On both sides were slayn here neer 6000 men, as by the Country it was judged, who had the burial of the dead. On the Kings party were slayn of note, the right Noble and valiant the Lord Aubigney, who died of his wounds at Abingdon, and was buried in Christ-Church Oxford, (Father to the most illu∣strious Charles Duke of Richmond); the Earl of Lindsey, Sir Edmond Varney, as before, and Colonel Monro a Scotch-man. On the Parliaments side, the Lord St. Iohn of Bletso, who dyed also of his wounds; Colonel Essex, and Lieutenant-Colonel Ramsey; all men of singular courage and resolution. The Earl of Essex next day marched towards Coventry, and the King by Ayno, (where his Army refreshed themselves) to Banbury, which was presently de∣livered to him; and so to Oxford. The King marching from Oxford, was by the way to London met by Com∣missioners from the Parliament, tendring Propositions, and desiring that during the Treaty the Kings Army should march no neerer this way; to spin time, while Essex could recruit his Army: Wherefore the King advancing from Cole∣brook, came to Brainford, where part of the Parliaments Army, (being the Re∣giments of Colonel Hollis, Hambden, and the Lord Brooks) for a while main∣tained their ground stoutly; but being over-powred, some were driven into the River, and there drowned, and three hundred slayn, among whom was Lieute∣nant-Colonel Quarles, and as many taken prisoners. This brought a general consternation upon the City of London; all shops were shut up, and all the Re∣giments, both Trained Bands and Auxiliaries, were drawn out: So that the Earl of Essex had a most compleat and numerous Army of a sudden. Hereup∣on the King presently marched away, fearing to be encompassed by the Parlia∣mentarians, over Kingston-bridge (which he broke down, to stop the pursuit
Essex made after him) to Reading, and so to Oxford,The King at Oxford. where he took up his Win∣ter-quarters. Sir William Waller takes Winchester. Chichester delivered to the Parliament, Marlborough to the King. Lord Hopton Arms against the Earl of Stamford, his Regiment put to the Sword by Prince Rupert at Cyrence∣ster. Gloce∣ster summoned.The Cities of Winchester and Chichester delivered to the Parliament, Marl∣borough to the King, and the Lord Hopton armed against the Earl of Stamford; several Towns taken for the King in the West, others for the Parliament in the North. Cyrencester had been Garrisoned by the Parliament-Forces of Glocester, being the mid way betwixt that City and Oxford. Upon this place Prince Rupert had a de∣signe, though his march that way was given out for the regaining of Shudly Ca∣stle, (out of which Colonel Massey had smothered the Royallists with wet hay:) for afte he had passed some ten miles beyond Cyrencester, he suddenly re∣turned back, and surprized the Guards, within two hours time became Master of the place, putting the Earl of Stamfords Regiment to the Sword, who made a stout opposition, taking 1100 prisoners, and 8000 arms, and other provisions for War; it being newly made a Magazine. From thence the Prince came be∣fore Glocester, summoned the Town, and departed. Litchfield-Close Garri∣soned by the K. Besieged by the Lord Brooke. He is killed by a Musket-shot: The Close de∣livered to the Parliament. The Regiments of the Lord Wilmot, Lord Grandison, Lord Digby, Sir William Penniman, Col. Blague, Col. Usher, and Col. Grey, take Marlbo∣rough, with the Governour Col. Ramsey.The Lord Brook and the Earl of Northampton were in Arms against each other in the Counties of Warwick and Stafford, where several small skirmishes had been between them: At last, in March, the Lord Brook came and besieged Litchfield Close, Garrisoned by the King; and as he was viewing the approaches to it out of a Window in the Tower, a single Bullet from the Close shot him in the head through the eye; of which he fell down dead: nevertheless the siege was continued, and the Close delivered to the Parliamentarians. His death happened by the shot aforesaid on St. Chads day, in whose memory the Minster from whence he was killed is called by the name of St. Chad, he being the first Bishop of that See. The Kings Forces under the command of Lieutenant-General the Lord Wil∣mot, assisted with his own Regiment of Horse, that of the Lords Grandisons and Digbies, with Sir William Pennimans and Colonel Blagues Regiment, of Foot, and Colonel Vshers and Colonel Greys of Dragons, took the Town of Marlborough, defended by Colonel Ramsey a Scot, and about five hundred Foot; the said Ramsey, and divers of the chief Rebels brought prisoners to Oxford; all their Arms taken, and four Colours, and the Town Garisoned for the King. This day paid success to the King also in the North, where the Earl of New-Castle besieged Tadcaster,Tadcaster besieged by the Earl of New-Castle, taken and Garrison'd by the King. Lord Fairfax stormeth Leeds. The Royalists defeated. a place well fortified, and better manned; the strength of the Parliament-Forces being summed up in this Town and Hull. Several Assaults were made most part of that day and evening, wherein several were killed, among whom was Captain Lifter. This resolution so discouraged the defendants, that they Slipt away in the night to Cawood and Selby, leaving the Town in a very tenable condition for his Majesties service. Leeds stormed by the Lord Fairfax, and a defeat given to the Royalists there∣abouts, and Belvoir-Castle, belonging to the Earl of Rutland, surprized for the King;Belvoir-castle surprized for the King. Col. Massey active in Glo∣cester-shire. Salisbury plundered by the Faction. Yarum fight. while neer the same time, Colonel Massey played feats in Glocester-shire, and Salisbury plundered by another party of the Parliaments. Yarum-fight al∣so betwixt Colonel Goring and General King, against some Forces of the Par∣liament, as Colonel Goring was conveying the Arms and Ammunition he brought over with him from Holland, who had the Victory. About this time happened a Skirmish betwixt Colonel Hambden and Sir Gilbert Gerrard at the Brill, of which Sir Gilbert was Governour: wherein a∣bout a hundred were killed and wounded of the Parliaments side; the rest fled.Sir Gilb. Ger∣rard puts Hambden to flight. The Queen having taken Shipping at Scheveling neer the Hague in Holland, on the 22 being met by the Earl of Newcastle, the Marquess of Montros, and the Lord Ogilby, she landed at Burlington-Bay,Queen landing at Burling∣ton-Key, is in imminent dan∣ger; But escaping, is conducted to York, and from thence to the King at Edge-Hill. where on the 24 came four Ships of the Parliaments, who making several shots of cross-Bars against the house, she was forced to rise out of her Bed, and to get under a Hill to save her life;
and then was honourably conducted through Maltou and Norburton to York, and from thence not long after (to his Majesties great content, who most entirely loved her, as she him) met the King at Edge-Hill. After General Essex had recruited his Army with new supplies, the first thing he attempted was the siege of Reading;Reading besie∣ged by the Earl of Essex. The Governour Sir Arthur Aston woun∣ded Col. Fielding yields the Town to the Parlia∣ment Marq. of New∣castle defeated at Wakefield by Sir Tho∣mas Fairfax Monmouth and Hereford taken by Sir Wil. Waller for the Parlia∣ment. which being manfully defended by Sir Arthur Aston, till he received a wound on his head by the falling of a Brick∣bat; and the relief brought by the King himself from Oxford being worsted at Caversham-bridge, after ten days siege was yielded by Colonel Fielding (then substituted Governour) to the Parliament. In the North, things went something equaller then before on the Parliaments side: Sir Thomas Fairfax had defeated the Kings Forces under the Marquess of Newcastle at Wakefield, and buoyed up the sinking interest of that Cause. Mon∣mouth likewise was taken by the Parliaments Forces under the command of Sir William Waller; who also took Hereford and other places. This in sum: more particularly now. Of the West, where the Kings inte∣rest bore the greatest sway, we have hitherto said little: It will be now time to turn that way, and see from what beginnings the War arose in that quarter, where for the most part, its principal events and concerns were placed. Two Proclamations were about this time published; one from the Earl of Cumberland, the other from the Earl of Newcastle; whereby Ferdinando Lord Fairfax▪ Sir Thomas Fairfax, Sir Matthew Bointon, Sir Edward Loftus, Sir Henry Forbes, Sir Thomas Malleverer, Sir Richard Darby, Sir Christopher Wray, Sir Hen∣ry Anderson,Ferdinando Lord Fairfax and his son Tho. Fairfax, with others proclaimed Traytors, by the Earl of Cum∣berland, and the Earl of Newcastle. The two afore∣said Earl pro∣claimed Tray∣tors by the Par∣liamnt. The King mre prosperous in the West. Sir Iohn Savil, Sir Edward Rodes, Sir Hugh Cholmley, Sir Thomas Rennington, Sir Thomas Norcliffe, and others, were declared Traytors; which the Parliament retaliate upon the Earls in like manner. The menage of the Military matters there, were on the Kings part, as to the remote Counties of Cornwal and Devon shire, (after the Retreat of the Marquess of Hertford, Lieutenant-General of the Western Association, with Sir Lewis Dives out of Sherburn (where they were besieged by the Earl of Bedford, but in vain) in Dorcester-shire) was committed to four eminent persons, viz. the Lord Mohun, Sir Ralph Hopton, Colonel Ashburnham, and Sir Iohn Barkley; by whose joynt Counsels and Forces, levyed by their respective Friends and Inte∣rests, an Army was framed to oppose the Earl of Stamford, then coming down from Glocester, where he first was made Governour, as Lord-Lieutenant joyntly with the Lord Roberts of the same County, to settle the Militia for the Par∣liament; having a Commission therefore, according to that Ordinance; which service was well advanced. At the approach of this enemy, near Liskard,Liskard fight January 19. Sir Ralph Hopton chief Commander for the King at Liskard. it was taken into conside∣ration to whom the alone charge and ordering of the Battel should be intru∣sted, for four would breed distraction: whereupon the business of the day was deservedly devolved upon Sir Ralph Hopton, who had been an old Souldier in the Low-Countries; and yet before the War, had been taken for a Puritan, and a Commonwealths-man, against the Prerogative: he was desired by them all, as hitherto they had prevented any such division, by an equal moderation, to take it upon him. After therefore he had commanded publique prayers in the head of every Squadron,He orders pub∣like Prayers at the head of each Squadron. (which was performed) he drew up the Foot in the best Order he could, placing a Forlorn of Musqueteers in the little enclosures, and then wing∣ed them with the Horse and Dragoons he had. This done,The Royalists get the day, and come to Lis∣kard. two Minion small Drakes being fetched from the Lord Mohuns house, were planted within random-shot of the enemy, concealed by the Horse from them; which were discharged with such success, that the enemy quickly quitted their ground, and in a rout fled; on which the Royalists did sparing execution. There were taken 1250 prisoners, most of their Colours, all their Canon, Arms and Ammunition; and so the Victor-Army came that night to Liskard. Salt-Ash was assaulted and forced by Sir Ralph Hopton,Salt Ash as∣saulted by Hopton. where he took ten
pieces of Ordnance, 700 more Prisoners, 400 Arms, and a Ship with 16 pieces of Ordnance. Litchfield be∣sieged ad um∣mond i the Eal of Nor∣thampton, March 19. Te  by Brereton and Gell; Hopton-Heath Fight. Te Earl of Northamp∣ton state.Litchfield was no sooner delivered to the Parliamentarians, but Spencer the valiant Earl of Northampton comes and besieges it again for the King, and summons the Governour Lieutenant-Colonel Russel to deliver it to him: he re∣fuseth; and in the interim Sir Wiliam Brereton and Sir Iohn Gell advance to his relief, with 3000 men and upwards: against these the Earl draws off a Party from the Leaguer, and at Hopton-Heath, on a ground full of Cony∣boroughs, (which afforded ill footing for Horse, of which the Earls Forces chiefly consisted) Charges the Parliamentarians, where at last he obtained a Victory with the price of his life; a dear bargain for the King and his Cause, of which he was a most magnanimous Assertor; he was first unhors'd, whether by the disadvantage of the Ground, or born down by the Enemies, is uncer∣tain: he refused quarter, and was killed by a private unlucky hand. His For∣ces returned afresh to the Siege, where soon after they were seconded by Prince Rupert, who having coasted the Country from his summons of Glocester into Wales,itchfield  to Prince Rupert. returned back by Litchfield, where he so powerfully carried on the Siege, that the stout Governour was compelled to hearken to his Terms, and surren∣der that place, which continued for the King throughout the War, the price it cost being well worth, and requiring the safe keeping of the Jewel. The rendition was the 16 day of April: I would not disjoyn the story, for the years sake. Grantham ta∣ken for the K. by Colonel Ca∣vendish.Colonel Charles Cavendish reduced Grantham to the Kings obedience, taking 350 Prisoners, with Officers and Colours, and then demolished the Fortifica∣tions; the like fortune had the Parliamentarians in recovering Marlborough from the King,Marlborough for the Parlia∣ment. which was regained by them; but soon after, as not tenable, was slighted by all parties. Anno Dom. 1643. THis year began with the smart actions,Prince upert at Briming∣ham. A slight skir∣mish. as before, of Prince Rupert, who on the third of April entred and Mastered Brimingham Town, the resi∣dence of a famed Lecturer. Some Welchmen were here got together for the Parliament, where they made some little defence; but were soon beaten up to their Barricadoes, which they forsook likewise and fled; betwixt 150 killed and taken,The Earl of Denbigh slain. some good Ammunition, but all not worth the life of that stout old Earl of Denbigh, who was here killed in the Service of his Soveraign. Scarborough delivered by Capt. Brown Bushel. for which he was beheaded.Next ensued a revolt of a notable place in the North to the King, as the year before began with a notable revolt of Hull to the Parliament: such another parallax was throughout the War in the Western and Northern Battels; if one had the better in the West, at the same time the other had it in the North. Now Scarborough was delivered to the King by the means of one Captain Brown Bushel, who long afterwards paid for it with his head at Tower-hill. Fairfax dfea∣ted at Bram∣ham-Moor. The Parlia∣ments Cause en∣dangered; the Scots invited to their assistance.The Lord Fairfax, who commanded in chief for the Parliament in the North, after several Velitations and Skirmishes betwixt him and the Earls of Newcastle and Cumberland, Generals for the King, who had declared this Lord and his Adherents Traytors, was overthrown at Bramham-Moor; and the Parliaments Cause, through this and other losses in those parts, greatly endan∣gered; whereupon the Scots were hastily sollicited to come into the aid of their English brethren, as we shall see at large hereafter. Queen pro∣claimed Tray∣to.Now the Parliament flew high in their consultations at home; the Grandees working upon the sober part of the Parliament, that the action of the Queen, in bringing over Arms, Money, and other provisions for the assistance of the King, was a dangerous destructive business, wound up the anger of the two Houses to such a pitch, that she was proclaimed Traytor: and at the same time,
down went all the Crosses throughout England;Cheapside-Cross and other Cros∣ses demolished. The Regalia seized at West∣minster by Mr. H. Martin. particularly, the third of this moneth, Cheapside-Cross was demolished. And for the better carrying on of the work of Reformation, Mr. Henry Martin a Member of Parliament enters violently into the Abby-Church at West∣minster, defaces the Ornaments of the Church, and breaking open two doors makes his way to a private place where the Crowns, Scepters, and other Uten∣sils of State used by Kings on their day of Coronation were: but Mr. Wheeler perswaded him to be more moderate, he only secured them by sealing up the Doors. After this beginning of Reformation,Covnant taken by the Parlia∣ment, the Londoners, and all within the Parliaments command. the Parliament took the Solemn League and Covenant at Westminster. It was first framed in Scotland, and was general∣ly taken by them in the Year 1639. The main drift of it was against the Epis∣copal Dignity, and was now, for the mutual indearment of the two Nations (assurance being promised the Parliament from Scotland) pressed upon all in England, where the Parliaments power was Paramount, being taken through∣out London the fifth of this moneth. The Earl of Essex advanceth from Reading to Tame,Essex advan∣ceth from Rea∣ding to Tame▪ Prince Rupert falls upon their quarters. where a general sick∣ness seized upon the Army: during their quartering there about, Prince Rupert fell into part of their quarters; but the Essexians taking the Alarm, and drawing out, the business came to a Fight in Chalgrave field, where Colonel Hambden that great stickler against Shipmoney was mortally wounded.Chalgrave fight, Hamb∣den mortally wounded. It was observable, that in this place the said Colonel Hambden first Listed and Trained his men in the beginning of the War. The Lord Keeper Littleton having departed with the Great Seal to Oxford,Id. Littleton lies with the Great Seal to Oxford, a new one voted. according to the Kings Command, the Parliament voted a new Great Seal to be made. To cast an eye to the affairs of the West, Sir Ralph Hopton, after his little victory at Liskard, having made sure of the County of Cornwal, and established all things to the advantage of the Kings affairs there▪Sir. R. Hopton marcheth into Devon-shire against the E. o Samford. and Ma. G. Chudleigh, Stratton fight. marched into Devonshire, to oppose the Earl of Stamford and Major-General Chudleigh for the Parliament; with whom on Tuesday, May 16 a Battel happened at Stratton in that Coun∣ty. The Kings Forces had the disadvantage, both in want of Ammunition, and being necessitated to March up a step Hill; open to all oppositions, to come to fight; being in number not above 3000, the sixth part whereof was Horse and Dragoons. The Enemy were above 5000, with the same quantity of Horse, but supplied that defect with the strength of the Hill, on which they were fortified. The Royalists attempted their ascent four several ways,The Kings par∣ty worsted. Ma. G. Chudleigh taken by Sir John Berkley, and the fortune of the day re∣stored. and were as resolute∣ly beaten down; the fight continuing from five in the morning, till three in the after-noon, without any certainty of event or success on either party. Major General Chudleigh charged stoutly against a stand of Pikes commanded by Sir Bevil Greenvile, to the disordering of his Party, and the overthrowing of his Person; but in time came Sir Iohn Berkley, and restored the fortune of the day, by taking Major-General Chudleigh Prisoner. Towards the end of the day, the several parties met at the top of the Hill, with great shouts of joy; which the routed Enemy confusedly forsook and fled. There were taken seventeen hundred Prisoners, all their Cannon and Am∣munition, being thirteen brass Pieces of Ordnance, seventy barrels of Pow∣der, with a Magazine of Bisket, and other provisions proportionable. By this opportune Victory, all that Nook of the West was reduced to the Kings entire obedience,Hopton then created Baron Hopton of Stratton. except Plymouth; and for which important service, the King pre∣sently honoured Sir Ralph with the Title of Baron Hopton of Stratton, from the place where he atchieved his honour. The Parliament had appointed first Colonel Thomas Essex,Col. Thomas Essex and Col. Nat. Fiennes Governours of Bristol. then Colonel Na∣thaniel Fiennes, to be Governour of Bristol, of which in the beginning of the troubles they had possest themselves: and having discovered a Plot of deliver∣ing the City to Prince Rupert, (who accordingly was drawn down near the
place expecting the Signal,Yeomans and Bourcher exe∣cuted. which was ringing of a Bell, and opening a gate) surprized and secured the intelligencers, viz. Mr. Robert Yeomans, and Mr. George Bourcher,Earl of Nor∣thampton de∣feats Colol John Fiennes. two of the Citizens; and soon after, notwithstanding the King and his Generals mandates, and threats of retaliation, disloyally executed them in that City. Wardour-Ca∣stle taken for th Parliament, and a whle af∣ter retaken by Sir Francis Dorrington.Iames Earl of Northampton defeats a body of Parliamentarians in Middleton Cheiny Town-field, under Colonel Iohn Fiennes, killed 200, took 300 more, with their Arms (while the rest fled to Northampton) and brought them into Banbury his Garison. At this time also Wardour-Castle in Wilt-shire was taken by the Parliaments Forces, and not long after retaken by Sir Francis Dorrington. But enough to be said of such petty places. Sir William Waller Garri∣sons Taunton and Bridg-Water for the Parliament.Sir William Waller was now advanced into the West with a well-furnished Army, to prevent those dangers which the growing Fortunes of the Lord Hopton threatned to the Cause, and the well-affected in those Counties. By force part∣ly, and partly by perswasion, he had screwed himself into a great many Towns, chiefly Taunton and Bridge-water, which he Garisoned: whereup∣on the Lord Hmpton joyning with Prince Maurice and the Marquess of Hart∣ford,Hopton joyns with Prince Maurice ad Marq. of Hart∣ford. advanced East-ward, and at a place called Landsdown met with Sir William drawn up in a place of great advantage with Forlorns. Sir Bevil Green∣vil and Sir Nicolas Slanning advanced first upon them, and some Horse; but Sir William had so lined the Hedges,Landsdown fight. and the Horse were so galled with Musquet-shot, that they were forced to retreat disorderly towards the Rear of their Foot:Sir Bevil Greenvil and Sir Nicholas Slanning ad∣vance towards Sir William Waller. when the Cornish-men came on with resolution, and beat them out of their Hedges; and pursued them up an ascent, where they had almost regu∣larly fortified themselves by Hedges, and laid Stone-walls. From hence Waller charged with a body of Horse, and again disordered them; yet they rallied, and received another Repulse▪ in one of which Major Lowre (that comman∣ded part of the Horse) was slain in the Head of them,Thy are disor∣dered, Maor Lowre and Sir Bevil Greenvil slain. as also that noble person Sir Bevil Greenvil in the Head of his stand of Pikes, with which he had done signal Service so oten; divers Gentlemen of less note falling with him, until in conclusion night drawing on, nay quite spent, for it was one of the clock in the morning, and past, before they gave over, the Battel might be said (or a continued Skirmish it was) to be drawn betwixt them, the Royalists continu∣ing in the Field all ight, having possession of the Field, dead, and of 300 Arms, and nine barrels of Powder let by the Enemy, which by some accident or treachery was fired,Lord Hopton hurt. and the Lord Hopton thereby hurt and endangered. Here were slain besides on the Kings part Mr. Leak, son to my Lord Deincourt, now Earl of Scars-dale,Divers others slain. Mr. Barker, Lieutenant-Colonel Wall, Capt. Iames, Capt. Cholwel, and Mr. Bostard. Lord Hopton surrounded by Waller.That which on the other side seems to say that Sir William Waller had the better of it, is, that within two days after he had cooped up my Lord Hopton in the Devises; this again is imputed to the want of Ammunition, the Royalists be∣ing forced,Round-way Down fight. as they were taught by their expert General, to boyl and beat their Bed-cords to make Match of it.Lord Hopton reed by Pr. Maurice, Earl of Carnarvan, Lord Wilmot, and Lord Bi∣ron: But long they were not surrounded in that untenable place, before Prince Maurice, the Earl of Carnarvan, the Lord Wil∣mot, and Lord Biron, with 1500 choyce Horse, came to their rescue, and pre∣sented themselves on the 13 of the same Month by break of day, to the Ene∣mies Leaguer; and having given a signe to their Friends within, fell with much valour on their Enemies, and routed them on Round-way-down: Which Onset being seconded from the Foot within, proved a total rout to the Enemy, whose Curassiers under Sir Arthur Hazlerig made some resistance;They rot Waller and Hazlerig; who fled to Bristol, thence to Farn∣ham, and so to London. but being once broken, became the ruine of the Infantry, who presently submitted, and had quarter given them. Here were slayn 800, besides what fell in the pursuit, which was continued ten miles an end with great Fury; but then their tired Horses began to lag: And so Sir William and Sir Arthur came first to Bristol, thence to Farnham, and from thence with expedition to London.
There were taken two Thousand Prisoners, four Brass Guns, with their Am∣munition and Baggage, eight and twenty Colours, and nine Corners. Upon this fortunate day,The King and Queen at Ox∣ford. the Queen with the King from Edge-Hill made her joyful Entry into Oxford; and not long after, the Earl of Lindsey, who was taken Prisoner when his Father was killed at Edge-Hill, was welcomed to the Court there from his restraint.The young E. of Lindsey at Oxford. This loss soon reduced Bristol into the Kings hands, being delivered by Colo∣nel Fiennes after three days siege to Prince Rupert;Bristol deli∣vered to Prince Rupert. for which surrender he had like to have lost his head. These successes drew the King into the West,Dorchester, Portland, Weymouth, and Melcomb submit. Bidiford, Ap∣pleford, and Barnstable surrendred. Exeter deli∣vered to Prince Maurice, Sir John Berkly Governour thereof. where Dorchester, Portland, Wey∣mouth, and Melcomb, submitted themselves: Bidiford, Appleford and Barnstable, surrendred, and after a little dispute before Exeter, and some Granadoes thrown in, and firing part of the Suburbs, the great Sconce being taken in storm, that City was delivered to Prince Maurice, and Sir Iohn Berkly made Governour. We must retrospect a little, lest the hurrying of the War carry us from other remarkables. The Marquess of New-Castle a little before, Fryday Iune 30, obtained a victory over the Lord Fairfax at Adderton-Heath, where he rout∣ed the Parliamentarians, gained their five pieces of Cannon, and so amazed them, that they fled to Leeds, which way was precluded and obstructed; then to Bradford, in their flight whither, he took and killed two thousand, while Fairfax hardly escaped to Leeds with the Convoy of one Troop of Horse. The next day the said Earl came before Bradford,Adderton-Heath fight. Fairfax routed. Bradford ta∣ken. Hallifax quit∣ted. Sir. H. Cholm∣ley takes Be∣verley. which after the Battering of forty great Shot, he took, with two thousand more of the same party the next morning, with all their Arms and Ammunition. Hereupon Hallifax was quit∣ted by the Parliamentarians; and Sir Hugh Cholmley took Beverley. The Lady Aubigney, Wife to that Noble Lord who dyed of his wounds at Edge-Hill, had brought to London (according to the intelligence and desires of some Citizens of London) from the King a Commission of Array; the designe whereof was, that they should seize into their custody the Kings Chil∣dren, some Members of Parliament,Lady Aubig∣ney brings a Commission of Array to Lon∣don. the Lord Mayor, and Committee of the Militia, all the City Outworks and Forts, the Tower of London, and all the Magazines. Then to let in the Kings Army, to surprize the City, to destroy all opposers; and this grounded upon refusal of paying of Taxes imposed without Authority. The Plot however came to be discovered,The designe dis∣covered. and great noise was made about it. The principal men were Mr. Edward Waller a Parliament-man, who with much ado and great friends,Mr. Edward Waller fined 10000 pounds. Some Lords & others suspe∣cted. came off with the fine of ten thousand pounds. (Some Lords were suspected to favour the business also.) Mr. Tompkins Clerk of the Queens Council, Mr. Chaloner a Linen-Draper, Mr. Hasel, Mr. Blink∣born, Mr. White, and others. These were all Arraigned before a Council of War at Guild-Hall,Tompkins & Chaloner exe∣cuted. where four of the last were sentenced to be hanged; and two of them suffered accord∣ingly, leaving sad and mournful Widows behind them, for their Loyalty and affection to their Soveraign. The Parliament now set a Fine of twenty thousand pounds upon Judge Berk∣ley,Iudge Berkley fined, voted incapa∣ble of any pub∣like trust, and a Prisoner du∣ring pleasure. The King re∣solves to gain Glocester. who had been a long time Prisoner for encouraging the designe of Ship-money; he is likewise voted incapable of any Office or Dignity in the Com∣monwealth, and to remain in Prison during pleasure. By the King it was concluded to set upon Glocester, being the only consi∣derable place that held out for the Parliament in the West, and lay very incon∣venient, hindering the intercourse betwixt Wales and the West-Countries. In order whereunto, his Majesty on the tenth of August came from Oxford in Person before it with a Royal Army, (while it was hardly imaginable where the Parliament could raise another Army) and that done, to march for London: which proved a Fatal mistake to the King; for if he had gone directly for London, there was no opposition in readiness against him, nor any place to stay him.
The King being resolved to gain Glocester, after Prince Rupert had summoned it at a distance, having close begirt it, and being displeased that such a forlorn City should stand out against him, yet desirous to gain it without blood and loss of time, which seemed then precious in his Career of victory, sent in this honourable Summons by two Heraulds. CHARLES REX. The Kings Gra∣tious Summons to the said City.OVt of Our tender compassion to Our City of Glocester, and that it may not receive any prejudice by Our Army, which We can∣not prevent if We be compelled to assault it; We are therefore person∣ally come before it, to require the same; and are graciously pleased to let all the Inhabitants of, and all other persons within that City, as well Souldiers as others, know, that if they shall immediately sub∣mit themselves, and deliver this City to Vs, We are contented freely and absolutely to pardon every one of them without exception; and do assure them on the Word of a King, that they, nor any of them, shall receive the least damage or prejudice by Our Army in their per∣sons and estates, but that We will appoint such a Governour, and a moderate Garrison to reside there, as shall be both for the ease and se∣curity of that City, and the whole Country. But if they shall ne∣glect this offer of Grace and Favour, and compel Vs by the power of Our Army to reduce that place (which by the help of God We shall easily and shortly be able to do) they must thank themselves for all the calamities and miseries which shall befall them. To this Mes∣sage We expect a clear and positive answer, within two hours after the publishing hereof; and by these presents do give leave to any persons safely to repair to, and return from Vs, whom that City shall desire to employ unto Vs in that business. And We do require all the Officers and Souldiers of Our Army quietly to suffer them to pass accordingly. To this Summons an Answer was returned in Writing, delivered by Major Pudsey, and a Citizen, in these Words. WE the Inhabitants, Magistrates, Officers, and Souldiers, within this Garrison of Glocester,Their equivocal Answer. unto his Majesties gracious Message return this hum∣ble Answer: That we do keep this City according to our Oath and Allegiance, to and for the use of his Majesty, and his Royal Posterity; and do accordingly con∣ceive our selves wholly bound to obey the Commands of his Majesty signified by both Houses of Parliament; and are resolved by Gods help to keep this City accord∣ingly. This equivocal strange answer the King received without any passion; onely wondered at their confidence, saying before the Messengers that brought the Answer, Waller is extinct, and Essex cannot come. Upon the return of the Messengers,Col. Massey the Governour fi∣red the Suburbs, and forceth Prince Rupert to retreat. Colonel Massey the Governour set fire on the Suburbs, whither Prince Rupert was advanced, but was driven out by the flame. The same night the Kings Army intrencht on two sides of the City, within Musquet-hot of the Wall, under shelter of some Houses which the Fire had not catched; which caused the Besieged to sally out upon them, in commanded parties of an hundred and fifty Musqueteers at a time, then greater parties of five hundred; which came off with safety, and did some execution, save the two last, where they received some loss by misguidance; which made them afterwards cautious
how they ventured out, having but a few men in the Town; the vanquishing of any one of those parties, being like to run the City into extream hazard, whose whole strength remained upon the Works day and night, except the re∣serve of a hundred and twenty men at the Main Guard. The King was loth to spill bloud,The King un∣dermines Glo∣cester. and throw away the lives of so many men as the Storming would cost, if he should prevail; and therefore fell to Undermining, and shooting out of Morters and Granadoes into the City; which the City answering, would speedily consume their Magazine, which was at last reduced to three Barrels of powder, by continual shooting of their Cannon into the Leaguer, which did much mischief. And to the Mining, the Governour used Countermines; both parties working with great industry, while the King thought it not honourable to vouchsafe to send them another Summons: And they held out in hopes of a sudden and potent relief; which came soon after, as we now shall relate. The Parliament was in great perplexity to recruit an Army so much wasted,The Parliament raise the Train∣ed Bands. and therefore since they could not raise a strength abroad; were resolved to make use of the Trained Bands: Those that were well-affected to the Parliament en∣couraged each other to the work; though by wise men the enterprise was des∣paired on. For the General, Essex, was eighty miles off, and his march lay through those Countries which were already harrased by the Enemy. Sir William Waller,Waller consti∣tuted Major-Gen. of Kent, Essex, Sur∣rey and Hamp-shire. who first had received his Commission about the time of Edge-bill ight, and had been defeated as we mentioned before, in regard of his vigilance and experience, though he failed therein, was intended for a Reserve to Essex in this Expedition; but that Ordinance of Parliament for him took no sudden effect, farther than the constituting of him Major-General of Kent, Sur∣rey, Essex, and Hampshire. On the twenty fourth of August,Essex Ren∣vouzed on Hounsloe-heath, lodged at Colebrook. P. Rupert with a party of Horse idea∣vours to impede his march. General Essex Rendevouzed on Hounsloe-heath, whither he was accompanied with most of the Members of the Parlia∣ment, and from thence marched on his way, lodging that night at Colebrook. Upon intelligence of this Armies advance, Prince Rupert with the greatest part of the Kings Horse drew off from Gloucester to oppose their march, that so the Siege might not be interrupted. Several incounters were made by parties before, who mis-judged the whole by the most resolute Troops in the Van, who were spirited with Money, and the Cause, and so reported it; so that the King fearing a powerful enemy from without, and an obstinate enemy within, drew off in the very nick, when he might probably have been possessed of it by delaying his remove. We will not mention other encounters,Te fight in Stow of the Would. than that which happened on the fourth of September, so commonly known by the name of the fight at Stow in the Would. The General sent Colonel Harvey with his Regiment of Horse, and two Regiments of Foot, to advance a little before towards the right-hand, and the City-Regiments upon the left, under the conduct of Lieutenant-General Boyly, Adjutant of the Foot. Prince Rupert having notice thereof, appear'd with about three thousand Horse drawn up on the Hills, facing the Parliaments Forces; and a strong party (which speedily executed their Errand) to enclose those Forces: which being perceived, three Regiments advanced to Colonel Herveys rescue, and thereupon the Kings Forces retreated to their main Body. Better order was afterwards taken for that small distance from Gloucester by Essex;Gen. Essex at Presbury-hills, the siege of Glocester deserted. so that on the fifth of September the General advanced and came to Presbury-hills, where he drew up his whole Army in view of the City of Glou∣cester, and discharged four pieces of great Ordnance, to give them notice of his approach. Soon after which, he saw the Kings quarters on fire; for immedi∣ately he deserted the siege, and marched away all night, hoping to take better advantages than the surrender of the Town would have offorded him; for Essex was concluded to be tired. The Relief being come, as before is said, the Town was freed, with much re∣joycing both of the Garrison and Army; the City extolling and praysing
the General for his timely and valorous advance, and he extolling their courage and constancy, and highly applauding the Governour for his skilful defence of the City. The Generals Reer-guard stayed on the top of Presbury-hill, by rea∣son of the steepness thereof, darkness of the night, and tempestuousness of the weather;Gen. Essex at Cheltenham. but the General quartered at Cheltenham: though during his March, the Kings Forces skirmished with part of his Army, and divers times beat up his quarters while he staid at Cheltenham, which was two days. It was hardly thought indeed that ever he could have been able to have effected the business; but providence pleasing to continue our troubles, which either by the taking or letting alone that City would have been at a neer Period, suffered the King to fail in the height of his hopes and expectations. Solemn thanks for the dlivery of Glocester, bth there and at London.At Glocester solemn thanks were rendered to God for this great deliverance, with all expressions of Joy and Triumph; and notice being sent to London, the like was done there, especially by the Women, whose Husbands were many of them Engaged in that service. The King neer Wilt-shire.The King continued-in his Quarters upon the borders of Wilt-shire, with a resolution to fight Essex in his return; which he must necessarily do, for recruits and refreshments,Essex reves Tewskbury & Glocester. having suffered many discommodities in the Expedition. He departed with this resolution from Tewksbury, which Garrison and that of Glo∣cester he had provided with necessaries, Sir N. Crisp, and Col. Spen∣cer. and takes Cyrecester. to Cheltenham, where he had notice that a party of the Kings Forces were quartered at Cyrencester, being the Regiments of Sir Nicholas Crisp, and Colonel Spencer; which at midnight he surprized, and took the Town, where he found forty oad of Victuals, which mightily heart∣ned his Army, who had almost been famished. From Cyrencester in leisurable short Marches, of five Miles a day, he came to Cricklade, and so to Swinden, intending to pass to Hungerford. But when the Van and Body of his Army had marched almost over Auborn-Chase, a Gallant Body of the Kings Horse,Auborn-chase ft. consisting of about five thousand, tell upon the Rear of his Army; which being soon disordered, indeavoured to make a Retreat to their Body; but they were pursued too hastily both on Rear and Flank, so that it was done with great loss and confusion. Being come to their Body, they faced the same Horse, who again put them into the like disorder, until some of the Van coming to their assistance, the Kings Horse were repelled; but fresh reserves coming on,The Parliamen∣tarians wor∣sed. stopt the fury of the Parliaments Foot. Two gallant and brave Charges were made, presently one after another, and the Parliamentari∣ans driven again to their main Body; at which time Sir Philip Stapleton, who had the Van for that day (as they changed it for reservation every day) came purposely back and drew up his Regiment to succour them, which caused the Royallists to retire; and so the night parted them. On the Kings party, in those smart charges and encounters, were slain a French Marquess, De Vieu ville, with other Officers of good quality,Marq. De Vieu ville slain. whose worth appeared highly; on the Parliament side were slain two Captains, Middleton and Hacket: The worst fell upon Colonel Sheffields Regiment of Horse, which was utterly broke, and two Standards taken, and very many men killed. Essex marcheth from Hunger∣ford to New∣berry.On Thursday the 19 of September, from his quarters at Hungerford, the Earl of Essex marched to Newbery, and upon approach to the Twon, saw the Kings Forces upon an hill, just in opposition to their March; which the General per∣ceiving, himself first advanced to a place neer the Enemy, and thence com∣manded Colonel Barcleys and Colonel Holborns Brigades to charge them:Newberry fight. That was done very fiercely,Col. Barcley and Col. Hol∣born charge P. Rupert. but was as resolutely recharged by Prince Rupert, who never wanted the first and most furious brunts. This place of advantage was contested for hotly by both parties, till both Armies being ready to grapple, the difference of ground was not reckoned on; and the Kings Forces departed to their several Posts. The Battle being then begun, Sir Philip Stapleton advanced with his Regi∣ment of Horse, and the Generals Life-guard; who being received by the Earl of Carnarvan,E. of Carnar∣van slain. he briskly Charged them, and pursuing them to their Foot, was unhappily shot in the head of his Troops.
(A Noble-man certainly of as great spirit and affection for the Kings service as any, and as much deservedly lamented by them; and to whose memory more publike Honours are due, than a private Interment in Iesus Colledge Ox∣ford.) The Royallists thus desperately Charging, were soon fallen upon the Parlia∣ments Body of Horse; who giving close Fire upon them, put them to the out, and made Prince Rupert hastily return to his whole Body of Horse. This gave opportunity for all the Parliaments Horse of the right Wing,Prince Rupert worsted. in which were the Regiments of the aforesaid Sir Phil. Stapleton, Dolbeir, Ramsey, Harvey, and Good∣win, with the General's, to draw up together; whom the Prince most resolutely again Charged, and that so thoroughly, that some Regiments were so mixed toge∣ther, that they knew not how to disengage themselves. In this confusion ma∣ny were slain on both sides, and the Parliamentarians at last forced to the Lanes end, where in the morning they entred, and where their Foot stood, in very great disorder. Some of the Royalists Troops pursued them into the Lane, but being roundly saluted by the Foot, came back with some loss and danger. In those Charges were wounded Colonel Dalbeir, Commissiary Copley, Captain Hammond, Captain Pym, and Captain Fleetwood. The left Wing of the Par∣liament and the right of the King could not be Engaged but in small parties, by reason of Hedges. As to the Fight made by the Infantry, 'twas so divided, dispersed and dis∣continued, that a stable fixt account cannot be given of it further than in parcels.The Kings In∣fantry led by Lord Ruthen, Earl of Brent∣ford. The Lord Ruthen a Scotchman, lately made Earl of Brentford, an expert Souldier, was here the Kings General, who warily managed the Bat∣tel: on the other side, under the Earl of Essex, Major-General Skippon com∣manded principally in the Foot-service,Major-General Skippon prin∣cipal Com∣mander of the Foot under Essex. which he prudently and couragiously performed; preventing the King, which was Ruthens design, either to seize his Artillery, or to fall on the Rear of his men that fought on the Hill, or gayning that Hill behind him, or their last nights quarter. Very many men were lost in this dispute; the Royalists having seized on some of the Artillery, but were forced to desert it, leaving some of the most daring of their Souldiers behind them. About four a clock in the Afternoon, all the whole Army of Foot was engaged in the Fight; which had proved a great deal more bloody, if night had not drawn on; when the Kings Army, both Horse and Foot, stood in good order on the further side of the Green,Both Armies divided by the night. intending in the morning to fall on the Parliaments Army afresh. But other Counsels prevailing, as sup∣posing better advantages ought to be made in their March home, they suffered them the next morning to March on; which was very acceptable to men who had endured much hardship, both for want of rest and dyet. In pursuance therefore of a resolution to fall upon them in the Lanes, next day Colonel Hurry, one of both sides, newly revolted to the King, with a commanded Party of 800 Musqueteers, and a body of Horse, was sent after them; who charging furiously in those narrow passages, put the Rear into an absolute Rout, who were compelled to stop the pursuit, to overthrow their Carriages across the way. Being thus fled to their main body, who were drawn up in Battalia in a Heath, whither they were still hotly followed, they faced about, and gave the Royalists such a welcome, that they stood not to a∣bide it, but made all the haste possibly back again. In this after-Skirmish were slain on both sides near 500 men; and in the main Battel the day before, and in Auburn-chase, betwixt five and six thousand; the greatest loss whereof, if any material difference, fell on the Parliaments side, of which the most con∣siderable were Colonel Tucker,Col. Tucker on the Parl. side slain. and two Captains, Massey and Hunt: on the King's, the aforesaid Earl of Carnarvan, the Earl of Sunderland, and Lord Viscount Falkland;On the K. side, the E. of Sun∣derland, and Lord Viscount Faulkland. both which were killed near the Kings person; (which was here very much endangered by shot) and other Colonels and Officers; both Armies with great valour and obstinacy maintaining their ground, especially
the London Trained Bands and Auxiliaries, against whom the Royalists had the greatest spleen, and therefore tasted of their resolution. This Battel was fought Wednesday the 20 of September, and on Thursday in the evening.Essex at ead∣ing, . The General Essex after that encounter in the Lanes, drew up the Army of Theal, and taking some refreshment there, Marched the next morning, being Friday, with the whole Army to Reading, where he stay∣ed till the Sabbath was past, and caused publique Thanks to be given for his victory. About this time Sir Nicholas Crispe, Farmer of the Kings Customes, and a Commander for the King by Land, and afterward by Sea, commanding a Regi∣ment of Horse, had the Convoy of the Train of Artillery from Oxford to the Sege of Glocester; which he brought safely thither, and quartered at a Knights house in Rouslidge near Glocester, where he findes the best part of the house ta∣ken up by Sir Iames Enyon and other Gentlemen of no Command in the Ar∣my. These Gentlemen chanced to miss some of their Horses out of their Pa∣stures, and suspecting the Colonels Souldiers, very rashly demand satisfaction of the Colonel; who refusing to draw forth his Souldiers upon Sir Iames his pleasure, the said Knight departs, and sends a Gentleman to him with a Challenge,A dl between Sir Nicholas Crispe and Sir James Enyon. the contents of which was, That he should meet him in a certain adjoyning Field with his Sword; which if he did refuse to do, he would Pistol him against the Wall. Sir Nicholas accompanied with only one Friend, within an hour goes to the appointed place, where he findes Sir Iames and the Gentleman that brought the Challenge, and desired to understand of Sir Iames the ground of his quarrel with him; adding, that his Command in the Army might excuse him from fighting; however, he was come with a Christian resolution to give him all reasonable satisfaction for what injury he had done, of which he proessed to be ignorant. Sir Iames replied, he expected justice from his Sword; and thereupon drew, Sir Nicholas doing the like: the encounter followed,Sir James Enyon kill'd. wherein Sir Iames received an unfortunate thrust about the rim of his belly, and was straightway conveyed to the aforesaid house, and within two days died. On Munday the 2 of October following, a Council of War sat upon Sir Ni∣cholas: but considering the provocations that were given him in his own quar∣ters,Sir Nicholas Crispe rye by a Council of War, and ac∣quitted. they thought it justice to acquit him from any punishment in that Court, and referred him to the King, who being informed of the occasion of their dif∣ference, Sir Nicholas was admitted to kiss his Majesties hand,He kisseth the Kingshand, and is pardoned. and received his Gracious Pardon under the Great Seal. Pity it were so worthy and learned a Divine as Doctor Featly should be buried in Oblivion,Doctor Featley committed to prison for oppo∣sing the Cove∣nant. though by the Parliament he was for some years in the Lord Peters House in Aldersgate-street London, for opposing the strict Rules of the Cove∣nant: he was formerly Minister at Lambeth, but his Livings were given away, and his Books bestowed on Mr. White of Dorchester. From Reading the General was received at London with great Triumph; the Army Marching into the City,He is received at London in Triumph. and were welcomed, especially the Trained Bands, by their Friends, and met by the Lord Mayor and Aldermen at Temple-bar;The King at Oxford. and the King departed to take up his Winter-quarters about Oxford. This Expedition, though not so successful as the Parliament voyced it, yet buoyed them up in their reputation, which was before very low; so that soon after they came to ballance the Kings fortune, which went less, through the Confederation of the Scots, who were then in preparation, according to the agreement and Covenant entred into here, to enter this Kingdom in assist∣ance of the Parliament. The King sensible of this, and for practising whereof, or at least intelligence with the main Agitators therein,The K. commit∣teth Ma. Ha∣milton to Pen∣dennis-Castle. he in Ianuary sent the Marquess Hamilton Prisoner to Pendennis-Castle, who had all along assured him to the contrary. And being daily sollicited by the pressing miseries of his Irish Subjects, who were
not able to subsist longer under them, to procure them some rest and respit from the violence of that Rebellion, as also the better to withdraw his Prote∣stant Army out of that Kingdom to his own assistance here against the Inva∣sion of the Scots, by the Marquess of Ormond, his Lieutenant there, conclu∣ded a Cessation for a year with those Rebels,A Cessation for a year in Ire∣land. and then gave order that 3000 of his English Army should be Embarqued; which soon after, in November, landed in Wales, under the Command of Sir Michael Earnely, a Wilt-shire Gentleman, slain in the second Newbery Battel, and Colonel Monk (after, the most renowned General, Duke of Albemarl) which being afterwards divided to make up several broken Regiments, by Prince Rupert, were rendred not so serviceable, by reason of the change of Officers, and parting with their old Comrades, as they might have been, had they continued in a Body to∣gether, being most of them veterane and well-experienced Souldiers. The greatest part of those Forces besieging Nantwich in Cheshire,Col. Monk surprized at Nantwich, and imprisoned in the Tower of London. were sur∣prized, after a sudden and stout resistance made, by Sir Thomas Fairfax, who was sent thither with all speed to keep them from taking head in those Counties. Among the Prisoners was this Colonel Monk, who was sent up to the Tower of London, where he continued a Prisoner in very hard durance, till the War was near expired; and then took a Commission for Ireland; from which auspi∣cious employment have sprung all his Heroick most glorious Actions towards the King and Kingdom. But to give a more particular account of the War, which was parcelled out into all the Corners of the Kingdom, we must insert here other actions of the noble Marquess of Newcastle,Mar. of New∣castle sends Forces to the Queen: divers places submit to them. and those Forces which he sent the Queen upon her advance Southward to Newark. The hot news whereof alarmed the Mem∣bers at Westminster, most of the Northern parts being already reduced for the King, and these considerable places since the Battel at Adderton-Heath (gained chiefly by the valour of Sir Henry Howard, and Sir Savile, who both lost their lives there, and were interred together in York-Minster:) Howly House, Tamworth Castle, Burton upon Trent, and Bradford yeilded to the Marquesses Forces. Hallifax was likewise quitted by the Lord Fairfax,Hallifax quit∣ted by Fairfax. himself with much ado shifting up and down with his broken Party, and suffering Beverly near Hull to fall into the same hands; until the Parliament sent down the Earl of Manchester to oppose this torrent of the Royal success;Manchester sent against the Royalists, Lyn yeilds to him. He Marcheth to assist the L. Willoughby of Parham. who rising with his Associated Forces from Lyn, which was yeilded to him September 16 (part of which had toward the end of Iuly, under the Command of Cromwel and Ire∣ton surprized Burleigh House and Stamford, and seized several eminent Gentle∣men of those parts, who were sent Prisoners to a new Goal in Maiden-street, London,) Marched to the assistance of the Lord Willoughby of Parham, then hardly put to it, and who had lately yeilded Gainsborough upon Articles to the said Marquess of Newcastle. And here I must not omit the death of a most eminent honourable person, upon account of this unfortunate Garrison, while in my Lord Willougbies possession. Some of his Forces had surprized the Earl of Kingston,L. Willohg∣by surprizeth the Earl of Kingston. Col. Caven∣dish slain. Father to the present Marquess of Dorchester, and brought him hither; whence for better security of his person, which was of great concernment to the Kings affairs thereabout, they resolved to send him to Hull. In the way thither, Colonel Cavendish, brother to the Earl of Devon-shire, with a party pursued the Pin∣nace to a shallow, which she could not pass; and demanded her, and the Earls surrender: which being refused, a Drake was discharged, which un∣happily killed the said Earl, and one of his servants, being placed on purpose on the Deck to deter the Royalists from shooting: whereupon they presently struck Sail and yeilded; but with a just revenge, were all sacrificed to the Ghost of that most Loyal and Noble Peer. Notice of this party and their design being given to the Garrison, a sufficient number under Colonel White a Lincoln-shire Gentleman were hastned to relieve the Boat, or recover it if taken, who accordingly encountred with the Royalists,
and being too many for them, this right valiant Personage was forced to take the Trent with his Horse, which swam him safe to the other side, but there stuck in the owze and mud; and as soon as the Colonel had got ashore off his Horse-back, the Enemy was come round by Ford, and seeing him desperately wounded, offered him quarter; which he magnanimously refusing, and throw∣ing his Blood he wip't off his Face among them, was killed outright upon the place. To return: the Earl of Manchester with his Horse approaching these parts, and this particular place, most part of the Earl of Newcastles Army, then quartering thereabouts, advanced to meet him; but the Associate Horse were so well disciplined, and such chosen able men, that after a very sharp and sore conflict near Horn-Castle in Lincoln-shire,Horn-castle fight. the Royalists were forced to flye, ha∣ving sustained a great loss, viz. 30 Colours (the Parliamentarians said 35) ta∣ken, 400 slain, the chief of whom were Sir Ingram Hopton,The E. of New∣castle orsted. Sir Ingram Hopton, and Sir George Bowls slain. Manchester besiegeth Lin∣coln. Sir George Bowls, and Lieutenant-Colonel Markham, with other inferior Officers; 1000 Horse taken, and as many Arms, and 800 Prisoners. After this Victory the Earl of Manchester marched to Lincoln, and beleaguered it round, and summoned it; which the Towns-men slighted: hereupon a storm was resolved on, after a weeks patience, and expectation of a surrender; and on the 20th of October put in execution just at day-break all round the City, which was speedily en∣tred by Manchester's Regiment of Foot,Lincoln City and Minster stormed and taken. who slew all they found in Arms, and most cruelly plundred the Town, leaving it not worth a farthing. The Minster and Close were surrendred after a little resistance upon quarter onely, and 2500 Arms taken therein;Sir Iohn Mel∣drum possesseth Gainsbo∣rough. and presently Gainsborough was quitted and deserted by the Royalists, and Sir Iohn Meldrum possest it or the Parliament, as not long after my Lord Willoughby of Parham took in Bullingbrook-Castle. Ld. Willough∣by possesseth Bullingbrook-Castle.These successes in those parts, the Parliamentarians making opposition afresh in York-shire, assisted by the Mancashire-Forces, under Colonel Rigby and Sut∣tleworth, and who had fortified Lanchester and other places in the County (which was generally for the Parliament, as to the vulgar, in hatred of the Roman Ca∣tholick Gentry, with which it abounded) caused the King to send away Sir Lewis Dives and Colonel Hurrey with a party of two or three thousand Horse in∣to Bedford-shire,The King sends Sir Lewis Di∣ves into the Associated Counties. and so to make an eruption into the Associated Counties, thereby to divert Manchesters further Progress, who was now with Cromwel and Sir Iohn Meldrum set down before Newark, but upon this invasion was presenty recalled; for the danger was judged very great at London, which instantly took an Alarm; and by Essex's order the Hartford-shire-Trained Bands were pre∣sently raised to oppose this unexpected enemy. Sir Lewis came first to Ampt∣hill, thence to Bedford; where he entred, and took Sir Iohn Norris and some other Officers,He takes Sir Iohn Norris: Affrights Hart∣ford-shire and Bedfordshire, and returns. who would have encouraged the Towns-men to a resistance, but they fared the better for their compliance, whether out of their Loyalty or dis∣cretion, I will not say. Thence this flying party came to Sir Samuel Lukes house, and served that as Sir Lewis was served before in the same County by the Sequestrators;Sir Lewis Di∣ves, Sir Rob. Heath, Iustice Forster, Sir John Banks, and Serjeant Glanvile, voted Traytors. and so proceeded as far as to face Hitching in Hartford-shire; and having soundly frighted those parts, informed of Manchesters re∣turn, they speeded back again to Oxford. The Members at Westminster were so vexed with this incursion, that they voted Sir Lewis Dives a Traytor, for levying War against the Parliament; as they had voted the Judges Sir Robert Heath, Justice Forster, Sir Iohn Banks, and Serjeant Glanvile, who declared and affirm∣ed at Salisbury, in the Circuit, the several Treasons of Essex, Manchester, and other superior Officers of their Army, to be guilty of the same Crime charged upon them; which was the recriminative temper of those times: And those persons that were threatned with the Curse of the Law, were ani∣mated in their Disloyal service by the thanks of the House. The Kentish In∣surrection in behalf of the K.There had been a dangerous Insurrection in Iuly this year in Kent, about the heart of that County towards Sevenoke, but quasht by the early prevention of Major-General Brown (just as they were seizing most of the Parliement-af∣fected
Gentry having already Sir Thomas Walsingham a member of the House in custody) who was sent with two London-Rgiments to suppress them: A small skirmish or two happened, but not worth notice: for he had no Commission to fight; it sufficed him to keep them from joyning with more of that Malecon∣ent party, and driving them further towards Canterbury, whence by the care and diligence of the Committees, a party of their own Country-men came and reduced them at Feversham, with some little Execution. Several persons ei∣ther fled or suffered for this Rsing; but the greatest damage fell upon Sir Ed∣ward Hales, who was accused of promoting it; as the like Loyal principle had in the beginning of the War endangered the Estate of Sir Edward Dering, a person formerly very eminent in the House for his defence and assertion of E∣piscopacy. These tendencies and offers of these Kentish-men towards their duty, in∣vited the King at some of their own instances also to send my Lord Hopton thi∣therward,Lord Hopton marcheth into Kent. as he had done Sir Lewis Dives into Bedford-shire, to make a new di∣version; and the Parliament to obviate such proceedings, though in the depth of Winter,Essex and Waller recrui∣ted. dispatcht away both Essex and Waller with recruited Armies to their several charges. Wallers Forces consisted chiefly of Volunteers which lifted themselves in the new Artillery-ground London, where he was greatly be∣loved and favoured, presently after his defeat at Roundway. Essex marched by the way of St. Albans (where Colonel Fiennes the late Governour of Bristol was Condemned and Sentenced by a Council of War for cowardize in deliver∣ing it in Ianuary) and so to Newport-Pagnel,Col. Fiennes condemned for Cowardize. Essex posses∣seth it. which had first been Garri∣soned by Prince Rupert, and was of great convenience and accommodation to the intelligence and commerce (besides hindrance,Newport-pagnal aban∣doned. dividing and distracting of the enemy) between London and Oxford, the chief Garrison for the King, but now presenly abandoned upon his approach;Walter ap∣printed to at∣tend Hopton. and so to Tositer and North∣ampton; Waller to Farnham and those parts, to attend the motion of the Lord Hpton, who had faced Petworth, and entred Midhurst, and at last was clapt down before Aundel-castle, the extremest parts of Sussex; whose shore before we leave,Isle of Jersey delivered to Sir John Pen∣nington. we must conjoyn a short account of the Isle of Iersey, which by Sir Peter Osburn was now delivered to Sir Iohn Pennington, still Vice-Admiral for the King in the narrow Seas; in exchange of which good fortune, the Garri∣son of Pool had received a very great success, in an Expedition into the Coun∣try, and the Earl of Warwick had joyned at Warcham with Col. Earl upon a designe against Crf-castle, but that succeeded not. Monsieur le Prince de Harcourt came hither a while before,The French Ambassador splendidly re∣ceived at Ox∣ford. as Ambassador Ex∣traordinary, to offer the French Kings interposition and arbitrement of the dif∣ferences between King and Parliament; and was convoyed and splendidly re∣ceived at Oxford; but his Coach and Pacquet searched as he passed the London-Fortifications; which he highly complained of to the Parliament, who to evade his Peace-making errand, would not own him as an Ambassador Extraordi∣nary. He was followed upon the same account to Oxford, whence he went and came twice, with a Duch Ambassador; but all to no purpose: For the Parlia∣ment had now two fresh Armies asoot raised by the City, and a third (the Scots) now upon their march, though a little before they earnestly beought an Accommodation. It is time here to remember other memorable things which happened a little before;Sir John Ho∣thams revolt and seizure. the first was that of the two Hothams, Sir Iohn and his Son; these persons eminent (more especially the Father) for adherence to the Parlia∣ment, having first of all men denied the King admittance into his Towns and Magazines, by putting themselves into Hull, and keeping it by vertue of a pow∣er from the Lords and Commons, now either touched in conscience for the un∣lawfulness and the undutifulness of that action, or else not so highly regarded and considered, as that important and leading piece of service might justly challenge from the Parliament, the Queen being also newly arrived in those parts, who probably might have dealt with Sir Iohn in the matter, he began to falter
from that firmness he had professed for the Parliament, which being guessed at by some strict observers of him, he not being reserved enough in a thing of that consequence, a party was made against him in his own Garrison; and he too late endeavouring to have secured Hull for the King, was in the bustle knockt down in the streets, secured with his Son,He and his Son sent Prisoners to the Tower. and both sent up prisoners to the Tower, whence not long after they were brought to tryal and execution. At the same time also returned Sir Hugh Cholmly, a Member likewise of the House of Commons, and who had secured Scarborough for them, which (as before) was afterwards put into the Kings hands by Brown Bushel. The other thing remarkable was the death of Mr. Iohn Pym, the great stickler against the King and his Prerogative,Mr. Pym dyes. the Speech-maker of the House of Commons, that could wiredraw money with every word he uttered to the City. He died when the Kingdom was in a flame, which he had chiefly blown up, not likely to be extinguished. Nothing is reported of his end cer∣tainly; and though there was a fable of his body being full of Lice, sure we may be, it was full of worms afterward; and let judgment be left to God, whether he engaged in the Times and Quarrel, out of a misguided or a reclaim∣ing Conscience. A new great Seal, The King de∣clares it trea∣son, sends a Messenger to adjourn the Term:Insert we here also, as matters of State, not War, that upon the carry∣ing the Great Seal to Oxford by the Lord Keeper Littleton, a new great Seal was made by the Parliament, which the King declared to be treasonable; and soon after sent a Messenger to London, one Daniel Kniveton, to forbid the hold∣ing of the Term by any colour of the said Seal; and did therewith adjourn the said Term: but the Parliament were so far from giving heed to that Message of the Kings, which was according to his duty delivered to the Judges in West∣minster hall by the said Kniveton,He is condemn∣ed for a spy, and hanged. that by a Council of War held at Essex-House they sentenced him to be hanged for a Spy; which was accordingly executed upon him at the old Exchange, London, on 27 November. Add we also, that in February the King convened the Members of both Houses who had deserted them at Westminster, as a Parliament in Oxford.The Parliament at Oxford. They met in the Schools accor∣dingly, and proceeded to several Consultations; but within a year totally dis∣appeared. To conclude this year with Military affairs; in Ianuary the Scotch Forces ac∣cording to compact entred England with a well-accomplisht Army,The Scots enter England. Divers places surrendred on both sides. and in February cross'd Tine. And to sum up the rendition of places on both sides, take this account: Scarborough, Brimingham, Litchfield, Howley-house, Burton up∣on Trent, Bradford, Hallifax, Bristol, Gainsborough, Dorchester, Portland, Weymouth, Melcomb, Beverly, Bidiford, Appleford, Barnstable, Exeter, Dart∣mouth, Howarden-Castle, Arundel-Castle, taken by the Lord Hopton; Beeston-Castle, Lapley-House, Crew-House, Hopton-Castle, Warder-Castle, regained; Stur∣ton-Castle, and Newark relieved for the King,Prince Rupert relieves New∣ark, and over∣comes Sir John Meldrum. where Prince Rupert gained a compleat victory against Sir Iohn Meldrum, who commanded there with 7000 men against the Town; The Parliamentarians were beaten from their entrench∣ments, into a House called the Spittle, or Exeter-House, where they came to a surrender upon capitulation, leaving their Arms, and Bag and Bagage behind them, and a thousand men slain on their side; Reading, Wardour-Castle, Mon∣mouth, Taunton, and Bridge-Water, Tamworth-Castle, Burley-House, Glocester relieved, Lyn yeilded to the Earl of Manchester, Grafton-House, and Arundel-House taken by Sir William Waller again, being again recruited with a fresh Army, and a new Commission given him to be a Major-General of the four Coun∣ties of Kent, Surry, Sussex, and Hamp-shire; which leads this Chronicle next to some remarkable actions of his (which were much in expectation) in the ensuing year.
Anno Dom. 1644. SIr William Waller, after his reducement of Arundel-Castle, Marched to find out the Lord Hopton,Brandon or Cheriton-down fight, between Sir Wil. Waller and the Lord Hopton, March 29. to cry quits with him for his defeat at Roundway-Down. Both Armies were near one another a good space: for his Lordship hovered about Winchester, and those parts; and at Brandon-Heath near Alsford, was drawn up (having a little before in his intended March to the relief of Arundel beaten Colonel Norton into Chichester, who endeavoured to impede him) and stood ready to receive Sir William, who had taken the advantage of a Hill, from which the Royalists with fury beat him, and drove him to another; where under the shelter of some Bushes and Trees, he so galled the Kings Horse,The Kings party worsted. that they were forced in some disorder to retreat to their Foot. There was a hollow betwixt both bodies, which each endeavouring to gain, many men found it for their Graves on both sides. The Lord Hopton therefore seeing the slaughter that was made,Lord Hopton draws off to Winchester, from thence to Oxford. and likely to continue upon his men, timely drew off his Artillery and Cannon towards Winchester, and then whee∣ling about, Marched for Basing, and so presently to Oxford. In this fight was killed on the Kings part, that valiant person Iohn Lord Stuart second Bro∣ther to the Duke of Richmond,John L. Stu∣art, Sir John Smith, Col. Sandys, Col. Scot, and Col. Manning slain. who dyed at Abbington of his wounds; as also Sir Iohn Smith, Colonel Sandys, Colonel Scot, and Colonel Manning, father to that person who betrayed the King to Cromwel while he resided at Colen, in the designe of Colonel Penruddock; for which he was shot to death in the Duke of Newburghs Country; with divers Persons of Quality wounded, among whom was Sir Edward Stowel, Eldest Son to Sir Iohn; and Sir Henry, after Lord Bard; besides private Souldiers above 1400. Of the Parliaments side, few men of note were killed, about 900 common Souldiers; Colonel Dolbeir wounded, and Colonel Tompsons Leg shot off by a Cannon-bullet. About this time the Dutch Ambassadors came to Oxford again,The Dutch Am∣bassador at Oxford. endeavouring to mediate between the King and Parliament, but returned re infecta; from whence the King also was designing to march, being newly come thither from Reading, which he slighted. Sir Charles Blunt,Sir Charles Blunt slain. a couragious Gentleman on the Kings side, was slain about this time. Great and extraordinary preparati∣ons were now made for this Campagnia, which I shall next relate. Essex and Waller,Essex and Waller joyn. (who had followed the Lord Hopton to Basing, and there shewed a mind of Besieging the house) now joyned their Armies together, a∣mounting to a very great strength, with intention to set upon the King at Ox∣ford; wherefore the Queen was sent away with a sufficient Convoy to Exeter:Queen goes to Exeter. In the mean time Essex plunders Abbington,Abbington plundered and Garrison'd. and makes a Garrison of it soon after. In this place, (which afterwards proved a Thom to the Kings foot, not being able but in great Parties to stir out of Oxford) Essex left Colonel Brown,Col. Brown Governor there∣of. and constituted him Governour thereof. This famous Person, as his actions all along after declared, especially his latter, in his Industrious Loyal endeavours for the Restitution of his Majesty, was no inconsiderable part of the War, having been designed by the Parliament to the suppression of the Kentish-Com∣motions, and then as an assistant to Sir William Waller at the taking in of Win∣chester and Chichester, was afterwards, when the War was ended, and the King brought to Holmby, made one of the Commissioners to attend his Majesty; where he was so gained upon by his Princely Goodness and Vertues, that from that time he was wholly changed,The K. march∣eth to Worce∣ster. The Parl. divide their Forces. Waller sent a King-catch∣ing, and Essex into the West. and reduced from all false Opinions concerning his Majesty, and afterwards proved a most Cordial and Loyal actor and sufferer for him and his Cause. To return: the King in the mean while marched with his Army from Ox∣ford to Worcester; which caused the two Parliament-Generals to divide their forces again: Waller was to go after the King, as they termed it, A King-catching,
while Essex marched with another gallant Army into the West, which was totally fallen from the Parliament. The King had but few Forces about him, by reason that Prince Rupert was sent with the greatest part of the Army to the relief of York,Prince Rupert sent to York. then Besieged by the joynt-power of three Armies, the Scots, Manchester's, and Fairfax's. In his way he Storms Bolton, and takes it: but of that by and by. The King having Traversed his ground, came back again from Worcester; and Sir William Waller from out of the Skirts of Glocester-shire, was ready at his heels: Insomuch that he overtook him neer Banbury,Corpredy-fight. at a place called Cro∣predy-bridge. Waller drew up in Battalia on a Hill, expecting the advantage of the Kings passing the Bridge: which the King adventuring to do,Waller sets up∣on the K. is gal∣lantry receiv∣ed by the Earls of Cleaveland & Northamp∣ton, and put to flight. Waller de∣scends from his Post, and falls upon the Kings Rear beyond the Bridge, where he was so gallantly received by the Earls of Cleaveland and Northampton, that he was quite Routed, Six hundred killed, and Seven hundred taken Prisoners, his Train of Artillery, and many of the Officers; so that Sir William was for∣ced to flie, and have recourse to London for another recruit. It was therefore resolved, upon this defeat of Waller, that the King should immediately follow the Earl of Essex, who was advanced so far, that the Queen, who was delivered of the Princess Henrietta at Exeter the sixteenth of Iune,The Princess Henrietta born at Exeter, the Queen goes to France. in the Month of Iuly was fain to be gone from thence for fear of a Siege (lea∣ving the young Lady to the tuition of the Countess of Dalkeith) to France, where she landed on the 25th at Brest in Britany. At the beginning of August, the King had overtaken the said Earl at Lestithiel;The E. of Essex defeated at Le∣stithiel. his Forces in so ill a condi∣tion through their long march, and their want of necessaries, which the Coun∣try-people kept from them, that it was concluded an easie thing to conquer them: The King therefore resolved to coop them up, and keep all manner of Provision from them. After two or three days leaguer in this manner, the Parliament-horse broke through the Kings Army by night; the General, and the Lord Roberts, at whose instance this Expedition was undertaken, got by boat from Foy to Plymouth; and the Foot being destitute, and deserted by the Horse, under the command of Major-General Skippon, came to a Capitulation; by which it was agreed, they should render their Arms, Ammunition, Artillery, and Stores, into the hands of the King, and have liberty (as many as would) to pass home; they engaging never more to bear Arms against the King. So that by this defeat the Parliament were quite undone in the West, as to present appearance. Marq. of New∣castle Besieged in York by the E. of Manche∣ster, Lord Fair∣fax, and Les∣ly.The Marquess of Newcastle had been besieged above nine weeks in York, by the joynt Forces of the Earl of Manchester, the Lord Fairfax, and the Scotch Army under Lesly; for the relief whereof, Prince Rupert was sent; who passed through Shrop-shire, and thence through Lancashire, increasing his Forces by the way from the several Garrisons and Parties thereabouts. In his way he raised the Siege of Latham-house, where the Countess of Derby had stoutly defended her self for a long time:Prince Rupert raiseth the Siege of La∣tham-house, & takes divers places. He moreover took Stopford, Leverpool, and Bolton; the last whereof refusing his Summons, and being in no condition to withstand his power, he deservedly (having mastered it by a Storm the third time) pil∣laged, using the right of Arms to those who had provoked him by their impo∣tent obstinacy. Besides, it was noted for a Town of Sectaries, and such-like people. On Sunday the last day of Iune, the Prince came to Knaresborough, fourteen miles from York; the next morning over Burrough-Bridge, and that night by the River to York;The Siege of York rad. upon whose approach the besiegers quit their quarters, and those in York pursued their Rear, and seized some Provisions: the next morning, Iuly the second, the Prince advanced after them, resolving to give them Battel: which resolution was opposed by the Marquess of Newcastle, as one who well knew the several concerns of the three confederate parties, among whom there had passed some Jarrings in their Councels for Command. But the Prince was determined to put an end to the Scotch danger, (which
onely retarded the Kings entire success) by a present fight; and though he be much blamed for it, yet it seems and appears he had the Kings express com∣mand to fight that Army with all convenient speed and advantage. According∣ly it was his intention to fight them that morning, or at least by noon; march∣ing in view of them on the plain called Marston-Moor:Marston-Moor fight. But it proved seven at night before both Armies Engaged. The Parliamentarians had taken the ad∣vantage of a Corn-hill, on the South-side of Marston-Moor, four miles from York;Prince Rupert commands the Main Battel, Marq. of New∣castle one Wing; General Gor∣ing, Sir Charles Lucas and Major-Ge∣neral Porter several parties. so that the Prince accepted of what fighting ground they had left him. His Army was divided into Wings, whereof the Marquess of Newcastle com∣manded one, the Prince the main Battel; though he charged in the left Wing, where was General Goring, Sir Charles Lucas, and Major-General Porter, Son to Mr. Endymion Porter of the Bed-Chamber. Being thus resolved, and drawn in Battalia, ready to charge and begin the Encounter, it was resolved upon the signal, that the Princes left Wing should commence the Battel; whither some new Reserves were brought to enforce and assist them. The right Wing of the Parliamentarians Horse,The Parlia∣ments Horse & Scotch Cavalry routed. which consisted of the L. Fair-fax's Troops in the Van, and of the Scotch Cavalry in the Rear, (against which the Prince had a more peculiar indignation) was at the first Onset of the Kings left Wing of Horse, (commanded as aforesaid) put to Total rout; the Royalists following them in the pursuit so far, (as it was their unhappy custom) that thereby they became the overthrow of their own Army. The Scots some of them ran ten miles an end, and a wey bit, crying out Quarter, with other lamentable Expressions of Fear. During this Slaughter and Conquest in that part of the Field,The Victory du∣bious in other parts, where the E. of Man∣chesters Horse engaged. the Victory stood dubious on the other, where the Earl of Manchester's Horse were on the Left Wing of their Army. These were Raised out of the Associated Counties of Bedford, Cambridge, Suffolk, Buckingham, &c. commonly called the Eastern Associates; and both for Arms, Men, and Horses, the compleatest Regiments in England: They were more absolutely at the command of Colonel Cromwel,Cromwel his Lieut. Gen. a most indefati∣gable Souldier. then Lieutenant-General to Manchester; an indefatigable Souldier, and of great courage and conduct: of whose ions we should have spoken before, and have mentioned how he first secured those Counties for the Parliament, purging, that is to say, extinguishing the University; suppressing several endeavours for the King namely, taking Sir Thomas Barker,Sir Tho. Bar∣ker, Sir John Pettus, Capt. Allen, &c. imprisoned. Sir Io. Pettus, and Capt. (since, Sir Thomas) Allen, Admiral of the Seas, and other the prime Gentlemen of Suffolk, Prison∣ers at Lowestoft in Suffolk, as they were met at a Rendezvous there, to pro∣mote the Commission of Array; as he did Sir Henry Connisby at Saint Albans soon after; having reclaimed himself from the open vanities of Youth, and taken up the secret Vices of Old men; so that certainly a stranger change was never wrought in any man; each Vice skipping over its medium of vertue, (which he touched not at all) becoming the contrary extream; his youthful Debauche∣ries proving in his Old Age all manner of Atheistical Prophaness, as Perjury, Hypocrisie, Cruelty; in a word, what not? so that indeed they had no more parallel, than his as strange Fortunes. He was born April the 25th in Saint Iohns Parish,An account of Oliver Crom∣wels life. in the Town of Hunting∣don, and was Christened in that Church the 29th of the same month, Anno Dom. 1599. where Sir Oliver Cromwel his Uncle gave him his name, being received into the Bosom of the Church by her Rites and Ceremonies; both which he afterwards rent and tore, and ungraciously and impiously annulled and renoun∣ced. That I may use my own words in his Life and Death lately printed, and transcribe a Paragraph or more which are of use here, for the information and satisfaction of Posterity. That year 1599, was the last of that wonderful Century, and did just pre∣cede the famous and celebrated Union of the two Kingdoms of England and Scotland under King Iames; as if it were congenial to Crowns, as to other lesser accessions of Felicity in private persons, to have at the same instant a tem∣perament
and allay to their Lustre and Greatness; th s Fortunes right hand presented a Scepter, so her left hand was ready with a Scourge to wreak her Envy and fury upon the glory and Grandeur of that renowned Succession to, and accrument of Dominion. The subtilties, Arts and Policies of his that Goddess, un∣der the name of Providence, potently and irresistibly conspiring with his, as close Treasons and dissembled Treacheries, to the ruine and overthrow of this Church and Kingdom, singly and insensibly accomplished by the mean and unobserved hand of this bold and perjurious Politique. Every thing hath its Good and Evil Angel to attend it; and that grand and happy Revolution was to be afflicted and persecuted by this Fury, to an almost dissolution of its well-composed and established frame. Born of an an∣cient Family at Hunting∣ton.He was descended of a very ancient Knightly Family of his name, in the County of Huntington, where for many Ages they have had a large and plen∣tiful Patrimony: it will suffice therefore to deduce him from no further Origi∣nals then Sir Henry Cromwel his Grandfather, a Gentleman highly honoured and beloved both in Court and Country; who had issue Sir Oliver his eldest Son, Henry, Robert and Richard, and Sir Philip the youngest (whose Son, upon sus∣picion of Poysoning his Master, was accused thereupon, convicted and hanged, some thirty five years ago.) This our Oliver was Son of Mr. Robert Cromwel, the third Son of Sir Henry, a Gentleman who went no less in esteem and reputation, that any of his Ancestors, for his personal worth, until his unfortunate production of this his Son and Heir,Married to E∣lizabeth the Niece of Sir Rob. Steward, who settled on him an Estate after he had consumed his Patrimony, and intended for New-Eng∣land. whom he had by his wife Elizabeth Steward, the Niece of Sir Robert Steward, a Gentleman of a competent for∣tune in this County, but of such a maligne effect on the course of this his Ne∣phews life, that if all the Lands he gave him (as some were Fenny ground) had been irrecoverably lost, it might have past for a good providence, and a happy prevention of those Ruines he caused in the three Kingdoms. For that estate continued him here, after his debauchery had wasted and con∣sumed his own Patrimony; and diverted him from a resolution of going into New-England, the Harbour of Nonconformists; which design, upon his sudden and miraculous conversion, first to a civil and Religious deportment, and thence to a sowre Puritanism, he straightway abandoned: by the former Repentance, he gained the good will and affection of the Orthodox Clergy,Sir Robert Steward de∣clares O. C. his Heir. who by their perswasions, and charitable insinuations, wrought him into Sir Robert Steward's favour, insomuch that he declared him his Heir to an Estate of four or five hun∣dred pounds a year: by his second change to Non-conformity, and Scrupulous Sanctity, he gained the estimation and favour of the Faction;Cromwel gets into favour with the Fa∣ction; they procure him to wife, Eliza∣beth the Daughter of Sir James Bòw∣cher, and choose him Bur∣gess for Cam∣bridge. some of the Heads whereof, viz. Mr. Hambden, and Master Goodwin, procured him the Match with a Kinswoman of theirs, Mistris Elizabeth Bowcher, the Daughter of Sir Iames Bowcher; and afterwards got him chosen a Burgess for Cambridge, by their interest in that Town, which was totally infected with Puritanism and Zelotry: and this was his first projection and design of ambition, besides that it priviledged him from Arrests, his Estate being sunk again, and not to be repair∣ed but by the General Ruine. I have the rather insisted upon him here, because this is the place from whence he began to appear in that eminence which shewed him to the people as a most able Champion of the Parliaments cause, and from whence it is thought he first derived those ambitious thoughts which after Ruined three King∣doms. To give him his due, the Honour of this Field was mainly, if not solely as∣cribable to his courage; for with his Regiment of Curassiers he broke through all that withstood him,The Marq. of Newcastle de∣feated. Defeating all the Northern Horse under the Marquess of Newcastle; at which time the main bodies joyned, animated and incoura∣ged by his success. Being thus over-powred both in Front and Flank, the Royallists began to flie, and Cromwel being impatient of any longer demur to his victory, which he had so fairly bid for, omitted not to prosecute the same. In this unhappy juncture,
the Princes right Wing returned to the field; but all was grown so desperate, and in such confusion and disorder, that it was impossible to Ralley them; and the fearful execution that was made among them, had quite taken away the hearing of any Command, or obedience to Discipline. There was yet standing two Regiments of the Lord New-castle's,His Lambs ex∣cellent Soul∣diers. one called by the name of his Lambs; these being veterane Souldiers, and accustomed to fight, stood their Ground, and the fury of that impression of Cromwel, which Routed the whole Army besides; nor did the danger nor the slaughter round them, make them cast away their Arms or their courage; but seeing them∣selves destitute of their friends, and surrounded by their enemies, they cast them∣selves into a Ring, where though quarter was offered them, they gallantly refu∣sed it,They are over∣powred and de∣stroyed. and so manfully behaved themselves, that they flew more of the enemie in this particular fight, than they had killed of them before. At last they were cut down, not by the Sword, but showers of bullets, after a long and stout resistance, leaving their enemies a sorrowful victory, both in respect of them∣selves whom they would have spared, as in regard of the loss of the bravest men on their own side, who fell in assaulting them. A very inconsiderable number of them were preserved, to be the living monuments of that Brigades Loyalty and valour. The Prince after this defeat fled to Thursk,P. Rupert fled to Thursk, &c. and so through Lancashire and Shropshire the way he came: (Night ended the pursuit: for it was eleven a clock before the fight ceased,The Parl. Gene∣rals march to the Siege at York, from whence they rose to fight. else more blood had been shed) and the Parliaments Ge∣nerals to the siege at York, from whence they rose to give the Prince battel. Here were slain to the number of 8000 and upwards in the field and flight; which at certain was divided equally between both Armies: For what slaugh∣ter was made by the Prince upon the Scots and Fairfax,The loss of men so great on both sides, that the Inhabitants were poysoned with the smell of the Dead bo∣dies. was requited by Crom∣wel on the left Wing as aforesaid, and the fight was furious and bloody there. It must needs be a great carnivage; for a month after the Battel, though the slain bodies were put into pits and covered, there was such a stench thereabouts, that it almost poisoned them that passed over the Moor; and at Kendal, a place near adjacent, the Bell for six weeks together never ceased tolling for the inha∣bitants who were poysoned and infected with the smell. The Marquess of Newcastle,Marq. New∣castle, L. Wid∣rington, Gen. King, Sir Wil. Vavasor and others pass over to Hamburgh. and the Lords and Colonels of his party who complyed not with the Prince in the resolution of fighting, (his men having been so long cooped up in York, and in no present condition for battel) took ship∣ping at Newcastle, and passed over to Hamburgh; among whom was the Lord Widdrington, General King, Sir William Vavasor, killed afterwards in the Swedes service at Copenhagen, and many others; which proved the utter loss of the North to the King. Here were slain of persons of quality a good number,Slain on the K. side, the L. Ca∣ry, and Sir Tho. Metham. such as Knights and Squires, and the like; particularly on the Kings side, the Lord Cary Eldest son to the Earl of Monmouth, and Sir Thomas Metham; on the Parliament-side, the Lord Diddup a Scotch Lord,On the Parl. side, the Lord Diddup. remarkable by this, that when it was told the King at Oxford, that such a Lord was slain on the Parliaments side, he answer∣ed, that he had forgot there was such a Lord in Scotland. To which one reply∣ed, That his Majesty might well do so, for the Lord had forgot he had such a King in England. The Victor Army being come again before York,York yielded by Sir Thomas Glenham. summoned the City again: they had used before their utmost indeavours, by Mines and Assaults, (in one whereof they lost near one thousand men, and were beaten off) to have entred; to which the Governour returned answer, that he was no whit dismayed with their present success; yet nevertheless on equal Conditions he would come to a Treaty and Surrender; which in nineteen days after the battel was concluded on. The main Articles were: That the Garrison should march out according to the honourable custome of War: That the Garison the Parliament put in should consist two parts of three of the Coun∣ty of York: That the Citizens should be indempnified, as well those absent as pre∣sent,
and have the benefit of those Articles: That the Cathedral and Churches should receive no prejudice, &c. According to which agreement, the Governour and Garison departed the 23 day of Iuly; but the Articles were most of them basely infringed and violated, by plundering the people that departed out of York to Skipton, whither by Articles they were to be convoyed. The Parliament raise new L∣vies.New Levies were at this time ordered to be made by the Parliament, amoun∣ting to twelve thousand Horse and Foot in the Southern parts of England, and as many more were by their directions to their Commissioners in Scotland in∣tended to be raised there, for a supply and reinforcement of that Army then in England; and like sums of money proportioned thereunto; the Scots crying Give, give, while the Citizens of London paid for all: (upon whom this year an odd kind of Tax was laid for the setting out of Sir William Wallers Army, as was unpractised ever in any War,A strange Tax laid upon Lon∣don. that every Citizen should pay as much every Tuesday, as his expences for a meal for his family usually amounted to.) Easinghouse besieged by Sir Wil. Waller,During the Kings absence in the West, and the Princes in the North, Sir William Waller had recruited himself, and joyned with the forces of Colonel Norton, and Colonel Morley, who had drawn down before Basing, a house of the Marquess of Winchesters, garrisoned by him, and kept for the King; which being distressed for want of Ammunition and provision, was close laid to by the enemy. Many brave Salleys were made, and a multitude of men they slew;And relieved by Col. Gage and Col. Sir G. Buncley. so that it was afterwards called Basting-house. Waller was resolved not to rise, cost what it would: at length relief was put into it, under the conduct of Colonel Gage, and Colonel Sir George Buncley, who with a party of 800 Horse, each having a Sack of Meal behind him, resolutely passed through the Leaguer to the House; and having unladen themselves, as valiantly return∣ed back safe again to Oxford.The besiegers at Last depart. Nevertheless they persisted in the enterprize, till after Newbery-fight, the King marching that way, the Forces left to block it up rose and departed without it. The siege of Dennington-Castle.Dennington-Castle neer Newbery was Garrisoned by the King; wherefore Colo∣nel Middleton Lieutenant-General to Sir William Waller, came and sate down before it with the broken remains of Cropredy, amounting to three thousand Horse and Foot; he presently made his Approaches, and seized a Barn from the besieged, and then sent in his Summons; which for the honour of Sir Iohn Boys the Governour, who did the King Knight-service then and afterwards, (as by and by will appear) in that place, are here inserted. For the Governour of Dennington-Castle. The summons by Col. Middle∣ton.SIR, I demand you to render me Dennington-Castle for the use of the King and Parliament: if you please to entertain a present Treaty, you shall have ho∣nourable terms. My desire to spare-blood, makes me propose this. I desire your Answer. John Middleton. For Lieutenant-General Middleton. The Answer from Sir John Boys the Go∣vernour.SIR, I am entrusted by his Majesties express command, and have not lear∣ned yet to obey any other than my Soveraign. To spare blood, do as you please; but my self, and those that are with me, are fully resolved freely to venture ours in maintaining what we are here intrusted with; which is the Answer of John Boys. The besiegers assault the Castle, come off with loss, and depart.Middleton perceived words would not do, and therefore advanced with Foot and Scaling-ladders in three places; the fight lasting six hours, in which he lost one hundred men, a Colonel, a Major, and other Officers, leaving them to
the disposal of the Governour; and broke up his siege, and departed Westward to Essex; and by the way was met with by Sir Francis Dorrington, and Sir Wil∣liam Courtney,They are met by Sir Francis Dorrington & Sir W. Court∣ney, and wor∣sted; They after∣wards rout a party of the K. Horse neer Sherburn. who had laid an Ambuscado for him in a Lane five miles long, beyond Bridgewater, where being pelted with their Shot from the Hedges, he faced about in some disorder, and fell upon the two Knights, who routed his Party, killed some, and took many Prisoners. Retreating thence as unable now to effect his business, which was to second Essex in the West, he fell upon a Par∣ty of the Kings Horse neer Sherburn in Dorsetshire, which he totally routed, and with this different strange success speeded for London. Colonel Horton comes next to Dennington, and Summons it again, as Adjutant-General to Major-General Brown;Dennington-castle again Summoned by Col. Horton. and to as little purpose, being answered with scorn: this so incensed him, that with a furious Battery from the foot of the Hill, on that side next Newbery, which lasted twelve days, every day spending eighty shot, he at last beat down their Towers, with a part of the Wall; and being increased with three Regiments more from the Earl of Manchester,Manchester comes to his as∣sistance. he in another Summons acquaints the Governour of his strength; but all in vain: at last came the Earl himself, who removed the Battery on the other side, and proceeded by Mines also;They batter the Castle, but in vain: they de∣part. but the Garrison sallying out, sent them out of their Trenches, killed a Lieutenant-Colonel, and other Officers; which made the Besiegers slacken in their heat. They continued nevertheless Battering two days after, and then seeing it bootless to lye there longer, rose from the Siege; the Earl to Reading, Windsor-Forces to Newbery, and Horton to Abingdon. About this time, the Reformation of the Church in defacing of its Paintings,The defacing of Churches in Ci∣ty and Country. breaking Glass-windows, pulling down Communion-Tables, and the like, was almost brought to pass in London; the last Church left, was his Majesties Chappel at White-hall, which by the order of Sir Robert Harloe,Sir R. Harloe a forward zea∣lot. the Parliaments Com∣missioner in that Irreligious business, was likewise visited in the same rude man∣ner, and several Sculptures and Paintings, as guilty of Superstition, indeed of other mens Avarice and Theving, were puroyn'd and sold. The King had sent a Message for Peace,The King sends a Message for peace. soon after his success at Lestithiel, as he had done before from Evesham. This last Message from Tavestock in Devon∣shire coming to the notice of Somersetshire and Wiltshire Inhabitants, they pro∣fessed their Concurrence with the King, and that they would petition the Parlia∣ment to comply with the King, and end those differences. From this root sprung afterwards that Association of the Club-men (after the Fatal business at Naseby) in the Western Counties.An Association of Club-men. Next to Dennington-Siege, remarkable was that of Banbury,Banbury Siege raised. where Col. Iohn Fiennes commanded for the Parliament, and where he used Batterings, Mines, and Stormings against the Castle, wherein Sir William Compton was Governour for the King; whom he summoned twice, and at last had answer, that the Gover∣nour wondred he would send again. Then Granadoes were used, which made a breach, & gave them encouragement to Storm it again; which was begun on the 23 of September: But they were Repulsed with great loss, yet nevertheless they continued their Granadoes and Battery,The Earl of Northampton and Col. Gage the Governour of Oxford, re¦lieve Banbury. till the Earl of Northampton was come from the Rendezvous neer Newbery, and had joyned with the Forces under Colo∣nel Gage, newly made Governour of Oxford. Upon the approach of the said Earl, the Parliamentarians Retreated to the West-side of the Town towards Hanwel, while the Foot in some disorder drew out of the Town, following their Horse; having sent away their Baggage and Artillery the night before. The Earl followed them, while Sir Henry Gage relieved Banbury. The Enemy be∣ing briskly Charged, made away in haste, and dispersed themselves several ways, by Cropredy and Compton. The Earl of Brainford and Colonel Web were here wounded, as also Lieutenant-Colonel Smith and Captain Boeler slain. The Ene∣my lost many men, a field-Piece, eight Waggons of Ammunition, and six barrels of Powder, four Cornets, and some Horse. Thus was this Siege Raised,The Siege rais∣ed. which had continued from the nineteenth of Iuly, to the five and twentieth of October.
While these things were acting hereabouts, when there was little motion in any parts else of the Kingdom, at least not considerable, another design was laid upon Glocester, by the united Forces of Worcester-shire and Hereford, while Massey was abroad on parties; who having notice thereof, having got an addition of three hundred and fifty men from Twksbury, to enable him to fight with Colonel Myn,Col. Myn sain i Glocester∣shre, and the Royalists wor∣sted by Masey, a gallant expert Commander, followed after him to his quarters at Elderfield. By break of day both parties engaged; Massey bea∣ting the Royalists from their Ambuscadoes, put their Horse to flight, and so fell upon the Van of their Foot, routed their whole body, killed and wounded several of them, and took many Prisoners. The Noble Colonel Myn, who commanded a Regiment of English which he brought with him out of Ireland, was killed here fighting and bringing up his men, and keeping them from the rout, with neer two hundred more slain, and the like number taken Priso∣ners. This defeat happened by reason the two County-forces aforesaid were not joyned, who came just in the close of the fight, and killed some of Masseys men who followed the pursuit; but he himself, with his ooty and Prisoners, got safe to Glocester,Who bestowed an honorable burial on the sai Clonl. where he very honourably interred the body of the aforesaid Colonel Myn. Some attempts, designs, and skirmishes about passes upon the Severn, whereabout Prince Rupert was quartered, after his deeat at Marston moor, hap∣ned every day:Princ Rupert at the Severn, where hapnd daily Skir∣hes. such being the fortune of war, that the Prince, who had bid battel but the other day to thirty thousand men, now pidled and trifled with a Brigade or two, to seek the advantage of a private and commodious march, being dogged but with a Squadron or two of Horse at At Ferry, where betwixt some of his forces and Colonel Massey a bkring fell out, wherein Massey prevailed,He is worsted by Massey. but to no great loss or concernment. While Colonel Massey was thus every day upon parties marching up and down, one Kirle, who for a while before had intelligence with him about the delivery of Monmouth,Monmouth bad to Massey, by Lieutenant-Co. Kirle. being Lieutenant-Colonel to Holtby the Governour, took the advantage of his approach to effect it: for Massey having shewed him∣self thereabouts, gave out that the enemy being plundering about Bristol, he was constrained to depart: whereupon Kirle is sent out with a Troop of Horse to pursue his rear: him and his party Massey takes, secures his men all but a Coronet, who gave the Allarm to Monmouth, where Kirle suddenly coming with a hundred Horse of Masseys, commands the Gates to be opened to let him in speedily (as he said) with his Prisoners; which after some dis∣pute being done, and the Draw-bridge let down, he entred, and presently decla∣red hin; Mastering the Guards, and making good the bridge, till a body of Horse and Foot close behind came on and entred the Town. The Gover∣nour escaped over the dry Graft, leaving this place (the key of South-Wales) thus in the enemies hands;Col Holtby Goverour thereof escapes. but it was regained from them soon after by as good Conduct, as it was lost by base Treachery. Several other encounters and velitations there were in those parts, wherein Massey's activity and vigilance manifested it self;Massey active and vigilant. but because they were of no great moment, it will be to as little purpose to relate them. Come we now to that which is most material and remarkable. Hitherto the King seemed to have fortune equal, if not favourable and incli∣nable to him, saving in that unfortunate business of Marston-Moor. Now the Cause came to be disputed. The King in his march out of the West, sent part of his Army on several services; his reduced enemy still marching before him towards London, as far as Basing, where they had Arms put again into their hands, and rcis from all parts thereabouts sent them. Neer that House they gathered into one body, but attempted not the place. Here joyned the Earls of Essex, Manchester and Sir William Waller, with some trayned Regiments of London. The King came to Kingsclear, Essex to Aldermarston, and thence privately over the water to Padworth, and so to Bucklebury-Heath, and thence to Newberry,
where the King was.Newberry se∣cond fight, Octob. 27. On Sunday-morning, about a thousand of the Earl of Manchesters forces, and London Trained bands, came down the hill very early, and undiscerned passed over the Kennet, and advanced upon some few of the Kings Foot,Manchester's forces over-powered the Kings, but are replied by Sir Bernard Ast∣ley. and over-powred them, till they were seconded by Sir Bernard Astley, who drove the enemy back again over the River, and the Reserves that were passed to assist them, altogether in the same rout. Essex his design was to surround the King toward Spr; to which purpose, about three a clock in the afternoon, four thousand of their Horse and Dragoons, and a stand of five hun∣dred Pikes, and some Cannon, appeared on the West-side of Newberry beyond the King;The Duke of Yorks Regi∣ment led by Sir Wil. St Leger, and Pr. Mau∣rices Brigade repulsed. where the Cornish Foot and the Duke of Yorks Regiment comman∣ded by Sir William St. Leger, with five field-Pieces, and a Brigade of Prince Mau∣rice's Horse, charged home, but were repulsed, and so over-powered with num∣ber, that they were forced to forsake their ground and their five Field-pieces, which the enemy seized, and maintained. Essex's Horse also were too hard for the Kings, whom they discomfited, and then with a part of them and some Musqueteers fell upon the Kings Life-guards,Essex his Horse too hard for the Kings, over-powred Sir Humphry Bennet and Major Leg; but are repulsed by the Lord Ber∣nard Stuart. Goring and Cleaveland worsted: Earle of Cleaveland taken Prisoner, and the Kings person in dan∣ger. and Sir Humphry Bennets Bri∣gade; they also over-powered Major Leg, who was sent with a party of Horse to their reserve; and made Colonel Bennet to bear off in some disorder: but be∣ing seconded by the Lord Bernard Stuart, who fell upon the enemies Flanks, they routed them, killing in the conflict a Captain and several private Souldiers. On the Kings side Captain Cathlin was slain, and Captain Walgrave woun∣ded. On the East-side of Newberry the Parliaments forces were not less successful; against whom General Goring and the old Earl of Cleaveland opposed them∣selves, with the said Earls brigade, which consisted of the Regiments of Colonel Thornhill, Colonel Hamilton, Colonel Culpepper, and Colonel Stuart. In this dispute the Kings forces had the better, killing Major Hurry, Colonel Hurry's Kinsman; but fresh supplies coming in, the Earl was forced to recede, and was at last taken Prisoner, and the Kings person very neer the same condi∣tion. Let us cast a view now into the bloodiest parts of the field, on the North-East of Newbery, where Manchester and the London Trained bands ought against the Lord Ashley and Sir George Lisle, who had secured one Mr. Dolmans house, as a place of some advantage,Earl of Man∣chester inga∣ged with Lord Ashley and Sir George Lisle, they are worsted but relieved by Sir John Brown. having Colonel Thelwel for his Reserve: Man∣chesters Horse and Foot descending the Hill with the aforesaid Trained bands, advanced hastily upon those Foot of Sir Georges, and worsted them; but Sir Iohn Brown, with Prince Charles his Regiment, coming in time, gave a stop to their fury, diverting some part of their Horse, to the relief of their Foot; which he fell upon, and so retreated: when the Reserve under Thelwel made good his beginnings; and Colonel Lisle animating his own Regiment by his example, by pulling off his doublet, brought them three several times to the Charge, and maugre all the force and fury of the enemy, could not be beaten from his ground, which he quitted not before command. Several times here it came to the butt-end, with very great resolution on both sides; which ceas∣ed not while they had any light to see what they did;The King mar∣cheth to Wal∣lingford, and so to Oxford. In the Covert of night the King drew all his Artillery, Ammunition, and Waggons, under the walls of Dennington-Castle, and marched away to Wallingford (though his Rear staid that night in the place till almost morning) and so to Oxford. This was a most fierce and bloody Battel, though of short continuance, but of four hours, from four a clock in the afternoon till eight at night; wherein the Parliamentarians strove to revenge their disgraceful defeat at Lestithiel▪ and the Royalists to redeem their loss at Marston-Moor: but it was observed, that none fought so eagerly as those Souldiers who took the engagement never to bear Arms against the King, at their rendition in Cornwal; so that the King was well rewarded for his lenity▪ and sparing of blood, which was at this place plenteously drawn from his own Army: Of which, of men of note, were slain fewer than in any Battel whatsoever; there being reckoned but three;
Colonel Sir William St. Leger,Slain of note on the Kings side, Sir William St. Leger. Lieutenant-Colonel Topping, and Lieutenant-Colonel Leak: There were wounded Sir Iohn Greenvile, the General the Earl of Brainford in the head, and Sir Richard Campfield, Colonel of the Queens Regiment of Horse; of Common Souldiers a greater quantity than of the Par∣liaments, neer three thousand: But of their side not any person of note above a Captain,Essex had the Field. and some five and twenty hundred killed. The Earl of Essex had indubitably the honour, as he had the pillage of the Field, on which he lay all that night; and having buried the Dead, marched to Besiege Demington-castle, where the Kings Artillery was secured by the care of the aforesaid Colonel Boys,Col. Boys se∣cured the Kings Artillery. who intended not to part with them at any Rates, though encompassed with so great and powerful an Army, which after three several Summons, three several days together assaulted it. The King having marched his Army through Oxford on the thirtieth of the same month, on the sixth of October Rendezvouzed them on Burlington-Green, within a Mile Eastward of Oxford; and so marched by Dorchester to Walling∣ford, and forward for the relief of Dennington-castle,The King re∣lieves Den∣nington-ca∣stle. which yet stifly defended it self: Upon his approach, and some resolute attempts upon their out-Guards over-night, which passed with sundry Skirmishes, the Enemy drew off next day, and departed, although they were two for one. The Parliament suspect the Earl of Essex.Hereabout, and in this matter, appears the first dissatisfaction of the Par∣liament, as to the good management of their Arms; the Earl of Essex being now suspected as careless or discontent: And therefore they fell to debate con∣cerning the Army in the House. For Colonel Norton had writ a Letter to them, that he had received a Warrant from a chief Commander in the Army to withdraw from Basing; which was a thing to him unexpected, but yet he obeyed: and besides, the commands of the Committee of both Kingdoms to the Army were lately much neglected▪ and complained of. This debate flew so high, as it came to this question: How chance the Parliament-forces permitted the Enemy to relieve Dennington-castle, when they were two for one? and why the Town of Newbery was quitted before the Enemy was marched away? as the pretence of not fighting was, because they would not quit Newbery. It seems it was first resolved by the Council of State, that Essex his Forces should not quit Newbery, or draw out into the Field, lest the King should take it for Winter-quarters; but when the King should retreat from the relief of Dennington, to fall upon his Rear: But no such matter was prosecuted; for the King possest himself of that Town, as a good covert and quarter for his Army, while the Parliaments Forces lay in the open Fields, who being by the Kings ap∣proach to them at Hungerford, and one thousand Horse sent under the same Co∣lonel Gage from thence, hastily dislodged also from the Siege of Basing, (where Manchester and his whole Army had shewed themselves onely) departed to their Winter-quarters in Reading, Henly, Abington, and Farnham; and the King's to Basing, Odiam, Newbery, Blewbury and Marlborough. Whilst they thus are lodged in their quarters, there will be respite to look upon the Counsels and debates of the Parliament, and the consultations of the King, and the debates likewise in his Court and Parliament at Oxford. Manchester and Cromwel disser.And first, the Earl of Manchester made his relation concerning the manage∣ment of the business at Dennington-castle of great length in Writing, which was in the nature of a Charge against his Lieutenant-General Cromwel, who had fought so Fortunately for the Parliament: He thereupon made answer to seve∣ral particulars therein mentioned, and pleaded first, point of Priviledge, because of the transmitting of that business from the Lords, before any Charge was brought into the House of Commons. This private Quarrel was presently qua∣shed, but the Publike disgusts were not so soon laid. For the Independent Faction began now to appear, and to be powerful in the House of Commons; so that a suspicion was raised and somented by them, that the Earl of Essex was more Royal than the Parliament ever intended, when they gave him his Commission. Upon this pretence, and after several discourses,
it came at last to a debate,The Parliament resolve to new model their Army. wherein it was resolved to new model their Army, and so by degrees to quit themselves of their General, and to bethink of a new one, that should not be of that dangerous greatness and honour, who might not well be disputed with; but to chuse one of a middle Estate betwixt the Peers and the People; and so to be at last rid of all the Lords: which afterwards they brought to pass. To this end they began with a subtle Order,They Order that no Member shall bear command in either Mili∣tary or Civil affairs. That no Member of either House shall during this War, enjoy and execute any Office or Command military or civil, which hath been granted or conferred on any Member of either House, or by any Au∣thority derived from either House. The Reasons published for this Order, were these fine ones. That all Commissions to Parliament-men being void, the new modeling the Army may be carried on with the less exception, when all are concern∣ed alike; That Military differences among the great Commanders being Parliament-men which might retard the work, will hereby cease; Those that shall be new ele∣cted Officers being of lesser quality and sooner subject to question and punishment, and the Army also maintained at a lesser charge. Forty days were limited from this Order, by which all such Commissions and Commands were in the Army declared void; with a resolution nevertheless expressed, to pay off their Arrears; which was meanly performed, and at the same rate that the Earl of Essex had the Ten thousand pounds a year assigned him (for the good service he had done the State) out of the Lands of the Lord Capel (whose Heirs now have his Honour) and other Delinquents, pun∣ctually paid him. This Ordinance for new modelling the Army met notwithstanding with great opposition;The Ordinance for the new mo∣deling the Army Decemb. 31. and as much (after it was received into the House) of alte∣ration: The Lords being instructed to soresee the evil consequences; nor would they plenarily consent, before the old trick of Petitions from City and Country compelled them to pass it. The Title whereof was, An Ordinance for the raising and maintaining of Forces for the defence of the Kingdom,Sir Thomas Fairfax made General. under the comand of Sir Thomas Fairfax. He thereupon is sent for, and privately comes out of the North; and on the nineteenth of February, was brought by four Members into the House of Commons, where a Chair was set, and he desired to sit therein; the Speaker telling him of the great confidence and trust the Kingdom had put upon him in the Command of this Army (from a sence of his Valour and Fidelity) for the defence of the Laws and Religion. While this Army was a modelling, many disorders happened, which retarded their settlement: it was to consist of fourteen thousand Foot, and seven thou∣sand Horse and Dragoons effective; so that the Spring was well advanced, before they were in any readiness.The stots ad∣vance South∣ward. Therefore the Scots Army was intreated to advance South-ward with all speed, to assist the Parliament in the mean time. It is to be noted,The first Address, contrived by Oliver Crom∣wel. that the first contrivance of Addresses was from Oliver Crom∣wel, who having by this Model (and by a Salvo to him from the injunction of the Ordinance) the Regiment of Colonel Leg, (which had been in some mut∣tering and discontent against the Parliament) conferred on him, did, as soon as he had Mustered them, present a Paper to them, wherein they professed their future adherence to the Parliament in all duty and affection, as to the utmost ha∣zard of their lives: which Precedent and leading Case was followed throughout the Army, and since throughout the Times. The Scots (we said before) were sent for to march more Southward,The Scots t Newcastle. having left all things secure behind them, save Carlisle, which was then Besieged; for Newcastle they had taken, of which we must speak a little. They had layn a long while for many months a close and desperate Siege to it, where several Sallies and Skirmishes had happened, it proving one of the hardest resolutest
Sieges in the Kingdom; all sorts of policy, of peace and war, by Treaty, by Mines, by Assaults, having been frequently used, but to little purpose; the Inha∣bitants resolving never, if possible, to fall into the Scots hands. But on Saturday the nineteenth of October, all the Scotch Army furiously set upon the Town: and having weakened the defences thereof, both as to the Fortifications and the Garrison, having made three breaches by their Battery and Mines, after a tedious Storm they at last mastered it. Sir Iohn Morley and Sir Nicolas Cole, and Sir George Baker, got to the Castle, where being forced by necessity, they came to a Capitulation, which in Articles concluded a surren∣der on the twenty seventh of the same month. The town being taken by assault, was plundered sufficiently over and over again;Plunder it. and thanks was given solemn∣ly at London,Som thanks at London for their success. for the giving of Newcastle up to their Brethren of Scotland. And very great reason they had to do so; for the poorer sort of people had been almost starved for the last two years, for want of fuel; Coles having risen to the price of four pound a Chaldron, never heard of before in London, as to the half of it. Sir Iohn Hotham and his son had been prisoners in the Tower of London since Iuly 1643. Now upon the new Model, several of the old strains were heard, as every Change began with Outcryes: the noyse was justice now against Delinquents; the Sword had glutted it self almost with blood, now the Ax was to tast some of it: but because of order, it is fit to put Sir Alexander Carew in the forlorn of those men,Sir Alexan∣der Carew beheaed, f endavouring to betray Ply∣mouth-Fort to the King. who on the three and twentieth of December was be∣headed on Tower-Hill, being condemned by a Council of War held at Guild-hall, for endeavouring to betray Plymouth-Fort, where he was Commander, to the King. This unfortunate person, of whom something strange as to the busi∣ness of the Earl of Strafford hath been said before, was brother to the more mise∣rable Iohn Carew, one of the Judges of his late Majesty. On the twenty seventh of December Sir Iohn Hotham received sentence in like manner, for his endeavour to betray Hull to the King, and for holding and main∣taining correspondence and intelligence with the Marquess of Newcastle and others: the Earl of Manchester, and other great persons, sitting in the Hustings Court at Guild-hall as Judges. He would have evaded the Charge▪ but he could not throughly do it, and so mainly insisted on the great service he had done before at Hull, when he might have expected great honour and preferment. He also produced some witnesses of quality, on purpose to take off the testimo∣ny of the Examinants against him; but they were not received for suffici∣ent. Sir John Ho∣tham and his son executed Jan. 1, 2. for endeavouring to betray Hull, and holding corre∣spondence with the Marquess of Newcastle.His Excecution should have been on the thirty first of December upon Tower-hill, where the multitude was assembled, the Scaffold, his Cofin and Executio∣ner was in readiness; but as he was on his way thither, a Reprieve came from the Lords for four days longer; which the Commons so stomacked, that conceiving their Priviledge hereby invaded, they ordered he should dye on the second of Ianuary; which was accordingly performed, (his son suffered the day before for the same offence; and both of them) dying with great reluctan∣cy, and reflecting upon the Parliament; being assisted in this sad business with no better comforter than Hugh Peters.Hugh Peters accompanieth them at their deaths. In their grave we leave them, with that most excellent memorial of them in the Kings book, than which nothing can be more truely or pathetically said of them; give me leave, for an example to posterity, to transcribe a Paragraph. The Kings ob∣servations of them in his Me∣itations.Nor did a solitary vengeance serve the turn; the cutting off one head in a family is not enough to expiate the affront done to the head of the Common-weal; the eldest son must be involved in the punishment, as he was infected with the sin of his father, against the father of his Country; Root and Branch, God cuts off in one day.
That which makes me more pitie him, is, that after he began to have some inclinations towards a repentance for his sin, and repara∣tion of his duty to me, he should be so unhappie as to fall into the hands of their Iustice, and not my Mercie, who could as willingly have forgiven him, as he could have asked that favour of me. Poor Gentleman! he is now become a notable Monument of un∣prosperous Disloyaltie; teaching the world by so sad and unfortunate a spectacle, that the rude carriage of a Subject carries always its own Vengeance as an unseparable shadow with it; and those oft prove the most fatal and implacable Executioners of it, who were the first em∣ployers in the service. Less than this could not be afforded to this most notable passage of the times, whose ill beginning with this man brought him to this ill and unfortunate end. The Assembly of Divines Convocated by the Parliament had sate a good while in consultation of Church-Government;The Assembly of Divines consult about Church-Government. and though they were forward enough to subvert what they sound standing, yet by the interposition of more moderate and learned Divines, who happened to be chosen among the rest, such as Dr. Featly, (whom at last the Parliament stifled in restraint) and Dr. (after Bishop) Gauden, and others, that speed was retarded: but upon this request of the Parliament to the Scots for their speedy advance, in exchange of mutual kindness, they demanded the speedy settlement of the Presbyterian Government, and that the Orders and Ceremonies of the Church of England might not be used, in the interim, in any of the Churches of the places where they should happen to quarter. Presently upon the receipt of this Letter, the Assembly was ordered to bring in their Model of Church-Government; and those Re∣solves were urged afterwards by many hundred Petitions,The Covenat prest to be uni∣versally tak. and the Covenant prest to be universally taken. Towards the end of this month, they had licked up the form of their Directory, but could not agree about the receiving of the Sacrament; which dispute was then committed. Hereupon the Parliament proceded, and voted the abolishing of the Com∣mon-Prayer-Book;The Commn-Prayer aboli∣shed. which gave some satisfaction to the Scots, yet not fully contended them: they had in the beginning of our Troubles openly named the Archbishop of Canterbury, and prosecuted him as an Enemy to their Country, as the great Incendiary of the broyls between both Nations, and did not desist while they had him safe in the Tower; now they would have his life also as a gratification of their assistance: His head must be danced off, like St. Iohn Baptist's, at the Musick of their Bag-pipes. This they publikely demanded; so that an Ordinance (for the Parliament durst not venture his Tryal at the Common-Law, as was thought by some, because of the clause of that Bill of Attainder against the Earl of Strafford, that his Case should be no precedent; and they knew the Judges (though they might pack a Jury that should) would never venture to condemn him: And his tryal by Peers they vouchsafed not, as alike dangerous) passed the House of Commons, whereby he was de∣clared guilty; and that sent up to the Lords for their concurrence, who bogled at it,Sir David Hawkins a zealous stickler for the Parlia∣ment. as a very ill precedent; so that it stuck for a while, until Sir David Hawkins with his veterane Troops of Justice-cryers came, bawled at the Lords House for speedy Execution of Delinquents: And then a new Expedient was set on foot for the better dispatch, that the Lords should come and sit in the House of Commons as to this business, and make one work of it; which some of them unworthily did: an ill Omen or Presage, what that degenerateness would come to, when after some of the same persons sate there as Commoners. By this trick, after several brave Defences made at the Bar of the Lords House, where with might and main his Enemies prosecuted his Innocence, he was condemned; (the main Argument against him being used by Serjeant
Wild, That he was so guilty an offender, that he wondred the people did not pull him in pieces as he came to and fro to his tryal,) and on the tenth of Ianuary brought to Tower-hill, from a most sound and sweet repose that night, till awakened by Pennington the Lieutenant of the Tower,Archbishop of Canterbury bheadd. to go to his Execu∣tion, whereat he was no whit dismayed, his colour being as fresh in his Face as ever it was in his life; which continued to his last minute. At his death he made a Funeral-sermon for himself, which was in lieu of a Speech, where this is (as he hinted it) to be observed,Vide Speechs. that though other Arch-bishops had lost their lives in this manner, yet not the same way: He being the first En∣glish-man that ever was condemned by an Ordinance of Parliament. His body was decently interred in Alhallows Barkin, London, according to the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England,Buried at Al∣hallows Bark∣ing, London. of which he had been the chief Defender and Assertor; leaving Sir Iohn Robinson his Nephew, (since Lieu∣tenant of the Tower) to inherit the remains of his Estate, and the rewards of his great Services and Munificences to this Church and Kingdom. Abington had been made a Garrison ever since the Earl of Essex marched into Cornwal; and became so troublesome a neighbour to Oxford, and the Country adjacent, by the continual excursions of the Horse, which were never less than a Regiment, that Colonel Sir Henry Gage (to prevent this perpetual annoyance,Sir Henry Gage Cl. for the King, shot neer Abing∣don. no man daring to travail upon any of the Roads towards Oxford with provi∣sions or other business, more especially hindering the intercourse betwixt Oxford and Wallingford) resolved to build a Fort at Culham-bridge, within a mile of Abington, on the London-road, to repress the boldness of those parties, who were constantly out thereabouts upon designes. In the attempt thereof, and to obstruct so dangerous an obstacle to their Eruption, the Abingdon-forces under Colonel Brown Sally out, Engage, and maintain a short fight with the Royalists, with little hopes of prevailing, till an Unfortunate shot wounded Colonel Gage in the head, of which he dyed as soon as he came to Oxford; and so that project was laid aside. The King had so closely prosecuted his intentions for Peace, that it being in the depth of Winter, both Armies in their quarters, and the two Factions of Presbytery and Independency jealous of one another, the modelling of the Army requiring also some gain and advantage of time; a Treaty, so often pro∣posed by the King, was now admitted to be managed at Vxbridge,Uxbridge-Traty, Jan. 3. by Commis∣sioners on both sides. The Kings Commissioners were as Follow: Commissioners for the King at the Treaty at Uxbridge.Duke of Richmond and Lenox, Marquess of Hertford, Earl of Southampton, Earl of Kingston, Earl of Chichester, Lord Capel, Lord Seymore, Lord Hatton, Lord Culpeper, Sir Edward Nicholas, Sir Edward Hide, after∣wards Lord Chancel∣lor. Sir Richard Lane, Sir Thomas Gardiner, Sir Orlando Bridgeman, Mr. Iohn Ashburnham, Mr. Ieffery Palmer, Dr. Stuart, and Dr. Hammond, Divines. The Parliaments Commissioners were, Earl of Northumberland, Commissioners for the Parlia∣ment.Earl of Pembroke, Earl of Salisbury, Earl of Denbigh, Lord Wenman, Mr. Denzil Hollis, Mr. William Pierpoint, Sir Henry Vane, Jun. Mr. Crew, Mr. Whitlock, Mr. Prideaux, Mr. Vines a Minister. The Scotch Commissioners. Scotch Commis∣sioners.Lord London, Sir Charles Erskin, Mr. Dundas, Mr. Brackley, Mr. Alexander Hender∣son, Minister.
The main things first to be treated of,The main things to be treated of were, Religon, Militia, and Ireland. were, first Religion; second, Militia, third, Ireland. For Religion, the King would not alter Government by Bishops, but would give way to some amendments in the Liturgie upon advice. For the Militia, he would consent some Forts and Garrisons should remain in the Parliaments hands pro tempore,The King refu∣seth to alter Religion by Bi∣shops, but would admit of some amend∣ments in the Liturgie. for security of the agreement; the King hav∣ing the nomination of half the Commissioners. For Ireland, the King would not abrogate the Cessation, until he were sure the Rebellion here were at an end; having, to avoid that popular demand, and to prevent any insisting upon that point, given Order to the Marquess of Ormond to conclude a Peace, but however to continue the Cessation for a year; for which he should promise the Irish,He is willing some Garrisons should be in the Parliaments hands pro tempore, but will not abro∣gate the Cessa∣tion in Ire∣land. if he could have it no cheaper, to joyn with them against the Scots and Inchiqueen: for by that time, the King said he hoped his condition would be such, as the Irish should be glad to accept of less, or he enabled to grant more. The Parliament on the contrary side, insisted, as to Religion, upon the ta∣king away of the Kings Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, his Donations and Temporal∣ties of Bishopricks, his First-fruits and Tenths of Bishops, Deans, Deans and Chapters; not offering to constitute the least dependance of the Clergy upon the King, to the Presbyterian mode; compensating him with Bishops Lands, in lieu of all those; which of themselves, if dissov'd, belong unto the Crown. For Ireland, the King should annul the Cessation, and leave the management of that Kingdome to the Scots. And for the Militia, that it should be mana∣ged altogether by such Commissioners as they should appoint; so that the King should not have the least power of his own to assist his Neighbours and Allies, or defend himself at home. They had also so obstructed any hopes of a conclusion, by limiting the time of the Treaty to twenty days, and trying up the Commissioners with such limi∣tations, that the good effect thereof was despaired at the entrance into it. Much perswasion was used by the Kings side, to the Parliaments Commissio∣ners, that they would gain longer time, and that the Treaty might be revived; but all to no purpose. And to this matter, notable is that of one Mr. Love,Mr. Love a strange Incen∣diary. who by some private means or other was admitted to Preach before the said Commissioners there; where he said, It was as possible for Heaven and Hell, as the King and Parliament to agree; strange words to be uttered in such a juncture, and in such a place, and before such an Assembly! but the end of that man shewed him the folly and wickedness of that expression. So after two and twenty dayes Conference, the Treaty ended in vain.The Treaty en∣ded in vain. The Kings Commissioners complained of this Love; but answer was made, he was none of their train, but the Parliament should be informed of him, who would do justice upon him; but the business was husht. In the interim, the Lord Macguire,The Lord Mac¦guire and Col. Mac Mahon hanged drawn and quartered. and one Colonel Mac Mahon, who were, as was said before, seized in Dublin the night of the breaking forth of the Rebellion in Ireland, and had been Prisoners in the Tower ever since, and some while before broke out from thence, and wading over the Moat escaped away, being found in Drury-Lane London, at a private house, were brought to the Kings-Bench-Bar, (though Macguire pleaded his Priviledge of Peerage, and insisted peremptorily on it, while over-ruled by the Court and Parliament together) and there after a Tryal, both sentenced for their Treason, to be hang'd, drawn and quartered; which they underwent with a great deal of stoutness, and their way of Piety; clearing the King from any privity to that Rebellion. Shrewsbury,Shrewsbury taken by Ma∣jor-General Mitton for the Parliament. a most important and strong Garrison for the King, was by some treachery not yet brought to light, betrayed just at the conclusion of the Treaty aforesaid to Major General Mitton for the Parliament: It seems the Parliament rather tampered under-hand, than dealt fair above-board, and openly, during the time thereof. For this good service, the said Major-Ge∣neral Mitton, being a Member of the House of Commons, at his coming thither,
had the thanks of the same given him by Mr. Speaker.He hath the thanks of the House. Abundance of Per∣sons of Quality were surprized in this place, as thinking it one of the securest Retreats in these parts; the List of whom I find after this sort: Eight Knights and Baronets, forty Colonels, Majors, and Captains; 200 private Souldiers; some few slain.The Parliament takes Scarbo∣rough and Weymouth, they raise Ply∣mouth Siege. Ponfract-castle relieved by Sir Marmaduke Langdale: he routs the Parl. Forces under Col. Rossiter. About this time also Scarborough and Weymouth were taken for the Parliament, and Plymouth-Siege for a while raised, and a day of Thanksgiving therefore set apart. Sir Marmaduke Langdale, an eminent man for the King in the North, was sent from Oxford to relieve Ponfract-Castle in York-shire, Besieged by the Forces of the Lord Fairfax: This Expedition he so prudently and valiantly underwent, that in his way thither he routed Colonel Rossiter, who opposed him at Melton-Mowbray, and passed forward; and with resolution, though twice inferiour in number, so charged the Besiegers, that after a sharp conflict he beat them from the Siege, and having relieved the Castle, departed back again to the assistance of the King, then threatned with a fresh and potent Army from London. For the Earls of Essex, Manchester and Denbigh had resigned their Commis∣sions in the House of Peers,Essex, Man∣chester, and Denbigh re∣signe their Com∣missions. few of their Officers also continuing in their ser∣vice; for whom the General Essex in a Speech, when he laid down his said Com∣mission, desired that the Parliament would take care of their Debentures: which they abundantly promised, but performed thinly, leaving them the un∣satisfied name of Reformado's. Their General himself having lost the op∣portunity of Blessing the Kingdom with a Peace when it lay in his power, to which he was courted by the King a while before at Lestithiel, seeing how the Pulse of the times beat, and what Counsels were likely to prevail, withdrew himself in a Discontent to Eltham-House in Kent, where not long after he de∣ceased, as in due time shall be declared. At that same time that Shrewsbury was thus surprised, the Kings Forces had a Success,A notable suc∣cess at the De∣vises, under Sir Jacob Ashley. for the handsomness, though not for the consequence of it, very No∣table. The Kings Forces had Garrisoned a repayred Castle at the Devises, and Colonel Devereux had a Garrison at Roudon-House between Malmsbury and that; which therefore for its inconvenience was Besieged. Colonel Stephens of Glocester-shire came to its Relief with 200 Horse, and as many Foot from Malms∣bury, and forced his passage with provision into the House. While he stayed to take further order for the security of the place, the Royalists surround the House again, cast up a Work where he entred, and keep him in; and Sir Iacob Ashley comes to second the Siege with 3000 men. Massey understanding this, did what he could to draw off Sir Iacob, by facing Cyrencester, and sending a Party of Horse from Glocester, which were to joyn with a like number from Malmsbury again; but all in vain: the besieged were compelled at last to render themselves upon very hard terms and conditions. About this time there was a kind of Faction in the Kings Court at Oxford, and some altercations betwixt the parties concerning the Kings Council;A Faction at Oxford; the Lords, Savil, Percy, and Andover, con∣fined. so that some Lords, Savil, Percy, and Andover, were confined; and the Parliament, that this, the Members of the same Houses at Westminster who adhered to the King, who by the Kings Order were the year before convened at Oxford, were for some Reasons and Discontents arisen about the Army,The Parliament Adjourned. Adjourned till the 10 of October. But that Parliament signified nothing. The House of Commons Voted, that in their new Generals Commission, the words,The Parlia∣ment's new Ge∣nerals Commis∣sion. For preservation of his Majesties Person, should be left out; and accord∣ingly they were so. And so ended the year 1644. the last of the Kings Feli∣city.
Anno Dom. 1645. WE will begin this year, though we post-date the time, that we may recite all the exploits in Scotland,The Actions of the Renowned Marquess of Montross. together with the actions of the renowned and ever-glorious Marquess of Montross, appointed Governour of that Kingdom. The year before, he came into Scotland, attended onely by two, Mr. William Rollock, and Mr. Sibbalds, in whose company he came at last to his Cousin Mr. Patrick Graham in the Sheriffdom of Perth, with whom he staid a while disguised, till he had sent to discover the State of the Kingdom. He had all along given the King information of the Scots Rebellions, and siding with the Parliament; but Hamilton was over-trusted. Much ado he had to pass, the ways being so strictly guarded, while the Scotch Army was in England. At his arrival in the Highlands,He arrives in the Highlands of Scotland. being supplyed with 1100 men from the Mar∣quess of Antrim out of Ireland, and another addition under the Lord Kilpont, and the Earl of Perths Son, he marched to find out the Army of Covenanters, then gathered under the command of Tullybarn,He fights the Covenanters, and obtains a great Victory at Tepper-Moor. the Lord Elch, and Drummond, consisting of a great Force, into Perth-shire, where at Tepper-Moor he obtained a great Victory; his Souldiers, for want of Arms and Ammunition, making use of the Stones lying advantagiously on the Fighting-ground. Here he killed no less then 2000 men; whereupon Perth-City opened its Gates to the Con∣querour. To withstand and repress so dangerous an Enemy within the Bowels of the Kingdom, another Army was raised, and put under more Experienced Captains. In the mean while, Montross had fallen into Argyles Country,H makes great spoils in Ar∣gyles Country, Who with the E. of Seaforth, mach against him with two several Armies. where he made miserable havock, intending utterly to break the Spirits of that people, who were so surely Engaged to Arguiles side. Here the Earl of Seaforth followed him with an Army, and the Marquess of Argyle had another of the other side. Montross therefore resolved to fight with one first; and so fell upon that party under Argyle; which he totally routed, killed 1500 on the place, the rest escaped; and so the Marquess of Montross bent his way after the other Army, which he defeated at Brechin,He routs Ar∣gyle, defeats Col. Hurry at Brechin, after∣wards at Al∣derne, and ob∣tains a re∣markable Vi∣ctory at Ales∣ford-hills. being newly put under the command of Colonel Hurry; afterwards offers Battel to Bayly, who had another Army ready to fight him; but he waited for advantages: whereupon he marches after Hurry, who had recruited, and was pressing upon the Lord Gourdon (having taken Dundee in his way) and at Alderne discomfits him, killing 1800, and dispersing the rest. He seeks out Bayly, to whom was joyned the Earl of Lindsey; and at Ales∣ford-hills forced them to fight, utterly routed them, and obtained a remarkable Victory: But that which lessened the Triumph, was the death of the Lord Gourdon,Lord Gourd∣ons death. one that was as the right hand of Montross. A very Loyal Right Noble Gentleman,Marquess of Montross af∣frights the Par∣liament at St. Johnstons. being Eldest Son to the Marquess of Huntley. After this, he comes to St. Iohnstons, where he alarm'd the Parliament there sitting; and so into the Lowlands, where the Kirk had another Army in readiness, under the command of the aforesaid Bayly. At a place called Kilsith,His famous Vi∣ctory at Kil∣sith. both Armies met; and a cruel Battel it was; but in conclusion, Success and Victory Crowned Montross's Head, and almost 6000 of his Enemies were slain in this fight, the pursuit being eagerly followed for a great way; the Covenanters at first fighting very resolutely; but the fortune of Montross still Prevailed.David Lesley routed. The Nobility now every where readily assisted him, and the Towns and Cities declared for him;The Nbility & Gentry assist him. so that the Kingdom, which afford∣ed men and assistance for the Invasion of another Kingdom, was not now able to defend it self; the Governour (so was Montross dignified) being seized of all places almost of strength, even as far as Edinburgh, where some Royal pri∣soners were delivered to him. The Estates of Scotland therefore sent for David Lesley, while Montross expected Forces from the King under the Lord Digby;
which staid too long, and were afterwards defeated at Sherburn in York-shire. Upon the arrival of Lesley, most of the Forces under Montross, not dreading any Enemie so soon out of England, were departed home; so that Lesley finding Montross in a very weak condition at Philips-Haugh, fell upon him before he could retreat, almost before his Scouts could give him intelligence, and there routs him. He at first resolved to lose his life with the field; but being per∣swaded of better hopes, he resolutely charged thorow, and brought the flying remains of his Army safe into the High-lands, where he began new Levies: But the fortune of the King failing every where, he was the next year ordered by the King,The King orders Montross to disband. then in the Scots custody, to disband, and depart the Kingdom. And so we leave him till a more unhappy revolution of time. In the beginning of this year Colonel Massey received a defeat at Lidbury, the manner thus: Prince Rupert,Colonel Massey defeated at Lidbury by Prince Rupert. who had for some time quartered thereabouts to make new Levies, had intercepted some Scouts, and by them understood the Col. had taken up his quarters there, intending to fall upon Sir Iohn Winter, who had been his restless adversary throughout the War in Gloucester-shire, and who being called into the Army, had tired his house, which he had main∣tained as a Garison against all opposition: When the Prince was within half a mile of the Town, Massey took the Alarm, commanded his Horse to mount, and gave order for his Foot to march, that the Royalists might not get before them, which the Prince aimed at. A furious Charge the said Horse maintained, consisting principally of Officers, among whom was Kirl that betrayed Mon∣mouth: at last Massey was forced to flye, narrowly escaping taking, Major Backhouse his great second being mortally wounded,He is forced to flye, and nar∣rowly escapes. with divers others, and some common Souldiers taken Prisoners, the rest fled to Gloucester in haste with the Governour. But that which deservedly ought to begin the year, was the investiture of Sir Thomas Fairfax in the supreme Command of the Army:Sir Thomas Fairfax takes command of the Army. It was the first of April when he received his Commission, and on the twenty third of April he went from London to Windsor to perfect the new Model; where he continued in that troublesome affair to the end of the month. In the mean time Colonel Cromwel (who had been commanded out of the West, by the Ordinance of the Parliament against Members continuance in any Military command, whose limitations of forty days was then expired) came thither to salute the General, and next morning was stopped there with a dispensation from his attendance on the House for forty days longer (which was extended to the length.) For Prince Rupert and his brother Maurice had gathered a compe∣tent Army of Horse in Worcester-shire,Prince Rupert and Prince Maurice raise Horse in Wor∣cester-shire. and the confines of Wales, and were ordered by the King to come and fetch him off with his Infantry and Train of Artillery from Oxford. To which purpose a Convoy of Horse was presently dispatched, consisting of near 2000, being the Regiments of the Queen, the Earl of Northampton, the Lord Wilmot, and Colonel Palmer; while the Prin∣ces advanced in a body after them. Upon advertisement thereof, the Com∣mittee of both Kingdoms recommended it to the General, to send Lieute∣nant-General Cromwel with some Horse to march beyond Oxford, and lye on the way to Worcester, to intercept the same Convoy.Cromwel sent to intercept the Kings Forces, routs them. With a party of Horse and Dragoons therefore then on the field, neither mustered nor recruited, as of the new Model, Cromwel immediately marched, found the enemy, and engaged them neer Islip-bridge, routed them, took 400 Horse, and 200 Priso∣ners, and the Qeens Standard.The Queens Standard ta∣ken. He summons Blechington house; the Governour Col. Winde∣bank delivers it. And to make up this a kind of a victory, presently summoned Blechington-house within four miles of Oxford, where Co∣lonel Windebank commanded, and whither some of these routed Troops had fled for shelter. At his approach, he instantly summoned it in a very threat∣ning Message, if he rendred it not immediately, (his Horse casting out words for the Foot to fall on, when there was none there.) The governour over-ruled by his fair young Bride, and some Ladies that were come thither to visit, and frighted with the menace, delivered the House, with all the Arms and Amu∣nition
therein. For which, the hopeful young Gentleman, for all the prayers and intreaties of his Wife,And was there∣fore shot to death. and the merit of his Father, was shot to death against Merton-Colledge-Wall in Oxford; to the great regret afterwards of the King, when he understood the business, and for which he was highly displea∣sed with Prince Rupert. After the taking of this Blechingdon-House, Cromwel sent the Prisoners away to Alisbury, and slighted that Garrison; and having intelligence of a party of 350 Foot under Sir William Vaughan, who were marching that way towards Radcot-bridge,Cromwel takes Sir Wil∣liam Vaughan at Radcot-bridge. he pursued them, and took the said Sir William, Lieutenant-Co∣lonel Littleton, and about 200 more Prisoners. His next attempt was upon Farringdon, having borrowed 600 Foot from Abingdon, of Major-General Brown; here he lost some 50 men withont any success, and so gave over the design; but before he could get off, was attaqued by part of General Gorings Horse, commanded by himself, then newly come out of the West from Taunton-siege; who by his valour so ordered his busi∣ness, that he gave Cromwel the first brush he received,Goring gives Cromwel his first brush. taking Major Bethel Pri∣soner, and three Colours; and then retreated to Letchlade, in order to his re∣turn to strengthen and renew the siege against the aforesaid Town of Taun∣ton. The new modeled Army on the first of May began to march,The new model∣ed Army march to Blandford in Dorset-shire: take Lieutenant-Col. Hacket. after a de∣bate whether it should march Westward to the relief of Taunton, or to besiege Oxford. The first designment was followed; and so on the 7 of May, from Windsor, General Fairfax reached Blandford in Dorset-shire, whither he march∣ed without any opposition, save a little skirmish betwixt some of his Troops and one Lieutenant-Colonel Hacket, whom they took Prisoner. The King taking this opportunity of the Armies marching Westward,The King leav∣ing Oxford, takes the field. drew his Forces and Artillery out of Oxford into the field: Which the General fore∣seeing, had left Cromwel and Major-General Brown to attend his motions; but they being not of strength sufficient to impede his Marches, or Conjuncture with Prince Rupert, who advanced out of Hereford-shire and Worcester-shire, Fairfax was recalled out of the West,Fairfax recal∣led from the West, but leaves part of his Ar∣my there. and ordered by the Committee of both Kingdomes to allot onely a portion of his Army for Taunton; which was a Brigade consisting of four Regiments, the Supreme Command whereof was given unto the eldest Colonel Welden. Upon approach of those Forces, the Roy∣alists thinking it had been the whole Army, (for Fairfax made such semblance, marching as far as Dorchester with the said relief) drew off, and gave them the liberty of entrance the fourteenth of May, where they were welcomed by the resolute Governour, afterwards General Blake, a man more famous in the Times succeeding. General Fairfax on the 14 of May likewise arrived at Newbery, where two days he rested his wearied Foot, and there again received new Orders to lay Siege to Oxford;Oxford besieg∣ed the second time. and Cromwel and Brown were recalled from following the King, to joyn with the General in that Enterprise: Nevertheless a party of 2500 Horse and Dragoons under Colonel Vermuden (Cromwel not being so acceptable to that Nation) were sent to joyn with the Scots in their march Southwards. Fifteen days the Parliaments Army lay before the City, while the King was at liberty, and irresistable in the Field. Fairfax despairing of reducing the Town, never sent in a Summons; thereby intending to save the first reputation of the Army, when it should rise from thence without it. Nothing occurred of any remark, during this Siege, but that a Bridge was laid over the River for a Communica∣tion, and a resolute Sally made by the Garrison upon a Corps du Gard neer Hed∣dington-hill, which they surprized, killed twelve, and took the rest, which made up 100 Prisoners, who were Exchanged for the like number which the Adju∣tant-General Fleming took neer Newnham, under the command of Captain Gar∣diner, who had been sent Prisoners to Abingdon,A cruel custome at Abingdon, where a cruel custom had been practised of hanging all the Irish without any manner of Tryal; under which notion, very many English also suffered: A barbarity so common, that it grew
into the Proverb of Abingdon-Law.Borstal-house besieged. Gaunt-house surrendred. Borstal-house was likewise besieged by Skippon, whither the General went himself, but to no purpose. Gaunt-house being battered by Colonel Raynsborough, and a breach made after a resolute an∣swer, was glad to abate from its stubbornness, and take Conditions upon quarter from the Enemy. But while General Fairfax trifled at Oxford, news came that the King having relieved Chester,Chester di∣stressed; Relieved by the King. distressed by Sir William Brereton and the Neighbouring County-forces, was now marching towards Leicester, and the Association; the Scots Army, instead of advancing against the King, being gone more Northward towards Westmerland, their own affairs at home so requiring: And also that General Goring,Goring, Hop∣ton, and Greenvile joyn, and be∣siege Taunton. Leicester Stormed and taken by Prince Rupert, May 21. Sir Ralph Hopton, and Sir Richard Greenvile, had joyned all their Forces against Colonel Weldens Brigade, in a manner besieging them, and the Town of Taunton together. And that which brought up the Rear of these intelligences was worst of all, that the King had taken Leicester by Storm, the manner thus. After Prince Rupert had summoned it, wherein he offered quarter to the Town, the Committee of that County then resident there, assembled all the Com∣manders, and read the Summons unto them; by whom it was resolved to give answer next morning. The Trumphet was no sooner returned, but a Drum was presently dispatcht for a full answer within an hour; which while they debated beyond their stint, the Kings Guns played from the Battery, and all Souldiers were commanded to their respective Posts; the great and small Shot never in∣termitting that day and night; when next morning they Stormed at six or seven places. At Newark-breach they entered first, where Colonel St. George was slain with a great shot, in a Bravery and Gallantry of Courage, venturing upon the mouth of the Cannon. The Works being seized, there yet remained a Work of greater Bloudshed, the Market-place, where the Defendants had drawn up their Artillery, and for three hours space maintained the fight at the Cross there∣in. They were at last over-powered; the Committee-men, with Sir Robert Pye,He takes Sir Robert Pye: the Town is plundered. Colonel Hacker, and Colonel Grey, taken Prisoners, and put into custody; onely Sir Robert had some more respect shewed him. The Town was plun∣dered, and some of the Inhabitants for the present secured; the spoil part of it carried away to the Kings adjacent Garrison of Newark, Ashby-Delazouch and Belvoyr-Castle: But the Parliament-forces found very neer as good Booty in those sudden spoils that came from Naseby. All men upon this Success looked upon the Kings Army as far the more puissant.The Parliament almost driven to despair. Great Fears and Distrusts were arisen in the Parliament it self, not much different from despair; several Members being over-heard to say in their passage to the House out of Westminster-hall, that there was no hopes but in the Kings mercy, and that the speediest recourse thereto would be the safest Expedi∣ent for them. And the Royal party were as good as Cocksure (as we say) that the day was their own; which they made appear, even in London, by all publike signes and discourses.The King and Royalists too confident of Success. The King himself deceived also with this Lightning be∣fore his Ruine, which he construed for the greatest Sunshine of his Felicity, was of the same Opinion; the result whereof appeared in a Letter written to the Queen, Iune the 8th, where he used this Expression. I may without being too sanguine affirm, that since this Rebellion, my affairs were never in so hopeful a∣way. But behold the inconstancy and fate of War! This his greatest Exalta∣tion, proved his utter Crushing and Final overthrow, in the approaching En∣counter at Naseby. For the Parliament being alarm'd with this imminent danger, gave speedy command to Sir Thomas Fairfax to rise from Oxford,Sir Thomas Fairfax order∣ed to give the King-Battel. and march after the King, and put their disperate condition to the decision of a Battel: For they were now upon a ticklish Point; and Treachery and Division at Home, with the Kings growing Success, would no doubt improve to a publike desertion of the Grandees of the Faction; than which to them a Conquest could not be worse, if not advantagious, by linking and involving so many in the danger, that in the multitude of the offenders they might find shelter.
The King was now in dispute whether he should turn his Arms to raise Ox∣ford or Pomfret-siege,York-shire a long time har∣rased by the Scots. march Southward or Northward: The York-shire-men insisted on going homeward to their own Country, that had so long been harra∣sed by and under the Dominion of the Scots; of which opinion was Sir Mar∣maduke Langdale, and that in going thitherward probably Fairfax would rise and follow, where some notable advantages might be taken of him, so far di∣stanced from any place or succour of relief. Others were of opinion that the King should march into the Association,The unresolved which way to bend his Forces. and bending a little Westward, joyn with General Goring, who now again besieged Taunton with a gallant Army, and had worsted Colonel Welden, sent thither with succours as aforesaid; and then with his United Forces, which Fairfax would be in no case to resist, to march directly to London, and put an end to the War. While this Consultation was held,The Parliament order Fairfax to put their dif∣ferences to the decision of a Battel. Fairfax was ordered to rise from before Ox∣ford by the Committee of both Kingdoms, who startled with the loss of Leicester, resolved as before to put the business to an Issue by the fortune of a Battel, if the King would be brought to it. From Oxford the Army arose, intending to put themselves between the King and the Associated Counties, and fight him if he advanced; if not, to follow him with the same resolution. The 5th of Iune the Parliaments Army marched to Marsh-Gibeon,They march to Marsh-Gibe∣on. Major-Ge∣neral Brown Garisons Gaunt-house. The King at Daventry, and Northampton ten miles from Oxford; and Major-General Brown put a substantial Garrison into Gaunt-house, as a Curb and Bridle to the Oxonians; when news was brought them that the King was come to Daventry with an intent to raise the Siege. Iune the 6th, the Army marched to Brickhil, designing Stony-Stratford for the Head-quarter, but that intelligence came that the King had faced Northampton with some of his Horse, and it was thought dangerous to come so near him, before the Horse under Vermuden were returned out of Derbyshire, and joyned with them. Lieutenant-General Cromwel,Cromwel sent for by the Par∣liament to com∣mand their Horse. who had been sent with three Troops of Horse a little before to secure the Isle of Ely in case the King should make an irrupti∣on as was supposed, was now by a Letter from the General to the Parliament desired to return to the Army to command the Horse; and accordingly by their order he came back with 600 Horse of the Association: the General writ like∣wise to Sir Iohn Gell, Colonel Rossiter, and the respective Governours of War∣wick, Coventry, Northampton, and Nottingham, to send what Forces they could spare; and then came Colonel Vermuden with 2500 Horse and Dragoons. After this Conjunction, the Army marched within three miles of Northampton, where they were informed that the King was still about Daventry,The Kings Foot and Carriages quartered upon Burrough-hill. Quartering all his Foot and Carriages upon Burrough-hill, as if he intended to fight upon that ground if they should advance; but he stayed onely till 1200 Horse which he had sent to Oxford, as a Convoy of the Cattel out of Leicester and Northam∣pton-shire were returned. The Parliaments Army then came to Gilsborough,The Parlia∣ments Army at Gilsborough. within five miles of Bur∣rough hill; where, as their General was riding in the morning (having been stopt in the night, which was rainy and tempestuous, by a private Souldier for the Word, till the Captain of the Guard being sent for gave it him) about three a clock he discerned the Royalists to ride fast over the said hill, making fires in abundance, as if they were firing their Huts; which gave some cause to believe that they were about to march, as it presently appeared. About five in the morning, Iune 13, certain notice was given, that the Roy∣alists were drawn off from Burrough-hill, having stood in Arms all night, being amazed that the Parliaments Army were so neer; it having been spread abroad among them, that they were gone for security into the Association: So that the Convoy of Horse being come from Oxford,The Kings Ar∣my march to Pomfret. they speedily resolved to march to Pomfret, thinking that Sir Tho. Fairfax would not follow them; or if he did, they should fight him with more advantage. Hereupon the Parliaments Drums and Trumpets began to sound;Ireton with a strong party of Horse sent to fall upon his Flank. and a strong party of Horse was sent under Colonel Ireton to fall upon the flank of the Kings Army if he should see cause; and the main Body came that night to
Gilling; the Kings Head-Quarters being at Naseby,The Kings Head-quar∣ters at Naseby. Alarm'd by Ireton, he goes to Harbo∣rough, and un∣happily resolves to fight. which Ireton Alarm'd; so that the King not having notice of it till eleven a Clock at night, as he had little imagined the nearness of an Army, or that they durst bear up to him, much a∣mazed, left his own quarters at that unseasonable time, and for security went to Harborough, where Prince Rupert and the Van of the Army quartered; and as soon as he came thither, sent to call up his Nephew, resting himself in a Chair in a low room. In the mean time a Council of War was also presently sum∣moned, where it was resolved, that seeing there was no bringing off the Rear if they should march further for Leicester, but that the whole Army would be put in hazard, they should give the enemy battel, relying upon the valour of the In∣fantry, and in a bravery to march back and find him out. But this was more the Kings unhappy resolution, than his Commanders, who would have avoyded fighting till General Goring were joyned with them. Naseby-fight.On Saturday, Iune the 14, a day fatal to the King, the Parliamentarians ad∣vanced by three a clock in the morning to retard the Royalists March with their Horse.The Parliament forces Rendez∣vouz neer Naseby: they discover the Kings Horse neer Harbo∣rough. By five a clock they Rendezvouzed neer Naseby; and immediately great bodies of the Kings Horse were discerned on the top of the hill short of Har∣borough; which shewed that he intended not to draw away, but that he would come forward and engage them on the ground where they stood; which they presently took the best advantage of, possessing the edge of a hill, from which they afterwards retreated 100 paces, that the Kings Army, marching upon plain ground, might not well discern in what form their Battel was drawn, nor see any confusion therein. The King mis∣informed.The King being falsly informed that the Parliaments Army was drawing off in haste and flying to Northampton, marched on with the greater precipitancy, leaving many of his Ordnance behind him. The place of the fight was a large fallow-field on the Northwest-side of Naseby, flanked on the left with a hedge, which was lined with Dragoons, to prevent the annoying of the left flank of the Parliaments Army, that was drawn up in this posture: Leiutenant-General Cromwel commanded the right Wing of Horse,Cromwel commands the right Wing of the Parl. horse; Ireton the left: The Gen. and Skippon the main battel of Foot. Whaley routs Lang∣dale, who com∣manded part of the Kings left Wing. wherein were five Regiments, and the addition of Colonel Rossiters Troops, who was newly come when the fight began, and took his post there: Commissary-General Ireton commanded the left Wing of Horse and Dragoons; and the General and Major-General Skippon the main Battel of Foot. Both the Wings of Horse charged toge∣ther upon the King's, who were drawn in the same Order, and marched swift∣ly, but very regularly upon the Enemy. Colonel Whaley, being in the right Wing, charged first two Divisions of Horse of the Kings left Wing, commanded by the Lord Langdale, who made a gallant resistance, firing at a very close charge, and came to the Sword; but were by force Routed and driven back to Prince Ruperts Regiment, being the Reserve of the Kings Foot. But the whole Right Wing of the Parliaments advancing (which was with some dif∣ficulty, by reason of a Coney-warren they passed) they were totally routed, after a Rally made, and put to flight, from which they never returned to their ground again; so that in this part there was an absolute Con∣quest. Prince Rupert routs the Par∣liaments left Wing. Ireton taken Prisoner, and (the fortune of the day chang∣ing) is released. The success of the left Wing, which charged the right Wing of the Kings, was quite contrary: Prince Rupert commanding it, according to his wonted custome, charged furiously, and broke in upon and routed the three rightmost Divisions of that left Wing, which was also distressed by a Brigade of the Kings Foot, in which Ireton himself charged, and therein being run through the Thigh with a Pike, and into the face with a Halbert, was taken Prisoner, and kept so; till the battel and fortune of the day changing, he changed his condition, giving his Keeper that liberty which he timely offered, and came over to Sir Thomas Fairfax. The left Wing being thus routed, Prince Rupert pursued his advantage and success almost to Naseby-Town; in his return summoning the Train, and of∣fering them Quarter; who instead of accepting it, fired lustily upon him;
who despairing of forcing it, being well guarded by Fire-locks, and percei∣ving the Success of the right Wing of Horse, retreated in great hast to the res∣cue of his friends, whom he found in such general distress, that instead of at∣tempting any thing in their Relief, being close followed in the Rear by the Par∣liaments Horse of both Wings, who were joyned, he stopped not until he came to the ground where the King was rallying his broken Forces himself in per∣son. In the main Battel, the Kings Regiment, Sir Bernard Ashley's and Sir George Lisle's Tertia's stood manfully to it; their Horse being in the Rear of them, but could no way assist them, being kept from it by part of the Enemies Horse, who kept them in action;The Kings Foot over-powered by the Parlia∣ments Horse. the other part fell in with their own Foot, and joyntly poured their whole strength upon the Kings Infantry, which now, except one Tertia, were all at mercy, the Reserves being likewise routed. This standing parcel of Foot Cromwel endeavoured to break with his Horse; attempting them in Flank, Front, and Rear, but in vain, till the Generals own Regiment of Foot came up, and fell in with the butt-end of their Musquets; the Horse Charging them at the same time, and so trampled them down. The King had now nothing in the Field but his Horse,His Cavalry in great distress. (where he himself was) which he had put in as good order as the time and the near pressing of the Enemy would permit: which Fairfax perceiving, he resolved to stay for his Foot, who were a quarter of a mile behind him, that he might not put the day in hazard again. As soon as they came up, the Horse opened at great di∣stance to receive their Foot in the midst of them, and stood again in the same form of Battalia as before the commencement of the Fight; having not onely the advantage of ground, but the Kings Artillery, who besides had no Foot to entertain the levelled Volleys against his Cavalry. During this respite,Okey's Dra∣goons do nota∣ble Execution on the Kings Horse. the Dragoons of Fairfax under Colonel Okey advanced (a person miserable by nothing more than his valour, which betrayed him to the Artifices of Cromwel in the matter of the King) and with notable courage and smartness fired upon the Kings Troops; his Majesty now discharging the part of a Souldier, animating his men to a second round Charge upon the Horse op∣posite to him, not yet secured by their Infantry; but they soon appearing, the gallantry of that resolution was lost, and the danger and despair of doing any good by any further resistance prevailed against the Kings entreaties, and indeed against the reasonableness of the attempt. For who can but expostulate the misery of this day!The Calamities of this day. the Troops of those calamities that broke in upon the Kingdom, sadly upbraiding the relasch and weakness of that Cavalry, which might by a generous Bravery have saved them∣selves, their honour, the King, and the Kingdom, and, which is more, the inno∣cence of the Nation. But the Justice and over-ruling Wisdom of Almighty God vouchsafed not his assistance and favour to those Arms, reserving the Honour and Reputation of the Cause they defended to his unquestionable all-puissant Arm; that it might hereafter be transcribed to posterity from the visible and glorious manifestations of Digitus Dei. Read then and peruse with thine eyes, O guiltless Posterity, the Fates of the flying Royalists, on whom for fourteen miles (the despicable condition of the Enemy, but that morning, proving the most potent and formidable strength) the Parliamentarians did Execution, no parties of them making any notable resistance;The Parliament take many of the Kings Of∣ficers, and his Standard  with his Cabi∣net of Letters, which they un∣worthily pub∣lish. but were freed from the extremity of the pursuit, more by the tire of their enemies Horse, than by the celerity of their own. The Prisoners taken at this fight, were 6 Colonels, Commissioned and Refor∣madoes, 8 Lieutenant-Colonels, 18 Majors, 70 Captains, 8 Lieutenants, 80 En∣signes, 200 other inferiour Officers, besides 4 of the Kings Footmen, 13 of his houshold, 12 pieces of Ordnance, 8000 Arms, 40 barrels of Powder, 200 Car∣riages, all their Bag and Baggage, the Kings Standard, and neer 100 Colours of Horse and Foot, and (the dishonour of the Parliamentarians Triumph) the
Kings Cabinet of Letters, published afterwards in a most impudent manner (of which the King most elegantly complained) by the irreconciliable Enemies of his and his Kingdoms peace. The number of the Common Souldiers taken, amounted to 4500, who were afterwards brought to London, and enclosed in the new Church-yard in Westmin∣ster by Tuttle-fields; from whence they were freed by another Captivity, the service of forreign Princes. The advantage equal to both parties.This Battel was fought much upon equal advantage for number both of Horse and Foot; the ground also as equal: For the fury of the fight dispensed with the first commodiousness of the Campania, which was uncertainly maintained by the diversity of Success; being thereunto very fit, by reason of its playnness, which was a mile broad from the utmost Flank of the Right, to the left Wing of the Parliaments Army, who first disposed of it; and the neutrality of the Wind favoured both alike. The Commanders on both sides behaved themselves worthy of their places: (nothing can be faulted in matter of courage, but the Northern Horse for the King, who were disgused in the beginning, for that they fought unwillingly, as resolute upon the enterprize of Pomfret.) To give them their particular dues, will be too filling for this Volume;The Lord Bard. did excellent service for the King. we will onely mention my Lord Bard, be∣cause this Chronicle hath given no former account of his Honour, to which he rose from a Commoner, by excellent services done the King; and Colonel Iohn Russel, of whom before in Marston-Moor; the whitest name in the Roll of Fame. And since it is by the Victor-party, even by the General himself, thought a crime, this Relation shall not spread it. He himself became the Command, had it been lawful; the other his Officers were men, and pity onely they were Eng∣lish. Skippon here received a mark of his Disloyalty. Fiennes snt to London with the Pri∣soners.The next day Colonel Iohn Fiennes with his Regiment was sent up to London by the General with the Prisoners and Colours taken in the fight, who had been all along eminent in the services of that side. The Parlia∣ments Forces pursut the Kings.The Kings Forces being thus vanquished, Fairfax gave orders for the Army and Train to march after them the next day, being Sunday, without any more intermission; the pursuit of the Victory being of parallel consequence with the obtaining of it. These Orders were chearfully obeyed, though the long march of the Foot for many days together, and the vehemency of the Battel, might have made them rest: That night they quartered at Great Glyn, four miles short of Leicester; but the Horse came nearer; which so much Alarm'd the Nobility and Gentry that had fled thither for security, that they fled thence in great haste, leaving the Lord Hastings to defend the place. The King at Ashby de la zouch. He goes into Wales.The King in the mean time not judging it safe to lodge at Leicester, departed to Ashby de la zouch, where he reposed himself some few hours; but stayed not there, making all speed he could from Litchfield in the night, and from thence into Wales. The other part of the rout, being the Northern Horse under Sir Marmaduke Langdale,Sir Marma∣duke Lang∣dale flies to Newark. fled incontinently from the Battel to Newark, and narrow∣ly escaped Sir Iohn Gell, who was advancing with 2000 Horse from Nottingham, to joyn with the General. The General Fairfax was once unresolved whether he should presently march to relieve Taunton sorely distressed by the Lord Goring,Taunton di∣strest by the Lord Goring. or undertake Leicester. He had received full information of the strength of that Army, and what a desperate forlorn condition Blake the Governour was in; yet knowing that now there was no possibility of juncture with the King, of which before the fight Goring had assured his Majesty within few days,Leicester re∣taken. he resolved to reduce Leicester first. Lord Hastings Governour thereof.On Munday the 16 of Iune, the whole Army came before the Town, when the General sent a Summons to the Lord Hastings to deliver it to the use of the Parliament; who very resolutely refused them, and thereupon command was given for a present Storm.
On the 17, being Tuesday, great store of Ladders were brought in, a Battery raised, upon which two Demy-Cannons and a whole Culverin taken at Naseby were planted upon an old Work against the Newark, being the very same Guns which the King not many days before had used against the same place. Whereupon the Lord of Loughborough, seeing this resolution of the enemy, sent a Trumpeter out that day with Letters, desiring a Parley concerning the surrender of the Town; which began that evening, and con∣cluded in an agreement; and on Wednesday morning, Iune the 18, the Gar∣rison marched out,The Kings Souldiers march out with Staves in their hands. the Governour to Ashby-de-la-zouch, the Souldiers and other Officers to Litchfield, with staves onely in their hands. There were taken in the Town 14 pieces of Ordnance, 30 Colours, 2000 Arms, 500 Horse, 50 barrels of Powder, and other Ammunition proportio∣nable thereunto. Then consultation was held whether any Horse should be sent after the King, who hastned to Hereford; but the distress of Taunton in the West sway∣ed the Parliaments Army thither-ward, being newly mustered, and gratified with their pay sent down from London. With this intention the Army marched towards Marlborough,The Parlia∣ments Army march towards Marlborough. where they should be nevertheless in the mid-way to Hereford and Taunton, if the King should appear formidable; but no such account being likely to be given of him, they advanced further West-ward, and by the way took in Highworth-Garrison, and came to Salisbury, where their General had notie that the Coun∣try-men under the Stile of Club-men were generally risen in those Counties,The Club men rise. (being distinguished by a white Ribon in their hats) and had been bickering with part of Major-General Massey's forces, which were the onely consider∣able for the Parliament thereabouts; and that there might be some suspition of danger, either in their Quarters or in the field from them: For it was supposed they were risen in favour of the King, however they pretended a neu∣trality, and preservation of themselves. To this purpose they presented the General with two Petitions; the one to the King, the other to the Parlia∣ment;They Petition the King and Parliament. desiring a Safe-conduct to go and deliver them. They were reputed neer the number of ten thousand, then ready at an hours warning to be em∣bodyed together; Armed with Country-weapons, Bills and Pitchtorks, and Clubs, and some Fire-Armes, under the command of one Mr. Hollis, who trans∣acted with Sir Thomas Fairfax in the matter aforesaid. Their Demands were high, though reasonable: but of these men more anon. Goring hearing of this advance of the Army,Taunton freed, Iuly 7. made a semblance and show of drawing off from Taunton (where Colonel Welden and the relief lately sent were besieged:) after he had marched some two miles, the Garrison sally'd out to fall upon his Rear; when on a sudden he faces about, falls with fury and execution upon the party, kills many, and pursues the rest into the Town up to the very Gates,And Goring after his defeat∣ing the besieged departed. and then sets down closer than before: But his Scouts giving him continual notice of Fairfax's approach, he finally departed, to prevent the enemies hastie advance, and to get an opportunity of joyning with the Forces which he expected to his assistance from the King. To this purpose he commodiously quartered his Army at Long Sutton,His Army quartered at Long-Sutton, keep∣ing the River betwixt him and his enemies, having the Garrisons of Bridge∣water, Langport, Burrough, and Ilchester, and several Passes upon the River, to friend; the Bridges every where broken down; and it would have been ha∣zardous to force a passage in view of his Army, who were in good order, rea∣dy to receive any attempt. It was therefore concluded by the Parliamentarians, to force a passage at a Town called Evil, and there to put up the bridge again, and so fall upon him. The Royalists understanding that Evil was gained, marched to Langport, and quitted Ilchester, and a Pass at Load-bridge; and made show as if (leading the most part of the Army that way) they would surprize Taunton.they march to Langport. To prevent that, Major-General Massey was ordered to fall on their Rear,Massey reso∣lutely attempis their Rear, but with loss. being of that side the water; which he resolutely
attempted, but with loss, for nevertheless the Royalists kept themselves in their station and way. Langport fight.The next day, Iuly the 10, General Goring advanced from Langport with his Foot to the Pass, having lined the hedges thick with Musqueteers, and drawn up his Ordnance, the main Body being placed in good order upon a hill, about a Musquet-shot from the Pass. The fight began with the roaring of the Cannon from Fairfax's Camp with some execution; then the Foot advanced, and beat the Royalists from their hedges,General Fair∣fax routs the Lord Goring. and made way for their Horse, who char∣ged resolutely under Major Bethel, and were couragiously received by the Roy∣alists Horse, drawn up in a lane; who with pure valour beat them back in disorder, and made notable execution; especially the Regiment of Colonel Nevil, formerly that of the Earl of Carnarvan, did with their wonted, yet extraordinary magnanimity, renew the encounter, till Desbrough coming in with fresh supplies, of which Goring knew they had store, he in some handsome or∣der drew off, having given their Cavalry such a smart entertainment, that they were willing to stay till their Foot came up. By this time the Royalists had marched two miles in the Lanes, when the whole Army appearing again, giving another Charge, they drew off in haste and confusion towards Bridge∣water, having fired and deserted Langport. In this fight and pursuit, of both sides,Langport fired. were slain about 1000, about 1200 Prisoners taken, some 1000 Horse, two Pieces, 30 Colours of Horse and Foot; the flight and pursuit continuing till within two miles of Bridgewater, where that night Fairfax took up his Quarters,General Fair∣fax at Bridge∣water. in deliberation whether he should follow the Lord Goring, or besiege that Town, through which the Royalists in their flight ped to the North of Devonshire,Sir Richard Greenvile, and Sir John Berkley joyn with the Lord Goring. where Sir Richard Greenvile and Sir Iohn Berkley joyned with him, making 6000 strong; and Prince Charles and the Lord Hopton were raising Forces in Cornwal for the same purpose. Fairfax determined therefore not to weary his Foot with a sudden march, but to attaque Bridgewater; and resolution was made after a little respite to storm it. It was a natural-well-fortified place, lying level with the adjacent valley; the Works about it very regular and strong, the Foss or Ditch deep, and about 30 foot wide, which was filled up every Tide to the brim; the Line of no great compass, and well manned with 1800 Souldiers; having a Castle also of a considerable strength within, and the support and maintenance of all provision, victual and Ammunition, every way sufficient. Such was the difficulty of undertaking it; and the disreputation of leaving it after a siege, was cast likewise into the danger: But trusting to their uncon∣troulable Fortune, the Parliamentarians resolved to storm it, as a way condu∣cing to free the Army to follow their success abroad, and make a final end. Accordingly, on Munday-morning, Iuly 22. (Hugh Peters having encouraged them the day before) just at break of day the Forlorn was led on by Lieute∣nant-Colonel Hewson, and seconded by Lieutenant-Colonel Ashfield, (men known,Bridgewater taken, July 23. by the Parliament. The Parlia∣ments forlorn led by Hewson a daring Soul∣dier. and infamous afterwards) who daingly having thrown their Bridg∣es over the Graft, mounted the Walls; and for all the showers of Bullets, beat the defendants from their Cannon, and turned them upon the Town, and let down their Draw-bridge, where Captain (afterwards Colonel and Comissary) Reynolds entred with the Forlorn of Horse immediately, and se∣cured that part of the Town called Eastover, charging as far as the Draw∣bridge of the other. Hereupon 600 of the defendants, who were assigned to the defence of that place, and had made manful resistance, craved Quarter, and had it granted; the whole Storm falling upon them, while the other on the West-side were but alarmed; but they perceiving this unhappy stratagem, soon after with Granadoes fired that part of the Town possessed by the enemy, and gave signs of an obstinate resistance.The town fired. Both sides continued in quiet till Tuesday-night, at which time another round alarm onely was given, to keep the besieged waking: the General then sent in another Summons, which was refused; but the Cannon playing, and se∣veral
Granadoes lighting in the Town; after some Messages past, the General proving very difficult to any Conditions,Colonel Okey takes Bur∣rough-Garri∣son for the Par∣liament. and prepared for an Assault, the Town was rendred by the Governour upon Quarter onely for life, on the 23 of Iuly; 1000 more Gentlemen, Clergy, and common Souldiers being made Prisoners. Both Towns were lamentably fired. The adjacent Garrison of Burrough was a little while before rendred to Colonel Okey. After this surrender,The Clubmen dispersed. the General before he would march further Westward, resolved to reduce the Clubmen, who were so peremptory in their demands: Colonel Fleetwood on the second of August encompassed them in Shaftsbury with 1000 Horse,They were Ten thousand in a Body. and took fifty of the principal, who were Mr. Hollis, Dr. Goche, Mr. Cary, &c. and disarmed and sent them to Prison; but on the fourth of August, Lieutenant-General Cromwel was sent against several parties of 10000 of them, who threatned much danger; some he perswaded to return to their dwellings; but on Hambleton-hill neer Strawton 4000 of them stood on their guard, in a place which had been an old Roman-Work, deeply tren∣ched: Thereupon Cromwels Troop charged up the hill, and were repulsed at the passage into the Fort; but Desborough coming behind on their Rear, they were presently dispersed, some 40 killed, and 200 wounded, and 400 taken Prisoners, with about 12 Colours taken, in one whereof was Written, If you offer to plunder, or take our Cattel,The Motto of one of their Co∣lours. Be assured we will bid you Battel. No doubt, as was said before, they had some design for the King, as was guessed from the general affection of these parts formerly and constantly to his Cause: but what ever it was, it was now defeated; and the Club-folks had Club-law. Sherburn-Castle was now besieged,Sherburn-Castle besieged, and Bath ta∣ken. while Colonel Rich took in the City of Bath, having none but Horse and Dragoons with him, and the place Tenable: and Prince Rupert was also on his way to relieve it from Bristol with 1500 Horse and Foot; but Okey's Dragoons creeping on their bellies over the Bridge to the Gate, which they fired, made the Governour surrender Iuly the 29. upon Articles. To return to Sherburn-Castle;Sir Lewes Dives the Go∣vernour of Sherburn-Ca∣stle maks a no∣ta defence. there Sir Lewes Dives was Governour, who made a most notable defence; which for the honour of that noble Knight, who so constantly, and through so many hazards adhered to the King, and because this was a place of remarque, and the first that endured a formal siege in the beginning of the War, shall be more largely spoken of. A Hay-stack (August the fifth at night) within a stones throw of the Works was gained; a Storm was then resolved on, but afterwards deferred, and Battery and Ap∣proaches pitcht upon, together with Mining, for that the ground wherein the Castle stood was minable. Much hurt was done out of the Castle by Birding-peices, by very skilful Marks-men; several Officers and Gunners being killed by such shot. Both Mines and Galleries were now made;The General Summons the Castle, and of∣fers the Ladies and women their liberty to depart. every worker being rewarded with twelve pence a day and twelve pence a night, so hazardous was the ser∣vice; and then a second Summons was sent in, with an offer from the Gene∣ral that the Ladies and Women might depart. Sir Lewis acknowledged that civility, but contemned the peremptoriness of the demand. The Miners were got within two yards of the Wall, where the Rock appearing, they be∣gan to doubt of any effect; but it proving but a soft stone, on the 14 of August the great Guns played, and had made a Breach by the evening in the middle of the Wall, so that ten a breast might enter; and one of the Towers was beaten down, when the Parliament-Souldiers were so venturous, as for six pence a Bullet to fetch off all the Cannon-shot that rebounded from the Castle, of which there was great scarcity.
A third Summons was now sent in,The Castle a∣gain Summo∣ned. The Governours resolute answer. to deliver the Castle, or expect ex∣tremity; to which Sir Lewis told the Drum, that he would hang him: That the language was so far different from what he had formerly received, that he could not believe it came from the same hand: That whatever happened, he would not lose his honour to save his life, which he should think well bestowed in the ser∣vice. Sherburn-Castle taken August. 15.The Mine being now ready to spring, a general Assault was resolved on, the Gallery being advanced so neer the Works, that the Souldiers pulled the Wool out of the Woolsacks from the besieged, who made fires all night to dis∣cover the Mines and Approaches. Two of the Towers were also gained, and with that encouragement the Assaylants without order improved it, forcing them within from their Guns, which they had planted to oppose their entrance at the Breach; so that presently they were forced to quit the great Court with∣in the Castle: Which so disheartned them, that the Besiegers hastily, and be∣fore the time appointed, leapt over the Works, and so into the Castle; which was followed by the whole Army, who presently possessed themselves of it, and plundered it sufficiently, stripping every person within it; but because of the little opposition they found,Sir Lewis Di∣ves imprisoned in the Tower: he escapes to Ireland. giving indifferent good quarter. Sir Lewis was taken Prisoner, and kept so a long while in the Tower, till after the death of the King, being designed for the slaughter also, he made an escape from his Keeper at White-hall, whither he was brought to be examined, and soon after did notable service in Ireland for his present Majesty. There were taken also 400 Prisoners, Colonel Giles Strangeways, Sir William Walcot, Colonel Thorn∣hil: and the Clubmen of the parts adjacent fully quieted by the loss of this place, their Leaders being sent Prisoners with those of Sherburn. The next place designed as a further Trophee of the Parliaments victorious Army, after some dispute (because Plymouth was straightly beset, and in the same plight now, as Taunton formerly) was Bristol. In the march of the Army thither, Colonel Rainsborough took in Nunny-Castle the 21 of August, upon condition of liberty to go to their own houses.Nunny-Castle taken by Colo∣nel Rainsbo∣rough for the Parliament. Commissary-General Ireton was first sent with 2000 Horse to secure the Villages and Towns adja∣cent to Bristol, from being fired by the Royalists in that City, which because of its importance, being justly reckoned in the first rank of populous Cities of the Kingdom, and the onely considerable part the King had for Shipping, Trade and Riches, and lay advantagious for supplies from Ireland, was thought necessary to be reduced;Ireton sent to∣wards Bristol. and the danger of leaving so considerable a strength of 3000 Horse and Foot, as Prince Rupert could make in the field, and leave a sufficient Garrison besides, was no inconsiderable motive to the attempt. At the setting down of the Army, several Salleys were made, with different success;Several Salleys with different success. Sir Bernard Ash∣ley mortally wounded. Sir Bernard Ashley mortally wounded and taken under the Walls, when on the fourth of September a Summons was sent in unto Prince Rupert; which for its extraordinary civility and stile, and that seeming reverence it bears, (for here the game began, this being the first tast of this Model, and drawn by Ireton) is very delightful to insert. For his Highness Prince Rupert. SIR, Sir Thomas Fairfax's Sum∣mons to Prince Rupert.FOr the service of the Parliament, I have brought their Army before the City of Bristol, and do Summon you in their Names to render it, with all the Forts belonging to the same, into my hands for their use. Having used this plain language, as the business requires, I wish it may be as effectual unto you, as it is satisfactory to my self, that I do a little expostulate with you about the Surrender of the same; which I confess is a way not common, and which I should not have used, but in respect to such a person, and such a place. I take into consideration your Royal Birth, and Relation to the Crown of England,
your Honour, Courage, the vertues of your person, and the strength of that place, which you may think your self bound and able to maintain. Sir, the Crown of England is and will be where it ought to be; we fight to maintain it there; but the King misled by evil Counsellours, or through a seduced heart, hath left his Parliament, under God the best assurance of his Crown and Fa∣mily: the maintaining of this Schism, is the ground of this unhapie War on your part; and what sad effects it hath produced in the three Kingdoms, is visible to all men. To maintain the rights of the Crown and Kingdom joyntly, a principal part thereof is, that the King in Supream Acts is not to be advised by men of whom the Law takes no notice, but by his Parliament, the great Council of the Kingdom, in whom (as much as man is capable of) he hears all his people as it were at once advising him, and in which multitude of Counsellours lies his safety, and his peoples Interest: And to see him right in this, hath been the constant and faithful endea∣vours of the Parliament; and to bring those wicked instruments to justice that have misled him, is the principal ground of our fighting. Sir,Observe the strange guise of these words. if God makes this clear to you, as he hath to us, I doubt not but he will give you a heart to deliver this place, notwithstanding all the other considerations of Honour, Courage, Fidelity, &c. Because of their constancy and use in the pre∣sent business, depends upon the right or wrongfulness of this that hath been said. And if upon such conviction you shall surrender it, and save the loss of blood, or hazard the spoiling of such a City, it would be an occasion glorious in it self, and joyful to us, for the restoring of you to the endeared affections of the Par∣liament and People of England, the truest friend to your Family it hath in the World. But if this be hid from your eyes, and through your wilfulness, this so great, famous and ancient a City be by your putting us to force the same exposed to the ruine and extremities of War (which yet we shall in that case as much as possible en∣deavour to prevent) then I appeal to the righteous God, to be judge between you and us, and to require the wrong. And let all England judge whether the burning of its Towns, ruining its Cities, and destroying its people, be a good requital from a person of your Family, which hath the Prayers, Tears, Purses, and blood of its Parliament and People. And if you look on either as now divided, hath ever had that same party both in Parliaments and People, most zealous for their assistance and restitution, which you now oppose and seek to destroy, and whose constant grief hath been, that their desires to serve that your Family, have been ever hindred or made fruitless by that same party about his Majesty, whose Counsel you act, and whose Interest you pursue in this unnatural War. I expect your speedy Answer to this Summons, with the return of the Bearer this evening, and remain Your Highness Humble Servant, THO. FAIRFAX. The Trumpeter was detained all the night,The Trumpeter detained: a Ces∣sation. during which there was a volunta∣ry Cessation on both sides; which continued all the next day, when this Answer was returned. SIR, I Received yours by your Trumpeter;Prince Rupert Answer. I desire to know whether you will give me leave to send to the King to know his pleasure in it. Your Servant, RVPERT.
To which this was the Reply next day. SIR, YOur overture of sending to the King to know his pleasure, I cannot give way to, because of delay.Sir Thomas Fairfax's reply. I confess your Answer doth intimate your intention not to surrender without his Majesties consent; yet because it is but implicite, I send again to know a more positive Answer from you self, which I desire may be such as may render me capable of approving my self Your Highness Humble Servant, THO. FAIRFAX. In the mean while, additions of Country-forces, by means of Mr. Ashe and others, promoting the Generals Warrant to that purpose, being come to the Leaguer, a Storm was concluded on, for that intelligence came to the Army, and was seconded with advice from the Committee of both Kingdoms, that the King, who was then newly come out of the Associated Counties, of which by and by, was intended for the relief of Bristol, and to that purpose was to joyn with General Goring, who was newly inforced, as was said before, and was now about Collumpton in Devonshire; whose Letters intercepted, being sent to Secretary Nicholas, said, that within three Weeks time he should be in a condition to relieve the Town: So that the Prince did prudently tem∣porize with Fairfax, by sending out a Draught of very high Articles, while suc∣cour might be sent him, and his Lines finished; though others, and those va∣liant expert Commanders, of whom for honours sake Colonel Pretty ought not to be forgotten, declared, that the Town was tenable by force, and nee∣ded not the courtesie or charms or words to preserve it: but it since appears, that the Prince had Orders from the King, if it came to extremity, to surrender it upon honourable Articles. On the 10 of September, the City having been alarmed two nights together, about two of the Clock in the morning the Storm began,Bristol Storm∣ed Sept. 10. which was round the City; (for the Sea-men also having (by the loss of Portshed, which was rendred to Colonel Weldens Regiment) free riding in the River, attempted it of their side; but the Tide failed them) the disposal of the several posts of the several Regiments was after this manner. The signal being given, which was by setting on fire a great heap of straw and faggots on the top of a hill, and the shooting of four great Pieces of Ordnance against Pryors Fort, from the place where the General was to reside all the time of the Storm, the General Assault began: Colonel Montague and Colonel Pickerings Brigade, with their Regiments, at Lawfords gate entred speedily, and recovered two and twenty great Guns, and took many Prisoners in the Works; them Major Desborough seconded with his Horse of the Generals Regiment, and part of Colonel Graves. Sir Hardress Waller's Regiment, and the Generals, between Lawfords gate and the River Froom. Lieutenant-Colonel Pride's Regiment part against Pryors Fort, and part to alarm the great Fort, who in the mean while took a Fort wherein were some Welch-men. Colonel Horn, and Co∣lonel Raustings attempted neer Pryors Fort. The Horse that entred here, were led on by Captain Ireton, seconded by Major Bethel, who received a shot in the thigh, whereof he after dyed: whose Troops likewise mortally wounded Colonel Taylor of the Kings party. The Line being thus thrown down by the Pioneers, and mastered both by the Foot and Horse, the Royalists Horse retreated, and stood in a Body under the favour of the great Fort, and Coulstons Fort. Priors-hill-Fort held out the most obstinately, but at length was resolutely ma∣stered, where Prides Souldiers gave no quarter except to a very few, in regard of the great slaughter they within made by their gallant defence.
But on the Somersetshire-ide, the success was not answerable, where Co∣lonel Weldens, Ingoldsby, and Herberts Regiments were appointed to storm; these, by reason of the height of the Work, which they had not rightly calculated, the Ladders proving too short, were repulsed with great loss of a∣bove 300 men; Leiutenant-Colonel Purefoy, and Major Cromwel killed in the general Assault; and soon after, some part of the Town was set on fire, to make the other more defensible:and afterwards delivered upon Articles. And then the Prince thought good to treat, and obtained the Conditions he first propounded, saving that the General would not admi of freeing the City from any Garrison. I may not omit, that Sir Richard Crane,Sir Richard Crane slain. The Royalists march to Ox∣ford. a familiar and Favorite of the Prince, was killed some time before in a Salley. According to the honourable Articles of the Surrender, on the 14 of Sep∣tember the Royalists Marched out, and then assigned (as was before agreed) Oxford for the place they would go to; and because of the danger of the Clubmen, had 1000 Arms lent them at the Princes intreaty for his Foot, to secure them in their way, which in all amounted to 1500, and the Horse to near half as many; and were exactly to their Conditions convoyed to the City aforesaid,The Gen. waits on Prince Ru∣pert two miles out of Bristol. the General waiting upon the Prince two miles out of Bri∣stol. After this Rendition, the General thought it not fit to reside at Bristol, because of the Plague that was rife in the City: It seems that infection hath an antidote against its communicableness in right and Battel,The Plague at Bristol. and onely kills in peace; To God orders it, that two such devourers should not at one time be entertained together; nor was it ever known that two contrary Armies were at the same time, though never so neer one another, afflicted with the same Contagion. The General therefore, to avoid the after-clap, removed to Bath,Sir Tho. Fair∣fax removes to Bath. to intend his health, and repose in that salubrious place, assigning the Ar∣my their refreshments against a March further Westward, where it is now time to leave them to their surfetting sweets of Conquest. We will now therefore travel on with this discourse Northward, where the Town and Castle of Scarborough, so gallantly defended for a long time a∣gainst several Commanders, and lately against Sir Iohn Mldrum the Scot, (of whom before at Newark) who laid his bones under the Walls thereof, was now freshly and more vigorously besieged by Sir Matthew Boynton in his place; to whom, after a long and tedious leaguering, the Garrison worn out by sickness, many slain, and no hopes of relief, and the North possessed by the Scots and Parliament,Sir Hugh Cholmley de∣livers Scarbo∣rough to Sir Matthew Boynton, for the Parliament, July 25. Raby, Skip∣ton, Sandal, and Pomfret-Castles deli∣to the Parl. Hereford be∣sieged by the Scots. They take Canon-Froom. the valiant Loyal Governour Sir Hugh Cholmly deliver∣ed it after a long Treaty, upon very honourable Conditions. Raby-Castle suffered the like fate, and had the like Articles; and Skipton and Sandal-Castle did afterwards the same; and the Castle of Pomfret some time before to General Poyntz, the Garrison marching to Newark. The Scots, with much intreaty, and more money, were now prevailed with to march Southward, and in the way took Canon-Froom a strong Garrison by Storm. On the 15 of August they sate down before Hereford, having made miserable spoil in their march, which they hoped to compleat at this City, a∣gainst which they proceeded in all hostile manner, by Mines, Batteries and As∣saults; but all to no purpose, more than the perswasion, Summons, and induce∣ment from the oppressed▪ Country, some Gentlemen whereof were wrought up∣on to request Sir Barnabas Scudamore to deliver the Town to their burdensome guests the Scots, and so deliver them from their present charge and oppression. A great number of men they lost here daily, being rejected with scorn upon all their Summons;Sir Barnabas Scudamore Governour of Hereford. The Siege rais∣ed. and at last hearing of the Kings approach, who was come from Oxford that way, they raised their shameful Siege, and by the way of Glou∣cester departed to Warwick, and so Northward again, to the hissing and laughter of the people through whom they passed. But now to a more sorrowful busi∣ness, the distracted unpleasant progress of the King. The King after his defeat at Naseby had fled towards Wales, with an intention
to recruit; but the necessity of his affairs requiring no long stay thereabout, he posted back again, his Armies being thus bestowed: The Lord Hopton and the Prince neer Exeter, Sir Richard Greenvile about Southam, Goring at Okington, and Prince Maurice at Worcester, and the King with a flying Army every where. The first account of his actions was from Bewdley (whither he advanced from Litch∣field) where he Encountred some of the Scots Horse and Dragoons,The King in person encoun∣ters the Scots at Bewdley, and worseth them: defeats Sir John Gell, and enters the Association, and surpriseth Huntingdon. and worsted them; then he passed to Sedbury and Ashburn in Derby-shire, and Skirmishes with Sir Iohn Gell, and defeated his party; and on the 16 of August came to Wel∣beck-house, belonging to the Marquess of Newcastle in Nottingham-shire. Here he stayed not long, but made all the hast he could, (being at liberty to go whither he would, but of no strength to make use of and enjoy it; like Consumptive bo∣dies, whose Legs do last of all fail them) into the Association. His Marches were so volatile, uncertain, and swift, that no preparatory resistance could be made; so that he mastered where e're he came, Alarming his Enemies every where; who while they consult to joyn Forces, are forced to dis-joyn those they have together, to meet with every emergency his nimble Troops occasioned. In this manner he surprized Huntingdon-Town, which he entred on Sunday after Noon in Service-time, with some little opposition made against him at the Bridge, where he slew the Captain and Lieutenant that maintained it, with most of the Souldiers, and put the Town to ransome, August 24. and Cam∣bridge.From thence he marched with the like expedition and celerity, faced the Town and University of Cambridge; but out of his favourable regard to that place, departed as suddenly; but yet the fright of his Coming had driven the most factious out of Colledges and Town; while his Majesty contented himself with casting a benevolent look upon that Nursery, that had been Planet-strook with the astonishing seizures of the Rebellion. His next Stage was Ouburn, having by the way fined St. Ives in 500 pound: and good reason of State there was for this manner of Tax in such places as the Association,St. Ives fined 500 pound by toe King. which had so largely contributed to the Rebellion, and so far as∣sisted and maintained it, free besides from the burthen of the War; and the great Bulwark, as London was the Castle and Magazine, of the Parliaments Cause. His next remove was to Doncaster, the way he took for Oxford, whither he came on the 28 of August.The King at Oxford. The Royalists began to come in upon compo∣sition.At his first arrival he found his Court much altered; some of the Nobility (besides others) very Right Honourably run away to the Parliament, being thereto allured by the late Propositions of Peace, which the House after much importu∣nity vouchsafed his Majesty; which imported in one clause, that all such as would come in, should be received upon payment of the tenth part of their Estates: which for the richer sort signified to be clapt in Prison, and received into custody; but yet this stratagem mainly helped forward the sinking of the Royal Cause, which having no Arms to protect it self, fell thus into the treache∣rous embraces of its enemies: For while they adventured rashly upon the secu∣rity of the Propositions, they found themselves mistaken upon the Prelimina∣ry, and stumbled at the threshold, not having obtained Passes for their access to the Parliaments Quarters; which error being rectified at last, the two Hou∣ses enhanced that commodity; such a quick Trade there was of the same, that Composition could not be had at the first rate; the Publiue Faith being alike good, and of the same value, in taking from Friends and Enemies: for now the expiatory money of their Loyalty was come to the Fifth part, and a time limited for that favour too, if men made not extraordinary hast to un∣do themselves and their Families, to save a little bread and salt, the remainders of some fair Estates. Oh unfortunate Allegiance and Duty! The King mar∣cheth towards Wales; comes to Ludlow, de∣signing to re∣lieve Chester.These heavy misfortunes both of publique and private concernment, the King not able, or unwilling to be enured to, by a constant sight of them, de∣parted with his flying Army towards Wales again, intending for the relief of Chester: with this purpose, on the 19 of September he came to Ludlow, and there understood that General Pointz out of the North was dogging him at
the heels, being thereto appointed by the Committee of both Kingdoms, ex∣pecting an advantagious juncture of time and place to fight him; which up∣on the Kings neer advance to Chester, offered it self. It was fore-thought that his design was there, and therefore it was agreed by the besiegers and Poyntz, that as soon as the King should approach, he should instantly engage, and upon signal accorded on, they should draw off, leaving a convenient force to make good the Leaguer, and joyn with him in the fight. At Routon-heath,Routon-heath∣fight, Sept. 24. The Parlia∣ments Forces under General Poyntz beaten; but reserves coming in, the King is wor∣sted. within two miles of Chester, the King made a halt, to give notice to the besieged likewise, when Poyntz desperately fell on, and be∣ing far engaged, was presently worsted and beaten, the Kings Horse, which was all his strength, fighting couragiously; but while he was Rallying again, in the very nick of a compleat Victory to the King (which had disowned and forsook him) in come his Reserves commanded by Colonel Iones and Louthian, with neer 1000 Horse and Foot; which gave so much encouragement to Poyntz broken Forces, that they returned to another Charge. While the King was a musing what to do, being beset in Front and Rear, in fine, he made ano∣ther brave Charge, where though he had the worst, yet he made thereby his Retreat good in part, though in some disorder, and with loss particularly of that thrice-Noble Lord Bernard Stuart, Earl of Litchfield, the last of the three Illustrious Brothers of the Duke of Richmond late deceased; and so got into Chester with the remains of his Army,The King quits Chester, and goes into Wales. where there was no safety for him to continue, but upon advice it was held expedient to depart again for Wales, of the fixed affection of which people the King had had constant experi∣ence. After so many disasters upon the neck of one another, yet did not the King despair of his Arms, nor with pusillanimity give himself over to the com∣plaints of his hard Fortune: Though he had lost Armies in the field, and Fortresses and Cities in every Corner of the Kingdome, yet was he inexpug∣nable and invincible in his own mind, and in the Loyal affection and constant sincerity of his Friends and good Subjects, whose firm adherence (till he to∣tally disarmed them himself, by his express command) and Gods Soveraign assistance and strengthning of him within, when there was no help from with∣out, was admirable, and more admirably improved in his Meditations on this subject. FRom small beginnings on my part,Eikon Basil. he let me see that I was not wholly forsaken by my peoples love, or his protection. My sins sometimes prevailed against the justice of my Cause; and those that were with me wanted not matter and occasion for his just chastise∣ment both of them and me. Nor were mine enemies less punished by that prosperity, which hardned them to contrive that Injustice by open Hostility, which was begun by most riotous and Vnparliamen∣tary Tumults. I never had any Victory which was without my sor∣row, because it was on mine own Subjects, who like Absalom died many in their sin. And I never suffered any defeat which made me despair of Gods mercy and defence. When Providence gave me or denyed me vitory, my desire was neither to boast of my power, nor charge God foolishly, whom I be∣leived at last would make all things work together for my good. I wished no greater advantages by the War, than to bring my Enemies to moderation, and my Friends to peace. I was affraid of the temptation of an absolute Conquest; and never prayed more for Victory over others, than over my self. When the first was de∣nyed, the second was granted me; which God saw best for me.
The King assists Montross with Horse.For notwithstanding these sad losses so thick together, the King by moving up and down recollecting the scatterings of several parties, had gotten to∣gether a good body of Horse, with which on the 10 of October he marched to Texford, thence to Welbeck, and quartered part of his Army at Blits the 13 day, and rendezvoused the 14 at Walsop, where, to answer the instant re∣quest of the Marquess of Montross (who was deated as beforesaid at Phi∣lipshaugh) for some assistance in Horse, he divided his Army, and appointed Sir Marmaduke Langdale and the Lord Digdy to march Northwards, and with all convenient speed to joyn with the said Marquess. This they at∣tempted, while the King went for Newark, taking such a way, as amazed the Parliaments Forces whither they were designed, or how they should way-lay them,Sherburn fight Octo. 25. in York-shire. and intercept their passage. About Sherburn they wheeled off, and beat up a guard, intending to rendezvous at Bramton-Brierly, the whole number of their Horse amounting to neer 1600. At this Camisade, they surprised at Sherborn and Mylford 800 Foot, and disabled Colonel Wren's Regiment of Horse. All their Arms they endeavoured to have carried off, lay∣ing them in heaps on the street, till they could get Carriages to convey them away. The Royalists forced to f, by Colonel Copley and Colonel Lilburn.While they were providing, Colonel Copley, and Colonel Lilburn, who had attended their Motion, fell upon them with the like number of fresh Horse; and after a sharp dispute, where Copley's Regiment were first defeated, the Royalists were forced to give back, and so fled Northwards; the enemy re∣covering all their Arms and Prisoners, took 400 of them Prisoners, (among the slain was Sir Francis Carnaby, and Sir Richard Hutton, with 40 more) the Countess of Niddisdale, and four or five Colonels, twelve Captains and Offi∣cers; and the best prize of all, was the Lord Digby's Coach, wherein, besides the rich spoil, were also the Trophees of other mens shame, private Letters of the King's, which were published with those taken at Naseby, to the great scandal of all ingenuous and civil people. But as the War began with Tu∣mults, so it was to be ended with worse indignities,Lord Digby routed at Car∣lisle-Sands, he flies into Ire∣land. those base and Vulgar Prostitutions. The Lord Digby was met and routed again at Carlisle-Sands, and from thence with 20 men got to the Isle of Man, and so to the Mar∣quess of Ormond in Ireland. The King at Newark, Octob. Lord Bellasis Go∣vernour thereof. Lord Digby charged with disloyalty by divers Lords, the King his friend.The King was at Newark▪ where a dissention happned concerning this very misfortune, as if it had not been calamitous enough it self, while the King and the Lord Bellasis (then Governour of that Town) sided with the reputation of the Lord Digby, against the imputation with which the two Princes Rupert and Maurice, the Lord Gerrard, Sir Richard Willis, (formerly Governour of the same) charged him, as disloyal and treacherous. For upon ts difference, which was grown to a quarrel, the Lord Gerrard, and Sir Richard Willis, with some hundreds more, withdrew themselves in a discontent, and laid down their Commissions; and the two Princes, as they were coming to take their leave of the King in the same mood, were treating with General Poyntz for Passes and Terms according to their respective qualities. This was first agitated at Worton-house, some fourteen miles from Newark, and was accor∣dingly entertained by the Parliament, who gave Colonel Rossiter order to give such Passes and Conditions; the severest whereof was, That all persons going beyond Seas by Warrant of either Houses, and after returning, shall have neither pardon nor quarter given them by the Parliament. The King re∣turns to Ox∣ford.The King staid at Newark about ten days; it being reputed the safest Gar∣rison he had, for that there was no considerable enemy neer it; and the Souldiers within were numerous and resolute, and the place known to be tenable and well provided, and besides, lay most advantagious for the King to draw together any Force, having lost and drayned most of his Garrisons in other Counties: But upon this Feud, and untowardness of his affairs, he in the beginning of November departed from hence, with a Convoy of 600 Horse to Oxford; so free and safe was the passage in that part of England
from any Armies, while the Westermost Counties were full of them, and la∣bouring to be delivered. But though the King escaped any Encounter,Gen. Poyntz routs the Kings Cnvoy. Belvoyr taken. Sir Gervas Lucas Gover∣nour thereof. the said Convoy returning home, were set upon by General Poyntz, and routed, the sixth day of Novem∣ber, and so shifted away to their Garrison; while the Victor sets down before Belvoyr-Castle where Sir Gervas Lucas was Governour for the King; summon∣ed it, and assaulted it, but both to the like purpose, till after a siege of four months, the House and Castle was delivered up to him on the 2 of February, upon honourable Conditions, Sir Gervas and his Officers being convoyed to Litchfield. Fairley-Castle in Somersetshire▪Several Castles and Houses ta∣ken. the Devises, Lacock-House (to Colonel Pic∣kering) Chpstow-Castle delivered to the Parliament, the last to Colonel Mor∣gan Governour of Gloucester; and Berkley-Castle, where Sir Charles Lucas com∣manded, to Colonel Rainsborough, after a Noble defence; when the Out-works were taken,Berkley Castle Surrendred by Sir Charles Lucas. and two Summons refused, Sir Charles saying, he would eat Horse-flesh first, and mans flesh when that was done, before he would yeild: But upon the planting of the Guns upon those Works against the Castle, was glad to Surrender, and spare those dainties for another extremity, when he made good his Bill of Fare. The Devises,Devises and Winchester Surrendred by the Lord Ogle. and Winchester, after a breach made in the Castle thereof by the great Guns, surrendred by the Lord Ogle to Lieutenant-General Crom∣wel: there marched out thence to Woodstock 700 men, the chief whereof were the Governour, Sir William Courtney, Sir Iohn Pawlet, and Doctor Curl Bishop of that Diocess, to whom Hugh Peters offered some civilities. A Reverend Pre∣late, who resided amidst his Flock, even in these days of danger and trouble; and quitted not his Charge, while he was suffered no longer to continue in it. The period of the glory and honour of Basing-house was now approaching,Basing-house stormed and ta∣ken. for thither next came Cromwel, who after his Batteries were placed, setled the several posts for the Storm; Colonel Dalbeir on the North-side of the House next the Grange, Colonel Pickering on his left, and Sir Hardress Wal∣ler's and Colonel Mountague's Regiments next him. The Storm was October the 14▪ at six in the morning: Pickering stormed the new house, passed through, and got the gate of the old house; whereupon the defendants beat a Parly, but it would not be hearkened, to. In the mean time Mountague and Waller's Regiments assaulted the strongest Works, where their Court of guard was kept, which they resolutely recovered, with a whole Culverin; and draw∣ing their Ladders after them, got over another Work, and the House-Wall, before they could enter. Sir Hardress Waller was slightly wounded here; ma∣ny of the defendants were put to the Sword, being about one hundred, and one Virgin, Doctor Griffith's Daughter,Doctor Grif∣fiths Daughter slain. Marquess of Winchester and the Gover∣nour sent Priso∣ners to Lon∣don. whom the enemy shamefully left naked: of note, Major Cuffle, slain by the hands (as supposed) of Major (since Major-General) Harrison. There were taken Prisoners 400, with their Officers, among whom the Noble Marquess of Winchester himself, and Sir Robert Peak the Governour, who with the Colours also taken, were sent up together to London. This Fortress of Loyalty, (the place being called by that name, Love Loy∣alty being written in every window of that spacious house) which Mr. Peters said, (who gave the relation of its taking to the house of Commons) would become an Emperor to dwell in, by the spite and fury of a Rebel∣lious crew was turned into Ashes,Basing-house demolished. to the incredible loss of the Marquess, who notwithstanding in the very ruining of it was heard to say, That if the King had no more ground in England but Basing-house, he would adventure as he did, and so maintain it to the utmost. It was commonly called Basting-house, and that truely enough; but now it must needs crumble under the heavy load of the Kings adverse fortune, which brought three Kingdomes with it to no less a ruine.
The plunder great and rich.Great and rich was the plunder here; one Common Souldier getting 300 pounds in silver, and was left in an instant by his Camerades worth but one Half-crown of it all. And no less was the quantity of provisions, which were enough to suffice for some years. All which came into the Conquerours hands entire, with a Bed worth 1400 pounds; who unhandsomly enough sei∣zed and disposed of them; the account whereof will one day be as justly re∣quired. Langford-house Surren∣ded to Crom∣wel.These Services being over, and the Western-Road cleared, Cromwel was commanded to attend on the General, now advanced after the Lord Goring: in his way thither, he came and besieged Langford-house, belonging to the Lord of Colerain, neer Salisbury, and upon Summons, had it delivered to him up∣on fair and equal Conditions, October 18. While the General on the 19 in∣tending to storm Tiverton, the Chain of the Draw-bridge by one unlucky shot broke in two, and let down the bridge; whereupon the Souldiers ran in, and seized all but the Church and Castle, which were presently yeilded, and quarter upon their asking for it given; but plundered they were even to their skins. Here was taken one Major Sadler, an active valorous fellow, who had revolted from the Parliament-side, and had now held intelligence, and proffered them the like service he had done the King, for his pardon; not∣withstanding he was condmned, and yet made a shift to escape to Exeter, where upon the same score of Treachery to them,Tiverton ta∣ken by Fairfax. Major Sadler executed: Sir Gilbert Tal∣bot taken Pri∣soner. having understood of his practices (by collusion no doubt of both parties) and for deserting of his post at Tiverton, he was sentenced and executed. Here was also taken Sir Gilbert Talbot the Governour, and 4 Majors, and 200 Common Souldiers, who were made Prisoners of War. There was nothing now left the King in the West, but what lay in the farthermost parts of Devonshire and Cornwal,Transactions in the West be∣twixt the Ar∣mies. and 6000 Horse, of whom the onely fear was, left they might break through and get Eastward: The Country therefore was commanded to keep diligent Watch, and to be assistant in intel∣ligence, if the Royalists should attempt it: and because it was Winter-time, and the Army wearied, it was not thought fit to advance after the Royalists, but to set down before Exeter.The siege of Ex∣eter, by the Lord Fairfax. Prince Rupert endeavours ac∣commodation with Fairfax. During this siege, which was at a good di∣stance, blocking up the City by Forts round about it, an Accommodation was endeavoured by the Prince with the Lord Fairfax, by a Letter sent to him from the Lord Capel for Passes and such other previous things to a Treaty, which he desired should take effect betwixt the King his Father and the Parlia∣ment: but Fairfax refused that, saying he was a Souldier, and but the servant of the Parliament, who alone might so allow, or consider of such desires. This was seconded by General Goring,General Go∣ring goes into France. whose design was like that intended before when the Earl of Essex was at Lestithiel, to have both Armies joyn, and make the King and Parliament come to a conclusion and peace;Lord Went∣worth com∣mands his Troops. but this with no other effect than formerly. Soon after this, General Goring passed over into France, leaving his Troops to the command of the Lord Wentworth, resolv∣ing to return with supplyes by Spring: but providence had otherwise deter∣mined of the Kings affairs. The King was very industrious, but his Councels so distracted with the re∣fractoriness of his Fortune, that he could effect nothing; nevertheless, to shew his willingness,A skirmish at Corf-Castle between the Kings Horse and the Parli∣aments; the Kings Horse worsted. and to be doing, he sent a party of Horse Westward, which for a while rambled up and down about Oxford, fetching in Contribution, to the regret of the Parliament, who complained of it to their General, who presently sent away a party of Horse, who fell upon some of those Horse neer Corf-Castle, and rescued the Committee-men of Dorset at Warham taken by them; and seeing no further danger of those Horse, returned to their Army, there being some likelihood of engagement. For it was now resolved by the Prince, by all means to free Exeter, a∣bout which City some inconsiderable skirmishes had happened, till the taking of Pouldram-Castle; Captain (afterwards Colonel) Deane, Comptrouler
of the Ordnance, appearing therein very active: and it was informed the Lord Hopton, that the Army was wasted with sickness; which indeed was true, but they never wanted recruits, nor any other necessary: so that the Prince having come as far as Okehampton, in his way understanding the force of the Army, drew back again; whereupon Fairfax presently set down before Dartmouth,Fairfax at Dartmouth. Plymouth siege dserted. being so far advanced, and gave notice of the Princes retreat to Plymouth, to encourage them in their defence; who having been long besieged, and bar'd of all Trade by land, were impatient of the Siege, but had lately made a successful Salley, and expected a final deliverance from their General, now something neer them; which accordingly happened without the Generals presence, for the onely Rumour of his coming served turn. The Prince being marched back without any encounter,Lord Went∣worth worsted by Cromwel. save that Cromwel beat up one of my Lord Wentworth's Brigades quarters at Bovey-Tracy, and took some 50 Prisoners, and 300 Horse; and a skirmish by Sir Hardress Waller, where he took some Prisoners also; the General resolved to attaque Dartmouth, a Port-Town, and where supplies from France or else-where might be landed; and therefore summoned Sir Hugh Pollard the Governour, who refused to treat;Darmouth stormed and ta∣ken, Sir Hugh Pollard Go∣vernour. which put him in a resolution to storm it. He came thither on the 12 of Ianuary, and on the 18 at eleven at night furiously assaul∣ted it, having no Artillery with him; yet his men went on against 100 Pie∣ces ready mounted, which being but once discharged against them, they got under them, and quickly turned them against the Town, which they present∣ly mastered, together with the Castle which commanded the River. There were two other great Forts, wherein were 34 pieces of Ordnance, that stood a mile from the Town;Sir Henry Cary hath con∣ditions to march, the Go∣vernour and the Earl of Newport have quarter given. who beat a Parley, but in the hurry and noise could not be heard: at last one of them, in which was Sir Henry Cary, had Condi∣tions to march away, he and his Officers with Arms; but the Governour, the Earl of Newport, Colonel Seymor, and Mr. Denham, in the other, could gain no other Conditions but Quarter. Here the General practised a civil Strata∣gem, giving all the Cornish-men their liberty, and two shillings a man to carry them home; they being the onely standing, as they had been constant, ene∣my to  Parliament. The General went on board Vice-Admiral Batten, who ked he place up by Sea, and was nobly treated. From thence the Parliament-Army marched to Totnes, and so back again to the Siege at Exeter; but were from thence diverted again by another acti∣on: for news came that the Prince was fully resolved to attempt something in relief of that City, and to that purpose had made up his Army neer 10000 strong, having mustered and assembled a great many of the Cornish at Laun∣ceston, and were come as far as Torrington;Torrington-fight. and Letters were intercepted from the Lord Wentworth to Sir Iohn Berkley the Governour, encouraging him with expectation of Relief. On the 15 of February, the Parliaments Army rendezvoused within two miles of Torrington, where the Lord Hapton conti∣nued; and an eye was kept by Colonel Cook, who for that purpose lay about Barnstable, that they should not break through. On the 16 of February, the Army marched, and by five in the evening drew up their Van in the Park, and Forlorns were sent out, betwixt Torrington and Mr. Roll's house, to line Hedges, to make good the retreat of the Horse. The Lord Hopton likewise drew out of the Town, four or five Closes off, and lined the Hedges within a Close of the enemy, and flankt his Foot with Horse; whereupon the Enemy sent good Reserves, lest by the advantage of the ground they might be encom∣passed. Towards night the Lord Hopton drew off from some of the Closes he formerly possessed; which the enemy entred, and made a halt, intending not to venture upon the Town, barricadoed, and such a strength within it, in the dark: but hearing a noise in the Town, as if the Royalists were retreating, and being loth that they should go off without some taste of their old Fortune and Success, the Parliamentarians sent a party of Dragoons to fire on the enemy neer the Hedges and Barricadoes, and withal to get some intelligence
of the estate of the Royalists in the Town. This being accordingly attempt∣ed, the Dragoons were answered with a round Volley of Shot; thereupon their Forlorn Hope of Foot went and engaged themselves to bring off the Dragoons; and the Reserve fell on to bring off their Forlorn. The Royalists also drew out Supplies and Seconds, and reinforced the Hedges, standing as before. Both Armies far engaged, the Parliamentarians manifesting a reso∣lution to go on for all their disadvantage of the night, it came at last to a plain Fight, the Regiments successively falling on; which continued a hot service for two hours, till at last the Royalists were beaten from their aforesaid Hedges, and up to their Barricadoes, where they again disputed it, manfully maintaining them at push of Pike, and with the But-end of their Musquets; and then by command drew off, and gave the Fairfaxians entrance; where the Foot first entred, and then the Horse, who there joyntly charged the enemy drawn up in the Town; the Lord Hopton commanding the Rear to make their retreat good; in which action he had his Horse shot dead under him. Here the Par∣liament-foot were forced back again to the Barricadoes, where Colonel Ham∣mond opposed himself, and by the assistance and timely supply of Major Ste∣phens, beat Horse and Foot into the Town again,it is taken by the Parliament. from whence the Foot marched away, but the Horse made several stands, and charged in at several Avenues of the Town, and at the Barricadoes which themselves had deserted. In fine, all their Horse marched over a Bridge, and at several other passes of the River, and so Westward; the Parliamentarians not adventuring to pursue them, but contented themselves with those Prisoners whom they took in the Town, being disordered and divided from their Body by the darkness of the night; who being put into the Church, where the Lord Hoptons Magazine of 80 Barrels of Powder was kept, and there guarded by some of the Parlia∣ments Forces;80 barels of Powder fired in a Church, the guard kil∣led, the Army and Town endangered. the said Powder either casually or by design was fired, the Church blown into the Air, those Prisoners and the Guard killed, and the whole Army all over the Town endangered by the stones, timber, and lead, which with the blast were-carried up very high, and scattered throughout, and beyond the Town; so that neer as much mischeif was done by this Powder, as by the Powder and Bullet together in the Fight, scarce a stone being left standing of the Church, which since is raised from its ruines. The Royalists fought resolutely here, the Cornish not forgetting the reputa∣tion they had formerly got during the War: For here were not taken in all above 400 Prisoners, the chief whereof were Lieutenant-Colonel Wood, eight Captains, Commissary Boney, six Lieutenants, one Cornet, three Ensignes, one Chyrurgion, four Serjeants, fifty two Troopers, one hundred twenty seven Gentlemen, and about 150 common Souldiers, and six Colours. The slain were Major Threave and Captain Fry, the Lords Hopton and Capel wounded, and the Lord Hopton's Commission to be General under the Prince,Lord Hopton and Lord Ca∣pel wounded. Lord Hoptons Commission ta∣ken. and 500 pounds in money left in Portmantles, came also to the hands of the Victors. The Lord Hopton after this Encounter made back into Cornwal, where he rendezvouzed his Army again; whither the Princes Regiment of eight hun∣dred Horse, and some other additional Cavalry of the County, not before joy∣ned with them, came in, and so made up a new entire Body of five thousand Horse, able to give Battel again to their enemy, on convenient Champion ground, or at least in such a condition as to make their own terms. And the poli∣cy of the Lord Hopton was as eminent as his valour in the late service, having thereby given a fair earnest for a Victory;Lord Hopton a valiant and discreet Soul∣dier. and made them consider of his For∣ces, if reduced to a necessity of fighting, as of couragious brave spirits, to whom Fortune could not but be obliged to a favourable aspect; and her least inconstancy would undo the Fairfaxians. We will now draw off from those main Bodies, this whole Winter in the field,Shelford-house stormed and ta∣ken, and return to the Garrisons, who thick and threefold rendred them∣selves to the Parliament: We will begin with Shelford-house, where Colonel Stanhop, akin to the Earl of Chesterfield, was Governour; which after Summons
refused,by Maj. Gen. Poyntz. Col. Stanhop the Governour thereof killed, and the house demolished. was stormed by Major-General Poyntz, who put all to the Sword they met with: some Gentlemen getting within a Seiling till the fury was over, found quarter; the Governour himself was killed in the defence after the House was entred, and the House demolished. On the 4 of December, the magnanimous Countess of Derby, who had endu∣red a Siege off and on for two years last past, rendred Latham-house to the Parliament upon very fair terms;The Countess of Derby surren∣ders Larham-house. the Governour, Officers, and Souldiers to march out either to the Garrison of Tidbury, or Ashby de la zouch. In this Siege I may not omit one Military neat Stratagem: The besiegers at dinner-time were jearing the Garrison with Shoulders of mutton and fresh-meat they shewed them:A neat Strata∣gem. whereupon a Captain sallied out, took both the guests and the provision, and two Colours, and brought them into the House; Whereupon the Assaylants took the Alarm, both great and small Guns playing on both sides. This continuing for a while, the Captain caused the Colours he had taken to be set on the Works backward from the Post where he had surprized them; which they of that quarter seeing, and imagining their men on the other side had entred the House, and erected their Ensigns, they fell on with∣out fear or wit,Bolton-Castle and Beeston-Castle deliver∣ed. and were presently cut down in heaps, and beaten to their Trenches, Bolton-Castle, and Beeston-Castle in Lancashire, were likewise de∣livered to the Parliament; and Hereford-City surprized by another Stratagem, the manner thus. The Garrison was strong and well appointed,Hereford ta∣ken by surpris. December 18. the inlet also for the Kings Welch Forces, and therefore much aimed at; and to that purpose intelligence had been held by some within, from Colonel Birch and Colonel Morgan Gover∣nour of Gloucester; but their greedy and impatient desire of the present pos∣session, abrupted all those practices, and put them upon an honester and safer way: With 2000 Horse and Foot they came from Gloucester in one day and night, where they had provided six men in Country-habits, with a seventh like a Constable (in pursuance of Warrants directed the day before to the adjacent Villages, for some Labourers to be sent in to break the Ice in the Trenches, and such other work) by morning to present themselves at the Gates; and as seconds to them, were placed 150 Firelocks, which in the covert of the night were lodged as neer as possible out of discovery; and next them, a Body of men ready at hand to succeed in the attempt, and enter with them. According∣ly the stratagem took effect; the Draw-bridge was let down to the Constable and his crew, with their Pickaxes and Spades; which they no sooner posses∣sed, but the Guard began to suspect, and make some resistance; but the Reserves powring in upon them, after three of them were killed, the Town was entred, first by Colonel Birch and his Firelocks, and then by Morgan: The Garrison amazed, presently submitted, and yeilded themselves Prisoners; the chief where∣of were the Lord Brudenel,Lord Brude∣nel, fourteen Knights, and Iudge Jenkins taken Priso∣ners. fourteen Knights, Judge Ienkins, (of whom more hereafter) four Lieutenant-Colonels, five Captains, Officers and Gentlemen neer a hundred more, besides eleven Pieces of Ordnance mounted, with Pro∣vision sutable to the strength and quality of the place. This loss was very much regretted by the Royalists, who now perceived that Fortunes right and left hand, Valour and Policy, were lifted up against them. The next place of importance which followed the fate of the Kings de∣clination,Westchester taken. was the City of Chester, which had been long besieged, and thrice attempted to be relieved;Sir William Brereton Com∣mander for the Parliament. and still rendred worse, by the loss and slaughter of their friends that came to its rescue, as we have said before. Sir William Brere∣ton now commanded in chief, as Major-General of those Counties; who civil∣ly courted the Lord Byron the Governour to a Surrender, laying before him the impossibility of any Army of Forces that could be advanced that way, for that the King was beset in all his Garrisons, either by close or open Sieges: which at last the Noble Lord hearkned unto,Lord Byron surrenders Chester. and upon very honourable Con∣ditions, Surrendred it by Articles, the 3 of February. And thence Sir William went to besiege Litchfield-close, which not long after he gayned by the same
way of Treaty, as will appear in its due place. Several other places of les∣ser concernment without much parley surrendred likewise, suspected of bribery or such-like practises, which were finely palliated by the necessity that compelled the greater to their rendition. The Court of Wards Voted down.The House now upon discharging the Wardship of the heirs male of Sir Christopher Wray, a Member of the said House, take an occasion to Vote down the Court of Wards and Liveries. The Kings For∣ces under Sir Jacob Ashley defeated at Stow in the Would, March 12.All the Kings strength in the field, except that Army that was pen'd up in Cornwal, was now collected under the Command of the Lord Ashley, who was marching to joyn his Infantry with the Kings remains of his Cavalry about Farringdon, whereabouts Colonel Rainsborough and Fleetwood kept their Post, having an eye upon that design of conjunction; and Colonel Morgan and Sir William Brereton pursued him in the Rear, from Hereford and Worcester∣shire. At Stow in the Would, they overtook and set upon him, wearied in his Quarters; but his men were yet not willing to resigne their swords, till after a fair dispute they were over-powred, 1500 taken Prisoners, with him∣self, and all his Baggage and Ammunition.Sir Jacob Ashley taken Prisoner. This was the last battel that was fought hac vice for the King in England, and which put a period to any further attempts in the field; the Royalists being forced to take up in their strong Holds, or submit to the Parliament, and endeavour a Composition; which was the main work, but too hastily entred upon, as their own sad expe∣rience soon informed them. Lord Hopton disbands.And just before this, the 14 of March, the Lord Hopton accepted of Terms for the disbanding of his Army, which was in this manner. After this worst∣ing at Torrington, and marching back into Cornwal, General Fairfax followed him within two days to Launceston, (where Colonel Basset with 500 men at first made opposition, but was compelled to abandon it, as likewise Saltash was quitted, and Mount Edgecomb offered a Treaty) and not far from thence Sir Iames Smith with a strong party fell upon some of the Van of their Army with good success;Sir James Smith falls on a party of Par∣liamentarians, with success. The Prince and Lord Culpeper set sail for Scil∣ly. but having notice of Cromwels approach, timely withdrew, and gave them liberty to possess Bodmin, while the Lord Hopton made his head-Quarters at Truro: from whence the Prince embarqued, and set Sail for the Island of Scilly, with the Lord Culpeper and others: which occasioned Ge∣neral Fairfax to complement the Lord Hopton to a disbanding, as reckoning them, by the Princes forsaking them, as good as lost. Among other terms offered him, this to his particular self, as being honour from the mouth of an enemy, is requisite to be inserted. Lord Hopton complemented by the Parlia∣ment General.Lastly, for your self, besides what is imployed to you in common with others, you may be assured of such Meditation to the Parliament on your behalf, both from my self and others, as for one whom for personal worth and many vertues, but es∣pecially for your care of, and moderation towards the Country, we honour and e∣steem above any other of your party; whose error (supposing you more swayed with principles of Honour and Conscience) we most pity, and whose happiness, so far as is consistant with the publique welfare, we should delight in, more than in your least suffering. In the mean while the Army advanced, and neer St. Columbe beat up the Quarters of the Princes Regiment,The Parliament Army beat up the Princes quarters, neer St. Columbe. Major-General Perr, a gallant-Commander, mortally woun∣ded. who made a gallant Charge through the enemy, and broke their first divisions; but fresh supplies coming, they drew off in order, leaving behind them Major-General Pert, a gallant person, mor∣tally wounded, a Prisoner; but so rebated the edge of the enemies courage, that they halted a while, and part of the Army drew back to Bodmin, more resolved for Treaty than Conquest: To which place came the Lord Hopton's answer, wherein he pretended his understanding of a likelyhood of agreement between the King his Master and the Parliament, which he said without any other Treaty would conclude him, and desired to be referred thereto: but Fairfax urging this Overture to his advantage, would allow of no such de∣lays; but his Terms he offered being honourable, was all he could grant; ac∣quainting
his Lordship that there was no such probability of Accommodation (and indeed his Lordship was greatly mistaken, for there was never any such in∣tention before nor after) and delays were dangerous, in respect of assistance both from the French and Irish, which had been promised to be landed for the Kings service in that County. Hereupon the Army also advancing,A Treaty con∣cluded on at Tresilian-bridge: a Ces∣sation agreed on. a Treaty was concluded on at Tresilian-bridge, and a Cessation agreed to; and the General thereupon, though with much reluctancy of the Lord Hopton, made Truro his Head-quarters; so that now the Kings Forces had but six miles in bredth, being as it were pounded up, as Essex before. The conclusion of the Treaty was followed by the ren∣dition of St. Mawes Castle. The number of the disbanded was nine Brigades;Nine Brigades disbanded. the French consisting of three Regiments, the Lord Wentworth's of four, Sir Iames Smith's of three, the Lord Cleveland's of four, Major-General Web's of three, the Lord Hopton's commanded by Colonel Bevil, the Lord Goring's of five, and the Princes Regi∣ment consisting of seven hundred, and Sir Richard Greenvil's Reforma∣does. The Conditions were,The Conditions of their dis∣banding. That they should march away with Horse and Arms, in number according to their respective qualities more or less, as they should chuse to go abroad to Foreign Service, or with Passes to go home: each Co∣lonel with eight or six horses, six or two pair of Pistols; and so other inferior Officers respectively; the common Troopers to have twenty shillings a man for their Horses; which, upon ratifying the Agreement being noised, many of the Royalists sold their horses before-hand, and got spittle-Jades in their stead, which upon their disbanding were turned upon their hand. The Lord Hopton was allowed fourty Horse and Arms for himself and twelve men; the Lord Wentworth twenty five Horse and Arms for himself and eight men. These were the most material,Th take ship∣ping at Ply∣mouth. and in six days performed. All the French were presently shipped for their Country, by provision made by the General at Plymouth, whither he went accompanied by Lieutenant-General Cromwel, be∣ing welcomed by the discharge of 300 Pieces of Ordnance, while the Army retreated back into Devon-shire, to make an end of the Siege of Exceter, where Sir Hardress Waller had continued during this Cornish Expedition; and the Lords Hopton and Wentworth, not deigning the Jurisdiction, or indeed any favour from their fellow-subjects at Westminster,Lord Hopton and Went∣worth sail in∣to Scilly. who Lorded it at a brave rate, gallantly waived and declined any advantage (but what was Military) in the Articles, and Sailed after the Prince into Scilly. About this time a resolute Attempt was made upon Abingdon,Abingdon at∣tempted by Sir Stephen Haw∣kins. where Ma∣jor-General Brown was Governour (as before) then absent in London, by a strong party under the command of Sir Stephen Hawkins from Oxford: The Foot had gained the Works, and had entred the Town as far as the Market-place; but some resistance being there made, and the Horse-guard taking the Alarm by the appearance of Major Blundel, who desperately charged, they were by Force driven out again; no Horse, but onely three Gentlemen of Christ-Church Oxon, clambering over to assist them;Ashby dela-zouch surren∣dred to the Parliament by the Lord Loughbo∣rough. the Pioneers and their instruments being so far behind in the Rear, that they could not timely ad∣vance to make a breach for the Cavalry to enter: and so that noble design, not without suspition of treachery, was frustrated. Ashby de-la-zouch, the maiden-Garrison, that was never before Besieged during the War, was now rendred by the Lord Loughborough, (whose Government it was) upon honourable terms to the Parliament. And so we have finished this unfortunate year, which with its period and re∣volution may be said to have concluded the Government; Monarchy being bea∣ten out of the field and out of doors together; the Enemies thereof having nothing more of hazard to do, but to encounter its Authority at the Bar with Pleas, not in Battalia with push of pike; and so the main of the Interregnum
between that and the Kings death, was spent in contrivances, designs and new models of I know not what; whereof (after the reduction of some other places in the beginning of the year 1646, which languished in a Consumption till May, the Critical month for that disease) there will be unwelcome occasion for this Chronicle next to discourse. Anno Dom. 1646. Dennington-Castle surren∣dred (Mar. 25. 1646.) to the Parliament,DEnnington-Castle leads the dance; and though it had withstood the many Sieges and attempts made by the enemy, could not now resist its Fate, nor the easie Summons of a Brigade of the Victor-Army; but despairing of Relief, and so of honourable Terms, if they should stand to their usual extre∣mity, submitted: But out of revenge for the slaughter and disappointment the Parliament had suffered under its walls, by the resolution of the Governour, he upon his return to his own house according to Articles, was notwithstand∣ing, contrary thereunto, sued and impleaded for several demolitions by firing of the out-houses, for the strength and security of the Castle; and by the neigh∣bours for damages. And to palliate this breach the better, they made an Ordi∣nance, being cock-sure of a plenary Conquest, That all Articles of Surrenders should insert the damages by wilful firing; which as it was most unjust, so was it as uncivil and base, and befitting none but tumultuary, head-strong, and un∣disciplined enemies. And for the fuller satisfaction of their spleen and adust choler against this Fortress, they themselves, not thinking of any reckoning, laid the goodly Fabrick in ashes;and demolished. made yet more notable by its loyal ruines, than it could have been if standing. Ruthen-Castle delivered to the Parliament by Sir William Vaughan.Then followed the Rendition of Ruthen-Castle in Wales to Colonel Mitton, (whither some of the residue of the divided Forces under Sir William Vaugban had betaken themselves) upon less equal Conditions than the main Army of∣fered to any place whatsoever. April 8. Corf-Castle ta∣▪Then was Corf-Castle in Dorsetshire taken without any offer of Terms, by vio∣lence and policy mixt together; and to make those Surrenders a Pair-royal, Exeter was added, whither Fairfax was come, and on the 31 of March drew all his Army round the City within Musquet-shot, having made Bridges over the River,Exeter-City delivered, Apr. 3. to the Lord Fairfax, by the Governour Sir John Berkley, by a Treaty be∣tween Commis∣sioners on both sides. and then sent in another Summons, which resolved into a Trea∣ty. Sir Iohn Berkley the Governour sent out the names of his Commissioners to treat, which at first were ten; but Fairfax for expedition desiring a less num∣ber, eight were consented to, and six of his: viz. for Exeter; Sir Henry Bark∣ley, Sir George Cary, Colonel Ashburnham, Colonel Godolphin, Captain Fitz-Gerald, Mr. Iohn Weare, Mr. Robert Walker, and Mr. Thomas Knight. For the Parliaments Army; Colonel Hammond Lieutenant-General of the Ord∣nance, Colonel Sir Hardress Waller, Colonel Edward Harley (now a Confident, shortly after a Reprobate of the Army) Colonel Lambert, Commissary-Gene∣ral Stane, and Major Watson Scoutmaster-General: By whom, after five days debate, it was agreed as followeth: The Conditions.That the City should be rendred to General Fairfax on Monday the 13th of April, with all the Stores, &c. The Princess Henrietta to depart any where with her Governess, in England and Wales, until His Majesty should give order for her disposal. The Cathedral nor Churches to be defaced. That the Garrison shall march out according to the most honourable custom of War, and to have free quarter all the way, and not to be compelled to march above ten miles a day, and with their Arms, to the places agreed upon for their laying them down. The Composition of persons of quality shall not exceed two years purchase. That all persons comprised within these Articles, shall quietly and and peaceably enjoy all their goods, debts and moveables, during the space of four moneths next ensuing: And be free-from
all Oaths, Covenants and Protestations, and have liberty within the said time of four moneths, in case they shall not make their Composition with the Parliament, and shall be resolved to go beyond Sea (for which they shall have Passes) to dis∣pose of their said goods, debts, and moveables, allowed by these Articles. These were the chief Articles, though there were a great many more; very honourable all of them, as it was the humour or else policy of the Army to grant them, and served as the original Draught for other places. In these Articles Sir Iohn Stawel was included,Sir John Stawel inclu∣ded in the Ar∣ticles. who for his constant avowance of those Immunities in these Articles from Oaths, &c. was most dishonourably and sa∣vagely used; insomuch that the Faith of the Army, with their disloyal and perfidious actions towards the King, appeared at the same time alike villanous and tyrannical. After the Articles were signed,The General marcheth to Tiverton, which was the ninth, the General would not lose so much time as to stay till Munday the thirteenth, the time of their Rendition; but though the weather was unseasonable, marched away to Ti∣verton, and so to form a Siege at Barnstable, which concluded upon the same Terms with Exeter; and then Dunstar-Castle, who embraced the same Condi∣tions; of which anon. The West being cleared, Pendennis-Castle onely excepted, General Fairfax on the 18th of April began his march towards Oxford,and towards Oxford. it being then rumoured that the King in the perplexity of his affairs would escape thence; but whither, it could not be so much as conjectured. In his way thither, saith one of their own Anglia Redi∣viva. Historians, so many Complaints were made to him of outrages and barba∣risms done in contravention of the Articles both of Cornwal and Exeter, by the Committee-Troops, (forsooth) that if they were particularly related, would make such a Volume as would scarce be imagined. In the interim of this March,Woodstock surrendred (April 26) to Colonel Rains∣borough for the Parliament. Colonel Rainsborough, who had beleaguered Wood-stock, and attempted it by storm with very great loss, it being manfully defended, and as well fortified, had it at last Surrendred to him upon such Articles as manifested the Governours worth and honour in the acknowledg∣ments thereby given him from his Enemies. The King foreseeing that Oxford was the next place which they designed,The King leaves Oxford, April. 27. not to make his own Court his Prison, what ever should be done by his Ene∣mies, if it should please God to reduce him to that distress, resolved to with∣draw himself in time to the Scotch Army, who (as was reported and ge∣nerally believed) had given him some assurance, that not onely his Majesty, but all others, that adhered to him, should be safe in their persons, honours and con∣sciences in their Army; yet not to lay more upon them, having so much alrea∣dy, I can hardly credit it. The manner of the traverse of the King is thus related: He went out of Oxford, as Colonel Rainsborough informed the Par∣liament (who no doubt were well acquainted with it before, for they had no other means to be rid of the Kings instances for Peace (of which hereaf∣ter together) that continually sounded in their ears so neer hand, than to have him removed from so neer a convenience of personal accommodation) in the disguise of a servant to Colonel Iohn Ashburnam, who was accompa∣nied with one Mr. Hudson a Minister, who for his singular Loyalty and fideli∣ty was intrusted in the menage of that affair, and for which he deserves a bet∣ter remarque, than this Chronicle can contribute or set upon him; losing his life afterwards in the same Cause, in 1648, in the Commotions of that unfor∣tunate year. By his Examination upon this business, it appeared that the King came first to Henly, then to Brainford, and so neer London, removed back to Harrow on the hill, there being a general Training of the City-Forces in Hide-Park, whither the King was expected to come, General Essex being them in the field, and his Majesty almost perswaded to venture himself into their hands; but other Counsels prevailing, he departed to St. Albans, and thence to Harborough in Leicestershire, where he expected the French Agent with some
Horse to meet him,Te King dis∣guised coms to the Scotch Ar∣my, May 4. and conduct him to the Scots: but he mssing, the King went (yet uncertain and irresolute what to do) to Stamford in Lincoln∣shire, and thence to Downham in Norfolk, from whence the examinant was sent to the Agent; and upon his return, they three passed into the Scotch Army, where for the present we shall leave him with this account of it from the Ge∣neral of that Army to the Parliament at London, which imported thus much. That out of a desire to keep a right understanding between the two King∣domes, he acquainted them with a strange providence with which his Army was surprized, together with their carriage and desires thereupon: That the King came the 4 of May, in so private a manner, that after they had made some search for him▪ upon the surmises of persons who pretended to know his face, yet they could not find him out in sundry houses. Trusting to our integrity, we are so far perswaded that none will so far misconster us, as to make use of this seeming advantage, for promoting any other ends than are expressed in the Covenant — We do ingenuously declare, that there hath been no Treaty nor Capitulation be∣twixt his Majesty and us, nor in our names; leaving the ways and means of Peace unto the Parliament of both Kingdomes. And with such twilight of language concluded. This was the happiest oportunity that ever offered it self, to do honour to the Scotch Nation, who had the Peace of three Kingdomes, but their own particular glory, at their sole Arbitrement; and how miserably they abused this advantage, and how they debauched their duty to their Prince, and their re∣putation to the World, we will not descant upon, since the Parliament of Scot∣land, in the year 1661, have so passionately protested against the conduct of this business, and have exempted from pardon whomsoever shall afterwards be found guilty of this most base and disloyal usage of the King; of which in its time. Before this adventure, which the King would have avoided, if the insolence of the prevailing Houses at Westminster could have been by any means rebated, his Majesty had courted the Parliament to a Peace by several Letters and Mes∣sages from Oxford;The King rei∣terated Messa∣ges for peace: the first, Dec. 5. the abstracts whereof it will not be tedious to recite. The first of them was soon after the aforesaid overture from the Prince by the Lord Fair∣fax, and was onely to desire a Pass or Safe-conduct for the Duke of Richmond, the Earl of Southampton, John Ashburnham and Jeffery Palmer Esquires, for their journey and continuance at Westminster, being furnished with such Proposi∣tions as his Majesty was confident would be the foundation of an happy Peace. The Parlia∣ments answer.To this Address, if I may so term it, though the Houses thought lesser of it, as appears by their Answer, they retort, That had his Majesties intentions been the same with his pretences and expressions, a happy Peace had been settled long since: That they cannot agree to his desires, as to the coming of those Lords and Gentlemen into their Quarters, in regard the designe (for Peace) may be of dangerous consequence: That they are in debate of Propositions, which they will draw up, and send to be signed by way of Bill, by his Majesty. This was in December 1645. The Reader will excuse this retrospection, because we will repeat this transaction in its own series. Message of the 15 of Decem∣ber, 1645.To this the King ten days after replies with more quickening Language; That his Majesty cannot but extremely wonder, that after so many expressions on their part, of a deep and seeming sence of the miseries of this afflicted Kingdom, and of the dangers incident to his person, during the continuance of these unnatural Wars; their many, great, and so often-repeated Protestations, that the raising of these Arms hath been onely for the defence of Gods true Religion, his Majesties
honour, safety, and prosperity, the peace, comfort and security of his people; they should delay a Safe-conduct to the persons mentioned in his Majesties Message of the 5 of this instant December, which are to be sent unto them with Propositions for a well-grounded Peace. A thing so far from having been denyed at any time by his Majesty, whensoever they have desired the same, that he believes it hath been seldome practised among the most avowed and professed Enemies, much less from Subjects to their King. But his Majesty is resolved that no discouragements what∣soever shall make him fail of his part in doing his utmost indeavours to put an end to these Calamities, &c. And therefore doth once again desire a Safe-Con∣duct. This would not do neither;Message of the 15 of Decem. for a Personal Treaty. the King therefore aggresseth them anothe way, and offers a personal Treaty ten days after. His Majesty laying aside all expostulati∣ons, as rather losing time, than contributing any remedy to the evils, will not complain of their neglect of him, and delays of Answer, but sends these Propositions this way, which he intended by the forementioned persons. For conceiving that the for∣mer Treaties hitherto proved ineffectual, chiefly for want of power in those persons that treated, as likewise because those from whom their power was derived (not possibly having the particular information of every several debate) could not give so clear a judgment as was requisite in so important a business; his Majesty there∣fore desires that he may have the engagement of the two Houses at Westminster, the Commissioners of the Parliament of Scotland, the Mayor, Aldermen and Com∣mon-Council and Militia of London, of the chief Commanders in Sir Thomas Fairfax his Army, for his Majesties free and safe coming to, and abode in London or Westminster, with such of his Servants and Train, not exceeding the number of three hundred, for the space of forty days; and after the same time, for his free and safe repair to any of his Garrisons, Oxford, Newark, Worcester, &c. which he shall appoint, there to have a Personal Treaty with his two Houses, to begin with the three heads which were Treated on at Oxford. And for the better ingredience and expedition thereto, will commit the great trust of the Militia for seven years into the hands of a mixt number of his own and their party; and calls God to witness of his sincere intentions to Peace, and adjures them likewise to the same. To this he is instant with them for an answer;Another to the same purpose, Decemb 29. and for the facilitating of the way to a Treaty, and their better inducement, without any expostulation, which he says he purposely forbears, he adds now more particularly, and to the respective interests, That upon his repair to Westminster, he doubts not but so to joyn his indeavours with his two Houses of Parliament, as to give just satisfaction not onely concerning the business of Ireland, but also for the setling a way for the pay∣ment of publique debts, as well to the Scots, as to the City of London and others: and resumes his desire afresh for a Personal Treaty, and that they would accept of his former offers. But the House of Commons resolved to keep to their first Answer,Royalists expel∣ed the Lines of Communica∣tion. not to treat, but to send Propositions; the main whereof was an absolute avoydance of the Kings concession as to the Militia, which they would have solely vested in themselves, and no other. And to give colour to this unreasonable stifness, and to obstruct a Personal Treaty, they Vote how great danger there is already to the Parliament and City, in the resort of so many Cavaliers to London; and thereupon an Ordinance is made anew, setling the Militia thereof, and re∣quiring them to provide for the safety of the City, and to search for Delinquents, and to expel them the Lines of Communication: and then on the 14 of Ia∣nuary returned his Majesty this Answer. They repeated the innocent blood spilt by his Majesties Command and Com∣mission,The Parlia∣ments Answer January 14. Irish Rebels brought over, and more, with Forraign Forces, on com∣ing; the Prince of Wales heading an Army in the West, and Garrisons kept
against them, and Forces likewise in Arms for him in Scotland. That for that reason, until satisfacton and security be given unto both Kingdoms, his com∣ing cannot be convenient; nor do they conceive it can be any way con∣ducing to Peace, that his Majesty should come to his Parliament for a few days, with thoughts of leaving it, especially with intentions of returning to Hostility against it. And do note likewise, that his Majesty desires not onely the engagement of the Parliament, but of the Lord Mayor, and the Officers of the Army, and the Scotch Commissioners; which is against the honour and priviledges of Parliament, those being joyned with them, who are subject and subordinate to their Authority. They insist upon their Propositions as the safest and surest way to settle Peace, as well in England as in Scotland, of which Kingdom in his Letters he makes no mention. In proceeding according to these just and necessary grounds for the putting an end to the bleeding calamities of these Nations, his Majesty shall have the glory to be the principal instrument in so happy a work, and they (however misinterpreted) shall approve themselves to God and man. But what? Before this came to hand, the King sends another Message, to know the rea∣son of the detention of his Trumpet;The King re∣plies, Jan. 15. and farther offers the free and publique use of the Directory (as commanded by the Parliament, and then practised in some parts of the City of London) to such as shall desire it; and testifies to God and the World, who they are that not only hinder, but reject this Kingdoms future happi∣ness; it being so much the stranger, that his Majesties coming to Westminster, which was the first and greatest pretence of taking up Arms, should be so much as delayed, much less not accepted or refused. But his Majesty hopes that God will no longer suf∣fer the malice of wicked men to hinder the Peace of his too much afflicted Kingdoms. From Oxford, Ianuary 15. In the mean while, some Papers concerning the Kings Transactions about a Peace in Ireland were published on purpose by the Parliament, to cast a scru∣ple into the minds of men, as if while the King Treated, he meant a new War by Ayds from thence; and so to prejudice him in his peoples minds, who began to murmur at the averseness and delays of the Parliament: which news coming to the Kings ears, he sends them a stinging and sharp Message, which was the next day after he had received their Answer. The Kings Message and Answer of the 17 of January to that of the 13.His Majesty thinks not fit to Answer those aspersions which are returned as Argu∣ments for his not admittance to Westminster to a Personal Treaty, because it would enforce a stile not sutable to his end, being the peace of these miserable Kingdoms; yet thus much he cannot but say to Those that have sent him this Answer, That if they had considered what they had done themselves in occasioning the sheding of so much inocent blood, by withdrawing themselves from their duty to him, in a time when he had granted so much to his Subjects; and in violating the known Laws of the Kingdom, to draw an exorbitant power to themselves over their fellow-Subjects, (to say no more, to do as they have done) they could not have given such a false Character of his Majesties Actions. That his Majesty with impatient expectation requires their Answer to his desire of a Personal Treaty, as the onely expedient. For certainly no rational man can think their last Paper can be an Answer to his former Demands, the scope of it being, That because there is a War, therefore there should be no Treaty for Peace. And is it possible to expect that the Propositions mentioned should be the ground of a lasting Peace, when the persons that send them will not endure to hear their own King speak? But what ever his success this way hath hitherto been, or how small his hopes, considering the high strain of those who deal with his Majesty,
yet he will not want Fatherly Bowels to his Subjects, nor will he forget that God hath appointed him for their King with whom he treats. At His Court at Oxford, January 17. 1645. This was well resented by the House of Peers; but the averse Commons would hear them no more at their Conference than the Kings Messages; where∣fore the King plies them again with a large Message, wherein he shows tha reaso∣nableness and necessity of his desires for a Treaty. His Majesty being resolved not to desist (though his discouragements be never so many and great) from his endeavours after Peace,His Majesties Message of the 24th of Jan. till he see it altogether im∣possible, thinks fit to make this Answer to the Objections of his two Houses in their Answer of the thirteenth instant, against his coming to Westminster; expecting still a Reply to his Messages of the fifteenth and the seventeenth, which he hopes by this time have begotten better thoughts and resolutions in the Members of both Houses. And first, as to the innocent blood spilt, he will not dispute who was the Author of it, but rather presseth there should be no more; it being no Argument to say, There shall be no such Personal Treaty, because there have been Wars; it being a strong inducement to have such a Treaty, to put an end to them. As to the next Objection of the assistance he had from some of his Irish Subjects; he saith, they are Protestants, who were formerly snt thither by the two Houses, and im∣possibilitated to stay there longer, by the neglect of those who sent them thither▪ who should have better provided for them. And that for Forraign Forces, their Ar∣mies have swarmed with them, when his Majesty had few or none. Thirdly, to the Princes heading an Army in the West, that there are divers Garrisons yet standing for him, and Forces likewise in Scotland; it must be as much confessed, that as yet there is no Peace, and therefore is this Treaty required. But his Majesty desires it may be remembred how long since he hath pressed the disbanding of all Forces; the refusing whereof hath been the Cause of this Objection. As to the time of fourty days limited for the Treaty, whereupon they infer that he would again return to Hstility; his Majesty protesteth the sincerity of those resolutions he bringeth with him for Peace, which if they meet with the like inclinations from them, will end all these unhappy bloody differences. To his requiring those engage∣ments of the City, &c. for his security; whosoever will call to mind the particular occasions that enforced his Majesty to leave his Cities of London and Westminster, they will not think his demands unreasonable. But he no way conceiveth how the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, Common Council, and Militia of London, were ei∣ther subject or subordinate to their Authority, there being neither Law nor practice for it, and so not to be parallel'd. That the breach of priviledge they mention, is more likely to be infringed by hindering his Majesty from this Treaty. As for Scotland, and their Religion, and securing the peace, his Majesty conceives it was included in his former Messages, particularly that of the fifteenth; but his sin∣cere meaning and endeavours are after it, as he new expresseth himself for their better satisfaction. Lastly, he saith, that there is but two ways of finally end∣ing these distractions; either by Treaty, or Conquest: The latter of which his Majesty hopes none will have either the impudence or impiety to wish for: and for the former, no better Expedient can be in the managing thereof, than by his Personal assistance in it; before which no Propositions can be effectual, which will remove all unnecessary delays, and make the greatest difficulties easie. Where∣fore his Majesty, who is most concerned in the good of his people, doth again de∣sire a speedy Answer. Amidst these importunities,The King com∣mands a general weekly Fast in Oxford. the King was not less sollicitous and instant at the High Court of Heaven; having commanded a general Fast in Oxford, up∣on Fryday weekly, according to the laudable example of the Primitive Chri∣stians:
in which devotions,The Earl of Glamorgan  by the Lord Digby, and for a while . another unhappy Cavil was raised against him, by the intercepting or discovering of his Commission to the Earl of Glamorgan, the Marquess of Worcester's Son, impowering him to treat with the Irish (for which he was afterwards impeached by the Lord Digby, charged on suspi∣cion of high Treason, and imprisoned for a while; (but soon after set at li∣berty) as having concluded a Peace against the Honour and Dignity of his Majesty, and to his great scandal with his English Subjects) of which said Transactions, to wipe off the imputation laid on him thereby he gives this ac∣count to his two Houses. And the words of this Prince are of such unqustio∣nable credit and veracity, that this affair needs no other defenc, which was this, (having intermingled therewith, and subjoyned his former dsires for a Personal Treaty.) Maesties , Jan. 29.His Majesty having received infrmation from the Lord-Lieutenant and Council in Ireland, that the Earl of Glamorgan hath without his or their directions or privity entred into a Treaty with some Commissioners on the Romane Catholique party there, and also agreed unto certain Artiles, highly derogatory to his Ma∣jesties honour and Royal dignity and prejudicial to the Protestant Religion there, whereupon the said Earl is arrested, &c. hath thought fit to give this relation thereof, to shew how contrary it was to his Majesties intention and directions; the Earls Commission being onely to raise Forces in that Kingdom, and to conduct them into this, for his Majesties service; and not to treat about any thing else, much less about Religion, or any propriety belonging to their Church or Laity. That what the Earl did there, came to his knowledge meerly by accident; protesting, that until the news of the said Earls restraint, he had no notice of any Capitulation with those Rebels, so destructive to Church and State, and repugnant to his Maje∣sties publique professions: That therefore he is so far from considering any of those Articles framed as aforesaid, that he doth absolutely disown the said Earl therein; having given order to his Lieutenant there, the Marquess of Omond, to pro∣ceed against the said Earl, as one who either out of falseness, presumption, or folly, hath hazarded the blemishing of his Majesties reputation of his own head, &c. But true it is, that for the necessary preservation of his Majesties Protestant Sub∣jects in Ireland, whose case was dayly represented unto him to be desperate, his Majesty had given a Commission to his Lieutenant to treat and conclude such a Peace there, as might be for the safety of that Crown, &c. And yet if the Houses will admit of a personal Treaty with him at London, and will send him a Pass or Safe-Conduct for a Messenger to be sent immediately to Ireland, he will dispatch one thi∣ther to prevent any accident that may hinder his Majesties Resolution of leaving the Manage of the business of Ireland wholly to the two Houses; and will make no Peace but with their consent. And further, in order to this desired Personal Treaty, he offers the Militia for seven years, with such limitations as were expressed at Uxbridge the 6 of Fe∣bruary 1644, all Forces disbanded, and Garrisons dismantled, and then all things to be in Statu quo. That the Houses shall nominate the Admiral, Officers of State, and Iudges, to hold their places during life, or quamdiu se bene ges∣srint, which shall be best liked. And likewise liberty to Tender Consciences be∣having themselves peaceably, with a general Act of Oblivion, in both his Parlia∣ments of both Kingdoms respectievly. These Concessions extending likewise to his native Realm of Scotland. And now his Majesty having so fully and clearly expressed his intentions and de∣sires of making a happy and well-grounded Peace, if any person shall decline that happiness by opposing of so apparent a way to attain it, he will sufficiently demon∣strate to all the World, his intention and design can be no other, than the total subversion and change of the ancient and happy Government of this Kingdom, un∣der which this Nation hath so long flourished. This was followed with two Messages more; the first of the 26 of February,
where he saith, that he needs make no excuse, though he sent no more Messages unto them, for he very will knows he ought not to do it, if he either stood upon pun∣ctilio's of honour, or his own private interest: but nothing being equally dear unto him as the preservation of his People, he passeth by many scruples, neglects, and delays, and once more desires a speedy Answer; which he provokes by a second Mes∣sage of the 3 of March, complayning of their unexpected silence, and offering up∣on the faith of both Houses for the preservation of his honour, person, and estate, and liberty given to all who adhered to him to go quietly to their houses with∣out any manner of Sequestration, and not to be compelled to take any Oath save what was warranted by the Laws of the Land, to disband his Forces, and dis∣mantle his Garrisons, and with no Martial but Royal attendance return to his two Houses, and there reside with them: And Concludes with a tender of an Act of General Pardon and Oblivion. Yet notwithstanding all these forcible and reasonable perswasions, and as many obliging Caresses and Condescentions, with which never Subjects or Par∣liaments of England were so treated, they continue inflexible, and rather the worse and more arrogant than at his first overture: for they resolved to pro∣ceed in their own method, spending their spare time in wrangling and deba∣ting their most quarrelsome Propositions; and on purpose totally to obviate and preclude the Kings designe (if he should so resolve) of coming to London, they throw these rubs in the way thither, by this Ordinance, in the first place. That in case the King shall, contrary to the advice of Parliament already given him, come or attempt to come within the Lines of Communication, that then the Committee of the Militia of the City of London shall have Power,The Parliament publish an Or∣dinance for the Scizure of the King and his Adherents. and are here∣by enjoyned to raise such Forces as they shall think fit, to prevent any Tumult that may arise by his coming, and to Suppress any that shall so happen, and to apprehend and secure any such as shall come with him, and to secure his Person from danger. That all persons whatsoever, that have born Arms against the Parlia∣ment, are to depart the City and Lines of Communication, by the 6 of April; or to be taken for Spies, and proceeded against according to the Rules of War in such cases. This Order to continue for a month, and no longer. Which shewed it was a sudden Legislative by-blow, made temporary, ac∣cording to their present apprehension, fear and occasion. And then to bear the people in hand, and to seem to intend their satisfaction, they promise to dispatch their Propositions with all speed; and to make this shew to appear more real, as if they were about a Settlement, they resolve to vouchsafe to give the Prince a like account of it,They pretend to invite the Prince by Com∣missioners. That Commissioners shall forthwith be sent, &c. Which Letters and Cajole were turned afterwards into another deeper fetch, or invitation (upon his Majesties going to the Scotch Army) of the Prince to the Parliament; whom, it was spread by the Faction, if the King should by his complyance prevail upon the Scots to take upon them his Interest, they would set up as a balance to his Majesties Authority, having the Scale of indubitable Succession on their side, against the quarrelled and perplexed posses∣sion of the Crown and the Person of the King on the Scots. But these were but sudden emergent thoughts, pro re nata, and to be used onely if the Rebel∣lion came to such extremity. And here we may wonder, how through so many patches of policy, and the changes of designes, one single Usurper at∣tained the compleat intire result of so many inconsistent devices and practi∣ces. The Prince was then departing for France, when this sollicitation was in∣tended; and we shall see how soon their mind changed.The Prince de∣parting for France. Exeter being delivered while the General was before Barnstable with the
other part of the Army,Barnstable surrendred April 7th. Ruthen-Castle, St. Michaels Mount, and Dunster-Ca∣stle Surrendred. Arch-Bishop of York declares for the Parlia∣ment. Dudly-Castle surren∣dred. that Town and Fort also rendred it self upon Terms: so that now there was nothing left the King in the West, and very few places elsewhere; the Garrisons that were yeilded this month, being no less than six, and those considerable, viz. Ruthen-Castle, Exeter, Barnstable, St. Michaels Mount, Woodstock, and Dunster-Castle, to Major-General Mitton, the Gene∣ral, Colonel Hammond, Colonel Rainsborough, and Colonel Blake: And this Iune also the Arch-Bishop of York declared himself for the Parliament, and maintained his House for them at Purin in Wales. Dudly-Castle, May the thirteenth, Surrendred by Colonel Levison to Sir William Brereton. General Fairfax having done here, marched now East-ward, and on the 19 of April came to Newbury, and advanced directly to Oxford, from whence the King (as before) escaped.Sir Thomas Fairfax cms before Oxford: he summons a Council of War, raiseth a great Fort neer the Town. Upon his approach, he summoned a Council of War, to advise which way to proceed: by whom it was agreed, that con∣sidering the strength of the place, they should make a Line and Starve them, for that it would be very hazardous to attempt it by Storm; to which was ad∣ded another reason, pretence of their Civility, lest by Batteries they should de∣molish the Colledges, and destroy the Library by their Shot and Granadoes preceding the assault. To this purpose a regular Circumvallation was finish∣ed, and a great Fort raised upon Hedington hill, within half a mile and less of the City (Eastward thereof) and a Battery likewise; but to little effect. Sir Thomas Glemham was Governour,Sir Thomas Glemham Go∣vrr of Ox∣ford. who to his everlasting Honour had so well defnded York, and made very honourable Conditions; but, to the wonder of Valour and Gallantry, had defended the City of Carlile against the Scots, (which was forgot to be mentioned in its place,Carlile iel∣ed to the Scts July 1, 1645, by Sir Thomas Glemham. other Actons cowding it out) for nine moneths, and upward, against Sickness, Famine, and War, having eaten things most reluctant to nature; till the Kings affairs 1645, being desperate, he accepted of no less honourable (than his York) Conditions, and was now deservedly, and as the onely fit person, intrusted with this chief Bulwark and Fortress of Loyalty. By him many additions were made, to render it impregnable; one most dangerous to the enemy was, that he had casd the ground before the Trenches to be broke and digged into pits, where∣in he had driven stakes; so that it was neither safe for Horse nor man, if they should attempt to storm, to approach the Works. But all this strength avail∣ed not against the Fate upon the Kings Cause: besides that there was some Division among the Nobles at Court,Divisions at Court among the Nobles at Oxford. to whom the King had left a power of Treating with the Enemy, insomuch that after a Summons, the Governour by the advice of the Lords condescended to a Treaty, which was managed at Mar∣ston at Mr. Crooks House, by Commissioners on both sides; and after a long debate, all Hostility being exercised in the mean time (especially when it was thought they would agree, the besieged shot their great Guns continually, by which they did some hurt, killing a Lieutenant-Colonel in the Works; and Prince Rupert received a shot in a Salley that he made, rather to take the air, than out of any great designe) the Treaty came to a conclusion, upon very noble Terms; which Fairfax was willing to grant, not knowing but that he might have been forced to continue there till the depth of Winter, at which time the over-flowing of the Rivers, which were now diverted, might make him rise and leave the Siege; there being plenty of all provisions in the Town to maintain it beyond that time. The Articles being tedious, and like those of Exeter, need no repetition. Oxford deli∣vered June 23.On Wednesday the 23 of Iune, according to Agreement, Sir Thomas Glem∣ham marched out with a Body of 3000 compleat Foot, through two Files of the Enemy, which were placed at the East-Gate, and extended to Shotover∣hill, where their Horse were drawn up in the Rear, in a Solemn Military posture; and having marched to Tame,The Governour marcheth to Tame. 900 of them laid down their Arms, and had Passes to their own houses; the rest, or the most part of them, took service under Colonel Tillier, one of the Garrison, for the French, and some for the Spaniard. A thousand more marched out at the North-gate, whose
habitations were in Glocester-shire, and the Counties that way.Prince Rupert and Prince Maurice de∣part to Oat∣lands. Prince Rupert and Maurice departed on the Monday before to Oatlands, upon special Articles for themselves; and a number of Gentlemen on Tuesday; besides near 2000 that staid aer the Army was entred, for Passes; so that there could not be less than 7000 men (besides three Auxiliary Regiments of Scholars and Towns∣men, which were disarmed by the General upon his entrance) then in the Town, being the very flower and the Chivalry of the Kings Army. There marched out likewise the Duke of York,Duke of York and many per∣sons of great Quality depart from Oxford. Duke of York conveyed to St. Iames's; soo after into Hol∣land; the Prin∣cess Henrietta to France, a while before. Faringdon in∣cluded in the Oxford Arti∣cles. the Marquess of Hartford, the Earls of Dorset and Southampton (the Duke of Richmond, and Earl of Lindsey, being comprised in the said Articles, who departed Oxford some while before the Siege, and rendred themselves) the Lords Cottington, Lane, and Dunsmore; Secretary Nicholas, Sir George Lise, and abundance of brave Gen∣tlemen and Officers: so that it was a pleasant martial fight, and many were the spectators from London, to behold their exit. The Duke of York was con∣veyed to St. Iames's to his Royal Brother and Sister under the Government of the Earl of Northumberland; from whence, by means of Colonel Ioseph Bam∣field, he was conveyed away, (according to the directions of the Queen his Mother) into Holland, as some while before, the Princess Henrietta, (after married to the Duke of Orleans) was by the Lady Dalkeith, her Governess, privately carried into France. In these Articles Faringdon was also included; the Governour, Sir George Lisle, being then in Oxford, ratifying the same. Colonel Poyntz and Colonel Rossiter had joyned their Forces, Parliament-Forces under Col. Poyntz and Col. Rossi∣ter besiege Newark. and with the access of the Scottish Army resolved to besige Newark, upon which they long had a hankering desire. They began the Siege in December, which was conti∣nued with all obstinacy, the Town defending it self resolutely, and by often Salleys annoyed the besiegers, doing notable Execution upon them. The Scots lodged on the North-side with 6000 men, making good Muschams bridge; Poyntz on the South-side, Colonel Rossiter and Lebunt at Blechington; Clay∣pool, (the first time he appears in service, now put on by Cromwel) with Lei∣cester and Ely forces at Bennington; the Nottingham Brigade at Stoak, where the Lord Bellasis, (the Noble stout Governour) gave them such a Camisade by a sudden eruption, that he totally routed their Horse, (Poyntz being there) and had near surprized the Foot, but that Rossiter came opportunely in, and de∣signing to get between the Salliers and the Town, made them leave their Victo∣ry, and make home: in their way whither, they defeated the said Colonel Rossiter, and safely returned in at their Works. Nevertheless, and though General Leven with his Army was drawn off from Newark,General Leven with his Scots draws of from Newark: the Town Summon∣ed; Lord Bel∣lasis the Go∣vernour com∣manded by the King to surren∣der. disgusted for want pay, Poyntz would not give over; but having turned the River Trent quite from the Town on the North-side, and the Scots having taken Sands Fort before, who paid dear for their Approaches, and the other River being also turned aside, and several Forts and Batteries new raised within Musquet-shot of the Town, a second Summons was sent in unto the Governour; which had not prevailed, for all their bravado's of danger, had they not been reinforced with a command from the King to his Lordship, to make as good Terms as he could, and deliver the place, for that the Peace of the King∣dome might the sooner be rstored. Accordingly, on the 4 of May,May 4 a Trea∣ty entred into, and Newark yeilded. a Treaty was entred into; the Articles very fair, but not so comprehensive as those given by Fairfax, but yet such as signified the noble Governours resolution, and pointed at his great desert; he having approved himself an eminent Souldier and Ser∣vant of his King and Country throughout the War, and was afterward his Ma∣jesties Governour of his Town of Hull. While the Army was marching to Oxford,The Parliament-Forces under Col. Whaley besiege Banbu∣ry. Colonel Whaley with a thousand Foot, and-four Troops of Horse, was sent to besiege Banbury; who lay before it ten weeks ere the Governour would hearken to any Terms, as nobly angry with the Fortune of his Cause, as disdainfully vext with the disparagement of the Siege; the Castle able to defie their entire Army, and which had often disap∣pointed
and beaten several united strengths that beleaguered it. But I cannot so regretfully partake with that Loyal Garrison, as Mr. Sprig Anglia Redi∣viva. doth zealously with the Town, in a Paragraph of his worthy observation, and which m very justly be construed in a better sense than he meant it, being a full ccount of that once-famous place for Zealotry. Banbury, once a great and fair Market-Town, before the late Troubles, but now having scarce the one half standing to gaze on the Ruines of the other, was ever till now unfortunate in all means and endeavours used for its recovery, having lain under the possession and Tyranny of the Enemy from the beginning, without almost any intermission; which happened to it, partly through the commodiousness of its Si∣tuation for the Enemy, as lying but eighteen miles North from Oxford, and in such a convenient place as gave it a command into divers other Counties, viz. North∣hampton-shire, Warwick-shire, &c. from out of which it gathered large Contri∣butions from Oxford: the sweetness that the Enemy tasted in the fruits and effects thus reaped by this Garrison, made them, that upon all our attempts to reduce it, they were still ready with great Forces to relieve it. But yet I cannot but also look upon and observe the end, a special hand and in∣timation of God against that Professing▪ Place, where in a manner Judgment began as at the House of God, and was removed with one of the last. The strange sights in the Air over it, as fighting, &c. whereof I was an eye-Witness, might po∣tend the portion which providence hath since prepared for them. All endeavours were used by the Besiegers, by Sapping, and Mining; which were again Countermined by the vigilance of Sir William Compton,Sir William Compton the Governour yields on ho∣nourable Terms, May 8. Brother to the Earl of Northampton the resolute Governour, who by flinging down stones and hand-Granadoes, mightily annoyed the Enemy; who nevertheless couragiously persisting in their work, being advanced close to the Wall, Sir Wil∣liam accepted of honourable Terms, and yeilded it on the eighth of May, the Anniversary of his Majesties Proclayming. I may not pass this notable place without another remarque. When the Grandees of the Faction in 1648 were dividing the spoyls of the Kingdom, and Loyal demolitions (which made entire structures of some of their partisans Fortunes) were conferred mutually by them, (of which in its place) and several Castles were then ordered to be rased; A friend of the Lord Say's,Lord Say Pro∣prietor of the place. (the Proprietor of the place,) moved in the House of Commons, that this Castle also might be ruined, as having been such a thorn to the Parlia∣ment; and that the Lord Say's consent might be procured (who had all along ser∣ved them as chief of their Council and Cabal, and dyed after the King's restitu∣tion, to say no more of him, though a grand engine of our Troubles) Two thousand Pounds should be given him in compensation:The Castle de∣molished. A Member, (that understood his Lordships drift, who put in for his share among the Commoners, while they were of the giving hand, and the Lords looked onely on others boun∣ty) stood up and said, that the Publique had no need of such penny-worths, as to give his Lordship two thousand pounds for that which cost him but five hundred; a cheaper time might be expected: which his Lordship was forced to await, and be content with an under-sale; when it was enviously by them, and dishonourably by him laid in its dust; the rather to be pitied, because of its reviviscency, having bravely and vigorously recovered it self from the decays of a long Antiquity; so much Art and industry being bestowed on it, that neither the Approaches of Time, nor the Batteries, fury and violence of the Enemy, were to be seen in any part of it. But it seems the Loyal Genius, the new Penates, agreed not well with their Mansion, and so abandoned it to the lust and spight of a deforming Reformation. May the present inhabitants consider, and the Reader pardon this digression. Colonel Wha∣ley marcheth to Worcester.From Banbury, Colonel Whaley was ordered to march to Worcester, and with some Troops of Horse to assist the Siege began by Colonel Morgan, who was
then commanded to the Siege of Ragland, to command in chief the Forces be∣fore that place; so that the Carrying on of Worcester-siege was devolved upon Colonel Whaley, who for want of Foot could not lay a close and regular Lea∣guer, until that defect was supplyed by Colonel Rainsborough,Besiegeth it for the Parlia∣ment. who came with a Brigade thither, and lustily pyed the raising of Forts and Approaches, which in short time he effectually brought to pass; so that the Governour (Colonel Washington, who had done the King excellent service throughout the War, particularly at the first taking of Bristol, where the breach he couragiously en∣tred was afterwards called by his name, made terrible thereafter by his brave Regiment of Dragoons, whose fierce and active gallantry bestowed a Pro∣verbe on every resolute exploit,Colonel Wash∣ington the Go∣vernour yildeth, July 23. Away with it, quoth Washington) who be∣fore had refused Terms, (or to accept a Summons) but upon his own high Conditions, seeing how feasible the forcing of the City might prove, and that no Relief could be expected, having also information of the surrender of Ox∣ford, inclined now to a Treaty, which took effect Iuly 19. and rendred the 23 of Iuly; the Articles being something less equal than the General gave; which was the manner of those substitute Commanders, who either might not, or rather were not indued with so much Military honour, as to grant them honourable Articles, the best Military policy: a courtesie, for which the Low-country-war is very deservedly famous; and the great master-piece of Souldiery in the late Princes of the House of Aurange. At the same time the Generals Regiment and Colonel Lilburn's were sent to assist and carry on the Siege before Wallingford,Wallingford yeilded, July 28, to the Par∣liament. where Colonel Thomas Blague commanded; and after Oxford was yeilded, the General came himself thither in person, to honour the Noble Governour, by the rendition of it to the main Army. His Terms were as good as any that had been given before; Sir Thomas as well respecting the merit and worth of the person, as the value and considerableness of the place. By Treaty it should have been surrendred on the 29 of Iuly; but a mutiny happening among the Souldiers of the Gar∣rison, the Governour was forced to render it the day before, having had six days time, from the conclusion of the Treaty, to prepare for his depar∣ture. After this rendition, Sir Thomas Fairfax went to the Bath to refresh himself,Sir Thomas Fairfax goeth to the Bath, from thence to Ragland-Ca∣stle, to assist Colonel Mor∣gan, Sir Tre∣vor Williams, and Colonel Laughorn. after so tedious attendance on several Leaguers; and from thence, being in∣formed of the resolution of the Noble Marquess of Worcester in defending his Castle of Ragland (where he had made many desperate Salleys, and kept the besiegers at hard and constant duty) he advanced to the aid and assistance of his Forces under Colonel Morgan, Sir Trevor Williams, and Colonel Laughorn; and upon his arrival sent in the Marquess this Summons. My LORD, BEing come into these parts with such a strength as I may not doubt, but with the same hand of good providence that hath hitherto blessed us,Sir Thomas Fairfax sum∣mons the Mar∣quess of Wor∣cester. in short time to reduce the Garrison of Ragland to the obedience of the Parliament: I have, in order thereto, thought good to send your Lordship this Summons, hereby requiring you to deliver up to  for the Parliament's use, the said Garrison and Castle of Rag∣land, which as it onely obstructs the Kingdom's universal Peace, the rendition may beget such terms as by delay or vain hopes cannot be expected. Aug. 7. Your Lordships humble servant, THO. FAIRFAX.
To which the Marquess Answered thus: SIR, The Marquess his Answer.ALthough my infirmities might justly claim priviledge in so sudden an An∣swer, yet because you desire it, and I not willing to delay your time to your Letter of Summons to deliver up my house, and the onely house now in my possession to cover my head in; These are to let you know, that if you did understand the condition I am in, I dare say, out of your Judg∣ment, you would not think it a reasonable demand. I am loth to be the Author of mine own Ruine on both sides, and therefore desire to have leave to send to his Majesty to know his pleasure,He desires to send to know the Kings plea∣sure. what he will have done with his Garrison. As for my house, I presume he will command nothing; neither know I how, either by Law or Conscience, I should be forced out of it. To this I desire your return, and rest, Your Excellencies humble Servant, H. WORCESTER. The General denyes it, shews the in∣conveniencies of the Marquess hi refusal.To which the General replyed, that for sending to his Majestie, it had been denyed to the most considerable Garrison in England, further than an account of the thing done upon the Surrender; which he offered: that for the destruction of his Lordships house and Garrison, he should not have troubled his Lordship, were it disgarrisoned. And repeats inconveniences upon a refusal. To this the Marquess answers,The Marquess urgeth reasons on his side. that he hath twenty thousand pounds due from the King lent out of his Purse, (it is believed the Loyal Noble Marquess might have said four times as much, being the richest and freest Subject the King had) which would be lost, if he in this matter should displease him, al∣ledges his familiarity with Sir Thomas his Grandfather in Henry Earl of Hunting∣tons time, President of the North; for whose sake, he supposeth, were it known to him, the General would do what safe courtesie he could: Desires, if he might have his Means, and be at quiet by the Parliaments approbation, and not vexed with the malice of the Committees of that County, to be quit of the Garrison, and to that purpose expects what Conditions he will give. The Marquess excepted out of the Parlia∣ments Pardon.The General returns, that he will give such as shall be fit and satisfactory for the Souldiers, to his Lordship and Family all security and quiet from any that belongs to him (note that the Marquess was then excepted out of Pardon;) he will interpose betwixt his Lordship and the Committees, that they shall do no∣thing without order from the Parliament,The General promiseth to interpose be∣tween his Lord∣ship and the Committees. to whom he hath liberty to send, and from whom, upon a present Surrender and submission to their Mercy and Favour, he may presume on better Terms than if he stand to extremity. Proposeth the sad example of the Marquess of Winchester, who lost all by the same resolution. For the twenty thousand pounds, he may send to the King at the same time with an account of the Surrender. The Marquess rejoyns, and desires to be satisfied, whether if any conclusion shall be made, he shall afterwards be left to the mercy of the Parliament for alteration at their Wills and pleasures;The Marquess cites the Earl of Shrewsbu∣ries Case. and cites to that purpose the Earl of Shrewsburies case, and divers others, whose Conditions were broken. He knows that by the Generals Will and Consent it should never be; but Souldiers are unruly, and the Parliament Vnquestionable, and therefore desires Pardon for his just cause of Fear. This was Answered by Sir Thomas, that what he granted, he would under∣take to make good. And as to the instance of the Lord of Shrewsbury, the Actors in that breach, who were none of his Army, have received their Censure, and by this time he believes Execution.
The first result between them,Ragland-Ca∣stle surrendred Aug. 19, to the Parliament. was, at the desire of the Marquess, a Cessation for six hours; but nothing being concluded on, the Army proceeded in their Approaches, which were cast up within sixty yards of their Works; when the Marquess was induced and perswaded by them within to come to a Capitula∣tion, which was in effect, the same with others: And on the 19 of August the Castle was Surrendred, according to Agreement; into which the General entred, and had some speech with the Marquess, and so back again to Bath. There marched out besides the Marquess,The Marquess casts himself on the Parlia∣ments mercy. Several persons of Quality in the Castle. who cast himself wholly upon the mercy of the Parliament, the Lord Charley his Son, the Countess of Glamor∣gan, Sir Philip Iones, Doctor Bayly, a Commissary, 4 Colonels, 82 Captains, 16 Lieutenants, 6 Cornets, 4 Ensigns, 4 Quarter-masters, 52 Esquires and Gentlemen, as by the Catalogue of them taken by the Advocate of the Army appeared. I do not wonder the gallant Marquess was so loth to part with his house: for not long after,The Marquess a great Scholar, to whom the King was much indebted: he departs this life. and 'tis presumed from some thought, sadness, and trouble of minde, of being forced from this his Castle, and exposed to the fury of his Enemies, he departed this life. A man of very great Parts, and becoming his Honours, of great Fortitude of mind, either Actively or Passively, and to whom the King was much beholden. He was nevertheless better at his Pen than the Sword and a great deal happier; for he hath used that with rare success, as some of his Works in print, viz, his Apophthegms and Discourses, and Disputes with his Majesty concerning Religion, do abundantly demon∣strate. He lived o see himself undone, and a most plentiful estate spoyled and Ruined; but anticipated and fore-ran that of the Kingdom, which soon after followed. Conway-Castle was taken by storm, by Forces under Major-General Mitton,Major-General Mitton takes Conway-Ca∣stle by Storm for the Parlia∣ment. Carnar∣van-Castle de∣livered; as al∣so Ludlow, Litchfield-Close, and Bor∣stal house. to whom Sir Thomas Fairfax would have spared some Forces, but he would have no partakers of his Trophies, but those men he had raised himself, and hitherto kept as a distinct Body, pretending he had more men than money to pay them. He also took in Carnarvan-Castle, seconded by Major-General Laugborn his Country-man, being delivered upon good Articles by the Lord Byron, who had before so stoutly maintained Chester. Ludlow was likewise delivered, and Litchfield-Close to Sir William Brereton; Borstal-house by Sir Charles Campian, slain after at Colchester; together with Gothridge. So that the Pen is quite worn out with scribling of Articles, and desires to be excused from further particulars. Onely we may not omit Pendennis-Castle (and Mount Michael in Cornwal taken during the siege of Exeter by Colonel Hammond) which stood out still,Pendennis-Castle (and Mount-Mi∣chael) taken for the Parlia∣ment, by Colo∣nel Hammond. John Arundel Esq. the Gover∣nour having order from the King to surren∣der. by the resolution and Loyalty of a right Noble Gentleman of that County, Iohn Arundel of Treacise Esquire, the Governour: it had been blockt up by Land by Colonel Richard Fortescue, and by Vice-Admiral Batten by Sea, ever since the General departed: no Summons could prevail, without his Majesties special Order to Surrender; whom the Governour was very instant to have leave to send to. All the deficiency was in Provision; and no Relief could enter, save two Shallops, who got in at the break of day, at which time the Parliaments Shallops that in the night-time lay close to the Castle to intercept them, drew off, for fear of being discovered as they were so neer within the reach of the Cannon. The Governour therefore gave the Prince notice; who not being in a condition to relieve the place, there being a numerous Garrison within, he accepted of Terms, which, to give Colonel Fortescue his due, were the best given by any but the General himself, and came the neerest his gene∣rous way of Treating, and caressing an yielding Enemy. Not long after followed the rendition of Scilly-Island;Scilly-Island, Denbigh and Holt-Castle Surrendred. and the Prince de∣parted for France: the like of Denbigh, and Holt-Castle, which concluded the Military Actions, and left the Conquerours (whose wreathed Bays would not well twine together; the Presbyterian Thistle, and the Independant Bramble,
not apt to such coalition, but scratching and tearing one another,) worse em∣broyled than they had been throughout, or before the War, in the greatest dif∣ficulties of their designs or defeats. The Pricks of these Triumphant Coronets sharply troubled the heads of the wearers; and how to set them easily they knew not. Ambition was the most poi∣gnant and grievous to Cromwel, Disdain and Envy to the old Presbyterian Commanders; from whence resulted a just indignation in some of their Grandees of having taken Arms to such ill purposes against the King: But in most others of them, the Itch of Sacriledge and Covetousness, the longing after the spoils of the Kingdom, rebated the acuteness of those animosites, jealousies and di∣strust, intending their private advantages, and chiefly aiming at the kirnel, Wealth and Riches, and leaving the shell of Government to be crackt and bro∣ken by other mens teeth, to give them the fruition of their projected profits and Estates. For Cromwel (as it might well be presumed) now took up these resolutions, which he had staggered at some while before, to invade the Soveraignty: un∣to which end, incredible will it be, how he had wrought upon the Grandees of his Faction, and they upon the Rascality and rabble of the same leaven, into so great a popularity,Cromwell the Idol of the pre∣tended Saints. that he became the very Idol of those (so then called) Saints. The News-books every day were filled with the wonders of his Atchievements; where he was present at any success, all was attributed either to his fortune or Valour; where they had Victory in his absence, it was acknowledged to his Counsel and Prudence: insomuch that by sober men it was well hoped such af∣fronts to his General might have awakened him to some distruct of his aspiring method; but by the secret wisdome of God he was blinded, not onely in a de∣structive and supine compliance with this Rebel, by a guilty omission of his care and inspection over him, but infatuated into his most scelerate and abominable practises, to the subversion of the Parliament, and the execrable murther of the King. They who Raised this Army against their Soveraign, being Raised af∣terwards by that (one of their own listing) Usurper. He disbands  of the Ar∣m under Ma∣jor-General Massey.His main and first engine to the overthrow of the Government and Laws, which took its mischievous effect, was the disbanding part of the Army under Major-General Massey, a Noble person, and though formerly an enemy to the King in that unlucky Siege of Gloucester, now suspected as inclinable to a mo∣derate use of that Victory the Parliament had obtained. He was known to have much affected General Essex, of whose principles, and intentions of duty to his Prince, one may without danger say they were tainted by the contagion of the times, but never corrupted or alienated from the Kings person, Authority, or Family, or Peace of the Kingdom. By disbanding the Forces under him, the design of Cromwel was first to make a division,Cromwel de∣signes to create differences in the Army. and stir some ill humour in the Army, as if that were the leading case; next, to make the standing Officers, when they should know they were at his disposal, more sure and obliged to him, and then to instil into them his own Trayterous devices; in sum, to perpe∣tuate the War till he had attained his ends, and then continue them, as the Turk doth his Ianizaries. Colonel Cooks Brigade dis∣banded.Accordingly, at the Devises, General Fairfax (for upon him it was put) disbanded Major-General Massey's and Colonel Cook's Troops, being in all 2500 Horse, prepared, but falsely Anglia Redi∣viva. to obey the Ordinance of Parliament, re∣ceiving onely six weeks pay for many moneths Arrears: and because the Parlia∣ment so vehemently tax the King for entertaining of Forreigners, and also because it is very strange, observe what Anglia Redi∣viva. he saith further: Sir Thomas Fairfax his Pen travelling as far as great Alexanders Sword.Many of the disbanded Souldiers of Forreign Coun∣tries. Divers of the disbanded came from very remote Countries, and bad Passes, some for Egypt, others for Mesopotamia and Ethiopia. Upon consideration of this passage (besides that it wipes away the cavil of the Kings entertainment of Forraigners, a more general and no less envious
observation ariseth, viz. that in some sort it may be said (what was spoke of the Roman Civil Wars, That all Nations and people were engaged in the for∣tune and Fate of Caesar or the Senate) that the whole World was concerned in our English Confusions: for by this black list of Auxiliaries from the other side of the Line, and such remote Regions (it being also unquestionable how dex∣terously and designedly all our potent Neighbours thrust themselves in at our Breaches) our troubles and intestine feuds may be allowed to pretend to a like obnoxious greatness and reputation; since the fame of our conflagration and incendiaries flew to such distant and scorched Climates. Those Salamanders embroyled themselves in the fire of our contentions, and by their Hue it had been no great prejudice to the Cause they maintained, if a man had guessed them to be the Tutelary Angels thereof; the inside of all the pretences of the War against the King, appearing as black and foul as the outside of these their fellow-Souldiers. So that while we shall now in its order and time repeat the subsequent per∣petrations of the Party and Faction, the War being wholly finished, and they by the wise providence and permission of God possessed of all they quarrelled for; (though it is not fair to prepossess posterity) the Reader and after-times will suspect or think there is some Hiatus or deficiency in the Register of these troubles, if after such a promising conclusion (wherein the necessity and blessing of Peace seemed to be well accommodated in that juncture, besides the opportunity and obligation of the Parliament to make appear their many Declarations and Protestations, both in behalf of his Majesty and the King∣dom) he shall be on a sudden, without any pause or expostulation, or account of the designes and practises of the Parliament and Army, plunged imme∣diately, and involved again in new,The Factions begin now to unmask them∣selves, and lay open their in∣tentions. and worser, and more perplexed actions and politicks than in the middle of the War: for now having laid aside the mask, the smooth and soft cover of their beautiful pretences, they put on the gastly and terrible Vizor, that personated the Tyranny and Usurpation which soon after followed. To proceed then, The state of the matter was briefly this: It was thought now high time by the principals of the conquering side, to share the Soveraignty; but the difficul∣ty of doing it, in regard of those mutual distrusts that waxed every day stron∣ger betwixt the two factions of Presbytery and Independency,The two Fa∣ctions, Pres∣bytery and In∣dependency distruct each other. delayed a while the actual fruition of their desires. The Bucket of interest went up and down a long while, one side secretly closing with the King in a seeming tenderness for his Rights and Person, to ballance the other, who by an obstinacy against him and his Government, engaged most of the first leaven of that tumultuous rabble to an adherence and strengthning of their party, from an expectation of spoil and preferment upon their Models, after their subversion of Monarchy. In these their distractions, the onely expedient for both, was to protract time, and await a more advantagious and favourable juncture for either of them, wherein to compass and accomplish their several aims and divided projections upon the Kingdom. Therefore the same publike ends and common concern∣ments, which were the pretended causes of the War, were now declared to be insisted on, as to constant and perpetual security, viz. the Laws, Religion and Liberty. That the bting the Enemy in the Field, was not sufficient alone to that purpose, but that some provision must be made for the future; and that those establishments of the publike upon a firm Peace, would require time, af∣ter so many commotions and dislocations, such disorder and confusion of the policy of the Government. To this purpose the King was held out to his people as an obstinate person,The King ma∣ligned to his people. no way changed in his mind as to their good, but that all his offers of Treaty and Peace were meerly to impose upon their credulous affections, intending nothing less than satisfaction to his Parliament, against whom he had waged a long and bloody War. That in a just resolution, they had proceeded, and would persist on their way of Propositions, on which alone a lasting Peace
might be grounded and expected. That in the mean time they would take care that the Common Enemy should take no advantage of raising a new War, (indeed their tyrannical method of Composition for their Loyalty in the first, might well make them as good as their words.) And with the old flourishes of Liberty, and happy times, inculcating their Successes, and ascribing them to their Cause, they thus offered to amuse the people, exchanging their fine∣ness and smoothness of words, for the real repose and tranquillity looked for by the Kingdom. This proceeding highly exasperated the Kings party, and as much encoura∣ged the desperadoes of their own,his party high∣ly exasperated. to claw them with Petitions and Addresses of Thanks for these resolutions, proving the onely means to continue the rupture, and consequently their Power and Authority; which how then and hereafter they executed, we will now more particularly relate, having laid down these SEEDS of the SECOND WAR, as they, and from then their Sequestrators and Committees were most wrathfully pleased to call it, when they wrongfully pla∣ced it upon their score and account. The Scotch Parliament and Army ingross the wealth of the Nation. The Scots are for ready Cash, the others for Delinquents Estates. The King in the Scots posses∣sion.These were the transactions and the devices of the English Parliament and Army: it will be requisite to see what the same bodies of Scotland do in refe∣rence to the Peace of both Kingdoms; and we shall finde them in as great a strangeness to it as the former, and not with far different purposes and inten∣tions: For the Scots would have money in Coyn and Specie, the other were for the value in great penny-worths, and purchases of Delinquents Estates. The Scots, as was said before, had the King in their possession, a good pawn and pledge for the debt accrued to them before, for the pay due for their service in England; which being not over-hastily pay'd, they quitted their post at the Siege of Newark, and with the King marched Northwards, bearing him in hand that they were his gude Subjects, and would stand as far as 'twas con∣sistent with their Covenant, for his person and interests. As the Army marched, so did the King, making the limits of their Quarters to be his Court, until by leasurable journeys (and which were interrupted by several Expostulations, Expresses from Westminster) he came at last and took up his residence at New∣castle, where appeared such a deal of Scotch bravery, especially among the Commanders of their Army, that the place appeared like the revived Court of King Iames after his assumption to the Crown of England. Every rag worn by them, being bought and purchased (if so fairly come by) with English gelt. The Parliament of England consult concern∣ing the Kings person.In the mean while the Parlianent were debating concerning the Person of the King; but it was so ticklish a point, that they agreed not to any present positive settlement or entertainment of it, but negatively, in signifying to the Scots, that in England his Majesty might be disposed by none but the Parlia∣ment of England: That their Army in England is theirs, and under their pay, and pretending the inconvenience of the great distance of the King from them, as to obtaining of his assent; and then the Covenant. This begat in the King another meditation, in his Eikon Basil. where he discourseth and deplores those events, which put him to such a choice; but resolutely fixeth himself on his own Honour and Conscience, however it should please God to order this disposition of him in the Scots hands. And con∣trariwise it raised in the faction Soliloquies and Charms, which way they might extricate this puzling difficulty. As the first expedient, the old stalk of courting the Prince was agreed upon; and therefore they sent a Letter to the Governour of Gernsey to be conveyed to him. The King at Newcastle May 13.At the Kings Arrival at Newcastle, he was there received with all demon∣strations of respect, both from the Town and the Scots; on the Towns part, with the usual customes of Bone-fires, and ringing of the bells, and ap∣precations for his Majesties happy restitution, and speedy accommodation with his Parliament; on the Scots, in a semblance of the same gladness and duty, with protestations to the same purpose as the inhabitants wishes; but which
suddenly lost belief,The Sots Gen. Prolaims that no Papists nor Delinquents shall came neer the Kings Per∣son. The Scts lay heavy As∣sessments on the Northern Coun∣ties. They send for their Horse. when their General signified by Proclamation, not onely that no Papists or Delinquents should come neer his Person, but also, That although his Majesties Person were present, yet all men whatsoever should yield Autho∣rity to the Ordinances of the Parliament. A parcel of which Authority they themselves imitated, laying heavy Assessments upon all the Northern Counties, pretending the Parliaments negligence of their pay; so that those poor people were ready to rise and free themselves from these oppressors, having in vain Petitioned them at Westminster for relief: which the Scots senting, they pri∣vately sent for their Horse under David Lesly, who had defeated Montross at Philipshaugh (of which briefly before) and driven him far enough into the High-lands, to return to their main Army then at Newcastle, to reinforce it, and to secure themselves in their Quarters, till the bargain should be made. They at Westminster understanding hereof, do resent this additional force of Scots, and thereupon in anger Vote,The English Parliament Vote them home, and 100000 l. to be paid to their Army. That this Kingdom hath no further need of the Army of their brethren the Scots in this Kingdom, and that the sum of one hundred thousand pounds should be advanced and paid to that Army, as followeth, viz. 50000 l. after their surren∣der of Newcastle, Carlile, and other English Garrisons possessed by them in Eng∣land, and the other 50000 l. after their departure into Scotland; and order should be taken for the payment of their Arrears. This was a good come on, and a handsome induction to greater sums: in the mean while the Scotish Commissioners,The Scotch Commissioners gloze with the English Par∣liament. with their Omne tulit punctum qui miscuit utile Dulci, address themselves to the Parliament with their glozing ora∣tory, protesting the good intention of their Army and Nation, and obtesting some speedy satisfaction of money, that they might not be burdensome to the Country; assuring them on one hand, of their complying with the Parliament according to Covenant, and offering something for the King too a la Mode the same Covenant; like the man in the Fable, that could blow hot and cold with the same breath. But where so many words pass between buyer and seller, a man may suspect little honesty or reason in either. To confirm this their firm adherence in all fairness to the Covenant,The Dispates be∣twixt the King and Mr. Hen∣derson at Newcastle. Mr. Alexander Henderson, the Moderator formerly in that illegal Assembly at Glas∣gow in 1639. and Commissioner here in England afterwards, a famed preach∣er, Scholar, and Presbyter, was set upon the King at Newcastle, whom the King handled with that acuteness both in private Conferences and Disputes, as also in discussive Papers of the Controversies of the Discipline of the Church of England, and so well plyed him (his Majesties prudent and laborious un∣dertaking of this person serving to stop the weaker yet more malapert assaults of his English Reformists who followed this grand Pattern) by asserting the practice and universal consent of the Primitive Church beyond any private or modern opinion whatsoever, that it is more than credible that Mr. Henderson convinced in his conscience of the errours he had maintained to the promoting of Schism and Rebellion, from such a Church, and against so excellent a Prince, whose Learning, Clemency and Courtesie, were alike eminent, not long after upon his return,Mr. Hender∣son languisheth and dyeth. or rather sending home into Scotland, languished with grief and anxiety of mind; and with plain symptoms thereof, and no other outward cause, dyed. Mr. Stephen Marshal,Mr. Stephen Marshal a great Preacher of the Covenant at Newcastle. another Presbyterian Minister, and a famous Teacher of the Covenant, was there also; but the King would not be troubled with his discourses, having such cause of offence at his prayers; which made him after∣wards wholly decline any intercourse with him: the Papers wherein he had so rationally refuted the same principles with Mr. Henderson, being publike, and therefore he might well be disobliged from further trouble in that Controversie.Politick dis∣putes between the Parliament and the Scotch Commissioners. Nor were the disputes less between the Scots Commissioners and the Parliament, which every day came in Print, being politick, subtile wranglings for nothing, de lana Caprina, each party endeavouring to cajole the other into absurd beliefs:
meer names of things, and distinctions, as the Person of the King, &c. wholly imploying those State-Logicians, with whom Majesty and duty were nonEn∣tia. Into these frivolous jars, Cromwel and his Army-Fellows put in their Pleas, and suborned some serious fools to throw in their considerations of the matter; and . which reflected bitterly on the Scots, not by way of Reason, but bold im∣pudent aspersions, and indeed, as to them, ungrateful and unmannerly dict∣ries. Those the Commissioners take notice of, complaining to the Parlia∣ment; but in vain, the Independant party laughing secretly at the pudder they made for such trifles as Religion and Government, which so forwardly and designedly they themselves had overthrown, and aukwardly and scrupu∣lously they would now seem to intend and establish. It being generally recei∣ved by them, as proclaimed by others, That all was but a Juggle; and the con∣clusion credited that report. Setting aside other punctilio's between them, concerning Presbytery (which now laboured grievously in the birth, being ready for the Midwifery of an Ordinance, and was hereby retarded, A Proviso for Tender Consciences being to be added as a superfaetation of that Discipline by the Independents, and rejected as an after-birth, inlet and receptacle of all Heresies, Sects, and Schisms by the Scots, of which there will be occasion hereafter) matter of State shall be first related, as coming first to the Kings consideration in the Propositions after ten months time sent to him by Commissioners while he was at New∣castle. To omit also all their disputes concerning the obligations of the Cove∣nant, as to mutual interests and polity of Government, whereby the one Kingdome might not act without the concurrence of the other, insisted on by the Scots, and waved by the Members, because these shadows and the Cove∣nant it self is vanished, and the best friends of it would be loath to have these absurdities and clashings of the said League revived; the Confederates, as at the building of Babel (such our after-Commonwealth) being divided within three years time among themselves in the very language of it; and some great promoters of it then, calling it now an Old Almanack: I say, not to rake in this unconcerning matter, which is intended to be forgotten, let's proceed onely with this due insertion of another matter, That Cromwel seeing how the Scots drove at money for pay, to ripen a division betwixt them and the Houses, set Poyntz's Souldiery and Garrison of York, where he was Gover∣nour, to mutiny for pay, and to force it as the Scots did, whose example they pleaded; and with the same blow to discard Poyntz first from the affection, and then from the command of his Forces; one suspected to be honester than the designes of the Army could suffer. 11.On the 11 of Iuly the Propositions were finished, and sent to the King by the Earls of Pembroke and Suffolk, Mr. Goodwyn, Sir Walter Earl, Sir Iohn Hippesly, and Mr. Robinson: who met on the way with a Message from the King to the Two Houses in answer to their demand for the Marquess of Or∣monds disbanding in Ireland; wherein he desires their Propositions, as the rea∣diest and safest way to gratifie them in that and other things conducing to the Peace of the Kingdom. A little while before this also, Monsieur Bellieure, a French Ambassador being sent to accommodate the difference between the King and Parliament, received thanks from the Parliament, to whom he first ad∣dressed; but the interposition of his Master was wholly denyed: whereupon he did the like fruitless office to the King; and having had some private Audi∣ence with him, after many good morrows departed. To keep a punctual account of the Prince his Son's peregrination; the first forrain place we find him in is about this time at the French Court in Paris; of which the Queen, then there also, gave notice to the King by Mr. Montril the French Agent residing there. The Propositions sent now to the King were quarrelled at by the Scots Com∣missioners; first, because they were not the same with those formerly sent to Oxford and Vxbridge. Secondly, Because all the additions, omissions and alte∣rations
made in them, are in those things which concern the joynt interest and union of both Kingdomes. And thirdly, the danger of wholly excluding the King and his Posterity, and so the Crown, from their right to the Militia; which was an alteration of the Fundamental Laws. And fourthly, the uncer∣tainty of the Religion the Parliament would establish, they refusing to give their Brethren, the Scots, the particulars thereof; Presbytery being then piece∣meal offered by the Assembly of Divines to the Parliaments considera∣tion. In this point,The Scots urge the Parliaments promise of Uni∣formity, and their ordering the Covenant to be printed in most Forrain Languages. the Scots urged how many promises of UNIFORMITY the Parliament had made at their instances to them throughout the War; and that this Uniformity might be extensive, and become the Discipline of the Re∣formed Churches every where, and so be the Catholick Rule, had ordered the Covenant as a Model or Pattern to be printed in most of the Forrain Lan∣guages; that it should be a sin and shame to England, that all sorts of He∣resies, Sects and Schisms should be so multiplied; Liberty of Conscience not onely pleaded for, but in place already, and all the kindnesses done them, so unhandsomly slighted. And as to the Presbyterial Government to be esta∣blished here, Exceptions were taken at the subordination of Church-Assemblies to Parliament, in the words prescribed, lest it should be interpreted as if the Civil Power were not onely conversant about matters of the Church and Re∣ligion, but were formally Ecclesiastical, and to be exercised Ecclesiastically, and be counted such a Supremacy in the Church, as in the Pope and the late High-Commission of England. Next, they scrupled their Provincial Commis∣sioners for judging of Scandal, there being no such Warrant for such a mix∣ture of Lay with Spiritual Officers; which they suppose may be the laying of a New Foundation of the said High-Commission or Episcopacy. Thirdly, That admitting the Power of calling and convening a National Assembly be in the Civil Magistrates as positive, yet they cannot allow it privative or destru∣ctive, and that therefore such Assemblies may not be restrained to times of Session, the safety of the Church being the supreme Law; That therefore it should not be left ad libitum to the pleasure of the Civil Power, but that fixed times for their meeting might be appointed. From this the English perceived that the Scotch Yoak would not fit their necks; and though they could be content with their Spirituals, there was no enduring of their Temporals: which consideration, with those Cavils printed and published, produced a Declaration of the House of Commons,The Parliament publish a De∣claration. wherein (being now in no need of further assistance, having no Enemy left but that Army) they come to a point, and withal thus gird their gude Brethren (we shall repeat onely one Paragraph.) Concerning Church-Government, we having so fully declared for Presbyterian Government,One Para∣graph thereof, relating to Church-Gover∣ment, &c. having spent so much pains, taken up so much time, for the settling of it; passed most of the particulars brought to us from the Assembly of Divines (cal∣led onely by us to advise of such things as shall be required of them by the Parlia∣ment) and having published several Ordinances for putting the same in execution, because we cannot consent to the granting of an arbitrary and unlimited Power and Jurisdiction to near TEN THOVSAND IVDICATORIES to be erected within this Kingdom, and this demanded in a way INCONSI∣STENT with the FVNDAMENTALS of GOVERNMENT, excluding the POWER of PARLIAMENT in the exercise of that IV∣RISDICTION; nor have we resolved yet, how a due regard may be had, that TENDER CONSCIENCES which differ not in any Fundamen∣tals of Religion, may be so provided for as may stand with the word of God, and peace of the Kingdom. And let it be OBSERVED, that we have had the more reason not to part with the Power out of our hands, since all by-past Ages manifest, that the Reformation and purity of Religion, and the preservation and protection of the people, hath been by Parliament, and the exercise of this power:
our endeavours being to settle the Reformation in the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government, according to the Word of God, and the example of the best Reformed Churches, and according to our COVENANT. That's the burden of the Ditty; but how that comes to be set in opposition to the Scotch Model of Presbytery, may be left to the distinguishing Expositors, between Bell and the Dragon. The Poets Fiction concerning Proteus, was cer∣tainly a meer vaticination and prediction of this variable Monster; for the King, the Kirk, the Parliament, the Sectaries, for every thing according to its present interest, as the Camelion appears in the colours that are neerest it. A serious Kirk-fallacy, made a Parliament-Riddle. The 23 Proposi∣tions sent to the King at New∣castle. These the chief∣est of the Pro∣positions, the rest relating to Ireland, and other private Concerns.Come we now to those long-hammered Propositions sent to the King at Newcastle, Iuly 11. as aforesaid, which were twenty three in number. First, That his Majesty would pass an Act for nulling all Declarations and Pro∣clamations against both or either Parliaments of England or Scotland. Secondly, The King to sign and swear the Covenant, and an Act for all persons in the three Kingdoms to do the like. Thirdly, An Act to take away Bishops, &c. Fourthly, To confirm by Act the Assembly of Divines at Westminster. Fifthly, To settle Re∣ligion as the Parliament shall agree. Sixthly, In Vnity and Vniformity with Scot∣land, as shall be agreed by both Parliaments, [Kill Episcopacy point-blank, and shoot at Scotch wild-fowl at randome] Seventhly, An Act to be confirmed against Papists. Eighthly, Their Children to be educated in the Protestant Religion. Ninth∣ly, For taking away part of their Estates. Tenthly, Against saying of Mass in England. Eleventhly, And the same in Scotland if they please. Twelfthly, For observation of the Lords day, against Pluralities and Non-residents, and for Visi∣tations and regulating the Vniversities. Thirteenth, That the Militia of the three Kingdoms be in the hands of the Parliament for twenty years, with power to raise money and suppress all Forces, &c. Fourteenth, That all Honours, and Titles, and Dignities, conferred on any since the great Seal was conveyed from the Parlia∣ment, May 21 1642. be nulled; and that those who hereafter shall be made Peers by the King, shall not sit in Parliament, without consent of both Hou∣ses. Fifteenth, That an Act be passed to confirm all the Treaties between England and Scotland, and a Committee of both Houses to be nominated Conservators of the Peace between both Kingdoms. Sixteenth, An Act for the establishing the Decla∣ration of both Kingdoms of the THIRTIETH of JANUARY, 1643. touching Delinquents, with other qualifications added now, which were so com∣prehensive, that they seemed accommodated for the fatal prognostick of that days Revolution in 1648. when accumulative treason (a word invented by them∣selves against the Earl of Strafford) was extended to other the Kings Friends as to number, and in the amassed guilt of all impiety, afterwards practised upon the life of his Martyred Majesty; exempting from pardon all such as had proved themselves zealous and stout asserters of the King and his Cause; Sequestra∣tions, Bonds, Fines, and Securities abiding the rest: as to the King himself, they had left him nothing but the name and Title of Regality, the honour and support thereof being quite taken away. The rest of them were private re∣serves and advantages for themselves and their partisans, and some relating to the Kingdom of Ireland; such an unreasonable miscellany, that the Scots for pretence of honour could not digest them, but scrupled at most of them, as they were framed at Westminster, for some of the reasons afore mentioned, but swallowed then, and were satisfied at their delivery at Newcastle, by the Solution of Two hundred thousand pounds, when in a peremptory manner, as will presently be related, they told him he must assent. At the delivery of those Propositions on the 23 Iuly, the King asked the Commissioners if they had power to Treat; who replyed, No: then said the
King,Discou be∣tween the King and the Parli∣aments Commis∣sioners. Saving the honour of the business, an honest Trumpeter might have done as much. I hope you expect not a present Answer to this high concernment. To which they answered, that their time was limited to ten days. By which time the King having viewed them, declined them altogether, though hardly be labour∣ed and sollicited on all hands to comply with them; and put into the Com∣missioners hands a Paper containing offers of coming to London to Treat there; which they nevertheless excused themselves from sending to the Parliament: whereupon the King sent this Answer to the two Houses by a Messenger of his own. The Propositions tendered to his Majesty by the Commissioners,The King An∣swer to the Pro∣positions August 1. &c. (to which the Parliament have taken up twice so many moneths for deliberation, as they have assigned days for his Majesties Answer) do import so great alterations of Govern∣ment both in Church and Kingdom, as it is very difficult to return a particular and positive Answer, before the explanations, true sense, and right reason thereof be un∣derstood; and that his Majesty upon a full view of the whole Propositions, may know what is left, as well as what is taken away or changed. In all which he finds that the Commissioners are in no capacity to Treat with him. That it is impos∣sible for him to give such a present judgment of, and answer to the Propositions, whereby he shall be able to answer to God, that a safe and well-grounded Peace will ensue; and therefore desires to come to London upon the security of Parlia∣ment and Scotch Commissioners, where, by his personal presence, he may not onely raise a mutual confidence betwixt him and his people, but also have those doubts cleared, and difficulties explayned unto him, which he now conceives destructive to his Royal power, if he shall give a full consent as they now stand: as likewise to make known unto them his reasonable demands, which he is assured will be con∣ducible to Peace, &c. and will be there ready to give his assent to all Bills for the security and stability thereof, not having regard to his own particular. Conjuring them as Christians, as Subjects, and as men, who desire to leave a good name behind them, that they will so receive and make use of this Answer, that all Is∣sues may be stopped, and these unhappy distractions peaceably settled. And post∣scribes, that upon such assurance of agreement he will immediately send for the Prince his Son, not doubting of his perfect obedience, to return into this King∣dom. This Answer had a various reception in the House of Commons; it start∣led the Presbyterians, as who found it difficult to effect their purposes other∣wise than by and with the King; it tickled the Independents, who did all they could, by thrusting in harsh words and terms, to make the King indisposed and averse to all. Both became very sensible the King was not the man they took him for, but a Prince of prudence and resolution; no evil Counsellors being to be taxed with the penning of this, as their custom was, except Duke Hamilton,Duke Hamil∣ton and the Earl of Lane∣rick industri∣ous to work his Majesty to consent. and his Brother the Earl of Lanerick, both of whom were very in∣dustrious in perswading his Majesty to consent: nay, even better friends than they to the King, who feared this peremptoriness of the Parliament would grow to somwhat worser, were almost of the same mind, as far as preferring the safety of his life would indulge such thoughts: whom the Presbyterians saw there was no way, but by strict and undutiful restraint, to bend to their will; and the Independents, by treachery and barbarous villanies to break and utterly to destroy. Most highly incensed therefore was the Parliament at this refusal of those means which they said their most elaborate prudence, and diligent ponderation of every circumstance (after so long a time) conducing to the King and King∣doms happiness, had prepared and digested to such an equal temperament of the rights of the King and the people.The Fastios scandalize the King as being obstinate and perverse. The King was scandalized and repor∣ted every where as obstinate and perverse; while nothing but the ipse dixit of the equity, justice, or reasonableness of their Propositions was produced; nor was
the Kingdom at all satisfied with their shallow suggestions. But this served the turn with those who were glad it should be so, and gratified the Rabble and the Army, who fearful of a disappointment of their shares in the Ruine of the Kingdom, the hopes whereof had so long flattered them, more especially by the better perswasions and irresistible. Arguments of money, they (suspecting the Issue some while before) prevailed upon the Scots reason, and faith, and honesty to Boot, who were so clearly convinced of the Kings refractoriness to the Counsel of his Parliament in denying those Propositions, that they would nor could no longer maintain nor abet such his persistency therein, but would leave him to the disposal of his English Parliament; having first procured from him an Order and severe Injunction to the Marquess of Montross to lay down Arms (though in a probable condition of recovering his late Defeat) and to accept such Conditions as he could procure for him;The Marquess of Montross ordered to lay down his Arms. which indeed were mean, and full of secret fraud and revenge against that Noble and famous Captain. He was forced,He takes ship for Norway, sollicites for the King in forain Courts, at last betakes himself to the Court of King Charles the 2. in the disguise of his Captains habit, at his prefixed time, to put himself on board an old and leaky vessel, (designed for him by the Estates of Scotland, but pretending want of Victual and other necessaries, while the time of his embarquing) and set sail for Norway, where it pleased God he arri∣ved in safety, and after traversed much ground, solliciting the Kings cause in several forain Courts, where he refused all imployments, intent onely upon his Majesties affairs; and at last betook himself to the Court of King Charles the se∣cond: but of that, and what afterwards happened to this illustrious Heroe, there is yet room for another Memento.The Earle of Lowdon unra∣vels the compact of both Parlia∣ments to the King. The Scotch Compact being concluded, the Earl of Lowdon very fairly tells the King (still at Newcastle) what he must trust to, if he will not comply with the offers of the Parliament. If you refuse to assent, you will lose all your friends in Parliament, lose the Ci∣ty and all the Country;The Lord Low∣don's speech to the King. and all England will joyn against you as one man: they will process and depose you, they will charge us to deliver your Majesty to them, to render their Garrisons, and to remove our Armies out of England; and so both Kingdoms for eithers safety to agree, and settle Religion and Peace without you, to the Ruine of your Majesty and posterity: and if you lose England, you will not be admitted to come and Reign in Scotland. We confess the Propositions are higher in some things than we approved of, but we see no other means of closing with the Parliament. And immediately thereupon, Instructions are sent them from Scotland,Instructions sent from Scot∣land to New∣castle concer∣ning giving over the King. concerning the giving over of the King. It had been debated in their Parliament, and from thence sent to the Assembly for their advice, by whom it was remitted in the affirmative, and carried but by two voices in the Parliament: and was accordingly transacted at Newcastle and Lon∣don. The Scots op∣press the Nor∣thern Counties.But the Scots were not so willing to be rid of the King, as the Northern Counties were to be rid of the Scots; of whom, besides free quarter, that Army had levied 20000 l. a month; an unheard-of rate, and a most unreasonable. Several general complaints had been made, but now they made up a charge of particulars, with variety of imputation upon them; which being also Printed, the Scots Commissioners desired the suppression thereof, or some other repara∣tion; which was,They agree with the Par∣liament to de∣liver the King for 400000 l. they insist upon the salt of De∣linquents estates for secu∣rity of perfor∣mance. as one may think, well repaid in the sums of money they re∣ceived upon this Contract, which at first demand was no less than a Million; but in consideration of a present round sum, abated to 400000 l. whereof 200000 l. to be paid at two payments, the first upon quitting Newcastle (and marching beyond the River Tine) the other upon the delivery of the King, and their departure out of England, and surrendring Carlile and Berwick: to the performance on either part, Hostages to be given. The Scots insisted upon security for the remaining 200000 l. naming very conscionably and brotherly, the sale of Delinquents estates; but the Parliament would not so undervalue their credit, nor prostitue it to their lustful eye, cast upon so fair a partage of their Conquest; nor buy the King, and sell his friends. The money they had
was enviously enough bestowed on them,But are pid out of Church-Lands sol by rder of Pali∣ament. being the sacrilegious rapine of Church-Lands then exposed to sale by Ordinance of Parliament, but conveyed in pomp to the place of payment in thirty six Waggons, six Regiments of the Army by the order of the General going with it for its Convoy; and accor∣ding to the agreement, the first 100000 l. was paid at Northallerton in December. Not to prosecute this subject further through so many diversities,The King deli∣vered by the Scots. and change of countermines, nor to touch on those irreverend Declarations from the Scotch Parliament and Assembly, and their Reasons as unmannerly, of not admitting the King into that his Kingdom, it will suffice to say, that at last they acquaint∣ed the Parliament (having received their money) that they were now upon going home, and desired to know what service the Parliament would command them to the Parliament of Scotland: which the King foreseeing, and that he should be thus basely abandoned by them, he betakes himself afresh to his sollici∣tation of his English Parliament, wherein he saith, That he had endeavoured by his Answer of the 24th of July last,The Kings Mes∣sage from Newcastle of the 20th of December. to their Pro∣positions delivered him in the Name of both Kingdoms, to make his intentions fully known. But the more he endeavoured it, he more plainly saw that any Answer be could make, would be subject to misinformations, and misconstructions; which upon his own explanations he is most confident will give such satisfaction, as to establish a lasting Peace. He proposeth therefore again his coming to London,He prpsth. again his com∣ing to Lon∣don. upon security of both Houses, where by his personal presence he may not onely raise a mutual con∣fidence betwixt him and his people; but also have all doubts cleared, &c. To con∣clude, it is your King who desires to be heard (the which if refused to a subject by a King, he would be thought a Tyrant for it) and to that end which all men did profess to desire. Wherefore he conjures them, as they desire really to shew them∣selves what they profess, as good Christians or subjects, that they accept this his Offer, which he is confident God will so blss as to a happy Settlement, &c. A Reply was sent to the former by Sir Peter Killigrew, one who had been the Parliaments Messenger throughout; but none to this, the two Houses being taken up with the business of disposal of his person somewhere else, which was wholly remitted to them by the Negative Resolves of the Parliament of Scotland,Scotch Parlia∣ment resolves concerning the Kings person. upon the Question of the Kings coming into that Kingdom: That the Government shall be managed in the same manner and way as it hath been these five years last past, and that fresh Assays and all means in the interim shall be used to make the King take the Covenant. That if he shall do so, yet the taking of it, or passing the Propositions, will not warrant them to assist him in England; nor is the bare taking of it sufficient otherwise. That the clause in the Covenant for defence of the Kings person, is to be understood of the defence and safety of the King∣dom. That if he refuse the Propositions, he shall be disposed according to the Co∣venant and Treaty. That he shall execute no power or Authority in Scotland, till he do signe them, and take the Covenant; and that the Vnion be kept between both Nations. His Majesty guessing at this their desperate and perfidious desertion of him, had sounded their Commissioners then attending him, in what condition or estate he was among them; whether at Liberty, or a Prisoner: and put the Dilemma upon them, If at liberty, why he might not dispose of himself any-whither? if in restraint, what did they mean by his assenting and signing the Propositions, which in no case could be valid or binding, if agreed by him while a Prisoner? To this the Scots had nothing to say, but their Covenant with the English, which they might not contravene; and that according to the above mentioned Resolves, which they now declared, he was to be rendred to such hands as the Parliament of England should appoint, who were expected every day upon that errand. They further excused themselves from their reception
and admission of his Majesty into Scotland, from the danger and hazard they might incur, his party being not yet so disbanded, but that by his neer pre∣sence, and advantage of his person, they would resume their Arms and Cou∣rages, and put that Nation in a worse broyl than before: and for conclusion, they told him, they were in no condition to entertain him in that state and dignity due to his person; the Treasure exhausted, and his Revenews eaten up: so that there was but one way for his Majesty to turn, which he might make hereafter large and convenient enough, by a present speedy complyance with his two Houses at Westminster. This made the King to look about him, and to cast about which way to pre∣vent and eschew this streight in which the baseness of the Scots had thus en∣gaged him.A Plot noysed of the King's escape. A design was therefore thought on of his escape from them; but it was presently discovered, and the surrender of him the rather expedited: for the Scots were such honest dealers, that having received their money upon the bargain, they would not defeat their Chapmen of their purchase. A wretched advantage to either! the Scots never thriving after it, but being totally at last vassalized and subdued; and the Presbyterians in England every day growing less and less, till they were swallowed up in the Anarchy and Medly of the following times, and benighted in the succeeding confusions and Schisms. We will leave the King thus in the Ballance between England and Scotland,The affairs of Ireland rela∣ted. 150000 men, women and children massa∣cred by the Irish Rebels; the English Lords of the Pale side with them. Earl of Leicester ap∣pointed Lord Deputy, and appoints the E. of Ormond to be his L. Gen. who after ma∣ny successful en∣counters con∣cludes a Cessa∣tion with the Rebels in 1643, by order from the King. and cross over to Ireland, of which little mention hath been yet made, but shall now be remembred in its own series. In the first four months of that Rebellion, no less than 150000 Men, Wo∣men and Children were Massacred there by the Irish Rebels; an account where∣of hath been published, taken by the Rebels themselves, lest they should have seemed more Cruel and Barbarous than indeed they were. Some of these Mur∣ders were committed by old English Families Grafted upon Irish stocks, and thereby became Roman-Catholicks; such as were the Lords of the Pale, who openly sided with the Irish, and were their Chief Officers and Leaders. The Earl of Leicester had been appointed Lord Deputy; and he hastned thither; but some difficulties intervening, he by Commission appointed the Earl (after∣wards Marquess, then Duke) of Ormond to be his Lieutenant-General in that ser∣vice; who after many successful Encounters with the Irish (whose numbers maintained the War more than their Valour, (though raised by the greatest incentive imaginable, Natural desire of Libertie) from the pressing Calamities of the Protestants there, and the urgency of his Majesties affairs in England) had concluded a Cessation by order of the King in 1643. Notwithstanding the Parliament-party and the Scots still carried on the War: And to shew the Irish what they should trust to, the Parliament in 1644, had Arraigned Mac Mahon and the Lord Macquire (who a little before had broke out of Prison,The Parl. party and Scots car∣ry on the War there: they ar∣raign Mac Ma∣hon and the L. Macquire, both wch were execu∣ted at Tyburn. Ld. Inchiquin & Lord Broug∣hil in distress. and af∣ter a months hiding were taken) at the Kings-Bench Bar, where Macquire insisted mainly on his Peerage, but was over-ruled, and both by a Jury of Mid∣dlesex-Gentlemen found guilty, and sentenced for High-Treason, for which soon after they were Executed as Traytors at Tyburn. The Lord Inchiquin and the Lord Broughil condescended not likewise to this Treaty, but with intermixed success stood out against the whole power of the Rebels, and were at last greatly distressed. To remedy this, the Lord Lisle, Son to the Earl of Leicester, was now ordered to go for Ireland, with an Army of 8000 men: the Lord Muskerry was likewise General for the Irish in the Southern parts of the Kingdome,The Lord Lisle ordered to go into Ireland with an Army of 8000 men. The Ld. Mus∣kerry Gen. for the Irish. Marquess of Ormonds con∣verts the Cessa∣tion into Peace, it is ped by the Popih Cer∣gy, and the in∣veate Pa∣pist. who took several places of strength in a short time; where∣upon the Marquess of Ormond proceeded to make that Cessation a kind of Peace; it being judged by the Lords of the Council there, not onely an ex∣pedient for their safety (for the Rebels threatned to besiege Dublin) but also to divide them against one another: the more moderate of them, who had some sence of the Kings condition, and had not altogether Renounced their Loyalty, being for a composure; but the Popes Nuncio and the inveterate Irish, such as the Family of Oneal and Masquire, and generally the Popish
Clergy Opposing themselves thereto. Notwithstanding it took some effect; for the Marquess perceiving that no good could be done at present with the Parlia∣ment of England, with whom he had Treated for supplies and assistance, and had in lieu of it offered the Surrender of the places he held, upon conditions, to them and the Forces they should send, came to agreement with the Rebels there; and though the King had by his Letters from Newcastle ordered him not to proceed farther to any conclusion with them, according as the Parliament had desired him, yet seeing the necessity of falling into the hands of the Rebels or the Parliament, and considering that the King when he writ this was in restraint, and so his Commands might be dispensed with, and that the Kings intention was to be judged better by them who saw the necessity of it upon the place, and so not give way to other mens designs and false representations of it to his Majesty; received these Propositions for Peace following, being signed in November 1646, from the haughty Irish, who thought themselves absolute. First, That the exercise of the Roman Catholick Religion be in Dublin, and Drogheda, and in the Kingdom of Ireland, as free as in Paris or Brussels. Secondly, That the Council-Table consist of Members true and faithful to his Majesty, and who have been enemies to the Parliament. Thirdly, That Dublin, Drogheda, Team, Newby, Cathirly, Carlingford, and all Protestant Garrisons, be manned by the confederate Catholicks, to keep the same for the use of the King, and defence of the Kingdom. Fourthly, That the said Counsellours, Generals, Commanders, and Souldiers, do swear and engage to fight against the said Parliament of England, and all the Kings Enemies; and that they will never come to any agreement with them, to the prejudice of his Majesties rights, or the Kingdoms. Fifthly, That both parties, according to their Oath of Association, shall to the best of their power and cunning, defend the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, the Kings rights, and liberties of the Subject. These the Irish insisted upon, and were held in play, that they should be granted with such Provisoes as should become the Kings Honour and Consci∣ence, of which, if that Loyalty they pretended was any way Real, they ought not to be less sollicitous than the Marquess; and in the mean while, the Peace to be as good as Established:A half peace made in Ire∣land. which indeed by the said moderate party was thenceforward observed, as to his Majesties Interest in that King∣dom. The Parliament to stop this Agreement, a little before dispatcht away the Lord Lisle, who weary of his Journey at his setting out, was recalled; but part of his Army was Transported, with whom was Colonel Monck (the after Re∣nowned General) who being Tampered with,Colonel Monck is sent by the Parliament in∣to Ireland. and for his Liberty, having en∣dured a long Imprisonment in the Tower for the space of three years, under∣took an Employment for the Parliament in Ireland. The Forces shipped from Chester were neer two thousand, accompanied with three Commissioners from the Parliament to the Marquess, who having offered Dublin upon some Terms, which they were to present to his Majesty for him to signe; upon non∣performance thereof on their part, by keeping the Paper from the Kings sight, now refused the delivery of the City without his Majesties Command: so that after a Noble Treatment given the Commissioners, they for the present ceased any further Transaction, and shipped away the said Forces, under Colonel Monck, for Belfast in the North of Ireland, where they did very good service against Oneal and his fellow-Rebels. The conclusion of this Peace was as ill resented by the Nuncio,The Parliament and Popes Nun∣cio alike un∣concerned in the Peace.. and all the said Popish party, as it was by the Parliament: For the Catholick Armies ha∣ving lately had several great successes, and neither of the two other King∣doms then in a condition to relieve that of Ireland, thought upon nothing less
than a shaking off the English yoak, which so often in former ages they had attempted, but never had the like probabilities as now: the Clergy therefore, who were generally addicted to the Spaniard, under whose protection they would render themselves and the Nation,The Spaniard threatens to besiege Dublin. thundered out Excommunication against any that should acquiesce in the said Peace and Agreement, and with an Army of 17000 Horse and Foot, resolve, notwithstanding thereof, to march and besiege Dublin. This result begot a division among them, as by the Mar∣quess was afore consulted;The Nunio and his party, notwithstand∣ing some divi∣sions among them, prosecute the War. but yet so great a strength remained to that party against the Peace, that the said Marquess was forced to resume his former Trea∣ty with the Parliament, concerning the delivery of those places he held to their Commissioners; who being sensible how difficult a work it would prove to be∣gin a new Conquest of that people, if either by force or a Treacherous Peace they should possess themselves of that little that was left to the English Prote∣stant interest, did labour with the King, the Marquess, and the Scots, that there might be no entertainment of any Accommodation with them, being ready (they said) to Transport over a numerous Army, to rduce and sub∣due that Rebellion; which they pretended had ere long been done, if the King would have permitted them, by a complyance with their Propo∣sitions. The King indeed was loth to abandon himself and his hopes in that King∣dom, with his Forces in England and Scotland at the same time, sadly foreseeing how the two Houses would use their Victory, and plainly seeing how his Scotch Subjects had already abused him; therefore he with no little reluctancy was brought to give way to the demand concerning Ireland: but there being no re∣medy, (all the assurances he had from the Marquess, and the Lord Digby, as well as from the transaction of the Marquess of Worcester, then Earl of Glamor∣gan, being disappointed by the Rebels falseness and Treachery, who indeed thought of nothing less than Peace, whereby the English Forces there could not be spared to his assistance) he consented to supersede and cease all manner of Treaty with the Enemy as aforesaid; which it is probable they coming to un∣derstand, did therefore the rather Violate their Accord which so unwillingly they entred into, as doubting of the performance of it, it being wholly out of his Majesties Power and Authority. Whatsoever the matter was, the Lord of Ormond was at last constrained (as the lesser Evil) to close with the Parlia∣ment, and surrender: of which, and the War prosecuted there by them, in the next year. The Earl of Essex dyes, Sept. 13. sus∣pected to be poysoned. A Zealous man for a composure, and an able Souldier.The 13 of September, the Earl of Essex (the former General) dyed of an Apo∣plexy, suddenly (having for a little while before retired himself to his house at Eltham,) not without great suspicion of poyson, or some such practice. For he was known to have had his judgment rectified concerning the Quarrel, and to have stickled for a composure of the War in the House of Peers; and his influence on the Army not yet so weakned, but that he could make a party there to any design he should stand for, and the Reformadoes his fast friends. He was an able Souldier, confest; whether so much a man, disputed; the reproaches of his debility that way, as loud and unmannerly, as the praises of his Valour and conduct were justly due and renowned. The Royalists derided him with the stile of his OXCELLENCY, jeering him with his two unfortunate Marriages,He was unfor∣tunately marri∣ed to the Lady Francis How∣ard, and after∣wards married to Sir Amias Pawlet's Daughter. first with the Lady Francis Howard, from whom he was divorced for his impotency and frigidity, quoad hanc; and the Daughter of Sir Amias Pawlet in Wiltshire, suspected of incontinency with Mr. Vedal. Her he had declined himself, who during the War continued at Oxford, while her Husband was in the field. Nor did he suffer less reproach from the Panatick Rabble, who prostituted his honour at the same rate: They that were once most highly in love with his person, scorning and contemning him; like adul∣terous fondness, which converts into extreme hate and contempt. By them whom his popularity had estranged from their first love to their Prince, was he alike repudiated, with publike dicteries and representations in Pictures.
So Transitory is Vulgar esteem, grounded no other where than upon levity and desire of change, the deserved fate of such Grandees, who with the spe∣cious debauchery of good Commonwealths-men and Patriots, corrupt the minds, and alienate the affections of the Subject, to dote upon the bewitches and flatteries of Liberty, of which such persons are held forth by their courtesie and affability to be the main assrtors: so that it may be said of this Earl, that he was alike served with his wives, and the Commonalty; saving that by the last he lost his innocency, and the real honour of his house and Family. But the Parliament (to which the Faction very readily concurred) to make reparation for those indignities done him,His Funeral so∣lemnized, Oct. 22 in a magni∣ficent manner. of which they could not otherwise acquit themselves, ordered his Exequies to be performed in a very solemn and magnificent manner. The Independent party, to colour and allay with the pomp and honour of his Funerals the envy and suspicion of his death, not grudging belike to make a golden bridge for a departing Enemy; as they might well reckon him to prove to their succeeding designs, when his duty to his injured Prince, and love to his abused deluded Country, and indignation of those affronts and contumelies put upon him, should raise in him a spirit as able to lay that white Devil of Reformation, as he was to conjure it up in the dreadful shape of an unnatural and disloyal War. — Cineri Gloria sera venit. Mart. He was drawn in Effigie upon a Chariot,Drawn in Ef∣figie upon a Chariot from Essex-house to Westminster-Abby, his Fu∣neral Sermon preached by Mr. Vines. Most of the Parliament-Nobility in close mourning. The Effigie pla∣ced in the Chancel, and privately defa∣cd. The Earldom of Essex conferred on the Capels. The Presbyteri∣an Government and Directory no sooner set up but slighted. from Essex-house in the Strand, to the Abby-Church at Westminster, (where Mr. Vines an eminent Presbyterian Preached his Funeral-Sermon upon this Text, [Knowest thou not, that a Prince is this day fallen in Israel?] very learnedly and elegantly) most of the Parlia∣ment-Nobility in close mourning following him on foot. The Effigie was af∣terwards placed in the uppermost Chancel in very great state, till a rude vindi∣ctive fellow laid his prophane hands upon it, and so defaced it privately in the night, that it was by order removed. Very few condolements were made after, he being like to be soon forgotten, who had neither interest, nor relation to his Honour, remaining; dying childless, and leaving his Estate to be divided betwixt the Marquess of Hertford who married his Sister, and his Cozen Leicester De∣vereux, after his decease Lord Viscount Hereford, which onely title of all the rest he now enjoys; his Title and Dignity of the Earldom of Essex being transfer∣red long after to the Noble and most Loyal Family of the Capels, in the 13th year of King Charles the second. The very soul of Presbytery now departed, that which actuated its mass and matter, the inform Schism in the Church, to a most unnatural division in the State, and armed its hands with Force and violence to propagate its dominion, and Magisterial Usurpation; when from pretentions of Ecclesiastical Autho∣rity, it invaded the Civil Supremacy and Government: it was now culminant, and with this great Patron and Champion of it was come to its  or full stop, having been declared by Ordinance of Parliament, for the onely Religion and manner of Worship in England:The Ordinance for Presbyteri∣an Government to be in force but three years. but to make an experiment of in onely, the Ordinance was to continue no longer than three years; a limitation which boded its abolition, and forespoke the inconveniences and unsuitableness there∣of to our Laws, Manners and Customs. Nothing but the best things are per∣petual, say the Philosophers, all immoderate things are short-lived; and 'twas a secret, but mortal wound, this prescription of time gave to the pretended Divine Right of Presbytery, which by that Plea must always be invariable, un∣changeable and indeterminable. But when this first great Pillar of it fell, (as it is observable, such Great Ones seldome go unaccompanied) it submitted to its period; its great blaze and flames it had raised waning into a glimmering and suspicious light, lookt upon rather as a Meteor or Exhalation, that any fixed Luminary, the ill influence thereof confirming our belief. And the Directory established the same time,The Directory established. was clearly such an ignis fatuus, which was to serve
as a guide to the wandring extemporary excursions of prayer, not allowing any certain or sure Form, the onely help and promoter of true Piety and Devo∣tion. It languished for a while after in London, but with such slighting and disregarding, as was due to the worshipful Pageantry of that Motly and time-ser∣ving Ordinance, wherein Presbytery and Independency were so blended and moulded together, that the least touch would separate and divide them; as was presently seen in the Contests between these two parties. The Presbyte∣rian and Inde∣pendent parties divided.It will be therefore requisite to give an account here of the manner and de∣sign of that rupture between them, it proving the rise of all those calamities that after befel the King. The Presbyterians were more numerous, the Inde∣pendents more active, vigilant and restless, watching all opportunities, and present both in publike and private Counsels: oft have they wearied out the House with long unnecessary debates, to unseasonable times of night; and when the Members of the other faction, being tyred and diseased, had with∣drawn themselves, slipt in a Vote of great concernment, and carried it by them∣selves. If in a full House any thing contrary or destructive to their designs was ready to pass, by putting in Proviso's, and perplexing the matter, or by in∣stance of further consideration of affairs of such importance, they so hinder'd it, that it dyed an Embryo abortive. Some of the Grandees of the other party they likewise so wrought upon, that they became false friends to their own side; the weaker sort of them they amused with fair offers. They scrued themselves by one means or other,The Indepen∣dents subtile practices. by promises, preferments, largesses, into all manner of persons who could either hinder or advance their designs; and when they had proceeded so forward by this smooth way, they attained the rest by Menace and Threats, and the formidable insolence of their Army, which they had solely at their Devotion: yet notwithstanding they were shreudly put to it, and countermined by some eminent Patriots, whose indefatigable diligence and saga∣city was yet deluded by these following Artifices. Their prodigal liberality of bestowing 5000 l. and 10000 l. on some of the chief of the Presbyterian Members for their losses and sufferings, far beyond the value of them, was the first. This clearly begot in them a supine negligence of their main drift. Next, they surrogated and substituted in the place of those Members whom they had expelled for their Loyalty, men of mean fortunes, and wholly addicted to, and of the Army, who awed (by drawing their Troops thither,) the several Boroughs at their Elections, by which means they became at last a com∣petent party in the House to carry any thing. But the main Engine was the Self-denying Ordinance, whereby all Members of either House were dischar∣ged from bearing any Office Military or Civil,The self-denying Ordinance, by which the In∣dependents out∣wit the Pres∣byterians. and obliged to quit all their places of profit and preferment, that the publike business might be better atten∣ded. By this shift they heaved out many eminent Presbyterians, who were possessed of Places and Offices in the Treasury, Garrisons and Commands of like consequence, and put in their friends, or those whom the profit would soon render such, in their stead. So that by this device the Presbyterians were absolutely stript of all Power, and were wip'd and cheated out of the Militia, for which they began the War, and which they had violently wrested from their Soveraign. Who cannot here but admire the wonderful steps and traces of Di∣vine Justice? The Presbyterians were not wholly insensible whitherto this tended; but they could not with any pretence of honesty resist the plausibility of this Ordi∣nance, lest they should seem all along to have sought themselves, and not the Kingdoms good. A cry very rife and loud, put into the heads of some Demo∣cratical and Levelling Scriblers of the Fanatick Rabble, by Cromwel and his Privy Council. They cast about therefore to check and counterplot this grand Stra∣tagem by another as subtile,The Presbyteri∣ans Counter∣plot, of disban∣ding the Army. and altogether more feisible and necessary, that was, to disband the Army, since they perceived they had lost their Command and disposal of it. The Independents had used the same trick with good suc∣cess in their modelling and disbanding Colonel Massey; and the Peace of the
times, and the charge of the Kingdom, did seem more instantly to require an end of the War here, as Ireland the translation of it thither. But the Independent Faction soon smelt out the design,Cromwel sents it, and pres it among his Souldiers. and gave notice to Cromwel (who was still licensed to continue in all his Commands, his Iron∣sides, by which name he was now called, being ORDINANCE-PROOF) of its undoubted effect, if the Army interposed not. He upon conference with his Privado Ireton, agrees to spread it among the Souldiers, and withal to add their own comment, That the Parliament by the prevailing Vote of some unsound Members, were resolved to disband the Army, and cheat them of their Arrears, and send them in a wanting condition into Ireland, to be Butchered by the Rebels, for having thus faithfully served them in England. And we may soon imagine what a quarrel and hatred this begot in the lump of the Souldiery against the Parliament; but it was best judged by the irreconcile∣able malice against them, which they made appear not long after, in those most insolent and daring affronts, in assaulting, seising, impeaching, and secluding them several times in the two years ensuing. From this Military rage and in∣dignation they were presently put upon an unpractised, and as licentious as dangerous a design, even to the Authors themselves (as it afterwards proved, though their confident ambition made them venture it) of chusing out two out of each Company and Troop to be their Adjutators,They chuse Ad∣jutatours to draw up the see of the Ar∣my, d assist at their Coun∣cils of War. Cromwel a compleat Poli∣titian. and to draw up the sence of the Army, and to assist at the Councils of War, and advise therein for the Peace and safety of the Kingdom, even to such a sawcy degree of strange freedom, as to give their Vote, and to put in their spoke to any debate. This highly conciliated them and the whole Army to act whatever was privately suggested to them by Cromwel, and engaged them alike in the hazard which by these des∣perate courses he was resolved to run; counting it no diminution of his great∣ness, if by the basest servilities, and wretched Familiarities, he could attain his Tyranny. By these ADJUTATORS, or AGITATORS, a Protestation of the Army was drawn and published, where they declared not to disband nor go for Ireland,The Army de∣clare not to disband till all their Arrears are paid. until all their Arrears were paid, and the people restored to those rights for which they had engaged, and the Kingdom setled, and Peace secur∣ed, by an Act of Indempnity principally for themselves. Which demands be∣ing formed into a Petition (which was pretended to be no more than a Tran∣script of a nother from several Counties to the General to the same purpose) was delivered to the House by Colonel Hammond, Colonel Rich, and Colonel Ireton. The Presbyterians now plainly saw what they must trust to, and therefore put on a good face, and generously shewed their displeasure of this undutiful procedure; and to cry quits with their Country-cheat, put the County of Essex, and some other adjacent, to Petition them to pursue their resolutions of disbanding. In the intrigues of which affair, we will leave them embroy∣led, and proceed to their no less perplexed consultation concerning the King. On the sixth of February the King was delivered,The King and Newcastle turned over to the English Commissioners, Feb. 6. and Newcastle at the same time, by the Scots, to the Parliament Commissioners, whose names were as followeth: the Earl of Pembroke, Earl of Denbigh, Lord Mountague, Sir Walter Earl, Sir Iohn Holland, Sir Iames Harrington, Sir Iohn Cook, Mr. Crew, (afterwards Lord Crew of Stene) and Major-General Brown, and two Ministers, Mr. Marshal and Mr. Caryl, whom they might well have spared▪ Marshal being an Amphibiam or Hermaphrodite of Presbytery and Independen∣cy; to this as a Pensioner, to the other a Chaplain; and was not much unlike Ma∣jor-General Skippon, who had the same Ianus aspect to the Army and City, to the last whereof he approved himself a most Treacherous friend, as in all other the secret practices of the Presbyterians afterward. Caryl was downright Independent; both of them so inacceptable to the King, that he would by no means admit either of them to preach before him; which begat such a disgust in Caryl, that he mightily promoted ever after the Independent slander of the
Kings obstinacy: Marshal lived not long after, being discovered and slighted by all Parties. They ki the Kings hand; he is coveyed to Holdenby, met in the way by the General, who ated and ki'd the Kings hands the King commends him for a truely Noble person. The Commissioners having kist his Majesty's hand, acquainted him with their Order and Instructions to convey him to his house at Holdenby, in North-hamptonshire; but the King desired New-Market, as more convenient, and near∣er to London: but understanding he was not at their disposal, who were tyed up by the Parliament, he acquiesced, and with a sorrowful mind departed, attended with near 1000 Horse, accompanied by the Commissioners. On the eighth of February at night he lodged at Durham, next to Aukland, to Richmond, to Kippon, to Leeds, to Wakefield, to Rotheram, to Mansfield (whereabouts he was met by the General, who at his approach alighted, and his Majesty gave him his hand to kiss, and this commendation, That he was a truely Noble person, and had kept the Articles and Conditions he had so fairly given) to Leicester, and so to Holmby; being all the way thither gratulated by the people, as if in a Pro∣gress. So far was any part of the Kingdom (and those had been his sharpest and sorest Enemies) from thinking him the cause of their Troubles, (as he was afterwards most untruly Blasphemed,) that with all joy and gladness ima∣ginable they would have brought him in with their Peaceful Troops, without more ado, to his innocent Throne, instead of a Prison; where, upon his arrival,At the Kings arrival at Holdenby, his friends are for∣bid to attend him, his Chap∣lains denyed admittance. Proclamation was made, That none that had assisted him, or deserted the Parlia∣ment, should presume to come near his person. This solitude gave him opportunity, though (as he saith most elegantly himself) sad occasion for some of those excellent Meditations in his Eikon Basil. particularly that of his restraint in this place; which was so much the more tedious,This solitude the occasion of his writing his excellent Meditations. by their barbarous refusal of admitting his Chaplains, or but any two of them, to minister to him in this distress. He had twice so passionately, and with such obliging language (that his Christianity passed on his Regality) wooed the House of Lords to do him that favour, that they could not in pity and Piety refuse; but the House of Commons peremptorily withstood them, alleaging that those Chaplains would the more indispose him, and avert him from complying with them as to Religion. This denyal grievously troubled the King; but since there was no perswasion of them, he endeavoured to con∣vince their Commissioners, in whose company he past some hours of his confine∣ment at Bowles and other exercise; which he in particular affected with Ma∣jor-General Brown, who most dutifully reconciled himself to the King, pro∣testing his sorrow to have engaged so far against him,Major-General Brown recon∣ciled to the King. and his resolution to hazard as much for him if there should be occasion. With this Gentleman and the Earl of Pembroke most an end he diverted the duress of this recluse life,He iverts himself by Bowling with the Earl of Pembroke and Major-General Brown. shewing himself pleasant in the intervals of his studying and devotions; and when the said Earl fell sick, most kindly visited him: but to all of them he shewed himself so affable and courteous in his converse, so obliging in his dis∣course, yet so Majestick and Authoritative in his Argumentation and State-conferences, that they were all (save Harrington his ungrateful domestick) meerly constrained to acknowledge their errour, and to profess a most willing obedience for the future to his person and Government.Harrington an ungrateful ser∣vant. Though we shall con∣clude this year with an indignity done him by their Masters, who a while be∣fore had caused the Great Seal of England,The Great Seal of England broken. which the Lord Littleton had car∣ried to Oxford, to be broke in pieces in the House of Lords; presuming there∣by to cancel whatever had passed it since that time: But it made too deep an impression to be so easily obliterated, as we shall see in the year 1660.
Anno Dom. 1647. THus had Providence been pleased to favour the Arms of the Parliament, by putting all into their hands they had conested for: we shall see them putting all that under their feet, trampling upon the King, his Prerogative, the Laws, and the Subjects Liberty. The City of London, their great Magazine, from whom th had exhausted so much treasure, expecting now the repleni∣shing of those veins, and to see her Exchange filled, straight beheld the whole Trade managed at Goldsmiths and Habordashers-hall; Mortgages and Purcha∣ses of Land, not Traffick and Returns from Sea, busying and employing the Usurer. Incredible is the mass of Money extorted from Royalists for Compo∣sition: most barbarous and Italian villany, to make them swear illegal Oaths, such as the Covenant and Negative Oath, directly contrary to that of Allegi∣ance: most pertidious and abominable Treachery, to deny their Articles, and by subornation and Trapans to justifie themselves; and not sufficed with that, to prosecute the innocent sufferers for their lives also, as in the case of Sir Iohn Stawel, and others, whom they kept first in long durance, seized all their estates, and lastly arraigned at their pretended Courts of Justice. Et quando uberior vitiorum Copia, quando Major Avaritiae patuit sinus? A heap of these enormities following thick upon the neck of one another, will wholly take up the ensuing sheets. Nostra haec farrago libeli, Juven. Sat. Prima. This perhaps might be indured by Subjects from their fellows, from the con∣sideration of precedents of other the like Commotions, especially from such starveling States-men as these; but in prudential manners, they could not be presumed to be more cruel to their Soveraign. He had waged no War for the lust of any Favorite, nor exercised any Tyranny over his people, but had been defended and ayded in his just quarrel, by the Noblest and most considerable of his Subjects; not abandoned like Edward the second, Richard the second or third; but in the decay and decliing of his fortune, more intently beloved, by how much his vertues in such a fiery probation became more conspicuous and relucent. But for all this, he is treated by his two Houses as one of the worst, and most undervalued and slighted of all his predecessors; they vouchsafe not a thought of him, but what's scared with the jealousie of publike safety, the main thing to be attained: it is sufficient for him, that he breathes the fresh Ayr, theirs is indeed too hot and contagious. While they thus neglect him (we speak still of the Presbyterian party,Cornet Joyce seizeth the King a Hol∣denby, June 4. who had yet the Major part of the House, and were sure of the Lords to concur with them) the King, by an Audacious Policy, which puzled most men what to make on it, is on the 4 of Iune late at night seized on by a Guard of 1000 men from the Army, under one Cornet Ioyce a great Adjutator, who being very importunate to speak with the King, though at such an unseasonable time, was at last admitted; where he declared his Arrand was to remove his Majesties person to the Army, for his and their security. The King told him it was too late for that night, but in the Morning he would speak with him. Next morning the King arose early,The King deli∣berates what to do. and had conference with the Commis∣sioners, who were highly troubled with the news; but their Guards were not sufficient to maintain them in the resolution of keeping him; onely General Brown offered to adventure; but 'twas concluded to no purpose: for 'twas not
to be doubted that they who durst attempt so dangerous a thing, had seconds neer at hand to reinforce them; and the House was so guarded, that there was no hopes neither of his escape: so that the King went down into the Court-Yard, and after some few private words with Ioyce, asked the Souldiers,puts several questions to the Souldiers. By whose Authority they came thither. They Answered, From the Army. He was instant, if from Sir Thomas Fairfax his Army? they continued, From the Army. His Majesty then replyed, What if I should refuse to go with you, would you compel me? They Answered, We hope your Majesty will not refuse; but we have com∣mand to bring you. His Majesty concluded, I have these Questions to put to you, which if you grant, I will go with you. He requests them.First, That he might have no violence offered his person. To which they all together shouted, and cryed, None, None. Secondly, He desired that his Trunks and Papers might not be rifled and tumbled, (here were parcels of his Eik. Basil. and some other choice Pieces, as was known since.) They promised to set a guard upon them, and that they should not be touched. Thirdly, He required such servants to attend him, against whom there were no just exceptions. They An∣swered, He should. And Lastly, desired that nothing might be imposed on him contrary to his conscience. They Answered, that it was not their judgment to force any thing against Conscience on any one, much less on his Majesty. Whereupon his Majesty took horse,His Majesty takes horse, is welcomed at Childersly by the General, but especially by Cromwel. and was conveyed by them to the Head-quarters at Childersly, where he was welcomed by the General, but with greater Reverence and expressions of Loyalty received by Cromwel, who now plaid his Master-piece of dissimulation, professing himself a devoted servant to his Ma∣jesties interest, and that the strangeness of this action of the Army, proceeded of meer care of his person, and out of respect to his Authority, which they should equally assert with their own rights and the Liberty of the Subject, against any persons whatsoever. His Majesty then propounded that they would conduct him to Mewmarket, the house he had formerly designed to go to, there to expect what judgement or resolutions his two Houses would make of his Treasonable enterprise; where∣in though he dealt as warily with Cromwel, as he did fallaciously with his Ma∣jesty, not seeming to look upon it as so heinous a fact as it was, yet he expected the Parliament, (if they were absolute, and not awed; which by this means would be experimented) to call the principals and complices in it to a severe account, and therefore reserved himself to Cromwel, till he could thence judge of it; hoping if the Army were masterless, to make better Terms with them, than he had yet hopes of from his two Houses; and the Impostor did not stick to declare as much; which was more manifest and easier of belief, when all persons that were formerly of his side,The Army suf∣fer the Kings friends and Chaplais to attend him. without any distinction, were admitted; his Chaplains, suffered to attend him, and the use of the Liturgy and Common Prayer publikely allowed him. Upon the Kings first arrival at the Head-quarters, the General sent to the Parliament, giving them an account thereof, but withal clearing himself from any hand in it, and saying as much for the Council of Officers: And 'tis very credible he knew not who it was did it, or by whose direction it was done, but was informed by his Council of Officers, that now it was done, 'twas very requisitely and oportunely done; and it being the sence of the Army, he had done enough in giving them at Westminster (for the Parliament sounded no more at the Head-quarters) an account of Him. But of this presently at large. Cromwel the chief conspira∣tor in seizing the King.Most certain it is, that this designe was laid solely by Cromwel and Ireton, and personated by the Agitatours, suspected many of them, and that ratio∣nally, for Jesuits; who were as good at wicked Plots and Contrivances, as either of those Catilines; but most accomplished for execution, having such Lawless, yet most powerful Indemnity, not onely to protect them, but to shroud their other Conspiracies for themselves, against this Church and State. It is strange indeed to consider how many several interests were driven on a∣mong the Belials of this Army, as then, under the appearance of honest and most just ends; the same pretence whereof served, and was accommodate
to each particular combinating against the Publike, as so many lines tending to one Center: with all which Cromwel wisely temporized, giving secret encourage∣ment to them all, professing to intend the same things, and to be of the Party, but that for a while there was a necessity of concealing his resolutions: To this purpose caresing the Papists, upon all addresses or discourses with him; as also familiarizing himself with the Levellers,Cromwel sets up the Level∣lers. as the men indeed that were to do his business, and were right of his complexion for the spoyl of the Kingdom, to be compassed any manner of way, but by setting up a Government or Laws (for their projected Democracy was but a more exact method or Rule of Thievery) of all which they most abominated Monarchy, as the most regular and strict, whose awful Authority could solely restrain their loose and licentious practises, and keep the mad vulgar within their bounds from invading all propriety, secured by the ancient Tenure of all Lands and Inheritances from the Crown,They designe to lay all things in common. and the Laws, which their devilish intention was to abrogate and abolish, and by a Wild parity lay all things in Common. But for fuller satisfaction what this Intrigue or designe meant, it will be requisite to consult the King's and the General's, or rather the Armies account thereof, just as it was done: and first from the Actors, the General and Council of War. Sir Thomas Fairfax his Letter. MAster Speaker,Sir Thomas Fairfax his Leter to the Parliament. yesterday the King was taken from Holdenby by some Soul∣diers, who brought him thence by his consent, the Commissioners going along with Him: That his Majesty lay that night at Colonel Mountagues, (after Earl of Sandwich,) and would be at New market next day: That the ground of the re∣moving the King, was from an apprehension of some strength gathered to force the King from them; whereupon he sent Colonel Whaley with his Regiment to meet the King and the Commissioners, and to return them back again; but they refused, and were come to Sir John Cuts neer Cambridge. Professing That this remove was without his consent, or his Officers about him, or the body of the Army, or without their desire or Privity, and that he will secure the King's person from danger. Fur∣ther assuring the Parliament, that the whole Army endeavours Peace, will not oppose Presbytery, nor affect Independency, or to hold a licentious freedom in Reli∣gion, or interest in any particular party, but will leave all to the Parlia∣ment. Tiberius Letters about Sejanus were not half so mystical as these, nor was there ever so daring, braving an attempt done in the face of the Sun, to the face and person of a Prince, so covered and concealed under such obscurities and pre∣tended ignorances, which rendred the impudence of the action more dange∣rously fearful, by how much the less it was conjecturable what it portended; nor could the King himself at present well resolve himself or his two Houses in this juncture, as we shall see in his acquainting of the Parliament with it by the Earl of Dunfermling, where he saith, contrary to what Fairfax before, That he was unwillingly taken away by a strong party of Horse:The Kings Message con∣cerning it. and desired of the Parliament to maintain the Laws of the Land; and that though he might signe to many things in this condition, yet he would not have them believed till fur∣ther notice given by him to his two Houses. The King imagined they would make use of his Authority, by forcing his consent to some Proposals and designes of Government; but they onely made a stalking Horse of his person, keeping his interest, by pretences of respect to him, on foot, meerly to countenance their own, and outvy and awe the Pres∣byterian party.
The perplexed thoughts of the Parliament and City about it.At the news of it in London, both Parliament and City were in such con∣fusion, and so distracted, that they might well be excused from rightly judg∣ing of the fact; therefore they first bethink of remedy: the Houses order the Committee of Safety to sit all night, and provide, ne quid detrimenti accipiat respublica; and dispatch a Messenger to the General, requesting him not to come neerer London than twenty five miles; for news was brought them they were upon a speedy March for the City, who at the same time shut up their shops, run to their Arms, and make a fearful hurry for a while, and then re∣solve to send Commissioners likewise, and attend the Issue in peace: in such a maze did this accident put them. In the mean while the King is caressed by the Army, and shown in state to the people, who with great joy every where receive him, and applaud the Ar∣my, who to carry their business the fairer, suffer some of his Majesties old Friends to have access to his person, as the Duke of Richmond,The Duke of Richmond, Dr. Sheldon and Dr. Ham∣mond, suffered to have access to the King. the two Doctors Sheldon and Hammond, his Chaplains, who Officiated with him in publike, ac∣cording to the Church of England, and divers others of lesser note. At this the Parliament take exceptions, and send again to the General, expostulating the matter, and desiring him to re-deliver the King to the Commissioners afore∣said, to be brought to Richmond, and there to be guarded by Colonel Rossiters Regiment of Horse. The Army de∣clare.In Answer to this, the Army declare, and require (after their like manner of expostulation about the Irish Expedition, and Transporting the Army thither, that it was against former Declarations of the Parliament, the precedent case of the Kingdom of Scotland, and the liberty and freedom of the People) That the Houses may speedily be purged of such as ought not to sit there. That such who abused the Parliament and Army, and endanger the Kingdom, may speedily be disabled from doing the like or worse. That some determinate period of time may be set to this and future Parliaments, according to the intent of the Bill for Triennial Parliaments. That provision be made that they be not adjournable and dissolvable by any power but their own consent during their Respective period, and then to determine themselves. That the freedom of the people to present Grievances by Petition to the Parliament, may be vindicated. That the exorbitant powers of Country-Committees may be taken away. That the Kingdom may be satisfied of the Parliaments accounts for the vast sums received, and in other things where the Kingdom hath been abu∣sed. That after Delinquents have passed their Compositions, an Act of Oblivion may be passed. Then they proceed to a Charge against ELEVEN Members; which be∣ing read to them, they stood up and made defence. Their names were as followeth: Denzil Hollis, Sir Philip Stapleton, Sir William Lewis, Sir Iohn Clotworthy, Sir William Walter, Sir Iohn Maynard, Colonel Massey, Mr. Glyn, Colonel Long, Colonel Edward Harley, Anthony Nichols Esquire; all of them active men for Presbytery, and obnoxious to their future undertakings, and therefore by all means to be removed. This was sent up by Colonel Scroop, Okey, Hewson, and Pride, Lieutenant-Colonel Goff, Major Desborough, Colonel Berry, Clark, Carter, Rolph, Saxby: to which Charge a Paper was added, wherein they set forth, That in pur∣suance of these Representations, they have the heads of the Charge ready, and shall appoint fit persons on their and the Kingdoms behalf to make it good. That if the Parliament shall admit this Charge, that the persons impeached may be forthwith suspended from fitting in the House, having appeared notoriously to the prejudice and provocation of the Army.
That another Months pay be sent down. That if those who deserted the Army, and have engaged for Ireland, have received more, that the Army be equally paid, and that such have no more pay till the Army are paid their Arrears. That because of secret practices and designes to raise new Forces, and to bring back to London those ordered for Ireland; That no Forces be raised or invited back or other Forrein preparations to interrupt the Liberty and Peace of the King∣dom. That all this be speedily performed; the condition of the Army, the Kingdom and the King (mark the order) so requiring. This concerning no raising of Forces,The Parliament demur to the suspending of their Members. &c. was agreed to; but to the suspen∣sion of the Eleven Members the Parliament demur, and answer, That by law no judgment can be given to suspend those Members, before the particulars of their Charge be produced, and proofs made. Nor have those Members said or done any thing for which the House can suspend them.They forbeare sitting of them∣selves. Nevertheless not to enrage them, the Mem∣bers forbore of themselves; whereupon the Army drew off to Berkamstead, twen∣ty seven miles distant, and so to Vxbridge, having marched the King from Roy∣ston to Hatfield, and so to Causam neer Reading. To this Answer of the Parliament,The Army quote th Cases of the Earl of Straf∣ford, ArchB. of Canterbury and Ld. Keeper Finch. the Army returned, That by the Laws and the precedent case of the Earl of Strafford, and the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury (observe how that blood is thrown or flyes in he faces of the Parliament) and the Lord keeper Finch (who upon Papers of accusation were suspended sitting) they might not be permitted likewise; but are contented as yet, because they of them∣selves have forborn the House. From Vxbridge the Army marched to Wickham, in complyance with the de∣sires of the Parliament. See here the Villanous Artifices of this Independent faction, to so neer an imitation of Machiavel, that they were neither discoverable nor resistible, cheat∣ing and overpowring the King,The King and Parliament over-awd by Cromwel: his remarkable expression. the Parliament, the City, nay the whole King∣dom at once: for while all men stood at gaze what would be the event, they had so obliged opportunity by their diligent attendance on her, that they were already in fruition of it: for remarkable is that speech of Cromwel, who, upon notice given him that Ioyce had the Kings person in his possession, replyed, Then I have the Parliament in my pocket; making sure of his full attainment of all his ambitious purposes, by this auspicious entrance and beginning of them. For he dared now to shew his teeth, and manifest that quarrel with the Presbyterians, which had festred inwardly so long; and by widening the rupture, give vent to that filthy matter enclosed betwixt them: All which cannot better be laid open, than the excellent Pen of the King hath done it, in this ensuing Medita∣tion thereupon. WHat part God will have me now to act or suffer in this new and strange Scene of affairs,His Majesties Meditation on the designes of the several fa∣ctions. I am not much sollicitous; some little practice will serve that man, who onely seeks to present a part of honesty and honour. This surprize of me tells the World, That a KING cannot be so low, but he is considerable; adding weight to that Party where he appears. This motion, like others of the times, seems excentrick and irre∣gular, yet not well to be resisted or quieted: Better swim down such a stream, than in vain to strive against it. These are but the struglings of those Twins, which lately one womb enclosed, the younger striving to prevail against the elder: what the Presbyterians have hunted after, the Independents now seek to catch for themselves.
So impossible is it for Lines to be drawn from the Center, and not to divide from each other, so much the wider, by how much they go farther from the point of union. That the builders of Babel should from division fall to confusion, is no wonder; but for those that pretend to build Jerusalem, to divide their tongues and hands, is but an ill omen, and sounds too like the fury of those Zealots, whose intestine bitterness and divisions were the greatest occasion of the last fatal destruction of that City. Well may I change my Keepers and Prison, but not my captive condi∣tion; onely with this hope of bettering, that those who are so much professed Patrons for the Peoples Liberties, cannot be utterly against the Liberty of their King: what they demand for their own Conscien∣ces, they cannot in reason deny to mine. In this they seem more ingenuous than the Presbyterian Rigour, who, sometimes complaining of exacting their Conformity to Laws, are become the greatest Exactors of other mens submission to their no∣vel Injunctions, before they are stamped with the Authority of Laws, which they cannot well have without my consent. 'Tis a great Argument that the Independents think themselves ma∣numitted from their Rivals service, in that they carry on a business of such consequence, as the assuming my person into the Armies custo∣dy, without any Commission, but that of their own will and power. Such as will thus adventure on a King, must not be thought over-mo∣dest or timorous to carry on any designe they have a mind to. Their next motion menaces and scares both the two Houses and the City; which soon after acting over again that former part of tumultuary motions, (never questioned, punished, or repented) must now suffer for both; and see their former sin, in the glass of the pre∣sent terrours and distractions. No man is so blinde, as not to see herein the hand of Divine Iu∣stice; they that by Tumults first occasioned the raising of Armies, must now be chastened by their own Army for new Tumults. So hardly can men be content with one sin, but add sin to sin, till the latter punish the former. Such as were content to see me and many Members of both Houses driven away by the first unsuppressed Tumults, are now forced to flie to an Army, to defend themselves against them. But who can unfold the Riddle of some mens justice? the Mem∣bers of both Houses who at first withdrew, (as my self was forced to do) from the rudeness of the Tumults, were counted desertours, and outed of their places in Parliament. Such as stayed then, and enjoyed the benefit of the Tumults, were all asserted for the onely Parliament-men: now the flyers from, and forsakers of their places, carry the Parliamentary Power along with them, complain highly against the Tumults, and vindicate them∣selves by an Army; such as remained and kept their stations, are looked upon as Abettours of Tumultuary insolencies, and Betrayers of the freedom and Honour of Parliament. They will find that Brethren in iniquity are not far from becoming
insolent Enemies, there being nothing harder, than to keep ill men long in one minde, &c. The King, as before, desired the free enjoyment of what company exception∣less he should need, wherein in part he had been gratified (though to avoid offence the Duke of Richmond had withdrawn himself:) he thought fit there∣fore by a more equitable request to desire the company of his Children,His Majesty desires his Chil∣drens company. which the Parliament had denied; which the General civilly undertook, in this Letter. MASTER SPEAKER, I Was sent unto by the King on Fryday last,Sir Thomas Fairfax his Letter to the Parliament concerning the Kings desire of seeing his Chil∣dren. to desire the Parliament to give him way to see his Children, and that they might for that purpose be sent unto him. If I may be bold humbly to offer my opinion. I think the allowance of such a thing may be without the least prejudice to the Kingdom, and yt gain more upon his Majesty than by denying it. And if it be in the Prayers of every good man, that his heart may be gained, the performance of such Civilities to him is very suitable to those desires, and will bear well with all men▪ who if they can imagin it their own case, cannot but b sorry if his Majesties natural affection in so small a thing shall not be complied with, I engaging for their return within what time the Parliament shall limit. Denies (occasion being taken hereby by some) any underhand contract or bargain with the King, and assures them of their Fidelity to them and the Kingdom; nothing being so likely to settle an agreement and peace, as an accord betwixt them and the Army, which they shall study to preserve. What is done in reference to a just consideration and settlement of the Kings Rights (he first giving his Concurrence to secure the Rights of the Kingdom) is declared in our Remonstrance, since which several Addresses have been made to him by several Officers, to clear the intentions of such Papers as the Representation and Remonstrance, whereunto his Majesty might make any question, but no bargain of advantage for our selves, having thereby ut∣terly disclaimed any such thing: But the onely intent and effect of those Addresses, hath been to desire his Majesties free Concurrence with the Parliament for establishing and securing the Common Rights and Liberties, &c. and to assure him (that being done) that it is fully agreeable to their principles, and that they should be de∣sirous, that in such setling of the publike, the Rights of his Majesties Royal Family should be also provided for. And that as we had declared, so in general, if things came to a settlement, we should not be wanting in our Sphere, to own that ge∣neral desire in any particulars of Natural or Civil Rights to his Majesties Person or Family, which might not endanger the publike. And in the mean time, that his Majesty shall finde all personal respects and civilities, and all reasonable freedom from us, that might stand with safety, &c. And fr that particular of the Duke of Richmond and his two Chaplains, Doctor Hammond and Doctor Shelden, lately admitted to attend his Majesty, it was not done without much reluctancie, because we doubted we might therein be misunderstood by the Kingdoms best friends. But upon his Majesties continual importunity, we did allow him such Company, of persons least dangerous, such as we hoped would not do ill offices, and in whom his former acquaintance might cause him to take pleasure, being both reasonable and just; and the debarring of that liberty▪ especially of his Chaplains, would but make him the more prejudiced against their Ministers. In general, we humbly conceive, that to avoid all harshness, and afford all kinde usage to his Majesties Person, in things consisting with the peace and safety, &c. is the most Christian, honourable and most prudent way; and we think that tender, moderate, and equitable dealing both towards his Majesty, his Royal Family, and late Party (so far (again) as may stand with the safety, &c.) is the most hope∣ful course to take away the seeds of War, future feuds amongst us for Posterity, and to procure a lasting Peace, and settle Religion, &c. And if God shall make us in∣strumental thereto, we shall thenceforth account it our greatest happiness and honour (if God see it good) to be disengaged from any publike employment whatso∣ever.
This in the name of the Army, or at least most considerable part thereof. A Letter from the King to the Duke of York inclosed.In this Letter he likewise enclosed another from the King to the Duke of York, wherein he ordered him to ask leave of the two Houses, for Him, his Brother, and Sister, to come and see Him, if but for a Dinner-time; acquaint∣ing him, that if the Parliament should make any scruple for fear lest the Army should dain them also, that he had assurance from the General and other principal Officers (such caut was then necessarily used, for they did what they pleased without the General that they should freely return according to the time limited, to eir Govrnour the Earl of Northumberland, who then kept them by a small allvanc out of his Majesties Revenue, at his Mannor of St. Iames. D the medians o the General, who could do more with a ,The King enjoy his Children company two days. than the King by a Proclamation, he had the pleasure, or rather favour done him to see them at Maidenhad, where they dined with their Father, and thence went with him to Causam,  house of my Lord Cravens, where for two days they were dispensed with in his company and hen remitted to their for∣mer tuition and cusdy.His Nephew the Prince Elector Palatine visits him. He was visit also  while before, by his Ne∣phew the Prince Elector Palatine (eldest Brother to the Princes Rupert and Maurice) who had all along continued from his coming ver lst, in the Parliaments Quarters, allowed by them a stipend of 8000  per annum, till in 1649. after the murther of his Uncle, they dismist him into Holland. To digrss a little to the review of the Generals Letter, but the poduct of Iretons brain, who was Secretary all along to these whidling and lacious Paper-Kites; no less than ten Salvo's or Restrictious to the ttlement of the King: yea to curry with him, setting forth a necessity of  his just rights, and the equity of their declaring for them; still not  the per∣formance of the least Syllable they wrr uttered in his behalf. They desire not to be misunderstood, and it is impossible for any man to understand them aright, their Language and Actions being so distanced: yet so plausible and swimmingly they carried it, that no Party was disobliged save the Presbyterian, with whom upon any slnder pretence, they desired and had offered to be at open defiance. But their conclusion of this Epistle bewrayed all, and gave some light to thse designes in the dark behind, in that they so voluntarily offered to disband, and to take it for an honour to be dismist, (thogh with a Reserve of a Settlement) when as a more honourable service, and a most Christian work, of assisting their poor Countrymen in Ireland, was with so much indignation and mercilesness upbraided and refused by them. But of this enough. The Armies de∣signe upon the City of Lon∣don.The Armies now thinking the King securely confident, turned their designes upon the City, which seeing they could not separate from the Parliament, and because the late purge of the 11 Members had not awed them sufficiently; (though they had patiently enough put it up, considering their insolence to the King, on his demand of their Five Members) the Country being lulled also by their pretences, they by a Remonstrance demand the Militia of London to be put into other hands: which insolent bravado ingated this Petition to the Right Honourable the Lord Mayor, &c. of the City of London; being stiled, The humble Petition of the Citizens, Commanders, Souldiers, and Officers, in the Regiments of Trained-bands, and Auxiliaries, Apprentices, Sea-Commanders, Sea-men and Water-men of the same City. The Citizens Petition the Lord Mayor in behalf of the King and the Army.That your Petitioners taking into serious consideration, that their Religion, his Majesties Honour and Safety, the Priviledges of Parliament, and Liberties of the Subject, are at present greatly endangered, and like to be destroyed; and also sadly weighing with our selves what means might likely prove the most effectual to pro∣cure a firm and lasting Peace, without a further effusion of Christian English-blood: We are therefore entred into a solemn Engagement, which is hereunto annexed; and do humbly desire, that this whole City may joyn together, by all Lawful and possible means, as one man, in hearty endeavours for his Majesties present coming up to his
two Houses of Parliament, with Honour, Safety, and Freedom, and that with∣out the approach of the Army; there to confirm such things as he hath granted in his Message of the 12th of May last [which was his Answer to the Prpositions from Holdenby, not inserted, because insignificant to that unreasonableness of the Parliament, being loth to weary the Reader with the Kings unwearied desirs after Peace to no purpose] in Answer to those Propositions of both King∣doms: And that by a personal Treaty with his two Houses of Parliament, and the Commissioners of Scotland, such things as are yet in difference may be speedily settled, and a firm and lasting Peace established. All which we desire, may be presented to both Houses of Parliament from this Honourable Assembly. The Solemn Engagement,The solemn n∣agement of the City. so was it called, run thus: Whereas we have en∣tred into a Solemn League and Covenant for Reformation and Defence of Religion, the Honour and Happiness of the King, the Priviledges of Parliament, &c. All which we do evidently perceive not onely to be endangered▪ but ready to be destroyed; we do therefore, in pursuance of our said Covenant, Oath of Allegiance, Oath of every Free-man, and Protestations, Solemnly engage our selves, and Vow unto Almighty God, that we will to the utmost of our power ardently endeavour, that his Majesty may speedily come to his  Houses of Parliament, to the end here specified. For effecting whereof, we do protest, and re-oblige our selves, as in the presence of God, the searcher of all hearts with our Lives and Fortunes, to endeavour what in us lies, to preserve and defend his Majesties Royal person and Authority, the Priviledges, &c. and the Cities of London and Westminstr, and Lines of Communication, and all other that shall adhere to us in the said Engagement. Nor shall we by any means admit suffer, or endure any kind of Neutrality in this common Cause of God, the King, and Kingdm, as we do expect the blessing of God, whose help we crave, and wholly devolve our selves upon, in this our undertaking. This was the honestest, and most genuine aspect, as to the fair pretences of the Covenant, Presbyter ever appeared in; here being some realities of those many semblances that Party had made before, and shewed that there was a sober misled number, and that for the major part too, who were onely Church-dis∣senters, hurt onely in their opinions, not festered or corrupted in their affe∣ctions to the State, the Kings Person and Government. For they prosecuted this Confederacy so vigorously, (and with all manner of diligence, openly aver∣ring the justice and equity of his Majesties offers, listing and encouraging all men to a present undertaking of his quarrel, of which more particularly by and by) that the Indpendents perceiving the sudden dangerous consequence thereof, they prevailed upon the Houses in a Vote, (which they wire-drawed by arguments of the indignity and affront, and breaches of Priviledge of Par∣liament, by such illegal and Tumultuous Combinations) and got it digested in a Declaration, orbidding all subscriptions to the said Engagement. See it here transcribed. Saturday 14 Iuly 1647. The Lords and Commons having seen a printed Paper entituled,A Declaration of the Lords and Commons, forbidding sub∣scriptions to the Engage∣ment. A Petition to the Right Honourable the Lord Mayor, &c. and the names of divers Citizens, &c. together with a dangerous Engagement of the same persons by Oath and Vow, con∣cerning the Kings present coming to the Parliament, upon terms far different from those which both Houses, after mature deliberation, have declared to be necessary for the good and safety of the Kingdom; casting reflexions upon the proceedings both of the Parliament and Army and nding to embroil the King∣dom in a new War: And the Lords and Commons taking notice of great endea∣vours used by divers ill-affected persons to get subscriptions thereunto, whereby well-meaning people may be misled; do therefore declare, That whosoever after publica∣tion, or notice hereof, shall proceed with, or promote, or set his name to, or give
consent that his name be set to, or any way joyn in the said Engagement, shall be deemed and adjudged guilty of high Treason, and shall forfeit Life and Estate, as in cases of high Treason accustomed. Mark how eagerly they fall upon men, the very same persons, credibly, whom at first they had put upon the very same course to commence our Con∣fusions▪ that is now by their Authority high Treason, which by their Lawless perswasions, then, was but the Liberty of the Subject, the birth-right of Eng∣lish Free-men. A good caution for the Vulgar, and for such Democraticks also, how they imbibe, or how they instil such dangerous and leud suggestions not warranted by Law, which every unhappy emergency or displeasing event may retort upon their own heads; as was most apparent in the ensuing Tumults, which the King excellently observes as a just judgement of God upon the Au∣thors and Actors of the like violences and insolences against himself in the be∣ginning of our Troubles. But the City of London were not so scared with this Ordinance, as they thought they would be; the cause of their discontent not onely not ceasing, but being more exasperated, by a justification of the injuries they were resolved to redress; they continued their Subscriptions; and while the Army was yet at some distance, and abundance of cashiered Officers, (the Presbyterian party in Parliament being some time before surprized in a Vote, whereby all Officers and Souldiers not of General Fairfax's Army were disbanded from their Com∣mands) and old Reformados of the Earl of Essex's now in the Town, to attempt the execution of what they had so publikely declared.The rashness and precipetan∣cy of the City. A great and fatal over-sight, in lying so open to so subtle and cunnig an Enemy, whom they needed not to have valued, if by equal and considerate progressions, they had silently advanced their enterprize, not precipitated it with noise, and pre∣sumptuous ostentation. For the City was furnished with men, both Souldiers and Officers, as expert, daring, and ready for such a piece of Service, as they could have desired. In some, their recent animosities for those cheats put upon them by taking away their Commissions, in recompence of their good service: In others, a true and rectified sense of what they had done a∣miss against the King: In others, and the most indifferent, the very Employ∣ment it self, which was sure to be gainful, by the certainty of Pay. But be∣fore they could be formed, or the designe digested into that formidable appea∣rance which the other Faction jealously dreaded, the Plot was spoiled by a Tu∣muluous Rabble, who on the 26 of Iuly, (a Petition being delivered that morning to the Parliament for the settlement of the Militia,The Pretices and Rle Tu∣mult the Parli∣ament-House. as of the 4 of May by that Committee of Citizens) ran down to Westminster, and forced the House of Commons to comply with their Commands, the Lords having granted that Petition before. For on the 26 of Iuly, the Parliament had made an Ordinance whereby the Militia of London was changed, and put into the hands of a mixt number of Pres∣byterians and Independents, but where the latter were most prevalent; reversing thereby their Ordinance of the fourth of May, which had vested it in the Lord Mayor, &c. for that year. From disgust of this change, the occasion of this Riot was taken; first therefore, the Speaker thinking to leave the Chair, and depart at the noise of their coming, a man of a covetous mind, who being in fear of being questioned for several sums of money purloined from the Publike, and wisely foreseeing the Army would have the better of it, stuck to that Party (though he had also held intelligence with the King formerly) firmly for the future) was seized on by them, forced to return to his Chair, and there, with the like complsion of th rest of the Members, to Unvote that Ordinance for the change of the Militia, which now stood entrusted in the said hands before, as if that Ordinance had never been. Next they obtained another Vote, where∣by that Declaration against abetting, carrying on, or subscribing to the said Engagement, under penalty of high Treason, was annihilated. Yet not con∣tent with this, (which had not done any great mischief, and seemed another
matter, no way relating to the King, whose interest was to be carryed on by the said spcious shs, though honested otherwise than those of the Army, with whom the counterparts of the said deceits were to be practised, and their juggles colluded) a madder crew of the said multitude, just as the House was risen, and after the Speaker had adjourned it, did constrain them back again, and both Lords and Commons to Vote this Resolve; That his Majesty shall come to London forthwith to Treat. To the sollicitation and forcing whereof, it was more than suspected, that the multitude was instigated by the Fanaticks, who had mixt and dispersed themselves among them for that purpose; it being clearly besides the first intention of that Tumult; which nevertheless yet ceased not, till the Sheriffs with what force they could get together (the Militia then unsetled, through the contradicting Order of Parliament) pacified them, and brought the Speaker home in safety. The Lords, who had been more ready to this complyance with the City, e∣specially as to the Militia, it being its custom all along before the said alteration, to name their Commissioners for the Parliaments approbation; and because they smelt the Armies designe in it, (whose partakers in the House of Commons said, that otherwise there was no stopping them from coming to London, which they had hitherto in duty forborn, and greatly magnified as their respectful ob∣servance of the Parliaments Commands) adjourned from the 26, to the 30 of Iuly, the Commons to the next day the 27. where they sate quietly, and ad∣journed to the said time with the Lords. And the next day being Wednesday, the Monthly Fast, they observed it at their usual Churches of St. Peters Abby, and St. Margarets Westminster. On Friday many of both Houses met accordingly,The Parl.  Speakrs. where of the Commons ap∣peared 140. but the Speaker was missing,The former Speaker to the Commons mna∣ced by Crom∣wel. Both the old Speakers go to the Army. and the House after some inquiry was informed that he was gone to the Army, fetcht thither it seems by this menace from Cromwel, That if he did not comply with their designes, he would cause the Army to impeach him, for cozening the State of many vast sums of money. The Earl of Manchester, Speaker likewise to the House of Lords, was gone the same way: Both Houses thereupon, without more hesitation, chuse two new Speakers, which were the Lord Grey of Wark for the Lords,The Lord Grey of Wark chen Speaker to the Lords, Mr. Hen. Pelham Speaker for the Commons. and Mr. Henry Pelham for the Com∣mons, who wanted 40 of their number that were Army-driven; and then pro∣ceeded to Vote, and Act as a Parliament. The first thing they did as such, and as became English-men, was to Vote the re-admission of the 11 Members who had subducted themselves; and then they revived and set up again the Committee of Safety,The Parl. Vote the re-admission of the 11 Mem∣bes. by Ordinance of both Hou∣ses, enabling them to joyn with the Committee of the restored Militia of London; giving them power to List and raise Forces, to appoint Commanders and Offi∣cers, and to Issue forth Arms and Ammunition,The Committee of Safety set up. for defence of both Houses and the City, against all that should invade them. This would clearly have done the business,Tumults in London about listing of For∣ces. had not their openness before, layd the rubs and obstacles in the way, which so much time of preparation against it had contrived. For while the City was in a great division by the sticklers of Independency, yet carrying on their levies, having appointed Major-General Massey and Poyntz to Command in chief the Forces so to be raised, who were listed at Guild-hall; several multitudes of Fanaticks broke in, and distur∣bed the Court of War, to so great an affront, that the two Major-Generals were forced to draw their Swords, and wound some of those Tumultuaries, before they could be quiet; and were scarce returned to their seats before they had no∣tice of the approach of the Army, who in scorn of the Parliaments Com∣mands of keeping at 30 miles distance,The Army ap∣proach within 10 miles of London. were approached to 10, and had appoin∣ted a Rendezvouz on Hounsloe-heath. This Alarm begot strange and different passions in the Citizens: the wealthier sort began to flinch from those resolutions of adhering to their Engagement, to save their bags; nothing being more vogued
among the people, than that the City would be plundered▪ as it was given out by some of the Grandees of the Army: but the Milita en, and those of meaner fortunes, seemed to take courage from the nearness of the danger, offer∣ing to meet it; and if the pusillanimity of the Court of Aldermen had not hin∣dred, Massey would have given the Army, then quartering (part of it) on this side Braynford, a salute or Camisado, by that means to make Rupture wide, and past the cure of a reconciliation. Nevertheless the defensive part, from their own concerns, they undertook, guarding the Works and Fortifications round the City, quartering several re∣serves in whole Regiments in the fields, more particularly those parts nearest the Army, out of dread of another Wat Tyler, or Iack Cade with his Rebel-rout, (a judgement this famous City hath been more subject to than any City in the World, most of which have often suffered by their own intestine divisions) but were in fine glad to seek Peace, (betrayed at their own doors by one Hard∣wick, Colonel of the Southwark Regiment, and who then guarded the Works on that side, which were opened to Colonel Hewsin;) by their Commissioners Fouk, Gibs, and Estwick, (acceptable men to the Army, for they durst not for fear of a dismission re infecta send others) then attending the General at Hounsloe. The King hears this, and to avoid the Scandal of these Uproars, which he in prudence did see primarily concern others, though they would right or wrong be Loaded upon him, emitted this Paper to clear himself from them. The Kings De∣claration clear∣ing himself of any design of war.THere having been many Rumours spread, and Informations given, which may have induced many to believe, that We in∣tend to make War against Our Parliament; We profess before God, and declare to all the World, That We always have, and do abhor all such designes; and desire all our Nobility and Commoners who are here upon the place, to declare whether they have not been witnesses of as frequent and earnest Declarations and Professions to this pur∣pose, whether they see any colour of prparations and Counsels that might reasonably beget a belief of any such designe, and whether they be not fully perswaded that We have no such intention, but that all Our endeavours (according to Our many Professions) tend to the firm and constant Settlement of the true Protestant Religion, the just Priviledges of Parliament, the Liberty of the Subject, the Law, Peace, and Prosperity of this Kingdom. He as a Neu∣ter attends the Issue of Divine Providence.This even course of the Kings, and constancy to himself so well known to the Army, made them speak less to the Kings prejudice in the altercation about the priviledges of Parliament, of which they now (forsooth) were the main assertors; so that the King, as he got nothing, lost as little by this brangle be∣tween both Parties, neither of them having whereon to fasten any cavil on the King in this matter, who without medling with their differences, further than his own private descants upon them, awaited the Issue of Divine Provi∣dence. Fugitive Members sit in Council with the Army.The Army therefore, the better to proceed and countenance their Rebellion, His Majesty and Parliament being made a meer Cypher, invite and engage the two Speakers and Fugitive Members, to sit in consultation, and pass Votes pro∣miscuously with the Council of War in the nature of a Parliament; and to Signe an Engagement, dated the 4 of August, to live and dye with Sir Thomas Fairfax and the Parliament and Army, both under his Command; affirming therein, that generally throughout, their sense agrees with the Declaration of Sir Thomas Fairfax and his Council of War,The Armies De∣claration. which shewed the grounds of their present advance towards the City of London. In this Declaration the Council
of the Army took upon them also to be the Supream Judges of the Parliament, discriminating whom of the two Houses they held for persons in whom the publike trust of the King remained, and by whose advice they meant to govern themselves in managing the weighty affairs of the Kingdom. They highly resent the late choice of a new Speaker by those Gentlemn at Westminster, and say, that as things now stand, there is no free nor legal Parliament sitting, such being through the violence of the 26 of Iuly suspended. That the Orders and Votes, &c. passed the 29 of Iuly last, and all such as shall pass in this Assembly of Lords and Gentlemen at Westminster, are void and null, and ought not to be submitted unto. This Remonstrance was the second to a Letter to the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen, upbraiding them with the late Tumult, as Enemies to the Peace of the Kingdom, Treacherous to the Parliament, and uitable to secure that, or themselves; and therefore demanding the City to be put into their hands, to which purpose they were then on their way. And to brave the City to a surrender, their General sends out Warrants to raise the Trained-Bands of the near Counties to march with him against the City and both Houses,Fairfax sends warrants for the Trained-Bands to march against the City. although such Bands were not under pay of the Parliament, and so not under any Command of the General by any Or∣der or Ordinance. But armed violence was not to be stopt with Lawyers niceties. A Bumkin in a Leather-doublet, must be a Red-coat; by the same rule, that Foxes have Horns. This brought the City to the expected submission,The City sub∣mits, on disho∣nourable Con∣ditions. by which they obtained (and thank you too) these most dishonourable Conditions: That they should yield to desert the Impeached Members, call in their Declaration newly published, relinquish their Militia, deliver up all their Forts and Line of Communication to the Army, together with the Tower of London, (which they had so clamorously and impudently extorted out of the Kings disposal) and all the Magazines and Arms therein; disband all their Forces, and turn all the Reformadoes out of the Line; withdraw ail their guards from the Parliament, and receive such guards of Horse and Foot within the Line, as the Army should appoint to guard them; demo∣lish their Works, and suffer the whole Army to mach through their City: all which were suddenly and dishonourably yielded to, and insolently executed; the Souldiers marching in Triumph, with Bays in their Hats, through all the prin∣cipal streets of the City, boasting of their civil march as a great courtesy, when there was men enough, if they had offered to Plunder, to have aten them. This envious disdainful Triumph being over,The Fugitive Members resea∣ted Aug. 6. and the former Speakers placed by the General. the next work was to reseat the Fugitive Members, whom the General himself brought to both Houses with a strong party, (the two Palaces filled with Souldiers, and double Files clean through Westminster-hall up to the stairs of the House of Common, and so through the Court of Requests to the Lords House; the Souldiers looking scorn∣fully upon many of these Members (as they were instructed to know them) that had sate in the absence of the Speakers) and seated the Speakers respective∣ly in their Chairs, and was by them, in return, placed in a Chair of State, where they gave him special thanks for his service to the Parliament;The Parl. ap∣point a day of Thanksgiving for their reset∣tlement. and like∣wise appointed, to signalize his desert, a solemn day of Thanksgiving for the re-settlement of the Parliament, their usual prophane and impious practice of mocking God: to which they now added the abuse of the Creature, at a Dinner provided for the Parliament and chief Officers of the Army by the City;The Army fea∣sed by the City. at whose costs they sreited, while the Poor thereof starved through want of Trade,Sir Thomas Fairfax made Generalissimo and Constable of the Tower. which decayed sensibly in a short time; no Bullion likewise being after∣wards brought to the Mint. Sir Thomas Fairfax was now likewise constituted Generalissimo (so sudden their favour, and so great their confidence) of all the Forces and Forts in Eng∣land, to dispose of them at his pleasure;The Souldiers ordered a months gratui∣ty. and Constable of the Tower of Lon∣don. The Common Souldiers were likewise ordered a Months gratuity, and the General remitted to his own discretion, for what Guards he should please
to set upon both Houses; in such a servile fear were those Members that sate in the absence of the Speakers, that they durst not dissent from any thing pro∣pounded by the contrary Faction. The effect of this was, that the Indepen∣dents displaced immediately all Governours, though placed by Ordinance of Parliament, and put in men of their own party, which they could not so currant∣ly do before; and by vertue of the same, the Militia's of London, Westminster, and Southwark, from whence was their sole danger, which were all united be∣fore, were now divided, to make them the weaker; the Lines of Communication dismantled, that the Parliament and City mightly open to any sudden invasion, that so they might have a perpetual and easie awe upon their Counsels and actions. The 11 imea∣chd Membrs withra. One of them, viz. Mr. Ni∣chols, sized on by Cromwel, and abed. Sir Philip Sta∣pleton passeth over to Calice, and dyes mise∣rabl.The Eleven Impeached Members, before mentioned, who had superseded themselves, and were newly re-admitted, (the Army not being able to pro∣duce their Charge, upon pretence of more weighty affairs) now altogether withdrew, and had Passes, (though some staid in London) some for beyond Sea, and other for their homes; in the way whither, one of them (Mr. Ni∣chols) was seized on, and basely abused by Cromwel: another, Sir Philip Sta∣pleton, one who had done them very good service, passed over to Calice, where falling sick, as suspected, of the Plauge, he was turned out of the Town, and perished in the way near to Graveling; whose end was inhumanely commented on by our Mamaluke like Saints, who inscribed it to the Divine Vengeance. All Votes, Or∣ds an Oi∣nances passed in the  of the Speakers atogate.Having thus Levelled all things before them, they proceed to an abrogation of all those Votes, Orders, and Ordinances, that had passed in the absence of the said Speakers. This was first carried in the Lords House without any trou∣ble; the Peers that sate there that time absenting themselves, so that there was not more than seven Lords to make up their House. By these an Ordinance was sent to the Commons for their concurrence, to make all Acts, Orders and Ordinances passed from the 26 of Iuly to the sixth of August following, when the Members did return, Void and Null, ab initio. This was five or six days severally and fully debated, and as often put to the question, and carried in the Negative; yet the Lords still renewed the same Message to them, being promp∣ted and instigated by the Army, rejecting their Votes, nor would acquiesce, but put them to Vote again, contrary to the priviledge of the House of Commons; nor could it pass, for all the threats of the Sollicitour-General Saint Iohn, one mancipated to the Faction▪The Sollicitour-General St. John, Hazel∣rigg, Sir Hen. Vane Junior, Tho. Scot, Cornelius Holland, Pri∣deaux, Gour∣don, Sir John Evelin unior, and Henry Mildway, all Regicides, and busie contrivers of the Armies designes. nor the fury of Hazelrigg, when he used these words—Some Heads must fly off, and he feared the Parliament of England would not save the Kingdom of England, but that they must look another way for safety. To which sence spoke Sir Henry Vane junior, Thomas Scot, Cornelius Holland, Prideaux, Gourdon, Sir Iohn Evelin junior, and Henry Mildway, (all Regicides, and Contrivers of it) until the Speaker perceiving some plain apparent en∣forcements must be used, pulled a Letter out of his pocket from the General and General Council of the Army, (for that was now their stile) pretending he then received it; which soon terrified the Members, (either by withdraw∣ing themselves, or sitting mute, as if they had been Planet-struck) into a com∣pliance; so that the next morning, August the 20. in a thin House, the Ordi∣nance passed; the procuring thereof being palpably and notoriously forced and Arbitrary. This Letter to the Speaker, was received by him over-night, as was conceived,The Ordinance of Null and Void, passed August 20. with directions to conceal it, if the Question had passed in the Affirmative: But that not fadging, it was was produced in the nick, accom∣panied with a Remonstrance full of villanous language against those that conti∣nued sitting while the two Speakers were with the Army, calling them preten∣ded Members, and taxing them in General with Treason, Treachery, and Breach of Trust; declaring, that if they shall presume to come there, before they have cleared themselves that they did not give their assents to such and such Votes, they should sit at their Peril, and he would take them as Prisoners of War, and try them at a Council of War. Having thus invalidated or annihilated those Laws, the Law-makers could
not think to escape untouched: Citizens of London, im∣peache and comtd. The impeachment  by Sir John Evelin junior and Miles Corbet. Iudgement began with the House of Lords, whose degenerate remnant, upon an Impeachment (carried up by Sir Iohn Evelin the younger) of High Treason in the name of the Commons of England, for their levying War against the King, Parliament, and Kingdom, committed the Earls of Suffolk, Lincoln, and Middlesex, the Lords Berkley, Willoughby of Parham, Hunsdon, and Maynard, to the Black Rod. Then divers of the House of Com∣mons were suspended, as Mr. Boynton; others committed to the Tower, as Recorder Glyn, and Sir Iohn Maynard: but the wrath of the Army ell prin∣cipally on the Citizens, the chief of whom were, viz. the Lod Mayor Sir Iohn Gayre, Alderman Adams, Alderman Langham, Alderman Bunch, and Sheriff Culham, with others; these without any more ado than an Impeachment pre∣ferred against them by Miles Corbet, one of the Regicides, and Chair-man to the Close-Committee of Examinations to the House of Lords, were (never being called to any Bar) sent Prisoners to the Tower of London, where they lay a long time, and could never obtain a Trial; but at last sued out a precious and precarious liberty:Poyntz and Massey  to Holland. so that by this means the Spirit of Presbytery was quite daunted, and the Independent Faction absolutely ruled the roast, and were pa∣ramount: Poyntz and Massey fled over to Holland, and so escaped. Having concluded this Contrast or Feud betwixt them, we will see with what aspect they regard their Soveraign, upon whom, having worried one ano∣ther in this despiteful manner, they fly as freely, as if there had been no such quarrel. His Majesty after several removes by direction of the Council of Officers,The King brought to Hampton-Court: Commis∣sioners sent to him from the Parliament with Proposi∣tions. was brought to Hampton-Court, whither, on the 7 of September, the Houses having hammered out the same substance of the former Propositions, into a new but stranger shape, sent Commissioners, to whom were joyned some Scots in the like quality from that Kingdom. The names of both were as followeth; the Earls of Pembroke and Lauderdale, Sir Iohn Holland, Sir Charles Erskin, Sir Iohn Cook, Sir Iames Harrington. Major-General Brown, Mr. Hugh Kenedy, and Mr. Robert Berkley. The preface to which Propositions (omitting them∣selves, as recited before) was this. May it please your Majesty,The Preface thereunto. We the Lords and Commons Assembled in the Parlia∣ment of England, in the name and in the behalf of the Kingdoms of England and Ire∣land, and the Commissioners of the Parliament of Scotland, &c. Do humbly pre∣sent unto your Majesty the humble Desires and Propositions for a safe and well-grounded Peace, agreed upon by the Parliaments of both Kingdoms respectively; unto which we pray your Majesties Assent, and that they, and all such Bills as shall be tendred to your Majesty in pursuance of them, or of any of them, may be Established and Enacted for Statutes, and Acts of Parliament, by your Majesties Royal Assent, in the Parliaments of both Kingdoms respectively. — And never a good word after. To these, his Majesty, being accustomed to the unreasonableness of the men, in two days returns this Answer. For the SPEAKER of the House of Lords, &c. C. R. HIs Majesty cannot chuse but be passionately sensible (as he be∣lieves all his good Subjects are) of the late great distractions,His Majesties Answer to them, Sept. 9. and still languishing, and unsetled state of this Kingdom: And he calls God to witness, and is willing to give Testimony to all the World, of his readiness to contribute his utmost endeavours, for re∣storing it to a happy and flourishing condition. His Majesty having perused the Propositions now brought to him,
finds them the same in effect which were offered to him at New∣castle:Those Propsitis  with  a New∣castle. To some of which, as he could not then consent, without vio∣lation of his Honour and Conscience, so neither can he agree to others now concerning them, in many respects more disagreeable to the present condition of his Majesty, than when they were formerly presented to him, as being destructive to the main principal interests of the Army, and of all those whose affections concur with them. And his Majesty having seen the Proposals of the Army, to the Com∣misioners from his two Houses residing with them, therewith then to be Treated on, in order to the clearing and securing the Rights and Liberties of the Kingdom, and the settling of a just and lasting Peace, to which Proposals, as he conceives his two Houses are not strangers, so he believes they will think with him, that they much more conduce to the satisfaction of all interests; and may be a fitter Foundation for a lasting Peace, than the Propositions which at this time are tendered unto him: He therefore Propounds (as the best way in his judge∣ment in order to Peace,) that his two Houses would instantly take into consideration those Proposals, upon which there may be a perso∣nal Treaty with his Majesty, and upon such other Propositions as his Majesty shall make; hoping that the said Proposals may be so mode∣rated in the said Treaty, as to render them the more capable of his Majesties ful Concession; wherein he resolves to give full satisfaction unto his People, for whatsoever shall concern the settling of the Protestant Profession, with Liberty to tender Consciences, and the securing of the Laws, Liberties, and Properties of all his Subjects, and the just Priviledges of Parliament for the future. And likewise by his pre∣sent Deportment in this Treaty, He will make the world clearly judge of his intentions in matter of future Government. In which Treaty his Majesty will be well pleased, if it be thought it, that Commis∣sioners from the Army (whose the Proposals are) may likewise be admitted. His Majesty therefore conjures his two Houses of Parliament, by the Duty they owe to God, and his Majesty their King, and by the Bowels of compassion they have to their fellow-Subjects, both for the relief of their present sufferings, and to prevent future miseries; That they will forthwith accept of this his Majesties offer, that here∣by the joyful news of Peace may be restered to this distressed King∣dom. And for what concerns the Kingdom of Scotland mentioned in the Propositions, his Majesty will very willingly Treat upon those particulars with the Scotch Commissioners, and doubts not but to give reasonable satisfaction to that his Kingdom. His Majesty  the Ar∣my Proposa.The Kings hrping upon those Proposals of the Army, (acknowledging a greater equity, and just mensuration, and comprehensiveness of them, and that they did much more conduce to the satisfaction of all interests, and were a fit∣ter foundation for a lasting Peace than the Propositions) seemed very pleasing to Cromwel,Cromwel iggls with his Majesty. who complemented the King with the Armies glad sense of his pre∣ferring their ways and method to Peace before the Parliament's, which would no doubt credit them likewise to the People; not sticking to upbraid the Mem∣bers with their disloyal and peevish carriage toward the King, and yet secretly He enraged the Vulgar against him. The Traytor yet knew that the King did
but shew them Art for Art, for that it was impossible to produce any thing out of that Chaos of their Proposals, without a Divine Fiat; which being made to serve onely as a temporary shift, a bone of contention, could not beyond the purpose of the Contrivers be durable: it will be requisite therefore to take a short view of them, that posterity may see what curious Legislators these Soul∣diers were, and how well capacitated for Government. — Bless us from the Goblin, this idaea of STRATOCRACY. The first principle is the dissolution of the Parliament,A abstract of the Armies Proposals. [a preposterous begin∣ning, where Nature ends; but yet not intended by them till they had served their own ends, lust, and ambition, from whence these structures.] 1. That there be Biennial Parliaments, and at more certainty than these. 2. Each Bien∣nial Parliament to sit 120 days certain, afterwards adjournable or dissolvable by the King. 3. This Biennial Parliament to appoint Committees to continue during the interval, for such purposes afore mentioned in the Proposals. 4. That the King, upon the advice of the Council of State, in the Intervals call a Parliament extraor∣dinary, with limitation of meeting and dissolving, that the course of the Biennial one may never be interrupted. 5. That a better rule of proportion may be observed in Electing, all Counies to have a number of Parliament-Members competent to their charges as they are rated to the publike; that no poor Boroughs have any more Elections; and that an addition of Members may be allowed great Counties, that have now less than their due proportion; and that effectual provision be made for the freedom of such Elections. 6. That the Parliament onely have Power to direct fur∣ther, as to Parliaments: and for those two ends expressed before, their Orders there to pass for Laws. 7. That there be a Liberty for Entring Dissents in the House of Commons; and no man further censurable for what he shall say in the House, ex∣clusion by, &c. from that Trust, and that by the House it self. 8. That the Iudi∣cial Power in the Lords and Commons without further Appeal may be cleared. The King not to be capable to forgive persons adjudged by them, without their consent. 9. That the Peers have no Iurisdiction against the Commons, without the concur∣ring Iudgment of the House of Commons, as also may be vindicated from any other Iudgement, &c. than that of their equals. 10. That Grand Iury-men be chosen by several parts or divisions of each County respectively, not left to the discretion of any Vnder-Sheriff; which Grand Iury-men at each Assize, shall present the names of persons to be made Iustices of the Peace, and at the Summer-Assizes the names of three, out of which the King may prick one for Sheriff. Secondly, [being another principle,] For the future security to Parliaments, and the Militia in general, in order thereunto, That it be provided by Act of Par∣liament, 1. That the power of the Militia by Land and Sea▪ during the space of ten years, shall be disposed by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, or persons they shall nominate. 2. That it shall not be exercised by the King, nor any from him, during the said space, nor afterwards, but by advice of the Parliament, or Council of State, or such Committees in the Interval. 3. That the said Lords and Commons, &c. raise and dispose of Money for the Forces thought necessary, and for payment of publike debts, and uses of the Kingdom. 4. That these ten years security may be the firmer, It be provided, That none that have been in hostility a∣gainst the Parliament in the late War, shall be capable of any Office or Trust for five years without consent of Parliament; nor to sit as Members thereof, till the second Biennial Parliament be past. Thirdly, For the ordering of the peace and safety of this Kingdom and Ireland. 1. That there be Commissioners for the Admiralty, an Admiral and Vice-Admiral now agree on, with power to execute amply the said Offices, and pay provided for the service. 2. That there be a Lord-General for the Forces that are to be in pay. 3. That there be Commissioners for the standing Militia in every County (consisting of Trained Bands and Auxiliaries not in pay) to discipline them. 4. A Council of State to surperintend the powers given those Commissioners. 5. That the said Council have the same power with the Kings Privy Council, but not make War or
Peace without consent of Parliament. 6. That that Council consist of trusty and able persons, to continue si bene se gesserint, but not above seven years. 7. That a sufficient Establishment be provided for the pay of the standing Forces;[Money e∣nough be sure, this they intended for a Law no doubt, and might have been put first, the other be∣ing meerly subrvient to it.] the Establish∣ment to continue till two months after the meeting of the first Biennial Parliament, or Saint Tibs Eve. Fourthly, That an Act be passed for disposing the great Offices for ten years by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, and by the Committees in the Intervals, with submission to the approbation of the next Parliament; and after that time▪ they to name three, and the King out of them to appoint one for the succession upon a vacancie. Fifthly, For disabling the Peers (made by the King since the Great Seal was car∣ried away May 21. 1642.) to sit and Vote in Parliament. Sixthly, An Act to make void all the Acts, Declarations, &c. against the Parlia∣ment and their Adherents; and that the Ordinances for Indempnity be confirmed. Seventhly, An Act to make void all Grants passed under the said Seal since May 1642. and to confirm and make those valid that passed under the Great Seal made by Authority of Parliament. Eighthly, An Act for Confirmation of Treaties between England and Scotland, and constituting Conservators of the Peace between them. Ninthly, That the Ordinance for taking away the Court of Wards and Liveries be confirmed by Act; but the Kings Revenue made up another way, and the Officers thereof to have reparation. Tenthly, An Act declaring void the Cessation of Ireland, leaving that War to the prosecution of the Parliament. Eleventhly, An Act to take away all Coercive Power, Authority, and Iurisdiction of Bishops, and other Ecclesiastical Officers whatsoever, extending to civil Penalties upon any; and to repeal all Laws whereby the Civil Magistracie hath been or is bound upon any Ecclesiastical Censure, to proceed ex Oicio unto any Civil Penalties against any persons so censured. [Mark, here is not a word of abolishing Epi∣scopacy, or confirming the sale of their Lands, in which they knew the Presby∣terians were entangled; but the King extreamly gratified, who abominated Sacriledge, and so was the likelier never to comply with the Parliament, (who made it one of their principal demands) which Cromwel designed.] They indulge the King in not abrogating the Common-Pray∣er, and claw with the Pa∣pist.Twelfthly, That there be a repeal of penal Acts or Clauses enjoyning the Common-Prayer, and imposing Penalties for not coming to Church; some provision to be made for discovering of Recusancie. Thirteenthly, That the taking of the Covenant be not inforced upon any, &c. but that all Ordinances enjoyning that be repealed. Life to the Roy∣alist, and death to the Presby∣ter.Fourteenthly, That the things before proposed being provided for, his Majestie, his Queen and Royal Issue, may be restored to a condition of Safetie, Honour, and Freedom in this Nation, without diminution to their personal Rights, or further limitation to the exercise of their Power than according to the particulars afore∣going.The rarest Ar∣ticle in the Pack. Fifteenthly, For the matter of Compositions. 1. That a less number out of the per∣sons excepted in the two first qualifications,Divers preten∣ces in favour of the Cavaliers. Cromwel de∣signes to please all Parties, by Proposing to regulate the Law and As∣sesstments; As∣serting the peo∣ple rights in Peioning; a∣gst Forrest-Lands, Excise, Monopolies, &c. (not exceeding five for the English) being nominated particularly by the Parliament, besides the Irish Rebels, may be reserved to the Iudgment of the Parliament, &c. [And many more good morrows in favourable restrictions of the Parliament's severity to poor Cavaliers, whom they reserved for their more ravenous jaws; thinking by these wiles, first to betray, and then devour them: and therefore now the Tyger is become a mediator to the Wolf, to spare the innocent sheep that's encompassed between them.] The rest of this batch was for particular redresses of the Law, and abuses of the Lawyers; concerning Imprisonments for Debts, Regulating Assessements, and reme∣dies against the contentious Suits of Tythes; for asserting the peoples right in Petition∣ing; against Forrest-Lands; and almost all particular grievances, especially the Ex∣cise and Monopolies; against Corporation-Oaths, as grievous to tender Conscien∣ces, being too long to enumerate. The drift of all being to please all sorts of people, one or other hitting the humour of every man; but chiefly gratify∣ing
the Fanaticks, and miserable Vulgar, who were to be deluded, and then used as a bridge to their own slavery. The conclusion of them, was to tye the hands of the Militia of the Trained-Bands, by regulating the Commissioners and Officers, from their former Arbitrariness, that so the Souldiers might be under no Command, and unable to offend them: To which was subjoyned a demand of their Arrears to the utmost penny, and the publike Faith to be satisfied and relieved. [And then they have more particulars to offer; if any body that knew their jugling should take them now at their word, which they would ra∣ther eat their Swords than perform.] Signed by the appointment of his Excellency Sir Tho. Fairfax, and the Council of War. Ioh. Rushworth, Secretary. This Hodgpodg or Alchoran, containing Jewish, Turkish, and some Chri∣stian sentences; some of the Parliaments, and some of their own, and some of the Kings Condescentions too, were far more tolerable than those Heathenish and Pagan Institutes of the Parliaments, sent to the King in the name of Pro∣positions: which He having declined, did hope to effect his and his Kingdoms Peace and restitution at easier terms from the Army; and therefore was in∣stant with Cromwel and other Grandees of the Army,Cromwel and other Grandees of the Army, frequently with the King. who were evermore at his Elbow, to appoint Commissioners to Treat with him of those Proposals: His Majesty not doubting, but so to temper them, as to come to a right understanding; which if it should happen, it would be the Glory and Honour of the Army, that they had laid such a platform and expedient, for the good, quiet, Peace and happiness of their King and Country. But Cromwel began to turn a deaf ear to those Charms,Cromwel has∣fleth with the King, and is discovered. to alter in his Addres∣ses to the King, to be full of uncertainties and scruples; and at last, to tell his Majesty that He did not rightly understand them, and so interpret their words o∣therwise than they were spoken, and that they had forgotten they had promised him any such things. He excused himself at another time, for not performing of their Engagements, from a reverence to the Parliament, whom as yet they durst not so openly oppose, as to take up his Quarrel. And lastly, as the main artifice, he acquaints Him with the boldness and malice of the Agitators and Levellers, who Conspired his Murthr; and that for the present he could not mitigate their vio∣lent and wicked Counsels; but when the Discipline of the Army should be recover∣ed, he would make good what he had undertook to perform. And so from time to time courted the King, till the Plot, which he might well forespeak, was rea∣dy for execution; of which by and by. The King was kept at Hampton-Court in very great State,The King still kept at Hamp∣ton-Court, with the pub∣like use of Com∣mon-prayer, in great State, his friends and Chaplains a∣bout him. as usually in times of Peace, his Chaplains and Friends about him, all people permitted to see him, Liberty of Hunting with the Duke of Richmond, and others of the Loyal Nobility allowed him together; so that great was the concourse thither; and most men that judged by the outside and fine appearance of things, concluded all things would do well, and that the Army would prove honest and Loyal. Others contrarily thought that the Army had some designe in this pompous and open Treatment of the King, who thereby imagining himself in his Rega∣lity and proper Orb, would keep and maintain the greater distance from the bold approaches of the Parliament upon his Soveraignty; as all men in prosperity are naturally more elated, more jealous of affronts, and less ductile, than in an ad∣verse condition. These came nearest the Mark, and yet the Kings constancy to himself not disputed; nothing being able to make him recede from those his two great principles of Honour and Conscience; which yet may admit of a magis and minus in the accidental and circumstantial defence of them, sometimes more magnanimously, and sometimes more warily. This concourse to the King, which shewed the love the people, especially
the Citizens of London,The Faction and Cromwel suspect and fear he Kings neer∣ness to Lon∣don. bare him, began to be no way pleasing to the Faction, less to Cromwel and his party, who feared a surprize of his person out of his hands to London, and then his designes and wits were at an end. He resolved therefore speedily to be rid of that fear: and though he had deliberated whe∣ther it were more conducing to his purpose to assassinate the King there, and in∣vade the Government by a sudden and impetuous violence, when all men should have been in a consternation at the atrocity of the Fact, and would save all those tedious arts to be practised in a solemn way of Regicide; yet more slower Counsels prevailed, the image and fright of Death should serve turn at present. To this purpose, Colonel Whaley is ordered to tell the King,Colonel Wha∣ley pretends to the King that the Adju∣tators designe to Murther him. that the Adjuta∣tors were grown to that height of violence, as that they had combined to Murther Him; and therefore as his duty was, besides his particular affection for his Majesty, he could not but acquaint him, desiring him to consult for his own Safety; it being also (as he said) the advice of the chief of the Ar∣my, who were loath he should be Murdered while they helplesly looked on. They fright the King from Hampton-Court: who by the advice of Sir John Berkley and Mr. John Ashburnham escapes to the Isle of Wight. Colonel Ham∣mond Gover∣nour thereof.The designe of this parricide had purposely been muttered up and down the Court, and so came to the ear of the Kings Friends, by whom he was near the same time acquainted with it. The King therefore called to him Sir Iohn Berkley and Mr. Iohn Ashburnham then attending him, and advised with them concern∣ing his Escape, where between them they unfortunately, and upon deceitful grounds, concluded to fly to the Isle of Wight, the Government whereof was newly confrred upon Colonel Hammond, (Brother to that Reverend Doctor Henry Hamond, the Kings beloved Chaplain) whom the crafty Traytor did fore∣cast, the King in such a perplexity would chuse to trust, from that Relation. Horses being therefore laid ready on the other side of the Water, the King leaves his Chamber November the 11. (in a very dark and tempestuous night) with his Cloak spread in the floor thereof, and by the back-stayrs descends to the Vault, and so ever the Thames to his Company, who were the same of his Counsel; and by Farnham (after much tedious straying in the night out of the way in that bad weather) came to the Sea-side neer Southampton, where mis∣sing of a passage, the Boat ailing the prefixed time, he was conveyed to the Countess Dowager of Southampton at Tedworth, Dow¦agers of South∣hampton. where he lay that night, while Sir Iohn Berkley and Colonel Ashburnham passed over to the Isle of Wight to the said Governour, concerning the entertainment of him: where we rest this relation▪ and return to Hampton-Court. Nov. 11. The King is misled. Whaley takes he Kings a∣pers left behind him in his Chamber.About 9 a clock at night the King was missed, but no doubt to the little wonder, less trouble of his Guardians; for the Centries had been on purpose drawn off, to give him free passage: and it had been discoursed in the Army some while before, that He would ere long be in the Isle of Wight. No more ado therefore was made of it, but onely a Letter with a bare account of his flight sent to the Parliament, and the watchful Guard remanded to the body of the Army; Whaley having first taken up the Papers which the King had left, the contents of which are as follow; the first superscribed, To the Lord Mountague of Boughton. MOUNTAGUE, The First di∣rected to the Lord Mounta∣gue.FIrst, I do hereby give you and the rest of your fellows thanks, for the civilities and good conversations that I have had from you. Next, I command you to send this my Message, which you will finde on the Table, to the two Houses of Parliament; and likewise to give a Copy of it to Colonel Whaley, to be sent to the General. Like∣wise I desire you to send all my Saddle-Horses to the Duke of York. For what concerns the resolution that I have taken, my Declara∣tory
Message says so much, that I refer you to it; and so I rest Your Assured Friend, C. R. The second to Colonel Whaley. Col. WHALEY, I Have been so civilly used by you and Major Huntington,The second to Colonel Wha∣ley. that I cannot but by this parting farewel acknowledge it under my Hand, as also to desire the continuance of your Courtesie, by the protecting of my Houshould-stuff and Moveables of all sorts which I leave behind me in this House, that they be neither spoiled nor Imbez'led. Only there are here three Pictures which are not mine, that I desire you to restore; to wit, my Wives Picture in Blew sitting in a Chair, you must send to Mrs. Kirk; my Eldest Daughters Picture Copied by Belcan, to the Countess of Anglesey; and my Lady Stanhop's Picture, to Cary Raleigh. There is a Fourth, which I had almost forgot, it is the Original of my Eldest Daughter, it hangs in this Chamber over the board next the Chimney, which you must send to my Lady Aubig∣ney. So being confident that you wish my Preservation and Restitution, I rest Your Friend, C. R. CHARLES REX. I assure you it was not the Letter you shewed me yesterday that made me to take this resolution, nor any Advertisement of that kind. But I confess, that I am loath to be made a close Prisoner, under pretence of securing my life. I had almost forgot to desire you to send the Black Grew Bitch to the Duke of Richmond. The third was the Message to both Houses. CHARLES REX. LIberty being that which in all times hath been,His Majesties Message left behinde Him at Hampton-Court to both Houses of Par∣liament. but especially now is, the common Theme and desire of all men; common Reason shews, that Kings less than any should endure Captivity. And yet I call God and the World to Witness, with what patience I have endured a tedious Restraint, which so long as I had any hopes that this sort of my suffering might conduce to the Peace of my Kingdoms, or the hindring of more effusion of Blood, I did willingly undergo: But now finding by too certain proofs, that my continued patience would not only turn to my Personal ruine, but likewise be of much more prejudice than furtherance to the Publike good; I thought I was
bound as well by Natural as Political Obligations to seek my safety, by retiring my self for some time from the publike view both of my Friends and Enemies. And I appeal to all indifferent men to judge, if I have not just cause to free My self from the hands of those who change their Principles with their Condition, and who are not ashamed openly to intend the destruction of the Nobility by taking away their Negative Voice, and with whom the Levellers Doctrine is rather countenanced than punished. And as for their intentions to My Person, their changing and putting more strict Guards upon Me, with the discharging most of all those Servants of Mine, who formerly they willingly admitted to wait upon Me, does sufficiently declare. Nor would I have this My Retirement misinter∣preted: for I shall earnestly and uncessantly endeavour the settling of a safe and well-grounded Peace wherever I am, or shall be, and that (as much as may be) without the effusion of Christian Blood. For which, how many times have I desired, prest to be heard, and no ear given me? And can any reasonable man think, that (according to the ordinary course of affairs) there can be a settled Peace without it, or that God will bless those who refuse to hear their King? Surely no! nay, I must further add, that (besides what concerns My self) un∣less all other chief Interests have not onely a hearing, but likewise just satisfaction given unto them, (to wit, the Presbyterians, Inde∣pendents, Army, those who have adhered to Me, and even the Scots) I say there cannot (I speak not of miracles, it being in My opinion a sinful presumption in such cases to expect or trust to them) be a safe or lasting Peace. Now as I cannot deny, but My Personal secu∣rity is the urgent cause of this My Retirement, so I take God to Wit∣ness, that the Publike Peace is no less before My eyes: and I can finde no better way to express this My Profession, (I know not what a wiser man may do) than by desiring and urging that all chief Interests may be heard, to the end each may have just satisfaction. As for example, The Army (for the rest, though necessary, yet I suppose not difficult to content) ought (in My judgment) to enjoy the Liberty of their Consciences, have an Act of Oblivion or Indempnity, (which should extend to all the rest of My loving Subjects) and that all their Arrears should be speedily and duely paid; which I will undertake to do, so I may be heard, and that I be not hindered from using such lawful and honest means as I shall chuse. To conclude, Let Me be heard with Freedom, Honour, and Safety, and I shall instantly break through this Cloud of Retirement, and shew My self to be Pater Patriae. From the hazard of a faigned attempt to be made on His person, behold the Majesty of so excellent a Prince really endagered, and in the very pit of de∣struction which his Enemies had digged for him. For upon notice given to Hamond by the said Attendants, of the Kings Adventure, which they would have to be valued at no less than His Liberty; He presently replied, that for se∣curity of Him from danger he would undertake, but His Liberty and that were in∣consistent, nor could be answer it to his Superiors the Army and Parliament; where∣upon since they perceived the necessity of yielding to these terms, they Boated over with him, accompanied by one Captain Basket to the place where the King
was,The King seized by Col. Ha∣mond in the Isle of Wight, and conveyed to Carlsbrook-Castle, Nove. 14. The Parl. make it High Trea∣son for any to conceal the King. They command Col. Hamond to send the Kings attendants up to London, he refuseth. The King pleads in their behalf. who delivered Himself into their hand, and was presently conveyed over to the Castle of Carisbrooke in the said Island. In the interim the Parliament had made it High Treason for any man to con∣ceal His person, and with Spies and Guards laid every place to intercept Him: but being soon informed by Hamond that He was in his custody, they derived their fury upon those Gentlemen that accompanied Him, commanding Hamond to send them up to London to be proceeded against; which he refused; pretend∣ing first, the just offence thereby given the King, in removing His only Friends and Familiars: then, his Honour engaged, as he said, for their indempnity; and declaring, that what they had done therein, was out of a desire of the Peace of the Kingdom: whereas the meaning was, that their safety and protection was obliged partly to that unwitting service they had done the Faction, who were (honourably) pleased to shield those, who had skreened them from the odium of that unfortunate and pernicious Escape; and partly to the King, who inter∣posed himself in the matter, declaring, If those Gentlemen were taken and punish∣ed as evil doers, for Counseling Him not to go out of the Kingdom, but rather to come to the place where he now is, for the ends aforesaid, and for their endeavours in at∣tending Him thither, He cannot but expect to be dealt with accordingly, His Case being the same. The next consideration of this affair by the Parliament was a result of five Votes,The Parliament vote that no Cavalier or Papists be ad∣mitted into the Island. The Gen. hath the command of his person. The King al∣lowed 5000 l. for the xpences of his Court. which forbad any Cavaliers or Papists to be admitted in the Island, and left the guard of his Person and the nomination of Officers to attend Him to the General, and allowed 5000 l. for the expences of his Court; the last of which Hamond quarrelled at, as an incompetent pittance, but it's questionable whether he meant not for himself; and no doubt he was better paid for his ser∣vice. He also required more aid, that (forsooth) he might be as good as his word, in keeping the King in security and out of danger, who having passed — (Per varios casus per tot discrimina rerum, — ad Latium tendit,) so many perils and discouragements, gave not yet over his endeavours after Peace, but with a just resolution of not being denied this time, when he now granted almost the whole controversie, He wooes them in this Message from His Prison at Carisbrook, (where He had only the liberty of the Walls under a Guard:) It indeed comprehends and clears all the differences between the King and Parliament. CHARLES REX. HIs Majesty is confident that before this time His two Houses of Parliament have received the Message which he left behinde Him at Hampton-Court the 11th of November,The Kings Mes∣sage to the Parliament from his inprison∣ment in Caris∣brook-Castle. by which they will have understood the reasons which enforced Him to go from thence, as likewise his constant endeavours for the settling of a safe and well-grounded Peace wheresoever he should be. And being now in a place where he conceives himself to be at much more freedom and security than formerly, He thinks it necessary (not only for making good his own Professions, but also for the speedy procuring of a Peace in these languishing and distressed Kingdoms) at this time to offer such grounds to His two Houses for that effect,He professeth as he is a Christi∣an and a King to defend the Government of the Church, by Arch-bishops, Bishops, &c. Their Order be∣ing placed in the Church by the Apostles. which upon due ex∣amination of all Interests may best conduce thereunto. And because Religion is the best and chiefest Foundation of Peace, His Majesty will begin with that particular. — That for the abo∣lishing Arch-bishops, Bishops, &c. His Majesty clearly professeth, that he cannot give his consent thereunto, both in relation as he is a Christian and a King. For the first, he avows that he is satisfied in his judgment, that this Order was placed in the Church by the Apostles
themselves, and ever since that time hath continued in all Christian Churches throughout the World, until this last Century of years; and in this Church in all times of Change and Reformation it hath been upheld by the wisdom of His Ancestors, as the great preserver of Doctrine, Discipline, and Order in the Service of God. As a King, at his Coronation He hath not onely taken a Solemn Oath to maintain this Order,And he and His Predeces∣sors having Sworn to main∣tain it. but His Majesty and His Predecessors in their Confirmation of the Great Charter, have inseparably woven the Rights of the Church into the Liberties of the rest of their Subjects. And yet he is willing it be provided, that the particular Bishops per∣form the several Duties of their Callings, both by their Personal residence,Bt agrees that their Power may be so limi∣ted as not to be grievous to ten∣der Consciences. and frequent Preaching in their Dioceses, as also that they Exercise no Act of Iurisdiction or Ordination, without the consent of their Presbyters; and will consent that their Powers in all things be so Limited, that they be not grievous to Tender Consciences. Wherefore since His Majesty is willing to give ease to the Conscien∣ces of others, He sees no reason why he alone, and those of his Iudge∣ment, should be pressed to a Violation of theirs. Nor can His Maje∣sty Consent to the Alienation of Church-Lands, because it cannot be denied to be a sin of the Highest Sacriledge, as also that it subverts the intentions of so many Pious Donors, who have laid a heavy Curse upon all such prophane Violations, which His Majesty is very unwil∣ling to undergo: And besides the matter of Conscience, His Majesty believes it to be a prejudice to the Publike Good; many of His Sub∣jects having the benefit of renewing Leases at much easier rates than if those Possessions were in the hands of Private men: Not omitting the discouragement which it will be to all Learning and Industry, when such eminent rewards shall be taken away, which now lye open to the Children of the meanest persons. Yet His Majesty considering the present great distempers concerning Church-Discipline, and that the Presbyterian Government is now in practice, His Majesty, to eschew Confusion as much as may be, and for the satisfaction of His two Houses, is content that the said Government be Legally permit∣ted to stand in the same condition it now is for three years: pro∣vided, that His Majesty and those of his Iudgement, (or any other who cannot in Conscience submit thereunto) be not obliged to com∣ply with the Presbyterian Government, but have free Practice of their own Profession, without receiving any prejudice thereby: and that a free Consultation and Debate be had with the Divines at West∣minster (twenty of his Majesties nomination being added unto them) whereby it may be determined by his Majesty and the two Houses, how the Church-Government after the said time shall be set∣led, (or sooner, if differences be agreed) as is most agreeable to the Word of God; with full Liberty to all those who shall differ upon Conscientious Grounds from that Settlement. Always provided, that nothing aforesaid may be understood to tolerate those of the Po∣pish Profession, nor the exempting of any Popish Recusant from the penalties of the Laws, or to tolerate the publike profession of Atheism or Blasphemy, contrary to the Doctrine of the Apostles, Nicene, and Athanasian Creeds, they having been received by, and had in reve∣rence
of, all the Christian Churches, and more particularly by us of England ever since the Reformation. Next, the Militia being that right which is inseparably and un∣doubtedly Inherent in the Crown, by the Laws of this Nation, and that which former Parliaments, as likewise this, hath acknowledged to be so; His Majesty cannot so much wrong that Trust which the Laws of God and the Land hath annexed to the Crown for the pro∣tection and security of his people, as to Devest himself and His Suc∣cessors of the Power of the Sword: Yet to give an infallible evidence of His desire to secure the performance of such Agreements as shall be made in order to Peace,The King con∣snts that the power of the Militia both by Land and Sea shall be ordered by the Parliament du∣ring his Raign. his Majesty will consent to an Act of Parli∣ament, that the whole Power of the Militia both by Land and Sea, for and during his whole Raign, shall be ordered and disposed by his two Houses of Parliament, or by such persons as they shall appoint, with Powers limited for suppressing of Forces within this Kingdom to the disturbance of the Publike Peace, and against Forain Invasion; and that they shall have Power during his said Raign to raise money for the present purposes aforesaid; and that neither his Majesty that now is, or any other (by his Authority derived onely from him) shall execute any of the said Powers during his Majesties said Raign, but such as shall act by the consent and approbation of the two Houses of Parliament. Nevertheless His Majesty intends that all Patents, Commissions, and other Acts concerning the Militia, be made and acted as formerly; and that after His Majesties Raign all the Power of the Militia shall return entirely to the Crown, as it was in the times of Queen Elizabeth and King Iames of Blessed Memory. After this head of the Militia,He promiseth to pay the Army their Arrears. the consideration of the Arrears due to the Army is not improper to follow; for the payment whereof, and the ease of his people, His Majesty is willing to concur in any thing that can be done without the violation of His Conscience and Honour. Wherefore if His two Houses shall consent to remit unto Him such benefit out of Sequestrations from Michaelmas last, and out of Compositions that shall be made before the concluding of the Peace, and the Arrears of such as have been already made, the assistance of the Clergy, and the Arrears of such Rents of His own Revenue as His two Houses shall not have received before the concluding of the Peace, His Majesty will undertake within the space of eighteen months, the payment of 400000 l. for the satisfaction of the Army. And if those means shall not be sufficient, His Majesty intends to give way to the sale of Forrest-Lands for that purpose; this being the publike debt which in His Majesties judgment is first to be satisfied: And for other publike debts already contracted upon Church-Lands, or any other Engagements, His Majesty will give His consent to such Act or Acts for raising of moneys for payment thereof, as both Houses shall hereafter agree upon,Consenteth that the great Offices of State, and naming of Pri∣vy Counsellors shall be in the Power of the two Houses, during his raign. so as they be equally laid, whereby His Peo∣ple (already too heavily burthened by these late distempers) may have no more pressures upon them than this absolute necessity requires. And for the further securing all Fears, His Majesty will con∣sent that an Act of Parliament be Passed for the disposing of the great Offices of State, and naming of Privy Counsellours for the
whole term of his Raign by the two Houses of Parliament; their Pa∣tents and Commissions being taken from His Majesty, and after to return to the Crown, as is exprest in the Article of the Militia. For the Court of Wards and Liveries, His Majesty very well knows the consequence of taking that away, by turning of all Tenures into common Soccage, as well in point of Revenue to the Crown, as in the protection of many of His Subjects being Infants: Nevertheless, if the continuance thereof seem grievous to His Subjects, rather than he will fail on His part in giving satisfaction, He will consent to an Act for taking of it away; so as a full recompence be settled upon his Majesty and His Successors in perpetuity, and that the Ar∣rears now d, be reserved unto Him towards the payment of the Arrears of the Army. And that the memory of these late distractions may be wholly wiped away, His Majesty will consent to an Act of Parliament for the Suppressing and making Null Oaths, Declarations, and Proclamations, against both or either House of Parliament, and of all Indictments and other Proceedings against any persons for adhering unto them. And His Mjesty proposeth (as the best expedient to take away all seeds of future differences) that there be an Act of Oblivion to ex∣tend to all His Subjects. As for Ireland, the Cessation there is long since determined; but for the future (all other things being fully agreed) His Maje∣sty will give full satisfaction to His Houses concerning that King∣dom. And although His Majesty cannot consent in Honour and Iustice to avoid all His own Acts and Grants, past under His Great Seal since the 22 of May 1642. or to the confirming all the Acts and Grants passed under that made by the two Houses; yet His Majesty is confi∣dent, that upon perusal of particulars, He shall give full satisfaction to His two Houses, to what may be reasonably desired in that par∣ticular. And now his Majesty conceives that by these his Offers (which he is ready to make good upon the settlement of a Peace) he hath clearly manifested his intentions to give full security and satisfacti∣on to all Interests for what can justly be desired, in order to the fu∣ture happiness of his people. And for the perfecting of these Con∣cessions, as also for such other things as may be proposed by the two Houses, and for such just and reasonable demands as his Majesty shall finde necessary to propose on his part, he earnestly desireth a Personal Treaty at London with his two Houses, in Honour, Freedom, and safety;He  at London with . it being in his Iudgment, the most proper, and indeed only means, to a firm and settled Peace; and impossible, without it, to reconcile former, or to avoid future misunderstandings. All these things being by Treaty perfected, his Majesty believes his two Houses will think it reasonable, that the Proposals of the Army concerning the Succession of Parliaments, and their due Election, should be taken into consideration. As for what concerns the Kingdom of Scotland, his Majesty will very readily apply himself to give all reasonable satisfaction, when
the desires of the two Houses of Parliament on their behalf, or of the Commissioners of that Kingdom, or of both joyned together, shall be made known unto him. This Answer was full, and apportioned to all interests, and shewed the incom∣parable prudence, as well as invincible constancy of the King: at which the Parliament shewed themselves much offended, and communicated this their displeasure to the Scots Commissioners, (who participated seemingly with them therein) but made no Reply to the King; their custom being to set other Pens on work to discant upon them,Several scurri∣lous Pamphlets published to de∣fame His Ma∣jesty. Especially Needham's, atituld a Hue and Cry after the King. and pick out some jealous Observations, to keep the people still to their party, by bold assertions of His Majesties preva∣ications and injustices in all his Papers and Messages to the Parliament; some of them writ meanly, scurrilously and impudently, (among the rest, a most execrable and blasphemous Paper called a Hue and Cry after the King, upon his flight from Hampton, by one Needham that writ afterward the News-Book for them) in others more modestly and politely, with a fine but false edge, which yet served to wound His Majesties Reputation, and to carve to the Grandees the spoils of the Kingdom, which were to be secured by these misunderstand∣ings. But against these Writers there appeared a Champion of Loyalty, Judge Ien∣kins, who out of the Parliaments Wrath,Iudge Jenkins sloutly vindi∣cates the King's Cause and Party. (with the Earl of Cleveland, Sir Lewis Dives, Sir Iohn Stawel, and others Royalists) was Committed to the Tower, and being brought to the Chancery-Bar, refused to own the Court and the Authority thereof, and so was remanded in Order to a Tryal at the Kings-Bench, where in the men while he fully Answered all those Cavils against the King, by Reason, Law, and from the Parliaments own words and Declarations, ridling their nice, time-serving distinction of the Kings Person and Authority, his Po∣litick and Natural Capacity, to be a meer Fiction never heard of before; and that their as bold assumption of the Kings Vertual presence in the two Houses, was also and alike Treasonable, as he cited in the Case of the two Spencers, in the 7 of Edward the 2. from their own Oracle Sir Edward Coke, in the 7 part of his Reports, fol. 11. He then runs over the whole Case and state of the Question and Dispute betwixt the Royalists and Parliamentarians; which being published, incredible it is how greedily they were bought up, and how many honest people undeceived; so that His Majesties Cause was every where under the nose of the Faction well spoken of. We will, for the honour of that Noble person, give this short and summary account of it, as a Sea-mark to Posterity. First, The Royalists have aided the King in this War (contrary to the Parlia∣ments Negative Oath and Votes,) warranted by the Statute of 25 Ed. 2. ch. 2. They have maintained the Commission of Array by the Kings Command against their Votes, by the Statute of the 5 Hen. 4.3. They have maintained Arch-bi∣shops, Bishops, &c. from Magna Charta, and many other Statutes. 4. They have maintained the Book of Common prayer, warranted by five Acts of Parliament, in Edw. 6. Queen Eliz. for Libels against which and Church-Government, some have been Executed. 5. They maintained the Militia of the Kingdom to belong to the King, from the Statute of the 7 Edw. 1. and many Statutes since. 6. They maintained the Counterfeiting of the Kings Great Seal to be High Treason, as like∣wise the usurpation of the Kings Forts, Ports, and Shipping, &c. from the said Statute of 25 Ed. 3. and divers others since, and the practice of all times. 7. They maintain, that the King is the only Supreme Governour in all Cases; the Parlia∣ment, that his Majestie is to be governed by them. The former's warrant is the Statute of Queen Eliz. &c. 8. They maintain that the King is King by an inhe∣rent Birth-right, by Nature, by Gods Law, and by the law of the Land; These say, that his Kingly Right is an Office upon Trust. Their warrant is the Statute of
the 1 of King James, and the 5 of Queen Eliz. 9. They maintain that the politick capacity is not to be severed from the natural; vide Coke, as before, their Oracle, who hath declared to posterity, that it is Damnable, Detestable, and Execra∣ble Treason. 10. They maintain, that who aids the King at home or abroad, ought not to be molested or questioned for the same. (These practice the contrary.) Their warrant is the Statute of 11 Hen. 7. 11. They maintain that the King hath power to disassent to any Bill agreed by the two Houses; which these deny. Their warrant is the Statute of 2 Hen. 5. the practice of all times, the 1 Car. ch. 7. and 1 Jam. ch. 1. 12. They maintain that Parliaments ought to be holden in grave and peaceable manner, without Tumults; These abet and keep guards of armed men to wait upon them. Their warrant is the Statute of 7 Edw. 2. 13. They maintain that there is no State within this Kingdom but the Kings Majesty, and that to adhere to any other State within this Kingdom is High Treason. Their warrant is the 3 of King Jam. and 23 Eliz. 14. They maintain that to levy a War, to remove Counsellours, to alter Religion, or any Law established, is High Treason; These hold to the contrary. Their warrant is the resolution of the Iudges, Queen Elizabeth, and Sir Edward Coke. 15. They maintain that no man should be imprisoned, put out of his lands, but by due Course of Law; and that no man ought to be adjudged to Death, but by the Law established. These have practised the contrary in London, Bristol, and Kent. Their warrant is Magna Charta, ch. 29. The Petition of Right, 3 Car. and divers others. 16. They believe what the Laws say, that the King can do no wrong, that He is Gods Lieutenant, and not able to do an unjust thing; These charge Him with the spoil and blood of His Subjects; which false imputation was like the rest of their actions, con∣trary to all Law, Reason, Christianity, or Humanity. Iudge Jenkins imprisoned, and enlarged at the Restauration of King Charles the second.This eye-salve made the wilfully blinde more peevish, and fuller of smart and anguish, so that they were resolved to have hanged him; but he had so hedged up their way to it, by upbraiding them with their former Illegal and Tyrannical Cruelty, that they only kept him in a strict duress, which was enlarged by degrees, till the time of Restitution 1660, when he was in health, and at perfect freedom. He was a great stickler likewise in the Feud betwixt the Presbyterian and Independent, siding with the Army, and doctrinating them with the Principles of Allegiance, which they pretended to; and animating them against the Par∣liament, by perswading them that all their Ordinances made for their Indem∣nity and Arrears, were insignificant and invalid, and were but so many blinds for the present; and that their security and satisfaction depended wholly upon the King: which designe of his, in that juncture of time, did operate success∣fully, until the cause of the contention ceasing, Cromwel having mastered and surmounted all the rubs to his designe, the effect, the ruine of both, likewise failed. Miserable now were the complaints from several parts of the Kingdom, by reason of the burden of Free-quarter.The burden of Free-quarter. In the third year of King Charles, upon the Expedition for the Isle of Rhee, the Lords and Commons in their Petition of Right, when not above 2 or 3000 Souldiers were thinly Quartered upon the people, but for a Month or two, complained thereof to his Majesty as a great grievance, contrary to the Laws and Customs of the Realm; and humbly pray∣ed, as their right, according to the Law of the Land, that he would remove it: which his Majesty presently granted. Yet now, though the Country was ten times more oppressed, no remedy could be had; the Army under pretence of Lodging, Fire, and Candle, taking all other necessaries: for which if at any time they pretended to offer money, yet durst none take it for fear of greater damage, the spoiler being only triable by a Council of War. This, the Souldiers were taught likewise by their Adjutators to load upon the Parliament,Cromwel and his supernume∣raries, the cause thereof. through their neglect of paying them; when indeed the supernumeraries with which Cromwel daily recruited the Army, without any Authority, far beyond the
pay or number established, was the cause of the Arrears, and this oppression of Free-quarter; for upon complaints thereof made in the House, the Army being quartered in several Brigades, supernumeraries have been disbanded in one Bri∣gade, their Arms taken by their Officers, and shortly after they have been listed again in another Brigade, and their Arms sold again to the State after a while, to new arm them. By which means Cromwel had amassed a Magazine of such, which being lodged in the City, and rumoured by some zealots to be for arming some Reformadoes, were now upon examination found to belong unto Him, and so the business was husht up; which if they could have fastned upon the other Party, should have been noised for horrid Treason. By this grievance of Free-quarter they were doubly and trebly payed, taking it in one place, and Composition for it in another, perhaps in three or four places at once, by false Billets; yet nevertheless, though by these tricks they owed money to the State, they demanded and compelled an Ordinance from the Par∣liament to secure their Arrears of the 24 of December, whereby they had the two thirds of Delinquents Estates, mentioned or comprehended in the three first qualifications of them, in the Propositions sent to the King at the Isle of Wight; and all the money arising out of the remaining part of Bishops Lands, appointed to be sold by former Ordinances;Vast sums of money raised for the Souldiery. and the sum of 600000 l. charged on the receipt of EXCISE, (with the Forrest-Lands and other incomes) for the securing of the said Arrears, to be issued out to the Treasurers at War, to such and such persons for the uses aforesaid, in such manner as the Committee of Lords and Commons for the Army, or any five of them under their hands would limit and appoint, which was by way of Audit and Debentures,Debentures sold. sold not long after upon doublings on purchases of the Crown and other forfeited Lands for Half a Crown in the pound, besides innumerable cheats by counterfeit hands, but more to the talk than trouble of the Kingdom, whose general Note was — Caveat Emptor. Wonderful it is (since we have now mentioned that Dutch Devil, as it was called, the Excise) what vast sums of money the Parliament had raised by it, amounting, as by their Ordinance of the 28 of August this year appears, to that time, from its Commencement some three years before, to One million three hundred thirty four thousand five hundred thirty two pounds ten shillings and eleven pence half peny, clear, and deducted of all charges in the levying of it, which defalked not above two shillings in the pound.The Excise an excessive Tax, and carefully upheld. No wonder therefore they did so carefully enjoy▪ and uphold this Tax, which had supported and en∣abled them in all their atchievements; and upon this score they made it over to the Souldiers, several Uproars and Tumults happening in the refusal of payment,Several refuse to pay it, and tumults happen. The Butchers at Smithfield-bars London, fire the Excise-house: several of them tryed, but acqitted. particularly at Smithfield-bars London, where the Butchers who then paid Excise for the Flesh sold, at two shillings in the pound, rose and fired the Excise-house neer adjoyning, with all the Papers of Books of Account; for which several of them were tryed, but acquitted: thereafter, that Duty upon Cattle, as likewise upon all Salt made in the Kingdom, was wholly laid aside. But a most severe injunction was now made for the continuance of the rest, and the refractory threatned with exemplary punishments. So that while Cromwel could finde Men and Arms at such a rate, and the Par∣liament such heaps of Money by several Revenues, it was in vain to think of a Peace, when such visible powerful advantages subserved to those wicked designes of inthralling King, Parliament, City and Kingdom, now mainly prosecuted by the Adjutators; but so lendly and unseasonably, that Cromwel, to palliate his secret impiety, abandoned one of the Ringleaders, one White,White a Le∣veller Executed at Ware. And Thompson condemned by a Council of War. to his Execu∣tion at Ware, by a Sentence of a Council of War, for mutinous speeches and Papers of the Levelling principle (but suspected also to aim at himself) among the Common Souldiers. Neer the same time, one Tompson of the same Crue, was seized on in the Lobby of the House of Commons, supposed to be ready with some Impeachment or Articles against him, and condemned in the same manner by a Council of War. They cryed out of the King as useless, and
had got a Stork of their own making ten times more dangerous, who durst crush them to Ruine in the very rise of his Ambition. These misdoings, and no Government, highly displeased and incensed the people, who too late (— Sero sapiunt Phryges) saw how they had fool'd themselves into slavery; the resentments whereof became so publike, and so fearlesly Voyced, that the Parliament was constrained to humour it, and to per∣sonate a serious study to an Accommodation. Hereupon, the same 24 day of December on which they had Voted Security for the Armies Arrears, (an ill Omen of what Kindness they had for the King, whom they would not bate an ace of their demands) their Commissioners present to the King at Carisbrook-Castle four Bills to be Passed as Acts of Parliament,The Parlia∣ment constrai∣ned to humour a Treaty. (with divers other Proposals, such or worse than those at Hampton-Court) before any Treaty might be ad∣mitted. Four Bills ten∣dred to the King at the Isle of Wight before the Trea∣ty should begin.The first was an Act with this Title, Concerning the raising, setling, and main∣taining Forces by Sea and by Land, within the Kingdoms of England and Ire∣land, and Dominion of Wales, the Isles of Gernsey and Jersey, and the Town of Berwick upon Tweed; whereby it was to be Declared, That the Lords and Com∣mons then Assembled in Parliament, or whom they should appoint, (that was a Council of State of Pickt Grandees) should for twenty years have the Militia in their disposal, against the King, His Heirs, and Successors for that term, and after that term the same Power to be exercised by the King, but with the consent of the Parliament, if they shall declare the safety of the Kingdom to be concerned; and the Moneys raised for that purpose to be imployed by the same persons in the like man∣ner: Which was in effect, to take away the Kings Negative Voyce from him and His Heirs for ever. Besides, it grants an unlimited Power to the two Hou∣ses, to raise what Forces, and of what persons they please, and to raise money in what sort, and as much, and of whom, as they shall think fit, without any restriction or exception. The second was, An Act for Iustifying the Proceedings of Parliament in the late War, and for Declaring all Oaths, Declarations, Pro∣clamations, and other proceedings against it to be Void; whereby they were to b de∣clared to have stood upon the Defensive part, (their Conscience prickt them with their Blood-guiltiness, and they would fain throw it off, and by adding more Guilt to it, load it upon the Innocent; a wicked shift!) and be Indempnified (still they are tormented) for all their past actions therein. The third was, An Act whereby all Titles, and Honour of Peerage, conferred on any since the 20 of May, 1642. being the day that the Lord Keeper Littleton deserted the Parliament, and carried away the Seal, were Declared Void. And it was further to be Enacted, that no person that shall hereafter be made a Peer, or his Heirs, shall sit or Vote in the Parliament of England, without the consent of both Houses of Parliament. The fourth was, An Act concerning the Adjournment of both Houses of Parliament; whereby it was Declared, that when and wither the two Houses shall think fit to Adjourn themselves, the said Adjournments shall at all times be valid and good, and shall not be judged or deemed to end or determine the Session of this Parlia∣ment. Their Proposals to the King.The Proposals were, 1. That the new Seal be Confirmed, and the old Great Seal, and all things passed under it since May 1642. be made Void. 2. That Acts be Passed for raising moneys to pay publike Debts. 3. That Members of both Houses put from their places by the King, be restored. 4. That the Cessation in Ireland be made Void, and the War left to both Houses. 5. That An Act of Indem∣puity be passed. 6. That the Court of Wards be taken away, and such Tenures turn∣ed into common Soccage. 7. That the Treaties between England and Scotland be confirmed, and Conservators of the Peace and Vnion appointed. 8. That he Ar∣rears of the Army be paid out of Bishops Lands, Forfeited Estates and Forrests. 9. That An Act be passed for abolishing Bishops, and all appendants to them. 10. That the Ordinance of disposing Bishops Lands be confirmed by Act. 11. That An
Act be passed for the sale of Church-lands. 12. That Delinquents be proceeded against, and their Estates disposed of according to their several Qualifications. 13. That an Act be passed for discharge of publike Debts. 14. That Acts be passed for setling the Presbyterian Government and Directory, Furteen of the 39 Articles revised by the Assembly of Divines, Rules and Directions concerning suspension from the Lords-Supper. 15. That the chief Officers in England and Ireland be named by both Houses. 16. That an Act be passed for the conviction of Popish Recusants. 17. That an Act be passed for the Education of the Children of Papists by Protestants. 18. and 19. Against Papists, for levying penalties, and prohibiting the hearing of Mass. 20. An Act be passed for Observation of the Lords-day. 21. A Bill for Suppressing Innovations. 22. And Advancement of Preaching. 23. And against Pluralities and Non-residencie. Withl, The Commissioners were to desire His Majesty to give His Royal Assent to those four Bills by His Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England, Signed by His Hand, and Notified to the Lords and Commons Assembled together in the House of Peers; it not standing then with the safety of the Kingdom for His Majesty to do it otherwise, (to wit, at London) and a Bill to be drawn for such Letters Patents to be presented Him, and then a Warrant to Edward Earl of Manchester, &c. whereupon a Committee shall be sent to the Isle of Wight to Treat with Him only. It was not intended to shew these shapeless abortions of Laws, but that they should have been buried in their Chaos, yet being the (though unprepared) matter of this beautiful Form of the Kings Answer, the darkness of the one occasioning and preceding the light of the other, they are here represented in this unreasonable lump an : Nothing indeed shews them better, or it may be said worse; so that they  Paraphrase or Comment: Give me leave only to insert th Scots sense of  Bills and Proposals. The Commissioners of Scotlan having understood the proceeding of the Parliament in the business, now  publikely protested against it here, and immediately followed the Commissioers to the Isle of Wight, where they like∣wise presented His Majesty with this Paper.— There is nothing which we have more constantly endeavoured and do more earnest∣ly desire▪The Scotch Commissioners declare their dissent from the Proposals and Bills. than a good Agreement and happy Vnion between Your Majesty and your Parliaments of both Kingdoms; neither have we left any means unessayed, that by united Councils with the Parliament of England, and making joynt applications to Your Majesty, there might be a composition of all differences. But the new Proposi∣tions communicated to us by the two Houses, and the Bills therewith presented to Your Majesty, are so prejudicial to Religion, the Crown, the Vnion and Interest of the Kingdoms, and so far different from the former proceedings and engagements be∣twixt the Kingdoms, as we cannot concur therein. Therefore we do in the name of the Kingdom of Scotland, dissent from these Proposals and Bills tendred to Your Majesty. Lowden, Lauderdale, Charles Erskin, Kennedy, Berclay. This was the first equal and good Office meant the King, though they had greater concerns of their own; but it something served to justifie the King to His people in His refusal to Sign them. The Kings Answer was as followeth.
For the Speaker of the Lords House pro tempore, to be Communicated, &c. CHARLES REX. His Majesties Answer to the Bills, &c.THe necessity of complying with all engaged Interests in these great distempers for a perfect Settlement of Peace, His Ma∣jesty finds to be none of the least difficulties he hath met with since the time of His afflictions; which is too visible, when at the same time that the two Houses of the English Parliament do present to His Majesty several Bills and Propositions for His Consent, the Com∣missioners for Scotland do openly protest against them: so that were nothing in the case but the consideration of that difference, His Ma∣jesty cannot imagine how to give such an Answer to what is now proposed, as thereby to promise himself his great End, A Perfect Peace. And when his Majesty further considers, how impossible it is (in the condition he now stands) to fulfil the desires of his two Houses, since the onely ancient and known ways of passing Laws, are either by his Majesties personal Assent in the House of Peers, or by Commission under his Great Seal of England; He cannot but won∣der at such failings in the manner of Address which is now made unto him; unless his two Houses intend that his Majesty shall allow of a Great Seal made without his Authority, before there be any con∣sideration had thereupon in a Treaty; which as it may hereafter ha∣zard the security it self, so for the present it seems very unreaso∣nable to his Majesty. And though his Majesty is willing to believe that the intention of very many in both Houses, in sending those Bills before a Treaty, was onely to obtain a Trust from him, and not to take any advantage by passing them to force other things from him, which are either against his Conscience or Honour; yet his Majesty believes it's clear to all understandings, that these Bills contain (as they are now Penned) not onely the devesting himself of all Sove∣raignty, and that without possibility of recovering it, either to him or his Successors (except by repeal of these Bills) but also the ma∣king his Concessions guilty of the greatest pressures that can be made up∣on the Subject, as in other particulars, so by giving an Arbitrary and unlimited power to the two Houses for ever, to raise and levy, for Land and Sea-service, of what persons (without distinction and quality) and to what numbers they please; and likewise for the payment of the Ar∣rears, to levy what monies, in such sort, and by such ways and means, (and consequently upon the Estates of whatsoever persons) as they shall think fit and appoint; which is utterly inconsistent with the Liberty and Property of the Subject, and his Majesties Trust in Protecting them: so that if the major part of both Houses shall think it necessary to put the rest of the Propositions into Bills, his Majesty leaves the world to judge how unsafe it would be for him to Consent thereunto; and if not, what a strange condition (after passing those four Bills) his Majesty and all his Subjects would be cast into. And here his Ma∣jesty thinks it not unfit, to wish his two Houses to consider well of the manner of their proceeding; That when his Majesty desires a personal Treaty with them for the setling of a Peace, they in answer propose
the very subject matter of the most essential part thereof, to be first granted; a thing which will be hardly credible to posterity: Where∣fore his Majesty Declares, That neither the desire of being freed from this tedious and irksome condition of life his Majesty hath so long suffered, nor the apprehension of what shall befal him in case his two Houses shall not afford him a personal Treaty, shall make him change his Resolution of not-consenting to any Act, till the whole be conclu∣ded. Yet then he intends not onely to give just and reasonable sa∣tisfaction in the particulars presented to him; but also to make good all other Concessions mentioned in his Message of the 16 of Novemb. last, which he thought would have produced better effects, than what he finds in the Bills and Propositions now presented unto him. And yet his Majesty cannot give over,His Majesty a∣gain presseth for a personal Treaty. but now again earnestly presseth for a personal Treaty, (so passionately is he affected with the advantages which Peace will bring to his Majesty, and all his Sub∣jects) of which he will not at all despair, (there being no other visible way to obtain a well-grounded Peace.) However his Ma∣jesty is very much at ease within himself, for having fulfilled the Offices both of a Christian and a King, and will patiently wait the good pleasure of Almighty God, to incline the hearts of his two Hou∣ses to consider their King, and Compassionate their fellow-Subjects Miseries. Given at Carisbroke-Castle, Dec. 28. On the third of Ianuary following,Sir Thomas Wroth flies high, and in∣veighs against the King in the House of Com∣mons. this Answer was debated in the House of Commons. And first Sir Thomas Wroth had his Cue (set by the Faction) to run high, and to feel the pulse of the House; which was uttered in this, or the like Expression: The History of Indpendency, p. 70. That Bedlam was appointed for Mad-men, and Tophet for Kings; That our Kings had carried themselves of late as if they were fit for no place but Bedlam: That his Humble Motion should consist of three parts. 1. To secure the King, and keep him in some close Inland-Castle with Guards. 2. To draw up Articles of Impeachment against him. 3. To lay him by, and settle the Kingdom without him. He cared not what Form of Government they set up, so it were not by Kings and Devils. — Then Commissary Ireton (seeming to speak the sense of the Army, under the notion of many Godly men, who had ventured their Lives to subdue their Enemies) said after this manner. The King had denied Safety and Protection to his People,He is seconded by Commisary Ireton. by denying the four Bills: That Subjection to him, was but in lieu of his Protection to his People; this being denied, they might well deny any more Subjection to him, and settle the Kingdom without him. That it was now expected, after so long patience, they should shew their resolution, and not desert those Valiant men who had engaged for them beyond all possibility of Retreat, and would never forsake the Parliament, unless the Parlia∣ment forsook them first. After some more debate, when the House was ready for the Question, Crom∣wel brought up the Rear; and giving an ample Character of the Valour, good affections, and Godliness of the Army, argued, That it was now expected the Parliament should Govern and Defend the King∣dom by their own power and resolutions,And both of them backed by Cromwel. and not teach the people any longer to ex∣pect Safety and Government from an Obstinate Man, whose heart God had hard∣ned. That those men who had defended the Parliament from so many dangers, with
the expence of their blood, would defend them herein with Fidelity and courage against all opposition. Teach them not, by neglecting your own and the Kingdoms safety, (in which their own is involved) to think themselves betrayed, and left hereafter to the Rage and Malice of an irreconcileable Enemy, whom they have sub∣dued for your sake, and therefore are likely to finde his future Government of them insupportable, and fuller of Revenge than Iustice; Lest despair teach them to seek their safety by some other means then adhering to you, who will not stick to your selves; and how destructive such a resolution in them will be to you all, I tremble to think,Who laid his Hand upon his Sword; not long before baf∣fled by Sir Philip Sta∣pleton. and leave you to judge. — At the latter end of this contrived Speech, he laid his Hand upon his Sword, that Sword which by his side could not keep him from Trembling, when Sir Philip Stapleton some while before baffled him in the House of Commons. Now we discover these two Matchiavels, avowing in a manner their ends and designes, which they had hitherto cloaked by fair pretences to the King, and charged upon the Adjutators: And henceforward we shall see them using all manner of scelerate practises to promote their Conspiracie. This bold Harangue and Menace so far availed them, that the Parliament over-awed therewith, after a long debate, from 9 in the morning till night, upon the first of the en∣suing Votes, the House being divided, 141 Yeas, to 91 Noes, came to these following Resolutions; the other three, except the last, being carried more easily: They were prefaced with a short Declaration (yet of twelve days deliberation) dated the 15 of Ianuary, in these words. Die Sabbathi 15 Ianuarii 1647. The Parlia∣ments Declara∣tion, wherein they make the King the Au∣thor of the War.The Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, after many Addresses to his Majestie for the preventing and ending this unnatural War, raised by him against his Parliament and Kingdom, having lately sent four Bills to his Majestie, which did contain only matter of safety and security to the Parliament and Kingdom, refer∣ring the composure of all other differences to a personal Treaty with his Majestie, and having received an absolute Negative, Do hold themselves obliged to use their utmost endeavours speedily to settle the present Government in such a way as may bring the greatest security to this Kingdom in the enjoyment of the Laws and Li∣berties thereof; and in order thereunto, and that the Houses may receive no delays nor interruptions in so great and necessary a work,Their Votes of Non-address to the King, 16 Janua. 1647. they have taken these Resolu∣tions, and passed these Votes following, viz. Resolved upon the Question, 1. That the Lords and Commons do declare, that they will make no further Addresses or Applications to the King.None to ap∣ply themselves to him without leave from bth Houses. Whosoever doth, to r the pe∣nalties of High Treason. That they will receive no more Messages from the K. and en∣joyn all persons not to bring any frm him. 2. That no Application or Address be made to the King by any person whatsoever, without leave of both Houses. 3. That the person or persons that shall make breach of this Order, shall incur the penalties of High Treason. 4. That the Lords and Commons do declare, that they will receive no more any Message from the King; and do-enjoyn, that no person whatsoever do presume to receive or bring any Message from the King, to both or either Houses of Parliament, or to any other person. Which Resolves by their Order were Printed, and by the respective Members dispersed into the Counties, to give notice of the in∣tended severity against the Offenders. But this was not all; they would be thought to do this from Right Reason, and therefore they second this Resolution with another Remonstrance, as far beyond the other delivered at Hampton-Court, for silly and ridiculous imputa∣tions, as that from Duty and Truth:They publish a∣nother Remon∣stnce. The old, stale, and exploded Stories of Rochel, and the Isle of Rhee, Ship-money, Monopolies, &c. for which the King had given them satisfaction, Arthur Haslerig's Bro∣ther subras one Smallin▪ to vilifie the K. being numbred again into this Charge. They would fain have made use also of that Story of the Plaister applied to King Iames by the Duke of Buckingham; but their subornation failing, which was attempted by Sir Arthur Haselrig's Brother, who produced one Smalling for that purpose,
who disppointed them, as to the Papers he was said to have as proofs thereof, (it being a most notorious lye) they let that falshood alone, and betook them∣selves to more plausible, yet self-guilty criminations. But all these devices and fig-leaves could not hide the guilt of their actions; the people every were loathing to be abused any longer with these fictions of misgovernment, when they perceived what masters of misrule they had proved themselves. This the Grandees found at some conferences with the City, whom still they thought to have befooled and sweetned out of their money, but soon saw they were mistaken. The Art of perswasion had lost its power; and plain force, if any thing, was to be used; which as the case stood, they durst not venture: for the Town was full of rage and madness▪ and expected but the first blow. However, the richer sort reserved themselves, as equally slaves to the Army and Riches. From this difficulty therefore they turn to a more facile undertaking, hoping to delude the King, whom his hard restraint could not but have softned to their hands:Col. Hamond tus away his Majesties Ser∣vants. and though Colonel Hamond upon the delivery of the Kings Answer to the Propositions to the Commissioners, had turned away His Majesties Servants, and made Him a close prisoner, (telling the King, who demanded the reason of it,The King a clse Prisoner. that He was acted by ill Counsels to the destruction of the Kingdom, and that He did it by Authority of Parliament, before they knew the said Answer, which the King said they would never reply to) yet was he now employed by Cromwel, during the force of these Votes, to make new Offers to the King from the Army, the drift being to get Him to own the Army, as He had formerly done against the Parliament, till by that means His Friends re∣posing themselves likewise on their integrity, and the people also amused, they might of a sudden irresistibly destroy Him. To this purpose they cajoled Co∣lonel Ashburnham, and Sir Iohn Berkley, whom Hamond yet retained about the Kings Person, to convey their poyson of perfidy more unsuspectedly into the King; and the Earl of Southampton was likewise dealt withal; but he better under∣stood them, and declined all manner of commerce or correspondence with them, having had the advantages of liberty, and opportunity of prying into the Cabal. Several persons were employed as Messengers in this transaction, who were ne∣ver questioned or punished, as the Resolves had declared. Very many, as was said before, were the discontents of the people against the Parliament, ready, but for fear of the Army, to burst out into Insurrections; when the near sense of the Kings Captivity, whose sighs were imagined to be heard in the Island, so affected one Captain Burleigh lately of the Kings Army,Captain Bur∣leigh beas  Drum in the Island for the King. and then an Inhabitant there, that not able to endure his Princes sufferings and injuries, he beat a Drum in the Island, intending to gather a force sufficient to rescue Him from His Imprisonment; but was quickly seized and supprest by Hamond,He is supprest and seized by Col. Hamond. who sent him over to Winchester, in order to his tryal by a special Com∣mission of Oyer and erminer. Against which time, one Major Rolf, accused by one Osborne a Servant of the King's,Major Rolf ac∣cused for design∣ing the Kings death. of a designe to have assassinated Him (which accusation was with much ado admitted, though Rolf was like to be torn in pieces by the Citizens of London, upon his seizure in Bishops-gate-street, meerly upon the bare Rumour of his Crime) was brought down from the Gate-house, and tryed there likewise by the same Judge and Jury.Seized in Bi∣shops-gate-street. The matter was delegated to Serjeant Wilde, and Sir H. Mildmay, betwixt whom and the said (packt) Jury, Burleigh was found guilty of High Treason,Capt. Burleigh Executed at Winchester, Feb. 10. Rolf quitted by Ignoramus, by the same Iury. for levying War against (because for) the King; and the other, Rolf, quitted by Ignoramus, for his wilful intention of parricide. Captain Burleigh courageously sealed his Cause with his blood, dying a Loyal Martyr for the King and his Country, and is worthily inscribed into that Roll; though the stupid, and Subjects uncom∣passionate of their Princes miseries, accounted him rash and inconsiderate. Upon this Attempt,Rainsborough commanded by the Parliament to guard the Island. Hammond sends to the Parliament for an additional strength to maintain the Island; and Rainsborough, who was newly put in the place of Vice-Admiral Batten, a Presbyterian, and who had done good service, (though now the Independents were possest of all places) was Commanded
with his Fleet to sorround the Island,The Army de∣clare for the Parliament. and to guard it: and next, out comes a Declaration of the Army, wherein they promise to live and dye with the Par∣liament in pursuance of these Votes; and so for a while they piece together again like Herod and Pilate, where we leave them, and cast a look into Scotland and Ireland. Scotland this year was infamous for the butchery and death of many gallant personages,Many gallant persons put to death in Scot∣land. taken at the defeat of Montross at Philipshaugh, whom the Covenan∣ters having carried up and down with them, till they setled at St. Iohnstons, there Executed them. The first whereof was Colonel Nathaniel Gordon, and another of his noble name;Col. Nathaniel Gordon and another o his ame executed at St. John∣stons. Sir Ro∣bert Spots∣wood executed▪ Mr. Andrew Guthery and Mr. William Murray execu∣ted. Lord Ogle∣by ap. s. then Sir Robert Spotswood, a man of most polite and deep learning▪ especially in the Oriental Languages: he was made the Kings Secretary of Scotland, in the place of the Earl of Lanerick; which, together with his other abilities, accelerated his end. His last words were, — Jesu have mercy on me, and gather my soul with those that have run before me in this Race. Next to him, Mr. Andrew Guthrey, Son to the Bishop of Murray. And lastly, Mr. William Murray, a young Gentleman of some 19 years old, Bro∣ther to the Earl of Tullibardin, who most magnanimously encountred Death, behaving himself (as he said His End would prove) as the greatest honour of his Family. For this Blood Scotland hath since pretty well satisfied the Divine Justice; I pray God it be yet fully expiated and attoned. There escaped out of their clutches the Lord Ogleby, the day before his designed Martyrdom, disgui∣sed in his Sisters apparel.Ferdinando Lord Fairfax th of a Gan∣grene. To conclude these Funerals in Scotland, Ferdinando Lord Fairfax, (Father to Sir Thomas the General) whose Barony is Scotish, dyed about the same time of a Gangrene, occasioned by cutting a Corn on his toe; and devolved that Honour to Sir Thomas. In Ireland, upon the advance of the Rebels in so formidable a posture against Dublin,Maq. of Or∣mond  Dublin to Col. Jones. the Marquess of Ormond was forced to capitulate with the Parliament; and in Iune, according to agreement, delivered that City to Colonel Iones, and other Parliament-Commissioners, who brought over with them 1000 Foot and 500 Horse; and the Marquess came over into England, and attended the King at Hampton-Court, and in his removes with the Army, with an account of Ireland,The Marquess attends the King. Goes into France, thence into Ireland. till upon his going into the Isle of Wight, he transported himself in∣to France, and from thence (not long after) back again into Ireland, by the Kings Commission, with the above mentioned Forces, some recruits out of Eng∣land, and other broken Troops of the Marquesses, amounting in all to 3000. Colonel Iones resolved to march against the Irish, who under the Lord Preston, within 12 miles of Dublin,Col. Jones routed. met him at a disadvantage, and totally routed him, killing many, and taking some few prisoners, the rest escaping with difficulty to Dublin. The Parliament had undertaken the War, and were therefore troubled at this unsuccessful beginning;Col. Jones kills 5470 Irish ner Trim. but they presently re-inforced Iones, who taking cou∣rage, met with the same Enemy again, and neer Trim utterly defeated him, crying over and above quits with him for his last defeat. After his two Wings had discomfited the two Wings of the Irish by plain Valour, their main Battle of 3000 Foot betook themselves to a Bog, where the English followed, and made great slaughter: those that escaped thence, the Horse killed. This slaughter (one of the greatest during all the War) was reckoned just to 5470. The Commander of them, with Preston,Preston hard∣ly escapes, and joyns with O Neal. hardly escaped, and joyned with O Neal, who lately had given a terrible defeat to the Scots in Vlster. Upon this Victory twenty several places yielded themselves to Iones, who omitted not to prose∣cute his success, till the Winter summoned him to his quarters at Dublin. Neer the same time the Lord Inchiqueen had a like good success in Munster against the Lord Taaf,The Lord Inchi∣queen defeates the Lord Taaf. where he killed near 3000. But the Parliament de∣signing to out him of his Command, (he being President of that Province) and to confer it upon the Lord Lisle or Broghil, to that purpose endeavouring to secure his person and convey him into England;Declares for the King, and joynth with the said Lord. he declared against the Inde∣pendent prevailing party in England, and for a speedy composure with the King;
and forthwith joyned his Forces with the said Lord Taaf, who with a part of that Catholick Army had declared solely for the King. This spoiled all the Triumphs of Iones his Conquest, and made the Parliament look about them; Ireland being by this means further from being reduced, than it was the first day of the Rebellion. An enterprise Cromwel resolved to undertake, when he had overcome the difficulties of his Invasion, and Usurpation of the Govern∣ment in England. In the mean while a Treaty was set on foot by the Faction with O Neal,The English Faction Treat with O Neal. The Lord Inchi∣queens Com∣mission taken from him. and the Lord Inchiqueen's Commission taken away; some of his Treacherous Officers (put upon him to that purpose, as Spies, by the Parlia∣ment) revealing and deposing his correspondencies with the Presbyterian par∣ty of the Parliament, who were by the said Examinations sworn to have pro∣cured their pardon of the King, to act for him for the future: which Inde∣pendent Fetch (to beget a new impeachment) bringing us back into England, we proceed in the affairs thereof, where we shall see the Scene altered; the do∣mineering Army, and their Grandees at Derby-house, (which managed all) seeking shelter for their outrages. The House of Lords had scrupled the passing of the Votes of Non-addresses,The House of Lords scruple the Vt. of No-Addresses: they at last pas it, and are  by the . 10 against 10: but the Army quartering at the Mews and at White-Hall, made them come to it: whereupon, the next day, the Army gave them their Thanks; and with those another piece of Journey-work, which was comprised in a Message sent down from them to the Commons, to desire their concurrence to the Engagement of those Members that fled to the Army, to live and dye with the Army. It was debated all day until 7 a clock at night, and then the question put, That this House doth approve the Subscription of the said Members to the said Engagement; which was carried in the affirmative by 10 Voices. To pro∣secute this project (now that the Army was afraid of the Scots advance, there being sufficient ground of quarrel, as they had set forth in their Papers) they would have the Parliament and City to own their late forcing of them, if cal∣led to account for it, (see the base vicissitudes of Villany! now insolent, then most sordidly fearful.) [Nor repeating all the Adjutators said to this subscri∣bing the Engagement, where they acknowledge, That they Rule by Power one∣ly, and that the House of Commons is no longer theirs than they over-awe them; and they fear the Critical day will come, which will discover the Parliament to be no longer theirs, than while they have a force upon it.The Indepen∣dents Propose to unite all In∣terests in the Houses, City and Army. Cromwel makes a speech to that pr e is confronted. Glover sent to the City, and rejected.] The Independent party Proposed to unite all Interests in the Houses, City, and Army; and Cromwel made a Speech in Parliament to that purpose, but was snapt up by a Member, That they were chosen and trusted by the people to pursue one Common interest, and Common good, Safety and Liberty of the People; and whosoever had any peculiar Interest eccentrick from that, was not fit to Sit in that Assembly, and deserved to be called to a strict account by those that trusted him. And one of Cromwels Agents, Mr. Glover, was employed to the City on the same errand, who offered them the release of their Aldermen, then Prisoners, and the setting up their Fosts and Chains, upon a mutual agreement; which the City likewise generously reje∣cted, as foreseeing the Scots Invasion; and therefore denyed any correspon∣dency with them; upbraiding them with their past actions, and reiterated Violences. Cromwel was troubled at this rejectment;Cromwel trou∣bled thereat. but resuming his wonted impu∣dence, taxed his Agents by what Authority they had made that Overture; who producing his own, he falsly renounced it. Yet the plot ceased not here; his implacable malice cast about presently another way to effect his mischievous intent against the City; of which suddenly, leaving him to prepare against the storm for Scotland, whose preparations we now speak of. The Scots Commissioners,The Scots Com∣missioners signi∣fie their desires, and depart home. upon the said Votes, had desired to know whether they did exclude them, or the Subjects of that Kingdom, from any Addresses; and had answer by an Interpretative Vote, that they were left at liberty, and might make application, &c. They then demanded the Arrears of money due, and other mutual stipulations according to Covenant; which being delayed, they departed home.
The Committee at Derby-house gows powerful.This netled the Derby-House blades, which from a Committee of Safety▪ (as it was constituted in the beginning of the War) being a joynt Committee of Lords and Commons of both Kingdoms, was now become a Committee of Danger; the power of the former being vested wholly in those persons, English only (with some other Independent Grandees added in the room of some de∣ceased) remaining of that Juncto; whereupon, by their appointment, the Parliament send Commissioners to Scotland,The Parliament sent Commis∣sioners into Scotland. two Lords, the Earl of Nottingham and another; and four Commons, whereof Mr. Ashurst was the chief; and two Clergy-men, Mr. Marshall a Renegado and Spy, and Mr. Herle; who did no more there but give constant notice of the Scots resolutions, and the for∣wardness of their Levies. The Scots set forth an angry Declaration. That and their Covenant is slighted.In the mean time comes an angry and expostulating Declaration from Scot∣land, where, as usual, the Covenant was mentioned; but with such scorn recei∣ved, and so opprobriously vilified, that of all its former veneration in that place, it was now thought worthy only of a Sirreverence. This Declaration was long debated, and several Postilions employed betwixt this and Edinburgh, with Lemtives, Invectives, Explanations, Corrections, and such sort of scribling, but all to no purpose.The Scots mad  an Expedi∣tion. The Scots were mad for another Expedition, being in∣vited by (the best pay-masters) the City of London; and a better Cause, which might assure them of freer and more welcom entertainment; besides the un∣known reward of Victory, if it should prove their good fortune to restore the King; whose condition is the next consideration, which we have elegantly de∣scribed by himself, in his Declaration in Answer to the Votes of No further Addresses. To all my People, of whatsoever Nation, Qualification, or Condition. His Majesties elegant Decla∣ration in An∣swer to the Votes of no further Addres∣ses.AM I thus laid aside? and must I not speak for my self? No, I will speak, and that to all my people, (which I would rather have done by the way of my two Houses of Parliament, but that there is a publike Order neither to make Addresses to, nor receive Message from me.) And who but you, can be Iudge of the Difference betwixt me and my two Houses? I know none else: for I am sure it is you, who will enjoy the happiness, or feel the misery of good or ill Government; and we all pretend who shall run fastest to serve you, without having a regard (at least in the first place) to parti∣cular Interests. And therefore I desire you to consider the state I am and have been in this long time, and whether my Actions have more tended to the publike, or my own particular good. For whosoever will look upon me barely as I am a man, without the liberty (which the meanest of my Subjects enjoys) of going whither, and conversing with whom I will; as a Husband and a Father, without the comfort of my Wife and Children; or lastly, as a King, without the least shew of Authority or power to protect my distressed Subjects; must con∣clude me, not only void of all natural Affection, but also to want Common Vnderstanding, if I should not most chearfully embrace the readiest way to the settlement of these distracted Kingdoms. As al∣so on the other side, do but consider the Form and Draught of the Bills lately presented to me, and as they are the conditions of a Treaty, ye will conclude, that the same spirit which hath still been able to frustrate all my sincere and constant endeavours for Peace, hath had
a powerfull influence on this Message: for though I am ready to grant the substance, and comply with what they seem to desire; yet, as they had framed it, I could not agree thereunto without deeply wounding my Conscience and Honour, and betraying the Trust re∣posed in me, by abandoning my people to the Arbitrary and Vnlimi∣ted Power of the two Houses for ever, for the levying and maintain∣ing of Land and Sea-Forces, without distinction of quality, or limita∣tion for Money and Taxes. And if I could have passed them in terms, how unheard-of a condition were it for a Treaty, to grant be∣fore-hand the most considerable part of the Subject Matter? How ineffectual were that debate like to prove, wherein the most potent Party had nothing left to ask, and the other nothing more to give? so consequently how hopeless of mutual compliance? without which, a settlement is impossible. Besides, if after my Concessions, the two Houses shall insist on those things from which I cannot depart, how desperate would the condition of these Kingdoms be, when the most proper and approved Remedy should become ineffectual? Being therefore fully resolved, that I could neither in Conscience, Honour, or Prudence pass those four Bills, I only endeavoured to make the rea∣sons and justice of my denial to appear to all the world, as they do to me, intending to give as little dissatisfaction to the two Houses of Parliament (without betraying my own Cause) as the matter would bear. I was desirous to give my Answer of the 28 of December last to the Commissioners sealed (as I had done others heretofore, and sometimes at the desire of the Commissioners) chiefly because when my Messages and Answers were publikely known before they were read in the Houses, prejudicial interpretations were forced on them, much differing, and sometimes contrary to my meaning. For ex∣ample, my Answer from Hampton-Court was accused of dividing the two Nations, because I promised to give satisfaction to the Scots in all things concerning that Kingdom; and this last suffers in a contrary sense, by making me intend to interest Scotland in the Laws of this Kingdom, (the which nothing is or was further from my Thoughts) because I took notice of the Scots Commissioners protesting against the Bills and Propositions, as contrary to the In∣terests and Engagements of the two Kingdoms. Indeed, if I had not mentioned their dissent, an Objection, not without some proba∣bility, might have been made against me, both in respect the Scots are much concerned in the Bill for the Militia, and several other Pro∣positions, and my silence might seem to approve of it. But the Commissioners refusing to receive my Answer sealed, I (upon the Engagement of theirs and the Governours Honour, that no other use should be made or notice taken of it, than as if it had not been seen) read and delivered it open unto them; whereupon what hath since passed, either by the Governour in discharging most of my servants, redoubling the Guards, and restraining me of my former liberty, (and all this, as himself confest, meerly out of his own dislike of my An∣swer, notwithstanding his beforesaid Engagement;) or afterwards by the two Houses, as the Governour affirms, in confining me within the circuit of this Castle; I appeal to God and the World, whether
my said Answer deserved the Reply of such Proceedings; besides the the unlawfulness for Subjects to Imprison their King. That by the permission of Almighty God I am reduced to this sad condition, at which as I no way repine, so I am not without hope, but that the same God will in due time convert these afflictions unto my advan∣tage. In the mean time, I am content to bear those crosses with Patience, and a great equality of minde. But by what means or oc∣casion I am come to this relapse in my affairs, I am utterly to seek; especially, when I consider that I have sacrificed to my two Houses of Parliament (for the Peace of my Kingdoms) all, but what is much more dear to me than my Life, my Conscience and Honour; desiring nothing more, than to perform it in the most proper and natural way, A Personal Treaty. But that which makes me most at a loss, is, the remembring my signal comply  with the Army and their Interests, and of what importance my comyance was to them, and their often-repeated Professions and Engats for my just Rights in general, at New-Market, and Saint  and their particular Explana∣tions of these generals, by  and Revoted Proposals, which I had reason to understand  utmost extremity would be expected from me, and that in  therein I should be eased, (herein appealing to the Conscien  me of the chiefest Officers in the Army, if what I have said be not punctually true) and how I have failed of their expectations, or my professions to them, I chal∣lenge them and the whole World to produce the least colour of rea∣son. And now I would know what it is that is desired: Is it Peace? I have shewed the way, (being both willing and desirous to perform my part in it) which is a just complyance with all chief Interests. Is it Plenty and Happiness? they are the inseparable effects of Peace. Is it Security? I, who wish all men would forget and forgive like me, have offered the Militia for my time. Is it Liberty of Conscience? He who wants it, is most ready to give it. Is it the right Admini∣stration of Iustice? Offices of Trust are committed to the choice of my two Houses of Parliament. Is it the Arrears of the Army? Vpon a settlement they will certainly be paid with much ease; but before, there will be found much difficulty, if not impossibility in it. Thus all the World cannot but see my real and unwearied Endea∣vours for Peace, the which (by the Grace of God) I shall neither repent me of, nor ever be slackned in, notwithstanding my past, pre∣sent, or future sufferings: But if I may not be heard, let every one judge, who it is that obstructs the good I would or might do. What is it that men are afraid to hear from me? It cannot be Reason (at least, none will declare themselves so unreasonable as to confess it;) and it can less be impertinent or unreasonable discourses, for thereby peradventure I might more justifie this my Restraint than the Causers themselves can do: so that of all wonders, this yet is the greatest to me. But it may be easily gathered hence, how these men intend to govern, who have used me thus. And if it be my hard sate to fall together with the Liberty of this Kingdom, I shall not blush for my self, but much lament the future miseries of my People, the which I shall still pray to God to avert, whatever becomes of me. C. R.
So we have attained the end of this bustling year, the 23 of King Charles the first, wherein the Pen laboured more than the Sword, and the politick Matchi∣avel-Head of the Army combated all opposition with the same success as their vi∣ctorious Arms lately before; their power now appearing Paramount, and from whence the Kingdoms were to expect their future Government, unless they could be able to master and disperse that Formidable Host, now joyntly and unanimously concurring with their aspiring and Rebel-Leaders. And behold, the next year gives us a proof of a noble and gallant Attempt for the recovery of Englands Majesty, Liberty and Safety; but the anger of Heaven was not yet neer appeased! Anno Dom. 1648. THat the beginning of this calamitous and black year might correspond and suit with its end, (as the annual revolution thereof was never better assimilated, than by the antient Hieroglyphick of a Serpent rounding its tail to its Mouth; the Serpentine windings of this monstrous Rebellion, terminating at the Head of their most sacred Soverain) the Grandees of the Faction fol∣lowing that State-principle, That it is as great prudence to keep as to win an Em∣pire, resolved to put out (as the accursed Philistins did to Sampson) the eyes of the Kingdom, that so they might make sport with our Laws, Franchises, and Priviledges, and then ruine and fatally destroy us; at last separating the Head from the Body Politick, in their ensuing monstrous Regicide. To this purpose,The Parlia∣ments Visita∣tion of the U∣niversity of Oxford, d tning out o the Loyal ad Learned Sch∣lars. The Earl o Pembroke made by them Chancellour of the University. under the notion and term of a Visitation of the University of Oxford, (whereby Authority from the Parliament was delegated to certain Inquisitors, such as were mancipated to their interest, of Clergy, and some more moderate Laity; such as were the two Wilkinsons, Cheynel, Rogers, Lang∣ley; Sir Nathaniel Brent, Esquire Tipping, Mr. Palmer, and others: to whom was added (as chief of this Commission) Philip Earl of Pembroke, with the Stile and Title of Chancellour of the said University.) The aforesaid persons proceeded to the ejectment of above two thirds of the Heads, Fellows, and Students of the respective Colledges, the most eminent for Learning, and Piety, and Duty to the Church, and Loyal obedience to His Majesty; for no other reason, but that they would not subscribe and recognize, that the two pretended Houses had any Right or Authority to visit that University; which by the known antient Statutes thereof, and the Laws of the Land, is invested only in the King, and such as He from time to time shall depute thereunto. By this most wicked practise and Dilemma, of either ruining men, or vio∣lating their Conscience, they had nearly barbarized those Fountains of Learning; with no less rage and fury inveighing against those Confessors of the Royal Cause, than the Goths did to Old Rome, sparing neither young nor old; even very Children, such of 16 years, being outed of their places, upon the same score, and under pain of death, (having endured a civil death already) by posting up their names at St. Maries Church-Gates, Commanded within 24 Hours to depart that City, or to be taken and proceeded against as Spies. It will indeed rather require an Elegie, or some Satyrical Lamentation, than an History; though I could not pass it, out of reverence I owe my Mother, and having but slightly touched the same rudenesses done to Her Sister of Cambridge by Cromwel and his Complices; and out of commiseration to those Noble per∣sons that suffered this persecution, who (though perhaps the Commonwealth may recover this loss by timely recruits of Literature) do no doubt irremedi∣ably rue this their violent Revulsion out of that Bosome, where they might and ought to have been cherished to a competent vigour, enabling them to serve the Commonwealth, and their own thus enforced necessities: — Sed quo vehor?
By these and the like distempers and pains in every part of it, England be∣gan now to be Heart-sick; and those ambulatory running Humours which spread through the whole mass of the people, to Center at last in the Metro∣polis, the City of London; which had more successfully broke out, but for the opposition it met with from the then Lord Mayor, Alderman Warner, Penning∣ton's own second,Alderman Warner Lord Mayor of Lon∣don, a facti∣ous person. a Factious and Seditious person, who discountenanced it by the Authority of his place, appearing at the first hubbub thereof openly against it. The manner was as followeth. On the 9 of April, being the Lords-day, a number of Apprentices (as was usual) were playing in Moor-fields,A Tumut and Insurrection is London by the Boys and Prentices, Apr. 9. in the afternoon; (for the Parliament had abrogated all Hlydays, and by a venerable Order had appointed one day in every Month for their Recreation, in lieu of those Festivals, after much coil and many elaborate Petitions, and reference to, and reports from Committees of both Houses concerning them) which being told to a Company of Trained-Bands then upon the Guards, whose Officers were some precise Schismaticks, they came into the Fields, and commanded them to depart; which they refu∣sing or delaying, they fired some Pieces at them: whereupon the Boys incensed, took up Stones, and couragiously fell upon them, and routed them, taking from them their Ensign, which in a tumultuous and childish bravery they marched with into the City; and being increased with additions like themselves, affron∣ted the Mayor, and made him hastily retire to his own House for Sanctuary, whither they followed him, and seized on one of the Drakes he had planted for his defence, and thence marched to the several Gates, which they likewise secured; more especially Ludgate, which lay neerest their Enemy the Army, who were then quartered at White-Hall and the Mews, they guarded with the same Drake: The City remaining the rest of that day and night in great ter∣rour and confusion, the Rabblé crying out for God and King Charles; but no Person of Quality undertaking their Conduct, or to bring them into Order and Discipline. In the mean while, the Army-Guards take the Alarm; and conceiving it dangerous to venture into the City by night, kept themselves in a readiness for the morning, when Sir Thomas Fairfax himself entred by Aldersgate with Horse and Foot,Sir Thomas Fairfax with part of the Ar∣my enters, quells it, and disper∣seth them. who fell a scouring the Streets, and driving this unarmed and ungoverned Multitude before them, wounding and killing divers innocent persons, Men, Women, and Children, in a cruel and hostile manner, until they came to Leaden-hall, where the Apprentices entred, and endeavoured to main∣tain it: But the avenues thereof being found defenceless, and themselves not strong enough, besides want of necessaries requisite thereunto, they wisely (and more prudently than any thing they did before) slipt away and shifted for themselves, few or none falling into the Armies hand; but some upon enquiry afterward, in the beginning of the Commonwealth, were discovered, and arrai∣ned of High Treason, for levying War, &c. Two of whom, a Vintner and a Meal-man, Kensey and Matthews, were convicted and condemned; but by the mediation of Alderman Tichborn (one of the best deeds likewise he ever did) were reprieved,Kensey and Matthews, the one a Vintner, the other a Meal-man, con∣demned; but reprieved by the mediation of Alderman Tichborn, and afterwards pardoned. and by the same means at last pardoned, and assumed by him, for a demonstration of his goodness, to be the guard to his person on publike Trayning days. This Insurrection, or Riot rather, was quickly noised to the uttermost parts of the Nation, where it was reported and received with great advantage, as we usually fancy and credit what we expect; to the encouraging of all honest people to rise now and follow this example, and redeem and rescue their Re∣ligion, Laws, Lives and Liberties now at stake: for neither the several nor uni∣ted practices of Parliament and Army, Presbyterian nor Independents, could impose upon them any longer. Nor was there an easie belief given to this check of that Tumult, but was supposed an Artifice, and one of their old Lies, with which they stuffed their News-Books; since the whole Nation saw how they had irritated the City by their insolent carriage towards them, in changing
their Militia, &c. so that it was undoubtable they would embrace and improve the first opportunity. Whereupon,Col. Laughorn Poyer and Powel, rise for the King in Wales, thy se∣cure Pem∣broke and Tenby Castles. as the next Scene of this years Tragedy, Colonel Laughorn, Poy∣er and Powel, who had done notable service for the Parliament in Wales, rose in Pembroke-shire and Flint-shire, to neer the number of 8000 men. They had been by the Council of the Army (which was Authorized always by the Par∣liament) ordered to disband, (as being men of better and surer principles than they durst confide in, in order to their subsequent designs) which they under∣standing the drift of, refused, and flew to their Arms; and for the strengthen∣ing of their Party, Declare for the settlement of the King and Kingdom; and gave notice to the Prince, who then issued out Commissions as General for his Father, of their intentions and present posture, having secured enby-Castle, and the Town and Castle of Pembroke, to the same end. This sudden and threatning defection put the Juncto at Derby-house to their dumps, when ano∣ther Express brought news that the like effects were to be looked for from North-Wales,Chopstow-Ca∣stle  cho∣las Kemish: and Si John Owen  for the King in North-Wales. where Sir Iohn Owen was risen with a Force, and had defated and taken Prisoner the High-Sheriff that opposed him; and that Sir Nicholas Kemish (an eminent Cavalier) had likewise surprized Chepstow-Castle; so tha all Wales was like to be lost, without a blow strucken, from the late Conquer∣ors, who therefore hastened away Forces to re-establish their Dominion, and suppress these dangerous beginnings. Over these Colonel Horton was now Commissioned, for the reducing those new and old Royalists;Col. Hrton sent to  them. Cromwel being (if occasion should require) preparing to second him. Horton with the Stafford and Worcester-Forces, and part of the Army quartering thereabouts, advanceth against Laughorne, his whole power consisting of not above 3000 men; with whom making more hast than good speed,Col. Fleming Commands a party against the Royalists: he is set upon and routed, lays violent hands on himself, and dieth. a party thereof being under the Command of Colonel Fleming, fell un∣awares into an Ambuscado, and were most of them cut off; the rest sheltring themselves in a neighbouring Church, were forced to render at discretion: which Fleming seeing, and despairing that he should be able to answer this over∣sight at a Council of War, or for some other cause, laid violent hands upon himself, and so dyed. Horton no way daunted with this inauspicious entrance, marched up and faced the Enemy, who shewed themselves upon the hills and places of advantage, making their Hubbubs to call the Country to their assistance. In their descent whence into more even ground, the Parliamentarians desperately Engaged with them, no way prepared, or thinking of fighting that day, (though Laughorn resolved to fight before Cromwel should come up,St. Fagons fight May 8. Col. Horton defeats Laug∣horn. who was then on his way) and having laid an Ambuscado behind some Shrubs and Hed∣ges in a Meadow, did so gall and terrifie these raw and undisciplined Britons, that they could not be made to stand, or to keep any order, but annoyed their fel∣lows, and gave the Parliament-Horse opportunity to engage their whole Body; which being vigorously prosecuted and maintained, the whole Army ran, some 1500 killed, 500 Officers, besides 3000 Prisoners taken, with all their Am∣munition, Bag and Baggage:Cromwel sends Col. Eure to attempt Sir Nich. Kemish. Chepstow-Ca∣stle retaken, May 25. But the chief Officers, and ablest Souldiers, got some into Tenby, and others into Pembroke, whither Cromwel came presently, and Besieged them both. In his advance whither, that he might not give Sir Nicholas Kemish leave or leisure, and time to nestle in his acquisition, he sent away Colonel Eure to at∣tempt him; who having a sufficient strength, resolved forthwith to storm Chep∣stow-Castle, (having before Loyally refused all manner of Treaty) which suc∣cessfully was attempted,Sir Nich. Ke∣mish killed in cold blood. and a disastrous slaughter made; the resolute and noble Knight being killed in cold blood.Sir Jo Owen's Forces suppres∣sed by M. Gen. Mitton, and himself taken. Cromwel joyns with Horton: Tenby stormed and yieldeth. Sir Iohn Owen's Forces were like∣wise at the same time suppressed by Major-General Mitton, and himself likewise taken prisoner. Cromwel was now joyned with Horton; by whose united Forces, Tenby was first stormed, and then yielded upon discretion; but Pembroke was a harder bit, being naturally and artificially well fortified, and as well manned, though not
proportionably stored with necessaries; and two or three Parliament-Ships lay before the Haven to keep out all supply, if the Prince should have endeavoured it, who was then at Sea; of which presently. Pembroke be∣sieged by Oli∣ver Cromwel.But Cromwel's impatience of loitering before a single Town, in a corner of the Kingdom, when the Scots were advancing upon the same account with the besieged into England, put him upon a resolution of storming it; to which glorious and facile work Hugh Peters by his Sermons and Stories of Iericho animated the Souldiers.Hugh Peters encourageth his Souldiers in his Sermon. Accordingly Approaches were made, and a Line drawn round, within Carbine-shot of the Works, and the night and hour ap∣pointed for their falling on; the Horse being drawn up, and in the dark got close under the Gates, to be ready at the opening of them by their Foot when entred. The besieged suspecting this stilness of the Leaguer would and in a Storm, had as closely prepared for the onset; just about the time thereof, calling off their Guards and Centries,Pembroke stormed to the besiegers loss. and making semblance of betaking themselves to rest; when with great fury the Parliament-Foot fell on, and having planted their Ladders, scaled the Works, the Trenches being filled with men like to a swarm of Bees, making hast to get over; which being the designed advantage, the Flankers of the Town discharged all their Cannon laden with Chain-shot, and so swept the Trenches, that not a Ladder was standing, abundance of men killed and maimed, and left therein, the rest forced to retreat, being pelted fore∣right from the Walls, and those that were entred knockt on the Head, some few onely escaping and becoming Prisoners. This so daunted the Army, that Cromwel thought not fit to expose them any more to such danger, but to block and starve them out; which the Besieged perceiving, and no hopes of Relief, and being already pinched with want, they bethought themselves of making Conditions in time, while the late Storm was yet in recent memory, and some regard had to their strength and courage, and while Cromwel was himself there; upon which account they entred into a Treaty,But at length delivered. whereby Cromwel was too hard for them: For giving good terms to the Souldiery and the inferior Officers, who were willing to accept of less, he reserved their three Leaders to discretion, and some Superiour Commanders to two years Banishment; and so having quieted that Welch commotion, hastned on his Expedition against the Scots. While all things appeared now ready to run into worser and more desperate mischiefs, equally feared from a new War, and that cicatrized and more perilous Peace we had rather past than enjoyed, during the quarrelling Intrigues of the Independant and Presbyterian parties; first the County of Essex, though not so considerably;Essex, Surry, and London Petition for Peace. then the neighbouring County of Surrey, thought it a good and neighbourly Office to the Parliament, to give them a taste (in fair and civil language, and peaceable quiet deportment) of the whole Kingdoms resentment of their proceedings with the King, that so without any more effusion of blood, a stop might be put to those threatning evils, that visibly were imminent upon the Nation. To this purpose, a calm, milde, and rational Petition was with all humility, and without any tumultuous disorder (attended on by a numerous, yet ci∣vil, and a well-reputed train) presented to the two Houses on the 16 of May, by the hands of the prime Gentlemen of that County, who were presently ordered to withdraw, and await their Answer, while in the mean time the Faction gave notice to the Guards at White-hall and the Mews to come and free them from this (otherwise unanswerable) Address. In the interim, the Honest Country-men understanding their Answer was respited,The Guards of the Army fall upon them, and disperse the. and that the chief of their County would onely be admitted to receive it, withdrew themselves to several Inns in Westminster, to put up and refresh their horses and themselves, where they found the Troopers very quarrelsom, and telling them, that there was no room, nor scarce accommodation for the Army; which made most of them go into the Suburbs; when presently the Guards of Janizaies marched in haste into the Hall, and fell a hewing and cutting (without any expostulation of the Petitioners business there,) and
with some slaughter,some are killed, and more terrour, drove them into the Palace-yards. Among the rest that were killed, was the Miller of Wandsworth, a stout Fellow, and who died not unrevenged, being cut and run through with a Halbert; the rest scattered and dispersed themselves, being in no capacity of resistance, and carri∣ed home their Answer for Peace, written in the red Letters of their Fellows Blood. This Petition had been Subscribing a Month before, and much order and ex∣actness used therein; but one Rubrick blot dasht it into nothing: the Trium∣phant Grandees never knew the ways of Peace, and this method to it retorting their own practices in the beginning of our troubles, was most distastful; for it discovered to the people that the right prayer of Petitions was onely for Parlia∣mentary Priviledges, and that the Liberty of the Subject was but a subservient pretence: They had attained the mystery and mastership of Government, and therefore those silly Rudiments were to be forgotten; but if their Crue would Petition against the King and their Country, (so was our English spirit charmed and transformed before) they should be honoured with the Title of the well-effected, and have the thanks of the House for nothing. This sanguinous reception of so innocent a Paper, was highly resented every where;The Kentish Insurrection May 24. but the Kentish-men reflected most upon it, who were then in a readi∣ness with a Petition to the same tenor, believing the Parliament would never so far vary from that principle they had so mainly held forth and asserted, viz. the Peoples right of declaring their grievances to that High Court: But now sadly convinced of that opinion, they resolved to save their honour, and their Journey to London; not to be baffled by Red-coats, or to travel up on a fools errand, but with their swords in their Hands, which was the onely reason then prevailing, to reduce those by force to their duty, they could not induce by the most urgent and winning intreaties;They Rendez∣vouze neer Ro∣chester, Lord Goring Earl of Norwich their General. and accordingly appointed a Rendezvous neer Rochester, to resolve upon the affair, and chuse their Officers. On the 24 of May they assembled together, and named the Lord Goring Earl of Norwich (then upon the place) for their General, being their next Countryman of Sussex, though they had pitcht upon the Duke of Richmond then at Cobham; who declined it, out of his incapacity for action, or that Command. Hither also resorted many hundreds of London-Prentices, the chief and flower of the Youth, with many of the Old Cavalry; and many thousands more had gone, but that all the ways from London thither were so laid, that there was no passage, the River of Thames being guarded with the like diligence, and several adven∣turers, and well-willers to the King and the quarrel, intercepted. 'Twas therefore thought hazardous to dally with such an Enemy who in∣creased every hour, being already formidable, not for the number onely, but the considerableness, experience, and gallantry of them: so that the General himself with all the Forces he could make, being 8000, six of Foot, and two of Horse, drew out against them: which advantage (as it was designed and hoped) the Citizens might have taken; but it seems the Army was sensible of that;The Army yield the Militia again to the City, and cajole them. and since they could not keep it, were contented to part with the Militia, and leave it according to that establishment which they so abominably quarrel∣led before; which artificial kindness so obliged the City, that though several promises had been made of their concurrence with the grand designe, Colonel Culpeper negotiating and pressing their speedy resolution and Declaration for the King and Kingdom,Col. Culpeper endeavours to perswade the City to Declare for the King: they refuse. at the very same time at Guild-hall, to his no little danger and honour; yet would they not by any means or arguments of their Honour and Safety, be drawn into any publike undertaking; not minding that story of Polyphemus to Vlysses, whose onely favour to him was, that he should be eaten up last. And it was a strange confidence in them, to think that their Militia could secure them, which before had seen so scurrilously and contumeliously wrested from them; when they were upbraided in 47 that they were not able therewith to preserve the City, much less the Parliament or the King. However, they now undertook both the former;Skippon mad Major-General of London. Skippon, instead of noble Brown, being ac∣cepted (a meer bosom-Traytor to them) as their Major-General, at the salary of 600 l. per annum.
Maidstone-fight June 2.Fairfax therefore securely and resolutely advanceth against these Kentish For∣ces; and understanding that the Body of the Army quartered about Rochester, whose Bridge was broke, he resolved to pass the River of Medway something lower neer Maidstone, and so march toward them. But the Royalists sensible, and fore-judging he would attempt that way, had manned it with 1500 men, of the resolutes and willingest of their Army, consisting chiefly of London-Au∣xiliaries; who though surprized by Fairfax's sudden approach, who had receiv∣ed intelligence from some Traitors within the Town, at what distance and in what security the Army lay dispersed, did yet make a most manful resistance. The first Dispute (after a slight skirmish at Crayfield-heath by Gravesend) hap∣pened at Northfield-bridge, the pass to Maidstone, whither Fairfax sent Major Husbands with a strong party before him, himself marching with a full Body, not trusting altogether to his Kentish intelligence. Major Husbands after a sharp and hot contest prevailed, more for fear of the approach of the whole Ar∣my, than his own strength; when yet that handful of men daringly engaged this whole Body, and fought very much of their ground with such pertinacious valour, that Fairfax (then troubled with the Gout) was forced to light out of his Coach, and to lead his men on in person for their animation, the service proved so tedious and desperate. At last the Royalists (fresh supplies overpow∣ring them) were beat up to the Barricadoes of the Town, where they made a more bloudy defence than in the Fields and Hedges, repelling the Enemy twice: And being thence beaten into the Town, did worser annoy them than ever be∣fore, firing out of the Windows and Leads, and using all those ready Engines of death which the Houses afforded, to the very great slaughter of the Red∣coats, so that it was 6 hours compleat before the Town was fully gained;The Royalists Roted. and had the Royalists from Rochester moved to their relief, it was more than proba∣ble the Army had been utterly baffled, and the Quarrel at an End. Of the Kentish were killed 300, and almost 1000 taken Prisoners, with 400 Horse, 8 pieces of Ordnance, and some Ammunition. Fairfax confessed they were the toughest Enemy he had met with in England. The Fight began at 7 a clock at night, and lasted till midnight. Earl of Nor∣wich and Kentish Forces at Black beath,But the main Body under the Earl of Norwich, instead of coming to their rescue, marched in hast away for Black-heath, where most of the Kentish-men (leaving him not above 500) deserted him. (The reason of their not second∣ing their Fellows, was reported to be this: The one half of them was march∣ed to Dover, and those places, to seize on those Castles, and secure that Country, and so weakened the remaining Party.) For seeing few come in to his assistance, which was to be ascribed to the strict care and industry of Major-General Skip∣pon, they thought then of the safest course.wooes the City for passage; de∣nied, Frries into Essex June 3. From Black-heath the Earl sent a Message to the City of London, desiring free passage through it, and declaring the intentions of his undertaking: But they flatly refused any such thing, though some former assurances had been given of their joyning in the designe; whereupon, the Royalists were forced to Ferry and Swim their Horses, and Boat themselves into the Isle of Dogs, and so to Mile-End-Green, whence afresh they Sollicited the City to partake in this Honourable Confederacy; but they were deaf to all such perswasions; their Major-General and his Tarriers inveagling them with the honesty and good resolutions of the Army, both to them and the Kingdom. Thence the Earl marched to Stratford-Bow, where joyned with him the Essex-Forces, under the Command of Sir Charles Lucas,The Essex-For∣ces joyn with him at Bow. Sir Charles Lucas their General. whom they had unanimous∣ly chosen for their General, being under colour of a Muster, Rendezvouzed by Colonel Far, a Gentleman of that County; whence they were drawn to this place, to countenance and favour any Loyal attempt in the City, and to encourage them to shew themselves Men and Subjects. But that hope proving more and more vain, so wretchedly stupid were the Londoners, they marched into Essex;They seize the Earl of War∣wick's Arms, and march to Colchester. and by the way, seized upon the Arms and Ammunition that then lay in the Earl of Warwick's House at Leez, (as then in open hostility against the
Prince) and so further into the County, until at last they setled in the Town of Colchester. Fairfax understanding of this Go-by, and their conjunction, having dispatcht away Colonel Rich and Colonel Barkstead with their Regiments, to reduce and free those Castles which the Kentish-men (as aforesaid) had taken, with all hast passed his Army over at Gravesend, to make the quicker pursuit after them, having underhand received recruits and supplies both of men and money from Skippon to re-inforce him, who every day privately listed men for the Service. At Colchester the Lord Capel,Lord Capel assists them with a party of Horse. (with some Horse of his own raising) met him: and a Troop of Veterane Royalists from London, who fought their way at Ep∣ping, with some Army-Horse, laid to obstruct all additions from the City by that Road, came also entire at the same time, just as the Van of Fairfax his Army was Skirmishing at the Towns-end where they so peppered the Enemy, that in great confusion he ran to the Body, having had an Essay what Sparks he had to deal with.Sir George Lisle Major-General of the Essex-Forces for the King. Colchester Siege. Sir George Lisle was made Major-General of the Essex-Forces, and the rest of the Army distributed into Regiments, and distinct Com∣mands, and had their posts and places assigned them. The Town was inconsiderable, either in it self, as being intenible and unde∣fensive, nothing but a Brest-work cast up about it; and as to the adjacent parts of the County, to receive any provisional relief or great Force into it; so that there was no hopes of setling or planting in it, for in all probability it was not thought possible to hold out a Month to an end; nevertheless, by their industry, courage, vigilance, and patience, it held out three compleatly, against a victo∣rious Enemy, recruited (as aforesaid) and assisted with the Forces of the Neigh∣bouring County of Suffolk, on whom deservedly the slaughter principally fell, for so basely engaging against (whom they had promised to joyn with) these Essex-Royalists. Several attempts were made by Fairfax to take the place by Force, and many Sallies were in requital made by the Besieged, who both in as∣sayling and defending did great Execution. From the beginning to the ending of the Siege scarce a day passed without actions from within, at first to fetch in Cattel, then to cut Grass, which was stained all over with Blood; for the Besieged would have it, who had now planted some Cannons upon St. Mary's-Steeple, whence they cruelly annoyed the Leaguer. Insomuch that Fairfax seeing the loss of his men, and the courage of the Defendants, gave over his re∣solution of Storming,The Lord Lu∣cas (Sir Charles his Brother) his House ruined. proceeding with his Approaches to begirt them close, and fortifying his Camp to starve them, and also to fire them out; which forced the Besieged to burn the Suburbs, that he intended for shelter; but he possest the Lord Lucas his House (Sir Charles his Brother) and ruined it. The provision they had in the Town (besides what they fought for and brought in afterwards) would not suffice for above a Month;The condition of the besieged. and all hopes were abandoned of getting in more; yet the courageous and generous suffer∣ance of these Loyal Souldiers, resolved to undergo all misery rather than yield▪ and so free the Army to march against the Scots, who were now entred Eng∣land upon the same account. Their main support was the sauce and relish to their meat, good store of Prunes and Plums with which the Town was stored, that did a little palate their Hors-flesh to them,They eat horse-flesh. which they were forced to kill and dress for their victuals, a good while before their Surrender; there was also some Corn, which Sir Charles charitably distributed among the Towns-folk, but the Souldiers borrowed it again in their extremity: in which we must leave these Noble Gentlemen, and take a view of other concurrent endeavours for the King and Kingdom. The Fleet which the Parliament had stollen,The Fleet comes in, and render themselves to the Prince, Ju∣ly 27. and debauched from their Duty by their first pretences, perceiving that indeed they were but such, and no more, repenting of their past service, did, to satisfie for their former offences, now turn sides, and rendred themselves to the Prince, now made Captain-General of His Fathers Forces.Their Comman∣der Col. Rains∣borough set on Shore. The Parliament had some inkling thereof, and therefore had Commissioned Colonel Rainsborough (a Sea-man formerly) to the Command
thereof, whom the Loyal Mariners fairly put on Shore, having posed him with this Question, of engaging for their Soverain; and at the same time their for∣mer Vice-Admiral,Vice-Admiral, afterwards Sir Will. Batten, brings more Ships to the Prince. Sir William Batten, now Knighted by the Prince, being dis∣banded by the Independent Rulers, as more honest than they would have him, brought some other Ships to His Majesties Obedience. With this Naval Force the Prince departed from Holland, and came into Yarmouth-Road, where it was deliberated, whether he should land, and attempt the Relief of Colchester. There were then in company with Him▪ His Illustrious Brother the Duke of York,The Prince in Yarmouth-Road with the Duke of York, Pr. Rupert, E. of Brain∣ford, Lord Hopton, Lord Wilmot, Lord Willoughby, &c. (who in April before had happily escaped from St. Iames's, (where he was kept by the Earl of Northumberland his Guardian) by the conduct of Colonel Bamfield, who was employed therein by the Queen; the Duke pretending to play in the dusk of the Evening, was disguised in Maiden-habit, and landed safely at Dort in Holland) Prince Rupert, the Earl of Brainford, the Lords Hopton, Wilmot, Willougbby, (who had deserted the Parliament, having been charged, imprisoned, and affronted by the Army) and Culpeper, and other Gentlemen; but understanding that Colonel Scroop was attending there∣about, they concluded it hazardous to venture the reputation of the Princes first Arms upon so well-appointed an Enemy, and thereupon weighed Anchor, and stood into the Downs. The Navy consisted of 20 Ships of War, most of the first and second Rate; the other Frigats, well manned and furnished, which anchoring neer the Mouth of the Thames, put the City into great fear; no Ships possibly going in or out without the Princes permission,The Prince takes a Ham∣borough-ship. Lord Rich Earl of War∣wick, Admi∣ral for the Par∣liament, order∣ed to set forth a Fleet. a Hamborough-bound Ship richly laden being seized on by him. In all haste thereore the Parliament order their old Admiral Robert Rich Earl of Warwick to Equip another Fleet then in the River, and to set to Sea; hoping by his Authority and influence to reclaim their Revolters; or if not, upon the coming of more Ships from Portsmouth (which accor∣dingly joyned with him) to fight the Prince. In pursuance of this Command, Warwick appears with his Fleet about Quinborough; but for all his former in∣dearedness to the Sea-men, and their affection his Masters confided in, he durst not engage,Earl of War∣wick at Quinbo∣rough, the Prince summons him. lest a total defection might have ensued: for the Mariners were grown sensible how Trade, and consequently Navigation was decayed by the long continuance of the War; and had more kindness besides for Batten, than they had for the Earl; which the Prince was sensible of, and therefore in civil terms, by a Message required him to submit, and bring in the Fleet under his Command,He refuseth. offering him those advantages, and so obligingly inviting him to such just ends and purposes, that of all the unhappinesses that befel that Noble∣man, (as there were many in his Family and Relations afterwards,) this his refu∣sal made the greatest breach of his Honour, as appeared to him not long after this, when he was ignominiously turned out as a dangerous person by his Ma∣sters, and saw his onely Brother murdered by their Hands. In the mean while of Warwick's preparation, the Prince, that he might not seem to be unactive, and to have done nothing worthy his adventure and pre∣sence, landed 500 men to the Relief of Sandwich, Walmer, and Deal-Castles, besieged as abovesaid. At Deal they were first opposed; and though they did as much as possible could be expected from men, yet were they finally vanquish∣ed by the unerring victorious hand of the Army-Forces; whereupon instantly ensued the rendition of those Castles; and the Prince, without any other effect than a perswasive Letter sent to the House of Lords for the obtaining of a Per∣sonal Treaty with his Father, which soon after ensued, set sail for Goree in Hol∣land,Prince Charles with the Fleet at Goree in Holland. where he Anchored his Ships: Warwick vauntingly following him, and demanding the States to thrust them out to Sea, according to the laws thereof; but the States were civiller and wiser: Prince Rupert therefore was constitu∣ted Admiral thereof,Pr. Rupert made Admiral. whose Navigation we shall in its place duely ob∣serve. To prosecute and advantage the same Royal Interest, another designe was laid in Surrey, where neer Kingston appeared some 500 men, under the Command
of the Earl of Holland,Earl of Hol∣land appears in Arms at Kingston, Ju∣ly 7. accompa∣nied by the D. of Bucking∣ham, the Lord Francis Vil∣liers, the young E. of Peterbo∣rough; the Ld. Petre, &c. Ty are atta∣qued by Sir Michael Live∣sy's Forces and other Parlia∣mentarias. Lord Fran∣cis Villiers slain. Earl of Holland flies into Hun∣tington-shire, and is taken by Col. Scroop. Col. Dalbier slain. Duke of Buckingham and E. of Pe∣terborough escape beyond Sea. Earl of Holland sent to Warwick-Castle. with the Duke of Buckingham▪ the Lord Francis Vil∣liers his Brother, the young Earl of Peterburgh, the Lord Petre, and others; but they no sooner rose, but Colonel Rich and Major Gibbons were upon the back of them, as they Rendzvouz'd between Ewel and Nonsuch-Park. Sir Michael Livesy joyned also with the other Parliament-Forces, and presently attaqued these upstarts, who had intended for Rygate, but were compelled to steer their course for Kingston; in the way whither, they were all along skirmished: for, to preserve their few Foot they had placed before, they were forced to march slowly. In one of those onsets, the nobly-spirited Lord Francis (being too far engaged by his metalsom courage) was taken Prisoner, and refusing Rebels quarter, was basely killed by a mean and rude hand; with whose fall fell the courage of all the other. For Holland having gotten the Town, gave the Foot opportunity to shift for themselves, and posted away with his Horse to St. Neots in Huntington-shire, where the next day he and his Party was surprized by Colonel Scroops Regiment of Horse, Colonel Dalbeir (formerly a great Par∣liamentarian) being slain in the defence of his quarters; the Duke of Buck∣ingham and the Earl of Peterborough escaped into Lincoln-shire, and so beyond Sea, leaving their Estates to satisfie for their offence; and the Earl of Holland was sent Prisoner to Warwick-Castle, where he continued till he was removed to his Tryal and his Death. To sum up all the disastrous events of this Second War, as it was called, (though the mention and hopeful concerns of Peace should orderly and of right intervne, a Personal Treaty being now Voted, of which presently) we must look Northwards, where, on the 13 of Iuly, the Scotch Army, after tedious debates and struglings with the Kirk and Presbyterian party of that Kingdom, entred England bringing with them a Declaration containing these five points. 1. That the King be forthwith brought to London to Treat in Person with the two Houses of Parliament. 2. That all those who had a hand in or contrived the car∣rying of the King away from Holdenby, be condignly punished. 3. That the Ar∣my be disbanded. 4. That Presbytery be setled. 5. That the Members of Parli∣ament who were forcibly secluded from the Houses,Scotch Army enters England uner command of Duke Hamil∣ton. may be reseated. (The third, first and last, being the very sense of the Essex, Surrey, Kent, and London Peti∣tions.) Of this Army Duke Hamilton (lately freed from his Imprisonment by the Kings Commitment at Pendennis-Castle) was made General; which when the King first understood,Colonel (after∣wards Earl of) Middleton Major-Gen. E. of Calendar Liet. Gen. Sir Marma∣duke (after∣wards Lord) Langdale, and Sir Philip Musgrave joyn Forces with them. he sadly and prophetically foretold the fatal Issue of that Expedition, reckoning him as an unfortunate, if not a self-ended person; as his Service in Germany in supply of the King of Sweden, and in favour of the Prince Elector Palatine, to the Ruine of many brave English Gentlemen, did evidently declare. Colonel Middleton, (afterwards Earl of Middleton, His Majesties High Commissioner of Scotland) was Major-General; and the Earl of Calender Lieutenant-General. It consisted of 15000 Horse and Foot effective, and was increased by an addition of 3000 English, under Sir Mar∣maduke (after Lord) Langdale, and Sir Philip Musgrave, antient Families in those parts, who had a while before surprized Carlile and Berwick, neer the same time that Major Morris surprized Pomfret-Castle (which Cromwel afterwards in his Northern march visited, and took the Town thereof) just upon the time of the Welch Insurrection. For the Honour of another brave person, we may not omit Colonel Wogan,Col. Wogan revolts from the Parliament. then a Captain in the Parliaments Army, who perceiving the wicked designes of his party, deserted them; and being sent to oppose, did joyn with this Scotch Army, before their advance into England, bringing a gallant Troop along with him. He afterwards did the King eminent service in Scotland and Ireland, of which hereafter. This entire strength wandering by the way of Westmer∣land and Cumberland, (which affords a pleasant passage, wherewith the Reader may be diverted; one Colonel Stuart who was in this Expedition, being after∣wards set on the Stool of Repentance by the Kirk, with others in the same En∣gagement, and being asked gravely and severely by the Minister, whether he
was not convinced that by his Malignancy he went out of the way,Col. Stuart's saying on the Stool of Re∣pentance. suddenly replied, Yea, for we went a wrong through Westmerland, &c. when we should have marcht for York, and so to London)▪ an ominous presage (besides the unluckiness of the General) of their overthrow,Major-General Lambert oppo∣seth Sir Mar∣maduke Lang∣dale, but forced to retreat. none of their Armies thriv∣ing that came that Road. Major-General Lambert made the first opposition, but was beaten by the English, and forced back to Appleby, and so to a further retreat, (Sir Marmaduke taking in some small places of strength by the way) until he joyned with Cromwel now come from Wales, to whom the chiefty of that service was committed:Cromwel joyns with Lambert. his whole strength amounting to 11000, most of them Horse and Dragoons. Preston-Fight August. 17.At Preston in Lancashire both Armies faced one another; and some two miles thence, on a Moor, on the East-side of the Town, engaged: the brunt of the fight continued but two hours; nor had it endured so long, but through the valour of the English Royalists, on whom the stress lay. The Scots Army was so ill ordered, that they came not all to the Fight, nor could relieve one another; so that a general Rout ensued; one part flying towards Lanca∣ster, who were pursued by Col. Twisleton and Thonhills Regiments of Horse; and the other over Ribley-River, whom the Body of the Army ollowed: most of their Foot, under Major-General Baily, came that night to Wigan, fighting and crying Quarter in the Rear; and the next day to Warrington-Bridge, where in their way, at a place called Red-bank, in a narrow lane, they made a stand with a Body of Pikes, and lined the Hedges with Muskets, who so rudely enter∣tained the pursuing Enemy, that they were compelled to stop (having lost abun∣dance of men, and Col. Thornhill himself) until the coming up of Col. Pride's Regiment of Foot, who after a sharp dispute put those brave Fellows to the run:The Scots de∣feated. they were Commanded by a little Spark in a blew Bonnet, that perform∣ed the part of an excellent Commander, and was killed on the place. After this, they never turned Head, but ran, crying, Mercy, Mercy, (so that the noise thereof was heard at 5 Miles distance) until they came to Warrington-Bridge, where Baily made Conditions for Quarter, and rendred himself and 4000 of them Prisoners.Major-General Middleton ta∣ken. Duke Hamil∣ton flies. Middleton was likewise taken with 400 Horse in his flight homeward; Hamilton fled first to Namptwich with 3000 Horse, where the Coun∣try-people surprized 500 of them; and thence in haste to Vttoxeter in Stafford∣shire, where he yielded himself to the Lord Gray of Grooby, and Col. Wayt, who were ready to encounter him;Is taken by the Lord Gray of Grooby. and was thence brought prisoner to Ashby de la Zouch, where he was kept in great state, and courted by those the Grandees ap∣pointed to attend him, on purpose to cajole and fish out what Great Oues, Members of both Houses, the City, and Clergy, had a hand in his undertaking; it being more than suspected that he had such Invitation. But the unhappy man was yet so fortunate to others, as to reveal little or nothing to their prejudice, re∣serving his thoughts till the last extremity, for his ransom; but he overstood the Market. To save the Reader the trouble of particulars, he may know, that all that ever belonged to that Army was taken, the Scots that escaped (which were but few) hardly carrying a Sword home with them: such as got home, happe∣ned to light upon Monro,Monro coming to assist Ha∣milton, but re∣turns. who was marching after Hamilton with a Reserve; and upon news of this defeat, hasted back again into Scotland, having intelli∣gence that Cromwel was marching towards him. Cromwel marches into Scotland.Who to compleat his Successes and Designes together, thought it expedient to make sure of a party in Scotland, that should keep all things quiet there, while he should accomplish his intended mischief here, and under the notion of God∣liness, and the Godly Party, should amuse and cheat one another, to the helping and bringing about his most ungodly Conspiracie. To this purpose he marched into Scotland, complementing the Kirk-men with the civility of his Journey to secure and settle them, in return of their kindness to the Parliament in 1643. who cawed him again, and congratulated his Victory in Scripture-Language, who was no way behind them in those hypocritical Cantings. He was likewise sumptuously feasted by Argyle and others of that Party;He is feasted by Argyle. and
lastly,His policie in diamin and disbanding the Scots Forces. by the Committee of Estates, of whom he required and obtained, that all the Armies both of Monro and Lanerick, who yet stood out, and Argyle's in oppo∣sition to them, should be disbanded (Berwick and Carlisle being already delivered to him) that so there might be none in readiness to hinder his resolutions. Secondly, that a new Parliament be called▪ And thirdly, that none should be elected to sit and Vote there,Sir Matthew Boynton Go∣vernor of Scar∣brough for the King. Major Lilburn seizeth Tin∣mouth-Castle for the King. It is resurpri∣zed for the Par∣liament. The Castle stor∣med, Lilburn▪ and the Soul∣diers put to the Sword. or in the General Assembly, that had any hand in the late Invasion under Hamilton. And so, after many high expressions of their thankful resentments and obligations for his meritorious service, took his leave of them, and return'd into England; being, as he passed through York-shire with his Forces, desired by that Committee to assist them in the reducing of Scar∣borough, some while before declared for the King. Sir Matthew Boynton (the former Governour) returning to his Allegeance, and securing the Town on that score. Tinmouth-Castle was likewise seized on for the King by Major Lilburn, one of (that famous) Iohn Lilburn's Brothers, who only seriously repented of his disloyalty, and would have made satisfaction, to the redemption of his Fami∣lies and his own Honour, but was presently, and before he had time to fortifie and prepare for defence, set upon by Forces sent by Sir Arthur Haslerig from Newcastle, who stormed the Castle and carried it, putting the Souldiers and Lil∣burn himself to the Sword. Return we now to the distressed and starved Colchester, where the Defendants had eaten up most of their Horses, in expectation of relief from the Scotch Ar∣my, being encouraged to hold out by Letters from the Lord Langdale of their Armies speedy advance to their succour. But understanding by information from the Enemy without, that that Army was totally defeated, these unfortunate Heroical Royalists were forced to bethink themselves of a Surrender; which Fairfax would now accept upon no other terms (after much debate by Trea∣ty) than the Common Souldiers to quarter for life, and the Officers to mercy. These hard Terms were disputed within, and were at the first generously scorn∣ed; and thereupon a resolution was taken, seconded with a Protestation, where∣by they engaged one to another, by the assistance of God, to break through the Enemy on Friday night the 23 of August: but through the dissatisfaction or personal consideration of some of the Grandees, this noble Designe was hinder∣ed, and the Souldiers by the delay and after-consultation of it (it being respited a day longer) being enjealoused as if the Officers would leave the Foot in the action, and shift for themselves (and it was impossible to attempt their Line without Foot and Pioneers) they were forced to accept of the former Conditi∣ons;Colchester surrendred Au∣gust 28. on hard terms. and accordingly August the 28th they rendred themselves, a sad spectacle to all, but that barbarous and insulting Enemy, who presently stript them of all they had left comfortable, their Money and Apparel. Within two hours after the surrender,Sir Charles Lucas and Sir George Lisle shot to death Aug. 28. Col. Ireton was sent to the Inne where all the Officers were put, to acquaint Sir Charles Lucas, Sir George Lisle, and Sir Bernard Gascoyn, that by a doom of the Council of War they were sentenced to be shot to death within three hours, and that they should prepare themselves ac∣cordingly. They all of them undauntedly received this sad Message; Sir Charles only desiring some little time longer to prepare himself, both in refe∣rence to his peace with God, and concerns of his Relations; which he said he asked not for fear of death, or in hope of life, which he would not value from their hands. But this was refused by Ireton, who, on purpose to make the Ge∣neral odious, then the only impediment to his Father-in-Law's Greatness (which was afterwards removed by a more innocent wile) had urged him to this murder. Seven a Clock at night was the appointed time; to prepare them against which, Ireton proffered the Generals Chaplain; but him they refused, the Lord Capel's being desired to assist them in this last duty to God and Nature. Accordingly they were brought unto the place of Execution (Sir Bernard Gascoyn being upon more humane consideration as a Stranger reprieved) where after two or three ejaculations,Sir Bernard Gascoyn sen∣tenced to be shot to death, but reprieved. Sir Charles tearing open his Doublet, and crying, Shoot Rebels, was presently dispatched. Sir George seeing him fall,
ran to him, and fell upon his Face, and kissed him, saying, Oh how soon hath a brave Soul expired! but I shall not stay long behind thee; my death at hand shall joyn us both together again. And then standing up in a most heroical po∣sture, drawing out of his Pocket five pieces of Gold, four whereof he sent to four Friends, the other he gave to his Executioners; and looking round about him, saying, Oh how many do I see here, whom I have saved i but blood, and must mine now be shed in cold! sure such barbarity is not a∣mong the Scythians! He likewise then opened his Doublet, and with the In∣vocation of the Name of Jesus, and bidding the Rebels shoot and do their worst, was likewise shoot dead and both their Bodies interred in the Vault where Sir Charles his Family were laid: where those impious wretches, the Common Souldiers, (as they were bid, and to fit them for succeeding Barba∣risms) did violate those Honourable Reliques, by taking the Hair from the Scalps; so extending their malice beyond his death, even to his deceased An∣cestors. This odious Fact (for which the Sufferers Memories, and the due Renown of their Virtue and Valour shall flourish, and the Names of those blood-thirsty men that perpetrated and counselled it, shall stink and rot) was most highly resented: For it was very obvious, that it was done on purpose to ex∣asperate and grieve the King, with whom at the same time the Parliament had Voted (and were proceeding in) a Treaty; of which we come next to speak: leaving these two Heroes to a resuscitation of their Glories, being without any partiality of affection declared by those that knew them, one of them the best for Horse-service, and the other for Infantry, that ever Commanded in their quality in the Kings Armies. The Londo∣ners continue Neuters.During all these several warlike endeavours for the Kings Restitution, the City of London, as was said before, kept it self in a kind of Neutrality, vainly expecting to accomplish those ends which had been so powerfully prosecuted by the Loyal Sword, by the peaceful Subscriptions of the Pen to a Petition for a Personal Treaty. But indeed the appearance of so many dangers to the Par∣liament, gave them hopes that they would begin to consider, if not of Peace to the Kingdom, yet of safety to themselves, if any one of those Loyal Es∣says should have taken effect: Nor were they deceived therein; but they did not cast this consideration far enough, nor did they manage it rightly. For they might have fore-thought of the Armies prevailing success, and consequently of the variation and different course of their intentions to the Publique, and should have therefore kept the balance even between the Royalists (whose Revenge upon Victory they pretended to fear) and the insolent Sectarian Host, who not long after requited them for their looking on, by the most impudent outrages upon their Charter; excluding all men from any place of Trust, or Vote, or Benefit of a Vote, that signed to this Personal Treaty, which upon their unanimous Address they obtained of the Parliament,A Personal Treaty voted▪ Jun. 30. who to methodize and open the way thereto, proceeded as followeth. Seeing themselves thus compelled into this Affair, and that their former Re∣solves of Non-address had so quickly altered the Scene, with the Hypocriti∣cal Repentance of the Army at the very same time (for their former sawcie intermedings with them, or Civil Affairs) they fain and imitate likewise the better part of Penitence, by a pretended Restitution, beginning at the right place, first, b these ensuing Nullities (as indeed at last they proved) Resolves or Dissolves, chuse you whether. I have thought fit to deliver the whole Treaty entire, without any intercur∣rencie of other State-affairs, it being of the main and sole concernment.
The Votes for a Treaty. Die Veneris July 28. 1648. Resolved, That a Treaty be had with the King in Person in the Isle of Wight,Resolves, That a Perso∣nal Treaty with the King be held at the Isl of Wight. by a Committee appointed by both Houses, upon the Propositions presented to him at Hampton-Court, and the taking away of Wards ad Liries, and for setling of afe and well-grounded Peace. Which was followed Wednesday the 2 of Au∣ with this other: Resolved, That a Committee of both Houses be sent to his Majesty,That a Com∣mittee be sent to his Majesty to acquaint him therewithal. to acquaint him with their Resolutions to Treat Personally with his Majesty by a Committee of both Houses, in such place as his Majesty shall make choice of in the Isle of Wight, upon . Propositions presented at Hampton-Court, &c. which Treaty is Resolved by the two Houses to be transacted with Hnour, Freedom, and safety to his Majesty in the Isle of Wight. And accordingly Instructions were given to the Earl of Middlesex,Earl of Mid∣dlesex, Sir Io. Hippeley, and John Bulkley Esq. delegated  the Parlia∣ment to attend on the King. Sir Iohn Hippesley and Iohn Bulkley Esquire, delegated to attend upon the King, what they should say to, or receive from his Majesty. At their arrival, the King shewed himself gladded with the good news brought, and received them very affectionately, and forwith applied himself to an answer to the Parliament, as they had desired, in haec verba. CHARLES REX. IF the Peace of my Dominions were not much dearer to me than any particular Interest whatsoever,His Majesties Answer to the two Houses of Parliament. I had too much reason to take no∣tice of the several Votes which passed against me, and the sad condi∣tion I have been in now above these seven Months. But since you my two Houses of Parliament have opened (as it seems to me) a fair beginning to a happy Peace, I shall heartily apply my self thereunto; and to that end,The King chearfully em∣braceth the overtes of Peace. I will as clearly, and as shortly as I may, set you down those things which I conceive necessary to this blessed work, so that we to∣gether may remove all Impediments that may hinder a happy Conclu∣sion of this Treaty, which with all chearfulness I do embrace. And to this end, you your selves have laid most excellent grounds: For what can I reasonably expect more, than to Treat with Honour, Freedom, and Safety, upon such Propositions as you have, or shall pre∣sent unto me, and such as I shall make unto you? But withal remem∣ber, it is the definition, not names of things, which makes them righly known; and that without means to perform, no Propositions can take effect. And truly my present condition is such, that I can no more Treat,Demands of the Parliament to recal those Votes and Or∣ders by which his Subjects are frighted from coming or sending to him. than a blind man can judge of colours, or he run a race who hath both his Feet fast tied together; wherefore my first ne∣cessary demand is, That you will recall all such Votes and Orders, by which people are frighted from coming, writing, or speaking freely to me. Next, that such men of all Professions whom I shall send for, as of necessary use to me in this Treaty, may be admitted to wait upon me. In a word, that I may be in the same state of Freedom I was in when I was last at Hampton-Court.That all men of necessary Pro∣fessions be ad∣mitted to come to him. And indeed, less cannot in any reasonable measure make good those offers which you have made
me by your Votes. For how can I Treat with Honour, so long as peo∣ple are terrified with Votes and Orders against coming to speak or write to me? And am I honourably Treated, so long as there is none about me (except a Barber who came now with the Commissioners) that ever I named to wait upon me? Or with Freedom, until I may call such to me of whose service I shall have use in so great and difficult a work?Note, That His Majesty had suf∣fered his Beard to overgrow in that solitary restraint of near se∣ven Months; so that Compassion wooed, where Majesty once aw∣ed. And for Safety (I speak not of my Person, having no appre∣hension that way) how can I judge to make a safe and well-grounded Peace, until I may know (without dis∣guise) the true present state of all my Dominions, and particularly of all those, whose Interests are necessarily concerned in the Peace of the Kingdoms? Which leads me naturally to the last necessary demand I shall make for the bringing this Treaty to an happy end; which is, That the Scots may be invited to send their Propositions.That you alone, or you and I joyntly, do invite the Scots to send some persons authorized by them, to treat upon such Propositions as they shall make. For certainly the Publique and Necessary Interest they have in this great Settlement, is so clearly plain to all the world, that I believe no body will deny the necessity of their concurrence, in order to a durable Peace.The King de∣claring a ten∣dr affection for both his Kingdoms. Wherefore I will only say, that as I am a King of both Nations, so will I yield to none in either Kingdom, for being truly and zealously affected for the Good and Honour of both; my resolution being never to be partial for either, to the prejudice of the other. The King ap∣points New∣port for the place of Treaty.Now, as to the place (because I conceive it to be rather a circum∣stantial, than a real part of this Treaty, I shall not much insist upon it) I name Newport in this Isle; yet the fervent zeal I have that a speedy end be put to these unhappy distractions, doth force me ear∣nestly to desire you to consider, what a great loss of time it will be, to Treat so far from the Body of my two Houses, when every small De∣bate (of which doubtless there will be many) must be transmitted to Westminster,But urgeth the reconveniencies of Treating so far from Lon∣don▪ before they be concluded. And really, I think (though to some it may seem a Paradox) that peoples minds will be much more apt to settle, seeing me Treat in or near London, than in the Isle, because, so long as I am here, it will never be believed by many, that I am really so free, as before this Treaty begin I expect to be. And so I leave, and recommend this Point to your serious considera∣tion. And thus I have not only fully accepted of the Treaty which you have propounded to me by the Votes of the 3 of this Month, but also given it all the furtherance that lies in me, by demanding the neces∣sary means for the effectual performance thereof. All which are so necessarily implied by, though not particularly mentioned in the Votes, that I can no way doubt of your ready compliance with me herein.His Majesty  the Delegates to expedite the Treaty by dis∣patching their Commissioners. I have now no more to say, but to conjure you by all that is dear to Chri∣stians, Honest Men, or good Patriots, that you will make all the expedi∣tion possible to begin this happy Work, by hasting down your Commis∣sioners, fully authorized, and well instructed, and by enabling me (as I have shewed you) to Treat; Praying the God of Peace so to bless our
endeavours, that all my Dominions may speedily enjoy a safe and well-grounded Peace. Carisbroke, Aug. 10. All which desires of the King were assented to,The Parliament appoint Com∣missioners, five Lords, ten Commoners. to their full intent and pur∣pose; and five Lords and ten Commoners appointed Commissioners for the Treaty, whose names were as followeth: The Earls of Northumberland, Pem∣broke, Salisbury, Middlesex, and Lord Viscount Say: The Lord Wenman, Mr. Denzil Hollis, Mr. William Pierpoint, Sir Henry Vane Junior, Sir Harbottle Grim∣stone, Mr. Samuel Brown, Sir Iohn Potts, Mr. Crew, Serjeant Glyn, and Mr. Bulk∣ley. The Treaty to begin ten days after the Kings Assent to Treat as is agreed, and to continue from thence forty days.And desire his Majesties Roy∣al Word for his continuance in the Island till 20 days after the Treaty. Resolved likewise, That His Majesty be desired to Pass his Royal Word to make his constant Residence in the Isle of Wight, from the time of his Assenting to Treat, until twenty days after the Treaty be end∣ed, unless it be otherwise desired by both Houses of Parliament; and that after His Royal Word so Passed, and his Assent given to Treat as aforesaid, from thenceforth the former Instructions of the 16 of Nov. 1647. be vacated, and these observed; and that Col. Hammond be authorized to receive His Majesties Royal Word Passed to his two Houses of Parliament for his Residence in the Isle of Wight accordingly, as is formerly exprest,Their Votes of Non-address re∣pealed. and shall certifie the same to both Houses. They likewise Re∣pealed the Votes of Non-address, and desired a List from his Majesty of those he would have to attend him. Whereupon the King by his Message of the 28 of August (not being in the former limitation) accepted of the Treaty,His Majesty sends the Par∣liament a List of such Persons he desired might attend him. desi∣ring the expediting of the Commissioners; and sent them a List of those per∣sons he desired to be with him. First, for the Journey into Scotland, he desired a Pass for Mr. Parsons, one of the Grooms of his Presence-Chamber: next, the Duke of Richmond, Marquess Hartford, Earl of Lindsey, Earl of Southampton, Gentlemen of his Bed-chamber; Mr. Kirk, Mr. Leviston, Mr. Murray, Mr. Iohn Ashburnham, Mr. Legg, Grooms of his said Bed-chamber; Mr. Hen, Mr. Rogers, Mr. Lovet, Pages of his Back-stairs; Sir Fulk Grevil, Captain Titus, Captain Burroughs, Mr. Cresset, Abr. Dowset, Firebrace, to wait as they did, or as he should appoint them: The Bishops of London and Salisbury, Drs Shelden, Ham∣mond, Oldsworth, Sanderson, Turner, Heywood, Chaplains; Davis his Barber, Rives Yeoman of the Robes; Sir Edward Sidenham, Mr. Terwhit, Hunsdon, Es∣quires; Mrs Wheeler Landress; Sir Thomas Gardiner, Sir Orlando Bridgeman, Sir Robert Holbourn, Mr. Ieffrey Palmer, Mr. Thomas Cook, Mr. Iohn Vaughan, Lawyers; Sir Edward Walker, Mr. Philip Warwick, Mr. Nicholas Oudart, Mr. Charles Whitaker, Clerks and Writers; Mr. Clement Kinnersley, and Mr. Peter Newton, to make ready the House for Treaty. To which, at the Kings request, were after added for the Civil Law, the Kings Advocate, Dr. Rives, Dr. Duck; and these Divines, the Bishops of Armagh, Exeter, Rochester, and Worcester; Dr. Ferne, and Dr. Morley. The Treaty began the 18th of September;The Treaty be∣gan Sept. 18. which the King so prudentially managed single against all the Commissioners (none of his Party being suffered to assist him at the Conferences) that there appeared some hopes of a right un∣derstanding. The Propositions concerning Religion took up the longest time, both in discourse and writing, whereby he fully evinced the right of Episcopa∣cie: which his Answers, with his Majesties Propositions on the 2 of Octob. be∣ing sent up to the Parliament, notwithstanding produced these Votes. Resolved by the Lords and Commons,The Parliament dissatisfied with the Kings Propositions. They send thanks to their Commissioners. &c. That they are not satisfied in the Pro∣positions made by his Majesty in his Letter; and that a Letter be sent to the Com∣missioners in the Isle of Wight, to acquaint them that the Houses do well approve of their proceedings, and do give them thanks, &c. requiring them still to proceed punctually according to their Instructions.
His Majesties Propositions. He is willing to confess himself Author of the War, rather than the Peace shall be frustra∣ted. That the As∣sembly of Di∣vines shall sit at Westmin∣ster 3 years. That the Dire∣ctory shall be confirmed for 3 years, &c.The Sum of His Majesties Propositions was this: He expressed his Consent to the Proemial or first Proposition, of acknowledging his beginning the War, that he might not by denying it be refused Peace; but that his Consent not to be valid till all was concluded in the Treaty. Concerning the Church, he will Consent that the Calling and Sitting of the Assembly of Divines at West∣minster be confirmed for three years by Act of Parliament; and will by Act of Par∣liament confirm likewise the Directory for 3 years in England, Ireland, and Wales, and the Form of Government by Presbyters for the same term. Provided that his Ma∣jesty, and those of his judgment, and others, who cannot in Conscience submit thereunto, he not obliged to comply with it. And that a free Consultation may be had with the Assembly of Divines in the mean time, twenty of his Majesties nomination being ad∣ded to them; whereby it may be determined how after the said term (by his Majesty and the Parliament) the said Church Government and Publique Worship may be setled; and the Articles of Christian Religion (now delivered him) may then be considered of, and care taken for tender Consciences. That Legal E∣states for Lives or Years shall be made of Bi∣shops-lands, Provided the Propriety re∣main in the Church.Concerning the Bishops Lands and Revenues, and to the Contracts and Purcha∣ses of them; His Majesty will Consent to an Act or Acts of Parliament for their sa∣tisfaction, whereby the Legal Estates for Lives or for Years (at their choice) not ex∣ceeding ninety nine years, shall be made of those Lands, at the old or some more mo∣derate rents; which if it will not satisfie, his Majesty will propound and consent to some other way: Provided that the Propriety and Inheritance of those Lands do still remain in the Church, according to the pious intentions of the Donors; and the rest that shall be reserved to be for their maintenance. That there be a Reformation, and concerning Papists.His Majesty will give Consent for a Reformation, viz. Observation of the Lords-day, and such other things in these their Propositions as they have desired, as also Consents to those Propositions against Papists. But as to the Thrust in by some rigid Presbyterians, and maintained there by the Independants, be∣cause they knew the King would never As∣sent to it, and so no Conclusion. Covenant, his Majesty is not therein satisfied that he can either Signe or Swear it, or Consent to impose it on the Consciences of others; nor conceives it proper or useful at this time to be insisted on. That the two Houses shall dispose of the Militia for 10 years, or du∣ring his Reign.Touching the Militia, his Majesty conceives that their Propositions demand a far larger Power over the persons of his Subjects, than hath ever hitherto been warranted by the Laws and Statutes of the Realm: yet considering the present distractions re∣quire more, and trusting in his two Houses of Parliament, that they will not abuse the Power hereby granted; his Majesty will consent to an Act of Parliament, wherein it shall be declared, That for the space of ten years, or during his Maje∣sties whole Reign, if they shall think it more satisfactory, the two Houses shall have the sole disposal of the Militia, and raise Mony, as in their Propositions: And that neither the King, his Heirs or Successors, or any other, but such as shall act by the Authority or Approbation of the Lords and Commons, shall during the space of ten years exercise any of the Powers aforesaid; nor after that term, without the Advice of the Lords and Commons. And Consents to the entrusting the Militia into the Cities hands, according to their Propositions: Provi∣ded, That all Patents, Commissions, and other Acts concerning the Premises, be made and acted in his Majesties Name,That the affairs of Ireland be determined by the Parliam. by Warrant signified by the Lords and Com∣mons, or such other as they shall authorize for that purpose. Touching Ireland, his Majesty leaves it to the Determination of his two Houses, and will give his Consent as is herein hereafter expressed. That Taxes he levied for the payment of the Army and pub∣like Debts.Touching Publick Debts, his Majesty will give his Consent to such an Act for rai∣sing of Monies, by general and equal Taxations, for the payment and satisfying the Arrears of the Army, and Publique Engagementss of the Kingdom, as shall be a∣greed on by both Houses of Parliament, and shall be ordered by them, or their ap∣pointment, within the space of one year after passing an Act for the same. That all the Chief Officers of State shall be nominated by the Parl. for 10 years.His Majesty will give Consent that all the Great Officers of State, and Iudges, for the said term of ten years, be nominated by the Parliament, to continue quam∣diu se bene gesserint; and in the intervals of Parliament, to be nominated by such as they shall authorize.
His Majesty will Consent,That the Mili∣tia of the City of London & Liberties, for ten years may be in the Lord Mayor, Alder∣men, Common-Council and Sheriffs there∣of. With the Tower and Chief Offi∣cers thereof. That the Militia of the City, and Liberties thereof, during the space of ten years, may be in the ordering and Government of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common-Council assembled, or such as they shall appoint; whereof the Lord Major, and the Sheriffs for the time being, to be three; to be em∣ployed and directed from time to time by the Parliament: And that no Citizen shall be drawn forth into the Field, without his own consent. And an Act be passed for granting and confirming the Charters, Customs, &c thereof: And that during the said ten years, the Tower of London may be in the Government of the City of Lon∣don; and the Chief Officers thereof, during the said space, to be nominated and re∣moveable by the Common-Council, as was desired in the Propositions. His Majesty having thus far expressed his Consent for the present satisfaction and securing of his two Houses of Parliament, and those that have adhered unto them, touching the four first Propositions, and other the particulars before-specified; as to all the rest of the Propositions delivered to him at Hampton-Court (not referring to those eads) and to that of the Court of Wards since delivered; as also, to the remain∣ing Propositions concerning Ireland, His Majesty desires only when he shall come to Westminster, personally to advise with his two Houses, and to deliver his Opinion and Reasons of it: which being done, he will leave the whole matter of those re∣maining Propositions to the determination of his two Houses, which shall prevail with him for his Consent accordingly. And his Majesty doth (for his own particular) only propose,His Majesty proposeth his li∣berty to repair to Westmin∣ster, and to be restored to his Revenues. Proffereth an Act of Oblivi∣on to all per∣sons. that he may have liberty to repair forthwith to Westminster, and be restored to a condition of abso∣lute Freedom and Safety (a thing which he shall never deny to any of his Subjects) and to the possession of his Lands and Revenues; and that an Act of Oblivion and Indemnity may pass, to extend to all persons, for all matters relating to the late un∣happy differences: which being agreed by his two Houses of Parliament, his Ma∣jesty will be ready to make these his Concessions binding, by giving them the force of Laws by his Royal assent. Though these Condescentions (nor indeed if they had been to the very let∣ter of the Propositions would they have been satisfactory) did not at present sute the high and imperious humour of the Parliament;The Parliament imperious. Most of their Commissioners dutiful in their behaviour to∣wards the King. yet by the good tempe∣rament and respectful behaviour of the major part of the Commissioners, such a mutual confidence was wrought, that the King won with their dutiful per∣swasion, did in most of those things (besides Religion and Church-lands) com∣ply with their demands; and then the Parliament upon debate of the whole Treaty, Voted his Concessions a ground to settle the Kingdom: of which pre∣sently. But a little before the conclusion of the Treaty, which hapned on the 27th of Nov. the Army (Cromwel being now come out of Scotland) had after a long Consultation how to break it off,The Army's Re∣monstrance at St. Albans. hammered out a villanous Remonstrance on the 16th of that Month, at St. Albans; and on the 28th presented it to the House of Commons by Col. Ewers (related to the Lord Ewers) and seven Offi∣cers more: the Treasonable and Execrable Heads thereof (setting aside that Principle, That the Magistery of the People is Supreme) were as followeth: First,The villanous heads thereof. That the King be brought to Iustice. That the Capital and Grand Author of our Troubles, viz. the Person of the King, by whose procurement, and for whose Interest of Will and Power all our Wars have been, may be brought to Iustice, for the Treason, Blood, and Mischief he is therein guilty of. Secondly,That the Prince of Wales and Duke of York render them∣selves by a cer∣tain day, or be proclaimed Traytors. That a Timely Day may be set for the Prince of Wales and the Duke of York to come in; by which time, if they do not, that then they may immediately be declared incapable of any Trust or Government in this Kingdom, or its Domini∣ons, and thence to stand exiled for ever, as Enemies or Traytors, to die without mer∣cy if ever after found or taken therein, &c. If by the time limited they do render themselves, that then the Prince be proceeded with as on appearance he shall give sa∣tisfaction or not; and then the Duke as he shall give satisfaction, may be considered
as to future Trust or not.That the Reve∣nue of the Crown be se∣questred. But however, that the Revenue of the Crown (saving necessary allowances for the Children, and for Servants and Creditors to the Crown) be Sequestred, and the costly pomp suspended, for a good number of years; and that this Revenue be for that time disposed toward Publike Charges, Debts, and Dama∣ges, for the easing of the people; so as the Estates neither of Friends to publique In∣terest, nor alone of inferior Enemies thereunto, may bear the whole burthen of that loss and charge, which by and for that Family the Kingdom hath been put un∣to. That Capital punishments be inflicted on some Chief In∣struments in the Wars.Thirdly, That Capital punishment be speedily Executed upon a competent num∣ber of his Chief Instruments also, both in former and later Wars; and that some of both sorts be pitcht upon, as are really in your hands or reach. Fourthly, That the rest of the Delinquents, English, may upon rendring them∣selves to Iustice, have mercy for their lives, and that only Fines be set upon them; and their persons declared incapable of any Publique Trust,That all De∣linqents come in by a certain day, or their Estates be con∣fiscated, and they to die without mercy. or having any voice in Elections thereto, at least for a good number of years: And that a short day may be set by which all such Delinquents may come in: and for those who come not in by that day, that their Estates be absolutely Confiscated and sold to the Publike use, and their Persons stand Exiled as Traytors, and to die without mercy, if ever after found in the Kingdom or its Dominions. That Fines, Compositions, and Confisca∣tions be dispo∣sed for the pay∣ment of the Souldiery.Fifthly, That the satisfaction of Arrears to the Souldiery, with other publike Debts, and competent reparations of publique Damages, may be put into some or∣derly way: And that therefore the Fines and Compositions of Delinquents be dis∣posed to those uses only, as also the Confiscations of such who shall be excluded from Pardon, or not come in by the day assigned. Now after Publique Iustice thus provided for, we proceed in order to the general satisfaction and Settlement of the Kingdom. That the Par∣liament set some period to their own Power.First, That you would set some reasonable and certain period to your own Power. Secondly, That with a period to this Parliament, that there may be a Settle∣ment of the Peace and future Government of the Kingdom. And in order thereto, First, That there may be a certain Succession of future Parliaments, Annual or Biennial,That the future Government of of the King∣dom may be setled. with secure provision, 1. For the certainty of their Sitting, Meeting, and Ending. 2. For equal Elections. 3. For the Peoples meeting to Elect: Pro∣vided that none engaged in War against the Kingdom, may Elect or be Elected, nor any other who oppose this Settlement. 4. For clearing the power of Parlia∣ments as Supreme; only they may not give away any Foundation of Common Right. 5. For liberty of Entring Dissents in the said Representatives, that the people may know who are fit for future Trusts; but without any penalty for their free Iudgments. That no King be hereafter admitted, but upon Election.Thirdly, That no King be hereafter admitted, but upon Election of, and as upon Trust from the people by such their Representatives; nor without first disclaiming all pretence to a Negative Voice against the Determinations of the Commons in Parliament: and this to be done in some Form more clear, than heretofore in the Co∣ronation-Oath. And he to ac∣cord to these Propositions as they shall be e∣stablished by the Agreement of the people.These Matters of General Settlement, we propound to be provided by the Autho∣rity of the Commons in this Parliament; and to be further Established by a general Contract or Agreement of the people, with their Subscriptions thereunto: And that no King be admitted to the Crown, nor other person to any Office of publique Trust, without express Accord and Subscription to the same. This was the Basis, Method, and Model of Cromwels Tyranny; and though he had changed his pretences, according to the exigences of time and occasi∣ons, yet he was fixed here, as having learnt from Matchiavel,Something near the same stuff, except what toucht the King, was Signed by nine Regiments of Horse, and seven of Foot, and afterward promoted in London by Lieutenant-Colonel Lilburne, and Mr. Prince, by Petition to the Parliament, who condemned both, Novemb. 1647. and yet the same Moneth next year it revived. that there is no readier way to an U∣surpation, than by destroying the Fundamental Laws and Essentials of Government, and propo∣sing pleasing Innovations to the Vulgar. This he drove at in his possessed Servants the Levellers,
whom he put on to divulge this new secret of Empire;The Levellers set on by Cromwel to prosecute this designe. but they thundering of it out (and to try its acceptance) as the rain in unseasonable weather, he was content to abandon them to a shower of Bullets, influenced on one of his prime Botefeus, by the Command of the Parliament to the General, as before∣said, in 1647 at Ware. For observe the trace of his Policie after this Critical Juncture, when he had superated all difficulties, and removed all obstacles; and you shall see how sequaciously he copied these Articles of Agreement (as they were called) of the people. First, Destroy the King as a Tyrant, then exclude the Royal Progeny, then disa∣ble its potent Friends, and ingratiate with the mean. Next, Gratifie and engage the Souldiers with promise of Arrears and Establishment. Then the next subse∣quent great work is the dissolution of the Parliament; then a Chimaera of Govern∣ment, such as Barebones Convention: And lastly, A pretended Elective Tyranny, under the Style of Protector; which his impiety afforded him not only to sub∣scribe, but to swear to. The ill news of this pestilent Paper flew amain to the Isle of Wight, where the King surprised with this monstrous disloyalty, at the reading of it to him at Newport, propounded these Queries. 1. Whether this Remonstrance be agreeable to the formr Declarations of the Ar∣my?The Kings Queries to the Remonstrance. and if not Whether the Parliament would maze good their Votes, that after he had consented to what they desired, he should be in a capacity of Honour, Free∣dom, and Safety? 2. Whether his acknowledgment of the Blood that hath been spilt in the late Wars (nothing being as yet absolutely concluding or binding) could be urged so far, as to be made use of by way of evidence against him, or any of his party? 3. Whether the Arguments that he hath used in a free and personal Treaty, to lessen, or extenuate, and avoid the exactness of the Conditions, though in manner and form only, might be charged against him as an act of obstinacie, or wilful persistence in what is alledged against him, in that he goes on in a destructive course, and enmity against the People and Laws of the Land; when he hath declared, that his Consci∣ence was satisfied concerning divers partiulars in the Propositions? 4. Whereas by the Letter of the Law, all persons charged to offend against the Law ought to be tried by their Peers or Equals, what the Law is if the person questioned is without a Peer? And if the Law (which of it self is but a dead Letter) seems to condemn him, by what Power shall Iudgment be given, and who shall judge it, or from whence shall the Administrators of such Iudgment derive their power, which may (by the same Law) be deemed the Supreme Power or Authority of Magistra∣cie in the Kingdom? These his Queries were resolved no otherwise,A strict Guard put upon the King. than by a strict Guard put up∣on him; so that the Commissioners coming to receive his Answer of him, he told them be thought to have sent his Answer sealed, because he had been preju∣diced by sending others open: but since his condition could not be worse (no body suffered to speak with him without suspition) he had sent it open; and reading it, desired their opinion; who told him, they thought it would procure a well-grounded Peace. He then desired them to put a good Interpretation upon his manage of this Treaty, and those vehement expressions in some of his De∣bates, there being nothing in his Intentions but kindness; & acknowledged their abilities which had taken him off from some of his own opinions; as he doubt∣ed not, if they had had power to recede, he could have prevailed upon theirs; as also, if he had been present, upon the two Houses. And he desires them to use the same freedom and instance to his two Houses, to indulge his Conscience wherein he cannot be satisfied, and to represent him candidly to his two Houses, since he hath parted with all how near or dear soever, but wherein his Consci∣ence is unsatisfied. And at their taking leave, he added these Pathetick Sen∣tences. —
MY LORDS, You are come to take your leave of me, and I believe, we shall scarce see each other again;His Majesties Pathetick Ex∣pressions to the Parliaments Commissioners at parting. but God's Will be done. I thank God I have made my Peace with him, and shall without fear undergo what he shall be pleased to suffer men to do unto me. — My Lords, You cannot but know, that in my Fall and Ruine you see your own, and that also near to you. I pray God send you better Friends than I have found. — I am fully informed of the whole Plot and Car∣riage against me and mine; and nothing so much afflicts me, as the sense and feeling I have of the sufferings of my Subjects, and the miseries that hang over my three Kingdoms, drawn upon them by those, who upon the pretences of good, violently pursue their own Interests and Ends. After which, he presently withdrew himself to his Guards. Let the Reader give me leave to compleat his sorrow with this last Captive Breath of the King's in the Isle of Wight, and I am confident he will not blame me for vouchsafing him a Sympathy or Part in this Threnody and Lamentation, sinc it was delivered to one of his Servants just at his departure thence, and Commanded by him to be published for the satisfaction of all his Subjects. His Majesties Declaration concerning the Treaty, and his dislike of the Armies pro∣ceedings.WHen large Pretences prove but the shadows of weak Perfor∣mances, then the greatest Labours produce the smallest Ef∣fects; and when a period is put to a Work of great Concernment, all mens ears do as it were hunger, till they are satisfied in their Expe∣ctations. Hath not this distracted Nation groaned a long time un∣der the burden of Tyranny and Oppression? And hath not all the Blood that hath been spilt these seven years been cast upon my Head, who am the greatest Sufferer, though the least guilty? And was it not requisite to endeavour the stopping of that Flux, which if not stopt will bring an absolute destruction to this Nation? And what more speedy way was there to consummate those distractions, than by a Personal Treaty being agreed on by my two Houses of Parliament, and condescended to by me? And I might Declare, that I con∣ceive it had been Physick, had not the Operation been hindred by the interposition of this Imperious Army, who were so auda∣cious, as to stile me in their unparallel'd Remonstrance, their Capital Enemy. But let the world judge, whether my endea∣vours have not been attended with reality in this late Treaty; and whether I was not as ready to grant as they to ask? and yet all this is not satisfaction to them that pursue their own ambitious Ends, more than the welfare of a miserable Land. Were not the dy∣ing hearts of my poor distressed People much revived with the hopes of a happiness from this Treaty? and how suddenly are they frustra∣ted in theire xpectations! Have I not formerly been condemned, for yielding too little to my Houses of Parliament, and must I now be condemned for yielding too much? Have I not formerly been imprisoned for making War, and shall I now be condemned for ma∣king Peace? Have I not formerly enjoyed the society of my dear
Wife and Children in peace and quietness, and shall I now neither enjoy them nor Peace? Have not my Subjects formerly obeyed me, and shall I now be obedient to my Subjects? Have not I been con∣demned for Evil Counsellours, and shall I now be condemned for ha∣ving no Counsel but God? These are unutterable miseries, that the more I endeavour for Peace, the less my endeavours are respected: and how shall I hereafter know what to grant, when your selves know not what to ask? I refer it to your Consciences, whether I have not satisfied your desires in every particular since in this Trea∣ty: if you find I have not, then let me bear the burthen of the fault; but if I have given you ample satisfaction (as I am sure I have) then you are bound to vindicate me from the ury of those, whose thoughts are filled with blood: though they pretend zeal, yet they are but Wolves in Sheeps cloathing. I must further Declare, that I conceive there is nothing can more obstruct the long-hoped-for Peace of this Nation, than the illegal pro∣ceedings of them that presume from Servants to become Masters, and labour to bring in Democracie, and to abolish Monarchy. Needs must the total alteration of Fundamentals be not only destructive to others, but in conclusion to themselves; for they that endea∣vour to rule by the Sword, shall at last fall by it: for Faction is the Mother of Ruine, and it is the humour of those that are of this Weather-cock-disposition, to love nothing but Mutabilities; neither will that please them but only pro tempore, for too much variety doth but confound the senses, and make them still hate one folly, and fall in love with another. Time is the best cure for Faction; for it will at length (like a spreading Leprosie) infect the whole Body of the Kingdon, and make it so odious, that at last they will hate themselves for love of that; and like the Fish, for love of the Bait be catched with the Hook. I once more declare to all my loving Subjects, and God knows whe∣ther or no this may be my last, that I have earnestly laboured for Peace, and that my thoughts were sincere and absolute, without sinister ends; and that there was nothing left undone by me, that my Conscience would permit me to do. And I call God to witness, that I do firmly conceive, that the interposition of the Army (that Cloud of Malice) hath altogether eclipsed the glory of that Peace, which began again to shine in this Land. And let the world judge, whether it be expe∣dient for an Army to contradict the Votes of a Kingdom, endeavou∣ring by pretending for Laws and Liberties to subvert both. Such acts as these must produce strange consequences, and set open the flood-gates of ruine, to over-flow this Kingdom in a moment. Had this Treaty been only mine own seeking, then they might have had fairer pretences to have stopt the course of it; but I being importuned by my two Houses, and they by most part of the Kingdom, could not but with a great deal of alacrity concur with them in their desires, to the performance of so commodious a work. And I hope by this time, that the hearts and eyes of my people are opened so much, that they plainly discover who are the underminers of this Treaty. For my part, I here protest before the Face of Heaven, that my own
afflictions (though they need no addition) afflict me not so much as my peoples sufferings, for I know what to trust to already, and they know not: God comfort both them and me, and proportion our pa∣tience to our sufferings. And when the malice of mine Enemies is spun out to the smallest thread, let them know that I will by the Grace of God, be as con∣tented to suffer, as they are active to advance my Sufferings; and mine own Soul tells me, that the time will come when the very Clouds shall drop down vengeance upon the heads of those that barricado themselves against the proceedings of Peace; for if God hath pro∣claimed a blessing to the Peace-makers, needs must the Peace-breakers draw down curses upon their heads. I thank my God I have armed my self against their fury; and let the Arrows of their envy fly at me, I have a breast to receive them, and a heart possest with patience to sustain them: for God is my Rock and my Shield, therefore I will not fear what men can do un∣to me. I will expect the worst; and if any thing happen beyond my expectation, I will give God the Glory, for vain is the help of man. The Presbyte∣rians satisfied with this De∣claration, and troubled at the proceedings of the Army.This Declaration gave entire and compleat satisfaction to the most refracto∣ry of the Presbyterian Party, who when too late perceived their untoward scuf∣fling and debating with so excellent a Prince, had brought him and themselves to ruine, together with three Kingdoms; the care of which, when his Prote∣ction failed, the King as his last and most incumbent business resumed in this following Letter. For having thus resigned himself into the hands of God, and patiently submitted to his Cross, he in a way of renunciation and Self-de∣position of his Government, transferred and bequeathed the Scepter, with these following excellent Advices, to his Son the Prince. Newport, Novemb. 29. 1648. SON, His Majesties Letter to the Prince his Son, our present So∣vereign.BY what hath been said, you may see how long We have laboured in the search of Peace: Do not you be discouraged to tread those ways in all worthy means to restore your self to your Right, but prefer the way of Peace: Shew the greatness of your mind, ra∣ther to Conquer your Enemies by pardoning, than by punishing. If you saw how unmanly and unchristian this implacable disposition is in Our Ill-willers, you would avoid that spirit. Censure Vs not for having parted with too much of Our own Right; the Price was great, the Commodity was Security to us, Peace to Our People. And We are confident another Parliament would remember how useful a Kings Power is to a Peoples Liberty; and of how much We have devested Our Self, that We and they might meet again in a due Parlia∣mentary way, to agree the Bounds for Prince and People. And in this give belief to Our Experience, never to affect more Greatness or Prerogative, than what is really and intrinsecally for the good of your Subjects (not satisfaction of Favourites.) And if you thus use it, you will never want means to be a Father to all, and a bounti∣full Prince to any you would be extraordinarily gracious unto. You
may perceive all men trust their Treasure where it returns them In∣terest; and if Princes, like the Sea, receive and repay all the fresh Streams and Rivers trust them with, they will not grudge, but pride themselves to make up an Ocean. These considerations may make you a Great Prince, as your Father is now a low one; and your State may be so much the more established, as mine hath been shaken. For Sub∣jects have learned (We dare say) that Victories over their Prince, are but Triumphs over themselves; and so will be the more unwilling to hearken to Changes hereafter. The English Nation are a sober peo∣ple, however at present under some infatuation. We know not, but this may be the last time We may speak to you or the world pub∣likely. We are sensible into what hands We are fallen; and yet we bless God we have those inward refreshments, that the malice of Our Enemies cannot disturb. To conlude,His excellent Advice to him▪ if God give you Success, use it humbly, and far from Revenge: If he restore you to your Rights upon hard Conditions, whatever you promise keep. Those men which have forced Laws which they were bound to observe, will find their Triumphs full of troubles. Do not think any thing in this world worth obtain∣ing by force and unjust means. You are the Son of Our Love, and as We direct you to what We have recommended to you, so We assure you We do not more affectionately pray for you, to whom We are a Natural Parent, than We do that the antient Glory and Renown of this Nation be not buried in Irreligion and Fanatick Humour, and that all Our Subjects (to whom We are a Politick Parent) may have such sober thoughts, as to seek their Peace in the Orthodox Profession of the Christian Religion, as it was established since the Reforma∣tion in this Kingdom, and not in new Revelations; and that the antient Laws, with the Interpretation according to known Practices, may once again be a hedge about them; that You may in due time Govern, and they be Governed as in the fear of the Lord. The Commissioners are gone, the Corn is now on the Ground; We expect the Harvest: if the Fruit be Peace, we hope the God of Peace will in time reduce all to Truth and Order again; which that he may do, is the Prayer of C. R. With this his Majesties final account of this unconsummated Treaty, I will conclude all his State-Missives and Papers, the justice and reasonableness whereof no doubt will be so convincing, that there needed no other Pen to assert his Quarrel. As he was the chief Subject of this History, so was he the Life of it, affording it the greatest light of Truth towards its composition; so that these his happy Labours shall perpetuate his just Renown, and make his Moral and intellectual Virtues endure together, enshrined in the hearts of pious Posterity: To contribute whereto, as far as my humble devoir would reach, I have made these Collections; and so with reverential leave to their blessed Author, I pro∣ceed in this Chronicle.
The Army con∣spire to force the House.In pursuance of that accursed Remonstrance presented the 20 of November aforesaid, Cromwel drew the Army into the Suburbs of London, quartering them at the Mews and at York-house (and afterwards into London it self) the General quartering himself at Whitehall, to keep the King out in defiance of the Trea∣ty, with a resolution to awe the Parliament into a non-compliance with his Ma∣jesty, whose great and most reasonable Arguments for a Composure, and his un-exampled Condescentions in order thereunto, they could neither fairly refel or honestly refuse. But notwithstanding, such was the justice of God in favour of his Majesties Cause, that the Parliament who had so obstinately and dilato∣rily (to the ruine of the Kingdom) rejected all his other Accommodations, closed with him now. For upon the 4th of December, the Question being put in the House of Commons, Whether the Kings Answer was satisfactory or no? (though the Army-party argued that they were not satisfactory, because the King had not granted all their Propositions in terms (contrary to the nature of all Treaties, where something must be bated on both parts) and so kept the bu∣siness in question (until 8 a Clock at night next day, being Tuesday the 5h of December) the Independents hoping (by their usual trick) to tire out the mode∣rate Party) it was then Resolved, The Parlia∣ment Vote the Kings Answer satisfactory, Dec. 5.That the Answers of the King to the Propositions of both Houses, are a Ground for both Houses to proceed upon, for the Settlement of the Peace of the Kingdom. This being carried Affirmatively, and that so clearly, that the House was not divided about it; to secure this Vote, and the earnest of a Peace, a Committee of six Members was appointed to attend the General, to keep a good Corre∣spondencie, &c. but we shall now see Hell broke loose in the Armes Insolen∣cies and Violence. For these Caitiffs understanding the courage and honesty of the House, re∣solved to play no longer with the weak Reed of Priviledge, but with a bold Sword to solve the Oracle of their Villanies, in ths ensuing complicated mis∣chiefs. To this purpose, Pride, Hewson, and other Officers, having had some Conference in Westminster Hall the Doors being shut) with the Speaker, sent in a Paper to the House of Commons,The Army re∣quire that the Ipahed Members and Major-General Brown be se∣cured and brought to Iu∣stice. Requiring the Impeached Members and Ma∣jor-General Brown (as guilty of calling in Hamilton) to be secured and brought to Iustice; and that the ninety and odd Members, who refused to Vote against the late Scoch Engagement▪ and all that Voted for recaling the four Votes of Non-Addres∣ses, and Voted for a Treaty, and concurred in the Yesterday's acquiescing Vote in his Majesties Answers, may be immediately suspended the House; and that all such faithful Members, who are innocent of those Votes, would by Protestation acquit themselves from any concurrence (that so they might know their own Goats) and so be distinguished. To this Paper they admitted no demur, not caring for, or not daigning them the consideration of an Answer, but presently brought three or four Regiments of Horse and Foot,The House guarded. Col. Pride, Col. Hewson, and Sir Har∣dress Waller seize on several Members Dec. 6. and set strong Guards at the Houses-doors, the Lobby-stairs, and every where about the Palace, admitting none but Parliament-men into the Hall; where the said two Colonels, and Sir Hardress Waller violently seized upon divers Knights and Burgesses of the Parliament, and forcibly carried them away Prisoners; others were by feigned excuses cal∣led out of the House, and then pull'd away, and committed likewise without any Warrant or cause shewn. And though the House remaining sent the Ser∣jeant of Mace to command their attendance, (when Pride would not suffer him to pass) and sent likewise to the General about it, declaring they would not pro∣ceed in any business without them; yet the secured Members were still kept in¦durance, while the Rump (or Conventicle) became of the Armies Complexi∣on, and so prevaricated, and deserted their Fellows. The Gentlemen thus de∣tained, were afterwards listed in a Catalogue by Hugh Peters,Hugh Peters an Agent for the Army in this Designe. and carried to a Victualling-place called Hell, being number 41. where they were kept with∣out Beds, or other fitting accommodation all that night; and the next day, af∣ter a tedious attendance on the Council of Officers, were committed Prisoners under Guard to two several Inns in the Strand. Besides these, the Belial Com∣manders
standing several days with Lists of Names in their hands at the Parlia∣ment-door,The Parliament impriod. turned back from the House and debarred above 160 other Mem∣bers, besides 40 more who voluntarily withdrew to avoid their violence. Most of those 41 Members were after much expostulation, and their Protestation of this Force upon them and the Houses,Ireton's inso∣lent expression. released; Ireton insolently bidding them to look to themselves, and to act nothing against the present Parliament and Ar∣my at their peril. But Major-General Brown was sent Prisoner to St. Iames's, where they would have put a trick upon him, by a forged Letter brought thi∣ther and delivered him (which he understanding their Plot,Major-General Brown sent prisoner to Windsor. would have pub∣likely read) as from the Prince. The Messenger seeing his Project would not take, threw the Paper into the fire, and escaped, as was forelaid: He was after∣wards sent prisoner to Windsor. The remaining Juncto having met and conferred at Sommetset-house, began to act at Westminster as a Parliament▪ with whom some fawning Lords joyned, and Passed an Ordinance, Declaring all persons that had any way appeared for the King,Note, that Skippon thrust in that clause. even by Subscribing to the personal Treaty, should be in∣capable, &c. whereby the City could not find men to supply those Trusts and Places, &c. and Petitioned against it, but in vain; the Sectaries had packt a new Common-council (by Authority from the Juncto) who constituted ay 40 of them a Court,The Iuncto take upon them to act as a Parliament. and supreme to the Mayor) whose first work was the framing a Petition for Justice against the King and other Capital Offenders; which was afterwards delivered by Titchburn, and had the thanks of the Mock-Parliament for their pains, who now entred a Protestation against that satisfactory Vote of the 5th of December aforesaid, and pursue the Dictates and Directions of the Army. A little while before this,Rainsborough slain at Don∣caster, Oct. 29. Colonel Rainsborough was slain at Doncaster by a party of Royalists that allied out of Pomfract, then besieged by Sir Edward Rhodes and the County-Forces, as he was in his Inn and his Souldiers about him, under a pretence of delivering him a Letter from Crowel. They would have only taken him prisoner, and carried him through his own Leaguer into their Castle; but he refusing, they pistoled him in his Chamber, and departed untoucht.Scarborough-Castle yielded to the Parl. — A strange, yet brave Adventure. Scarbrough-Castle now likewise yielded to the Parliament, whom we will leave, and see the Armies like violence and outrages upon the King. Colonel Ewres was appointed by the Parliament to this Service,The Army seize the King, and carry him from the Isle of Wight to Hurst-Castle, Dec. 1. who assisted by Colonel Cobbet, on the first of Decemb. according to Command, received from Hammond the person of the King, and hurried him out of that Isle away priso∣ner to Hurst-Castle, within the term of those 20 days after the Treaty, in which he was to remain according to the Houses Declaration, in Honour, Safety, and Freedom. This Castle stands a mile and a half in the Sea, upon a Breach full of mud and stinking oaze upon low Tides, having no fresh water within two or three miles of it; so cold, foggy, and noysome, that the Guards cannot endure it without shifting Quarters. Here they frayed the King a while, till Harrison was on his way to receive him,From thence to Winchester. who brought him to Winchester; where the May∣or and Inhabitants caused the Bells to ring, and at the Towns-end (as was due and usual) in the middle of the mire presented his Majesty with the Keys of the City and the Mace; but in the very Ceremony were tumbled in the same mire by the Horse, at the Command of Harrison. The next day the King came to Farnham,To Farnham. To Windsor. and so to Windsor, where he kept his sorrowful and last Christmass, being pent up in a corner of the Castle, no man besides his Guards to come to him; and all respect and reverence to his Person forborn, while by Order of the Juncto he was sent for up to his Palace of St. Iames's,The King brought to St. James's, Jan▪ 19. Harrison impudently riding covered in the same Coach with him, and his Myrmidons wounding any that shewed their Loyal Compassion, and lamented this misera∣ble condition of their beloved Sovereign.Harrison's in∣solent behavi∣our to the King. In which we must leave him, and return to our Grandees. These offals of a Parliament having by an Ordinance taken away the Oaths
of Supremacie and Allegeance, usually administred to Freemen, &c. thereby to free themselves from those ties of Duty upon them, and to make way for their ensuing Trayterous designe (in order whereunto the Council of War had forbid any Ceremony or State to be used to the King, and his Attendants lessened) now proceeded roundly to their Army Journey-work: for on the 28 of Decem∣ber, Thomas Scot brought in the Ordinance for Trial of the King:The Ordinance for Trial of the King brought into the Iuncto by Tho. Scot. it was read and recommitted three several times, and the Commissioners names of all sorts, to engage the whole Body of the Kingdom in this Treason inserted; and to give it a Foundation, these Votes passed: They Vote it Treason for the King of England to le∣vy War against his Parlia∣ment.That the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament d Declare and Adjudge, that by the Fundamental Laws of the Realm, it is Treason in the King of Eng∣land for the time to come to Levy War against the Parliament and Kingdom of Eng∣land. With this Declaratory Vote the said Ordinance was carried up to the Lords by the Lord Gray of Grooby,The Vote and Ordinance car∣ried to the Lords by the Lord Gray of Grooby. Ianuary 2. 1648. The Lords being 16 in num∣ber, met that day; and received it, promising to send an Answer by Messengers of their own. The first Question started by some Lords (who had rather had a thinner House) was, Whether it should be presently debated; which was affirmed. The first Debate was upon the Declaratory Vote, to which the Earl of Manchester said, That the Parliament of England by the Fundamental Laws, consisted of three Estates; King, Lords, and Commons; whereof the King is the first and chief∣est: He Calls and Dissolves Parliaments, and without him there can be no Parlia∣ment; and therefore it's absurd to say, the King can be a Traytor against the Par∣liament. Then the Earl of Northumberland added, That the greatest part, at least twenty to one of the people of England, were not yet satisfied, whether the King Levied War first against the Houses, or the Houses against him? And if the King did Levy War first against the Houses, there is no Law to make it Treason in him: And for them to declare Treason by an Ordinance, when the matter of Fact is not proved; nor any Law extant to judge it by, is very unreasonable. The Earls of Pembroke and Denbigh said,The Lords cast out the Ordi∣nance, and ad∣journed for 7 days. they would be torn in pieces before they would assent with the Commons; so the Lords cast off the Debate, and cast out the Ordinance, and adjourned for seven days. This netled the Commons, who thereupon resolved to rid their hands of King,The Commons netled, they resolve to rid their hands of King, Lords, and dissenting Commons. Lords, and their Fellow-Commons together, by a leading Vote, That all Members of Committees should proceed and act in any Ordinance wherein the Lords were joyned, though the Peers should not Sit nor concur with them. And added thereunto three other Democratical Resolves, Ian. 4. 1648. 1. That the Peo∣ple are under God the Original of all just Power. 2. That the Commons of Eng∣land in Parliament Assembled, chosen by and Representing the People, have the Su∣preme Power of the Nation. 3. That whatsoever is enacted or declared for Law by the House of Commons Assembled in Parliament, hath the force of Law. Which passed without one Negative Voice; which shewed at whose beck they were. And thus first they hatcht this Monster, called An Act for the Trial of the King, &c. which is here transcribed; transferring the names of the Commissioners to their ensuing Character. An Act of Parliament of the House of Commons for Trial of Charles Stuart King of England. An Act of the House of Com∣mons for the Tryal of King Charles the First.WHereas it is notorious, that Charles Stuart the now King of England, not content with the many Encroachments which his Predecessors had made upon the People in their Rights and Freedom, hath had a wicked designe to subvert the Antient and Fundamental Laws and Liberties of this Nation, and in their place to introduce an Arbitrary and Tyrannical Government; and that besides all other evil ways to bring his designe to pass, he hath prosecuted it with Fire and
Sword, levied and maintained a Civil War in the Land, against the Parliament and Kingdom; whereby this Country hath been miserably wasted, the Publique Trea∣sure exhited, Trade decreased, thousands of people murthered, and infinite other mischiefs committed; for all which high offences, the said Charles Stuart might long since have been brought to exemplary and condign punishment. Whereas also the Parliament, well hoping that the restraint and imprisonment of his person, after it had pleased God to deliver him into their hands, would have quie∣ted the distempers of the Kingdom, did forbear to proceed judicially against him, but fund by sad experience, that such their remisness, served only to encourage him and his Complices in the continuance of their evil practices, and in raising new Com∣tions, Rebellions and Practises. For prevention of the like and greater inconveniences, and to the end no Chief Offi∣cer or Magistrate may hereafter presume traiterously and maliciously to imagine or contrive the enslaving or destroying of the English Nation, and to expect impunity: Be it Enacted and Ordained by the Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, and it is hereby Enacted and Ordained, that Thomas Lord Fairfax, &c. (the other per∣sons that actually did Si and Sentence are hereafter subjoyned) shall be and are appointed Commissioners and Iudges for the Hearing, Trying and Iudging of the said Charles Stuart. And the said Commissioners, or any twenty of them shall be, and are hereby Authorized and Constituted an High Court of Iustice, to meet at such convenient time and places, as by the said Commissioners, or the major part, or twenty or more of them under their Hands and Seals shall be appointed, and notified by publique Proclamation in the great Hall or Palace-yard of Westminster; and to adjourn from time to time, and from place to place, as the said High Court, or the major part thereof meeting shall hold fit; and to take order for the Charging of Him the said Charles Stuart with the Crimes above-mentioned, and for receiving his personal Answer thereunto, and for examination of Witnesses upon Oath if need be concerning the same; and thereupon, or in default of such answer▪ to proceed to final Sentence, according to Iustice and the merit of the Cause, to be executed speedily and impartially. And the said Court is hereby Authorized and required to chuse and appoint all such Officers and Attendants, and other Circumstances, as they or the Major part of them shall in any sort judge necessary or useful, for the ordering and good managing of the Premises: And Thomas Lord Fairfax the General, with all Officers of Iustice, and other well-affected persons, are hereby Authorized and Required to be aiding and assisting to the said Commissioners, in the due execution of the Trust here∣by committed to them. Provided, that this Ordinance, and the Authority hereby granted, do continue for the space of one Month, from the Date of the making here∣of, and no longer. This Act was followed by a Proclamation Ianuary 9. made by Serjeant Dendy,Jan. 9. Serjeant Den∣dy makes Pro∣clamation, that the Commissio∣ners of the High Court of Iustice were to sit the next day, and all persons invited to give in Evidence a∣gainst Charles Stuart. by sound of Drums and Trumpets, and Guards of Horse and Foot in Westminster-Hall, whereby notice was given, that the Commissioners of the (pretended) High Court of Justice were to sit down on the morrow, and that all those that had any thing to say against Charles Stuart King of England, might be heard. The like was done in Cheap-side, and the old Exchange. The Actors or Tragical Persons in this Ordinance, were stumbled at several illegalities and irregularities thereof, which in a presumptuous confidence (as drunken men passing over a dangerous Bridge) then yet slighted. But when it was perfected, and the consummatory part of the Seal to be affixed, and the whole result to be warranted thereby, they were at a stand, as knowing the Kings Seal could not be made use of against him;Proclaimed in three places, Westminster, Cheap-side, and the Old Exchange. while the Army-Familiars inspired them, that the King and his Seal was alike unnecessary, and that they must now (according to their advice) act by themselves and their own Autho∣rity; which direction they followed, and gave order for a new Seal to their en∣suing Acts as hereafter. We have omitted the Cypher-Names specified in the said pretended Act, be∣cause
cause many of them, upon reluctancie of Conscience, or more happy perswasi∣ons of Friends, did not undertake the Impiety; as also, because we would not defame the Names of those Lords and Peers of the Kingdom, and the Judges (whose Function instructed them to the contrary) that were invited, and listed one by the same Treasonable Combination,The Names and Caracters of the King's Iudges. to be partakers in that Guilt: but those that appeared and prosecuted their Power, and are worthy of their brand, are with their due Character here subjoyned. The Kings Iudges marked with † are those that were Executed. † Cromwel, a Native of Hun∣tingdon-shire.Oliver Cromwel, an English Monster, a shame to the British Chronicle; a name of ruine and mischief, a Native of Huntingdon-shire, who needs no other Character than this Chronicle, being the Troubler of our Israel; whose ruines were his Grave, yet hath found another under Tyburn, Ian. 30. † Ireton, his So-in-law.Henry Ireton, Commissary-General of Horse, Cromwel's Second, espoused his Daughter as well as his Designes, — so, like Father-in-law, like Son-out-law, and renterised in the same manner, and at the same time, 1660. † Iohn Bradshaw, President, Cum nemini▪ obtrudi potest itur ad Hunc, — there was no such Villain to be found among the Long-Rob, who drowned all his wickedness and false practises, not to be compared, under this most flagitious and scelerate parricide of the King.Bradshaw, a Cheshire-man died obstinate∣ly, 1659. A Cheshire-man born, but hateful to his Country, more abominable to his Name, most odious to his Nation, whose hopeful recovery by the first endeavours of his own County under Sir George Booth,He took the Oath of Alle∣geance but two Terms before the King's death. in 1659. he so pined at, that taking a just desperation, he died. Two Terms before the Perpetration of the Kings Murther, he had took the Oath of Allegeance as a Serjeant at Law, being called to that Dignity from the scolding and railing of Guild-hall London, to convitiate and reproach his most peaceable Sovereign. He grew conscious (as to the safety of his Body) of his Fact, when he shewed his aversness to Oliver, the very name of a Single Person frighting him; but so cauterized as to the salvation of his Soul, that he departed in a most damnable obstinacie and maintenance of his Fact, presuming there was no High Court of Iustice in Heaven, or else that he was judged already. The price of this Villany was the Presidencie of their Council of State,He is rewarded with the Lord Cottington's Estate and the Dutchy of Lancaster. the Lord Cotting∣ton's Estate, and the Dutchy of Lancaster, with some Advance-Money like Iu∣das for his undertaking. It is observed he died in his Bed, advantageously Com∣mented on by the Imps and Abettors of his villany; by others, at least taken as a note of admiration, leaving his Name and Memory to be tortured for ever. The good Providence of God removing this wretch, and the most implacable Enemies of our Sovereign, by the same easie hand (which might otherwise have been died in blood) with which it restored Him to his Kingdoms, and his people to their Laws, Liberty, and Religion; he was likewise digged out of Westminster-Abby, and thrown under the Gallows. † Harrison, a Butchers Son at Newcastle in Stafford-shire, was ex∣ecuted at Cha∣ring-Cross, Octob. 1660.Col. Thomas Harrison, the Son of a Butcher at Newcastle-under-line in Staf∣ford-shire, once Servant to Mr. Hulker an Attorney. He betook himself to the Army in the beginning of the Wars, and by Preaching and such-like sanctity, came to be a Major; where his pragmatical spirit cherished by Cromwel, pre∣ferred him to a Colonel, and the custody of the Kings person, when taken from the Isle of Wight; which he mos irreverently abused, by no less sawcie behaviour than Treasonable speeches. He was afterwards the great Captain of all the Schismatiques, especially Fifth-Monarchy-men, in whose love, and no others, he died, and was expectedly Executed at Charing-Cross, in that expia∣tory Month of October, 1660. † John Carew.Iohn Carew, Brother of Sir Alexander Carew beheaded in 1644. This per∣son was no doubt deluded by the mistaken impulses of Satan, for those of the Spirit, being a Rank Fifth-monarchist, and so pre-disposed against all Govern∣ment
and Authority, which he helped to strike at in the death of the King. † Iohn Cook,John Cook, Sollicitor of the High Court. the Sollicitor of the High Court, whose Plea (charitably taken) is his best Character, that his Crime was not out of Malice but Avarice; being a poor man, and in a wanting Condition, before he undertook this most scele∣rate piece of Service. — Better be out of practice, than in such as this. † Hugh Peters,Hugh Peters, the shame of the Clergy. the shame of the Clergy, a Pulpit-Buffoon, a seditious abomi∣nable Fellow, Trumpet to this Pageantry of a High Court of Justice, the most unparallell'd Ecclesiastick in all Story or Times. † Thomas Scot,Thomas Scot, a Brewers Clerk, his rash wish. a Brewers Clerk, then turned Country-Attorney, and by coun∣tenance of the Grandees was chosen a recruit for the Borough of Wickham in the County of Buckingham; so violent an Enemy of the Kings, that he wished for no other Epitaph or Inscription on his Grave, than Here lies Thomas Scot one of the King's Iudges: but he should first have wished for a Grave. † Gregory Clement,Gregory Cle∣ment, a Mer∣chant. a Merchant, who procured and purchased a place in Parlia∣ment, by the same means as he did his lustful debaucheries, for the notoriety of which, his Fellow-villains discarded him their Company. He contributed to the destruction of his Sovereign, that he might Reign in his own wicked∣ness. † Adrian Scroop,Adrian Scroop, Bro∣ther to Sir A∣drian. a Colonel of Horse, very active against the Kings Party in 1648. and more diligent against his Life and Honour at this High Court of Justice. 'Tis sad to think he should be allied to so Honourable a Family, and so deserving and Noble a Gentleman of his own name, Sir Adrian Scroop Knight of the Bath, 13 Caroli 2. † Col. Iohn Iones,John Jones, a Serving-man, marries Cromwels sister. a Serving-man, of a mean fortune, till the times, which afforded him advantages among the ruined Loyal Welch, where he was first a great Committee-man, and then a recruit to the Parliament, and married one of Cromwels Sisters (who had as many Females to bestow as a Cardinal) and might therefore be presumed on to make one in this Tragedy. † Francis Hacker,Francis Hac∣ker▪ a Souldier of Fortune. a Souldier of Fortune, of notable Resolution and Conduct, the success whereof wrought him into Cromwels familiarity, from whence he had not the faculty or power to recede, but was charmed into this desperate de∣signe; his being the last hand through which it passed to the Scaffold. † Daniel Axtel,Daniel Axtel, a Country-Mercer, Capt. of the Guard at the Kings Trial. a kind of Country-Mercer in Bedfordshire, obeyed the Call (as he said) of the (seditious) Pulpits, and went forth some small Officer to fight a∣gainst the Mighty: after many Traverses, was made Lieutenant-Colonel, and employed by Cromwel out of favour to him, as the ready way to Greatness, to be Captain of the Guard at the Kings Trial, where he made his Ianizaries by blows and threats, to cry out, Iustice and Execution. He was guilty of a great deal more (but not to be mentioned with this) blood in Ireland, and had got∣ten a pretty soul Estate. † Col. Okey,Okey, a Chandler near Billingsgate, London, a da∣ring Comman∣der. formerly a Stoker in a Brew-house, then a Chandler near Billings∣gate; but leaving his Trade for his hopes in the War, passed through the several Commands to that of a Colonel, in a very short space of time. He was a da∣ring bold Commander, which rendred him open and suitable to Cromwels de∣signes, who likewise bewitched him into the Partnership of this accursed Mur∣ther. † Miles Corbet,Miles Corbet, of a good Fa∣mily in Nor∣folk, Burgess for Yarmouth of a very good Family in Norfolk, chosen Burgess for Yarmouth in that County, when he had no other advantage but troublesome times to reco∣ver himself, which he helped forward into the ensuing Calamities. — Hoc faciunt mores Pontilianae Tui. — He was one of the Male-content Members of the former Parliament, with Sir Iohn Elliot and others; and now took the opportunity of wreaking all those old grudges upon the Kings life, and to share himself an Estate from several great places in England and Ireland, where he was in effect Lord Chancellor. † Col. Iohn Berkstead,John Berk∣stead, a Gold∣smith, Lieute∣nant of the Tower. once a sorry Goldsmith in the Strand, and having learnt a little City-Souldiery, for want of better Commanders, was made Captain of a Foot-company under Colonel Ven at Windsor▪ was afterwards Governour of
Reading, and by his pliantness ingratiated with Oliver, who made him one of the Kings Judges, afterwards preferred him to the Lieutenancie of the Tower, where now his head stands. These of the Kings Iudges marked with * are those that died before the Kings Return. * Col. Thomas Pride, a Brewer, to which he ascended from a Dray man, by the same steps as from thence he became a Lord:Thom. Pride,  Brewer . he was a resolute ignorant fel∣low, but of very good success, and therefore fit to partake with Cromwel, and to venture on that prime and hardy work of garbling the Parliament for him. That done, he deserved any employment from his Master, and was put upon this, which he discharged with as much brutishness. * Isaac Ewer, of  in Yorkshire.Col. Isaac Ewer, descended of an Antient and Right Honourable Family in Yorkshire, but the Patrimony thereof so wasted, that this Cadet was forced to be take himself to the wealthier side, where he profited alike in Principles. He was thought fit (because of his Birth) to be the Kings Guardian from the Isle of Wight; which he performed, and afterwards to be his Murtherer. His Re∣lacion was chosen one of Olivers Lords of the other House. * The Lord Gray of Grooby, Son to the Earl of Stamford.Thomas Lord Gray of Grooby, Son to the Earl of Stamford, a Colonel in the Army, and so infected. By the Honour of his Family he escapes a mention or condemnation for this Crime, as well as others. * Sir John Dan∣vers, Brother to the Loyal Earl of Dan∣by.Sir Iohn Danvers Knight, Brother to the Earl of Danby, a Loyal and Noble Peer: Sed scio quis Deus est, hunc qui tibi dividit astris. The covetousness after his Brothers Estate (who was made a Delinquent) suckt him in, and afterwards swallowed his Name and Honour in this Whirl-pool of confusion, and Roy∣al Blood. * Sir Tho. Ma∣leverer, of a good Family in Yorkshire.Sir Thomas Maleverer, descended also of a very good Family in Yorkshire, but obliged to the kindness of the two last Kings for their Honour, which being above his Estate, wickedly prompted him for the equalling of it, to drain the Fountain of his Masters life and Honour. * Sir John Bour∣chier, a dili∣gent Indepen∣dent Mercena∣rySir Iohn Bourchier, another Yorkshire Knight, an Independent Mercenary, who from the Crisis of their prevalencie workt for them; and that he might not be out of the way when occasion should serve them, diligently dined at Hell; and to compleat his work, consented to this Murther. * Col. Purefoy, a Warwickshire Gentleman, and Governour once of Coventry; a great Zealot against Crosses,Col. Purefoy, Governour of Coventry. and no less against Crowns. He imbrued his hands in the Blood of his Prince, but could not tell (for the ease of his Consci∣ence upon his death-bed) how he should wipe them. * John Blake∣stone, a Shop-keeper in Newcastle.Iohn Blakestone, formerly a Shop-keeper in Newcastle, where pretending him∣self a Presbyterian while the Scots were there, he was chosen Burgess for that Town; and jugling a while among the Independent Faction, learnt a worse Trade, and the wicked Craft of King-killing. * Sir William Constable of Yorkshire, Governour of Gloucester.Sir William Constable, a Yorkshire-man, one who sold his Lands to Sir Mar∣maduke (after Lord Langdale) in the beginning of our Troubles, but when the said Lord was made a Delinquent, regained them for nothing; was a great Rumper, and at their hand for this Parricide, he died Governour of Glouce∣ster, and a great Commander in the North. * Rich. Dean, General at Sea, slain by a Cannon shot.Richard Dean, Colonel and General at Sea, where he was slain by a Cannon-shot, standing by the Renowned General Monk his Colleague. This person was formerly a Hoymans servant in Ipswich, and when the War began, was a Matross in the Train of Artillery, and role to a Captains Command therein; and was famous first at the Siege of Exeter, & being a cross Fellow, was thought fit to be one of Cromwels Complices, to execute his Plots against his Sovereigns life. * Fr. Allen, a Goldsmith, one of the Com∣mittees for the sae of Kings Lands.Francis Allen, once a Gold-smith in Fleet-street, where he leapt into a pretty Estate by marrying his Mistress; was chose a Recruit of the Long Parliament, and adhered to the Juncto for their admission of him; was made one of the
Treasurers at War, a Customer; and had Crone-house given him, and held it in Capite Regis: after that Murther, was made one of the Committees for sale of his Majesties Lands, &c. * Peregrine Pelham, Go∣vernour of Hull.Peregrine Pelham, a Yorkshire Tike, not of the Sussex-Family; a kind of Go∣vernour of Hull after Hotham; the dutiful carriage of which place taught him afterwards this Trayterous deportment in the High Court of Justice. * Iohn Moor,John Moor. formerly Colonel of the Guards, and had the benefit of all Passes from London. * Iohn Allured,John Allured. a Souldier of Fortune, promoted (for his hand in this Villany) to be a Colonel, died just before his Majesties Restitution. * Humphry Edwards,Humph. Ed∣wards, a Member of the Long-Parl. a Member of the Long-Parliament, discontented against the King for being denied by him a Preferment he deserved not; which rankled and fered him into this malicious Parricide. * Sir Gregory Norton, a poor Knight, one of the Pensioners to the King, had Richmond-Mannor and House as good as given him for this Service against his good Master and Sovereign.Sir Gregory Norton. * Iohn Ven,John Ven, a Silkman, Go∣vernour of Windsor-ca∣stle. a broken Silk-man in Cheap-side, made Governour of Windsor-Castle in the beginning of the War, and had other profits and emoluments. It is credibly reported that he hanged himself; certain it is, he died strangely and suddenly. * Thomas Andrews, a Linnen-draper in London, afterwards a Treasurer for the Guild-hall Plate,Th. Andrews. and Receiver for the Army; he afterwards proclaimed the Act against Kingly Government, and very narrowly prevented Justice. * Anthony Stapely,Anth. Stapely. a Sussex Gentleman and Colonel, and Governour of Chi∣chester strangely wrought into this wicked Conspiracie. * Thomas Horton,Th. Horton, Recruit to the Long Parl. a Recruit to the Long-Parliament, of so mean and unknown a Quality before St. Fagons-Fight, that that's all the Character can be given him here. * Iohn Fry,John Fry, a Yeoman of Dorsetshire, an Arrian. another Recruit to the Long-Parliament, a Yeoman and Commit∣tee-man of Dorsetshire; he proved an Arrian in Print, which Colonel Downs charged him with; and so no wonder he that dar'd deny the Divinity of Christ, was so cruelly Traiterous to the Majesty of his Prince. * Thomas Hammond,Thom. Ham∣mond, Bother to Dr. Ham∣mond: the Kings Iaylor. Son to Prince Henry's Physitian, who most ungratefully and disloyally was the Kings Jaylor, and verified that sad Presage and Oracle of the King, That there are but few steps between the Prisons and Graves of Princes; to the great trouble of his most Loyal and Learned Brother, Dr. Henry Hammond, the Kings beloved Chaplain. * Isaack Pennington,Isaac Pen∣nington, Lord Mayor of London. Lord Mayor of London two years together, against the Kings express Command from Oxford, a most implacable Rebel; yet for all the spoil he got, broke twice, and hop'd to make good all by the death of his Sove∣reign: since his Imprisonment he died in the Tower. * Simon Meyne,Simon Meyne of Bucking∣hamshire, died in the Tower. a Buckingham-shire-man, of a good Estate, but an illegal Re∣cruit of the Long-Parliament; a great Committee-man and Sequestrator of o∣ther mens Estates, and being so initiated, thought it no great matter to assist in this business of the Kings life: since his Imprisonment he died in the Tower. These of the Kings Iudges marked with ¶ are such as are in Prison in the Tower of London and elsewhere, and are under Sentence of Death, to be Executed at the pleasure of the King and Parlia∣ment. ¶ Sir Hardress Waller,Sir Hardress Waller, a Souldier of Fortune. a Souldier of Fortune, once a Cavalier in Judgment, then a Presbyterian; upon the new Model an Independent, where finding the uncontroulable sweetness of Pay, and likeliness of greater Spoils, he was hard∣ned into this Conspiracie against the King, and mastered his hopes of Wealth
in Ireland, being Major-General: he was a prisoner in the Tower of London▪ and confessed and deprecated his crime. ¶ Will Hve∣ningham Esq  antient Family in Suffolk.William Heveningham Esquire, a Gentleman of the fairest Estate, and as Gentile and Ancient a Family as any in Suffolk. To keep ill Company, is the way to be wicked. Other causes and inducements to this horrid action are not publique; and I will not dive further. ¶ Henry Mar∣ten.Col. Henry Marten, Son of Sir Henry Marten Judge of the Perrogative-Court; a most lewd, vicious, and infamous person, who first spoke Treason against the King and his Family in the House of Commons, and was in complement com∣mitted and suspended. There was no question, but he would act what he spoke, when the power thereof was in his fellow-Traytors hands. ¶ Owen Row, a Silk-man of London.Owen Row, a Silk-man of London, a constant Commander in the Indepen∣dent Militia thereof, and so trained up to the perpetration of this wicked∣ness. ¶ Augustine Garland, a person relating to the Law.Augustine Garland, a Recruit of the Long-Parliament for the Borough of Quinborough in Kent, in 1647. Chair-man of the Committee that drew up the pretended Act for the Kings Trial: as rare a Blade as the worst of them at the spoil of the Kingdom, a Lawyer, and suspected to have spit in the Kings Face at his Trial. ¶ Henry Smith, one of the Six Clerks in Chancery.Henry Smith, a Lawyer, but a mean one, of a fair Estate in Leicestershire, 40 which was added (as the hire of this villany) a Six Clerks place in Cancery; sup∣posed to be drawn in, and complicated in this Guilt. ¶ Robert Titchbourn, a Linnen-draper, of good City-Extraction, a Colonel, made by Fairfax Lieutenant of the Tower for a while,Robert Titch∣bourn, Lord Mayor of Lon∣don. Lord Mayor of London, and one of the infamous Triers of his Sovereign, the meritorious service o all his preferments and greatness. ¶ Col. George Fleetwood of Buckingham-shire, Kinsman to Sir Miles Master of the Kings Court of Wards,George Fleet∣wood. and Brother to Sir William a very Loyal and ho∣nest Gentleman, and to Charles Fleetwood a very Knave and Fool. ¶ Iames Temple, of Sussex, Colonel, came in to this pack for his share of the spoil▪James Tem∣ple. a man remarkable for nothing but this horrid business. ¶ Thomas Wait, a Rtlndshire-man, a Recruit to the Parliament, chosen by the Armes influence,Thomas Wait. and from a mean person made by them Governour of Bur∣leigh, by which means he became engaged to their Interests and Designes. ¶ Peter Tem∣ple, a London Linne-draper, Bges for Lei∣cester.Peter Temple, formerly a Linnen-drapers, apprentice in Friday-street, but his elder Brother dying, forsook his Trade, and was possest of some 400 pounds a year in Leicestershire; was as a Recruit chosen Burgess for that County-town, as Colleague to Sir Arthur Haslerig; made a Captain of Horse, and a great Committee-man, but of very weak parts, and easie to be led where the hopes and promises of pro∣fit guided him: yet got nothing (though a constant Rumper) being fooled by Oliver into the snare, as he hath often confessed it. ¶ Robert Lil∣burn, Brother to John Lil∣burn.Robert Lilburn, of the Bishoprick of Durham, Brother of Iohn Lilburn the Trouble-world, sided formerly with Cromwel, and was through-paced to his In∣terests; though another Brother repented, and would have kept Tinmouth-castle for the King, when Iohn fell off upon a Model of his own. A Colonel of Horse he was made a while before this Regicide, and so ran fearlesly into the danger of it. ¶ Gilbert Mil∣lington, a Lawyer.Gilbert Millington, a Lawyer, and constant Chair-man of the Committee for plundered Ministers, the sweets of which Imployment set his Teeth on edge, and sharpned him to this cruel attempt upon his Sovereigns life. ¶ Vincent Pot∣ter, an upstart Member.Vincent Potter, a Recruit of the said Long-Parliament, a Mushroom-Member, so suddenly sprung up, and from such ignoe Relations, that the only knowledge of him came by this infamous Murder. ¶ Iohn Downes, formerly a Citizen, then a Colonel in the Army, and a Recruit to the Parliament,John Downs, a Citizen of London, and a Colonel. and by menaces and threats engaged in this fatal business: he would have opposed the violence that carried it, but was over-born himself, his Allegeance and Conscience being over-awed by Cromwel.
These of the Kings Iudges marked with ‖ are those that fled the Kingdome upon His Majesties Return. | Thomas Wogan,Thomas Wo∣gan, an obscure person. a recruit likewise to the Parliament, had his lesson set him upon his procured Election, that he was to endeavour the Ruine of the King∣dom, for his share in it; and to destroy the King, to become himself one of our Princes in the Anarchy. | Iohn Lisle,John Lisle, a Gentleman and Lawyer, Presi∣dent of several High Courts of Iustice. a Gentleman and a Lawyer bred, was born of a good Family, who had a fair Patrimony in the Isle of Wight, whose Father dyed there during the Treaty: a severe and supercilious person, clouded always with pretences of Religion, and Common-wealth Interest. The very picture of a male-content, and by his countenance (the counterfeit of Guy Fauks his Dark-lanthorn) di∣rected to this conspiracy. For his service done herein, he was made one of the Commissioners of the new Great Seal, Master of Saint Crosses, a place onely fit for a Divine, worth 800 per annum, in place of a reverend Doctor; for which preferments he became obliged to the Blood-sucking State, to assume the Scar∣let Robes and the as deep dyed guilt of Iohn Bradshaw, and be President to all the High Courts of Justice during the Usurpation: the last effects of his san∣guinous violence being the death of Sir Henry Slingsby, Doctor Hewit, and others of lesser quality. He fled upon the return of the King, and not long after fell himself by the hand of Violence. | William Say Esquire,Will. Say Esq. a Lawyer and Deputy-speaker of the House of Commons. a Member also of the Long Robe, and a well-practised but ill counselled Lawyer — who for the Fee of this wicked combination, had Liberty to get what he could, being foysted in as one of the illegal recruits of the Long-Parliament. He sate in the Chair of the Scorner when Lenthall the Speaker was sick of the sullens for ten days, upon the approach of General Monke; and gave himself the Thanks of the House, while three Kingdoms gave him their Curses. He is relatively good, by a Brother now living, Fel∣low of Oriel-Colledge in Oxford, for whose sake I will speak no more of him, till Justice finde him, for he is fled. | Col. Valentine Walton,Valentine Walton, Bro∣ther in law to Cromwel, and Governour of Lyn. whose first remarque was the marriage of Crom∣wel's Sister, by whose awe and command he was made by the Parliament Go∣vernour of Lyn, and Bashaw of the Isle of Ely; which place he had fortified, if before Cromwel could have compleated his designe, he had been forced thi∣ther. He hath escaped hitherto, but remains in the list of the Fugitives of that tribe. | Col. Edward Whalley;Edward Wha∣ley, a Wollen-draper, his Fa∣mily of Not∣tinghamshire, a good souldier. once a Wollen-draper, descended from a Family in Nottingham-shire, but decaying, left the Ell and took up the Spear, and from our first Troubles continued in them, till he rose to be Commissary-General of the Horse. These advantages taught him first to betray the King at Hampton-Court under pretence of affection, when he made him fly to the Isle of Wight, and to murder him afterwards, without any scruple. He is fled also. | Edmund Ludlow,Edm. Ludlow the son of a Traytor, a da∣ring souldier. whose Father was a Traytor before him, and uttered Trea∣sonable words against the King in the House of Commons in 1643. which were afterwards accomplished by his Son in this unparallell'd Fact, who by several gradations in the Parliament and Army came to be a Lieutenant-Gene∣ral, and one of the chief Commissioners for Ireland.Sir Michael Livesey of Kent. | Sir Michael Livesey, a person of an undone reputation and Estate in Kent, whose Plunder-Master-General he was in the progress of the War; a fit person for the employment,John Hewson, a Shoo-maker, dead in Exile, a bold Com∣mander. Dignum patella operculum. | Iohn Hewson, a broken Shoo-maker or Cobler, who by degrees rose to be a Colonel: a Fellow fit for any mischief, and capable of nothing else, as his sto∣ry will declare, and therefore no wonder that he was a partaker in this impie∣ty. He is since dead in Exile, and was buried by report at Amsterdam. | William Goffe,Will. Goffe, a Salters Ap∣prentice, and a bold Comman∣der. a Salters Apprentice, run from his Master into the Army, and
by his boldness was notified to the Grandees thereof, who liking of his hu∣mour preferred him, and served themselves with his company in this flagiti∣ous crime. | Cornelius Holland,Cor. Holland, a servant to Sir Hen. Vane. a Servant to Sir Henry Vane, and preferred by him to the Green-cloth in the Kings Houshould. His Father was a poor man, and dyed a Prisoner in the Fleet; but this Fellow got a vast Estate by his disloyalty against a good Master,Thomas Chal∣loner, a great speech-maker against the K. whom he not onely robbed but murthered. | Thomas Chal∣loner, a great Republican, and Enemy to the King, his Family and Government, since he knew what it was; the great Speech-maker against him, having been a traveller, and no doubt Jesuitically affected, as he made more visibly manifest in the practise of their Doctrine of Regicide.Will. Cawley a Brewer of Chichester. | William Cawley, a Brewer of Chichester, and returned for a recruit of the Long-Parliament, could not for Trade-sake but concur with his Brethren O∣liver Cromwel and Thomas Scot. | Nic. Love son to Dr. Love of Winchester.Nicholas Love, Doctor Love's Son of Winchester, Chamber-fellow with the Speaker Lenthall, made one of the six Clerks of Chancery in Master Penrud∣ducks place; a violent Enemy against the King and his Friends, from the very beginning of our Troubles,John Dixwel, Governour of Dover-Castle. and an Army-partaker in this horrible Act. | Iohn Dixwell, a recruit of the Long-Parliament for Dover, Colonel and Go∣vernour of Dover-Castle; one so far obliged to them for their promotion of him,Daniel Bla∣grave, a re∣cruit for Rea∣ding. that he could do no less for them, than assist them in this grand Conspi∣racy against the King. | Daniel Blagrave, a recruit also for Reading in Bark-shire, of a small but com∣petent Fortune, there to have kept him guiltless of this great offence. | Daniel Broughton, a Clerk.Daniel Broughton, a Clerk, bred up among Committees in the War, and pre∣ferred therefore at last to be chief Scribe to this Pharisaical murderous crue of the High Court of Justice. | Edward Dendy,Edward Den∣dy, Serjeant at Arms. Serjeant at Arms to the said Court, who had outed his Fa∣ther from the employment of the Mace before: no wonder such a Rebel to his Father, should prove a parricide to his Prince. These following being of the Kings Iudges, but recanting, were par∣doned, or otherwise mulcted and punished. John Hutchi∣son fined.Col. Iohn Hutchison, who both Sentenced and Signed to his Majesties Exe∣cution, by a timely repentance (which he publikely testified by tears) obtain∣ed his pardon, being onely discharged the House of Commons, and all fu∣ture Trusts, and fined a years profit of his Estate to the King. Col. Francis Lassels, a York-shire man, who sate once, but neither Sentenced nor Signed,Francis Las∣sels fined. was mulcted accordingly as Colonel Hutchison, having alike given▪ proof his sorrow and detestation of that monstrous Fact. Lord Munson. Ja: Challoner Esq. Sir Hen. Mildmay. Ro. Wallop Esq. Sir Ja: Har∣rington and John Phelps, their Estates Forfeited, drawn to Ty∣burn, and Im∣prisoned during life.William Lord Munson, Iames Challoner Esq. deceased in the Tower, Sir Hen. Mildmay, Robert Wallop Esq. Sir Iames Harrington, and Iohn Phelps another of the Clerks, for sitting in the said pretended High Court of Iustice, were by Act of Parliament deprived of their Estates, and ordered to be drawn to Ti∣burn in Sledges, with Ropes about their Necks, as Traytors are used, and so back again to the Tower, there to be imprisoned during their natural Lives. This is the perfect Catalogue and Character of these unfortunate men, who in obedience to the said pretended Act, or rather out of dread of Cromwel and his Red-coats, (though some others named in the said Act wisely withdrew themselves) met according to appointment in Westminster-hall, having adjour∣ned thither from the Painted-Chamber, where they had chosen Serjeant Brad∣shaw for their Bold President, and had made Proclamation at the Palace-gate and in London for the Witnesses (whom they had raked out of the refuse and most perdite sort of the People) to be ready there with their evidence; which Witnesses were numbered to near 40. So much for the preparation, come we now to the perpetration.
The High Court of Iustice. On Saturday,The High Court of Iustice sits Jan. 20. being the twentieth day of Ianuary, 1648. Bradshaw Presi∣dent of the High Court of Iustice, with about seventy of the Members of the said Court, having Colonel Fox, and sixteen Fellows with Partizans, and a Sword born by Colonel Humphrey, and a Mace by Serjeant Dendy, with their, and other Officers of the said Court marching before them, came to the place ordered to be prepared for their sitting, at the West-end of the great Hall in Westminster,A crimson Vel∣vet-chair and Cushion for the President. where the President in a Crimson-Velvet Chair, fixed in the midst of the Court, placed himself, having a Desk with a Crimson-Velvet Cushion be∣fore him. The rest of the Members placing themselves on each side of him, upon the several seats or benches, prepared and hung with Scarlet for that pur∣pose; and the Partizans dividing themselves on each side of the Court before them. The Court being thus set,Silence made, the Hall-gate set open. and Silence made, the Great Gate of the said Hall was set open, to the end that all persons, (without exception) desirous to see, or hear, might come into it; upon which the Hall was presently filled, and Silence again ordered. This done,Col. Thomlin∣son commanded to bring his prisoner. Colonel Thomlinson, who had the charge of the King, as a Pri∣soner, was commanded to bring him to the Court; who within a quarter of an hours space brought him, attended with about twenty Officers with Parti∣zans marching before him; there being Colonel Hacker and other Guard-men, to whose care and custody he was then committed, marching in his Rear. Being thus brought up within the face of the Court,He is brought to the Bar, a chair of crimson-Velvet set for him. the Serjeant at Arms, with his Mace, received and conducted him streight to the Bar, where a Crim∣son-Velvet Chair was set for the King. After a stern looking upon the Court, and the people in the Galleries on each side of him, he placed himself, not at all moving his Hat, or otherwise shewing the least respect to the Court; but presently rose up again, and turned about, looking downwards upon the Guards placed on the left side, and on the multitude of Spectators on the right side of the said great Hall.Silence made, the Act for the Tryal of Charles Stu∣art King of England read. After Silence made among the people, the Act of Par∣liament for the Trying of Charles Stuart King of England, was read over by the Clerk of the Court; who sate on one side of the Table covered with a rich Turkey-carpet, and placed at the feet of the said President; upon which Table was also laid the Sword and Mace. After reading the said Act,The Names of the Commissio∣ners read. the several names of the Commissioners were cal∣led over; every one who was present, rising up, and answering to his call. The King having again placed himself in his Chair, with his face towards the Court, Silence being again ordered, the President stood up, and said; President. Charles Stuart,The Presidens speech to the King. King of England, The Commons of England Assem∣bled in Parliament, being deeply sensible of the Calamities that have been brought up∣on this Nation, (which is fixed upon you as the principal Author of it) have resolved to make inquisition for Blood, and according to that debt and duty they owe to Iustice, to God, the Kingdom, and themselves, and according to the Fundamental Power that rests in themselves, They have resolved to bring you to Tryal and Iudge∣ment; and for that purpose have constituted this High Court of Justice, before which you are brought. This said Cook Sollicitor-General of the Commonwealth (standing with∣in a Bar on the right hand of the King) offered to speak;Cook Solici∣tor-General offers to speak; is forbid by the King. but the King having a staff in his hand, held it up, and laid it upon the said Cooks shoulder two or three times, bidding him hold: Nevertheless, the President ordering him to go on, he said: Cook. My Lord,He proceeds. I am commanded to charge Charles Stuart King of Eng∣land, in the name of the Commons of England, with Treason and high Misdemea∣nors; I desire the said Charge may be read.
The said Charge being delivered to the Clerk of the Court, the President ordered it should be read, but the King bid him hold: Nevertheless, being com∣manded by the President to read it,The Charge read. the Clerk begun. The Charge being read, (which, for its falshood and Treasonable impudence, is purposely omitted, as imputing to the King the Blood spilt, by his pre∣sence in several Fights;President de∣mands the Kings Answer.) The President replyed: Sir, you have heard your Charge read, &c. The Court expects your Answer. King. I would know by what power I am called hither: I was, not long a∣go, in the Isle of Wight; how I came there, is a longer story than I think is fit at this time for me to speak of; but there I entred into a Treaty with both Houses of Parliament, with as much publike faith as 'tis possible to be had of any people in the World. I Treated there with a number of Honourable Lords and Gentlemen, and Treated honestly and uprightly: I cannot say but they did very nobly with me; we were upon a concluion of the Treaty. Now I would know by what Authority,His Majesty refuseth to An∣swer, and dis∣owns the Au∣thority of the Court. I mean, lawful: there are many unlawful Authorities in the world, Theeves and Robbers by the high ways; but I would know by what Authority I was brought from thence, and carried from place to place, (and I know not what) and when I know by what lawful Authority, I shall answer: Remember I am your King, and what sins you bring upon this Land. Think well upon it, I say, think well upon it, before you go further from one sin to a greater; therefore let me know by what lawful Authority I am seated here, and I shall not be unwilling to Answer: in the mean time I shall not betray my Trust. I have a Trust committed to me by God, by old and lawful descent, I will not betray it, to Answer to a new and unlawful Au∣thority; therefore resolve me that, and you shall hear more of me. President. If you had been pleased to have observed what was hinted to you by the Court at your first coming hither, you would have known by what Authority, which Authority requires you, in the name of the people of England, of which you are E∣lected King, to answer them. King. No Sir, I deny that. President. If you acknowledg not the Authority of the Court, they must pro∣ceed. King. I do tell them so, England was never an Elective Kingdom, but an Hereditary Kingdom for neer these thousand years:Proves his Ti∣tle to the Crown, by suc∣cession, not E∣lection. therefore let me know by what Authority I am called hither. I do stand more for the Liberty of my people than any here, that come to be my pretended Judges; and therefore let me know by what lawful Authority I am seated here, and I will Answer it, other∣wise I will not Answer it. President. Is prevented by the Presidents insolent re∣bukes.Sir, how really you have managed your Trust, is known: your way of Answer is to interrogate the Court; which beseems not you in this condition. You have been told of it twice or thrice. King. Here is a Gentleman (Lieutenant-Colonel Cobbet) ask him, if he did not bring me from the Isle of Wight by force? I do not come here as submit∣ting to the Court; I will stand as much for the priviledge of the House of Commons, rightly understood, as any man here whatsoever. I see no House of Lords here that may constitute a Parliament, and (the King too) should have been. Is this the bringing of the King to his Parliament? Is this the bringing an end to the Treaty in the Publike faith of the world? Let me see a legal Au∣thority warranted by the Word of God, the Scriptures, or warranted by the Constitutions of the Kingdom, and I will Answer. President. Sir, You have propounded a Question, and have been Answered: see∣ing you will not Answer,Who urgeth for an Answer. the Court will consider how to proceed; in the mean time, those that brought you hither, are to take charge of you back again. The Court desires to know whether this he all the Answer you will give, or no? King. The King still refuseth, de∣manding their Authority.Sir, I would desire that you would give me and all the world satis∣faction in this; let me tell you, it is not a slight thing you are about. I am
sworn to keep the Peace by that duty I owe to God and my Country, and I will do it to the last breath of my Body; and therefore you shall do well to satisfie first God, and then the Country, by what Authority you do it: if you do it by an usurped Authority, that will not last long. There is a God in Heaven that will call you, and all that give you Power, to an account: satisfie me in that, and I will Answer, otherwise I betray my Trust, and the Liberties of the people, and therefore think of that, and then I shall be willing. For I do avow, that it is as great a sin to withstand lawful Authority, as it is to submit to a Tyran∣nical, or any other ways unlawful Authority; and therefore satisfie God, and me, and all the World in that, and you shall receive my Answer: I am not afraid of the Bill. President. The Court expects you should give them a final Answer:The President answers, their Authority is Gods and the Kingdoms. their purpose is to adjourn till Monday next, if you do not satisfie your self, though we do tell you our Authority, we are satisfied with our Authority, and it is upon Gods Autho∣rity and the Kingdoms: and that Peace you speak of, will be kept in the doing of Iustice, and that's our present work. King. Let me tell you, if you will shew me what lawful Authority you have, I shall be satisfied: But what you have hitherto said, satisfies no reasonable man. President. That's in your apprehension; we think it reasonable that are your Iudges. King. 'Tis not my apprehension, nor yours neither, that ought to de∣cide it. President. The Court hath heard you,The Court riseth and you are to be disposed of as they have commanded. Two things were remarkable in this days proceedings. It is observed, That as the Charge was reading against the King, the silver head of his staff fell off,The head of the Kings staff falls down, e stoops and takes it up. Some cry, God save the King; others, Iustice and Execution, by Axtels di∣rections. the which he wondered at; and seeing none to take it up, he stoop'd for it himself, and put it in his pocket. The other, that the people as the King went out cried aloud and shouted God save the King, while the weaker noise of hired and commanded Souldiers cried out Iustice and Execution, at Colonel Axtels Threats and Bastinadoes. At the High Court of Iustice sitting in Westminster-Hall, Monday, January 22. 1648. Upon the Kings coming a shout was made.The Court sits, the King comes in, the people shout. Solicitor moves for the Kings Answer. Sollicitor. May it please your Lordship, my Lord President, I did at the last Court in the behalf of the Commons of England, exhibit and give into this Court a Charge of High Treason, and other High Crimes, against the Prisoner at the Bar, &c. My humble Motion to this High Court is, That the Prisoner may be directed to make a positive Answer, or else the Charge may be taken pro confesso, and the Court may proceed according to Justice. President. Sir, You may remember at the last Court you were told the occasion of your being brought hither, &c. you were then pleased to make some scruples concer∣ning the Authority of this Court, &c. Since that, the Court hath taken into conside∣ration what you then said, they are fully satisfied with their own Authority, and they hold it fit you should stand satisfied with it too: and they do require it, that you do give a positive and particular Answer to this Charge that is exhibited against you:President in∣sists upon it. they do expect you should either confess or deny it; if you deny it, it is offered in the behalf of the Nation to be made good against you; their Authority they do avow to the whole world, that the whole Kingdom are to rest satisfied in; and you are to lose no more time, but to give a positive Answer thereunto. King. When I was here last, 'tis true, I made that Question; and truly if it
were onely my own particular case,His Majesty still denies the Authority of the Court. I would have satisfied my self with the Protestation I made the last time I was here against the Legality of this Court, and that a King cannot be tried by any Superiour Jurisdiction on Earth; but it is not my case alone, it is the Freedom and Liberty of the people of Eng∣land, and do you pretend what you will, I stand more for their Liberties. For of Power without Law, may make Laws, may alter the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, I do not know what Subject he is in England, that can be sure of his Life, or any thing that he calls his own; therefore when I came here, I did expect particular Reasons,Refuseth to plead▪ and of∣fers to shw his Reasons. to know by what Law, what Authority you did proceed against me here, and therefore I am a little to seek what to say to you in this particular, because the Affirmative is proved, the Negative often is very hard to do: but since I cannot perswade you to do it, I shall tell you my Reasons as short as I can. My Reasons why in Conscience, and the duty I owe to God first, and my peo∣ple next, for the preservation of their Lives, Liberties and Estates; I conceive I cannot answer this,Here the King would have de∣livered his Reasons, but was not suffered. till I be satisfied of the legality of it. All proceedings against any man whatsoever — President. Sir, I must interrupt you; which I would not do, but that what you do is not agreable to the proceedings of any Court of Iustice: you are about to enter into Argument and Dispute concerning the Authority of this Court, before whom you ap∣pear as a Prisoner, and are Charged as a Delinquent; if you take upon you to dis∣pute the Authority of the Court, we may not do it, nor will any Court give way un∣to it; you are to submit unto it, you are to give in a punctual and direct Answer, whether you will Answer to your Charge or no, and what your Answer is. King. Sir, by your favour, I do not know the forms of Law, I do know Law and Reason:His Majesty presseth to shew his Reasons, though I am no Lawyer professed, yet I know as much Law as any Gentleman in England; and therefore (under favour) I do plead for the Liberties of the people of England more than you do, and therefore if I should impose a belief upon any man without Reasons give for it, it were un∣reasonable; but I must tell you, That by that Reason that I have as thus infor∣med, I cannot yield unto it. President. Sir, I must interrupt you, you may not be permitted: you speak of Law and Reason,but cannot be permitted. and there is both against you. Sir, the Vote of the Commons of Eng∣land Assembled in Parliament, it is the Reason of the Kingdom, and they are those two that have given that Law, according to which you should have Ruled and Reigned. Sir, you are not to dispute our Authority, you are told it again by the Court. Sir, it will be taken notice of, that you stand in contempt of the Court, and your contempt will be recorded accordingly. King. I do not know how a King can be a Delinquent: not by any Law that ever I heard of; all men (Delinquents or what you will) let me tell you, they may put in Demurrers against any proceedings as legal,He desires to Demur. and I do demand that, and demand to be heard with my Reasons; if you deny that, you deny Reason. President. Sir, you have offered something to the Court, I shall speak something unto you of the sense of the Court; Sir, neither you nor any man are permitted to dis∣pute that point,He is over-ru∣led by the Court, you are concluded, you may not Demur to the Iurisdiction of the Court; if you do, I must let you know, that they over-rule your Demurrer: they sit here by the Authority of the Commons of England, and all your Predecessors and you are responsible to them. King. I deny that, shew me one precedent. — President. Sir, you ought not to interrupt while the Court is speaking to you; this point is not to be debated by you,and Interrup∣ted. neither will the Court permit you to do it; if you offer it by way of Demurrer to the Iurisdiction of the Court, they have considered of their Iurisdiction, they do affirm their own Iurisdiction. King. I say Sir, by your favour, that the Commons of England was never a Court of Judicature, I would know how they came to be so. President. Sir you are not to be permitted to go on in that speech, and these Dis∣courses.
Then the Clerk of the Court read as followeth. Charles Stuart,The Clek red. King of England, You have been accused on the behalf of the people of England, of High Treason, and other high Crimes; the Court have deter∣mined, that you ought to Answer the same. King. I will Answer the same, as soon as I know by what Authority you do this. President. If this be all that you will say,The Guards charged to take away their Pri∣soner. then, Gentlemen, you that brought the Prisoner hither, take charge of him back again. King. I do require that I may give in my Reasons why I do not Answer; and give me time for that. President. Sir, 'Tis not for Prisoners to require. King. Prisoner? Sir, I am not an ordinary Prisoner. President. The Court hath considered of their Iurisdiction, and they have alrea∣dy affirmed their Iurisdiction: if you will not Answer, we shall give order to Record your default. King. You never heard my Reasons yet. President. Sir, your Reasons are not to be heard against the highest Iurisdi∣ction. King. Shew me that Jurisdiction, where Reason is not to be heard. President. Sir, we shew it you here, the Commons of England: and the next time you are brought, you will know more the pleasure of the Court, and it may be, their final determination. King. Shew me wherever the House of Commons was a Court of Judicature of that kind. President. Serjeant, take away the Prisoner. King. Well Sir, remember that the King is not suffered to give his Reasons for the Liberty and Freedom of all his Subjects. President. Sir, you are not to have liberty to use this Language; how great a friend you have been to the Laws and Liberties of the people, let all England and the World Iudge. King. Sir, under favour, it was the Liberty, Freedom and Laws of the Sub∣ject that ever I took — defended my self with Arms: I never took up Arms against the people, but for my people and the Laws. President. The command of the Court must be obeyed; no answer will be given to the Charge. King. Well Sir. Then the President ordered the default to be recorded, and the contempt of the Court,The Court order the default and contempt to be Recorded. and that no Answer would be given to the Charge. And so the King was guarded forth to Sir Robert Cotton's house. Then the Court adjourned to the Painted-chamber on Tuesday at twelve a clock,The King guar∣ded to Sir Ro. Cottons. The Court ad∣journs. The Court sits again. and from thence they adjourned again to Westminster-hall, at which time all persons concerned were to give their attendance. At the High Court of Iustice sitting in Westminster-hall, Tuesday, January 23. 1648. O yes made. Silence commanded, The Court called, seventy three persons present. The King came in with his Guard,The King comes. looking with an austere countenance up∣on the Court, and sate down. Cook. Sollicitor-General. May it please your Lordship, my Lord President, This is now the third time, that by the great grace and favour of this high Court, the Prisoner hath been brought to the Bar, before any Issue joyned in the Cause. My Lord, I did at the first Court Exhibit a Charge against him, &c.—
The Sollicitor moves the Court for Iudgement.My Lord, after this great delay of Justice, I shall now humbly move your Lord∣ship for speedy Judgment against him. My Lord, I might press your Lordship upon the whole, according to the known Rules of the Law of the Land, That if a Prisoner shall stand as contumacious in contempt, and shall not put in an Issuable Plea, Guilty or not Guilty of the Charge given against him, whereby he may come to a fair Tryal; that as by an implicite Confession, it may be taken pro confesso, as it hath been done to those who have deserved more fvour than the Prisoner at the Bar has done: but besides, my Lord, I shall humbly press your Lordship upon the whole Fact. The House of Commons, the su∣preme Authority and Jurisdiction of the Kingdom, they have Declared, that it is notorious, that the matter of the Charge is true, as it is in truth (my Lord) as clear as Crystal, and as the Sun that shines at Noon-day; which if your Lord∣ship and the Court be not satisfied in, I have notwithstanding, on the People of Englands behalf, several Witnesses to produce: And thereore I do hum∣bly pray, and yet I must confess it is not so much I, as the nnocent Blood that hath been shed, the cry whereof is very great for Justice and Judgement; and therefore I do humbly pray, that speedy Judgement be pronounced against the prisoner at the Bar. President. Sir, you have heard what is moved by the Counsel on the behalf of the Kingdom against you. Sir, you may well remember, and if you do not▪ the Court cannot forget, what Dilatory dealings the Court hath found at your hands. You were told,The Presidents speech in behalf of the Court, that it was not for you, nor any other man, to dispute the Jurisdiction of the Supreme and highest Authority of England, from which there is no appeal, and touching which there must be no dispute; yet you did persist in such carriage, as you gave no manner of obedience, nor did you acknowledge any Authority in them, nor the High Court that constituted this Court of Justice. Sir, I must let you know from the Court, that they are very sensible of these delays of yours, and that they ought not, being thus Authorized by the Supreme Court of England, to be thus trifled withal; and that they might in Iustice, if they pleased, and according to the Rules of Iustice, take advantage of the delays, and proceed to pronounce Iudgement against you; yet nevertheless they are pleased to give direction, and on their behalfs I do require you, that you make a positive Answer unto this Charge that is against you. Sir, in plain terms, for Iustice knows no respect of per∣sons, you are to give your positive and final Answer in plain English,he demands a positive answer from the King. whether you be Guilty or not Guilty of these Treasons laid to your charge. The King after a little pause, said, His Majesty de∣sires to speak for the Liberties of the people:When I was here yesterday, I did desire to speak for the Liberties of the people of England; I was interrupted: I desire to know yet whether I may speak free∣ly or not. President. Sir, you have heard the resolution of the Court upon the like Question the last day, and you were told, that having such a Charge of so high a Nature a∣gainst you, and your Work was, that you ought to acknowledge the Iurisdiction of the Court, And to Answer to your Charge. Sir, if you Answer to your Charge, which the Court gives you leave now to do, though they might have taken the advan∣tage of your contempt,but is not per∣mitted till he gives his An∣swer to Guilty or not Guilty. yet if you be able to Answer to your Charge, when you have once Answered, you shall be heard at large; make the best Defence you can. But Sir, I must let you know from the Court, at their commands, that you are not to be permitted to issue out into other discourses, till such time as you have given a positive Answer concerning the Matter that is Charged upon you. King. For the Charge, I value it not a Rush, it is the Liberty of the People of England that I stand for; for me to acknowledge a new Court, that I never heard of before, I that am your King, that should be an example to all the peo∣ple of England, to uphold Justice, to maintain the old Laws; indeed I do not know how to do it: you spoke very well the first day that I came here, (on Saturday) of the Obligations that I had laid upon me by God, to the main∣tenance of the Liberties of my people: The same Obligation you spake of, I do acknowledge to God that I owe to Him, and to my people, to defend, as much
as in me lies, to give any parti∣cular answer, desires  to shew his Rea∣sons. the antient Laws of the Kingdom; therefore until I may now that this is not against the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, by your fvor, I can put in no particular Answer: If you will give me time, I will then shew you my Reasons why I cannot do it, and this — Here being interrupted, he said, B your favour,is interrupted, you ought not to interrupt me: how I came here, I know no, thre's no Law for it, to make your King your Prisoner: I was lately in a Treaty up on the publike Faith of the Kingdom,again, that was the known — the two Houses of Parliament, that was the Representative of the Kingdom; and when that I had almost made an end of the Treaty, then I was hurried a∣way and brought hither, and therefore — Here the President interrupted him,and again. and said, Sir, you must know the pleasure of the Court. King. By your favour Sir, — President. Nay Sir, by your favour, you may not be permitted to fall into these discourses; you appear as a Delinquent, you have not acknowledged the Authority of the Court; the Court craves it not of you, and once more they command you to give your positive Answer — Clerk, do your Duty. King. Duty Sir! The Clerk reads.The Clerk reads Charles Stuart, King of England, you are accused in the behalf of the Commons of England, of divers high Crimes and Treasons; which Charge hath been read unto you; the Court now requires you to give your positive and final Answer, by way of confession or denial of the Charge. King. Sir, I say again to you, So that I might give satisfaction to the peo∣ple of England of the clearness of my proceedings,His Majesty ju∣stifies his pro∣ceedings, and refuseth to An∣swer to the Charge. not by way of Answer, not in this way, but to satisfie them that I have done nothing against that Trust that hath been committed to me, I would do it; but to acknowledge a new Court against their Priviledges; to alter the Fundamental Laws of the King∣dom; Sir, you must excuse me. President. Sir, this is the third time that you have publikely disowned the Court, and put an affront upon it; how far you have preserv'd the Priviledges of the Peo∣ple, your Actions have spoke it; but truly Sir, mens intentions ought to be known by their Actions: you have written your meaning in bloody Characters throughout the whole Kingdom: but Sir, you understand the pleasure of the Court. — Clerk, Re∣cord the default,The Guards or∣dered to take charge of their Prisoner. — and Gentlemen, you that took charge of the Prisoner, take him back again. King. I will onely say this one word to you, If it were onely my own parti∣cular, I would not say any more, nor interrupt you. President. Sir, you have heard the pleasure of the Court, and you are (not∣withstanding you will not understand it) to finde that you are before a Court of Iustice. Then the King went forth with his Guard,The King goes forth, and the Court adjourns. and Proclamation was made, that all persons who had then appeared, and had further to do at the Court, might depart into the Painted-Chamber, to which place the Court did forthwith ad∣journ, and intended to meet in Westminster-hall by ten of the Clock the next morning. Cryer. God bless the Kingdom of England.
His Majesties Reasons a∣gainst the Iu∣risdiction of the Court, which be inten∣ded to speak in Court, but was hindered.His Majesties Reasons against the pretended Iurisdiction of the High Court of Iustice, which he intended to have delivered in writing on Monday, January 22. 1648. But was not permitted. HAving already made my Protestations, not onely against the illegality of this pretended Court, but also that no earthly Power can justly call Me (who am your King) in question as a Delinquent; I would not any more open my Mouth upon this oc∣casion, more than to refer my self to what I have spoken, were I in this case alone concerned. But the duty I owe to God in the preservation of the true Liberty of my People, will not suffer me at this time to be silent: For, how can any free-born Subject of England call life, or any thing he possesseth, his own, if Power without Right may daily make new▪ and abrogate the old Funda∣mental Law of the Land? which I now take to be the present case. VVherefore when I came hither, I expected that you would have endeavoured to have satisfied me concerning these grounds which hinder me to answer to your pretended Impeachment; but since I see that nothing I can say will move you to it (though Negatives are not so naturally proved as Affirmatives) yet I will shew you the Reasons why I am confident you cannot Judge me, nor indeed the meanest man in England: for I will not (like you) without shew∣ing a Reason, seek to impose a belief upon my Subjects. No proceeding just, but what is warranted by the Laws of God or man.There is no proceeding just against any man, but what is warrant∣ed either by Gods Laws, or the Municipal Laws of the Country where he lives. Now I am most confident, this days proceeding can∣not be warranted by Gods Law; for on the contrary, the Authority of obedience unto Kings is clealy warranted, and strictly comman∣ded both in the Old and New Testaments; which if denied, I am rea∣dy instantly to Prove: and for the Question now in hand, there it is said, That where the word of a King is, there is Power; and who may say unto him, What doest thou? Eccles. 8.4. Then for the Law of this Land, I am no less confident that no learned Lawyer will affirm that an Impeachment can lie against the King,No Impeachment can lie against the King. they all going in His Name: and one of their Maximes is, That the King can do no wrong. Besides, the Law upon which you ground your procee∣dings, must either be Old or New: if Old, shew it; if New, tell what Authority warranted by the Fundamental Laws of the Land hath made it, and when. But how the House of Commons can erect a Court of Iudicature,The House of Commons can∣not erect a Court of Iu∣dicature. which was never one it self, (as is well known to all Lawyers) I leave to God and the world to Iudge: And it were full as strange that they should pretend to make Laws without King or Lords House, to any that have heard speak of the Laws of England. And admitting, but not granting, that the People of Englands Commission could grant your pretended Power; I see nothing you can shew for that: for certainly you never asked the question of the tenth
man in the Kingdom: and in this way you manifestly wrong even the poorest Plow-man, if you demand not his free consent; nor can you pretend any colour for this your pretended Commission without the Consent at least of the major part of every man in England,Nor are the Membe of this House Cois∣sioned by the people of Eng∣land. of whatsoever quality or Condition, which I am sure you never went about to seek; so far are you from having it. Thus you see that I speak not for my own right alone as I am your King, but also for the true Liberty of all my Subjects; which consists not in the power of Government, but in living under such laws, such a Govern∣ment, as may give themselves the best assurance of their lives, and propriety of their goods.The Priviledges o aliamet Violated Nor in this must or do I forget the Pri∣viledges of both Houses of Parliament, which this days proceedings do not onely violate, but likewise occasion the greatest breach of their publike Faith, that I believe ever was heard of; with which I am far from charging the two Houses: for all the pretended Crimes laid against me, bear date long before this late Treaty at Newport, in which I having concluded, as much as in me lay, and hopefully ex∣pecting the Houses agreement thereunto, I was suddenly surpriz'd, and hurried from thence as a Prisoner, upon which account I am a∣gainst my will brought hither; where since I am come, I cannot but to my power, defend the antient Laws and Liberties of this King∣nom, together with my own just Rights. Then for any thing I can see,The higher House excluded, and the major part of the lower deterred from sitting. the Higher House is totally excluded; and for the House of Com∣mons, it is too well known that the major part of them are detained or deterred from sitting; so as if I'had no other, this were sufficient Reason for me to protest against the Lawfulness of your pretended Court. Besides all this, the Peace of the Kingdom is not the least of My thoughts: and what hopes of Settlement is there, so long as Pow∣er reigns without Rule or Law,The frame of Government chaged. changing the whole frame of that Go∣vernment, under which this Kingdom hath flourished for many hun∣dred years? (nor will I say what will fall out, in case this lawless unjust Proceedings against me do go on.) And believe it, the Com∣mons of England will not thank you for this Change, for they will remember how happy they have been of late years, under the reign of Queen Elizabeth, the King my Father, and my Self, until the be∣ginning of these unhappy Troubles; and will have cause to doubt that they shall never be so happy under any new. And by this time it will be too sensibly evident, that the Arms I took up, were onely to defend the Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, against those who have supposed my Power hath totally changed the antient Govern∣ment. Thus having shewed you briefly the Reasons why I cannot submit to your pretended Authority, without violating the Trust which I have from God, for the Welfare and Liberty of my People: I expect from you either clear Reasons to convince my Iudgement, shewing me that I am in an Error (and then truly I will Answer) or that you will withdraw your proceedings. ¶ This the King intended to speak in Westminster-hall on Monday, Jan. 22. but against Reason was hindred.
The Court sits.The Proceedings of the High Court of Iustice sitting at Westmin∣ster-hall, on Saturday the 27 of January, 1648. Silence com∣manded.O yes made. Silence commanded. The Court called, Serjeant Bradshaw Pre∣sident, in his Scarlet-Robe (sutable to the work of this day) with sixty eight other Members of the Court called. As the King came into the Court,The King comes, the soul∣diers cry for Iustice. His Majesty de∣sires to be heard. in his usual posture, with his Hat on, a cry made in the Hall by some of the Souldiers for Iustice, Iustice, and Execution. King. I shall desire a word to be heard a little, and I hope I shall give no occasion of interruption. President. You may Answer in your time, hear the Court first. King. If it please you Sir, I desire to be heard, and I shall not give any occa∣sion of interruption, and it is onely in a word: A sudden judgment — President. but not permit∣ted.You shall be heard in due time, but you are to hear the Court first. King. Sir, I desire it; it will be in order to what I believe the Court will say; and therefore Sir, a hasty Judgement is not so soon re-called. President. Sir, you shall be heard before the Iudgement be given, and in the mean time you may forbear. King. Well Sir, shall I be heard before the Judgement given? President. Gentlemen, it is well known to all or most of you here present, That the Prisoner at the Bar ath been several times convented, and brought before the Court, to make Answer to a charge of Treason and other high Crimes exhibited a∣gainst him, in the name of the People of England; to which Charge, being re∣quired to Answer he hath been so far from obeying the commands of the Court, by sub∣mitting to their Iustice, as he began to take upon him to offer Reasoning and debate unto the Authority of the Court, and of the highest Court that constituted them to try and judge him; but being over-ruled in that, and required to make his Answer, he was still pleased to continue contumacious, and to refuse to submit or Answer, &c. But Sir, if you have any thing to say in defence of your self concerning the matter charged, the Court hath given me command to let you know they will hear you. King. Since I see you will not hear any thing of debate concerning that which I confess I thought most material for the Peace of the Kingdom, and for the Liberty of the Subject, I shall wave it, I shall speak nothing to it; but onely I must-tell you, that this many a day all things have been taken away from me, but that that I call more dear to me than my life, which is My Con∣science and my Honour; and if I had respect to my life more than the Peace of the Kingdoms and the Liberty of the Subject, certainly I should have made a particular defence for my self; for by that at least-wise I might have delayed an ugly Sen∣tence, which I believe will pass upon me: therefore certainly Sir, as a man that hath some understanding, some knowledge of the world, if that my Zeal to my Country had not over-born the care that I have of my own preservation, I should have gone another way to work than that I have done. Now Sir, I con∣ceive that an hasty Sentence once past, may be sooner repented than recalled; and truely the self-same desire that I have for the Peace of the Kingdom, and the Liberty of the Subject, more than my own particular, does make me now at last desire, that having somethimg to say that concerns both, I desire before Sen∣tence be given, that I may be heard in the Painted Chamber before the Lords and Commons: this delay cannot be prejudicial to you, whatsoever I say; if no Reason, those that hear me must be Judges; if it be Reason, and real for the Welfare of the Kingdom, and the Liberty of the Subject, I am sure on it, it is very well worth the hearing; therefore I do conjure you, as you love that you pretend, I hope it is real, the Liberty of the Subject, the Peace of the King∣dom, that you will grant me the hearing, before any Sentence e passed: I one∣ly desire you will take this into your consideration; it may be you have not heard of it beforehand; if you will, I'le retire, and you may think of it: but
if I cannot get this Liberty, I do here protest, that so fair shews of Liberty and Peace are pure shews, and not otherwise, and that you will not hear your KING. President. Sir, you have now spoken? King. Yes Sir. President. And this that you have said is a further declining of the Iurisdiction of this Court, which was the thing wherein you were limited before. King. Pray excuse me Sir, for my interruption, because you mistake me; it is not a declining of it, you do Judge me before you hear me speak; I say it will not, I do not decline it, though I cannot acknowledge the Jurisdiction of the Court; yet Sir, in this give me leave to say, I would do it though I did not acknowledge it in this: I do protest it is not the declining of it, since I say, if that I do say any thing but that that is for the Peace of the Kingdom and the Liberty of the Subject, then the shame is mine. Now I desire that you will take this into your consideration, if you will I'll withdraw. President. Sir, this is not altogether nw that you have moved unto us; not al∣together new to us, though the first time in person you have offered it to the Court: Sir, you say you do not Decline the Iurisdiction of the Court? King. Not in this that I have said. President. I understand you well Sir: That which you now tender, is to have a∣nother Iurisdiction, and a co-ordinate Jurisdiction. I know very well you express your self, Sir, that notwithstanding what you will offer to the Lords and Commons in the Painted-Chamber, you would nevertheless proceed on here. Sir, because you shall know the further pleasure of the Court upon that which you have moved, the Court will withdraw for a time. King. Shall I withdraw? President. Sir, you shall know the pleasure of the Court presently. The Court withdrew for half an hour into the Court of Wards.The Court with∣draws. Then the Court commanded the Serjeant at Arms to withdraw the King, and to expect order for his return again.Serejant at Arms with∣draws the King. The Court withdrew for half an hour, and returned (this withdrawing was occasioned by the importunacy and disturbance of Colonel Downs, who sate next to Cromwel;The Court re∣turns, but Downs was quickly quieted, being awed by Crom∣wel during this short stay.) President. Serjeant at Arms, send for your Prisoner. Sir, their withdrawing and adjournment was pro forma tantum; for it did not seem to them that there was any difficulty in the thing;resolving to proceed. the Court is now resolved to proceed. King. Sir,The King brought into the Court: he urgeth to be heard, and ad∣viseth the Court against a haty Iudgement. I know it is in vain for me to dispute, I am no Sceptick for to deny the power that you have, I know that you have power enough: Sir, I confess I think it would have been for the Kingdoms Peace, if you would have ta∣ken the pains to have shown the lawfulness of your power. For this delay that I have desired, I confess it is a delay, but very important for the Peace of the Kingdom; for it is not my person that I look on alone, it is the Kingdoms welfare, and the Kingdoms Peace: it is an old sentence, That we should think on long before we have resolved of great matters suddenly; Therefore Sir, I do say again, that I do put at your doors all the inconveniency of an hasty Sen∣tence. I confess I have been here now I think this week; this day eight days was the day I came here first; but a little delay of a day or two further, may give peace, whereas an Hsty Iudgement may bring on that trouble and perpe∣tual inconveniency to the Kingdom, that the Child that is unborn may repent it; and therefore again, out of the Duty I owe to God, and to my Country, I do desire that I may be heard by the Lords and Commons in the Painted-Chamber, or any other Chamber that you will appoint me. President. The Court will proceed. King. I say this Sir, That if you will hear me, I doubt not but I shall give some satisfaction to you all here, and to my people after that; and therefore I
do require you, as you will answer it at the dreadful day of Judgement, that you will consider it once again. President. Sir, I have received direction from the Court. King. Well Sir. President. If this must be re-enforc'd, or any thing of this nature, your Answer must be the same, and they will proceed to Sentence if you have nothing more to say. King. I have nothing more to say; but I shall desire that this may be entred what I have said. President. The Court then Sir hath something to say to you, which although I know it will be very unacceptable, yet notwithstanding they are willing, and are resolved to discharge their Duty.The Presidents speech in de∣fence of the Courts procee∣dings. [and so proceeded by way of iery, how other Nations in all times had taken the same course with their Kings and Prin∣ces, deposing and executing of them, especially, and more frequently in the Kings Native Realm of Scotland; mis-citing, and wresting, and abusing the truth of History, to varnish the Rhapsody and Treason of this lying Harangue: of all which, one most remarkable paragraph, as noted by the King himself with an admiration, is here inserted. Sir, That that we are now upon by the command of the highest Court, hath been and is to Try and Iudge you for those great offences of yours. Sir, the Charge hath called you Tyrant, a Traytor, a Murtherer, and a publike Enemy to the Commonwealth of England. Sir, it had been well, if any of all these terms right∣ly and justly might have been spared, if any one of them at all. King. Ha! — President. — To do Iustice Impartially, and even upon You, is all our Resolu∣tions. Sir, I say for your self, we do eartily wish and desire, that God would be pleased to give you a sense of your sins, that you would see wherein you have done amiss, that you may cry unto him, that God would deliver you from Blood guiltiness. A good King was once guilty of that particular thing, and was clear otherwise, sa∣ving in the matter of Uriah. Truly Sir, the story tells us that he was a repentant King, and it signifies enough that he had died for it, but that God was pleased to accept of him, and to give him his pardon. Thou shalt not dye, but the Child shall dye; thou hast given cause to the enemies of God to blaspheme. King. I would desire onely one word before you give Sentence, and that is; That you would hear me concerning those great Imputations that you have laid to my charge. President. Sir, You must give me leave to go on, for I am not far from your Sen∣tence, and your time is now past. King. But I shall desire you will hear me a few words to you; for truly, what ever Sentence you will put upon me, in respect of those heavy Imputa∣tions I see by your speech you have put upon me,His Majesty is interrupted. that I Sir, it is very true that — President. Sir, I must put you in minde: truly Sir, I would not willingly at this time especially interrupt you in any thing you have to say, that is proper for us to admit of; but Sir, you have not owned us as a Court, and you look upon us as a sort of people met together; and we know what Language we receive from your party. King. I know nothing of that. President. You dis-avow us as a Court, and therefore for you to address your self to us, and not to acknowledge us as a Court to judge of what you say, it is not to be permitted: and the truth is, all along from the first time, you were pleased to dis-avow and disown us, the Court needed not to have heard you one word; for un∣less they be acknowledged a Court, and engaged, it is not proper for you to speak: Sir, we have given you too much liberty already, and admitted of too much de∣lay, &c. The President commands the Sentence to be read. Make an O Yes, and com∣mand Silence while the Sentence is read.
O Yes made,Silence com∣manded, the Sentence read. Silence commanded. The Clerk read the Sentence, which was drawn up in Parchment. Whereas the Commons of England in Parliament, have appointed them an high Court of Iustice, for the Trying of Charles Stuart King of England; before whom he had been three times convented, and at first time a Charge of high Treason and other Crimes and Misdemeanours was read in the behalf of the Kingdom of England, &c. Here the Clerk read the Charge.The Charge read. Which Charge being read unto him as aforesaid, He the said Charles Stuart was required to give his Answer;The King requi∣red to give his Answer, he refuseth. but he refused so to do. [expressing the seve∣ral passages of his refusing in the former proceedings.] For all which Treasons and Crimes, this Court doth adjudge, that He the said Charles Stuart, as a Tyrant, Traytor, Murtherer, and a publike Enemy, shall be put to Death by severing his Head from his Body, Jan. 27. 1648. Which being read, Bradshaw added — This Sentence now read and published, it is the Act, Sentence, Judgement, and Resolution of the whole Court. To which they all expressed their assent by standing up, as was before a∣greed and ordered. And then the King (not being admitted to reply) was ta∣ken by his Guards and carried to Sir Robert Cottons:The King guar∣ded awa. He is abused by the Souldiers, the Souldiers as he passed down the Staires, scoffing at him, and casting the smoak of their Tobacco (a thing odious to him) in his Face, and strewing the Pipes in his way. And one more insolent than the rest Spitting in his Face; which his Majesty accor∣ding to his wonted Heroick Patience, took no more notice of, than to wipe it away. As he passed along further, hearing the same wretches crying out Ju∣stice, Execution; He said — Alass poor souls, for a piece of money they would do so for their Commanders. Being brought thus to Sir Robert Cottons, a house neer adjoyning and thence by water to White-all; the Souldiers (at their Commanders instigation, who were set on likewise by Cromwel) continued their brutish carriage toward him, abusing all that seemed to shew any respect or even compassion to him, not suffering him to rest in his Chamber, but thrusting in, and smoaking their Tobacco,disturbed in his Devotions. His admirable patience. and disturbing his privacy. But through all these Trials (unusual to Princes) he passed with such a calm and even temper, that he let nothing fall unbeseeming his former Majesty and Magnanimity. In the Evening, a Mem∣ber of the Army acquainted the Committee with his Majesties desire, that see∣ing they had passed a Sentence of Death upon him,He desires to see his Children and Doctor Juxon. and his time might be nigh, he might see his Children, and Doctor Iuxon Bishop of London might be admit∣ted to assist him in his private Devotions, and receiving the Sacrament. Both which at length were granted. At this time did some of the Grandees of the Army tempt the King with new Proposals;The King tempt∣ed with new Proposals from some Grandees of the Army. but so destructive to the peoples Liberty and Safety, so contrary to his Honour and Conscience, and so reproachful to any Christian Govern∣ment, that he with the like courage and constancy which he had shewed through∣out his Troubles, rejected, and chose the Cross; to prepare him whereto, the Lord Bishop of London on Sunday (being that day guarded at Saint Iames's) preached before him on these words — In the day when God shall judge the secrets of all men by Iesus Christ,B. Juxon preacheth before him at Saint James's. according to my Gospel. On Monday following,His Maj. giveth his Blessing to the Duke of Gloucester, and the Lady Elizabeth. His pious ad∣vice to them. the day before his death, the Duke of Gloucester and the Lady Elizabeth were brought to him, whom he most joyfully received; and giving his Blessing to the Princess▪ He had her remember to tell her Brother James, when even she should see him, That it was his Fathers last desire, that he should look no more upon Charles as his eldest Brother onely, but be obedient unto him as his Sovereign: And that they should love one another, and forgive their
Fathers Enemies. And then said unto her, Sweet-heart, you will forget this. No, said she, I shall never forget it while I live. And pouring forth abundance of Tears, promised him to write down the particulars. Then the King taking the Duke of Gloucester upon his Knee, said, Sweet-heart, now they will Cut off thy Fathers Head. (upon which words the Child looked very wishfully on him.) Mark Child what I say; They will Cut off my Head, and perhaps make thee a King: But mark what I say, you must nt be a King, so long as your Brothers Charles and James do live; for they will Cut off your Bro∣thers Heads (when they can catch them) and Cut thy Head off too at last: and therefore, I charge you do not be made a King by them. At which the Child sighing, said, I will be torn in pieces first. Which falling so unexpectedly from one so young,The Duke of Gloucester's reply. it made the King rejoyce exceedingly. Another Relation from the Lady Elizabeths own Hand. What the King said to me 29 of January last, being the last time I had the hap∣piness to see him:The Lady Eli∣zabeths Rela∣tion of what passed between his Majesty and her. He told me he was glad I was come, and although he had not time to say much, yet somewhat he had to say to me, which he had not to another, or leave in writing, because he feared their Crueltie was such, as that they would not have permitted him to write to me. He wished me not to grieve and torment my self for him; for that would be a glorious Death that he should die, it being for the Laws and Liberties of the Land. He bid me read Bishop Andrews Sermons, Hookers Ecclesiastical Policy,He adviseth her to read Bp. Andrew's Ser∣mons, Hookers Policy, and Bp. Laud against Fisher. and Bishop Laud's Book against Fisher, which would ground me against Poperie. He told me, he had forgiven all his Enemies, and hoped God would forgive them also; and commanded us, &c. to forgive them. He bid me tell my Mother, that his thoughts had never strayed from her, and that his Love would be the same to his last. Withal, he commanded me and my Brother to be obedient to her. And bid me send his Blessing to the rest of my Brothers and Sisters, with commendation to all his Friends. So after he had given me his Blessing, I took my leave. Further, he commanded us all to forgive those People, but never to trust them; for they had been most false to him, and to those that gave them power, and be fear∣ed also to their own Souls. And desired me not to grieve for him, for he should die a Martyr; and that he doubted not but that the Lord would settle his Throne upon his Son, and that we should all be happier than we could have expected to have been if he had lived. With many other things, which at present I cannot Re∣member. A Committee appointed to consider of the time and place for Execution.The same day the Regicides met (being sixty four in number) at the Pain∣ted-Chamber, in pursuance of their Bloody Sentence, and appointed Sir Hardress Waller, Harrison, Ireton, Dean, and Okey, to be a Committee to consider of the Time and Place for the Execution; who having made a report, fourty eight of the Commissioners meeting again the same day, made this Resolve. Vpon Report made for considering of the Time and Place of the Executing of the Iudgement against the King: that the said Committee have Resolved, that the open street before White-hall is a fit place;They agree upon the open street before White-hall the mor∣row following. and that the said Committee conceive it fit, that the King be there Executed to Morrow, the King having already notice thereof. The Court approved thereof, and ordered a Warrant to be drawn for that purpose; which Warrant was accordingly drawn and agreed unto, and or∣dered to be ingrossed: which was done, and Signed and Sealed according∣ly, as followeth.
At the High Court of Iustice for Trying and Iudging of Charles Stu∣art King of England, January 29. 1648. Whereas Chares Stuart King of England,The Wara for the Kings Ex∣ut. is and standeth Convicted, Attainted, and Condemned of high Treasn, and other high Crimes; and Sentence upon Sa∣turday last was pronounced against him by this Court, to be put to death, by severing his Head from his Body; of which Sentence Execution yet remains to be done: These are therefore to will and require you, to see the said Sentence Executed in the open street before White-hall, upon the morrow, being the 30 day of this instant Month of January, between the hours of ten in the Morning, and five of the afternoon of the same day, with full effect: And for your so doing, this shall be your sufficient Warrant.Sigd by Joh. Bradshaw▪ Tho Gray, Ol. Cromwel,  to Col. F. Hac∣ker,  Hunks, an Li. Cooel hray. And these are to require all Officers and Souldiers, and other the good People of this Nation of England, to be assisting unto you in this Service. To Col. Francis Hacker, Colonel Huncks, and Lieutenant Colonel Phray, and every of them. Given under our hands and Sals, &c. John Bradshaw, Thomas Gray, Oliver Cromwel, &c. But to amuse the people, for prevention of a rescue, they caused it to be ru∣moured as if they would respit the King, and better consider of so weighty and important a business, when the next day discovered their villany. For Tuesday the 30 of Ianuary (the Fatal day) being come, the Comis∣sioners met, and ordered four or five of their Ministers to attend upon the King at Saint Iames's,Factious Mi∣nisters appoin∣ted to attend the King; he refuseth to con∣fer with them. where they yet kept him; but his Majesty well knowing what miserable comforters they were like to prove, refused to have conference with them. That Morning, before his Majesty was brought thence, the Bishop of Lon∣don dd again Officiate, and read Divine Service in his presence; to which Du∣ty, the 27 Chapter of Saint Matthew, being the History of our Saviours Passion, was appointed by the Church-Calendar for the second Lesson. The King sup∣posing it to have been selected on purpose, thanked him afterwards for his sea∣sonable choice. But the Bishop modestly declining those undue thanks, told him that it came by course to be read on that day;Bp. of London readeth prayers to him, and administers the Sacrament. which very much comfor∣ted his Majesty, who proceeded to the remaining duties of receiving from the Bishop the Holy Sacrament, and the other preparations for his approaching passion. His Devotions being ended, about ten a clock his Majesty was brought from Saint Iames's to White hall by a Regiment of Foot,The King brought to White-hall. with Colours flying, and Drums beating, (through the Park) part marching before, and part behind, with a private Guard of Partizans about him, the Bishop on the one hand, and Colonel Thomlinson (who had the charge of him) on the other, bare-headed. The Guards marching a slow pace, as on a solemn and sad occasion, to their ill-tu∣ned Drums: He bid them go faster, (as his usual manner of walking was) say∣ing — That he now went before them to strive for an Heavenly Crown, with less Sollicitude than he had often encouraged his Souldiers to fight for an Earthly Di∣adem. Bing ome to the end of the Park, he went up the stayers leading to the Long- in White-hall, where he used formerly to lodge. There finding an unexpected delay in being brought upon the Scaffold, which they had begun but that Morning, He past the most of that time (having received a Letter from the Prince in the interim by Mr. Seymor) in prayer.Mr. Seymor presents his Majesty with a Letter from the Prince. About twelve a clock his Majesty (refusing to dine) eat onely a bit of Bread, and drank a gass of Claret; and about an hour after, Colonel Hacker with
other Officers and Souldiers, brought him with the Bishop and Colonel Thom∣linson through the Banqueting-house to the Scaffold, whereto the passage was made through a Window. A strong Guard of several Regiments of Horse and Foot were placed on all sides, which hindred the neer approach of his misera∣ble and distracted Subjects,The Kings friends arba∣rously ud. Engines to force the King  had ∣sted. (who for manifesting their sorrow, were barba∣rously used) and the King from speaking what he had designed for their Ears: whereupon his Majesty finding himself disappointed, omitted much of his in∣tended Matter; but having viewed the Scaffold (which had Irons driven in it to force him down to the Block by Ropes, if he should have resisted) and the Axe, (of whose Edge he was very careful, having minded one (a Knight then present) of touching it wih his Cloak.) The King being come upon the Scaffold, look'd very earnestly upon the Block, and asked Colonel Hacker if there were no higher: And then spake thus: (directing his Speech chiefly to Colonel Thomlinson.) I Shall be very little heard of any body else, I shall therefore speak a word to you here: Indeed I could have held my peace very well,His Majesty had ot spo∣en bt that therwise he might be thought to sub∣mit to the guilt. if I did not think, that holding my peace would make some men think that I did submit to the Guilt, as well as to the Punishment: But I think it is my dutie to God first, and then to my Countrie, to clear my self, both as an honest man, a good King, and a good Christian. I shall begin first with my Innocency; and in troath, I think it not very needful for me to Insist long upon this: For all the world knows, that I did never begin a War with the two Houses of Parliament;H began not  War; and I call God to witness, unto whom I must shortly make an account, that I did never intend to in∣croach upon their Priviledges: They began upon me; it is the Militia they began upon:span Hoss. They confess'd the Militia was mine, but they thought it fit to have it from me. And to be short, if any body will look to the dates of Commissions, of their Commis∣sions and mine, and likewise to the Declaration, he will see clearly, that they began these unhappie Troubles, not I. So as for the guilt of these enormous Crimes that are laid against me, I hope that God will clear me out. I will not (for I am in charitie) and God for∣bid that I should lay it upon the two Houses of Parliament,His Majesy lays not the  the two : il struments the caue of it. there is no necessity of either, I hope they are free of this guilt; but I be∣lieve, that ill instruments between them and me, have been the chief cause of all this blood-shed: So that as I finde my self clear of this, I hope (and pray God) that they may too: Yet for all this, God forbid that I should be so ill a Christian, as not to say, that Gods judgements are just upon me: Many times he doth pay ju∣stice by an unjust Sentence, Sen∣tence pushed with another. that is ordinarie: I will say this, That unjust Sentence that I suffered to take effect, is punished by an unjust Sentence upon me: So far I have said to shew you,  am an innocent man. Now to shew you that I am a good Christian; I hope there is a good man that will bear me witness, that I have for∣given all the world,His Majesty for∣gives all the world, ev the casers  his death. and even those in particular, that have been the chief causers of my Death: who they are, God knows I do not de∣sire to know, I pray God forgive them. But this is not all, my
charitie must go further; I wish that they may repent, for in eed they have committed a great sin in that particular; I pray God with St. Stephen, wa to Pace. that this be not laid to their charge: And with that they may take the way to the Peace of the Kingdom; for my cha∣ritie commands me, not onely to forgive particular men, but to endeavour to the last gasp, the Peace of the Kingdom. So (Sirs) I do wish with all my soul, (I see there are some here that will car∣ry it further) that they endeavour the Peace of the Kingdom. (Sirs) I must shew you, both how you are out of the way, and put you in a way. First, You are out of the way; for certainly all the ways you ever had yet, as far as I could finde by any thing, is in the way of Conquest:Conquest an ill way, seldom . certainly this is an ill way; for Conquest, in my Opi∣nion, is never just, except there be a just and good cause, either for matter of wrong, or a just Title; and then if ye go beyond the first quarrel that ye have, that makes it unjust at the end, that was just at first: for if there be onely matter of Conquest, then it is a great Robbery; as a Pirate said to Alexander, That he was a great Rob∣ber, himself was but a petty Robber: And so Sirs, I think for the way that you are in, you are much out of the way. Now, Sirs, to put you in the way; believe it, you shall never go right, nor God will never prosper you,To give God his due, and the Kng his , is the right way. until you give God his due, the King his due (that is, my Successor) and the people their due; I am as much for them as any of you. You must give God his due, by re∣gulating rightly his Church, according to the Scripture, (which is now out of order.Give God his due in seting the Church.) And to set you in a way particularly, now I cannot; but onely this: A National Synod freely called, freely debating among themselves, must settle this: When every Opinion is freely heard.As to the King, it concerning , hi Majesty aves it. For the King, indeed I will not, the Laws of the Land will clearly instruct you for that; therefore because it con∣cerns mine own particular, I onely give you a touch of it. For the People, truly I desire their Libertie and freedom as much as a∣ny body whomsoever:Peoples Liberty consis in ha∣ving Govern∣ment, not sa∣ring in it. But I must tell you, that their Libertie and their freedom consist in having Government under those Laws, by which their lives and theirs may be most their own; it is not in having a share in the Government, that is nothing pertaining to them: A Subject and a Soveraign are clean different things; and therefore until you do that, I mean, that you put the People into that Libertie, as I say, certainly they will never enjoy them∣selves. Sirs, it was for this that now I am come hither; for if I would have given way to an Arbitrary way, for to have all Laws chan∣ged according to the Power of the Sword, I need not have come here; and therefore I tell you (and I pray God it be not laid to your charge) that I am the MARTYR of the people.His Majesty the Martyr of the People. In troath Sirs, I shall not hold you any longer; I will onely say this to you, that I could have desired some little time longer, because I would have put this, what I have said, a little better digested than I have done; and therefore I hope you will excuse me. I have delivered my Conscience: I pray God you take those Courses, that are
best for the good of the Kingdome, and your own Salvati∣on. Dr. Juxon. Will your Majesty (though your Majesties affections may be very well known to Religion,) yet it may be expected that you should say somewhat for the worlds satisfaction. King. I thank you very heartily, my Lord, for that I had almost forgotten it. Introath Sirs, My Conscience in Religion I think is very well known to all the world, and therefore I declare before you all,His Majestie deares hs Rligio. That I die a Christian, according to the profession of the Church of England, as I found it left me by my Father: and this honest man I think will witness it. Then turning to the Officers, said, Sirs, excuse me for this same; I have a good cause, and I have a gracious God, I will say no more. Then turning to Colonel Hac∣ker, he said; Take care they do not put me to pain; and Sir, this, and it please you. But then a Afterwards Sir William Clerk. Gentleman coming near the Ax, the King said, Take heed of the Ax, pray take heed of the Ax. Then the King speaking to the Executioner, said, I shall say but very short prayers; and when I thrust out my hands Then the King called to Doctor Iuxon for his Night-cap; and having put it on, he said to the Executioner,The King makes ready for Execution. Does my hair trouble you? who desired him to put it all under his Cap; which the King did accordingly, by the help of the Executioner and the Bishop: Then the King turning to Doctor Iuxon, said, I have a good Cause and a gracious God on my side. Dr. Juxon. Dr. Juxon comforts him.There is but one Stage more; this Stage is turbulent and trouble∣some, it is a short one: But you may consider, it will soon carry you a very great way: it will carry you from Earth to Heaven; and there you will finde a great deal of cordial Ioy and Comfort. King. I go from a corruptible to an incorruptible Crown; where no disturbance can be, no disturbance in the world. Dr. Juxon. You are exchanged from a Temporary to an Eternal Crown; a good exchange. The King then said to the Executioner, Is my hair well? Then the King took off his Cloak and his George, giving his George to Doctor Iuxon,It is known for to give it the Prince. saying, Remember. Then the King put off his Doublet, and being in his Wast-coat, put his Cloak on again: then looking upon the Block, said to the Executioner, You must set it fast. Executioner. It is fast, Sir. King. His Majesty gives the Sig∣nal.When I put my hands out this way, stretching them out, then,— After that, having said two or three words (as he stood) to himself, with hands and eyes lift up; Immediately stooping down, he laid his Neck upon the Block; and then the Executioner again putting his hair under his Cap, the King (thinking he had been going to strike) said, Stay for the Signe. Executioner. Yes, I will, and it please your Majesty. And after a very little pause, the King stretching forth his Hands, the Executio∣ner at one Blow severed his Head from his Body.He is Executed. The Head being off, the Executioner held it up, and shewed it to the people; which done, it was with the Body put in a Coffin covered with Black Velvet for that purpose, and conveyed into his Lodgings there: And from thence it was carried to his House at Saint Iames's, where his Body was Embalmed and put in a Coffin of Lead, and laid there a fortnight to be seen by the people: and on the Wednesday sevennight, his Corps Embalmed and Coffined in Lead, was
delivered chiefly to the care of four of his Servants,The Corps com∣mitted to the care of his ser∣vants. viz. Mr. Herbert, Captain Anthony Mildmay, his Sewers; Captain Preston, and Iohn Ioyner, formerly Cook to his Majesty: they attended (with others) clothed in Mourning utes and Cloaks; accompanied the Herse that night to Windsor,Carrid to Windsor. and placed it in ht which was formerly the Kings Bed-chamber: next day it was removed into the Deans Hall, which Room was hanged with black, and made dark, with Lights burning round the Herse; in which it remained till three in the after∣noon, about which time came the Duke of Lenox, the Marquess of Hertford, the Marquess of Dorchester,Some Lords get an order for the burial of the King. and the Earl of Lyndsey, having obtained an Or∣der from the Parliament for the decent Interment of the King their Royal Ma∣ster, provided the expence thereof exceeded not five hundred pounds. At their coming into the Castle, they shewed their Order of Parliament to Colonel Whichcot Governour of the Castle,They desire it might be in St. Gorge's Chap∣pel by Common-prayer: are denyed. They expostu∣late, but pre∣vail not. desiring the Interment might be in Saint George's Chappel, and by the form in the Common-prayer-Book of the Church of England. This request was by the Governour denyed, saying, it was improbable that the Parliament would permit the use of what they had so solemnly abolished, and therein destroy their own Act. To which the Lords replyed, There was a diffe∣rence betwixt destroying their own Act, and dispensing with it, and that no Power so binds its own hands, as to disable it self in some Cases. But all could not prevail, the Governour persisting in the search of a convenient place for the Burial of the Corps;Seeking a place for Burial, they finde Hen. 8's Vault. the which after some pains taken therein, they discover∣ed a Vault in the middle of the Quire, wherein, as it was probably conjectured, lyeth the body of King Henry the eighth, and his beloved Wife, the Lady Iane Seymor, both in Coffins of Lead: in this Vault, there being room for one more, they resolved to interre the Body of the King; the which was accordingly brought to the place,The Funeral. born by the Officers of the Garrison, the four Corners of the Velvet Pall born up by the aforesaid four Lords, the Lord Bishop of London following next, and other persons of Quality; the Body was commit∣ted to the Earth with sighs and Tears, especially of the Reverend Bishop, as de∣nyed to do the last Duty and Service to his Dear and Royal Master; the Velvet Pall being cast into the Vault, was laid over the Body. Upon the Coffin were these words set: KING CHARLES. 1648. All Elegies are useless and in vain, While Charles the Second shall be King again. No learned Grief can tell the Church and State What Heaven conceals in this blest Martyrs Fate. Fortune may play with Scepters for a time, Yet make the Peoples Liberty their Crime.
A CHRONICLE OF THE CIVIL WARS OF ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, and IRELAND. THE SECOND PART: BEING The Democracie. THe Scepter had not departed from Great Britain, nor had the Imperial Majesty of England been ever darkned,England had not been with∣out Regal Go∣vernment from the begininng. or in any part so Eclipsed, since the Nation first Inhabited the Island, which is beyond the computation of any History. Regnum Britanniae prin∣cipio Regis habuere, was an original and constant truth through innumerable successions, nor did it ever vary in the most difficult perplexities of whatsoever Revolutions. Indeed Monarchy was so congenerous with the People and Inhabitants of this Island, that civil Fortune, when she had given up the rest of the world to the potent Arms of Romes Senate, and that victorious Commonwealth (for Caesar had Conquered France and Spain as a General in their service) yet reserved us to be the infallible next and immediate Omen of his future Empire, when he parted hence with a resolved and facilitated Am∣bition of seizing the universal Soveraignty; and 'tis observable, that the Britains were never taken into the protection of the Senate and people of Rome, but of Caesar onely. After the decay of that Empire, we changed our Governours onely,It had change of Governours, not change of Government. not the Government, which in our British, Saxon, and Danish Rule, was one and the same, save that it was divided into several Principalities under the Heptarchy, and afterwards parted among the Invading Potentates, until the Norman Line successfully grasped all, and united the whole Realm of England under one entire Regality.
The Royal race had continued 562 years in ou Regality.In this Royal race the Crown had continued 562 years; and though some of those Princes had been dispossessed and outed of the Throne, yet was it but transferred to another proprietor; changed onely the Temples, that it might sit faster and easier, and with more spreading splendor shew its self to the World. Of such a veneration was the Royal right always esteemed, that the Laws placed it beyond the power of Fate, and made it the supreme sanction, that the King never Dieth; like the Sun in his Glorious Orb, that perpetually shires, though our interposed sight conceives him benighted, Moritur & Oritur, In the sme instance and moment he sets and riseth. Now clouds a darkn, blackess and .But oh, the thick gloominess, those dismal Clouds, that palpable Darkness, which enveloped the setting of this our Martyr'd Soveraign! The Face of the Kingdom gathered blackness, and we seemed to have returned to our first Chas; nothing of Order, Frame, or Constitution remaining to be seen. If we loked upwards, the incensed Heavens had vailed themselves from behol∣ding this Impiety: if upon our selves, our stupified senses and our despairing looks gave sgnes, Humanity was fled, and Nature could not long continue: if round about us, the reproaches and derision of the world, and the affronts and impudence of these flagitious Regicides, pointing at, and deriding us for our disloyal cowardise, sharpned those stings of Conscience, and made us seek Soliudes, and wish for a total dissolution: If downwards, the mournful Earth gaped for vengeance, and represented us the infernal Tomb of less wic∣ked Rebels, Corah and his Tribe.Horrour and Amazemnt. Nothing but horrour and amazement pos∣sest us, Hope abandoned us; Women miscarried and died. Young people made vows of abstinence and perpetual chastity, Old Mens spirits aied them, and they gave up the Ghost, Children wept and lamented (by a natural instinct) for this Father of their Country; an universal out-cry there was to Heaven for help and mercy: those whose stronger hearts could not presently yield, felt such Convulsions within them, as if they were in travel with grief, and knew not how to be delivered of their unwieldy burden. In fine, shame and anguish laid hold upon us, and our Glory departed. dissolution.No less extasies of grief could serve to shew how sensible we were of the dissolution of that Political Machine, which had so long and so happily con∣served our Honour, our Lives, and our Liberties; wherein the Princes Prero∣gative, and the Subjects Propriety, so harmoniously moved, without the least jar and discordance for so many hundred of years, till our unhappy Reformers took too much upon them, and would be tampering with that Noli me Tan∣gere▪ the sacred (and not to be profaned) right of Princes; boldly distin∣guiing betwixt the personal and political capacity of the King, and so ma∣king him co-ordinate with his Parliament: An impious Treasonable Tenet, and the corrupt Fountan and bitter source of all those undutiful and rebellious actions gainst that blessed Prince, and since damn'd by a Parliament it self in those xress Epithets. It therefor the Indians do customarily every night with sorrowful Lamen∣tations take leve of the Sun, whom yet undoubtedly they expect in the Mor∣ning; no wonder will it seem to posterity (nor will these evidences of our consternation (before recited) be thought an hyperbolical strain) if so dis∣consolately we saw our Sun pulled out of his Orb, and darkned in the shadow of Death; his Beams cut off and eloigned into obscure and remote corners, from whence, it was treason against these Princes of Darkness to return, and with their hereditary successive influence to re-visit and revive the drooping dy∣ing hearts of a forlorn and deserted people. Such was our condition in the deprivation and extinguishing of that lamp of life, which supplied with so many vertues and graces, rendred our Mar∣tyr'd Soveraign the most conspicuous of all Monarchs,His Majesty might have lived very long. The Prince ab∣t, and might have prolong∣ed his days to an extraordinary term; so proportionate and fit, had God and Nature made him to Eternity. The same was our fearful case, in the absence and exile of our present miraculously-restored Prince, Charles the second;
whom yet wiser and kinder providence had secured in that cloud,but in safety. and by a timely rescue had in safety conveyed into Forrain Parts, out of the reach of these Herods, who would have stretched out their Hands also against his innocent and most precious Life. Now when there was neither Sun, Moon, nor Stars (the King murthered, Regal Authority abolished, the Heir excluded, the House of Lords turned out of doors, and the House of Commons turned into a Den of Thieves, and packt Juncto and Conventicle of a most perdite sort of men) did these Bats and Scritch-owls usurp the Dominiou of the night of our confusions,In the night of confusion, Bats and Scritch∣owles rule. and take up∣on them to Enact and give Laws suitable to their interests, as rational as true; which shewed they concerned the Law-givers, not the receivers. The first hoarse and ominous noise they made, as a foundation and main prin∣ciple of their wild Government, was a fained note to catch the Vulgar and the mad rabble, on whom they wholely depended, and whom they were to flat∣ter (no force) into slavery and servitude, by the specious hopes of their ar∣riving also in time to be Governours and States-men, and to share in the honours and profits of their new Commonwealth.They make an Act forbidding the Proclama∣tion of a King, &c. Jan. 30. This was concluded, as is mention∣ed before, in these few words, viz. That all power and Authority is originally in the people: And in order to that, they now emitted a Tidy Act by way of a Proclamation; which was with wonderful Expedition sounded all the King∣dom over, in these or the like words. That where as several pretences might be made to this Crown, and Title to the Kingly Office set on foot, to the apparent hazard of the publike Peace; Be it En∣acted and Ordained by this present Parliament, and the Authority of the same, that no Person whatsoever do presume to Proclaim, declare, publish, or any ways to promote Charles Stuart, Son of the said Charles late King of England, com∣monly called Prince of Wales, or any other person to be King on chief Magistrate of England or Ireland, or of any Dominions belonging to them; by colour of Inhe∣ritance, Succession, Election, or any other claim whatsoever, without the free con∣sent of the People in Parliament first had or signified by a particular Act or Or∣dinance for that purpose: any Law, Statute, Vsage, or Custom to the contrary notwithstanding. And whosoever shall contrary to this Act, Proclaim or cause to be Proclaimed, &c. shall be deemed and adjudged a Traytor, and suffer accor∣dingly. So did they contrive and imagine to obstruct and bar the way to the Throne which themselves had Invaded, and parted into shares; but such monstrous wickedness boyling up to an excess of malice towards the dead and living Proprietors of the Crown, was not suffered to pass without an allay and coo∣ler, in a Printed Proclamation thrown about streets,A Proclama∣tion thrown a∣bout streets. letting them see the peo∣ple would not run a gadding after their Calves at Bethel, as they would have fancied to themselves, but would keep in the old path, and beaten track of Government, in the succession of Charles the second to the Majesty of England. Which Proclamation was as followeth: We the Noblemen,The Procclama∣tion. Iudges, Knights, Lawyers, Gentlemen, Ministers, Free∣holders, Merchants, Citizens, &c. and other Free-men of England, do according to our Allegiance and Covenant, by these Presents, heartily, joyfully, and unanimous∣ly acknowledge, and Proclaim, the Illustrious Charles Prince of Wales, next Heir of the Blood Royal to his Blessed Father King Charles (whose late wicked and Trayterous Murder we do from our sots abominate, and all parties and consenters thereunto) to be by Hereditary Birth-right, and Lawful Succession, rightful and undoubted King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, and the Dominions there∣unto belonging— And that we will faithfully, constantly, and sincerely, in our se∣veral places and callings defend and maintain his Royal Person, Crown, and Dig∣nity, with our Blates, Lives, and last drop of our Blood, against all Opposers there∣of, whom we do hereby declare to be Traytors, and Enemies to his Majesty and his Kingdoms. In Testimony whereof, we have ordered, and caused these to be
published and Proclaimed throughout all Countries and Corporations of this Realm, the first day of February, and the first year of his Majesties Raign. God save King Charles the second. This without any solemnity, or indeed open appearance, met with the chear∣ful reception, and inward Loyal resolutions, as if vent had been given to a publike manifestation of Duty and Joy, upon his Majesties present accession to the Crown: for it revived the Hearts of mourning and disconsolate Subjects, to see the sure and certain Succession thereof to be continued in the same most beloved name, the Eldest Branch and descendant of their Martyr'd Soveraign, in whose ruines the Regicides thought to have raked up and buried all the claims and just Titles to this Impartial Diadem. In tendency whereunto, they first considered how to keep the honest Mem∣bers (the Army had Secluded) from entring in again,They Vote the Exclusion of the Members the Army had secluded. that they might not have too many partakers in the spoil of the Kingdoms; and therefore another Legisla∣tive by-blow was Enacted, That all those Members that had assented to the Vote of the 5 of December, concerning the Kings Concessions, should never be re-admitted; and such as Voted in the Negative should presently enter their said dissent, or before they were to be admitted. And this characteristical discrimination they most pun∣ctually insisted on to the very last, as the main Pillar of their Oligarchy: and we shall see this difference hardly laboured throughout their Usurpa∣tion. The House of Lords Voted useless, Feb. 5.On the 5 of February they fell again upon the standing remains of the dis∣solved Government, the Peerage and Nobility of the Kingdom, whose med∣ling in State-affairs to the settlement of the Nation, and their Message to that purpose, they had scornfully rejected, not looking upon them as a part of the people; but at one blow, and with the breath of one Vote, which imported that the House of Lords were useless and dangerous, and so ought to be abo∣lished, they laid them aside, having given order for an Act to be drawn up ac∣cordingly; yet so far indulging their Honours the favour of any mean Sub∣jects priviledge, to be Elected either Knight or Burgess to serve in their House. Against this civil and political Execution, came forthwith likewise a Decla∣ration and Protestation,The protestation of the Nobility against it. dated, February the 8. in the name of the Nobility, braving them with their illegal, Trayterous, Barbarous, and bold saucy Usur∣pation, with other arguments, mingled with threats, menaces, invectives, which will be too tedious to recite: And indeed it was to little purpose then, for it was too late to argue with, or to Vapour against those men, who were so Fortified in their new Empire, by a so numerous, and potent, and well-paid Army. — Something might have been done when this Cockatrice was a hatching; but now its angry looks were enough to kill those that enviously be∣held it. And to let them see how little they valued, and how slightly they thought of the injury the Peers so highly urged, they with the same easie demolition of Kingly-Government,The Kingly Power Voted Useless, Feb. 7. by a Vote that it is unnecessary, burden∣some, and dangerous, overwhelm the whole Fabrick together, bidding them seek a place to erect their Monumental Lordships; and Honour was never yet so neer a shaddow. Now that they were thus possest of the whole entire Power and Authority, for the better-exercise thereof, and the speedier fruition of the sweets thereof, they agree to part and divide the Province, the Government among them. To this end, they concluded to erect an Athenian Tyranny of some 40 of them, under the Name and Title of a Council of State,A Council of Sate in Force. to whom the Executive part of their Power should be committed, while the Parliament (as they called their Worships) should exercise onely the Judicatory part thereof; and so between them make quick work of their business, in confounding and ruining the King∣dom.
And that they might likewise appear to the people as great preservers of the Laws, and to study their weal in the due aministration of Justice; their next care was for drawing up Commissions for the Judges;Iudges Com∣missioned. which ran in the new stile of the Keepers of the Liberties of England, by Authority of Parliament; and to that purpose, a Conference was had by a Committee with the Judges about it;-six whereof agreed to hold, upon a Proviso to be made by an Act of the House of Commons, that the Fundamental Laws should not be abolished: a very weak security, but that it met with strong and prepared confidence: these were Lord Chief Justice Rolls, and Justice Iermyn of the Kings-Bench; Chief Justice Saint-Iohn, and Justice Pheasant, of the Common-Pleas, and Chief Ju∣stice Wilde, (how he was made so, Captain Burleigh tells us,) and Baron Yates: the other six refused, as knowing the Laws and the present Anarchy were incom∣patible and incapable of any expedient to sute them together. But the one half was very fair, and served to keep the Lawyers in practice, and from dash∣ing at their illegal Authority. In pursuance of that promise made to those Judges that held, and to deceive and cologne the people, they Passed a Declaration, That they were fully resolved to maintain,They declare to preserve and maintain the Laws. and would uphold and maintain, preserve and keep the Fundamental Laws of the Nation, as to the preservation of the Lives, Liberties, and Properties of the People, with all things incident thereunto, saving those alterations concerning the King and House of Lords already made. And yet notwithstanding, they at the same time were Erecting High Courts of Justice; impressed Sea-men, and levied illegal Taxes by Souldiers, and many other Enormities. But it seems those Judges were content with the preservation of the litigious part of the Law, extending this Proviso no further, than to the private disputes of Meum & Tu∣um, whilst this publike Monster swallowed all. Having thus establisht themselves in the Civil Power, with some face of a Democratical Authority, they proceeded to other Acts of State, to give repu∣tation to themselves, and strength to their Government; the first whereof, was their Voting a New stamp for Coyn,A new stamp for Coyn Voted. whereby their Soveraignty might be notified to all the world, in the Trade and traffique thereof: Next, designing several Agents and Envoys to go to the Courts of Forrain Princes,Agents and Envoys design∣ed to Forrain Princes. and there by their specious challenges and shews of Liberty and publike good, the pretence of the Law of Nations, peculiarly the Municipal Laws of this, to palliate o∣ver, the Justifie their unparallell'd proceedings against the King; of which Messengers we shall presently speak. And so we shall for a while leave these Usurpers amidst the several Complements given them by way of Salutation from the Army and Sectarian party, under the yet-continued Notion of the Godly; who forsooth highly magnified their Justice in this, and urged them in their Addresses to extend it further.The monthly Fast Nulled. (About this time the Parliament Nulled the Monthly Fast on Wednesday, which had continued through all the War, thinking to impose upon the people, as if God had answered all their prayers in that Murther of the King, and that the work of Reformation was now ac∣complished.) It was high time therefore for such of the Kings party as were in their hands to look about them; for besides the rise and most certain rumour of a general Massacre intended against the whole, which was debated at a Council of War; and carried but by two Votes,Several escapes of the Cavalier party. viz. Col. Massey, Sir Lewis Di∣ves, Mr Hol∣den, and Lord Capel; the last of them be∣trayed by Da∣vis a Water-man, they had special information of proceedings to be had against them, in the same way of Tryal, before a High Court of Justice. First therefore Colonel Massey escapes away from Saint Iames's, just upon the Kings Death; next, Sir Lewis Dives and Master Holden being brought to White-hall upon examination, pretending to ease themselves, got down the Common-shore to the Water-side, and escaped, leaving their Warders in the lurch; and to a vain research after them. The Lord Capel likewise made a handsome escape out of the Tower; but passing by Water to Lambeth, in the Boat of one Davis a Water-man, and unhappily and fatally casting out some words by way of enquiry of the said Lord; the wicked villain suspecting the truth,
seized him at Lambeth,and retaken. from whence he was re-conveyed to the same Prison, in order to his speedy Tryal; his Betrayer being preferred by the Parliament, be∣came the scorn and contempt of every body, and lived afterward in shame and misery.Lord Lough∣borough es∣capes from Windsor-Ca∣stle with seve∣ral others. And the Lord of Loughborough Brother to Ferdinando then Earl of Huntingdon, famous for several Loyal Services, but most maligned by the Par∣liament for the last effort thereof at Colchester, gave them also the slip from Windsor-Castle (where he and the Colonels Tuke, Hamond, and Francis Heath (newly at liberty upon his parole to finde good security) and other Royalists were imprisoned) and got cleaverly away, and in March arrived at Rotterdam in Holland, where on the New-bridge he accidently met with Colonel Massey, who claiming knowledge of him, from Lidbury-figh, where they more un∣happily encountred each other; his Lorship was civilly and Nobly pleased up∣on the Colonels protestation of a urn and entire obedience to his Majesties Authority) to pass with him in company to the Hague, whither. this occasion happily directs us. The King at the Hague, Feb. &c. The Prince of Arange a friend to the Royal Family.The King our Soveraign, Charles the second, then kept his Court there, fur∣nished with Blacks and other mournful Embls of his rars Death, at the charge of the Prince of Aurange, whose mo ignal kindnesses to the Royal Fa∣y may not pass without a due Commemoration. The King was here at∣tended by the Lord Marquess of Montress the Lords Hopton, Wilmot, Culpeper, Weworth, and other great Personages, Sir Edward Hide, Sir Edward Nicholas, and a Noble (though poor) retinue of old Royalists, who had vowed to his Majesties Fortunes. The Relator was present, when the Lord of Loughbo∣rough added Colonel Massey to that number, both of them kissing the Kings Hand the same morning; the Lord in his Majesties Privy-Chamber, where he was received by the King with all possible gladness and joy of his escape, and other endearments; the Colonel was very respectfully and civilly treated, and confirmed into the Kings Service and Trust, by his Majesties gracious accep∣tation of his sorrow for his former actions, and his resolutions of reparatory Duty. The new Estates of England liked not well of his so neer neighbourhood and entertainment, in a Commonwealth too, and thought their greatness so formidable, that it could perswade (without any more trouble) all places and people to his dereliction; and to this purpose, they insinuated the same inten∣tions to Myn Heer Pauw (the then Dutch Resident here) who was sent over by the States, as also another Embassador from the French, besides the earnest intervention of the Scots Commissioners, to intercede for the King) with whom they had several discourses about the dangerous greatness of the Prince of Au∣range: and 'tis reported the Man was made by them. He departed hence a∣bout the middle of March, very well pleased with the pronts of his Em∣bassie. Though they could not reach the King, and though some of his best Sub∣jects had outreached them, yet many others could not so escape them. Ma∣ster Beaumount a Minister belonging to the Garison of Pomfret, then belea∣gured by Major-General Lambert, in place of Rainsborough, who was killed, and buried at Wapping neer London, as aforesaid, was taken for holding cor∣respondence in cypher; and by a Council of War Condemned and Hanged before the Castle,Mr. Beaumont Executed at Pomfret, Feb. 7. presently after the Kings Death; and deserves to be placed as the Protomartyr for King Charles the second. But this was but a puny vi∣ctime to the ensuing Sacrifices: for the old pretence of Justice challenged new does, by the evidence of its former administration, which would have been thought but a step purposely made to their ambitious Usurpation, if other blood, not so obnoxious to their grand designe, should not (in pursuance of their de∣clared impartial bringing to condigne punishment all sorts of Delinquents) be offered up to their Idol of Liberty. There was also another Reason of State in it; for that the House of Lords being so easily laid aside, it was requisite while the first violence was yet recent, utterly to disanimate the Nobility by a∣nother as lawless, more bloody infringement of their Priviledges.
In order to this,A new High Court of Iustice erected. a new High Court of Iustice was Erected, by an Act to that purpose, wherein other Drudges were named under the conduct of the former President; for that the State-Grandees could not themselves intend such minute matters, as the lives of the Peerage. Before this Tribunal were brought (as in the said Act were named) Iames Duke Hamilton as Earl of Cambridge, and Naturalized thereby in this Kingdom, Henry Rich Earl of Holland, George Lord Goring then Earl of Norwich, Arthur Lord Capel, and Sir Iohn Owen of North-Wales. Duke Hamilton was the first of those that came to this Bar,Duke Hamil∣ton, Earl of Holland, Lor Capel, Tred by the High Court of Iu∣sti. where he was soothd by Bradshaw according to instruction, in hopes he would be won to discover his partakers in the late Parliament and City; and Peters to that purpose gave evidence that Lambert gave him quarter, when Colonel Wait (who took him) denied it to the House: but when the Court perceived he was not so free therein, offering in lieu of such Treachery 100000 l. for his life, and promising to joyn interests with Arguile in Scotland; Bradshaw took him up short, and for all his plea of quarter, and to what he further rged against his Naturalization, (that he himself was never Naturalized, but that it was his Fa∣ther, whose right devolved no more to him by the Civil Law, than the same Franchise doth to Children in other Countries) hastily was answered, that in the 15 year of King Charles, he was called to Parliament by Writ as Earl of Cambridge. They objected against him also his breach of Faith passed to the Go∣vernour of Windsor for his true Imprisonment, from whence he had escaped, and was retaken in Southwark; which breach he denied, and challenged the Governour of untruth in that particular. After much delay, which he obtain∣ed in hopes of a discovery, and several arguments of his Counsel assigned for him, Bradshaw at last snapt him up, telling him of his Treasons and Murthers, and gave final Sentence.The Lord Ca∣pel's legal De∣fences. The Lord Capel likewise after several brave legal Defences, as his Peerage, &c. and his plea of quarter given by Fairfax, who in open Court construed that quarter to be but a present saving from the pro∣miscuous slaughter, with a reference still to a Judicial proceeding, was over-ru∣led; they urged also against him, his escape out of the Tower, which he pro∣ved to amount to no more (at the most of it in any other case) than a bare Felony, and within the benefit of the Clergy. His resumed argument (when all would not do) was the Honour of the Sword, which seeing how little those (that should have justly asserted it) did value, he resolved to trouble himself no longer at their Bar; but being demanded what he could say more for himself, replied nothing; but with a chearful resignation of himself to providence, expected his Doom, then impending over him. The Earl of Hol∣land came not to their Bar while they had finished with the other Lords, by reason of his indisposition which delayed him at Warwick-Castle; but such was their impatient pretensions to Justice, that they got him conveyed to their High Court, and as they had done by the rest, over-ruled his plea (which he argued in much weakness, taking a spoonful of some Cordial every foot between his words) of quarter given, and concluded him in the same Sentence. The Lord Goring so artificially and wisely pleaded to them in Form,The Lord Go∣ring and Sir John Owen reprieved. Not Guilty, and withal insisted upon his Commission and Authority, and harmles∣ness therein, that he escaped the Execution of the like Condemnation; as also did Sir Iohn Owen, who with a Britain confidence denied every tittle of the Charge against him; especially that part relating to the death or Master Loyd the Sheriff of Cardigan, and came off with the same danger, and the like success as the Lord preceding, whose Fate being referred to the Parliament, proved fortunate but by the decision of one Vote, 24 to 24 being divided in the que∣stion of his life; and as I Remember, it was the saving double voice of Len∣thall the Speaker; Sir Iohn Owen was carried more affirmatively; the rest all in the Negative, being turned off with their Ladies and their Relations Peti∣tions, to the same High Court, who to shew their civility more than their mer∣cy, were pleased to gratifie the Ladies with a respit of two days, as long as their Commission and power lasted.
Dke Hamil∣ton, E. of Hol∣land, and Lord Capel behead∣ed, Mar. 9.On the 9th of March, the Duke, the Earl of Holland; and Lord Capel be∣ing guarded from Saint Iames's to Sir Robert Cottons House, (the next fatal Stage of late to the Scaffold) were severally brought to the Palace-Yard through the Hall, their Judges then sitting, and looking fore-right upon their Execu∣tion. The Duke ascended first; and to give him his due, he kept a good seeming de∣corum in his last words and actions. The Earl of Holland succeeded to this bloody Theatre, who very Christianly, penitently, and compassionately enough, prepared him for his end, justifying his honest intentions in that his first and last action for the King, and intimating that Duty we all owed to our present Soveraign, and so suffered for him. But the Lord Capel (like a true Christian Heroe) as he came last, so did he sum up all (both in his Speech, Countenance, and Gestures) that was good, praise-worthy, and generous in them both; re∣solutely asserting his own actions, his late Soveraigns Cause, and his present Majesties Rights; recommending him to his people as the great example of true English worth, and as the onely hope of the Kingdom. So as with Sampson he may be said to have done these Philistins more harm at his Death than in all his Life, raising and renewing the desires of the people after so deserving a Prince. This Tragedy being over, they resume afresh the debate of what persons were yet within their Clutches,Other capital Delinquents in nomination. As Sir John Stowell, Iudge Jenkins, and Cap. Brown Bushell, Marq. of Winchester B Wren, Ma. Gen Brown, and Sir John Cloworthy hardly escaping. Several quali∣fications of De∣linquents to life and Etate. Te chief of whom were, the Kings Ma∣jesty, the D. of York, E. of Britol, D. of Buckingham, Lord Digby, Lord Cotting∣ton, Marq of New-castle, Marq of Wor∣cester, Sir Ed. Hide, Lrd Culpepe, and Lord Wd∣drington. any way obnoxious to their Cannibal-Idol of Justice, who could not be pleased but with whole Hecatombs: and therefore the Noble Sir Iohn Stowel and Judge Ienkins, those Champions of Law and Loyalty, with Captain Brown Bushell, were next ordered to be put in that fatal List of Traytors against their Commonwealth: the Marquess of Winchester, and Bishop Wren, who had lain prisoner from the beginning of our Troubles, hardly es∣caping the like dangerous qualification; which was upon a orged information intended likewise against Major-General Brown, and Sir Iohn Clotworthy; and to that purpose the Case of all those secluded (and thereafter imprisoned) Members was ordered to a Committee, to make a discrimination of their offen∣ces, and render those two the most liable to their severity. As for those who had escaped their hands by departing the Kingdom, they satisfied their indig∣nation, by a decree of perpetual Banishment, and present death upon the re∣turn of any so sentenced. The chief of these, besides the Kings Majesty, whom God long preserve, and the Duke of York, &c. were the Earl of Bristol, the Duke of Buckingham, the Lord Digby▪ Lord Cottington, Marquesses of Newcastle and Worcester, Sir Edward Hide, Lord Culpeper, Lord Widdrington, and some others, who were very well satisfied they could do no more to them, and were then following he hopeful fortunes of the King. The rest of that unfortunate par∣ty were put to Ransome, a Fine being set upon their Heads, proportionable to their Estates; to be paid within such times, or else to be in the same predicament with the condemned. Having thus made good their Conspiracy or (by them stiled) Agreement, of bringing Delinquents to Justice, that the exactness of their dire performances might credit thir intentions and resolutions, and make them seem to the Vul∣gar the most impartial lovers of their Lives and Liberties; (but rather of their Estates) they proceeded in the political part of Government, by filling up their Committee of Estates to the number of 41. who were ordered particularly to enter their Assent to whatsoever the Juncto had done in reference to the King and Lords, before they should act in that Committee; and Cromwel thereupon reported to the House, being impowered by them, that of that just number, 22 had refused to engage, as to what was past; but would joyn with them for the future, and acknowledge the Supreme Power to be vested in them. There could no expedient be found to salve this sore; so they were contented to cicatrize it, and gently lay aside all disputes, or further contrasts about it: but though they past it without doors, they would not so within, but totally precluded any further pretences of the Members of taking their places in Parliament,Secluded Mem∣bers totally Excluded. who in some numbers returned to Westminster; for they Voted, That all such as ad absented
themselves from the 5 of December, should not sit till further order; which was never vouchsafed till such claimers had given evidence of their adherence and closing with them. In this same Month,The Parlia∣ments proced∣ings in reference to the City. to take away the same dignity and priviledge as the House of Lords was to them) from the Lord Mayor and Court of Alder∣men, and to make the Government of London à la mode Democratical, they ordered a Quorum of the Common-Council to act without the Lord Mayor or the said Aldermen, if they should refuse to joyn with them: and not long after, to put another affront (though distant some space of time, being the 24 of March ensuing) upon the Mayor, they order him to proclaim their Act for abolishing Kingly Government; which he disdainfully and generously re∣fusing, (his Lady likewise not suffering their Messenger that brought it to drink in her House, but bidding him return to his Masters for his Wages) up∣on the report thereof by Alderman Atkins a Member of their House,Alderman Rey∣noldson the Lord Mayor outed and fi∣ned, and Alder∣man Andrews one of the Kings Iudges placed in his stead. He proclaims the Act for a∣bolishing Kingly Govern∣ment. they Vo∣ted him Imprisonment in the Tower for two Months, and to be degraded of his Honour, and disfranchised, and to pay 2000 l. to be distributed among the Poor of Westminster, the Hamlets and Southwark; which was rigidly le∣vied, and Alderman Andrews (one of the Kings Judges) was Elected in his place; for whose choice at his presentment for their approbation, the House gave the City thanks, and ordered the Barons of the Exchequer to swear him in these words, That he should be faithful to the Commonwealth (as it was now established) in the Government of the City, where he in state Proclaimed the said Act, though the people hooted and reviled it, and cryed aloud, God save the King, and would have made worse work, but that the Guards of Horse awed them.Sir Thomas Soams, and Alderman Cul∣ham degraded. Alderman Sir Thomas Soams, and Alderman Chambers, for ab∣senting themselves, and justifying their conscientious refusal, as from former Oaths, were likewise degraded from their Dignity in the City; Alderman Cul∣ham and Gibs excused themselves by business in the Country at the same time. A Exeter likewise, the Mayor and Sheriffs refused to act or joyn in Commis∣sion with Baron Wilde, sent down that Circuit; and divers other places were very stiff in complyance with these new Masters: but their Iron Bodies quickly brought them to perform those new Instructions the Parliament had given for altering the Patents and the Oaths of Sheriffs, as in all Indictments, a little before, instead of Contra Coronam & Dignitatem, they had ordered it, Contra Rempublicam & pacem publicam, and so Mutatis Mutandis. To compleat the Martyrology of those that fell with, and accompanied their Soveraign,Col. Poyer Executed April, 25. Col. Laughorn and Col. Pow∣el condemned. Colonel Laugorn, Colonel Powel, and Colonel Poyer, were now brought before a Court Martial, for the Welch Insurrection at Saint Fagons and Pembroke, where they were all three Condemned: but at the importunity of their Wives and Friends, the General was pleased to exempt two of them, such as the Lot should spare; which being delivered out of a Hat by a little Child, fell upon Poyer, his scroll of Paper being a Blank, the other haing written in it, Life given by the Lord. Accordingly Poyer was Executed in Coent-garden against Bedford-House-wall, on the 25 of April, where he died in some reluctan∣cy, but ought nevertheless to be numbred with other Loyal Sacrifices, from whom therefore I could not, though against order of time, disjoyn him: Nor indeed is the thred of this Chronicle possible to keep straight, in such a diver∣sity and multitude of transcurrencies, which weave it up and down in the va∣rious confusions of this new-fashioned State; but we shall now proceed more re∣gularly: Our Lords a Westminster having lickt their Cub into some form, and shewed us a glimpse of its Complexion, and how like it was to its monstrous Parent (a Rebellion) in the shapes ensuing. Yet first we must Northward in our way to Scotland,Pomfret-Ca∣stle delivered, Mar. 24, to Maj. Gen. Lambert. and behold Pomfret-Castle, that had held out 9 Months, now delivered (after much debate) to Major-General Lambert, with this condition, That Colonel Morris the Governour, and five more, should be ex∣empted from Mercy; but if they could escape any way, they might attempt it betwixt the Agreement and the Surrender; the Article to stand force otherwise
to all purposes. These six-divided themselves into two parties, wherof Mor∣ris, Cornet Blackburn, and another, broke quite through the Leaguer, but the other three were taken; the rest of the Garrison had liberty to go home, leav∣ing two Months Provision, and some Ammunition behind them. Lambert was the willinger to give these terms, for the easing of the Country, which by reason of an Armies lying before it so long, was wasted and exhausted of all provisions; who to avoid the like future inconveniencies, sollicited and procured the Demolition of that Castle, which from the Grave of Richard the second, became now the Sepulcher of departed Layalty, whose last efforts Expired here, as became the repository of a Princes Ashes, and his Royal Manes. There is something to be said in this place, concerning the seizing of Lieu∣tenant-Colonel Iohn Lilburn,John Lilburn, and some of his party secured. Master Walwyn, Master Prince, and others of the Levelling Faction, which began now to shew it self in the same rise and danger to the Independent Faction, as that did to the Presbyterian; but we will take that story all together: upon which account we refer the Reader likewise as to the sale of the Kings Goods, Moveables, and Houshouldstuff, now con∣demned there, to a more exact account in the year following, which begins with the Scotch affairs. Anno Dom. 1649. THe Estates, and Parliament, and the whole nation of Scotland, having received Advertisement of the horrible Murther of the King,An account of the state of Scotland. to the impeding whereof they had used what endeavour they could by their Commissioners inter∣mediation at London, did with all manifestation and expressions of sorrow bewail and deplore his Death; and on the 6 of February ensuing, to testifie the truth of their constant Allegiance to the Crown, did in most solemn manner Proclaim his Son, King Charles the second,Charles the se∣cond proclaim∣ed King at Edingburgh. at Edingburgh, the Cross there being hung with Tapistry, and the Parliament-Lords in their Robes, the Chancellour him∣self reading the said Proclamation (reciting the Murther of the King) to the King at Arms, and the night concluded with all usual Demonstrations of joy and gladness. This being over, the Estates sent an expostulatory Letter to their former Brethren at Westminster, concerning their proceedings with the King, and were in the mean time by Letters flattered with the cajole of good amity and friendship, and other fineries from those Regicides, with many other flams of advantage, if they would concur with, or acquiece in what the Mogens of Independency had done in England. The English▪  State tampers with the Scotch Parliament.But the passion of the Scot, as seeing how his Countries Honour had been lost by the same Trayterous proffers, boiled too high, and would give no ear to such overtures, nor would they enter into any Treaty with them, nor own them (di∣recting their Messages to the Honourable William Lenthall Speaker of the House of Commons) unless they were a free Parliaments, consisting of both Houses, without any force upon, or seclusion of their Members. The Scots were mainly intent upon another guess Treaty with the King, and Sir Ioseph Douglas was ordered to be gone forthwith to give his Mejesty an ac∣count at the Hague,Sir Jos. Doug∣las is sent from the Scots to the King at the Hague. what they had done, and were preparing to do; when on a sudden some of the Mackenzeys, a great Sept in the North of Scotland, and the Lord Freezer's Brother, seized Innerness for the King, and put them into per∣pleased Counsels about it:Innerness sei∣zed for the King. The news whereof those at Westminster thought a good occaion for them to lay hold upon in order to a rupture with their King; and when that distemper came to the Head (some of the Gourdens (whose Fa∣ther, the Marquess of Huntly, was Beheaded about the beginning of March, when he died a resolute Royalist) with Lieutenant-General Middleton, who had made an escape from Barwick into those parts, and the Lord Rea joyning with them)
they failed not of doing their devoir, by offering their assistance, and incesin the Scots against the King, for whose sole sake they said all those Troubles wr▪ and still were like to be raised and fomented; but Colonel Ker, and Straghan defeating that party, killing 400, and taking the Lord Rea and 800 Prisoners▪ and Middleton submitting, that disturbance ended, and the Kingdom was a∣gain reduced into peace and quietness. The Commissioners in the mean while were dispatched to the King, being one Earl, one Lord, one Burgess, and one Minister; of which the Earl of Cassils was the chief; and their Commissioners at London, viz. the Earl of L∣thian, Sir Iohn Cheisly, and Master Glendonning remanded; who having sent a peremptory Paper to the Juncto, withdrew themselves privately, intending to pass by Sea to Scotland; but at Gravesend they were intercepted, and by a Guard conveyed by Land, an Envoy going with them to the Scotch Parlia∣ment, to know if they would approve of the aforesaid Paper; who stomaching the Rump worse and worse, turned him home again without any Answer; but prepared for defence, intending to Levy 17000 Foot, and 6000 Horse▪ as ex∣pecting the return of their Commissioners, who landing about the middle of the Summer, though they brought no Confirmation of Agreement, yet gave certain hopes of it, by Treaty presently to be Commenced; the King offer∣ing all whatever his Father had promised to the settlement of Presbytery: whereupon the Lord Liberton was dispatcht to wait on the King,Lord  now inten∣ding to remove from the Hague through Flanders into France. The English Army next comes under our consideration, who perceiving this Principle of the Levellers (which was to lay all things in Common, and ma∣an Hodgepodge, an Ochlarchy of Government) was very taking, and flw high in their speeches, and was higher in the Noddle of the covetous Souldier; had ordered, That no Souldiers or Officers should keep any private Meetings, to bege a disturbance in the Army, their right of Petitioning being still preserved: whereupon several Souldiers were seized, and sentenced to ride the Wooden-horse with Pa∣pers on their Heads, and Cashiered. Lieutenant-Colonel Lilburn, &c. as afore∣said, was likewise seized, for a Book of his called, Englands New Chains Dis∣covered, which was the bottome and foundation of the Levellers designe; and one Lockier a Trooper, for promoting of the like Models, and two others, were sentenced by a Court-Martial;Lockier the Leveller shot to death in Saint Paul's Church-yard. and Lockier was shot to death accordingly in Saint Paul's Church-yard, and most sumptuously, and in great state, a Foot-man leading his Horse in black after his Herse, attended by thousands with black and Sea-green Ribbons, all of his party, and some men of note and Estates, carried to his Grave in the New Church-yard London. These appearances of danger from the same party, whom Cromwel had used as his foot-step to his designs, lookt very untowardly upon Him and the Gran∣dees, whom this deceived people were ten times more enraged at, than ever against the King. For the prevention therefore of this evil, he had timely be∣thought himself of a Remedy, the transporting of these Mutineers and Male-contents under any Government,Eleven Regi∣ments designed by Cromwel for the Irish service. to the service of Ireland; (for which 11 Re∣giments, besides one of Dragoons under Colonel Abbot, were by lot designed, viz. of Horse, Iretons, Scroops, Hortons, and Lamberts; of Foot, Eures, Cooks, Hewsons, and Deans; and three new ones, viz. Cromwels, Venables, and Phayrs) their combining against or discouraging one another whereto, he had catio∣ned before by the said Order: but that proved the meer crisis of that disease; for the Army being generally infected and bewitched with the promises Crom∣wel himself and his Agents had spread abroad (in order to the bringing about the death of the King) of sharing the Kingdom among them, could not en∣dure to hear of fighting in another Country, where they were sure of hard∣ships and more desperate service, and leaving their sweets (they had already swallowed in their fancies) of their Conquest here. There was one Thomp∣son the great ringleader of them, a Cornet, who had for these tricks of med∣ling with Government, and other adjutating pranks, and pragmatical boldness
to his superior Officers,Thompson a corne with 2 Trops, enters Northampton and declares his and the Ar∣mies resolution against that Expedition. been condemned at a Council of War, and reprieved. This fellow now with two Troops of Horse enters Northampton, and emits a Declaration, shewing the Armies resolution of not going for Ireland (though they think that Expedition in time fit to be undertaken) till those main ends, the peoples Liberty, for which the Army first engaged, should be secured: and generally the Army was of this leven, through the licentiosness and into∣lerable boldness which their Antimonarchical Leaders had trained them up in, to fit them to their purpose. The first formidable eruption of it was at Salisbury, where Colonel Scroop's Regiment of Horse laid aside their Officers,Several Regi∣ments confede∣rate in the same designe. and with their Colours marched thence, in order to a conjunction with Harrisons, Iretons, and Skippous Regi∣ments, who had confederated (by means of those Adjutators) in the same designe: which affair admitting no delay, Fairfax and Cromwel with his own Regiment advanced to them, to Bagshot, and to Alton, where they had notice that they were marched to Abingdon, whither (after a tedious march of fourty miles in one day) the General came; and Cromwel fell presently to work with his old arts of Treachery, for Harrison's Regiment was hasting to the Con∣junction. His first finess in order to their reducing, was the offer of a Treaty, where∣in satisfaction might be mutually given;Cromwel by treachery sur∣prizeth them. and that done, that neither party should come within ten miles of one another: whereupon the Levellers marched to Burford, and being opposed at a Pass called Newbridge over the River, to avoid any quarrel, and hoping the Souldiery there would no doubt joyn with them up∣on the Treaty, passed a mile lower, and arriving at the Town, relied so much upon the Generals and Cromwels engagements, that most of them had put their Horses to Grass, leaving a Corps de guard of some 60 men, the whole party making in all 900 men, consisting of 12 entire Troops, reputed the best in the Army, and whose defeat would have cost many men lives, if the Army would have stood against them. But to save that difficulty, while those secure Troops were resting themselves, and their Horses put in the adjoyning Meadows, a∣bout twelve a clock at night Colonel Reynolds fell into their Quarters,Levellers de∣feated at Bur∣ford in May. having notice from some Traytors within of their posture, and presently mastered the Guard, not dreaming of such a Camisado, and seized most of the other, then tipling or asleep. Here were taken neer 900 Horse, and 400 Prisoners, where∣of there onely were Executed one Thompson and two more,Thompson and two more Executed. who died very re∣solutely: Cornet Den expressing his grief and sorrow, was reprieved at the in∣stant of Execution, which their fellows beheld from the Leads of the Church, and were saluted with a Message of Decimination: but that Cromwel might ingratiate with the Army, for his sake, and at his instance they were pardoned, and sent home to their own Houses;Their Chieftain slain in Wel∣lingborough-wood. the great Chieftain of them being pursued as he was marching towards this party, took into Wellingborough-wood, where couragiously defending himself, he was killed by Carbine-shot, refusing to take Quarter at such perfidious peoples hands. This Hurliburly being over, and en∣ded like a flash,Fairfax com∣plemented at Oxford, and treated at Din∣ner in the City of London. the General came to Oxford, where he was highly Treated, and he and Oliver made Doctors of the Civil Law, and Lambert, &c. and Hew∣son made Master of Arts: from thence having intelligence of the like commo∣tions feared in Portsmouth and the Isle of Wight, he hasted thither through Hampshire, and was received every where in great state, and so back in tri∣umph to London, where he was complemented by the Parliament and City, the last inviting both to Dine with them at Grocers-hall, where they had a very Mag∣nificent Entertainment.They present Fairfax and Cromwel with Gold and Plate. Fairfax (as their farewel-complement) being pre∣sented with a Bason and Ewer of Beaten Gold, and Cromwel with 300 pounds worth of Plate, and 200 pieces of Gold; and great rejoycing there was, and smiling too, at this the Cities kindness; whose Proclaiming of the Act for abo∣lishing the Kingly power having touched before, I think I am not obliged to the worth or worshipfulness of the matter, to say any thing more of it here in its place; but in lieu thereof, will pleasure the Reader with a contra-aspect in
this Archive and Premier Record of Englands being a Free-State Created by these Hogen Mogen words. Be it Enacted and Declared by this present Parliament, and by the Authority there∣of, that the People of England, and all the Dominions and Territories thereunto be∣longing, are and shall be, and are hereby Constituted, Made, and Declared a Com∣monwealth, and Free-State, and shall so be Governed by the Supreme Authority the Representatives of the people in Parliament,England made a Free-State, Iune. and by such as they shall constitute as Officers for the good of the people, and that without any King, Single Person, or House of Lords. And for the Honour and Grace of this Free-State,A new Mace made. a new Mace was now made, and brought to be Consecrated in the House, wrought with Flowers in∣stead of the Cross, and on the bottome and the top, the Arms of England and Ireland; which was so well liked, that they ordered all the Maces in England should be made after that pattern. But that which they did most like a Free-State, was giving and bounteously bestowing Estates upon one another: for be∣sides smaller Rents and lesser Sums, kindly squandered and reciprocated among the Journey-men by themselves;4000 l. a year out of the D. of Buckinghams Estate, given to Fairfax. no less than 4000 a year was given to Fairfax, out of the Duke of Bukingham's Revenues; the Lord Cottington's Estate to Brad∣shaw, and so to other their deserving Favorites. And to requite the City for their civility of the late Treatment, and to engage them at a pinch; New-park with all the Deer therein,Lord Cotting∣ton's Estate to Bradshaw. was liberally conferred upon them, to hold it in Com∣mon Soccage, [from any body; a very excellent Tenure and Title.] Great givers must be great receivers, and therefore, besides their former Act of selling the Kings Houshold-goods (which was pretended to satisfie his Debts, but such Creditors as ventured upon them, found them dear pennyworths, not onely in conclusion, but for the present, being rated and prized so unreasonably, that 100 l. in goods would not yield above ten in money) There came out an Act for the sale of Deans and Chapters Lands,Several Acts to raise money. the product whereof (though encumbred with Debentures) amounted to a clear account of incredible sums; and another for the sale of the Mannors, Houses, Lands, and Forrests of the King, Queen, or Prince: but White-hall (for that it was the residence of my Lords the Committee of Estates) Saint Iames's and Windsor-Castle were by them excepted; and Cromwel for a pleasant retreat for his future greatness, saved Hamp∣ton-Court and Greenwich; and the French-Church, having obtained the use of the Chappel of Somerset-house, rescued that likewise from sale, because the Purchasers could not build upon the ground with any conveniencie, if that were not de∣molished. But the grand money-making Act, the very Mint of their Com∣monwealth, was an Act of the 7th of April, for 90000 l. a Month, which rose higher afterwards, though in the middle of the War it was never more than 56000, and there were three Armies in pay; but it seems the good Husbands had accounted, and then published it, that the Monthly charge was 160000 pound, and that the standing force amounted to 40000 men in England and Ireland.Several Castles demolished. About this time several Inland Castles were demolished, as Winchester, Lancaster, Belvoir, Nottingham, &c. and some reparations made to the several Proprietors. It will be requisite now to enquire what and how the King doth,A short account of the King at the Hague. since we left him at the Hague, while his Rebels rant it away in such ample manner, and carry all before them. 'Tis true, he wanted not a Kingdom, being lookt upon by the people of those Vnited Provinces with the same respect as if he were their Soveraign, nor did they ail of giving manifest demonstration thereof. His Fathers Death was with all State Condoled, and his ascent to the Throne Gra∣tulated, and that moreover both by the Swedish and Danish Embassadors, then resident at that Court; especially the Prince of Aurange by his respects and ob∣servance, obliged all persons to the reverence of his Person, as if no such misfor∣tunes had befallen him; nor could any thing but a vertuous tempered minde
(amidst such caresses and Honours) been sensible of so sudden, so dis-regard∣ed and discountenanced adversity. To better also his condition as to his King∣doms, came forth several defences of his Authority in several Treatises, espe∣cially that of Salmasius called The Royal Defence (which one Milton,Salmasius  in the Kings defene. Is  by Milto the likwise an∣swer His Majties Me∣ditations; which Answer was since burn∣ed by the com∣mon Hang-ma. The condition his Majsty was in at the Hague. since stricken with blindness cavilled at, who wrote also against that imcomparable Book and Remains of King Charles the Martyr, about this time produced to light, though endeavoured by all means to be supprest, called Eikon Basilike, in an impudent and Blasphemous Libel, called Iconoclastes, since deservedly burnt by the Common Executionr) doth justly challenge to be here Registred. Thus He triumpht by the Pen, and great were the expectations of his like suc∣cess by the Sword, Scotland being wholely his, and Ireland vry neer reduced to the same obedience; the affairs of both which Kingdoms calling him away, He resolved to depart from this His long-continued abode, and after mature con∣sultations with the Princes His Allyes, and His neerer Relations, His disconso∣late Mother then in France, to determine to which Realm He should first be∣take Him: but before His departure, fell out this remarkable passage at His Court at the Hague. One Doctor Dorislaus a Dutch-man and School-Master that fled his Coun∣try, and here became a Civilian, then pertainer to the University of Oxford, and a Professor there, but disappointed of his ambitious expectations, in the beginning of the War became the Parliaments Judge-Advocate in their Army, and at the expiration thereof, by his acquaintance with Sir Henry Mildmay, a great Enemy to (though raised by) the King (at whose House in Essex, he ordinarily played at Cards on Sundays) was promoted to the Employment of drawing up that Charge against the King; and the rather, for that no English∣man durst finde or make a way to that illegal and unprecedented business. Af∣ter that perpetration, he was thought the onely fit man to be sent over as an Envoy to his Country-men, to prosecute the designs of that Fact; which would look the handsomer to them, by this their Subjects hand in it (though he durst not have appard there but in the quality of a Forrain Minister.) He arrived there in May, and the first night, as he was at Supper there, one Colonel Whit∣ford a Scotch-man (then attending the Kings Court) with some twelve other Royalists, regretting and disdaining the affront done to the King, by the im∣pudent boldness of this Fllows address in the Face of His Majesty; entred his Lodging,Dr. Dorislaus their Envr to the Estates Ge∣neral killed at the Hague. May. and with a broad Sword cleaved his Head and killed him, suffering his Pag to escape, but by a mistake, wounding another Dutch-man for him at their  coming in; and having done the deed, quietly departed: and though the States pretended a Hue and Cry, yet the people were generally well satis∣fied, and applauded the Execution; but our States here were outragiously mad, and published a Paper, wherein they imputed this Fact to the Royalists, and upon the next occasion threatned to retaliate it upon those of that party then in their Hands:Ascham their Envoy to Spain killed by one Sparks, ho was there∣fore Executed. yet Ascham their Agent and Envoy to Spain some time after, with  Interpreter Signour Riba, was served in the same manner, at his arrival at Madrid, in his Inn, by one Sparks, and other English Merchants▪ upon the same account: Sparks fled to the Venetian Embassadors, and thence to Sanctuary; but by the subtile Don, to curry with our Masters, then dreadful to his Plate-trade, and for othr designed advantages, was at their important instance taken thence, and with all mens pitty and indignation at the meanness of the Spaniard, there∣after Executed. King Charles the second de∣parts for France, Iune.The King on the 15 of Iune departed from the Hague, in company with his Sister and her Husband the Prince of Aurange in their Coach, and came ear∣ly to Rotterdam, where the Burgers were in Arms, and was Nobly received and saluted at his passing the Gates with all the Artillery, and Ringing of the Bells, and other signes of Joy and Honour; though the English Company there durst not (as of themselves) give any particular proof thereof. From thence to Dort, where he was received in the same ample manner; and then to Breda, and so to Antwerp, where by the Arch-Dukes order he was met and entertained
with , and presented with a most splended Chariot, with eight Horses  welcomed by the Marquess of Newcastle (who had fixed , out of respect to the great Civility he found from that people▪  him Excise-free, with other immunities and priviled∣ges) and  to Brussels, whre his Treatments were most Royal∣ly ordered (as the Kng ftrwrds acknowledged,The King mag∣nificently trea∣ted by the Arch-Duke. for the most sumptuous mag∣nificeny and peasing  He ever met with) and with the same gran∣deurs as if the King of Spain had received them himself: which Amplitudes were observed throughout  passage; and at his departure thence, the Duke of Lorrain gave him the like entertainment, and conveyed him on his way to France, where in Compgne the French King (accompanied with the most and chiefest of his Nobility▪) received him with all the Testimonies of affection and Honour, and brought him in State to Saint Germains to the Queen his Mo∣ther, where we will leave him in Counsel with his surest and most beloved friends. The Dutchess of Savoy his Aunt,The Dutchess of Savoy assignes him 50000 crowns per Ann. having made him an assignment of 50000 Crown: a year; and several the like proffers from others of his Family: while His Brother the Duke of Glocester, and the Princess Elizabeth, were transfer∣red from the Earl of Northumberland's, to the care of the Countess of Leicester at Penshurst,Duke of Glou∣cester and the Princess Eliz. at Penshurst, with the Coun∣tess of Lei∣cester. with the maintenance of 3000 a year, which was afterwards les∣sened when they came into the custody of Anthony Mildmay at Carisbroke in the Isle of Wight, there being a bold but credible rumour of a resolution of our States putting the Duke to a Merchant or some other Trade. The Commonwealth of England was now wholy busid about the affairs of Ireland;The affairs of Ireland sum∣med up toge∣ther. which proving very desperate, Colonel Monk, lately dismist from his Imprisonment in the Toer, upon account of his service in this Kingdom (having vowed  draw▪ Sword against the King in England) was or∣dered privately to jyn  O Neal, and Nuntio party, the bloo∣diest of  the Rbels,Note, they tax∣ed the King with what themselves were guilty. to perve what was yet let the Parliament (of which more hereafter) and in the mean time, all possible speed was made for the Ex∣pedition henc; money was mainly wanting, and therefore the City was de∣sired to lend  20000 l. upon the security of the Act of 90000 l. per mensem; but that not proving satisfactory, the Act for the sale  Dean and Chapters-lands, then greedily bought up by old Arrears, Debentures, and Doublings, was offer∣ed, and additional Acts for removing of Obstructions were passed, and sums of money to be raised thereupon secured for the same:Lieut. Gen. Cromwel Vo∣ted Lord-Go∣vernour of Ire∣land. Lieutenant-General Crom∣wel was complemented with the Command, which ater some debate he accep∣ted, and was Voted Lord-Governour of Ieland, Fairfax yet continuing Gene∣ral in both Kingdoms. Towards the second of Iuly,The Parl. Ar∣my hi▪ from Milford-Ha∣ven to Wales. most of the Army designed for that service, was drawn to the Sea-side, and Colonel Venables Regiment shipped over, with some 1500 more, which (with Tuthills Regiment newly landed before) made Iones the Governour of Dublin 7000 strong, with which he attempted seve∣ral times against the Marquess of Ormond, with little and various success. On the 13 of August, Cromwel having passed to Bristol, and by reason of cross wea∣ther compelled to go for his passage to Milford-Haven, with a Fleet of 60 Dutch and English Bottoms,Cromwel lands at Dub∣lin. set sail, and the next day after landed at Dublin: his whole Force with Iones, now made his Lieutenant-General, amounting to 15000 men. It will be now very necessary to give an account of the state of that Kingdom: and because it is the first atchievement of the New State, it shall be rendred entire, without any interfering affair; though without any other Apology, it will take up the most part of the remaining year: The Relation whereof we have from an Actor and Eye-Witness there, as he hath most elegantly and orderly laid it down, worthy of all belief, and even pleasant in the ruines he deplores; who with many other Loyal English Gentry having escaped or left England to the barbarities of the Usurpation, joyned with the more civiller Irish, and pursued the Kings Cause in this, another of his Kingdoms.
The State of the Kingdom f Ireand.The Marquess of Ormond Lord-Lieutenant of that Kingdom, being prest with the danger of a Siege from the Roman-Catholick-Confederates, who had broken their League and Treaty with him, had delivered Dublin, as aforesaid, in 1647. to the Parliaments Commissioners, having articled for his free passing to the King, and for those sums of money he had expended for the English In∣terest out of his own private purse, when that Exchecquer was drained; and accordingly having waited on the King, while the Army carried him about, with an account of his Actions, passed into France, whence about September, 1648. the said Catholick Confederates perceiving a storm impending on them from England,The English Roman Catho∣likes declare for the King, and desire the Marq. of Or∣mond may be their General. had by Letters to the King importuned His resending to them, upon their Engagement and Protestation of plenary submission to his Majesties Authority, and to him as his Lieutenant, as being the onely fit qualified person, for his Interest, Birth, and Relation, to preside in that Nation. His Lordship accordingly undertook the Commission; and though all things promised fair, by the agreement made with the Lord Inchiqueen, who had had several suc∣cesses against the Rebels, and had joyned Forces with the said Confederates, yet did the Popish and Nuntio Party under General O Neal, very much perplex the hopes of these Affairs. For this Nuntio Party had Excommunicated the Confederates, which con∣sisted of most of the old English Papists, and some Irish, who wisely foresaw their further obstinacy against the King or the Protestant Interest would final∣ly give them up a pry to the English Usurpation (which yet fatally evned) which had made an association by Cromwel's practses with the said O Neal,An Association with O Neal, by Sir Charles Coot, and Col. Monke, then in Arms for the Parliament. with Sir Charles-Coot and Colonel Monke, then in Arms in Vlter for the Par∣liament. On the other side, the Confederates had Proclaimed the Nuntio party Rebels and Traytors, and were making ready to Reduce them by force. Their strength and the Lord Inchiqueens▪ with addtions from the Marquess of Clanrickard and the Earl of Castlehaven,The Cnfede∣rates ad the Lord Inchi∣queens Forces do not brook one another. being now joyned under the Com∣mand of the Marquess of Ormond, though upon hard restrictions and condi∣tions, as it was very difficult for him to divide himself conveniently betwixt those two former opposite Interests; the English undr Inchiqueen grudging at the Exercise of the Romish Religion among the Irish, and they at the constan∣cy of the Englishes pay and contribution; the Lord-Lieutenant had little else to do, but onely go in and out before this Army, without any power or Autho∣rity, more than they themselves pleased to allow: the source and occasion of all those mischiefs which thereafter followed thick upon these ill associated and misunderstanding parties.thy with the Marq. of Clan∣rickard, and the E. of Ca∣stlehaven de∣signe to reduce Dublin. For the Lord-Lieutenant having drawn down their united Bodies as soon as there was Forrage for his Horse, and some advance-mo∣ney in the beginning of the year 1649. to the reduction of Dublin, having in vin Courted Iones the Governour there, and Owen O Neal, to the Kings Obedience: In the very entrance of the Expedition, an ominous Rub befel him; Inchiqueen's Forces would not march, nor the Scotch-Vlster Forces (then ad∣vanced also to the aid of the said Union) unanimously submit before the Lord Inchiqueen was Declared Lieutenant-General of the Army,Lord Inchi∣queen Lie. Gen. for the King. to the dissatisfaction of the Marquess of Clanrickard and the Earl of Castlehaven; though the former made his merit and Honour presently yield to his Loyalty, and the other very patiently (for a while) absented himself from the marching Army. In the time that this was in doing, the Lord-Lieutenant was also busied in Treating with,O Neal joyns with the Inde∣pendent party. and Courting Iones and Owen O Neal unto the Kings Obe∣dience; the first of which (being as is believed) corrupted by Cromwels bribes, and large promises, positively declined the Lord-Lieutenants favour, as appears by their Printed Letters: the latter having at last waved all things concerning Religion, more than what was granted in the Peace, insists finally upon the Com∣mand of 6000 Foot, and 00 Horse, together with those other conditions that since were granted him. The Confederate Commissioners will permit his Ex∣cellency
to allow him no more but 4000 Foot, and 800 Horse; which number they obstinately refused to exceed, denying him also several other of his lsr de∣mands: whereupon O Neal seeing them willing to leave him quite out, or to have him come in upon such terms as he judged inconsiderable (they peradven∣ture thinking themselvs able to do the work without him) makes present application unto Monke, and Iones, either to be revenged upon the Commissio∣ners, the Lord Inchiqueen, the Scots, and all the rest that he conceived to op∣pose him; or else, as he afterwards said, to make himself more considerable, and thereby facilitate his conditions with them. Whatsoever his motive was, at last Colonel Monke makes an agreement with him,Col. Monke agrees with him. in the name of the Parliament (though they very wisely by Cromwels ad∣vice did afterwards think fit to disclaim it, because of its ill aspect and odiousness to the English, but acknowledged his faithfulness and well-meaning by a Vote to that purpose) upon which score howsoever, he assisted them all he could, un∣dertaking the Relief of Derry,O Neal Re∣lieves Lon∣don-Derry. which he afterwards effected; and notwithstan∣ding that his Excellency (during all this time) was very sensible of the great consequence of Owen O Neal's coming in, or standing out, in order to the ser∣vice or disservice of the King; and that he looked upon the dispute of deny∣ing him the Command of 6000 men, when they were content to intrust him with 4000, as a strange kinde of oversight in the Commissioners, and the rest concurring with them, the rather, because he knew that by his standing out, that accursed quarrel between the Kings and the Nuntios party (not unlike that of the Guelphs and Gibbelines in Italy) was kept on foot,The ill conse∣quence thereof to the Kings affairs. the refractory Clergy were countenanced and upheld in credit with the people, and the great Cities were animated to refuse Garrisons, to deny the payment of impositions, and to dis∣respect both the Lord-Lieutenant and the Commissioners: yet was it not in his power to help it by any means, unless he would have broken Conditions with the Confederates, which no consideration of any advantage (how great soever) could induce him to do. Other difficulties overcome, his Excellency makes directly for Dublin, all the Garrisons in his way (but Ballisanon) by force or fair means surrendring un∣to him; yet is he set forth so slenderly provided with money, that neer Kildare the Army is ready to mutiny, and fall to pieces for want of a very small sum, had not a worthy person (that was there but accidentally) supplied them in that extremity. This streight also being over-past, and the Lord Inchiqueen's Forces being come wholly up,The Marquess of Ormond comes before Dublin, Aug. they hold on for Dublin, and compel Iones (that was drawn out as far as the Naas, with what strength he could make to inter∣rupt them) to retire into the Town: whither being come at last, and find∣ing it competently well fortified, and plentifully man'd, both with Horse and Foot, insomuch that it was judged no ways fit to hazard the Army upon a des∣perate assault; and being not as yet a number able to invest the place, especially whilst O Neal and Monke, together with the Garrisons of Drogbeda and Trim lay so convenient to attempt upon them: it was resolved that the Lord-Lieu∣tenant should (with the greatest part of his Army) Encamp at Finglasse, from thence to awe and distress the Town, and be ready to countenance any stirs or revolts within, whilst the Lord Inchiqueen with a great Body of Horse, and above 2000 Foot, endeavours to take in Trim and Drogbeda. All this time his Excellency found great wants to encounter with, his Provisions and Contribu∣tions coming in so slowly, and disproportionably to the necessities of his Army; and many Factions to compose and temper; the Munster and the rest of the English Forces murmuring against the Liberty the Irish had there in the exercise of their Religion, and the Irish again repining to see themselves murmured at; but more especialy, to see the English Munster-Forces (though they were fewer in number, and had Contributions of their own) to swallow up both their Pay, and Provisions also; which though the rest of the Army did Petition against, his Excellency could in no ways remedy, being constrained to humor and comply with that party, as being a people so ticklish, and unsteady, that if
disgusted, might probably either side with Iones, or retiring to their own Garrisons, compel the Army to withdraw from Dublin, by declaring them∣selves for the Parliament, of which Grudge slightly hinted before. Sir Thomas Armstrong, Col. Trevors, and the Lord Moor declare for the King.Sir Thomas Armstronge and the Lord Moor, being come in to the Lord Inchi∣queen; Colonel Mark Trevors (that was but newly declared for the King) having got notice of a choice party of O Neals, sent to Dundalke, to convey thence such Arms and Ammunition as Monke had undertaken to supply him withal, invited the Lord Inchiqueen to intercept them, who came so opportunely thi∣ther, that he gained O Neals supply of Ammunition, with the utter deeat of his Party; whereupon, soon after the gaining of Drogheda, which ensued im∣mediately upon O Neales defeat,O Neal defea∣ted, Drogheda taken, Dun∣dalke surren∣dred to the King. Dundalke it self being summoned, the Soul∣diers compelled Monke to a Surrender, and themselves took Arms for the King. Immediately after this defeat of his Party, O Neale hastneth towards the Relief of Derry, which was the onely Town in that Province untaken, all the rest being already reduced by the Lord of Ards, Sir George Monr, and Colonel Trevors, who were now hindered onely by O Neales Army and the Siege of Derry, from bringing up a considerable Body of Horse and Foot to the Leaguer of Dublin. Where may be observed how great a prejudice the Faction of those men (who desiring out of animosities and ends of their own, to stave off O Neal and his party from the benefit of the Peace, stood chaffering with him about his Command of 4000, or 6000 men, and other trifles) have done to the Kings service, and to the whole Kingdom, in depriving themselves thereby, not onely of the forementioned assistance of the Scots, but also of the possession of London-Derry, together with so considerable an addition of Forces, as O Neal could then have brought; whereby not onely the whole Province of Vlster would have been secured to the King; but Dublin it self either reduced, or so strongly surrounded, that it would have been impossible, either for Iones to relieve him∣self, or Cromwel to invade the Kingdom: Which, notwithstanding all these forementioned disadvantages, was upon the matter, even gained already, and would have been entirely, without any manner of question, if it had fortuned that His Majesty had seasonably come thither himself in Person, which by all parties was desired with infinite passion; but especially by those whose prudence made them best able to Judge, how effectual his presence would be,His Majsties Presence most necessary and most desired in Ireland. not onely for the animating of his own Loyal Party; but also suppressing of all Factious humours, and uniting all Interests chearfully and unanimously to go on against the common Enemy: which must soon have put a period to that War, and made his Authority absolute in that Kingdom, without dispute; for as upon his arrival His Majesty should have found Munster entirely in the Irish and the Lord Inhiqueens possession, Vlster all reduced, but the Fort of Culmore and Derry into the Hands of the Scots; Connaght by the Marquess of Clanricards fortunate gaining the strong Fort of Slego (with what else the Enemy had then remaining in that Province) wholly cleared: In Leinster, nothing left for Re∣bellion to nestle in, but Dublin and Ballisannon; both which were so well at∣tended upon, that the Defendants had but little pleasure to air themselves without the circuit of their Works: so by his coming he would undoubtedly have diverted Owen O Neal (who would immediately have submitted unto the person of the King) from relieving London-Derry, and thereby have secured both that Town and Province, with Dublin also, as it is thought: for they that had reason to know Iones's minde, apprehended that his leaving the Kings party did proceed from a Pique, her against the Lord-Lieutenant or Sir Ro∣bert Byron, about a Lieutenant-Colonels place, which was conferr'd over his head upon another; and that then the Scene being altered in England, and his old Friends out of Authority there, his new terms with the Independents also yet unmade, he himself would come over, if the King had been there in person; or if not, yet his Party would have all deserted him, and the work have been done one way or other; that Kingdom wholly reduced without a blow, all
Factions (as I said before) extinguisht; and his Majesty had had an Army of above 20000 men, to have employed where he pleased. After the taking in of Trim (which followed soon upon the surrender of Dundalke) the Lord Inchiqueen brings up his Forces (now much improved in number) to the Army before Dublin; whereupon his Exellency leaving a part of his Army at Castleknock, under the command of the Lord Dillon of Co∣stelo (a person of much Gallantry) to keep them in on that side the Water; removes his Camp to the other side the Town, to distress the Enemy that way also: Which, whilst they are endeavouring to do (upon intelligence that Cromwel was ready with an Army to Embark himself for Ireland, and that he intended to land in Munster) the Lord Inchiqueen thought if fit, that he should with a good party of Horse go down into those parts, to secure his Garrisons and provide for the worst. His Lordship was no sooner gone,The Siege of Dublin by the Kings Forces; Aug. but the Lord-Lieutenant designing to shut up the Enemy within his Works, and quite impede as well their getting in Hay, as the Grasing of their Cattel without their Line; gave order to Patrick Pur∣cell, Major-General of the Irish Foot, to march with a sufficient Party of men and an Engineer to Baggot-Rath, there to possess himself of that place imme∣diately, and cast up such a Work as had been already designed: Sir Wiliam Vaughan Commissary-General of the Horse, had order likewise to draw toge∣ther most part of the Troops that were on that side the Water, and to keep them in a Body upon a large plowed Field looking towards the Castle of Dub∣lin, there to countenance the Foot while the Works were finishing, and to secure them in case the Enemy (out of the Town) should attempt to interrupt them. These were the Orders given, but not executed: for notwithstanding it did not much exceed a mile whither the Foot were to go, yet through the ignorance or negligence of the Officers that were to conduct them, many hours were spent ere they came at the place: whither when they were come, they found the Work so wretchlesly advanced by Master Welsh the Engineer, and (to help all) themselves kept such negligent Guards, that many judged it was done on purpose; and that these neglects proceeded from those lurking seeds of discord between the Kings and the Nuntio's Parties: For it is certain, that about that time, upon an apprehension that things went on too prospe∣rously with the Lord Lieutenant, there were Letters written to Owen O Neal about broaching a New War, in case Dublin had been taken. Whatever the grounds of these failings were, the Enemy never stood to examine, but being troubled to see a Fort designing there, (where, with so much ease they might not onely be kept from all Forrage and succour by Land, but intercourse with the Sea also) and perceiving the posture they were in, destitute of Horse to Guard them, resolved upon a desperate Sally to disturb this Work, which they happened to make about eight of the clock in the morning, when his Excellen∣cy who had been on horse-back most part of the night (as his constant custom was since his coming neer Dublin) was newly laid him down in his Tent to take his rest, however the Westminster-Scandals of those days did asperse him. The Enemy found the new Fortification so slight,Dublin Relie∣ved by a sally the Forces of the Gairison made, Aug. 22. and the resistance there so weak, that they soon became Masters of the place; from whence seeing the Irish fly in such fright and disorder (contrary to their first intentions) they pursued them up to the Avenues of their Camp, where finding the Souldiers also that were in Guard with great security and unconcernment looking on, they laid hold on the advantage, Charging briskly in, and in a trice beat them off their Posts; which if they had defended (as a far less number might very easily have done) the Camp being no way accessible towards the Town (excepting by those few Avenews which there purposely had been left open, nay some of them thrown open (contrary to orders) for the conveniency of the Souldiers) they could possibly have run no hazard. But these Passes being thus lost and abandoned, and more men coming out of
the Town to re-inforce those that were alrady so successful, the whole Army (in the greatest trrour and confusion that might be) falls a running every one a several way: and in this condition were all things brought, before the Lord Taafe, then General of the Ordnance, had awaked the Lord-Lieutnant, who presently taking Horse, together with the Lord Castlehaven (who was now re∣turned back to his Command) and Colonel Milo Power, made towards the Enemy, taking all such along with them, as they could either by force or fair means perswade to face about, with intention to beat them back, or at least, by making head a while, to stop their progress, till some considerable part of the Army could be Raild and brought up again to oppose them: But by that time they came neer the Enemy, their followers were gown so thin▪ that his Excellency (after the having exposed himself to much danger,The Marq of Ormond  Db∣lin, Aug. . and recived a shot upon his Arms, in a brisk Charge that he made upon e foremost of the Enemies Toops) was fain to retire at last, and sek to recover his Army that was gone before; Sir William Vaughan being already kiled,Sir William Vaughan  Wo∣gan  pi∣soners. his Brother Co∣lonel Richard Butler taken, and the whol Camp in effect abandoned, except by those that could not get them ready, o wanted means o flyig. This was oght on the second of August. Thus, besides the slaughter that was made, and the Prisoners that were taken, one of which, was the lot of mo o the English that were under the Com∣mand of Colonel Wogan, (whose bviou that day deserves much common∣dation) who having gotten togr  Body, defended themselves so gallantly, and with so much rsion against the whole power of the Ene∣my, as at last, after a great slaughter, th  made Conditions or themselves before they could be inorced to yield or lay down thir Arms.) The total plun∣der of the Camp, with all the Arilery, Tns and Baggage fell into the Ene∣mies hands. Most of the Lord Inchiqueens Foot, that at first made some resi∣stance, seeing the day lost, upon this disaster changed sides, and revolted to the Enemy. All this was done in so short a space, and with so little noise, that the Lord Dion, and the res of the Forces that were on the other side the River of the Iiffy▪ knew nothing of what was done, till the business was over, and some runaways brought him word of it; the Irish making such hast every one towards his home, and with such distraction, that it was impossible for the Lord-Lieutenant to draw any Body of them together; and therefore (having met with the news of the Surrender of Ballisannon (that very day) into the hands of his Forces that lay before it) he rested at Caterlo that night,Marq. o Or∣mond akes Bllsannon for the Kig. and went the next day to confer with the Commissioners of Trust and the Lord Inchiqueen at Kilkenny. A ust deplora∣tion of this ca∣lamity.When this great disaster is well considered, scarce any other ound reason can be given for so sad a misfortune, but the good pleasure of Almighty God, who (if it be lawful to look so far into the Judgements of Heaven) knowing the ill intntions and designes that were in the Hearts of many, both of the Irish and English there, in case Dublin had been taken, saw them unworthy of that Blessing, and took that time for their punishment and humiliation; not onely this, but a torrent of other crosses following in the neck one upon ano∣ther: for besides this mischance before Dublin, to the ruine of so great an Ar∣my, about which same time O Neal Relieves Coot in London-Derry,O Neal re∣lieve Coot. to the im∣mediate loss of that Province, and the future scourge of his own followers: Not long before likewise the Plague was brought by a Ship out of Spain into Galloway,The Plagu in the Loyal Pro¦vinces of Ire∣land. and besides the havock it made in that Town, so disperst it self over all the Province of Connaught, that the Lord Marquess of Clanrickard being deprived, through the Calamities that were upon that Town and Country both of Money and Means to march withal, could not for many Months draw his Army together, either to act any thing alone▪ or joyn with any other, for fear lest by that means the Plague that had made such spoil while they were asunder, should Mow them down now when they were all toge∣ther.
This rout at Dublin, the Relief of Derry, and the Plague, might be thought competent afflictions to be cast upon a people so impoverished, and a Kingdom so wasted bfore; yet this sufficeth not, there are heavier losses yet to follow, and a worse Pestilence to land shortly at Dublin, that will sweep away their Men and Towns together. But here you may justly interrupt me, and say, that though it must be confessed, that whatsoever befals us in this Vale of misery is to be attributed to the Hand of Heaven, or the permission at least of the Divine Providence (into the Reasons of whose secret and hidden Counsels our weak capacities are unable to search) yet nevertheless, those visible causes whereby we draw misfortunes upon our selves, by such who through neglect of their Duty, and disobedience to their Superiours, are apparently the Authors there∣of, ought not to pass unpunished; and therefore you see no reason why those were not called to an account, that deserved it both by their cowardise, and so shameful omission of their Duty, as could admit of no excuse. But when you shall be pleased to reflect upon what I said before,The Marq. of Ormond not able to punish the cowardise and treachery of the Parties. that the Lord-Lieutenant Commanded this Army, and indeed the Kingdom, but as it were upon courtesie, all his Authority in effect consisting in the awing one Fa∣ction with another, the best of which he found to be on so uncertain and un∣setled terms, that you will I doubt not when you reflect upon it easily grant, that the Lord-Lieutenant could not in prudence do an act that was likely to give so great and general a distast, as indeed to have proceeded against Major-General Purcell would have been to the Confederates, amongst whom he had so many alliances and friends: and the running away of the rest was so universal a fault, that it was hard to discover who deserved punishment most, and harder to find a Court of War to censure them. During this short residence at Kilkenny,The Marq. of Ormond re∣cruits his For∣ces. his Excellency having taken Order with the Lord Inchiqueen to bring up what Forces he could possibly make, and with the Commissioners, for the recruiting, drawing together, and arm∣ing their dispersed Forces as soon as could be, to the end they might be sent after him; he speeds away himself (in the Company onely of 20 or 30 Horse) towards Trim and Drogheda, as the places both neerest the Enemies attempts, and likeliest to totter back, if not secured in time: At Tecroghan (a House of Sir Luke Fitzgarretts) he makes a stay, till those several Bodies that he then expected were come up; and upon notice of their coming removes to Trim, where he meets with news of Iones his being before Drogheda, who soon after, upon intelligence that the Lord-Lieutenant was at Trim, and supposing his For∣ces to be greater than indeed they were, drew off in the night, and returned im∣mediately to Dublin. The next day his Excellency went through to Drogheda,Drogheda Garrisoned with the flower of the Army. where a party of the Scotch Horse and Foot, under the Command of the Lord of Ards and the Lord Clanbrazill came up unto him; but whilst they were consulting what to do, they received assurance of Cromwels landing with very considerable Forces: Whereupon concluding that Town necessary to be kept, to entertain the Ene∣my before, whilst they made up their Army, as they hoped to do very conside∣rable, and soon enough to come to the Relief of the place; of which if they should fail, no question was made, but after the gaining of time (which was then precious) they in the Town should be able to make Honourable Condi∣tions for themselves, whilst Cromwel is refreshing his own men in Dublin, and reducing Iones's: There is put into Drogheda a Garrison of 2500 Foot, and 300 Horse,Sir Arthur Aston made Governour of Drogheda. which was thought sufficient; and so having furnisht it with Pro∣visions, as well as that short time would give them leave, his Excellency com∣mits the charge of that place to Sir Arthur Aston, as a person whose Experience, Courage, and approved Fidelity, did worthily deserve the highest Trust. These things thus ordered,Col. Daniel O Neal Go∣vernour of Trim, dispatch∣ed to treat with Owen O Neal. his Excellency returns to Trim, and from thence he dis∣patched away Colonel Daniel O Neal, then Governour of that place, with a Commission to set on foot the Treaty again with Owen O Neal if it were pos∣sible, and to endeavour the reducing of the Vlster-Army, even upon any
conditions; a person esteemed by all best qualified for that employment, as well in regard of his singular ability, and approved Fidelity to the King, as for the great Interest he was supposed to have in his Unkle, who managed the business with that dexterity,Sir Richard Barnwell and  Nicholas Plunkett sent to assist him, and conclude an Agreement. as he won his Unkle to hearken again unto an Agreement: whereupon Sir Richard Barnewell and Sir Nicholas Plunkett are sent after, to make an absolute conclusion with him; though by the way this may not be unworthy of observation, that those persons who were formerly most opposite to this Agreement, were now become the greatest sticklers to pro∣mote it with his Excellency, being grown sensible of the imminent and approach∣ing danger that now threatned them. Tecroghan is the next Stage his Excellency removes unto: here he makes a stand, as being the most portune place to draw his Army together in, and lying most convenient (after that was done) to Relieve Drogheda, or make any other attempt upon the Enemy: Where, besides the remains of the Irish Army, already somewhat recruited, there joyned unto him a good Regiment of the Lord Marquess Clanrickards of above 1000 Foot, together with 300 Horse; likewise that party of the Scots before mentioned, Sir Thomas Armstrong and Colonel Trevors, together with what Forces the Lord Inchiqueen could bring out of his Precincts: these being got together, and daily additions being still ex∣pected, to the making them up a more considerable Body than they were at Dubllin; the Lord-Lieutenant received several advices from Sir Arthur Aston, to precipitate nothing;Drogheda be∣sieged by Cromwel. for he doubted not of finding Cromwel play a while, as certainly he had done, had not Colonel Wall's Regiment, after the Enemy had been twice bravely Repulsed, upon the unfortunate loss of their Colonel in the third Assault, being so happily dismaid, as to listen (before they had need) unto the Enemy offering them Quarter, and admitted them in upon these Terms; thereby betraying both themselves and all their Fellow-Souldiers to the slaughter. For Cromwel being Master of the Town, and told by Iones, that he had now in his hands the Flower of the Irish Army,The Mas at Drogheda. Sir Arthur Aston, &c. kil∣i, Sep. 16. 3000 Soul∣diers put to Sword. gave order to have all that were in Arms put to the Sword: Where, besides the gallant Gover∣nour, Sir Arthur Aston, Sir Edmund Varney, whose Name-sake was Standard-bearer to King Charles the first, Colonel Warren, Colonel Fleming, and Colo∣nel Brin, Lieutenant-Colonel Finglasse, and Major Tempest, together with many other excellent Officers and Gentlemen, there were Butchered neer 3000 Soul∣diers, and those truly reputed the best that Kingdom affordd. This Massacre at Drogheda having lopt off a principal Limb of the Lord-Lieutenants Army,The Marquess of Ormond en∣deavours to strengthen other places. and the loss of that Town letting the Enemy loose, cau∣sed his Excellency to remove his Army from Castle-Iordan, down towards the Counties of Wexford and Kilkenny, there not onely to lye secure till General O Neal's Army came up unto them (with whom now at last, he having been re∣jected by the Parliament and the Commissioners, and whipt to Reason with ad∣versity, there was an Agreement made, and he submitted to the Kings Au∣thority) but also ready to be drawn into either Wexford or Kilkenny, as there should be occasion; for upon one of those places, after the Enemies retreat from Drogheda to Dublin, it was concluded they would tall on next. For which reason, his Excellency for many days Courts the Town of Wexford to take in a Garrison,Sir Edmund Butler Gover∣nour of Wex∣ford for the K. It is besieged by Cromwel, sur∣prised and stor∣med, 2000 put to the Sword. Kilkenny having received one already; but they (affirming they were able to defend their Town themselves) would never be brought to admit of one, till the Enemy was at the Walls, and then tumultuarily Sir Edmund Butler with neer 1500 men was received in as Governour; whom to re-inforce, after the Enemy was now set down before it, the Lord-Lieutenant comes with new supplies within sight of the Town, and had put them in, to the infallible preservation of the place, if (before his Excellencies eyes) the Town had not been given up into the hands of the most Cruel and Faithless Enemy, who Butchered there also, after they were Admitted in, above 2000 more. Several Troops of the Lord In∣chiqueens Re∣volt.There was nothing more remaining to be done, the Vlster Army being not yet come up, (and several Troops of the Lord Inchiqueens being since the
Siege of Drogheda run away to the Enemy) but to put a Garrison into Ross which was sent in under the Command of Luke Tse,Luke  Rose  Rose surr∣dred. with orders (for the place was judged scarce Tenable against powerful n Enemy) to make Con∣ditions when they saw themselves able to resist no longer; as at last they did, when the breach was made, and the Enemy ready to give an Assault, having Terms to march away with their Arms. About Graigge and Thomas Town his Excellency hovered with his Horse, and the small remainder of his Foot, until the coming up of the Vlter Army, under the Command of Lieutenant-General Farrell (the General himself lying then a dying:Litu. Ge. Far∣rll  of O∣mond.) This new Conjunction with Owen O Neal, and so great an accession of Forces, brings the Lord-Lieutenant into a condition not onely of putting a stop upon Cromwels hasty progress, but even of gaining ground upon him, as questionless he would have done, had not another misfortune greater than any of the former, intervened to frustrate all: which was this, the Lord In∣chiqueen having (as I said before) conditioned to have the ordering of those Garrisons and Forces that he brought in with him to the Kings Obedience  wholly to himself, out of desire (as is believed) to keep himself still consider∣able upon a bottome of his own, would never hearken unto any Proposition of admitting a proportion of Irish into any of his Towns, Kingsale onely excep∣ted, into which place (at the importunity of Prince Rupert) he at last ad∣mitted some: Being confident that the English Forces under his Command, having served under him so long upon several scores, all or the most of the Offi∣cers whereof, being either creatures of his own, or men obliged and indeared unto him upon a long account, would never separate themselves from his Fortune, or abandon his Service. But his Lordship (it seems) took wrong measures; for the most part of them being steered wholly be self-Interest, and knowing the way already how for advantage to serve against the King (whose business they saw so much declining, that no more was likely to be got that way) whilst Cromwel was full of money and success; Conspired together how to possess themselves of the Lord Inchiqueens Person,Lord Inchi∣queen's Offi∣cers are trea∣chrour. together with the Towns under his Command, that they might make a surrender of all at once unto the Enemy. Youghall begins the dance, and taking occasion to mutiny against the English Royalists under Wogan's Command) that were quartered there, imprisoned and disarmed them all, and afterwards stood upon their Guard. Whilst the Lord Inchiqueen is by all gentle means endeavouring to reclaim back this Town, several of his Officers combine to seize upon him (then ly∣ing secure at Lieutenant-General Barries house of Castle Lions) but they and their designe being discovered to his Lordship by one of their complices, were so far prevented,They are disco∣vered and ta∣ken, and no conditions Re∣leased. as to be seized upon all themselves. Whereupon the Town of Youghall seeing Cromwel yet at too great a distance, and the time of his coming into Munster uncertain, offered to submit, upon assurance of Indemni∣ty, the relief of the Imprisoned Officers, and removal of the Royalists; which his Lordship either wanting the means to compel them, or being willing with kindness and fait means to win upon them, and keep them in Or∣der, Assented unto. After which, having visited his Garrisons, and believ∣ing all things so secure, as not to require either his stay further there, or the bringing any proportion of the Irish into those other Towns;Cromwel ba∣ed by Colonel Wogan at Duncannon. he returns un∣to his charge in the Army. And now Cromwel having newly received an af∣front before Duncannon, through the Courage and Gallantry of Wogan, with those English Gentlemen that were put in with him upon that occasion, was retired back to Rosse, there (under the Protection of the Town) to make a Floting-Bridge over the River, to the end, that by having a passage to the other side, he might at his pleasure, either compel his Excellency to divide his Army to attend upon his motions, and so give him an opportunity of setting upon one part or other of it; or at least, if it kept together, of getting a passage into Munster, where he expected to finde a general Revolt of those Garrisons under the Lord Inchiqueens Command, as it afterwards happened.
The Lord Taafe was sent with a part of the Army to hinder the work; but what through want of Powder (and indeed all sorts of Ammunition) which was now grown exceeding scarce, extremity of soul weather, distempers a∣mongst his men, and other ill concurring accidents; he was not able to effect it. The Lord-Lieutenant (through Cromwels sudden retreating in the night from before Duncannon having lost the opportunity of fighting him, as he was then resolved, finding his Army chearfully desiring the occasion) had nothing left him now to do, but wait upon the Enemies motion, and endeavour to cut off his Provisions, which the Country-people (allured by the orderliness of his Souldiers, who had money to pay for what they took, and Command it seems to do so) brought them in as fast as could be; whilst his Excellency ha∣ving no money to pay his Army, nor indeed a competence of Bread to give them, was constrained to let them take their sustenance where they could finde it. Corke, You∣hall, and all the English Towns of Mun∣ster revolt.During this intermission of Action, Corke, Youghall, and all the English Towns of Munster (even through the incitation of those Officers that were but lately released) being openly Revolted, and the Lord Broghall with some men landed in those parts; very many of the Lord Inchiqueens party (both of Horse and Foot) deserted the Lord-Lieutenant, and ran daily over to the Ene∣my; insomuch, that both the Commanders and Souldiers of the Irish (not without reason) grew very jealous of the rest that remained behind, fearing that if ever they came to Engage against the Enemy, they would turn upon them, and betray them: there wanted not divers also (though doubtless very unjustly) that extended their jealousies unto the Lord Inchiqueen himself,Lord Inchi∣queen suspe∣cted, accused by the Marq. of Antrim. grounding their accusations upon his Lordships not punishing the Conspirators, when he had them in his Power, upon so fair a warning, and just an occasion, as was then given him; his not putting Irish into his Garrisons; upon his Wife, his Family, Plate, and Goods being sent him safely out of Corke into the Irish Quarters; upon his not consenting to the dismounting and disarming the rest of his men, when some of the Commissioners prest the doing of it; upon his delivering his advice in Council (as they heard) for his Excellencies com∣ing to Conditions with Cromwel, and making this an Argument for it, That his men would fight no longer; and lastly, upon an impertinent accusation with∣out Head or Tail (as appeared when he came to be examined in the business) brought against him by the Marquess of Antrim, for holding correspondence, and having made Conditions underhand with the Enemy. Upon these Foundations, and such as these, did many of the Irish represent unto the Lord-Lieutenant the necessity of discharging the Lord Inchiqueen of his Command, and securing his person; which his Excellency being more tender of the Kings Honour and his own, than upon bare surmises and suspi∣tions to deal in that manner with a person that had but lately deserved so well both of the King and him, would not be brought unto; chusing rather to run any adventure, than to be guilty of breach of Conditions with him; which he must needs have been, if before a Conviction of apparent Trea∣chery, he should upon the score of the Lord Inchiqueen's over-sights, or the un∣certain jealousies of the Irish, have condescended unto either of the things pro∣posed. This Temper and Justice in the Lord-Lieutenant (in not suffering himself to be led by the clamors and importunity of the people and Souldiers) in∣volves him also at last under their displeasure and mistrust; so that out of want of confidence in their Chief Commanders, and out of diffidence in one another, the Army was now fallen into a very unfit condition of hazarding a battel with the Enemy, if an occasion should offer it self: and to make it worse, the Scots that were there (being tired out with the necessities the whole Army suffered, and receiving news of the Enemies prevalence in their Country) de∣sired leave to return into the North; which after great importunity at last be∣ing granted them, they immediately withdrew their Forces, and hasted home∣wards;
where they were no sooner come, and Sir George Monro joyned with them, but they received so sore a blow from Coote, with so much loss and dispersion of their men, that they were never able to make Head in Vlster ater. Cromwel now finding the Army so much weakened by the desertion of so many of the Lord Inchiqueens men, and the departure of the Scots, and like∣wise knowing that it was in such disorder through the distrust and animosities that were amongst them, so that in reason he was like to have much the ad∣vantage if they should fight him; adventures over his Bridge at Rosse, into the County of Kilkenny, where by facing the Lord Lieutenants Army, and moving after it up and down▪ he amazed the Irish; whilst Iones his Lieutenant-Gene∣ral, with parties,Carrick taken by Lieu. Gen. Jones. took in the Castles of the Country, and had Carrick given in∣to his hands wretchedly by Martyn that Commanded there: Upon notice whereof Cromwel hastens thither, to pass his Army over into Munster, which was now his business; for notwithstanding his purse to buy provisions of the Country, and his Ships that wherever he went waited continually upon him, his Army through the unseasonableness of the weather, and want of Quarters, was so much harassed and wasted, many of his men falling sick and dying dai∣ly, that it he did not hasten to his Winter-quarters, he would in probability have perished without a blow; which nevertheless to make sure work, the Lord-Lieutenant (whose Army also was quitired out with wants, sufferings, and continual marches) nearing that he was gone towards Carrick, intended to bestow upon him, before necessity forced him to disperse his men; and to that end his Excellency marcht speedily after the Enemy,The Marq. of Ormond de∣ to sight Cromwel. with designe to st on him, whist he was either Engaged before Carick, or else incumbd at some other Pass upon the River: but after all this diligence, when his Excellency came neer the Town, he then learnt that the place was lost before, and that Cromwel leaving a competent Garrison therein, had onely past his Army over, and was gone towards Waterford; which Town during Cromwels Residence a Rosse, through the perswasion (as it is said) of Geoffry Baron and Hugh Rochford, had underhand begun a treaty with him for the delivery of the Town unto him; which Treaty onely stuck upon the free exercise of their Religion and the Churches, denied unto them by Cromwel. The knowledge of this, caused the Lord-Lieutenant now to hasten thither, with no small danger to his person, to press them to admit of a Garrison; which being a long time denied, and the Lord Castlehaven, with divers others that his Excellency propounded, being utterly rejected by them; yet at last they were content to admit of Farrell and the Vlster-men, who accordingly were sent immediately unto them.Lieu. General Farrel made Governour of Waterford. After Farrells admittance, he upon notice of the Enemies motion that way, fearing some commotion in the Town, and think∣ing himself not strong enough to resist the Enemy without, and master them within; writes unto his Excellency for a supply of men; and these his Ex∣cellency (seeing Cromwel so unexpectedly got over into Munster, through the Treachery of the Garrison of Carrick) intends now to conduct himself out of hand into Waterford, before which the Enemy was supposed to be: there∣upon, some Principal Officers of the Army desired leave that they might in the interim attempt the re-gaining of Carrick; against whom his Excellency object∣ing the want of materials necessary for such an enterprize, was assured they had enough to serve their turn for that work; yea, and some of them positively undertook the taking of the place that night. Wherefore leaving them to their business, his Lordship bends his course for Waterford,Cromwel at∣tempting Wa∣terford, in vain departs. where he arrived when it was late; upon notice whereof, Cromwel despairing of doing any good upon that Town, and finding many of his men fall sick and dye of the Flux, which then raged amongst them, draws off in the night, and hastens towards his Win∣ter-quarters at Corke and Youghall; in which march, as he gained Dungarvan, so he lo Iones his Lieutenant-General.Col. Jones dyes of the Flux. During the Lord-Lieutenants absence, the Army at Carrick assaults the place,
the Foot falling on with extraordinary gallantry and resolution,The Kings For∣ces Assault Carrick; but depart with loss. where after the loss of many of them, they failed of carrying the place onely for want of a few Pickaxes and Spades, which being call'd for, were no where to be found; which necessitated the poor Foot, after having done so handsomely, and stood under the Walls some hours, to quit the business and draw off; when extreme want of Food (they having eaten nothing almost for two days) enforced them to march away towards Clonmell; all the Country betwixt Carrick and Kilkenny being totally spoiled already. This Carrick was gained and now defended by Colonel Reynolds. The removal of the Army hence, without sending notice of it to the Lord-Lieutenant, had like to have put his Excellency into the Enemies hands: for he making full account of the regaining of Carrick, upon the former assurance that was given him, was upon his way directly thither (where the Enemy had 300 Horse, and he not 40 in his Company) when Colonel Milo Power by good fortune found him out, and told him of the ill success of the Enterprize, and the motion of the Army thence: whereupon he altered his course another way. And then considering that the Enemy was now retired into his Garrisons,Both Armies retire to their Winter-quar∣ters. that the weather was bitter and unfit for action, the Winter being now come on, or if it were not so, that he had neither Meat, nor Money wherewith to keep his men any longer together; having since the Revolt of Munster (which de∣prived him of the greatest share of his Contributions and Provisions) been a long time already forced to live upon the spoil of the rest of the Country; he concluded upon dispersing his Army into Quarters also, which (because the Principal Towns refused to admit them in) he was fain to scatter over all the Kingdom. The greatest part of the Vlster-Forces were sent into their own Province, there to chuse a new General, according as their conditions allowed them, for Owen O Neal was dead;Gen. Owen O Neal dyes. the Ulster-Forces sent into their own Province. Luke Taafe sent into Con∣naght, Lord Inchiqueen goes to Clare, Lord Dillon into Meath. Maj General Hugh O Neal made Governur of Clonmel for the King. Kilkenny gar∣risoned for the King. and Luke Taafe with his men were sent back into Connaght to the Lord of Clanrickard: The Lord Inchiqueen with the remainder of such as belonged unto him, went over into the County of Clare; the Lord Dillon with his into Meath, and towards Athlone; all the rest were scattered several ways, onely Major-General Hugh O Neal was admitted with about 1600 Vlster-men into Clonmell as Governour; and Kilkenny received also a competent Garrison, to secure them against so ill Neighbours as both Rosse and Carrick were. Here you may behold a summary of what past in the field, since the Army first set forth, until their going to their Winter-quarters; in all which time, how ill soever the success hath been, nothing can with any colour of reason be laid to the Lord-Lieutenants charge, except the not punishing those many Fail∣ings, Treacheries, and Disorders that were committed during this Summers Ex∣pedition: Yet as to the disobedience and neglects in the Siege of Dublin, I gave you Reasons why that was past over before; and those that were committed since, were for the most part by men of that condition and interest, that it was neither safe nor fit (all things considered) to call them to an account. As for Treacheries, most of the Authors of them took care to secure themselves, and in time get out of reach; onely Crosby that betrayed Kingsale,Crosby betray∣eth Kingsale; he is Reprieved and pardoned. after he was design∣ed to dye by the Lord-Lieutenant, upon the Lord Inchiqueens coming to Town, was (I know not for what considerations) reprieved and saved. The want of money to pay the Souldiers, and the exigences they were for the most part in, after the mischance at Dublin, did so much Authorize their disorders in the Country, that if they had not been past by and connived at, there had been no means of keeping them together. So that I have many reasons to believe, that notwithstanding the defeat at Dublin, and success upon Drogheda, Cromwel with all his great Army, his Fleet, and store of Money, had been lost and sunk to nothing, if the Castles of Wex∣ford and Carrick had not been so foully given up; nay, and after that too, if those Towns and Forces in Munster had not so treacherously Revolted. Thus did the knavery and malice of a few, steal away the Hearts of the gene∣rality
of that undiscerning simple people from the Lord-Lieutenant, few of them being able to judge at all of the Prudence and Integrity of his Conduct; or to consider that the Army that was in the Field the foregoing Summer, would have required four times the Contribution that was raised, without leaving any surplus,The Marq. of Ormond of∣fers to morgage his Estate for the spport of the Amy. either to be hoarded up or sent beyond Seas: From which his Ex∣cellency was so far, that on the other side, he frequently offered to engage at a very low rate, all that remained Unmorgaged of his Princely Estate, for the sup∣port of the Army. The Surrender of Dublin truly had been made unto the people of Ireland by the arts of those that were at that time in Government amongst them, a most odious thing; though those very persons knew well enough, it was themselves and not the Lord-Lieutenant, that was in the fault, by twice foully violating their Publike Faith with him: First, in breaking a Peace made, and solemnly published both at Dublin and Kilkenny (the Respective seats of the Kings Lieu∣tenant, and the Council of the Confederates) and in seconding that Act (af∣ter having imprisoned the Lord Muskery, Sir Robert Talbott, Sir Lucas Dillon, Master Brown, Master Belings, and the rest of their Supreme Council, that had made the Peace, and still stood honestly to what they had done) with bringing their Armies before Dublin, where having caused the burning and destruction of those quarters▪ the Town it self must have been lost unto them, it upon overture of a Treaty with the Parliament they had not sent Men and Supplies to rescue it. And next, in the breach of that solemn Engagement made be∣tween them and the Marquess of Clanrickard, as soon as (upon belief of their resolution to return unto their Duty) the Treaty was broke off, and the For∣ces of the Parliament sent home again. Could it be expected that after two such acts as these, any wise man would trust or treat with the Irish any more, whilst the Government was still in the same mens hands? who after all this, wrought the whole Assembly to declare they would never have any Protestant Governour more, and namely not the Lord-Lieutenant; and who were not ashamed at the same time, both to annul the Peace, and yet acknowledge that the forementioned Gentlemen that had been makers of it, and suffered in justi∣fication of it, had neither exceeded their instructions, nor done any thing mis∣becoming honest men. His Excellency was now at Kilkenny,He is at Kil∣kenny. where having in vain endeavoured to qualifie the universal discontents, and observing how fast (notwithstanding the admonitory Declaration of all the Bishops from Clonmacnosse to the contra∣ry) the people being alienated with the ravaging and disorder of their own Armies, and allured with the successes and smooth invitations of Cromwel, run headlong in to him for Protection, and under Contribution; as also, how great numbers of the Irish Souldiers,The Irish Soul∣diers, some frighted with the Plague, others in neces∣sity, revolt to Cromwel. some frighted with the Plague, which now be∣gan to spread into the other Provinces of the Kingdom; and others for want of livelihood, as having neither meat nor pay, flockt in unto the Enemy: He went into Connaght to confer about carrying on of the publike business, and the remedy of those disorders, with the Marquess of Clanrickard, at his Castle of Portumna, about the end of Christmas; who being a person of that eminent Merit towards our King and Nation, and deserving so much Honour from all honest men, I must, I believe, do a thing very displeasing to you, not to give you a due Character of him here. Upon his coming to Portumna, the Lord-Lieutenant meets with Sir George Monro, who was posted thither out of the North, to make some Proposals in order to the reduction of Vlster to his Excellency and the Lord Clanrickard (who had the Summer before assisted him towards his Vlster Expedition,The Marq. of Clanrickard Character. with a Regiment of Foot, 100 Horse, and 1000 pounds in money, out of the Pro∣vince of Counaght) and in case those overtures of his were not approved of, to demand his Pass, that he might leave the Kingdom: but what he propoun∣ded was so plausible, that in case Money and Arms could be had in time, and in proportion to what he demanded (as the infection of Galloway, out of which
Town chiefly both were to be had, made it very difficult) they judged it a very likely Expedition: Whereupon the Lord (Clanrickard, desirous to keep so able a Commander as Sir George in the Kingdom,He supplies Sir George Mon∣ro with money. furnisheth him with what Money he could at the present, and sends him Northwards to lay and prepare the business before; promising to do his uttermost endeavours to procure him those supplies of Money, Ammunition, and Arms, by the time appointed; as also to bring his Army up as far as Sligo, there to countenance Sir George in his undertakings, and be ready for any fair occasion that should present it self for the mastering of the Country. Marq. of Or∣mond at Kil∣kenny endea∣vouring with the Lord Clan∣rickard to pro∣vi an Army against next spring.After four or fiv days stay at the most, his Excellency took his leave, and hastened towards Kilkenny, obliging the Lord Clanrickard to come after him, to be present at a meeting he had appointed there, for the procuring of a good understanding between the Clergy, the Commissioners, and himself, and for taking the best order they could, for the raising and maintaining an Army a∣gainst the next Spring: But though they met, nothing at that time could be done or agreed upon; wherefore the Lord Clanrickard returns into Connaght, to take order for his Northern Expdition; which out of the great difficulties of getting his men together, arising out of the universal distractions that were then in the Kingdom, the hard Season of the year, the Pestilence, the want of Moneys and Provisions, he could not possibly go through with against February, which was the time designed; nor even then when he did, without very great necessities and inconveniencies to himself and his Army; though that No∣ble Person declined no difficulty, nor spared no Charge in his Majesties Ser∣vice. This failing in point of time, and a great part of the Moneys promised him (which nevertheless as things stood, no mans industry could have remedied) Sir George Monro complained very much of, affirming, that their opportunity was lost thereby, especially, now they being come, the Army was able to move no further through extreme want of Provision (kept from them by foul and contrary weather) for which, and the residue of the Money, together with hopes of an accord between the Lord-Lieutenant and the Commissioners, some days were spent in expectation; but nothing in the end, except onely a Letter from the Lord Ormond summoning the Lord Clanrickard suddainly away; his Lordship was forced to leave his Army and the Northern business to the hazard, and return back to meet the Lord-Lieutenant and the Commissioners at Logh∣reogh: Wereupon Sir George Monro believing now the Lord-Lieutenant would leave the Kingdom, seeing the divisions amongst the Irish grew daily greater, and giving all for lost (having received a defeat by Sir Charles Coot,Sir Charles Coote defeats the Iri, and takes the Earl of Claneboys. Sir Geo: Mon∣ro delivers Eniskillin to the Enemy. where the Earl of Claneboys was taken Prisoner, and Colonel Henderson killed, with some 800 Private Souldiers) and lastly, finding the impatience of his own party to treat with the Enemy, (as he had often before publikely declared he would) retires himself to Eniskillin; and having made Conditions for himself, the re∣mainder of his Party, and his Officers that were in Prison, gave up that place to the Enemy, and departed the Kingdom. Very soon after whose retirement, the Lord Clanrickard's Army through extremity of want was forced to return from Sligo back towards the County of Galloway. Where I will leave it, and come back to his Excellency, who being left by the Lord Clanrickard lately in Kilkenny,Capt. Tickle Executed for designing to be∣tray Kilkenny. after having caused Captain Tickle to be Executed for a designe he had of betraying that Town to Cromwel; was by the breach growing daily wider between him and the Kingdom, and through the increase of the Sickness now come thither, at the joynt request of the Com∣missioners and Officers, induced to remove towards Limerick;Marq. of Or∣mond at Lim∣erick, departs in diast to Clare. Cromwels Army takes the Field. where being neg∣ligently received, without the accustomed respect used to the Kings Lieute∣nant, he after a short stay departed thence into the County of Clare. Imme∣diately thereupon, the Enemy having refreshed his men, and encreased his Ar∣my with a great accession of old Souldiers that had formerly served under the Lord Inchiqueen and the Lord-Lieutenant, takes the field, and falls a Sum∣moning
Castles, and bringing the Country under Contribution; wherein he had a general success, most of the Castles surrendring upon appearance of a party of Horse; except Kiltenan, which gave him some resistance. His Excellencies Army,The Kings Ar∣my dispersed. through the forementioned obstinacy and disobedi∣ence of the Towns against receiving Garrisons, was so far dispersed, that there was no means of drawing them together; neither, if that were done, of draw∣ing them in a Body; for the Country was destroyed and wast, so that it could not supply him: besides, during these disagreements between the Lord-Lieute∣nant, the Clergy, and the Commissioners, there were few or none of the Irish Souldiers (if there had been Provisions for them) that would obey his Excel∣lencies Orders. Of all which Cromwel was well aware, and therefore went securely, and with confidence to work, carrying all before him. Amongst o∣ther of his successes,Ballisanon sold to Crom∣wel. Cahir-Castle given him. Ballisanon was sold unto him, and Cahir Castle (then the dwelling-house of Master Matthews, a young youth, and half Brother to the Lord-Lieutenant) given him, contrary to those strict orders left by his Excel∣lency with Master Matthews for the keeping of it; who was so conscious of his own misdoing in the Act, that he refused upon several summons and invitations to appear before his Lordship, and stayed sll in the Enemies quarters to secure himself from his Excellencies indignation.The affairs in Ireland . Marq. of Or∣monds . But nevertheless, this act of Ma∣ster Matthews is made a ground of new susns, and fresh clamours against his Lordship himself by the Irish, who all this while run on in their extravagan∣cies, intent onely upon their disputes in hand, as if there were no such man as Cromwel in the Kingdom; insomuch, that seeing so many several meetings assigned, and so much time spent to so little purpose, his Excellency concludes that those people would never be brought into order by him, and therefore re∣solves to withdraw himself from the Government, if not to depart the King∣dom, and to commit the management of all unto the Marquess of Clanric∣kard;He withdraws, leaving the Marq. Clan∣rickard to Go∣vern that King∣dom. which was the reason of his Lordships being sent for back again from Sligo. The Enemy in the mean time having the Castles of Gowran and Laghlin, together with the Officers Commanding in them, delivered into his hands by the Common-Souldiers, sets at last upon Kilkenny; whence (a while before) the Earl of Castlehaven (who was now left with chief Command in Lemster) was drawn out with his Forces, by reason the Sickness raged so, leaving Sir Wal∣ter Butler and Major Walsh, with about 50 Horse, and some 400 Foot in the place, where a breach being made, and the Enemy Assaulting, they were brave∣ly Repulsed, leaving 600 Arms behind them; after which check, they resolved to march off, and are sending their Artillery away silently before, whilst the Towns∣men convey a Drummer privately over the Wall, and upon I know not what accord,Kilkenny ta∣ken. let the Enemy in, unknown to the Souldiers, who were then forced to retire to the Castle, and make their Terms, which being granted them, they march away. Kilkenny being gained by him,Cromwel at Cashel. let us leave Cromwel at Cashel for a while amongst his Committee-men, and return into Connaght, where the Clergy and Commissioners seeing that the Lord Clanrickard having refused to take the Go∣vernment upon him,The Lord Clan∣rickard refu∣seth to take up∣on him the Go∣vernment. was resolved in case they continued disobedient unto the Lord-Lieutenant (lest the Kings Authority should be exposed to further dis∣obedience and contempt) to leave the Kingdom together with his Excellency: and considering what a certain Ruine their departure would be unto them all, are now courting the Lord-Lieutenant to stay,The Marq. of Ormond cour∣ted to continue it. and offer to come to composition with him; who demands assurance from them, that the Respective Towns of Limerick and Galloway shall receive sufficient Garrisons, and that themselves with all the Souldiers and people shall hereafter readily obey him; which they undertake unto him, upon condition that all the English whatsoever (under his Excellencies Command) might be disbanded and sent away; that the Bi∣shops of the Kingdom might have a share in Council, and the management of things; that the Receiver-General (which was Sir George Hamilton, Brother-in-law
to the Lord-Lieutenant,to which on certain codi∣tions he agrees. a person of great parts, Honour, and Merit) might give in his accounts; all which his Excellency, out of his great desire to satisfie and unite the people, thereby to preserve the Country and the Kings In∣terest (if it were possible) at last assents unto This Agreement being made, the English were accordingly (to free the Irish of their Jealousies, who either were or would seem to be equally suspici∣ous of the Royalists, as of those that had served the Parliament before) disban∣ded; and since there was no further employment for them,The English un¦der Ormond disbanded and take Condi∣tions. nor means of get∣ting away by Sea, they had leave to make their Conditions with Cromwel, to pass through his quarters out of the Kingdom: which being granted by him all, all the small remainder of the Lord Inchiqueens men (except a few that Colonel Buller was to carry for Scilly) went under the conduct of Colonel Iohn Daniel into the Enemies quarter; so did the Lord Ards, and after him Sir Thomas Arm∣strong, with whom went also Master Daniel O Neal, upon the score of carrying a Regiment into Spain. There remained none behind that was permitted to bear any charge, but Lieutenant-Colonel Treswell, at the Lord Ormonds particular instance, to Command his Guards of Horie; onely Iohn Digby, Colonel Hen∣ry Warren, and Colonel Hugh Butler aid to wait upon his Excellencies person, and bear him company in his aentures: Colonel Trevor rendred himself like∣wise upon the same account. But before I go on, I must not omit to tell you, how Dean Boile, who was sent to treat with Cromwel for the English that were disbanded, being offered it (as he says) by Cromwel, and imagining (as himself affirms) to do a ser∣vice to the Lord-Lieutenant and the Lord Inchiqueen in it, adventured of his own head to take Passes from him, for their departure out of the Kingdom; where∣of, as soon as ever Dean Boile was gone, he makes use, to debauch the Irish Gar∣risons to take Conditions from him, assuring them the Lord-Lieutenant had received his Pass to depart the Kingdom; though the Passes were absolutely without his Lordships privity or license accepted, and with indignation resen∣ted; but in the mean time Emer Mac Mahon Bishop of Cloghor,Emer Mac Mahon Bp. of Cloghor, made General of the Ulster-Army. who had been chosen General of the Vlster-Army, having a good while since received his Commission from the Lord-Lieutenant, was now gathering together his Army, which in a short time after he had made up to be about 6000 men, wherewith having taken several little Castles in his way, he was marched up into the Clane∣boyes, and become Master of the field. Cromwel re∣pulsed and worsted at Clonmel, by Maj. General Hugh O Neal Governour thereof.The next enterprize Cromwel went in hand with, was to take Clonmell which was kept by Major-General Hugh O Neal, who behaved himself so discreetly and gallantly in defending it, that Cromwel lost neer upon 2500 men before it; and had notwithstanding gone away without it, if they within had had store of Powder; but their small proportion being spent, the Governour with his Soul∣diers was fain to go out of the Town on the other side of the River, by night, towards Waterford, and leave the Towns-men to make Conditions for them∣selves; which they did the next morning, the Enemy not knowing but the Gar∣rison was still in Town,Clonmel sur∣rendred to Cromwel. till the Conditions were signed. Thus the loss of this place, and several other Garrisons, for want of Ammunition, was another effect of the disobedience of the Towns; insomuch, that had it not been for a little Magazine that the Lord Clanrickard had providently made beforehand, and wherewith (since the loss of Drogbeda) his Excellencies Army, the Scots, the Vlsters, and most of the Garrisons were furnished; all might have gone to an irrecoverable ruine, whilst the Walled-Towns (like Free-States) lookt on as unconcern'd, denying to afford it to them. David Roch defeated by the L. Broghall. The Bp of Rosse and two other Priests hanged.About the time of the Siege of Clonmel, David Roch having raised above 2000 men in the Counties of Corke and Kerry, and beginning to make head with them, received a small brush from the Lord Broghall, which onely dispersed his men for a few days, his loss being not considerable for any thing but the Bi∣shop of Rosse, who being taken was hanged with two other Priests by Cromwel, for being found in Arms (as he said) against the States of England.
Soon after the gaining of Clonmel,Cromwel goes for England, Ireton chief Commander in his place. Cromwel upon Letters out of England in∣viting him thither; went to Sea, and leaves Ireton in chief Command behind him, to subdue the rest of that miserable wasted Kingdom, whilst himself went about the Conquest of new Empires, more worthy of his presence. Here I can∣not but observe, that of all those thousands that either came with him thither, or were sent after, there are now few tens surviving, either to reap the benefit, or report the stories of their Victories; his Army upon his departure being sunk to a very inconsiderable number, especially in Foot; and neer three parts of those, consisting of either Irish, Ione's, or the Lord Inchiqueen's men, who one∣ly are able to undergo the woful incommodities of that Country, now groning under a universal Plague, Famine, and Desolation, to that degree, that if they had known but half the miseries that expect them there,An account of the Irish affairs. I am confident that no Threats nor Flatteries could have perswaded men out of England thither, in hopes of reaping the fruits of their fellows labours, in that destroyed King∣dom. Which, as low as 'tis brought, may chance to cost Cromwel a second Ex∣pedition, and another Army, and yet go without it. For they have Waterford, Galloway, and Limerick, three of the strongest and most considerable Towns of the Kingdom still untaken; any of which, if they be well Garrisoned (as questionless now they are) will be neer a Summers work to reduce: The Forts of Duncannon and Sligo, the Castles of Caterlo, Ath∣lone, Charlemont and Neanagh, are not easie purchases: the Province of Con∣naght is still preserved entire by the Lord Clanrickard, who will be able to bring 4000 men of his own into the field, now that Galloway and his Country is some∣what cleared from the infection of the Plague; which begins to rage greatly in the Enemies quarters, as Corke, Youghall, Wexford, and Dublin it self; Kilkenny, Clonmel, with several places thereabouts being left desolate with it. The Coun∣ty of Clare in Munster brought unto the Lord-Lieutenant at a Rendezvouze at the same time above 2000 men, wherewith his Excellency (being invited by the Magistrates) was ready to march into Limerick to Garrison that place, and to make it his residence. What Forces the Irish had in Vlster and towards Kerry, I have already told you, as likewise what Connaght and the County of Clare afforded: I must adde that Hugh Mac Phelim had in Wiklow, and towards Wexford, hard upon 2000 men; and at Waterford, General Preston and Hugh O Neal had little less: to con∣clude, besides all this, the Lord Castlehaven, the Lord Dillon, and the Bishop of Drummore, made account they should draw together a considerable Body in Meath, and the rest of Leimster to joyn with the Marquess of Clanrickard to∣wards the relief of Tecroghan, then besieged by Colonel Reynolds. Thus you may see that (provided they be united amongst themselves, and that means can be found of keeping them in bodies together) there are men enough in Arms yet to dispute the business with an Enemy that is not half their number, and whose quarters are pestered likewise with the Plague and Famine, as well as theirs; especially these having such strengths and fastnesses still in their hands, as are almost inaccessible to Cromwels Souldiers. Who after having mastered the greatest part of Munster and Leimster, their supplies from England coming in but slowly, have made bold at last with the people they flattered with be∣fore, and altered their manner of proceedings, taking from them by force what they pleased, and violating their protections given; making not nice to tell them, they suffered them to possess their Estates but during pleasure, and till they could have Planters to put into their rooms: by which kind of clear deal∣ing, they have so lost and made desperate the Natives, that lamenting their former too ready compliance with the Enemy, they now called for the Lord-Lieutenant again, and taking Arms in their hand, began to rise in all quarters of the Kingdom, so that it is impossible for a greater power than Ireton hath there to attend to the suppression of them all. This is the perfect account of the Irish affairs, whereby the first Trophees of the English Commonwealth raised themselves to greater Atchievements, by a
chain of successes; but Winter growing on, their Army was put into Winter-quarters, Cromwel himself to that purpose taking up Youghall lately, with Corke (wherein were the Lord Inchiqueens Lady and Family) revolted by the trea∣chery of the Colonels Gilford, Warren, and Townsend:Col. Wogan defeated and taken prisoner. Prince Rupert departs King∣sale with his Fleet, leaving three empty ships behind him. Oct. 24. (Colonel Wogan new∣ly defeated in his attempt in Passage-Fort, and then taken prisoner by Colonel Zanchy) whereupon Prince Rupert with the Constant Reformation, the Conver∣tine, wherein was Prince Maurice, the Swallow where was Sir Iohn Mien, and some other Sips, set sail from Kingsale, where he had continued Blockt up most part of the last Summer by Admiral Popham, and betook themselves to the Nar∣row Seas, now that the Parliament had most of that Coast in their possession, and sailed for France. In the mean while Captain Young had fired the Antilope (one of the Kings ships) at Helvoet-sluce in Holland, and the Guinny-Frigot was mastered and taken neer Scilly, the Rendezvouze and Harbour of his Ma∣jesties Fleet, that did very much hinder and obstruct the Trade at Sea, where∣in his Majesties Rebels were now principally concerned; of which we shall have yet further occasion to speak in the ensuing year. The Parliament had in Iune filled up the Benches at Westminster. Aske from Clerk of the Crown (one of their Beagles at the High Court of Iustice) was made one of the Justices of the Vpper (so was the Kings) Bench newly cal∣led; and Broughton (a Clerk to the same Court) had his former Office. Pu∣liston and Warberton in the Common-pleas, to whom in the place of Judge Phe∣sant, Serjeant Atkins was added: Colonel Rigby and Thorpe were made Barons of the Exchequer;Col. Morris and Cornet Blackborne Executed at York, Aug. by the last of whom, Colonel Morris (the late noble Go∣vernour of Pomfret) and Cornet Blackborne, were Condemned and Executed at York, on the 18 day of August; at which Sessions Thorpe likewise in his Charge to the Grand-Jury magnified the late Actions of the Parliament, and justified their Authority, and endeavoured to shew its consonancy to the Laws: which fine Oration is yet extant in Print. About this time, after much debate by these Judges, and at the instance of the Army, the Parliament passed the Act commonly called the Five Pound Act, whereby Debtors in Prison, upon their Oath that they were not worth five pound, were discharged; by Vertue where∣of, most of the Goals in England were emptied, and room made for Cavaliers and Royalists; of which party Sir Robert Heath,Lord Chief-Iu∣stice Heath dyes. the Noble and most Loyal Lord Chief-Justice of England (being an excepted person by the Parliament) died at Caen in Normandy, about the end of August; and Sir Kenelm Digby and Master Walter Mountague were ordered to depart the Kingdom,Sir Kenelm Digby and Mr. Walter Moun∣tague ordered to depart the Kingdom Forrain Prin∣ces, how affect∣ed. as not being within any of the qualifications for Delinquents Composition. Thus stood things at home, in a Commanding and Authoritative posture: we will see next how they fadge abroad; and first, the Scot their next Neighbours having an Army moving up and down in the North of that Kingdom, to sup∣press the Montrossian Party, which appeared in the Isles of Orkney [the Mar∣quess then bestirring himself in the Court of the Duke of Holstein for supplies, and ready to Embarque, having sent a forerunning Declaration,The Marq. of Montross his Declaration. wherein he recited the greatness of those condescentions to, and that confidence his late Majesty had of them, when he put himself into their Hands at Newark; both which some wicked persons of that Nation had Trayterously abused, even to the Murther of that blessed Prince, and thereafter would impose Conditions and Limitations to their present Soveraign; and desired all good and honest Subjects who had been misled, to appear with him to the vindication of those injuries, as well as reproach of the Scotch Nation, &c.] and other Forces quartering about Edenborough, had Decreed that no Provision whatsoever should he carried into England, and shewed an absolute averseness to any fur∣ther Treaty or Correspondence with the English; but had dispatcht away the Laird of Windram, one Master Libberton, to the King, who after his arrival at Zeland, sailed to the King at Iersey, with the onely Conditions of taking the National-Covenant, and renouncing of Montross and other Royalists of that Nation. For in the beginning of September, the King was arrived there with
His Brother the Duke of York in company with Sir George Carteret the Gover∣nour, and other his Nobles and Confident Followers, having before his depar∣ture designed some of his Lords as Embassadors to several Princes. The French also had prohibited the Importation of Cloth into France (in a proud revenge and quittal whereof,The French  the im∣portation of cloth. The States of Holland dy Audi to Strickland the Stat of Eng∣lands . Th Spaniard pribits his Subs to seve our King at ea The Gallantry of t Emperour Russia. the Parliament forbad the Importation of French-wines) and the States General of the Vnited Provinces had denied Au∣dience to Walter Strickland their new Resident, after several instances; onely the Spaniard (who had lately before acknowledged the same Provinces for a Free State) began to wind about, and to insinuate a Compaliance wth the Eng∣lish One, as imagining it no way dangerous, but advantageous to his Interest and Stale Ambition of Universal Soveraignty, as Campanella had designed it. For in tendency thereunto, he prohibited his Subjects in Flanders to serve the King at Sea, his Ports being before open to such Vessels that served the King, and were Manned with Flemings for the most part, and did also undertand hold Intelligence with this State. But the Emperour of Russia no sooner heard of the Kings Death, but he immediately Commanded all the English to de∣part his Dominions, and was hardly perswaded (having first secured their Goods) to give them leave to stay a while in Arch-Angel, his onely Port of Trade, whi∣ther from his Court and City of Musco he had driven them. He had profered to the Lord Culpeper (His Majesties Embassador) to have given him all the English Estates; but he declining it, and telling the Emperour the King con∣ceived very well of those His Subjects,He lends the King of Eng∣land 20000 l. he very frankly lent the King 20000 l. with a protestation of his further good will, if he had not been so greatly en∣gaged in a War at home. The Dane, the Swede, and the Pole knew not what to make of our New Lords, and so let them alone: the Portugal's actions De∣clared Him. Several Affronts were likewise given them under their very Noses:Presbyterian Ministers de∣cline t Parli∣ament. the Lon∣don Presbyterian Ministers would not Officiate, neither at their Fasts nor Thanks∣givings; for which Contempts, several of them were brought before their Com∣mittees, and after severe reprehension and warning dismissed, as namely Ma∣ster Love. Master Ienkins, and Master Ash:The Levelrs discontented. And the Levellers began to make new broils, the Garrison of Oxford, of Colonel Ingoldsby's Regiment, mutining, and securing their Officers; while Lilburn and his Associates vex them in print, by a new Pamphlet called the Apprentices Outcry. The Mutineers were suppressed in a manner by themselves, and two of them shot to Death:New commo∣tions by the Levelers. Lilburn having been kept a long while before Prisoner in the Tower, was now brought to his Tryal at Guild hall, by a Commission of Oyer and Termier, directed to the new Lord-Commissioner Keeble, Justice Iermin, and others; where after a confident defence of himself, reading of several Statutes, and thumming of Magna Charta, and a hundred Slurs upon the Court, he was acquitted by his Jury,John Lilburn chosen a Com∣mon-Council-man for Lon∣don, but disa∣bled by the Parliament. and not long after chosen a Common-Council-man for the City; though the Parliament (by Vote afterwards) disallowed it, and made him uncapable of any Office: And finally, that I may have done with this Trouble-world, not long after Sentenced him to Banishment, which was procured by the old Feud betwixt him and Sir Arthur Hasilrigge. To secure themselves therefore from that and all other Parties, they Legislated a thing called an Engagement,The Engage∣ment Voted, Octob. which though at its first designment it reached onely persons in Office and Trust, and the Lawyers that Pleaded (with an ad∣ditional precept to the several Benches, to remove out of their Chambers (in the Respective Inns of Court) all who had served the King in the late War (saving the benefit of Articles) as they had kept them some good while before from the Bar) yet at last it included all sorts of men from 18 years old and upwards, who were enjoyned to recognize, and then subscribe this knack, in these Republican words, — You shall promise to be true d faithful to the Commonwealth of England, as it is now established without King or House of Lords. And their repeated prosperous violation of all things Sacred and Civil, had so (prob Dolor!) Atheisted the Land, that people jested themselves into this snare:
the Royalists and some such sober Presbyterians onely disavowing it, though no protection or benefit of the Law was to be had without it. The terrible Powder-blow in Tower∣street, Jan. 4.On the 4 of Ianuary, happened a most terrible blow by Gunpowder in Tower-street, out of a Ship-chandlers cellar, who going down about 8 of the Clock about some business there with a Candle, it unfortunately sparkled into the Powder, as was conceived, and blew up and spoiled above 100 Houses, some 60 persons being killed, the most whereof were slain as they were drinking in the Rose-Tavern, in whose Ruines they were over-whelmed. This accident invited the curiosity of some to say, that the Treason committed that time Twelve month before, was followed with this its sutable attendant, to point to the Authors the likeness of their Villany. But whatever that disaster signified, the Death of Alderman Hoyle (a great Rumper) of York,Alderman Hoyle hanged himelf, Jan. 30. who hanged him∣self on the same day and hour Twelve month that the King was Murthered, plainly shewed the vengeance and displeasure of God against that monstrous and abominable Fact. This was the Evening-Sacrifice to their Thanksgiving-Devotion, in most so∣lemn manner celebrated by the States a Westminster, in commemoration of their lately recovered Liberty from the Laws and a just Government, by the Death of the King, being the Anniversary of his Martyrdom; but had so many ill Omens and sinister Prognosticks, that they rased this Festival out of their Kalen∣dar, which carried in it so many signal remarques of the just Judgement and Vegeance of God upon that impious Fact, and their no less abominable moc∣kery of Him as the Author thereof, in this their pretended religious observation of that fatal Providence. Gen. Blake commands a Fleet.General Blake was now fitting out to Sea with a lusty Fleet, to hinder Prince Rupert, (now Commanding in the Western-seas) from doing further prejudice to the Trade, the Nation being then much incommodated by several Ships of War set out by His Majesties Commission, the execution whereof could not discern betwixt His Subjects and His Rebels. The Prince was then in Harbour at Lisbone,Prince Rupert blockt up Lis∣bone, Mar. whither Blake directly sailed with 16 able Men of War, and blockt up the Port, demanding license to fall upon the Prince in the River; which being denied, an attempt was made by him; but the Castles firing upon his foremost Frigots, in favour and protection of the Prince's Fleet, he was forced to give it over, and come to an Anchor at the Mouth of the Tagus, resolving to stop and seize such Vessels of the Portugals as should make for that place: and the Bra∣zile Sugar-Fleet was then daily expected. An Act now passed for removing obstructions in the sale of the King, Queen, and Princes Lands, as they then called them: and several Mannors and Lands were apportioned to the Souldiers for their Arrears, whose Debentures were now stated by the Committee of the Army, the Common Souldiers purcha∣sing in manner of a Corporation by Regiments; the frequency of these Deben∣tures (which the old Officers and Reformadoes sold at Half a Crown in the pound, and so drew in a great number of Citizens to be Bargainers with the Trustees named in the Act for the sale of the said Lands and Hereditaments, which were thereby invested and setled on them for the use of the Common∣wealth) gave an opportunity to one Granger and his Complices to counterfeit the Hands of the said Committee,Granger's no∣torious Cheats. by which means several false Debentures were put upon the Commissioners, and more Cheats upon those that bought them, when at last they came to be discovered. This Granger, who justified his little Cheats by their great ones, continued this kinde of Trade throughout the Usurpation, in levying Assessements by Warrants, which he would counter∣feit and make use of to any of the Treasurers of the Costome-house or Cham∣ber of London, and to any Collectors and Receivers of any publike Money, especially in Cromwels raign, and yet never suffered further than the Pillory and a Temporary Imprisonment, and is yet alive, and in custody for his former Cheats, and the like endeavours and attempts of late. The King was yet at Iersey, whither the Lord Libberton was Arrived,
and having delivered his Letters to the King from the Committee of Estates of Scotland,Lord Liberton brings Letters from Scotland to the King at Jersey. was very well received and liked of by the King, and in February di∣spacht away, and on the 18 of the said Month landed at Leith with Letters like∣wise from the King, which though they were not in all particulars according to the wish and mind of the Estates;The Scots ap∣point Commis∣sioners to treat at Breda. yet did they so far satisfie, that Commissio∣ners were appointed forthwith to go for Holland, to commence the Treaty which was appointed by the King at Breda, the Prince of Aurange being de∣sired by the Scots to moderate and mediate in that affair.The King in danger of drowning. The King in his de∣parture from Iersey, was by a sudden Gust of Wind near over-set (it being a lit∣tle Bark that conveyed him into France) had not one of his Retinue very fortu∣nately with his Knife cut the Cordage that held the Main-sheet, and let it flie in the Wind. So the good hand of Providence still took care of and preserved him to most glorious and wonderful Revolutions. In the interim the Scots are busie in purging their Army of al Officers who were any way concerned in Hamilton's Engagement,The Scots purge their Ar∣my  send Coissioners to the King. and were not througly Kirkified, twelve of such being turned out of Command in Lshes own Regi∣ment, to leave no advantage to the King of requiring any favour for such of hi own or that Party to be admitted into Places or Trust; and withal, they thought fit now to give an answer to that mentioned Declaration of the Marquess of Montross, most virulently and falsly answering the Contents thereof, by utter de∣nial of their promoting the War in England, or selling the late King, or tying his Son (their present Sovereign) to any further Conditions or Agreements than what his Predecessors had constantly been bound to, and the Laws and Cu∣stoms of the Nation did require; and finally, adjured all men to beware of Apostacie, or taking part with that Monster of Men (so they stiled that Mar∣tyr, the Honour of their Country) Iames Graham, more deservedly and fa∣mously known Marquess of Montross. But the Sun was not clearer at Noon∣day, than the truth of that Charge in very particular, as full experience did convincingly demonstrate. The Commissioners names that were sent, and who departed in March, were the Earls of Cassils and Lothian, Sir Iohn Smith, the Lord Libberton, Laird Broady, Iefferies, Leviston, Wood, and Hutchinson, who had Inructions to acquaint the King, that the Committee of Estates and Ge∣neral Assembly were not satisfied with his last Letters, and to insist that he would take the National Covenant, and enjoyn others to do it; that he would aban∣don the Counsel and Company of the Marquess of Montross, and other such Ma∣lignants; that then they should invite him to come into his Realm of Scotland,They except a∣gainst Ma∣lignants. and take his Word that he would not bring any Cavaliers over with him, they having already excepted (not deigning further mention of Montross) against Duke Hamilton, the Earl of Lauderdaile, Dunfermling, Ruthen, the Lords Na∣pier, Fendraught, St. Clare, Garnegy, and Eython, and some others; and com∣manded the Earl of Calendar upon penalty of 100000 Mark Scots to depart the Kingdom: other matters upon the Treaty the King left to the Parliament, which he likewise allowed and confirmed, and all proceedings had been had or done therein: which shall suffice for the account of that Transaction; neither the King nor the Commissioners taking any notice of Montrosses preparation to come into that Kingdom, but purposely avoiding any dispute about it, of which we shall have occasion to speak presently. At home, the Parliament to comply with the Proposals of the Army and their former Agreements, made shew of dissolving themselves, and chusing a new Representative, and debated upon qualifications of Members, for new Tumults were feared among the Souldiery; and one Marston a notable Adjutator,Marston the Leveller kills two Messen∣gers, and wounding a third, escapes▪ is afterwards taken and ex∣ecuted. who had escaped from Burford defeat, was now ordered to be taken into Custody. The Messengers accordingly came to his Lodging in Aldersgate-street, and send∣ing him word to come down, he with a Stilletto killed two of them out-right, and sorely wounded the third, and escaped; but being retaken, and terribly cut in his endeavouring to make another escape, he was Arraigned at the Sessions-house in the Old Baily, and condemned to be hanged in the said Street; which
was accordingly executed, so preventing another death from the grievousness of his wounds. He was a truly stout person, and died as resolutely as his weak∣ness would permit. Sir John Berckley and Col. Walter Slingsby se∣cured.Sir Iohn Berkley and Colonel Walter Slingsby were now taken at Colonel Travanions house in Cornwal, and secured; which made them conceive there was some designes on foot for the King to be put in execution. At the same time they proceeded with the old Vizor of Piety, voting some Expedients for the pro∣pagation of the Gospel, and withal, very strictly urging Subscriptions to the new Engagement;The Engage∣ment pressed by the Parlia∣ment. which at last visited the University of Oxford, and was as unwelcome and destructive to the new Fellows and Scholars, put in by the Pres∣byterian Party of Parliament in 1647, and 48. as the Covenant was (being ten∣dered in the like manner) to the rightful proprietors (the Loyal Students) then ejected; particularly Doctor Reynolds, who come in the place of Doctor Fell, re∣signed it to one Owen, who was made Doctor in Divinity (famous for his primer and his better Lesson of flattery with Oliver) and Dean of Christ-Church. Ne∣ver greater or more Robberies committed by Thieves than at this time,Great Robbe∣ries. for which almost 60 suffered at Tyburn at two Sessions. A new Coun∣cil of State.A new Council of State was (as their annual change required) now consti∣tuted, Basil Earl of Denbigh being first named in the Act by which it was ap∣pointed; by whom Mr. Anthony Ascham and Mr. Charles Vane were sent A∣gents to the respective Kings of Spain and Portugal,Mr. Ascham and Mr. Vane sent Agents in∣to Spain and Portugal. in the Fleet with General Blake. Care was likewise taken for another Fleet to be presently equipped, which should consist of 30 great Men of War: and several Frigats of great Force were now upon the Stocks, and preparation made for others; the Names of most of the former Navy being changed,The Names of Ships changed. taking their new Names from the several places of the Parliaments Successes and Victories; others relating to the Dignities of the Government, as the President, and the Faithful Speaker, now newly lanched; so that the Dutch began to look about them. Several Com∣plaints were now made to them, from some that had suffered for their disloy∣alty in the Isle of Barbadoes,A Fleet sent to Barbadoes a∣gainst the Lord Wil∣loughby of Parham. as also from other of the Loyal American Domini∣ons, except New England, that yet kept in Statu quo; whereupon the State de∣creed to send a Fleet thither to reduce that place, it being now Governed by the Lord Willoughby of Parham, sent thither by the King from Holland, whither his Lordship had withdrawn from the violence of the Army, being one of those Peers whom they questioned for Treason in 1647. Cavaliers to depart Lon∣don.And Act came now out likewise, Commanding all Royallists to depart Lon∣don, and twenty miles beyond it, with an injunction not to stir five miles from their own habitation, and to give notice to the next Officer of their arri∣val there: and to make through work with them, the Parliament was now in Debate of exposing several of their Estates to sale,Orders con∣cerning Delin∣quents Estates. and such in the first place who were then beyond Sea; and (to raise these unhappy forfeitures to their great∣er advantage) ordering that no Estate not Compounded for in the Delinquents life-time, should be now Compounded for by his Heirs, but should accrue entire to the State. Against several Branches of this and other harsh usage, particularly of that restraint and confinement within five miles of their dwelling, the kin∣der Army interposed their desires, as not consistent with their former Proposals: but they well knew they were not to ask, and must be disobeyed in that particu∣lar; yea, even in this most reasonable request of Liberty to those, who had the benefit of Articles,A new High Court of Iu∣stice constitu∣ted. Keeble made President thereof. and had Compounded. Another High Court of Iustice was now a forming, which though the Act that Constituted it bore date the 5 of April in the year ensuing, yet we mention it here, because Montrosses Expediti∣on and final defeat do challenge an entire space of time to register them. Of this Court, Keble one of the Commissioners of the Seal was now made President, Bradshaw being too high to do that Journey-work any longer, being President of the Councel of State: it was erected in revenge of Ascham's and Doristaus's death, as a Vote and Declaration of the States angrily expressed. An Act passed like∣wise for the better managing of Estates under Sequestration; which trust was
committed to Samuel Moyer, Iames Russel, Edmund Winstow, Iosias Barners, William Mullins, Arthur Squib, and Rowland Moor; names so terrible, and Haberdashers-Hall their Court or Judicature so hated and infamed, for the vio∣lences done by these persons there, that they are not to be passed without a mark to Posterity. They likewise Enacted the outing of all Officers who should not nor had taken the Engagement; another Act against Mariners serving of For∣rein Princes, which still carried an ill aspect towards the Dutch: another (accor∣ding to their tenour of professed Sanctity) against Fornication; which was passed in April,An Act against Fornication. but was not to take place till the 24 of Iune ensuing; the first Reading thereupon was Harry Martin's, who said it was made to catch Fools, for that there was a Clause in it, That no person should be convicted without the joynt-testimony of two witnesses; yet an Old Man and an Old Woman of above 80 years old apiece suffered afterwards for it; and for the open guilt whereof, they had turned out Gregory Clement, one of their Members, though others lewd enough kept their Seats; and finally, one for the levying of 90000 lib. per mensem for the three first and 60000 l. for the three last months, by which they hoped to ingratiate with the people, now heavily complaining of the pressures and the ruine of their Trade. And so we conclude this first year of the Go∣vernment of our Novel Free States. Anno Dom. 1650. WE begin the Year with the end of one of the Noblest Gallantest Per∣sons that Age saw amongst all the Wars and Broils in Christen∣dom:An Account of the last actions of the Marquess of Montross. A Captain whose unexampled Atchievements have fam'd a History; and were its Volume ten times bigger, it would yet be disproportionate to the due praises of this matchless Heroe. Enter and Exit the glorious Marquess of Mon∣tross, whose most lamentable Fare and Catastrophe, we will here sum up in this (no way competent) compendious Narrative. After his departure out of Scotland,He was offered to be Capt. of the Scots Guards to the King of France. as you have read, he betook himself to the Court of France, where he was proffered the Captainship of the Scots Guards to that King, a place of great Honour and Revenue; but being delayed by Car∣dinal Mazarine, who affected not that Nation, and his spirit aiming at his own Princes Service, he betook himself to the King then at the Hague, where he en∣deavoured after the Murther of King Charles the first, a like new Commission for Scotland; but being thwarted therein by Duke Hamilton, then residing there likewise (and his confident Friends the Earls of Lauderdale and Calen∣dar) who was aemulous of his former glories in the Government, and late War of that Kingdom; he betook himself to the Emperor at Vienna, where he was presently proffered the Command of an Army of 10000 men, and to be in∣dependent of any other General;The Emperor at Vienna offers to make him one of his Ge∣nerals. but the Peace being concluded betwixt the Swede and the Emperour, he departed, upon pursuit of his adventure into Scot∣land, having obtained a Commission from the King; and in order to that Ex∣pedition, was furnished with four ships from the Duke of Holstein, some supplies from the King of Denmark, and 1500 Arms from the Queen of Sweden (and some Horse promised under General King from thence) and a little neat Frigat or his own conveyance; some monies also were disburst to him, which were transmitted to Amsterdam, for other the like occasions and necessaries, and there falsly and basely squandred away by one Colonel Ogilby, an old friend, and now entrusted by the Marquess in that affair unfortunately and unhappily enough, a limb of the Designe being thus broken. With these the Marquess (as is supposed) fearing lest he should have an ex∣press command to desist from his purpose, because the Treaty betwixt the Prince and the Scotish Commissioners was now very neer a conclusion, did pre∣cipitate himself and those that were with him into a most inevitable ruine. Now
all those great Levies and Aids, those mighty preparations for the Invading of a Kingdom settled in a posture of War, and well forewarned of his intentions, a∣mounted not above the number of six or seven hundred at the most, strangers and all. The Common Souldiers which adventured over with him, most of them Holsteyners or Hamburgers. He had sent him by the Queen of Sweden, for the arming of such Gentlemen as should upon his arrival betake themselves to his Party (as before) 1500 Arms compleat for Horse, Back, Brest, Head-piece, Car∣bines, Pistols, and Swords; all which (after his defeat in Cathnes) were taken untouch'd. With this small preparation, it was a desperate action to attempt so mighty a business. And although his touching first upon the Island did en∣crease his number, and gave him almost the beginning of an Army; yet were those barbarous people so raw and unacquainted with Discipline, that they pro∣ved in a manner useless and unserviceable. 'Tis true, the Inhabitants of those Isles were a people in former times very fierce and warlike,Marquess of Montross Arms for the King in Scot∣land. and have under their own Captains made many great Impressions into the very heart of the Kingdom. But whether it was the policie of the late Kings to leave them untrained of pur∣pose to break their natural fierceness, or because their own Captains being quel∣led or cut off, they cared not much to engage under any other; certain it is, that Kingdom for 200 years last past hath not made less use of any they had under their Jurisdiction, nor have they at this present less opinion of any Scots for Military courage and valour. And this may be alledged as a great cause of their remissness and unweildiness, whilst they were in the Marquesses Service. I told you a little before of Montross's whole strength which did accompany him from Germany, whereof two ships (with near upon a third part) were sent be∣fore; but by storm of weather (which is both frequent and dangerous) amongst those Northern Islands,His ill success. they were lost with all the men and Arms, nothing sa∣ved: This was another check, and as it were a warning and a forerunner of the sad event which followed. But the business being fatal, he must needs con∣tribute his own endeavours towards that destruction which his cruel fortune had provided for him. For he being nothing terrified with this success, sends out a second party, which making a more prosperous Voyage, landed at Orkney, and entred the Island without any resistance; there being at that time no Gar∣rison or defence placed in any of those Islands by the States of Scotland: toge∣ther with these he sent several Commissions for levying Horse and Foot. Im∣mediately there were several dispatched to Scotland, and the Islands adjacent for that purpose: the people of the Country being in no condition to resist these Officers, endeavoured in hopes of favour as much as they could to further the designe: And those who were not so earnest, were by their own neighbours, favourers of the Cause, and these violent Commissioners, forced to take up Arms. Not long after, landed. the Marquess himself with the rest of his Company, together with those Gentlemen which were resolved to partake of his fortune; amongst whom were several persons of note: Colonel Hurry was there, a man who had engaged in all Quarrels, but never prospered in any; the Lord Fren∣draught (for his Kinsman the Lord Napier was left in Holland) Colonel Iohnson a resolute man and an old Souldier, Colonel Gray a German Souldier, Harry Graham his own natural Brother, Colonel Iames Hay of Naughton, Sir Francis Hay of Dalgety, George Drummond of Ballach. For he had employed as was thought Colonel Sibbalds (his Companion heretofore) as his Agent in Scotland; but he was apprehended at Musselburgh, and did accompany his General in death upon the same Scaffold. The Marquess continued a considerable time in Orkney, raising of Forces, and strengthning himself with such Recruits as the place would afford: Neither was there any preparation at all made in Scotland to dis∣possess him of these Islands, either because it might be thought a difficult busi∣ness to assail him within those places naturally guarded with a rough and dan∣gerous Sea, or because they knowing his strength, expected a better opportunity of him, as they found indeed, within the Country.
After this poor rabble of silly creatures was amassed, he resolved at last to Embarque; and to that purpose gathers all the Boats he could finde, ships his men, and in a short space Lands them all upon the point of Cathnes, which is the farthest land to the North-west of Scotland. The people having some expe∣rience of the carriage of his former souldiery, and now far more dreading the name of Forrainers, partly by the terrible reports which were constantly given out of him, fled away in heaps, many of them not stopping till they came to the chief City Edenborough,The Parliament at Edenburgh Alarmed. and there gave the terrible Alarm to the Parlia∣ment then sitting. The Commanders were immediately summoned, and char∣ged with all possible hast to get the standing Forces in readiness; and a Rendez∣vouze (in order to the States Command) was hereupon presently enjoyned at Brechin Northward.Col. Straughan sent with a choice party of Horse to oppose him. Colonel Straughan (who was then in high esteem with the great ones for his Valour lately expressed in the English service, and his Zeal to the Presbyterian Cause, much extol'd at that time) had an ample and particular Commission granted to him by the Parliament, to command a choice party of Horse, which should not be subject to David Lesly's Orders, but might Engage and Fight with the Enemy at his best advantage. With these (being not above 300) he advanced before the Army;After him fol∣lows Lesly and Holborn. David Lesley with the rest of the Horse, and Holborne with the Foot marching after him. In the mean time the Marquess advanced, but very slowly; and that he might not be mistaken, (since all the world was much astonished at this Invasion now whilst the King was upon a Treaty) he published a second Declaration,The Marq Pub∣lisheth a De∣claration. wherein he laboured to clear himself of any aspersion of sinister ends. That his intention was onely against some particular persons, who had against the Laws of the Kingdom, raised and maintained a War against the Kings Father, and did now by their subtile practises endeavour to destroy the Son also. That he intended nothing against the Generality of the Kingdom.The danger of this attempt. Lastly, Exhorting all Subjects of that Nation to endeavour to free themselves from the Tyranny of those who for the present ruled the State, and the oppression of the Ministry. But the Country, for several Causes, did not come to second him as he expected. For the Earl of Sunderland,Earl of Sun∣derland oppo∣seth him. a potent man in those parts, his Lands being next to the place where the Marquess then was, raised a great power of his Tenants and Friends, and did his best to terrifie and hinder all that were willing to joyn with him. And though he found himself unable to deal with the Marquess's Forces, yet did he stop all intercourse betwixt him and his Friends. And those Gentle∣men who had heretofore followed him, and yet inclined to assist him, knowing the danger of the enterprse, considering the fewness of his number, and that his Souldiers were much undisciplined, and unlike to the former with whom he had done so great things, began to be averse, and have a suspition of the event. Yet have I heard some say, which knew well enough the situation of that Coun∣try, that if he had not been suppressed in the nick, he might have gained such strength amongst the Hills, as might have given him leisure enough to have strengthened his own Party, and tired out the Enemy. Howsoever, he was not altogether unmindful of a retreat: There is in that Country a Castle called Dumbath;Dumbath-Ca∣stle surrendred to the Mar∣quess his For∣ces. the Lord or Laird thereof is the head of a very Antient Family, but no friend of the Marquesses. This Gentleman (having left his House in the keeping of his Lady and some servants) fled to Edenburgh. The Lady (though the place was naturally fortified) yet upon summons delivered it to Colonel Hurry, (who was sent thither by the Marquess with a party of Foot to reduce it) upon conditions her Goods and Estate might be secured, and she with her Servants suffered to march away. Hurrey having placed a Governour and a Garrison (as he thought) sufficient for the defence of the place, returned to the Marquess, who was advanced to the place, or neer it, where he was to lose at one Throw both his Life and Fortune. The Marquess hearing of the Ene∣mies approach, made his whole Forces March at a great Trot, to recover a Pass which they were not very far from, when he himself in the Van-guard discover∣ed the first party, which was Straughan's Forlorn-hope,Col. Straughan sets upon him. advancing very fast
upon him. So that these, with their hase and the Soul diers running, found them both out of Breath and Order. The second Party was Commanded by Straughan himself, and the Rear-guard by Colonel Ker, for he had divided them into three Bodies: But now the first party being very neer, there was a Forlorn-hope of 100 Foot drawn out to meet them, who giving fire upon them, put them to a disorderly retreat; but being immediately seconded by Straughan's Party, they made good their Charge, and so terrified the Islanders with that breach, that most of them threw down their Arms, and called for Quarter. Onely the Dutch-companies (after they had bestowed a Volley or two amongst the Horse) retreated into some shrubs hard by, and there very valiantly defen∣ded themselves a while,The Marq. of Montross de∣feated Ap. 29. but were all taken at last. There were killed in this business to the number of 200. taken 1200; very few escaped. For the whole Country being in Arms, especially Sunderland-men (who came not to the Fight, but to the Execution) they killed or took Prisoners all such as fled. In that skirmish was taken the Standard which he had caused to be made on purpose to move the affections of the people, with this Motto, Iudge and revenge my Cause, O Lord; and the Portraict of the late King beheaded, exactly well done. The Standard-bearer (a very gallant young Gentleman) was killed,His Standard taken, and the bearr thereof slain taken besides on the Marquess his side, Col. Hur∣rey, Lord Frendraught Sir Francis Hay, &c. after he had several times refused quarter: there was Colonel Hurrey taken, the Lord Frendraught, Sir Francis Hay of Dalgetie, Colonel Hay of Naughton, Colonel Gray, and most of the Officers, and two Ministers. The Marquess (after he saw the day was absolutely lost) threw away his Cloak, which had the Star on it (having received the Order of the Garter a little while before:) his Sword was likewise found, and not very far off his Horse, which he had forsaken: For so soon as he had got clear off that ground where the Skirmish was, he betook himself to foot; and lighting upon one of that Country, or one of his own Souldiers (I know not whether) took his High∣land Apparel from him, and so in that Habit conveyed himself away: But such narrow search being made for him, he could not long escape; yet he conti∣nued in the open fields three or four days, without any notice gotten of him. At last the Laird of Aston (being in Arms with some of his Tenants, and a∣broad in that search) happened on him: He had been one of his followers before.The Marq. of Montross ta∣ken, May 3. by the Laird of Aston, In that place he had continued three or four days without Meat or Drink, with one onely man in his company. The Marquess knowing him, and believing to finde friendship at his hands, willingly discovered himself; but Aston not daring to conceal him, and being greedy of the reward which was promised to the Apprehender by the Council of State, seized upon him and disarmed him. 'Tis said he profered great sums for his Liberty; which being in vain, he desired to dye by the hands of those that took him, rather than be made an object of misery and shame (as he knew very well he should) by his enraged Enemies. But neither of his desires was granted, but in place of them a strong Guard set on him, and so conveyed to David Lesley.and conveyed to David Les∣ley. Straughan having atchieved his bu∣siness with great expedition, and freed the State from this much-feared danger, returned to Edenburgh, leaving the rest of the business to Lesley and Holborn, where he received great rewards and thanks for his Eminent Service; not with∣out the great heart-burning of David Lesley, who seeing a rival risen up to his honour, and one whom he lookt upon as an upstart Souldier, have so great suc∣cess, fretted not a little. Howsoever, forwards he moves to accomplish the rest of the work, which was now of no great consequence; for there rested nothing within the Country, but onely the Castle of Dumbath,Dumbath-Ca∣stle yielded to the Covenan∣ters. which being out of all hopes of relief after the defeat, so soon as they were perfectly assured thereof by some Prisoners they knew, yielded the Garrison. The Governour was pri∣soner at mercy; the Souldiers being Dutch, were upon terms to return home∣wards. There was nothing else to be done, save the reducing of the Islands, and the Town of Kirkwall in Orkney, where Colonel Iohnson and Colonel Har∣ry Graham were left, when the Marquess passed over to Cathnes: but Mon∣tross (either because he could not spare any Souldiers, or because he expected
better success) had left them almost naked, though there were several places in those Isles which might have been made very Tenable. Colonel Iohnson having had notice of the defeat, with those that were with him, took shipping, and returned from whence he came; so did Harry Graham likewise, else both of them had tasted of the same sauce which their General did. Thus Lesley's For∣ces entred without any resistance, seized upon the Arms which Montross had brought thither, together with two pieces of Ordnance, the Queen of Swe∣dens present; the little Friggot of 16 Guns which lay in Harbour, the Master of her being gon ashore into one of the Islands, and the Company seeing the event of the business, revolted, and brought in that likewise. The Victory being now compleat,The Covenan∣ters give solemn thanks for their Victory. there was a solemn day of Thanksgiving appointed through the whole Kingdom, Bonfires, Shooting of Ordnance, and other testimonies or joy: but many of the Gentry who had been under his Command before, having now engaged with him again, were no partakers in this joy. For some of his Papers being taken, many of them were afterwards discovered, and suffered in their Estates. The Marquess being now in the Custody of his mortal Enemies, from whom he could not expect the least favour; yet exprest a singular constan∣cy, and in a manner a carelessness of his own condition. Coming to his Father-in-laws house, the Earl of Southesk,Montross visits his Children at his Father-in-laws the Earl of Southesk. where two of his Children were, he pro∣cured liberty from his Guard to see them; but neither at meeting or parting could any change of his former countenance be discerned, or the least expression heard which was not suitable to the greatness of his spirit, and the same of his former actions. 'Tis Memorable of the Town of Dundee, where he lodged one night, though it had suffered more by his Army than any else within that Kingdom, yet were they amongst all the rest so far from insulting over him; that the whole Town testified a great deal of sorrow for his woful condition; and there was he likewise furnished with Cloaths suitable to his Birth and Per∣son. Being come to Leith,His journey to Edenburgh. he was received by the Magistrates of the City of Edenburgh; and staying a while there to refresh himself, he was afterward led to∣wards the City, by that way which goes betwixt Leith and the Water-gate of the Abbey, and with him all the Prisoners of quality on foot, betwixt thirty and fourty; but he himself had the favour to be mounted on a Cart-horse.He is mounted on a Cart-horse and delivered to the Execu∣tioner; Having ended this part of his journey, with as much state as in Triumphs is accustomed to be, he was met at the end of the Cannon-gate by some other Officers, and the Executioner in his Livery-coat, into whose hands he was delivered. There was framed for him a high seat in fashion of a Chariot, upon each side of which were holes, through which a Cord being drawn, and crossing his Brest and Arms, bound him fast down in the Chair.bound with Ropes in a Chair, and d∣spitefully used The people pity him, The Executioner (being comman∣ded so to do) took off the Marquess's Hat, and put on his own Bonnet; and the Chariot being drawn by four Horses, he mounted one of the first and very solemnly began to drive along towards the Tol-Booth. The people who were assembled in great multitudes, and were many of them heretofore very desirous to see this spectacle, could not now refrain from tears; and those who had heretofore wished him all misfortune, began to be shaken with the first Scene of his Tra∣gedy. But the implacable Ministry having him now at their mercy,but the Mini∣sters revile him. could ne∣ver be satisfied with his Calamities: they reviled him with all possible spite, objected frequently to him his former condition, and his present misery, and pronounced heavy judgements against him. Being come to the Tol-Booth,He is Imprisoned in the Tol-booth. His friends not suffered to vi∣sit him. he was very closely shut up, and strong Guards set upon him, and access denied to him; no, not his Father-in-law, or any of his friends suffered to come nigh him. There he was a considerable time, the Ministers never ceasing to exacer∣bate his misery: of whom one being asked why they could not otherwise be sa∣tisfied, but by so ignominious handling of him? He answered, They knew no other way to humble him, and bring him home to God. The Parliament having notice of his approach to Edenburgh, fearing his gal∣lant presence might gain favour among the people (which the Kirk-Ministers thundred at afterwards) appointed a Committee to draw up a Sentence against
him on the 17 of May, which they did presently: The first part about his en∣trance we have already seen performed;The Marquess of Montross sentenced to die by a Committee of Parliament in Scotland. the latter part ran thus, That he should be hanged on a Gibbet at the Cross in Edenburgh until he died, his History and De∣claration being tied about his Neck, and to hang three hours in publique view of all the people; after which he should be Beheaded and Quartered, his head to be fixt up∣on the Prison-house of Edenburgh, and his Legs and Arms over the Gates of the Cities of Sterling, Glascow, Perth, alias Saint Johns-town, and Aberdeen: And in case e repented (whereby the Sentence of Excommunication may be taken off by the Church) the bulk of his Body should be buried in the Gray-Friers; if not, in the Borrow-moor (a place like Tyburn.) Some Members and Ministers sent to examine him. He refuseth to answer them.It was seven a Clock at Night before he was entred into the Prison; and im∣mediately the Parliament met, and sent some of the Members and some Mini∣sters to examine him; but he refused to answer any thing to them, until he was satisfied upon what terms they stood with the King, his Royal Master: which being reported unto the Parliament, they ceased proceedings against him until Monday, and allowed their Commissioners to tell him, that the King and they were agreed: he then desired to be at rest, for he was weary with a long Jour∣ney; and said, The Complement they had put upon him that day was somewhat tedious. The next day (being Sunday) he was constantly attended by Ministers and Parliament-men, who still pursued him: he told them, They thought they had affronted him the day before by carrying him in a Cart, but they were much mista∣ken; for he thought it the most honourable and joyfullest Cavalcade that ever he made, God having all the while most comfortably manifested his presence to him, and furnished him with a resolution to over-look the reproaches of men, and to behold Him, for whose Cause he suffered. The Chancel∣lours Speech in Parliament a∣gainst the Marquess.Upon Monday in the forenoon he was brought before the Parliament, and after the delivery of a long-penned discourse by the Chancellor, wherein he was pleased to take notice of his miscarriages against the first Covenant, the League and Covenant, his Invasion and joyning with the Irish Rebels, and blood-guiltiness; and that now how God had brought him to just punishment: He desired to know if he might be allowed to speak for himself;The Marquess of Montrosses Answer in Parliament. which being granted, he said, Since you have declared unto me that you have agreed with the King, I look upon you, as if his Majesty were sitting among you; and in that Relation I appear with this Re∣verence, Bare-headed: My care hath been always to walk as became a good Chri∣stian and a Loyal Subject▪ I engaged in the first Covenant, and was faithful to it, un∣til I perceived some private persons under colour of Religion intended to wring the Authority from the King, and to seize on it for themselves; and when it was thought fit, for the clearing of honest men, that a Bond should be Subscribed, where∣in the security of Religion was sufficiently provided for, I subscribed. For the League and Covenant, I thank God I was never in it, and so could not break it; but how far Religion hath been advanced by it, and the sad consequences that have followed it, these poor distressed Kingdoms can witness: for when his late Majesty had by the blessing of God almost subdued those Enemies that rose p against him in England, and that a Faction of this Kingdom went in to the assistance of them▪ His Majesty gave Commission to me to come into this Kingdom, and to make a diversion of those For∣ces that were going from hence against him. I acknowledged the Command most just, and I conceived my self bound in Conscience and Duty to obey it. What my carriage was in this Country, many of you may bear witness; disorders in any Army cannot be Prevented, but they were no sooner known than punished; never was any Blood spilt but in Battle, and even then many thousand lives have I preserved; and as I came in upon his Majesties Warrant, so upon his Letters did I lay aside all Interests, and retreated. And for my coming in at this time, it was by his Majesties Command, in order to the accelerating of the Treaty betwixt Him and you; His Majesty knowing, that when ever he had ended with you, I was ready to retire upon his Call. I may justly
say, that never Subject acted upon more honorable grounds, nor by a more Lawful Power, than I did in this Service; and therefore I desire you to lay aside prejudice, and consider me as a Christian, in relation to the justice of the Quarrel; as a Sub∣ject, in relation to my Royal Masters Command; and as your Neighbour, in relation to the many of your lives I have preserved in Battle: And be not too rash, but let me be judged by the Laws of God, the Laws of Nature and Nations, and the Laws of this Land; if you do otherwise, I do here Appeal from you to the righteous Iudge of the World, who one day must be both your Iudge and mine, and who always gives righteous Iudgment. This he delivered with such gravity,The Chancellor comands the Sentence to be read. and without passion, as was much admi∣red even of his Enemies. After which the Chancellour commanded the Sen∣tence to be read; which he heard with a settled and an unmoved Countenance; and desiring to be further heard, was presently stopt by the Chancellour, who Commanded he should be presently removed back again to prison;And the Mar∣quess to be con∣veyed back to prison. where he was no sooner come, but the Ministers assault him afresh, aggravating the ter∣rour of the Sentence, thereby to affright him. He acknowledged himself much beholding to the Parliament for the Honour they had put upon him, saying, He took it for a greater honour to have his Head stand upon the Prison-gate for this Quar∣rel, than to have his Picture in the Kings Bed-chamber.His noble beha∣viour there. And (lest his Loyalty should be forgotten) they had highly honoured him, in designing lasting Monuments to four of the chiefest Cities, to bear up his Memorial to all Posterity; wishing he had had flesh enough to have sent a piece to every City in Christendom, to witness his Loyalty to his King and Country. His Friends were not suffered to come neer him, but a Guard was always in the Chamber with him, insomuch as he had neither time nor place for his pri∣vate Devotions, but in their hearing. The next day being the 21. cloathed in a Scarlet-cloak richly laced with Gold∣lace,He comes to the Scaffold in rich attire. he was brought to the Scaffold: He came along the Streets with so great state, and there appeared in his Countenance so much Beauty, Majesty, and Gravity, as amazed the Beholders; and many even of his Enemies did acknow∣ledge him to be the gallantest Subject in the World. But because all his Friends and Well-willers were debarred from coming near him, there was a Boy (de∣signed for that purpose on the Scaffold) who took his last Speech; which was to this effect: I Am sorry if this manner of my End be scandalous to any good Christian.The Marquess of Montross his Speech on the Scaffold. Doth it not often happen to the righteous according to the ways of the righteous? doth not sometimes a just man perish in his righteousness, and a wicked man prosper in his malice? They who know me should not disesteem me for this; many greater than I have been dealt with in this kind: yet I must not say, but that all Gods Iudgments are just: For my private sins, I acknowledge this to be just with God, I submit my self to him; but in regard of man, I may say, that they are but Instruments, God forgive them, I forgive them: they have oppressed the poor, and vioiently perverted Iudgment and Iustice, but he that is higher than they will reward them. What I did in this Kingdom, was in obedience to the most just Command of my So∣vereign, for his defence in the day of his distress, against those that rose up against him. I acknowledge nothing, but fear God and Honour the King, according to the Commandments of God, and the Law of Nature and Nations; and I have not sinned against man, but against God, and with him there is mercy, which is the ground of my drawing near unto him. It is objected against me by many, (even good People) that I am under the Cen∣sure of the Church: This is not my fault▪ since it is only for doing my Duty, by obey∣ing my Princes most just Command for Religion, his Sacred Person and Authority. Yet I am sorry they did Excommunicate me, and in that which is according to Gods Laws, without wronging my Conscience or Allegeance, I desire to be relaxed: if they will not do it, I appeal to God, who is the righteous Iudge of the world, and who must, and will, I hope, be my Iudge and Saviour.
It is spoken of me, that I should blame the King (God forbid;) for the late King, he lived a Saint, and died a Martyr; I pray God I may so end as he did: If ever I should wish my Soul in another mans stead, it should be in his. For his Ma∣jesty now living, never people I believe might be more happy in a King: His Com∣mands to me were most just: in nothing that he promiseth will he fail. He deals justly with all men, I pray God he be so dealt withal, that he be not betrayed under trust, as his father was. I desire not to be mistaken, as if my carriage at this time in relation to your ways were stubborn; I do but follow the light of my own Conscience, which is se∣conded by the working of the Spirit of God that is within me: I thank him, I go to Heavens Throne with joy. If he enable me against the fear of Death, and furnish me with courage and confidence to embrace it, even in its most ugly shape, let God be glorified in my end, though it were in my damnation. Yet I say not this out of any fear or mistrust, but out of my Duty to God, and Love to his people. I have no more to say, but that I desire your Charity and Prayers. I shall pray for you all I leave my Soul to God, my Service to my Prince, my Good-will to my Friends, and my Name and Charity to you all. And thus briefly I have exonerated my Conscience. Mark the hor∣rib unchri∣stianity of the Scotch Kirk.Being desired to pray apart, he said, I have already poured out my Soul before the Lord, who knows my heart, and into whose hands I have commended my Spirit; and he hath been pleased to return to me a full assurance of peace in Iesus Christ my Redeemer; and therefore if you will not joyn with me in prayer, my reiterating it again will be both Scandalous to you and me. So closing his eyes, and holding up his hands, he stood a good space at his inward Devotions, being perceived to be inwardly moved all the while:The Marquess gives moy to the Executio∣ner, who ac∣cording to the Sentence hang∣ed his Decla∣ration and Hi∣story about his Neck. when he had done, he called for the Execu∣tioner, and gave him money; who having brought unto him (hanging in a Cord) his Declaration and History, hanged them about his Neck, when he said, Though it hath pleased his Sacred Majesty that now is, to make him one of the Knights of the most Honourable Order of the Garter, yet he did not think himself more honoured by the Garter, than by that Cord and Book which he would embrace about his Neck with as much joy and content, as ever he did the Garter, or a Chain of Gold; and therefore desired them to be tied unto him as they pleased. When this was done, and his arms tied, he asked the Officers, If they had any more Dishonour (as they conceived it) to put upon him,He is hanged on a Gibbet. he was ready to accept it. And so with an undaunted Courage and Gravity suffered according to the Sen∣tence past upon him. Thus fell that Heroical Person by a most malicious and barbarous sort of cru∣elty, but — Sequitur ultor à tergo Deus, there is a Fury at hand ready with a Whip of Snakes to punish this Viperous Brood of men:Cromwel for England, May. For Cromwel having been secretly called for over from Ireland, to amuse all parties (both the Irish who trembled at his presence, and made no considerable resistance against him and his fortune; and the General himself at home, who expected not such his sudden rivalship to his Command, which gave him no time for mature conside∣ration of the designe; the Scots, who though allarmed by frequent rumours of an English Invasion, yet were not so forward in their Levies, as having assurance of Fairfax's dissatisfaction) was now wasted over into England, preventing his Letters he had sent to the States to know their express pleasure for his departing that Kingdom; which before we leave, we must insert some omissions. Colo∣nel Hamond a Kentish Gentleman, and firm Royallist, who was a Colchestrian, and had been imprisoned at Windsor,Cromwels cruelty to the English Royal∣lists. being by the mutiny of his Souldiers (the Marquess of Ormonds Regiment) which he Commanded, forced to render him∣self and Officers at discretion (the Garrison being the Castle before mentioned of Gowran, accepting of life from Cromwel, and refusing to fight) was immediately shot to death, one Lieutenant only escaping: The like fate suffered a Dutch Co∣lonel, one Major Syms, and another Lieutenant-Colonel of the Lord Inchiqueens Loyal Party that yet adhered to him, being worsted by the Lord Broghil, where
in fight they lost 600 men near Bandon-bridge.Col. Wogan escapes. Colonel Wogan, that noble per∣son, who had been so constant a terrour to them, having corrupted or converted his Keeper Colonel Phair's Marshal, escaped with him to his old friends, being reserv'd to the same death by Cromwel, but by Providence to be a further plague to them,An Embassa∣dor from Hol∣land. in that & another Kingdom & place, as we shall see in the continuation of this Chronicle. About the same time with Cromwel arrived here from Holland the Lord Ioachimi, in quality of Embassador from the States General, sent on pur∣pose to understand the condition of affairs here, & what stability this Common∣wealth was yet grounded upon or like to obtain, and report it to his Superiors. Further yet in Ireland. After the departure of Cromwel, in the Province of Vl∣ster, where the Bishop of Cloghor, Emir Mac Mahon was Generalissimo, the Irish not being to be satisfied till the Conduct of Affairs was wholly left to them∣selves, having gathered an Army of 5000 Foot and 600 Horse, was ranging that Country at his pleasure, having so ordered and interposed his Forces, that Sir Charles Coot the President of Connaught, and Colonel Venables who Com∣manded in Chief in Vlster for the Parliament, could not joyn Forces; and though other additions had been made to Coot, with which they had faced Finagh, and that part of that Province some while before, yet durst they not engage till Iune; on the second of which Month, Cloghor being incamped on a boggy ground within half a mile of Sir Charles his Leaguer, who was about 800 Horse and as many Foot, stood and faced him for almost four hours, and then drew over a Pass, wherein Coot fell upon his Rear with 250 Horse, and charged through two Divisions of Foot, and had routed them, but that their Horse came in to their rescue, and repelled that Party: but Colonel Richard Coot likewise advancing, both came off with even hand, and so the enemy over Faggots passed another way. This was but a Trial of Skill; but on the 18 of Iune, Colonel Fenwick with 1000 having joyned with Sir Charles,Bishop of Clo∣ghor defeated June 18. by Sir Charles Coot. Mor∣tally wounded and taken with his Lieut. Gen. Hen. Oneale. the matter came to a final deci∣sion. Cloghor was encamped strongly on a side of a Hill, to which Coot approa∣ched; the Irish courageously descended to Battle, but were so most resolutely received, that in an hours time this Mitred General was defeated, himself mor∣tally wounded and taken, with his Lieutenant-General Henry O Neale, together with most of the Officers, all of them Irish, to the total loss of that Province, and the utter ruine and destruction of that Rebel-Party that began the War, and continued it when it might have expired by the closing with the Marquess of Or∣mond, to the taking of Dublin and London-Derry. The remaining Irish War was meerly defensive, and of such weak dying efforts, that all was given over there for desperate and lost: and who cannot, must not, here acknowledge the unerring certainty of Divine Justice upon that bloody and pitiless people? Now appeared in Print,Marchamount Needham the Parliament-Droll, Author of a scurrilous Pamphlet. as the weekly Champion of the new Common∣wealth, and to bespatter the King with the basest of scurrilous raillery, one Mar∣chamount Needham, under the name of Politicus; a Iack of all sides, transcendent∣ly gifted in opprobrious and treasonable Droll, and hired therefore by Bradshaw to act the second part to his starcht and more solemn Treason; who began his first Diurnal with an Invective against Monarchy and the Presbyterian Scotch Kirk, and ended it with an Hosanna to Oliver Cromwel, who in the beginning of Iune returned by the way of Bristol from Ireland to London,Cromwel re∣turns from his Conquest in Ireland, June 6. and was welcom∣ed by Fairfax the General, many Members of Parliament and Council of State at Hounslo-heath, and more fully complemented at his Lodgings, and in Parlia∣ment, by the Thanks of the House, and the like significant address of the Lord Mayor, &c. of London, being lookt upon as the only Person, to the Eclipse and diminution of his Generals Honour, whom we shall presently see paramount in the same supreme Command. Prince Rupert was yet in the Harbor of Lisbon,Prince Rupert blockt up in Lisbon. whither the Parliament had sent a Fleet to fight him and reduce those Ships to their service; which the Prince declining, and the King of Portugal refusing to suffer Blake to fall on in his Port, and trom his Castles shooting at some of the Frigats who adventu∣red within their reach; a Quarrel arose betwixt that King and this State, whose
Men of War seized on nine Brazile-ships as they were passing into that Har∣bour. The Estates of Scotland had now notice of the Kings present coming into that Kingdom; the Earl of Dunfermling, Mr. Murrey, and Sir William Fleming, being sent before by the King to acquaint them therewith; when the two last were dispatcht again, to give the King to understand the exceptions they took against some uncovenanted Scotch Lords, as Hamilton and Lauderdail, and o∣ther English Royalists coming over with Him; but before their Arrival the King was shipt, having newly received the distastful intelligence of the Mur∣ther of his faithful Servant the Marquess of Montross, which, as Cases then stood, He was forced to pass by, having expostulated very sorrowfully thereof with the Parliament, who by all means endeavoured to smooth and colour that per∣petration with the Vows of their Allegiance; in order whereunto, they said, they Executed that Nobleman, and some others with him, viz. Sir Iohn Vrrey, Colonel Spotswood, Ogilby, and Sibbald: a very inauspicious entrance and begin∣ning of a right understanding between his Majesty and them, that was cemented with such Loyal Blood. The King ships himself for Scotland from Schevelt, June.The King (as was said before) shipt himself at Terbeyden, a Village neer the Hague, aboard a Friggot (an excellent Sailor) Commanded by young Van Trump, old Van Trump attending the King on board, and charging his Son to do his utmost devoir for the Kings preservation, and with Tears parting (for there was some intelligence of the English Fleet lying to intercept him:) there were also two other Men of War in Company, who carried his Goods and Retinue, well provided, and alike able for Fight and Defence. With these Ships He had not long been under sail, but a Tempest drove Him upon one of the Danish Islands unknown to the Fleet, but where they were most humanely and civilly Treated, and whence (after a tedious Navigation) they Arrived at the Spey in the North of Scotland (Colonel Graves and Captain Titus alone of the English attend∣ing on his person) just as the English King-catchers were set sail from thence, under their Admiral Popham,His Majesty complemented by the Nobility of Scotland. to seek out after him. At His Arrival He was Complemented in great State by the Nobility, and brought to Saint Iohnstons, and so to Sterling, being presented in the way with very great gifts, according to the ability of that Nation, who were now rising generally in Arms; and a Party of Horse under Major Cuningham, sent to visit the English Borders, and to get intelligence; for the Messenger they had sent to London (Colonel Gray) was secured, (at which time Mr. Prin was laid up in Dunster-Castle) and dis∣missed with a Guard back again unheard, an Answer being then in preparation to be sent by a General, a more honourable and more powerfully-attended Officer. Fairfax layes down his Com∣mission, June 26.That Command of course was devolved upon the Lord Fairfax, and he desired to accept it; but he being inscrupled by some of the Presbyterian Ministers (who were highly incensed at this War) as it was cunningly foreseen by Oliver and his Party, who never endeavoured his satisfaction) and pretending a reluctancy from the obigations of the National Covenant to engage against their Brethren, totally declined it, transferring the long-expected Military Supremacy by a Vote of the Parliament to Cromwel, who very zealously accepted the Charge, and with all readiness prepared for the Expedition; which makes the second Trophy or Garland of these strangely and wonderfully prosperous Free-States of England. The Army mar∣ches into Scot∣land, July 22.On the 12 of Iune it had been resolved that the Army should Advance Northward, but it was the middle of Iuly before they Arrived there; for on the 21 of that Month Cromwel quartered at Berwick, from whence he sent a Letter and Declaration to the Committee of Estates, fraught with hypocritical canting expressions; which the said Committee supprest, returning answer that they would reply to it by Messengers of their own. And lest any of their peo∣ple should be deluded by the like fair words, they made it Treason for any person to Correspond with the English, and fell a driving all their
Cattle and Provisions in the parts next adjacent to them, beyond Edenbo∣rough. Cromwel's Army was now reckoned 16000 men effective, with which he came first to Mardington his Head-quarters, Iuly 25. thence to Hadington, with∣in 12 miles of Edenborough, on the Hills whereabout the Scots had Encamped themselves, declining to Engage till their additional Forces were come off the Hig-lands. On the 25 of Iuly the English advanced, and attempted one of the said Hills,A light Skir∣mish and En∣counter at Mus∣sleborough, July 29. where a small party of the Scots were, and beat them presently off; when a party of Scotch Horse fell in their Rear with such fury and vigour, that they wholly disordered it, and with Reserves and fresh Bodies seconded and pursued this advantage: which being perceived by Major-General Lambert and Colonel Whaley, who had the Rear-guard, they couragiously Repulsed them to their Trenches; in which action Lambert had his Horse shot under him, was rn through the Arm with a Lance, and was taken Prisoner, but was res∣cued by one Lieutenant Empson. This past, and the Army wet and weary on their way to Muscleborough. Betwixt 3 and 4 in the Morning, another party of some 1500 Horse, the flower of the Army, being veterane Blades, under the Command of Colonel Montgomery and Straughan, fell with great fury, and more exact valour upon them betwixt sleeping and waking, and brought a ter∣rible fright and dismay upon the whole Army, Charging almost clear through upon the Sands; but returning with their Prisoners, were set upon by fresh Troops under Colonel Okey in good order, and forced to double their speed home to their Camp, having lost 100 men (to the same number in the for∣mer attempt) and some of their Officers slain and wounded, but came off o∣therwise with Honour enough, giving the Invaders little hopes of so easie a Victory and Conquest, as the Fates had decreed to them, and their invincible Fortune. At Home the Parliament was busie about their High Court of Iustice, and ma∣king orders for the Composition of Royalists, excluding all such who within six weeks (from their last limitation some time before) should not effectually have finished it; and in order thereunto, they Debated upon an Act August the 6 (be∣ing pressed for Money to carry on this great undertaking abroad) for the sale of Delinquents Lands; and Voted so many Estates to be sold, as would make up security for 200000 l. and that an Act should likewise be Passed for doubling on the Purchases of those Estates of Deans and Chapters, &c. And into this black list the Earl of Derby was now put, and other unfortunate Royalists: of which hereafter. In the Month of Iune Doctor Levens,Dr. Levens hanged in  Cornhill. formerly a Doctor of the Civil-law, who had all along served the King, was apprehended in his Lodgings, being set by the State-spies, and several Commissions from the King, and such pa∣pers found with him; whereupon he was brought before a Court-Martial, and there Sentenced to be Hanged: which was accordingly Executed on the 13 day of Iuly, against the Old-Exchange in Cornhill, where he Triumpht in his suffering. See we next a piece of their Justice upon an inanimate Statue, the old Kings Effigies in the Old-Exchange, and the same with his Fathers at the West-end of Saint Pauls: the first they had ridiculously (in imitation of their more scele∣rate cruelty) decollated; but ashamed of that impotent Revenge, had now or∣dered to be taken out of its Nich altogether, and under the Basis thereof these words were decreed to be inscribed:The Kings Sta∣tues pulled down Aug. — Exit Tyrannus Regum ultimus, An∣no Libertatis Angliae restitutae primo, Annoque Domini 1648. Which stood a long while, a Testimony of their Guilt, and a memorial to Strangers of their impu∣dent and bold-fac'd Treason; which gave not onely Truth, but even Time it self the lye: For never was there such a thing, as the first year of the Peoples Liberty under their Anarchical Usurpation. The other Statue of the King at its fall from the Gallery at St. Pauls aforesaid, light upon its Feet; which was taken as a good and sure Omen and Presage, that His Majesties glorious Me∣mory,
Fame, and Posterity, should recover and dure, magure all the designes and present prosperous successes of His and their Enemies. Myn Heer Jo∣achim Resident from the States of Holland sent home.Myn Heer Ioachim was Resident here about the same time from the Estates-General, whom the Parliament (because the said Estates had refused to give Audience to Mr. Strickland their Agent) had sent home, having limited his stay here to a prefixed time; but at his departure gratified him with the free transport of some able Horses, expressing likewise their desire of Amity: at the same time they were somenting a Rebellion in France, by offering aid to the City of Burdeaux, then in Arms against their Soveraign; hoping to make all the world follow their humour, and that, as their Libellers said, the Government thereof might return to that Form and Constitution it obtained most universally, before the Ambition and Tyranny of Single Persons, within 1600 years last past, had invaded and overthrown it; the great motive and argument used to the Dutch, for a neerer and strict alliance with that Plebeian Authority and Free-State. The Duke of York had for a good while after the Kings departure continu∣ed at Iersey (in which time Sir Richard Lane Lord-Keeper of the Seal died there) until the latter end of August,Lord-Keeper Lane dieth at Jersey. whereabouts he arrived at the Louvre in Paris, bringing with him a considerable sum of Money, the value of such Pri∣zes as his Iersey-Frigats had brought in, intending speedily to go thence into Holland, which journey he pursued. In London, on the 22 of the same month, Eusebius Andrews (a former Royallist, and Secretary to the Lord Capel) being trepan'd [a word newly heard in England, being a Denomination of a leud sort of people that prostituted Strumpets under pretence of their being their Wives, and having deprehended persons of Estates (by a signe given) in the Fact, prosecuted them at Law, to the recovery of great damages] by one Ber∣nards, formerly his Major, and engaged in a kind of Plot against the Parliament; who having made a most accurate legal Plea against the lawfulness and Authority of the High Court of Iustice, and notably defended himself, was notwithstandnig Sentenced as a Traytor, and had the favour onely of altering the manner of his Execution,Col. Andrews Executed Aug. 2 on Tower-hill. which was by the Axe, on Tower-hill, where he died like other Martyrs before him, full of joy and blessed hope. Sir Iohn Gell, who had been one of their prime Champions in the beginning of the War, was now, in re∣compence of his service, principally aimed at, and endeavoured to have been wrought into the same Confederacy (by the innocent sollicitation of Colonel Andrews, and the partaking of his Man Captain Benson therein, who was to that purpose onely, concerned in this Plot of their own contrivance, being both an old Reformade (and so obnoxious to them for Arrears and inveterated dis∣content) and a Presbyterian, of which Party Sir Iohn was thought the onely Chieftain;) but he wisely and prudently declining all such matters, save a pro∣fessing himself the Kings Servant when opportunity should serve; though the High Court of Iustice did what they could to bring him within the danger of their new Act of new Treason, after several hearings at their Bar, he was found onely guilty of Misprision of Treason,Sir John Gell Sentenced, and Cap. Benson Executed, Octo∣ber 7. for Concealing of it, and to lose his E∣state, and suffer perpetual Imprisonment; but Benson and Astly were Condemned, and Benson, October 7, Executed at Tyburn, where he Loyally and Christianly (taxing their treacherous cruelty and ingratitude) finished his Course. Several surren∣ders in Ire∣land.In Ireland, the resolute Garrison of Tecroghan, Governed by the Lady Fitz∣garret, with the same prudence and magnanimity as Latham-House was by the Countess of Derby in England, having endured a very hard and long Siege, ren∣dred at last to the Parliaments Forces on the 26 of Iune; and that as ennobled place for brave defence, the Garrison of Duncannon (where the famous Colonel Wo∣gans Royalists resided) together with Waterford, surrendred on the 20 of Au∣gust ensuing, upon very good terms, considering how the Plague and the Enemy had so destructively annoyed them; and the Lord Preston the Governour Sail∣ed into France. Caterlogh and Charlemont (two more important places) fol∣lowed the same Fortune, and gave the Parliament such hopeful assurance of a sudden plenary Conquest, that they were thinking of transporting some of their
Foot thence into the West of Scotland, where Sultan Cromwel was now pra∣ctising, hoping to gain Colonel Ker and Straughan (a kinde of Puritan-Pres∣byterians of the last Edition) over to their Party: All in a Zealous way for the Gospel, put up in Bags here at London, for their new gude Brethren of the Rebellious Kirk: of which fine juggle more anon. Several jealousies,Animosities among the Scots. animosities and discontents, were now reigning among the Scots, more supremely than the Kings Authority: the Kings friends wholly discountenanced and laid by, even Presbyterians themselves no way understan∣ding one another; some willing to give the King His Rights without more sti∣pulation and Engagements; others of them thinking they could not sufficient∣ly debase His Authority, and that it should wholly depend on the Kirk; and to that purpose several irreverend Postulata were put to him, beyond the Tenour of the Treaty at Breda; and in fine, that party prevailed so, as that the Army then on foot was in effect but very little for the Kings Interest and Service, but was wholly at the disposal of the rigid Covenanters. This was not unknown to Cromwel,Cromwel makes use of them. who thereupon never ceased Scribling and Divulging of the Eng∣lish Armies good intentions to the people of Scotland; With whom they have no Quarrel, but against a Malignant powerful Faction, who had brought in the King to the disturbance of the Publike National Peace and Frendship betwixt the two People; and that he was willing by Conference to give and receive satisfaction therein, otherwise to decide the Iustice of that Cause by Battle. To which when no Answer would be returned, he advanced on the 10 of August (having re∣cruited his Army by those Provisions that were plentifully brought by sea, the Fleet sailing an even pace with him, and observing the same Signals) on the West-side of Edenburgh up to the Line of the Scotch Army, playing his Can∣non, which were likewise Answered, and Encamped on Pencland-hills a little above Edenburgh-Castle; intending to march for Queens-ferry, but the Passes were so difficult, and other considerations intervened, that he proceeded no further. Next morning came a Letter to the General, with a Declaration from the Estates and Kirk, by sound of Trumpet, Declaring that the Quarrel being now stated, and the King ready to consent to their demands, they were resol∣ved to put it to the Issue: and that the world may see what that was like to prove, it will be worthy the memory of those transactions, to particularize them in this short abstract. In the Declaration of the Kirk (or Commissioners of the General Assem∣bly) to Cromwel as the state of the Quarrel, they most undutifully set forth (to the giving up the merit of the Cause) That the King stumbling at, and refusing to Subscribe unto the Declaration offered him by the Committee of Estates, and Commissioners of the Kirk, concerning His former carriage, and resolution for the future, is cause of just grief and offence, in reference to the Cause of God, and the Enemies and Friends thereof.The peremptory resolution of the Kirk of Scot∣land. And therefore they do Declare, that they do not, nor will not Espouse any Malignant Party or Quarrel, but that they Fight meerly upon their former grounds and Principles, in the Cause of God and the Kingdom; nor will they own the King, nor his Interest, further than be owns and prosecutes the Cause of God, &c. Concluding that they will Answer Oliver Cromwel's Letters, and clear themselves from the Falshoods contained therein, as if they owned the late Kings proceedings, and were resolved to prosecute His present Majesties Interest upon any other terms than as above mentioned. And this peremptory Kirk-resolution was Signed by A. Ker, then one of the chief Colonels of the Scotch Army. To this Cromwel takes very good occasion to reply,Cromwel cau∣seth the Kirk-Declaration to be read to his Army. and help out their Sophi∣stry with some more of his own; and to let the Scots see of how neer affinity the Kirk and the Congregational way were in this respect to the King, he permitted, nay, caused their Declaration to be publikely read to his Army; putting the Scotch-remonstrants upon these Dilemma's; namely, That their professed disowning of Malignants, and receiving and assisting their Head and Chief, in whom all their hope lies, cannot consist in common sence or prudence, (reciting
(as evidence thereof) the late Popish affairs in Ireland, and Prince Rupert's ra∣ving at Sea) That suppose He (the King) should give security of his turning, it must be some other way, than by a few and faigned formal submissions; for it is his necessity and his old Complices that Counsel him to that Compliance: Nor is it possi∣ble for the Scots (in the way that they are now in) to be able to secure themselves or England; and concludes, that upon this Quarrel, if they be ready to fight, his Army attends there for that purpose; and therefore the Scots cannot complain for want of an opportunity. These pestilent and alike dangerous Papers, (which in effect seemed rather an Agreement than cause of quarrel between the Antagonists) were warily considered by some, even of themselves, who loved the King, as of sudden and desperate consequence to His Majesties Person and Government, so highly vilified and disregarded; so that a Declaration (to the liking of the Kirk) was extorted from him, that there might no cause of pretence remain, either for their obstinate carriage towards Him, or ready Compliance with the Ene∣my. Hereupon the English Army advanced again; and though several Bodies of Scotch Horse appeared, yet they presently withdrew upon their approach: which that it might not be altogether frustrate, Cromwel in sight of them caused a Garrison (called Red-house,Red-house stormed. within a mile and a half of Edenburgh) to be storm'd, wherein were taken 60 Foot, and the House made Tenable, and man∣ned by the English; while the Scots (being necessitated for Provisions, and to joyn with some other Forces from Fife and the West) had marched two miles beyond Edenburgh,The Armies face one ano∣ther. having a great Hill on the one side, and the City and a Ri∣ver on the other, so that it was very hazardous to Engage them, being drawn up in Battalia, the great Guns playing on both sides. In which posture and attendance the Scots and English stood, and neither changed ground, till Provi∣sions growing exceeding scarce, Cromwel retreated to Pencland-hills (Lambert having had some discourse and conference with Straughan, &c. about the for∣mer equity of their Cause, de lana Caprina) and thence with some difficulty (by reason of bad weather) to Mussleborough for provant, and thence a few days af∣ter to Dunbar,The English re∣treat to Dun∣bar. with intention by shipping or any other way to get into Eng∣land, being now closely followed by the Scoth Army in their Rear; who right∣ly guessing the English to be weakned with long marches and want of Victual, made cock-sure of a total Victory, which snatching at before it was ripe for them, fearing nothing more than that they would escape them; they saw themselves miserably frustrated, and their despairing Enemy, a most insulting Conquerour. On Sunday at night, the first of September, the English (making at most not above 12000 men) came to Dunbar, whither the Scots (keeping close at their Heels) came also and drew up their whole Army, consisting of between 20 and 24 thousand men, upon a high Hill within a mile of the Town, to the great a∣mazement at first of the English; but despair adding resolution to their Cou∣rage, they presently drew out in Battalia, in the Corn-field neer adjoyning, and so stood all night, being Encamped upon a neck of Land, whose breadth was not a mile and a half from Sea to Sea; so that they were by Land quite cooped up. In confidence therefore of an assured Victory, David Lesley who Commanded this Kirk-Army in chief, began to advance as early as the Sun next morning, and drew down the Hill, fixing at the foot thereof, and about four a clock in the afternoon brought down his Train, there being a great Ditch be∣twixt both the Armies. That night the English (by Command) placed them∣selves close to the Ditch, and placed their Field-pieces likewise in every Regi∣ment, that they might be in a readiness in case the Enemy should attempt a∣ny thing upon them, who were vainly expecting terms of a Rendition; boast∣ing that they had them in a worle Pound than the King had the Earl of Essex at Lestithiel in Cornwall.
The Ministers having their Voice in the Council of War held by this Kirk-Army, most earnestly urged the Engagement, and Fight, (against those that were of opinion to let the English escape, and not venture the fortune of War upon an Enemy made desperate, of which there were so many sad examples) saying, that God had delivered Agag (meaning Cromwel) into their power; and if they let him go, would require him at their hands. On Tuesday-morning at four of the Clock, a Brigade of the English Army drew down to possess themselves of a Pass upon the Road between Edenburgh and Berwick; which being had, they might with the more ease and advantage make their way home, and in order thereto, pass over to the Enemy, to fall upon them.Dunbar fight, Sep. 3. This Brigade consisted of three Regiments of Horse, of Major-General Lambert's, Commissary-General Whaley's, and Colonel Lilburn's, and two of Foot. This gave the Scots a great Alarm, and a sore dispute happened about the Pass, which lasted above an hour, the great Guns playing in the mean time against both the Bodies. At length that stout Brigade gained and possessed the Pass, much gallantry and bravery being shewed on both sides. (This Pass lay at Copperspeth in the English way homewards; to impede which, they had drawn off their best Horse upon the right Wing to receive the English, whose Word was, The Lord of Hosts; theirs, The Covenant. The Enemy charged hereupon with their Lanciers, so that the Horse gave way a little, but immediately Rallied▪ and the Foot advancing to second them, the Scots were charged so home, that they put them presently to the rout, it being about six a clock in the morning; the left Wing of Horse without striking one stroke following the same way: the Foot seeing this rout and flight of the Horse, and not able in any order by reason thereof to Engage, were all of a sudden so confused and confounded, that without any resistance or offer of En∣gagement, they threw down their Arms and fled, giving the English the full pursuit of them above eight miles beyond Haddington.The Scots rout∣ed. The number of the slain were 4000, 9000 Prisoners, many whereof were desperately wounded, and 10000 Arms,Prisoners of Note, Sir James Lumsdale, Lieu. Gen. of the Army, Lord Libberton, who died of his wounds, Adju∣tant-General Bickerton, Scout-master Campbel, Sir Will. Doug∣las, L. Cran∣ston, Colonel Gurden, &c. Their Colours taken ordered to be hung up in Westmin∣ster-hall. all their Ammunition, Bag and Bagage. Prisoners of Note were, Sir Iames Lumsdale Lieutenant-General of the Army, the Lord Libberton, im∣ployed by the Estates to the King lately, and died of his wounds presently af∣ter the Fight at Dunbar, Adjutant-General Bickerton Scout-master Campbel, Sir William Douglas, Lord Cranston, and Colonel Gurden; 12 Lieutenant-Colonels, 6 Majors, 42 Captains, 75 Lieutenants, 17 Cornets, 2 Quarter-masters, 110 Ensignes, Foot and Horse Colours 200, 27 Guns, some Brass, Iron and Leather: with the loss of not above 300 English, and one Major Rookisly, who died af∣ter of his Wounds: There was likewise taken the Purse to the great Seal of Scotland, which was presently sent up to London, and the Colours, with those taken before at Preston, ordered forthwith to be hung up in Westminster-hall. The full Contents of all which, was signified in a Letter from the General in his usual strain of devout zeal, tending very much to strengthen the Independent against the Presbyterian at home, and the advancement of a Commonwealth to the imitation of the rest of the World; the latter part thereof, for the severe as∣pect it had towards the Ministry, in favour of Anabaptists, with which the Ar∣my swarmed, I have here inserted. — The Ministers of Scotland have hindered the passage of those things (meaning his Affection to the good people of Scotland) to those to whom we intended them,Cromwel's Letter after the fight. and now we see that not onely the deceived people, but some of the Ministers (three or four) are fallen in the fight. This is the great hand of the Lord, and worthy of the consideration of those who taking into their hands the Instrument of a foolish Shepherd, to wit, medling with worldly policies, and mixtures of Earthly powers, to set up that which they call the Kingdom of Christ, (which is neither it, nor if it were it, would such be found effectual to that end) and neglect, or trust not to the Word of God, the Sword of the Spirit, which is alone able and powerful to that end, and when trusted to, will be found effectually able, &c. This is HUMBLY
offered for their sakes (who have lately turned too much aside) that they might return again to Preach Iesus Christ, &c. and then no doubt they will discern and finde your protection and encouragement. Which Humble offer was to command a strict Inquisition upon them, as those most probable to obstruct the new Mo∣del and his future greatness. The glory of this field, though it were by his own party ascribed to his Va∣lour, yet it laid a great blemish on his Conduct: and indeed the rescue of his ho∣nour is principally to be referred to Colonel Monke,General Monk chiefly conc'd in the honour of this field. whose company he had ob∣liged in this Expedition, (being very understanding in the choice, and as subtile in the shaking off his Friends and Familiars.) He had newly had a Regiment conferred on him, made up of recruits and other imprfect Compes, and did now at the Generals request draw and designe the fight, and embattle the Army, and seconded that deliberate speculation, with forwardest of action; for which indeed most of the Officers were very praise-worthy. After the fight, Cromwel used some catching courtesies to the wounded Souldiers, and the fee∣bler sort of Prisoners; but the poor Highlanders,The Highlan∣ders sold for Slaves. and such-like, paid dear for that partial kindness shewed their Country-men, as many as with difficulty lived be∣ing sold for slaves. Nor were their Lords and Superiours at home in much better condition of minde, being confounded and distracted at this strange and most unexpected dis∣aster. The Kirk immediately ran to her old trick of humiliation, assigning their vain confidence in the arm of flesh, to be the sole and most just cause of this their defeat; not considering their disloyal arrogance to, and most unnatural diffidence in their Leige-Lord and Soveraign, was that accursed thing, which God made inquisition after in this blood, though they had hidden it, and most hypocritically vail'd it under the covering of the Covenant. These were the rigid Kirk-men, whose peevish obstinacy this remarkable success of the English was so far from reclaiming, that in the conclusion they totally prevaricated from the interest of their Nation. Others the more sober, being taught by this Lesson what it was to set up and maintain parties and factions when the Enemy was at the door,A union of par∣ties endeavour∣ed by the Scots. and so Victoriously potent, were for the perfect reconciling and uniting them; which necessary, most incumbent, and pressing affair, was yet unhappily hindred by even those men themselves, who when they began to consider how they must part with that Supream and extraordinary power they had so long Usurped, made so many nice difficulties, by their Cavils and Disputes about the admission of the Royal party, that Cromwel had fixed such ooting in their Country, that made it a difficult task to them to keep any part for themselves. The Royalists onely, and the King himself, by all manner of tenderness and condescentions, studying the common preservation, and suffering any thing from these, though uncertain friends, rather than expect it from so implacable an Enemy. And in some sort it may be said, that this overthrow did much serve to conciliate both interests: for the Kirk could not now defend it self with its own Arms, and was constrained to accept of help from those they had rejected; so that the Earl of Cleaveland, Lord Wilmot, and other English Royalists (we shall men∣tion the Scotch by and by) who were upon their departure, (none but the Duke of Buckingham, and Colonel Massey, Graves and Titus being permitted to stay) now continued there; so that the common voice then was, that the King had lost nothing in the discomfiture of that Army of the Kirk. The same day in the afternoon presently after this blow, the Scots quitted Leith and Edenburgh, whither old Leven got by nine of the clock, Lesley at two, and had packt up their Bag and Baggage, and by Queens-ferry marched to Sterling. Cromwel marched fast after them, and the next day quartered at the two places aforesaid, with a resolution to fortifie Leith; Lieutenant-Colonel Paul Hobson being made Go∣vernour thereof, and Colonel Overton of Edenburgh with his Brigade to se∣cure it, while the Army marched towards Sterling, having received recruits by
shipping from Dunbar. Upon occasion of this Victory, several Ministers in London, of the Presbyterian way, were summoned to appear, Sept. 18, before the Committee of the Militia,The Parliament at Westmin∣ster appoint a Thanksgiving day. according as Cromwel had intimated in the before-recited Letter, and charged to observe the Thanks-giving day the Par∣liament had appointed for this their great success in Scotland. On the 14 of September, General Cromwel marched out of Edenburgh with 7 days Provision,Cromwel marcheth for Sterling, Sep. 14. for the Scots had not left any manner of subsistance betwixt that and Sterling, and on the 15 reached beyond Linlithgow, but through bad weather was constrained to retreat thither that night for shelter: the 16 to Fal∣kirk, within a mile of Sterling, from whence fresh Letters of the old strain were sent into that City, but the Trumpeter was not suffered to enter; whereupon Order was given for a Storm, but upon better thoughts of the danger, forborn, so that on the 19 of September they returned to Linlithgow, (whither came General Dean to him from shipboard, being newly arrived at Leith in the Spea∣ker Frigot) and fortified the Town, being the Road-way betwixt Edenburgh and Sterling, and a sufficient Garrison was left to maintain it; and so on the 22 the English returned to Edenburgh, where Colonel Whaley had offered the Mi∣nisters fled to the Castle leave to come out and Preach in their several Parishes; but they refused. Now was the time of the Independent Ecclesiastical Government: for the Parliament would no longer halt between two opinions.Liberty of Con∣science Enacted in England. An Act was now published for relief of Religious and Peaceable people, from the rigour of for∣mer Acts of Parliament, whereby the compulsive Authority of Presbytery, and its appurtenances of Lay Elders, was quite annihilated, and the Separatists and Sectaries were the onely Church countenanced then in London; who to make themselves more considerable, and in grateful acknowledgment to the Parlia∣ment, raised one Regiment of Horse,The Sectaries raise an Army. and another of Foot, of well-affected persons, to be ready upon all occasions for defence of the Commonwealth, and marched in good equipage through the City to Hide-park, being then made up three Regiments of Foot, and two of Horse, to the number of 8000. being led by Colonel, then made Major-General Harrison:Col. Harrison. made Maj. Gen. Several other recruits for the Army were now drawn out of Colonel Barkstead's Regiment in the Tower, and new men raised in divers Counties for the same service. The Duke of York was now at the Hague,The Duke of Yoak at the Hague. from whence he went to Breda, whereabout at a Town called Longstraet in Brabant, His Brother the Prince of Aurange was raising of some Troops, designed as it was thought for Scotland, to be commanded by the Duke; from whence a while after he passed to the Rhyne in Guelderland, accompanied with some English Noble-men, and Sir George Ratcliff, Sir Iohn Byron, and Sir Iohn Berkley, and thence returned to the Hague, where the Lords Iermyn and Seymor, with Colonel Progers, left him with the Piercy, (the Lord Culpeper taking his journey into the Dutchy of Cleve:) the Lord Cottington, and Sir Edward Hide, were at the same time at Madrid in Spain, negotiating the Kings affairs at that Court; where finding nothing but shews and temporary Counsels in relation to any assistance from thence, they resolved to depart. The Lord Goring was likewise newly come into the Low Countries. Prince Rupert having disengaged himself of the English Fleet at Lisbon,Prince Ru∣perts Fleet dispersed, Nov. that had long blockt him up, being now at Sea on the same coast of Spain, on the be∣ginning of November, where at Velos and Malaga he had burnt five or six English ships, advice hereof was presently given to General Blake, then with the same Fleet, hovering about that shore, who on the 3 and 4 of Novem∣ber, with some of his said ships, first mastered the Robuck; another of the Prin∣ces, named the Black Prince, of 44 Guns, being ready to be boarded, ran on shore, and on the 5 of November four more ran a ground, the Guns, Tackle and Fur∣niture of all which were then demanded of the King of Spain, by Fisher the Parliaments Agent there, and promised to be delivered, as a pledge of that re∣spect the King of Spain was now manifesting to the Authority of the Com∣monwealth
of England; Prince Rupert with the Reformation, and his Brother Prince Maurice in the Swallow, by good intelligence avoiding the same Fleet, sail'd into the Adriatick Sea, and refreshing themselves a while at Sicily (when Blake sailed to the Isle of Majorca, guessing that for their Rendezvouze) put to Sea again, and took an English ship called the Marmaduke, laden from Archan∣gel in Russia to Legorn, with Caveer and Hides of a great value, and with her sailed into Toulon, and there exposed her to sale, and ook up their remaining part of Winter in that station: In requital of which etertainment, the Parlia∣ment made seizure of several ships, both of War and Merchandise, belonging to the French Nation. But before this loss, came a greater to the King; for it pleased God on the 16 of September to lessen the number of that sorrowful Family, by the death of the Princess Elizabeth,Princess Eliza∣beth dieth at Carisbroke-Castle: is bu∣ried in New∣port. who died at Carisbroke-Castle; having lain sick a fortnight: she first complained of her Head, after her coming from Bowls with her Brother the Duke of Gloucester; and though little care was taken there, the place affording no learned Physician, yet Dr. Mayrn sent down some fitting Cor∣dials; but her grief was irremediable: In October she was buried in the Church of Newport, the Mayor and Aldermen attending her to her Grave. This was seconded with the death of the Prince of Aurange, who some while before ha∣ving had several contests with the Burgermasters of some of the chief Cities of Holland, and had designed the seizing of Amsterdam, in order to the accom∣plishing his intentions of reducing the stubborness of some of the principal there to their obedience, in the discussing and conclusion of that affair, as he was Hunting neer Arnhem, a destemper seized him, which turning to the Small Pox, and a Flux of putrified blood falling upon his Lungs,Prince of Au∣range died Octb. 27. presently carried him a∣way, on the 17 of October, not without suspition of Poison; leaving behind him the Princess Royal neer her time, who to the great joy of the Low Countries, was delivred of a young Prince on the 5 of November, as a cordial to that im∣moderate grief Her Highness and her Family took from this sad providence; the Prince being the most sincere and absolute friend his late and present Majesty found in the greatest difficulties of their affairs. The War in Ireland went on prosperously still with the Parliament, the suc∣cess being very much facilitated by the misunderstanding and divisions that were among the Catholicks and the Protestant Loyal party there,Divisions a∣mong the Loyal parties, in Ire∣land. in so much that the Lord Ormond the Lieutenant was not regarded among them, nor he able through this means to make any head against Ireton, then left Deputy in that Kingdom; so that little of any memorable action passed in the field till the expiration of the Summer, at which time Ireton intending to besiege Lim∣rick, one of the strongest Cities in Ireland, marched from Waterford, and made a compass into the County of Wicklow, which being stored with plundered Cattle, furnished him with 1600 Cows for provision in that Leaguer, and so marched to Athloe in hopes to gain it; but finding the Bridge broke, and the Town on this side burnt, he left that, and took two other Castles, and the Bur on the same side, and presently clapped down before Limrick, having marched 150 miles (and in some Counties 30 miles together, and not a house or living crea∣ture to be seen.)▪ The Marquess Clanrickard (to whom the Military power was by general con∣sent devolved, as being a Papist, and a Native of most Antient and Noble Ex∣traction, and by the very good liking of the Marquess of Ormond, who had had large experience of his exemplary fidelity to the King and the English interest, ever since the very first Rebellion in 1641) having notice of the Enemies being at Athlone, marched with 3000 men, to whom joyned afterwards young Preston late at Waterford, presently to the relief of it, if any thing should have been at∣tempted; and passing the Shanon, having notice of Ireton's quitting Athlone, took the two Castles again, and laid siege to the Bur, where two great Guns had been left by the English. To the relief whereof likewise Colonel Axtel (having fac'd them before, but now reinforced) marched with a resolution
to Engage, being in all some 2500 men: whereupon the Marquess Clanrickard quitted the Siege, and retreated to Meleke Island, bordering upon the Shanon, into which there was but one Pass, and a Bog on each side: On the 25 of Octo∣ber, a little before night, Axtel made a resolute attempt upon them, and after a sharp dispte beat them from the first and second Passes;The Marq▪ of Clanickards Forces eeated by Col. Axtel, Octob. 25. and at the third, which was strongly fortified, came to the Bt-end of the Musquet, and entred the Island, which the Irish in flight deserted, leaving most of their Arms be∣hind, 200 Horse, all their Waggons and Baggage▪ so that what by the Sword and the River, one half of that Army perished: On the English side, Captain Goff and a hundred more were killed: the Marquess was himself not present, but was gone upon a designe against the Siege at Limerick, which advanced very slowly. The next day the Irish quitted all the Garrisons they had taken, and fired thm; whereupon Ireton drew from Limerick, and took in the stog Ca∣stle of Neanagh in low Ormond, and so retreated to his Winter-quarters a Kil∣kenny in November. These untoward events and misfortunes one upon the neck of another, toge∣ther with the displacency and dissatisfaction among themselves,The Marq. of Ormo, and Lord Inchi∣queen, resol∣ved to depart out of Ireland, Nov. made the Lord Ormond despair of retriving His Majesties interest in that Kingdom without for∣rain assistance, and therefore he resolved to depart; and signified his intentions accordingly to the Council of of the Irish, who after some arguments and in∣treaties of his further stay, did at last humbly and sorrowfully take leave of him, rendring him all expressions of thanks and honour for those unwearied Servi∣ces he had done his Country, and passed several Votes in record thereof, desiring his Lordship to excuse those many failures which evil times and strange necessi∣ties had caused in them, and desiring him to be their Advocate to His Majesty, and to other Princes, to get some aid and supplies from them, to the defence of that gasping Realm, that now strugled with its last Fate. About the begin∣ning of December the Marquess took shipping in a little Frigat called the Eli∣zabeth, of 28 Tuns and 4 Guns, and set sail from Galloway, followed by the Lord Inchiqueen, Colonel Vaughan, the Noble Colonels Wogan and Warren, and some 20 more persons of Honour, intending for France, Scilly, or Iersey, but happily landed at St. Malos, in France in Ianuary; whence they went to Paris, and gave the Queen-Mother an account of that Kingdom. Thence the Marquess of Ormond removed to Flanders, and the Lord Inchiqueen into Hol∣land, and came to Amsterdam; the Valiant Wogan taking the first opportunity in Scilly, in order to his further service of the King in Scotland, where he first ma∣nifested his Zeal and gallantry to the Royal Cause. The noise of these lucky Atchievements, had made most of the Neighbouring Princes consider a little further and more regardfully of this Commonwealth, more especially such whose Trade by Sea might be incommodated by their Na∣val-force, which now Lorded it in gallant Fleets upon the adjoyning Seas. The first whom this danger prevailed upon, was the King of Portugal Iohn the 4. whose Fleet (laden with Sugar from Brasile) General Blake had met with, and for his entertainment of Prince Rupert with his Fleet (now newly taken and dispersed) brought away 9 of them into the River of Thames, where they were delivered to the Commissioners for Prize-goods, then newly established by Authority of Parliament (upon which score the State received in few years many hundred thousand pounds, and was cheated of almost as much) whose names were, Blackwel, Blake, Sparrow; and upon the Dutch-War others particularly named for that very Affair, because of its continual Employ∣ment. In the Month of December therefore he sent hither his Embassador,An Embassa∣dor from Por∣tugal to the new States. Dec. who lan∣ded at he Isle of Wight, and gave notice to the Council of State of his Arrival, who (instead of a better complement) sent him a safe Conduct for his Jour∣ney to London, there being then open Hostility between the two Nations, for that the King of Portugal, to satisfie himself of his damages sustained in his Sugar-fleet, had seid all the English Merchants goods in Lisbon. On the 11
of December, he had Audience before a Committee of Parliament (attended with the Master of the Ceremonies and 20 of his own retinue) in the House of Lords; which he at first refused to accept, as being a Diminution to his Ma∣sters Greatness; but at last was forced to accept of the Lord-Commissioner Whitlock, Major-General Harrison, Sir Henry Vane, Thomas Challoner, and others, being appointed thereunto. He delivered his Credentials, which were to the Parliament of England, and made an excellent Rhetorical Harangue, setting forth the Constant Friendship betwixt both Kingdoms, and the Civili∣ties they had received formerly and of late from the English, and desiring that the late mis-understanding might occasion no further breach thereof, but that a firm and new League might be ratified as formerly. He had answer, that the Committee would report his Message to the Parliament: and so after a mutual Salutation upon the Embassadors rising from his Chair, he withdrew with the same attendance. But the reason he had no solemner Reception, was the pride and opimonastry the States had of themselves, by the Courtships and flattering Insinuations of the Spanish Kings Embassador, who had likewise desired Au∣dience of them, and came with a most welcome acknowledgement of their Commonwealth; and it was a reciprocal kindness to him, not to allow the Por∣tugal (his pretended Rebel, and a much less potent Prince) the said Grandeurs and Legatory Honours, considering besides the uninterrupted amity that had yet been maintained by the Spaniard. On the 16 of December, therefore, Don Alonzo de Cardenas, who had lain Leiger Embassador in the Kings time throughout the War,The Spanish Embassador likewise ac∣knowledg'd them a Free-State, Decem. was with all State received to Audience in the Parliament-house, he having delivered his Creden∣tials to the Speaker, which were directed [Ad Parliamentum Reipublicae An∣gliae] and Conducted back again with large protestations of friendship, and good correspondence on their part to be inviolately observed. During these Forrain Agencies, the New State was Alarmed with an Insur∣rection in Norfolk,An Insurrection in Norfolk: where some hundreds of men were gathered together, De∣claring for King Charles the second: but the County-Horse quartering at Lyn, and a Troop of Rich's men that were neer at hand (being there before) ha∣ving some intelligence of the designe,Suppressed. presently dispersed them, most flying in∣to Lincolnshire; and saved the London-Forces the trouble of a long Journey, who were then on their way.A High Court of Justice E∣rected at Nor∣wich. To try these Insurrectors, a High Court of Iustice was Erected by the Parliament at Norwich, the Members and Commissioners whereof chose out of themselves; Justice Iermin their President, and Justice Pu∣liston and Warberton to be his Co-adjutors. Those Condemned 24, whereof 20 were Executed:Mr. Cooper a Minister, Maj. Saul and others Executed. the chief of those thus Condemned, were Mr. Cooper a Mini∣ster in the same County, who was Executed at Holt, and died a Loyal and Christian Martyr; Major Saul, formerly an Officer in the Kings Army; and a Merchant and a Brewer in the City of Norwich. There were several persons of quality besides, as Sir Iohn Tracy, Gibbons Esq. and others secured and com∣mitted; but no proof coming in, they were at last acquitted. While we mention the High Court of Iustice,A memorable accident at Oxford. a very remarkable instance of the Justice of Heaven (the Highest Court) deserves mention. One Anne Green, a Servant in Sir Thomas Read's House at Dunstu in Oxfordshire, being supposed to be gotten with Childe by one of that Family (as the woman constantly af∣firmed when she had no temptation to lye) neer the fourth Month of her time, with over-working her self by turning of Malt, fell in Travel; and not knowing what the matter might be, went to the House of Office, and with some strai∣ning, the Childe (not above a span-long, and of what Sex not to be distin∣quished) fell unawares (as she all along affirmeth) from her. Now there ap∣pearing the signes of such a thing in the Linnen where the Wench lay, and car∣rying a suspition thereof; and she before confessing that she had been guilty of such matters as might occasion his being with Child; thereupon a search was made, and the above-said Infant was found on the top of the Jakes, and she af∣ter three days from her delivery being carried to the Castle of Oxford, was
forthwith Arraigned before Mr. Crook, sitting as Judge in a Commission of Oyer and Terminer, and by him Sentenced to be Hanged; which was Executed on the 14 day of December in the said Castle-yard. She hung there neer half an hour, being pulled by the Legs and struck on the Brest by divers Friends, and above all received several stroaks on her Stomack with the But-end of a Souldiers Musquet. Being cut down, she was put into a Coffin, and brought to a house to be Dissected (before a Company of Physicians, according to ap∣pointment) by Doctor Petty the Anatomy-Reader in that University. When they opened the Coffin to prepare the Body for Dissection, they perceived some small ratling in her Throat; and a lusty Fellow standing by, thinking to do an act of Charity, stamped upon her Breast and Belly. Doctor Petty, Mr. Willis of Christ-Church, and Mr. Clerk of Magdalen-Colledge, presently used means, and opening a Vein, laid her in a warm Bed, and caused one to go into Bed to her; and continued the use of divers Remedies, respecting her senselessness, Head, Throat, and Brest; so that it pleased God within 14 hours she spoke, and the next day talked and prayed very heartily, and was in a hopeful way of perfect health: whereupon the Governour presently procured her a Reprieve; thou∣sands of people coming to see her, and magnifying the just providence of God in asserting her Innocency of Murther. After two or three days of her re∣covery, when Doctor Petty heard she had spoken, and suspecting that the Women about her might suggest unto her to relate of strange Visions and Ap∣paritions to have been seen by her in that time wherein she seemed dead (which they had begun to do) having caused all to depart the room but the other Gen∣tlemen of the Faculty, she was asked concerning her sense and apprehensions during that time she was Hanged. At first she spake somewhat impertinently, talking as if she had been now to suffer; and when they spake unto her of her miraculous deliverance from so great sufferings, she answered, That she hoped that God would give her patience, and the like. Afterward, when she was better recovered, she affirmed, and doth still, that she neither remembereth how her Fetters were knocked off, how she went out of the Prison, when she was turned off te Ladder, whether any Psalm was sung or not, nor was she sensible of any pain as she can remember. Another thing observable is, that she came to her self as if she had awakened out of a Sleep, not recovering the use of speech by slow degrees, but in a manner all together, beginning to speak just where she had left off on the Gallows. I have thought this occurrence no way unworthy of a Remembrance in this Chronicle, but very fit to be transmitted to Posterity, for Gods Glory, and Mans Caution in Judging and punishing. Several Acts passed the Parliament this Ianuary;Several Acts of Parliament Passed. as namely, for continuance of the Committee for the Army, and Treasurers at War; for the Receiving and Issuing of the several sums of Money appointed to be received and paid, by ver∣tue of their Act for the raising of 120000 pounds per mensem, for 4 Months, to Commence the 28 of Decemb. 1650. for the Maintenance of the Army, &c. Another Act passed for Importation of Bullion, with the usual priviledges, and to have free passage and protection without any seizure upon any pretence whatsoever; (which was very well cautioned) and another against Forced and Stolen Marriages, Enabling Commissioners of the Great Seal to Issue Commissions of Delegates in case of pretended Marriage; and lastly, one for ta∣king away the Fee of Damage-clear, or Damna Clericorum, from the first of Ianuary 1650. Not to omit in this place, that Sir Iohn Stawell was now the third time before the High Court of Iustice. From the Gown pass we to the Sword.The Progress of Cromwel in Scotland. The English Army in Scotland, not being able to effect any thing against the main Army of the Kings that lay on Sterling-side, resolved to be doing with a party that then lay in the West of Scot∣land, under the Command of Colonel Ker and Straghan, with whom Crom∣wel had maintained an open intercourse, and had profered them a Cessation; driving at this, to take them off, and subdivide the Nation in several parties: and
the effect of his Papers taxing the Scots with the admission of the King upon the old Malignant score, did operate as he projected; for thereupon out comes a Declaration or Remonstrance from these Western Fellows,The Trayterous Western Remon∣strance of some Scots, full of saucy and Treasonable Language, which accordingly was Voted both by the Commissio∣ners of the Kirk, and the Committee of Estates, to be scandalous and seditious: Sir Iames Stuart, and Sir Iohn Cheisly, and one Mr. Leviston (who seemed to countenance it) were strictly watched, and Straughan taken and made Pri∣soner in Dunbarton, and after in Cathnes-Castle, whence he escaped, and came over to the English at Edenburgh: but 'twas more the sacred hunger of Gold than Zeal for Religion, made him first betray his King, and his Country after: and we shall see all Cromwel's Proselytes of that Nation, both Dundass, War∣reston, and Giffin, to love nothing so much as the Mammon of Presbyte∣ry. Straughan thus removed, Major-General Lambert was sent to prevail with Ker, either by blows or words; the latter being thought as feasible as the former: and accordingly on the last of November, having difficulty found and passed a Ford over Hamilton-River, Ker got notice of it, and resolutely fell into the Major-Generals Quarters at a Town of that name; but the Horse being in a readiness to receive him, he lost a hundred men, had his Hand almost cut off, and was taken Prisoner;Ker defeated and taken Pri∣soner. and the rest of his party, being 5 Regiments of Horse, two whereof were the Earl of Cassels and Kirconbrights, pursued as far as Ayre, where Commissary-General Whaley was now left to Command in chief in those Western-parts. Cromwel had marched with his Army this way as far as Glas∣gow in October; but understanding or dreading the Enemy would come and re∣lieve Edenburgh-Castle with Provisions and another Governour (being in Trea∣ty with the present for a sum of Money) he forthwith retired; having there took and Garrisoned two Houses, while Colonel Whaley took in Dalkeith and another nest of Moss-Troopers: yet his coming thither hindred Major-General Mountgomery from marching into those parts, to reduce Ker likewise to his obe∣dience to the King. Edenburgh-Castle had been Besieged some Months and upwards, with little loss on either side, save that the Great Guns from the Castle did some mischief in Edenburgh-streets, and one Captain Hamilton was shot in the Head with a Musquet as he was viewing the Castle, and the Morter-pieces made semblance of great terrour and annoyance to the Besieged; a Mine was likewise carried on some 60 foot, the Stone being cut all the way; but then they could proceed no further, being come to the Rock whereon the Castle stands: nevertheless the Derby-shire-Miners (being 12 in number) did what they could to proceed, the Enemy throwing Pitch and Flax, and other combustible stuff into the Works. At last the personated Hostility came to a period; and Dundass old Levens Son-in-law pretending want of Water, came to a Parley; and having premised a colourable request of 10 days time, to send to the Committee of Estates, by whom he said he was intrusted, which he knew was to be denied; and after several Missives betwixt Cromwel and Him, concluded the rendition of that most important place to the Kings Service,Edenburgh-Castle yielded Dec. 24. in these Articles agreed on betwixt Major Abernethy Dundasses man, and Captain Henderson on one side, and Colonel Monke and Lieutenant-Colonel White on the other. (It was always before called the Maiden, it may henceforth be called the Prostitute- Castle.) The Articles were as follow. The Articles for the Rendi∣tion of Eden∣burgh-Castle.That the Castle should be Surrendred to his Excellency Oliver Cromwel, with all the Ordinance, Arms, Magazine, and Furniture of War thereunto belonging, on Tuesday the 24 of December. 2. That the Governour, Officers and Souldiers should march with Drums beating, &c. in Military posture, to such place as they shall appoint. 3. The Publike moveables, private Writs and Evidences to be re∣moved to Sterling. 4. That Proclamation should be made for all that had Goods in the Castle, to come or send to own and receive them. 5. All sick Officers and
Souldiers, as well such as hurt (in reputation) to have liberty to stay in Eden∣burgh, and the English to provide Horses and Waggons for the Governour and other Officers, and Hostages to be given on the Scots part for performance. There were found in it five French Cannon, nine Dutch half-Cannon, two Culverings, two demi-Culverings, two Minions, two Falcons, 28 Brass Drakes called Monkeys, two Petards, betwixt seven and eight thousand Arms, neer eighty Barrels of Powder, and a like store of Cannon-shot.Col. Fenwick mad Gove∣nour , and of Leith for the Parlia∣ment. Colonel Fenwick was presently upon the Surrender made Governour of this and Leith. Sir Ar∣thur Haslerig and Mr. Scot were present at the Rendition thereof, and then de∣parted, their work being done; which that it may the better appear for a piece of the vilest Treachery any Scot ever committed (though Cromwel ascribes it in his Letter to the Speaker to the alone wisdom of God, beyond all humane power and accomplishment) take this account from the lovers themselves of this Treason at Edenburgh. The greatest want they had was of Beer; but as for Oatmeal, Butter, Fresh Water, and Salt Meat, they had enough. The Master Gun∣ner told me, that when our Guns were a drawing to the Batteries, he had so placed his Peices that ours could not possibly have been planted without great loss; but when he prepared to give fire, he was forbidden by the Governour upon pain of death. His man Abernethy went often out of the Castle upon pretence of getting Intelli∣gence; (but it was to hold it with Cromwel:) sure it is, that Dundass and he and some others were a little wiser, and went not over the Water as they had made Conditions, some of thse that did being Imprisoned (the Court and Camp being sadly affected with this loss.) The Provost of Edenburgh, Sir James Stuart, is in Town, but keeps private, lest the Wives in the streets should abuse him as they did Straughan and Ker at their coming hither: the Lord Warreston, who came as he pretended for the Records, is not yet returned, but stays in Town, for he cares not to go back. He and the rest of that Remonstrant Tribe are Summoned to come to Par∣liament; Colonel Dundass, Straughan▪ and Captain Giffan, with Abernethy, Swinton and Andrews, were else to be Excommunicated, and Declared Traytors, which was done, January 14. Mr. James Guthry, and the Earl of Lothian, and General Holborn, were generally suspected, with Sir John Chiefly, who are every day expected in our Quarters. Rutherford and Gillespy are likewise dissenters from the present manage of affairs. Ker saith, his wound on his right hand is Gods Justice against him, for lifting it up against us in such a cause as he maintained. And so I will conclude all those Treasonable practices, and fomented divisions of that Nation against their common Interest. Having first acquainted the Reader with an occurrence of the like nature, from the better mannered and necessity-instructed Kirk, who yet would fain have been paramount,The Scots bold∣ly sollicitous with the King. and were most boldly sollicitous with the King to consent to some other Acts mis-becoming the Majesty of a Soveraign, and the Honour of His Crown; which the King generously and disdainfully refusing, there flew such rumours and whispers, as if some disloyal and dishonest Counsels were hatching against his Person;His Majesty withdraws to Gen. Middle∣ton. whereupon the King privately withdrew him∣self to his Northern Friends and Forces under General Middleton, till such time as a right understanding (Hostages being given on both sides, as to his party and theirs) was setled betwixt them; which was firmly and absolutely concluded in an unanimous resolve of his immediate Coronation, which was solemnly per∣formed on the first of Ianuary in this manner. First the Kings Majesty,The manner of His Coronation January 1. in a Princes Robe, was conducted from his Bedcham∣ber, by the Constable on his right hand, and the Marshal on his left, to the Chamber of Presence; and there, was placed in a Chair under a Cloath of State by the Lord of Angus, Chamberlain, appointed by the King for that day; and there after a little repose, the Noblemen, with the Commissioners of Barons and Burroughs, entred the Hall, and presented themselves before His Maje∣sty. Thereafter the Lord Chancellor spoke to the King, to this purpose: Sir, your
good Subjects desire You may be Crowned,The Lord-Chan∣cellors Speech to the King. as the righteous and Lawful Heir of the Crown of this Kingdom; that You would maintain Religion as it is presently pro∣fessed and established: Also that You would be graciously pleased to receive them under Your Highness's Protection, to Govern them by the Laws of the Kingdom, and to defend them in their Rights and Liberties by Your Royal Power; offering them∣selves in most humble manner to your Majesty, with their Vows to bestow Land, Life, and what else is in their Power, for the maintenance of Religion, for the safety of Your Majesties sacred Person, and maintenance of Your Crown; which they intreat Your Majesty to accept; and pray Almighty God, that for many years You may happily enjoy the same. His Majesties Answer.The King made this Answer: I do esteem the affections of my good People more than the Crowns of many Kingdoms, and shall be ready by Gods assistance to bestow my Life in their defence; wishing to live no longer than I may see Religion and this Kingdom flourish in all happiness. He is accompa∣nied by the No∣bility to the Kirk of Scoone.Thereafter, the Commissioners of Borroughs and Barons, and the Noblemen accompanied His Majesty to the Kirk of Scoone, in order and rank according to their quality, two and two. The Spurs being carried by the Earl of Egling∣ton. Next, the Sword by the Earl of Rothes. Then the Scepter by the Earl of Crawford and Lindsey: And the Crown by the Marquess of Arguile, imme∣diately before the King. Then came the King, with the great Constable on the right hand, and the great Marshal on his left, his Train being carried by the Lord Ereskine, the Lord Montgomery, the Lord Newbottle, and the Lord Machlelene, four Earls Eldest Sons, under a Canopy of Crimson-Velvet support∣ed by six Earls Sons, to wit, the Lord Drummond, the Lord Carnegie, the Lord Ramsey, the Lord Iohnston, the Lord Brchin, the Lord Yester; and the six Carriers supported by six Noblemens Sons. Thus the Kings Majesty entred the Kirk. The Kirk being fitted and prepared with a Table, whereupon the Honours were laid, and a Chair set in a fitting place for His Majesty to hear a Sermon, over against the Minister, and another Chair on the other side, where He receiv∣ed the Crown, before which there was a Bench decently covered, as also for seats about for Noblemen, Barons and Burgesses; and there being also a Stage in a fit place erected of 24 foot square, about four foot high from the ground, covered with Carpets, with two stairs, one from the West, another to the East; upon which great Stage there was another little Stage erected, some two foot high, ascending by two steps; on which the Throne or Chair of State was set. The Kirk thus fittingly prepared, the Kings Majesty entred the same, accom∣panied as aforesaid; and first set himself in his Chair, for hearing of Sermon, which was Preached by Mr. Robert Douglas,Mr. Robert Douglass preacheth before the King. Prince of Au∣range Christ∣ned. A la mode the Covenant. About this time the young Prince of Aurange was Christened; at which celebration the States General of Holland, of Amsterdam, of Delf, were his God-fathers, and the Queen of Bohemia and the old Princess of Aurange his God-mothers, and was named William Frederick Henry. But this being over, the King intended to march Northward, to hasten the said levies by his presence: but the Nobility and Gentry of the High-lands, promising to effect that affair with all expedition, he went no further than Aber∣deen, having more occasion to continue in the Southern parts to keep the newly re-cemented friendship betwixt both parties entire, and from other new Rup∣tures, and to countenance his friends,Several of the King Friends preferred and intrusted. who now were admitted into the chiefest places of Trust and Offices: Duke Hamilton being received into the Army; Earl of Crawford made Governour of Sterling, Middleton Lieutenant-General, and other Loyal Scotch Lords in Offices and Commands befitting their quality, and to their seats in Parliament, which was to set down the 15 of February; the King diverting himself in the mean time at his house of Falkland, care being taken to secure the Castle of Fife from any Invasion; two attempts that way being already made in the beginning of February, upon Brunt Island; which
nevertheless miscarried, with a great loss of men: but the want of Provisions the English then laboured under, and their having hopes of plenty on that ide (Fife being the fertilest and most abounding place in all Scotland) made them every day contrive and venture a landing thereon,Fife-Castle at∣tempted by the English. and flat-bottomed Boats and Sloops were now a coming from Newcastle and London for the accommoda∣ting their passage. Cromwel likewise was very earnest and intent upon making or finding a way by Sterling; and therefore on the eighth of February he marched thither a∣gain, having been informed of some Fords thereabouts where he might pass his Army, or at least impede their raising of new Forces, and way-lay their marching into England, which was given out as the grand designe, a Force being lef on that side the Water sufficient to sustain any impression of the Eng∣lish; and to that Expedition Duke Hamilton, Duke of Buckingham, Lords Cleaveland, Wentworth, Wilmot, and Colonel Massey, who had a Noble and full Regment, and was to be Major-General, with Titus, and Colonel Graves, were designed. Cromwel, as was said, to this purpose, in very tempestuous weather reached his intended passes; but found the approaches to them so boggy and unpassable, that in the same stress of weather his Army half spoiled with cold and other discommodities, he was forced to retire again, as he had done twice before, (having onely Alarm'd the Scots, and put them into a sudden posture of defence) and to await the time of his Boats arrival, and a happier season of the year. About this time Hume-Castle was taken by Colonel Fenwick,Hume-Castle taken Feb. 4, by Col. Fen∣wick for the Parliament. the Gar∣rison having held it to extremity, being forced to deliver it at mercy, February 4. A Copy of the Governours Answer to the Summons, for the quaint briskness thereof, I have thought fit to pleasure the Reader withal. Right Honourable, I have received a Trumpeter of yours,The Governours Answer to the Summons. as he tells me, without your Pass, (he had forgot it, it seems, and left it behind upon the Table) to Render Hume-Castle to the Lord-General Cromwel; please you I never saw your General, nor know your General: as for Hume-Castle it stands upon a Rock: given at Hume-Castle this day before seven a Clock. So resteth without prejudice of his Native Country, Your most Humble Servant, Iohn Cockburn. Timtallon-Castle,Timtallon-Castle yielded by Sir James Seaton, to the Parliament of England. which had been very prejudicial to the English Sea-traders to Leith, and had taken more men than all the Garrisons in Scotland, having been Besieged above a week by Colonel Monke; upon the 21 of February, af∣ter the Mortar-pieces had played, and a Battery of six Great Guns was raised, yielded to mercy; Sir Iames Seaton the Governour, newly knighted, not being able to obtain any other Condition; but Colonel Monke, out of his usual civility, suffered not a man of them to be stript or plundered. There were 15 Great Guns taken in it, and the passage not onely freed, but an Inlet opened to the Bass Island. General Ruthen Earl of Brentford and Forth,General Ru∣then, Earl of Brentford and Forth, deceas∣eth. David Lesley General for the Scots. nominated to be this Kings General also, deceased about this time, and left that Command without any further competition to David Lesley, old Leven having likewise retired him∣self both from Counsel and Service as superannuated; but indeed disregar∣ded. Our New States at home found it opportune, being grown so potent abroad, and so dreaded at home, to discard their Journey-men of the Council of Sate,A new Council of State, March. whose assistance they were forced to use (though they would not assent and concur with them in their alteration of the Government, and the Murder of the King, &c. but would act as it was now altered) in the rearing of their Model; twenty one of them, such as were instrumental and principal in the Change, as Cromwel, Bradshaw, and others of the Kings Judges, being continued,
and twenty new ones of the same gang were surrogated in the others places: for they could now do the work and receive the wages themselves. To those a power was given of executing the Admiralship to all purposes and intents, as any Admiral of England had executed it before.John Fry one of the Kings Iudges, writts a Book against the Trinity: he is Voted to leave the House, and his Book to be burned. About this time one Iohn Fry another of the Kings Judges, having written a blasphemous Book against the Trinity, but purposely against the Divinity of Christ, as the Socinians teach, was by a Vote disbanded their Company in the House, and his Book ordered to be burnt by the Sheriffs of London: not a word of the Hangman in the Order, for that would have sounded ominous to the whole pack of them, now in pomp and great splendor. The King having visited Dundee, Aberdeen, and other places, accompanied with Arguile, who had raised men for Him in his Countries, returned to St. Iohnstons and the Low-lands, against the sitting down of the Parliament at that City; which was appointed on the 2 of March; in which interim, He gave Audience to a Dutch Envoy,A Dutch Envoy complains to the King of Sir Jo. Greenvile Go∣vernour of the Isle of Scilly, and others. who came to complain of the taking of 20 of their Merchant-ships by Sir Iohn Greenvile, Governour for the King in the Isle of Scilly; to which the King gave a favourable Answer. The Earl of Der∣by likewise seized divers Vessels belonging to the English Irish Trade, and held intelligence with the King in Scotland; having employed one Master Berken∣head in the business, who was taken about the beginning of March by Colonel Lilborne; Sir Philip Musgrave and Sir Theophilus Gilby hardly escaping by row∣ing away in a Boat. Several Dutch ships laden with Ammunition, sent by the Lord Iermin (as the Dutch pretended) arrived likewise at Dundee; where∣abouts, and over all the adjacent parts, Drums were beating, and a speedy march was resolved on. The Earl of Calender, a great Hamiltonian, which party now swayed, being newly come over Sea, an Employment in spight of the Kirk was intended to be conferred on him. On the 27 of February the Prince of Aurange was Buried in great state at Delf in Holland,The Prince of Aurange buri∣ed, Feb. 21. and Interred in the Vault of his famous Predecessors. By the taking of these Papers and Mr. Berkenhead, after the Earl of Derby's designe in Lancashire, whither Massey was to have marched with a flying party (and a kind of a motion he made that way, but immediately retreated) the States at Westminster to exact scrutiny addrest themselves: and having traced it, gave order for the apprehension of one Thomas Cook of Grays-Inne Esquire,Tho. Cook of Grays-Inne Esq. committed to the Tower. who being brought, and attending at the Council-door, gave his Keeper the slip, and was pursued with a Proclamation, and 100 pounds offered to any should take him and bring him in; and was taken thereupon the next Week in an Upholsters-house in London,Maj. General Harrison or∣dered to march into Lanca∣shire. and committed to the Tower; and Major-Ge∣neral Harrison was ordered to march speedily into Lancashire, to attend all mo∣tions and designes in those parts. This Month Maj. Harrison of Guernsey Island (kept for the Parliament) having a designe upon Cornet-Castle (held by Colonel Burgess for the King, being now and then relieved with Shallops and Boats which struck in thither from the Coast of France) attempted it by Storm, having false information that most of the Garrison were dead, and the rest weak and feeble; but were so stoutly received, that very few that Engaged got off again, the Tide too com∣ing in and drowning many of them, to the utter disheartning of them from any future Assault; so that they resolved to try what fair means would do, and by a sum of Money amounting to 1500 pounds,Cornet-Castle delivered by Col. Burgess to M. Harrison for the Parlia∣ment. with other good Conditions and Indemnity, which (there being no likelihood of doing His Majesty any Service by longer keeping it, relief also being so very scarce, difficult, and uncertain) was at last accepted, and that little Citadel delivered into their Hands. The Irish de∣feated at Fi∣nagh, March 13.In Ireland, the Forces there remaining being now under the sole Command of the Marquess of Clanrickard, whom the Earl of Castlehaven did to the last assist in the Kings Service, being drawn to the relief of Finagh, were there to∣tally routed; 800 taken and killed, Colonel Macdonnel, his Lieutenant-Colonel
and Major taken prisoners, Colonel Mac Hugh and Colonel Caban killed, and 376 Officers besides taken; upon which followed the Rendition of Finagh upon Articles. After these successes, several Officers having liberty to go for England, it was the fortune of the Colonels Axtell, Sadler, the Irish Adjutant-General, and Colonel Le Hunt to be taken Prisoners by a Frigat of Scilly, and there Lan∣ded and Imprisoned, till such time as that Island acknowledged the possession of the States of England; who having erected their High Court of Iustice, had in revenge of Dorislaus and Ascham Sentenced Sir Henry Hide Cosen to Sir Edward then Lord-Chancellor with the King, for taking upon him the quality of an Em∣bassador from His Majesty to the Grand Seignior at Constantinople, and deman∣ding Audience in his Name; which they aggravated with imputations of his designe of seizing those Merchants Estates there, and Affronting Sir Tho∣mas Bendish the old Resident there with his new Commission. It booted nor availed Sir Henry (who at his Tryal (having been long out of England) would have used the Italian Tongue as the readiest for his defence; which was also charged upon him as his vanity and pride) to deny, extenuate or justi∣fie the several parts of his accusation:Sir Henry Hide Beheaded June 4, in London. his Name was guilt enough. He was Sentenced to be Beheaded; which Death he suffered against the Old Exchange on Cornhill, with as much courage of minde, as weakness of Body, and is justly inscribed to the Roll of Martyrs. Captain Brown Bushel,Cpt. Brown Bushel Execu∣ted, Mar. 29. (who had delivered Scarborough to Sir Hugh Cholmly, then revolted in the year 1643. from the Par∣liament, and being Prisoner at Hull for the same, had been exchanged by Ho∣tham, then winding about to his Allegiance) suffered in the same manner the 29 of March. But it is not a rude Prolepsis of the time, to assigne him (because of the nearness of their Deaths for the same cause of Loyalty) his place in this year, in the Company of Sir Henry Hide. Yet before we conclude the Revolution of this year, we must adde one of the most remarkable occurrences in it, viz. the Embassadors sent by this State to that of the Low Countries, who departed hence about March the 10, and landed at Rot∣terdam the 14, being met by the way by two Yachts of State, and handsomely ac∣commodated at the English-house there, by some of the said Company. The Names of them were, Chief-Justice Saint Iohn of the Common-Pleas, formerly the Kings Sollicitor, and the Earl of Straffords vehement Adversary; and Mr. Walter Strickland; stiled in their Credentials the Lords Embassadors Extraordi∣nary from the Parliament of England, and were the first that they ever sent to any Forrain Princes; for as from Kings and Sovereigns they had just cause to fear their united Forces, to chastise that infamous Regicide, whose example was so dangerous to themselves. Anno Dom. 1651. ON the 30 of March (attended by a gallant Retinue of their own, and such as that State sent with Coaches) they were received to Audience,The Lord Saint John and Strickland Embassadors to Holland. They desire a firm League. where Saint Iohn in a well-composed Speech, very gravely declared, that notwith∣standing several injuries received by the English Commonwealth and Subjects from that State; yet the Parliament had sent them first to make a firm League and Friendship with them, if they should think fit. 2. That to that purpose they would renew that most amicable Treaty of Commerce, made between the King of England and the Duke of Burgundy, their then Sovereign in 1495. 3. He set forth those many advantages in point of Trade and Navigation the Dutch might receive from England by such a League, discoursing of the commodi∣ousness and Excellent Situation of the Ports and Harbours, and other Emolu∣ments. 4. He expressed the just resentment of the Parliament for the Death of Doctor Darislaus, and that he doubted not but their High and Mighty Lord∣ships
would give satisfaction therein, and cause Justice to be Executed upon those Offenders. Which said, a Committee was appointed to confer with him further, and he conducted in the same manner as he came, to his own Lodg∣ings. The States Ge∣neral shew no forwardness to this new friend∣ship.But the States General shewed no great readiness to embrace this new Friend∣ship of their Rival States, although the Province of Holland did endeavour to promote it; for the Prince of Aurange's Interest was yet very potent in their Assemblies, which was the reason no Address had been made before in his life∣time from the Parliament, who very much courted this peoples Amity, not onely from the nearness and likeness of both their rises to be Commonwealths; but for that no danger was so neer, and to be feared elsewhere from the Interest and Alliance of the King. But the people were far more averse to any accommo∣dation with Traytors and Murderers, as they called these Ministers and their followers; which Clamours were heightned by the Royalists, then yet in great numbers residing there. The Duke of York being then in the Country with the Princess of Aurange his Sister, as also the Queen of Bohemia, and Prince Edward her Son, who first gave these Embassadors an Affront as they chanced to meet him in their Coach, taking the Air neer the Hague, with his Sister the Princess Henrietta in his Hand, where in indignation he gave them the opprobrious names of Dogs and Traytors.The Embassa∣dors affronted by Prince Ed∣ward son to the Queen of Bo∣hemia. The next day several uproars were made a∣bout their House, as if there were a resolution to Storm it; nor was it safe for them or any of their Gentlemen to stir abroad, and several advices were given them of designed attempts upon their persons: Of both these affronts and in∣juries they complained to the States;They complain to the States, and have a Guard appoin∣ted them. who after a long and tedious delay, sum∣moned Prince Edward to appear and answer; but he pleaded he was a Prince of the Empire, and Subject to no other Jurisdiction; and for the other appoin∣ted them a Corps du guard to secure the House; and by a Proclamation prohi∣bited all manner of injuries or violence to be done unto them: but notwith∣standing the said indignities were yet committed frequently. In this sort they continued there, expecting an Answer and Conclusion (which Mounsieur Bellieur did likewise hinder what in him lay, his Servants and attendants being as quarrelsome and slighting of these English as any whosoever) and in the interim six of the chiefest Gentlemen of their Retinue travelling upwards the Country, were met by a Lorain-Colonel one Harter then going to the Spaw, and kept Prisoners for a Ransome, which at length was paid to the Spanish-Governour of Limburgh, into whose hands upon a remove they lighted. This troublesome delay so displeased their Westminster-masters, that on the 18 of May the Parliament recalled them; which being notified to the States, they seemed surprized, and by consent of the Embassadors sent away an Express, accompa∣nied with Mr. Thurloe, Saint Iohn's Secretary, to London, to desire a longer re∣spit, in hope of a satisfactory Conclusion. But after a vainr Expectation there∣of [saving this dubious insignificant Resolution, as the States called it, In haec verba, — The States General of the Netherlands having heard the report of their Commissioners having had a Conference the day before with the Lords Embas∣sadors of the Commonwealth of England, do declare, That for their better satisfa∣ction, they do wholly and fully condescend and agree unto the 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, and 11 Propositions of the Lords Embassadors (which were the most unconcerning) and also the said States do agree unto the 1, 2, 3, and 5 Articles of the year 1495. Therefore the States do expect in the same manner as full and clear an Answer from the Lords Embassadors, upon the 36 Articles delivered in by their Commissioners the 24 of June 1647. — This indifferency being maintained and strengthned by the presence and Arguments used in a Speech made by Mr. Macdonald the Kings Agent, then at that time Resident at the Hague, who also printed their Articles or Propositions, with his Comments on them.] another Months time being spent,They depart for England June 20. they were finally remanded, and departed on the 20 of Iune, re in∣fecta, to the trouble (as was pretended) of most of the Lords of Holland. When Saint Iohn gave the States Commissioners who came to take leave of
him,Saint John's Speech at his departure. these parting words, — My Lords, You have an Eye upon the Event of the Affairs of the Kingdom of Scotland, and therefore do refuse the Friendship we have offered; now I can assure you that many in the Parliament were of opinion that we should not have come hither, or any Embassadors to be sent to you, before they had superated thse matters between them and that King, and then expected your Embassadors to us. I nw perceive our errour, and that those Gentlemen were in the right: in a short time you shall see that business ended, and then you will come to us and seek what we have freely offered, when it shall perplex you that you have refused our proffer. — And it ell ou as he had Divined it. Upon his com∣ing home, after those welcomes and thanks given him by the Parliament, he omitted not to aggravate those rudenesses done him, and to exasperate them a∣gainst the Dutch: and the angry effects of his Counsels and report soon after ap∣peared. On the 9 of April, in order and designe to abolish all Badges of the Norman Tyranny (as they were pleased to call it) now that the English Nation had obtained their natural Freedom, they resolved to Manumit the Laws, and restore them to their Original Language; which they did by this ensuing additional Act; and forthwith all or most of the Law-books were turned into English, (according to the Act a little before, for turning Proceedings of Law into English) and the rest written afterwards in the same Tongue; but so little to the benefit of the people, that as Good store of Game is the Country-mans Sor∣row, so the multitude of Sollicitors and such like, brought a great deal of trou∣ble to the Commonwealth, not to speak of more injuries by which that most honourable profession of the Law was profaned and vilified, as being a dis∣course out of my Sphere. At the same time they added a second Act, explana∣tory of this same wonderful Liberty: both which here follow. Be it Enacted by this present Parliament,The Law and its Proceedings turned into English, Apr. and by the Authority thereof, That the Translation into English of all Writs, Process and Returns thereof, and of all Patents, Commissions, and all Proceedings whatsoever▪ in any Court of Iustice with∣in this Commonwealth of England, and which concerns the Law and Admini∣stration of Iustice, to be made and framed into the English Tongue, according to an Act, entituled, An Act for the turning the Books of the Law, and all Pro∣ces and Proceedings in Courts of Iustice into English, be, and are hereby refer∣ed to the Speaker of the Parliament, the Lords Commissioners of the Great Seal of England, the Lord Chief Iustice of the Upper-Bench, the Lord Chief Iustice of the Common-pleas, and the Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer, for the time bing, or any two or more of them: and what shall be agreed by them, or any two or more of them, in Translating the same, the Lords Commissioners shall and may affix the Great Seal thereunto, in Cases where the same is to be fixed: And so that no miss-Translation, or Variation in Form by reason of Translation, or part of Pro∣ceedings or Pleadings already begun being in Latine, and part in English, shall be no Errour, nor void any Proceedings by reason thereof. Provided, That the said recited Act shall not extend to the certifying beyond the Seas any Case or Proceedings in the Court of Admiralty; but that in such Cases the Commissioners and Proceedings may be certified in Latin as formerly they have been. An Act for continuing the Assessment of 120000 l. per mensem, for five Months, from the 25 day of April 1651. for maintenance of the Armies in England, Ireland, and Scotland, was likewise passed. By our way to Scotland,A new Welch Insurrection started. we must digress to a petty commotion in Wales; Hawarden, and Holt-Castle Seized, and a Hubbub upon the Mountains, which engaged Colonel Dankins to a craggy expedition; Sir Thomas Middleton pur∣ged, and the Coast cleared of a Presbyterian discontent, upon which score the noise was raised; but the story not taking, Presto on, all's gone, and the invisi∣ble Royalists cannot be found, or sequestred for their combination in Lancashire-plot,
now started, and hotly sented, and pursued by the Grandees of the Coun∣cil of State, and the Blood-hounds of their High Court of Iustice again unken∣nelled: of which more presently. Blackness-Ca∣stle delivered to Cromwel.Blackness-Castle was now delivered to General Cromwel in Scotland, on the first of April (while he yet continued sick of an Ague,) General Dean being newly arrived with Money and supplies from England two days before: and on the 11 of the same Month the Scotch Parliament sat down, where they re∣scinded that often-mentioned Act of Classes of Delinquents; whereby way was made to the restoring of the Loyal Nobility to their seats in Parliament:The Loyal No∣bility in Scot∣land restored to their Seats in Parliament. and an Act passed from the perceipt of the dangerous consequences of the Western Remonstrance; that it should be Treason to hold correspondence with, or abet the Enemy. Cromwel having already made another journey into those parts, to carry on his business at Glascow, which place had been infamed at the begin∣nig of the Scotch Troubles, and was now by the just Judgement of God the Stage designed to act the Catastrophe, and last act of three Kingdoms Ruine: For I must remember the Reader,The Kirk con∣vd at Glas∣cow. that here the first Scene of our misery was laid, by the illegal convention of the general Assembly of the Kirk. E. of Egling∣ton surprized in his designe of raising For∣ces for the King.By his Forces thereabouts, the Earl of Eglington, with his second Son, and some other persons of Note, were surprized in their designe of raising Forces for the King at Dunbarton: His Majesty still continuing at Sterling. London the Chan∣cellor being now outed of his Presidentship, Mr. Gutbery, and Bennet, and other Kirk-blades Committed for their refractoriness to the Kings Authority, which yet they would not own but as subordinate to the General Assembly. But for the prevention of such future sidings and divisions those men had caused, a Com∣mittee by Parliament was now empowred to manage the War, and substitute Officers, without any more impertinent reverences to the Presbytery; the King being also declared Generalissimo. Cromwel after some debates and pub∣like disputes with the Ministers, viz. Gillespy, Rutherford, &c. of Glascow afore∣said, concerning the lawfulness of his Invasion, which he performed; as he said, in much weakness of (both Argument and) Body, seeing there was no drawing the Scot out that way to fight, which way they intended for an un∣disturbed march, marched back to Edenburgh by the beginning of May, (and in his way burned the Lady Kilsithes House,Cromwel burneth the La∣dy Kilsithes house. for holding intelligence with the King) having notice of the arrival of his Boats at Leith, for the Transpor∣tation of his Army into Fife; which was the last remedy; the failure of Vi∣ctuals in the Scotch Camp, which therefore they should be forced to abandon and march, proving a meer delusion. In the mean while, on the 15 of April, in a mist, the Lord Montgomery, Son to the Earl of Eglington, and Lord Cranston, with 500 Horse and Dragoons marched from Sterling, and resolutely charged into Lithgow, (a Garrison the English had fortified upon their first march to Sterling) to the Market-place, whence having taken what Prisoners they could in hast meet with, they retreated; and being pursued by Major Sydenham of Sir Arthur Haslerig's Regiment,Maj. Syden∣ham slain, and his party de∣feated, Apr. 15 by the Lord Montgomery, and Lord Cranston. the Go∣vernour, in place of Colonel Sanderson lately deceased, they faced about and routed him, killing most of his Followers, to the number of some 60; himself being wounded mortally in the Groyn, whereof not long after he died, that Government being twice vacated already. The Lord Register Warriston now had a Pass from Sterling to come to Edenburgh about the Records, and the ships loading that was staid after Cromwels Pass and permission by Articles; and pro∣secuted the business so to effect, that the said Goods, Papers, and lading got before him to Sterling, May 31. whither he had no more mind (after Cromwel and he had conferred) to return. The Reduction of Scilly-Island in May.The Dutch had now sent Van Trump their Admiral with 12 sail of Men of War to Scilly Island, to demand satisfaction for 20 ships which Sir Iohn Greenvile the Governour had seized; and had further instructions to Treat with the said Governour: which, besides the aim this State had to integrate all the An∣tient Dominions of England under a new Commonwealth, did very much enjea∣lous
them that that important place might be put into Dutch hands: thereup∣on a Fleet was presently manned for the Reduction of that place, and Sir George Ayscue (who was then preparing for a Voyage to Barbadoes in the Rain∣bow and two other Men of War upon the same account) was ordered to at∣tend General Blake in that Service, who Imbarqued in the Phoenix-Frigat; and on the 18 of May with great resolution he landed some of his Forces in the Islands of Tresco and Brier, which were as stoutly defended by the Noble Colo∣nel Wogan, who in his Voyage from Ireland had taken up Arms here for the King again, and made a very great slaughter of the first Invaders: but footing being gained by fresh Boats succeeding the other, he past over to the Isle of St. Maries, both more naturally and Artificially Fortified, and of very difficult ac∣cess. Some few attempts were nevertheless made; but rather to shew there was an Enemy there, who would fain be admitted, and who otherwise might prove very troublesome to their Trade: and to that effect a Summons or invitati∣on was sent unto the Governour; who having (as it was believed) the Kings leave for what he should do therein, and knowing with England it would return, and without would be of little use to the Crown; after some Messages accepted of a Treaty; which after caresses and civilities on both sides, concluded in a Rendition of the Isle,St Maries Island surren∣dred June 2, by Sir John Greenvile, to Gen. Blake and Sir Geo▪ Ayscue. on the second of Iune, upon very Honourable Terms. The Governour Sir Iohn, the son of Noble Sir Bevil Greenvile, after Earl of Bath, a person always much in the Kings Favour, receiving a considerable sum of Money and Indemnity for his Estate and person, freed from all manner of Arrests and molestations whatsoever: the Officers and Souldiers to go whi∣ther they would; of whom, Sir Fulk Hunks with Doctor Lesley the Bishop of Down sailed for Ireland, Colonel Wogan for Scotland, to pursue the quarrel there also. In all, there went out 9 Colonels, 4 Lieutenant-Colonels, 10 Serjeant-Majors, 60 Captains, (saith the Catalogue) 40 Lieutenants, and other under-Officers of a proportionable number: which over, Sir George Ayscue proceeded in his Voyage. Prince Rupert was now at Sea from Toulon,Pr. Rupert and Pr. Mau∣rice at Sea from Toulon. with five Men of War, and two Fire-ships, sailing the Mediterranean-sea, in Company with his Brother Prince Maurice; and much discourse there was of the Duke of Lorrain's shipping and Transporting some Forces for Ireland, by an Agreement made with the Irish, and promoted at the French Court (whither the Duke of York was now ex∣pected, and Sir Edward Hide arrived out of Spain) and several Provinces and Cities were by report assigned him for his security; but the whole story proved meer Castles in the Air: for it's supposed the Duke was unwilling to come where his plundering Troops should finde Blows instead of Booty; and he had his own Country and Dominions to regain first.An Agent from the D. of Flo∣rence to the Parliament of England. An Agent likewise came now to the Parliament of England, and owned them as such, from the great Duke of Florence, May the 21. The Lord Howard of Escrick a Peer, who had got himself returned a Burgess for Carlisle, was about this time convicted of Bribery, dismissed the House, and committed to the Tower.Lord Howard committed to the Tower for Bri∣bery. Cromwel being at Edenburgh, having notice how the King lay encamped at Sterling, Lesley's Foot quartering on the South-side, and Middleton's on the North-side of the Park encompassed with a Stone-wall; and that abundance of Provision was brought in daily, supposing they would march, drew all his For∣ces out of the West with as much care and conduct as could be, and Encamped likewise in the Fields by Edenburgh in a readiness for them, whether to march or fight:Cromwel sick May. But in the mean time he was taken very ill of his Ague, so that Do∣ctor Wright, and Doctor Bates (an eminent Physitian, and a concealed Roy∣alist, as appears by a polite Piece of his, written some time before, entituled, Elenehus Motuum nuperorum in Anglia) were sent down to attend his Cure; and many blithe and anxious discourses were concerning his Death, as either partie wished, for he was brought very low; but being recovered to some degree of Health by these Gentlemen, it was presently sounded like a Proclamation; and I have therefore thought fit to transcribe a piece of the Letter, that the World
may see what queer Hypocrites his Attendants, like himself and his times, were, by the pious Nonsense and most Blasphemous Flattery of this Apocryphal Epistle. If I knew the Secretary or Inditer, I would Chronicle him for his Pen. — Truly Sir,Part of a Let∣ter from one of Cromwels Creatures. His Life and Health are exceeding precious, and I account it every day a greater mercy than other that we have his Life, observing that every dispensation of God draws him nearer to himself, and makes him more Heavenly and Holy, and by consequence more useful for his Generation, in the management of that power God hath Committed to him, &c. An Act of Ob∣livion in Scot∣land.The Parliament of Scotland after long debate had Passed an Act of Olivion for all things done thitherto; inviting thereby all Parties to joyn in carrying on the Service of King and Kingdom; and a new Engagement with the Sacrament was taken by the Kings Army to adhere to him: whereupon all Faction and Division seemed to be laid aside; the Royalists and Kirk-men good Friends,The Royalists ad Kirk-men good friends. Earl of Calen∣der Commander in chief of their new Levies. and the Earl of Calendar made Commander in chief of the new Levies: and this newly made Peace and Friendship was no more than just necessary, for the Wolf was at the Door, and ready to seize. In the interim, it was thought expedient for some of their Horse to march to Dumfrize in the West of Scotland, now deserted by the Enemy, and to make more considerable Levies. The Presbyteri∣an Ministers seized by the Council of State, in order to their Tryal, May.On the 7 of May, Mr. Love, Mr. Ienkins, Mr. Drake, and other Presbyte∣rians had been seized by order of the Council of State, in order to their Tryal be∣fore the High Court of Iustice, as yet standing by Adjournments (and having three times convened before them old and resolute Sir Iohn Stawel, who so gravel∣led them, that at the third Hearing they were forced to desist from the pursuit of his Blood; and making report thereof to the Parliament, they Voted the sale of his Estate, giving him sad cause to complain with Iob, With the Skin of my Teeth am I escaped; making an exception to that general Rule, — Vesti∣gia cerno omnia te adversum spectantia nulla retrorsum: He first escaping Condem∣nation at that Tribunal.) Now the aforesaid Ministers, with some Laicks (En∣gaged in the said practise for the King) were brought thither; and Mr. Love first and principally charged with High Treason against the State,Mr. Love charged with High Treason. for holding correspondence with the King and his Party, and supplying them with Money, contrary to an Act of Parliament in that case provided. After several appear∣ances, in all which Mr. Love very undauntedly disputed the Court, one Mr. Iackson a Minister denying to give in Evidence against him,Mr. Jackson fined 500 l. and committed to the Fleet, for refusing to give Evidence against Mr. Love. was fined 500 l. and committed to the Fleet (which made him more passionate and confident) but the accusation being at last proved against him, he desired Lawyers to assist him, and had them assigned; but they not having taken the Engagement, would not be admitted to Plead, Mr. Hales onely excepted. In sum, his main defence appearing to be equivocal, in that he averr'd he did not personal∣ly correspond, neither Write, nor receive Letters, nor send any, or receive any Money to that use himself; and to consist also of an allegation of his merits, mixt with invectives against the Court and its Authority, which he aided with Scripture-proof, in an Oration of two hours, on the 15 of Iune: On the 5 of Iuly they proceeded to Sentence;Mr. Love Sen∣tenced, July 5. which was, that he should be Beheaded: the time appointed, the 15 day of the same Month, which by several Petitions of his Wife and others was respited to the 15 of August. Mr. Potter and Mr. Gib∣bons Sentenced, July 25.And in the mean time, on the 18 of the same Month, Mr. Potter an Apothe∣cary in Black-friers, and one Mr. Gibbons, were tryed before the same Court-Potter confessed, and craved their mercy; Gibbons pleaded matter of Law: but on the 25 of Iuly they were both Sentenced as Mr. Love, who not coming up to the Parliaments expectation of discovery, and more humble submission and acknowledgement of their Authority, and the King advanced into England, had his Reprieve cassated by the Parliament,Mr. Love and Mr. Gibbons▪ Executed on Tower-hill. who referring him to the High Court of Iustice, they ordered his Execution with Gibbons on the 22 of August; which was done on Tower-hill accordingly. Mr. Love resolutely enough, and I am loath to prejudice his Memory; for his designe was good proof of his
Loyalty: Gibbons bewrayed something of pusillanimity, as being a Taylor, and after, a kind of Sollicitor to Mr. Hollis, for whose relation more than his own guilt, he was thought fit to suffer; for when the Blow was just a coming upon his Neck, he turned his Eyes and Face towards the Executioner, in hopes (or desire at least) of some Reprieve; but present Death freed him with o∣ther troubles and sollicitudes of Life from that sudden anxiety. And so we have done with our High Court of Iustice for this Session. This High Court of Iustice was so much their darling, that the antient Judica∣tures had little or no respect, especially they could not endure any of those Courts that more immediately related to the King: and as they had changed the name of his Bench to the Vpper-Bench; so now, that there might remain no foot∣steps of a Court,An Act for a∣bolishing the Marshals-Court in Southwark. or the Majesty of a Prince, they abolished the Marshals-Court at Southwarke, which was a kinde of a peculiar Kings-Bench for the Verge, that is, 12 miles circuit every way round the Kings Residence and Palace (that there might be no annoyance nor disorder committed neer his Person.) It was re∣solved therefore Iuly the 8, that the Court of the Knight-Marshal held in South∣warke, should be from and after the first of August next, absolutely dissolved and taken away, and no further Suit, Action, or Proceeding to be had there∣upon. About this time they passed another Act,Another for the sale of Delin∣quents Lands. which as that struck at the Root of the Royalty of England, so this lopt the Branches that clave to it, viz. An Act for the sale of Delinquents Lands, such as had with the utmost of their Lives and Fortunes served the late King in our unnatural Wars. It will be needless and too bulky to name them particularly; we will mention onely some of the principal: the Duke of Buckingham, the Marquesses of Newcastle, Worcester, Win∣chester; the Earls of Cleveland, Norwich, Scarsdale; the Lords Hapton, Wilmot, Langdale, Gerard, Cottington, Iermin, Percy, Culpeper, Hide, and lastly the Lord Craven, whose Princely Estate was enough to help them to a quarrel against him; which they managed by a perjured Fellow one Faulkner,Faulkner a perjured wit∣ness against the Lord Craven. into a suspition of Treason▪ he deposing that the said Lord Craven had delivered a Petition to the King at Breda, from him, and other Cavalier-Officers, wherein the Parlia∣ment were termed Bloody and Barbarous Rebels and Traytors. This wretched subornation was laid to the charge of the Lord Gray of Grooby, who afterwards sold his own Inheritance to purchase some of this Lord's, whom the Parlia∣ment had peremptorily summoned to appear by a day at Westminster▪ which he wisely declining, as having heard sufficiently of their High Court of Iustice, they proceeded to sale; and although afterwards he convicted the abovesaid Villain of wilful Perjury, and afterwards prosecuted his right before a Committee ap∣pointed to adjudge claims, where Bradshaw had the Chair; (who to captate an opinion of Justice, seemed to favour the merit of the Cause, and gave a reso∣lution accordingly:) yet could his Lordship by no means recover his possession; being baukt and wearied with a fruitless Suit and Attendance during the Usur∣pation. To single also out of the number of the Honourable the Loyal Commoners, Sir Iohn Stawel, who for all the Honour of the Sword, his Articles at Exeter (which as they saved his Life, should in the same manner have preserved his Estate) was now put into this Black Bill of Forfeiture and Attainder; the Estates of them all being vested in the hands of William Skinner,The Estates of the Royalists put to sale. William Ro∣binson, Sampson Sheffield, Samuel Gookin, Henry Seely, William Lisle, and Arthur Samuel, as Trustees; Robert Manwaring Register-Accountant, Randal Man∣waring Comptroller, and Iohn Baker Surveyor-General. These were again named to the same trusts in the second Edition of this libellous Act, which be∣gan with a Preface of Treason and Rebellion against the Commonwealth: and great fear there was that such Acts would at last become as constant as those of the Monthly Assessments, till they had not left a Royalist but what was en∣slaved and sold. And that they might appear the more like to what they had reduced them
in this emptiness and meanness of Estate,The Honours of the Royalists given by the King since Jan. 1641. abolish∣ed. they Enacted the stripping them of those Honours which their Loyalty and worth had purchased them, that they might be fit Peers to sit with any Lower-House, and the Gentry be sutable Mates and Company to their finical Rabble, who had now Coached their Fel∣low-Servant-maids, with all the other distinctions of Gentility, even to the laughter of the enraged people; who perceived they had Fought for those, that were so much uninteressed in the Quarrel, as to what they had to lose, as the meanest of those wretches, who sneak in for Drink to Games and Match∣es, have in the Stake and Adventure. It was made by these men, a penalty of 5 l. for any Knight, proportionably 50 l. for a Duke, to receive a Title which had been conferred on him since Ianuary 1641. And the several Patentees or Titulado's were Commanded to bring in their Patents by such a time, or else to incur worser Forfeitures. But this not being such an Affront and Indignity as the abrogating the power of the whole Peerage, was taken but for a brava∣do; nor did I ever hear any one that paid for giving or receiving this due civili∣ty; which even such of them as had Breeding and Manners, would be guilty of themselves. The Irish affairs June.In Ireland the Lord Broghal had given a notable defeat to the Lord Musker∣ry; who having beaten up his Quarters could not so conveniently and nimbly retire, but Brogal was at his Heels:Lord Brog∣hall defeats the Lord Musker∣ry. It was a dispute with all Cavalry, no Foot on either side; which before had not happened in Ireland: there was loss on both sides; but the least thereof with the Victory fell to the English. A∣bout the same time Sir Charles Coot having attended a Pass over the Shanon,Sir Charles Coot succes∣full. which was guarded all along the other side by the help of three Cotts, and a Boat, landed some few Forces upon one of the Enemies Guards, (who suspected no Boats possible to be had without danger of sinking as they passed) and mastered it; whereupon all the Irish Forces disposed thereabouts in several Posts, ran away to Limerick, leaving the River free; which was laid over pre∣sently with a Bridge to bear Horse and Artillery. Athlone a week before had been delivered by the Lord Dillon to the said Sir Charles; by which means the whole Irish Council and the Marquess of Clanriekard,The Irish Coun∣cil and Com∣manders in great straights. Scots Leaguer in Tor-wood. and Castlehaven, were put into great straights and confusion of Councils. The English Army in Scotland was now in motion for grass, and marched upon their old designe of Sterling to Newbridge, so to Lithgow, from whose Castle-Battlements they might espy the Tents of the Scotch Army, Encamped in Tor-wood, some four miles off this side Sterling: (whither Warriston was now summoned by the Commissioners of the Assembly peremptorily by the third of Iuly) having cast up a regular and well-fortified Line with Bulworks mounted with Guns, and having a River behind them, which they might pass at plea∣sure: in this posture they awaited the English, who coming up and facing them the third of Iuly, in the night following the Scots drew up their Cannon, and planted them on the brow of the Hill, and next morning saluted Cromwel with 50 Great Guns; but with little Execution; which made him quickly draw out of shot, and give over his once-begun resolution of attaquing them at so much disadvantage. The English therefore marched back again: Major-General Lambert being sent from Glascow a week after to view the Passes; which he reported by reason of the boggy approaches there, to be very hazar∣dous. Upon their departure from Lithgow to Glascow the Scots removed from Tor-wood, and Encamped at Kilfith, a place environed with insuperable desen∣ces, having a Bog on one hand, and craggy Mountains on the other: but the English Army having eaten up all at Glascow and those parts, and trod down the Corn standing, that the Scots might finde no sustenance that way, if they should march, appearing and marching with great noise; on the one side, they imaging the English meant to clap in between them and Sterling,Cromwel stor∣meth Calen∣dar-house, the defendants put to the Sword. haste∣ned back again to their old Line at Tor-wood, Iuly 13, whither Cromwel fol∣lowed, and to provoke them to an Engagment, Stormed Calendar-house in their view, and put all the Defendants except the Governour to the Sword, and
then seeing there was no possibility of fighting with them, but that they were resolved to keep them in play, till Winters scarcity of Horse-meat should make them give over and depart the Kingdom; he Encamped himself, awaiting the success of his designe by Boat into Fife: In the mean while, Newark-house,Newark-house and two others taken. lying, before Dunbarton-Castle, was taken, and two Houses more. Prince Rupert, and Captain Pen Commander of a Fleet in the Streights for the Parliament, were now both at Sea together; but it was not their fortune to meet one another. The Prince had lately taken a Spanish Ship,Pr. Rupert takes a rich Spanish ship. worth 100000 Crowns, and had put forth a Declaration, shewing the reason thereof, (satisfying partly his own Revenge for the Spanish injuries towards the Palati∣nate) which were, First, That Kings giving Protection and Free Port to the Kings Rebels, and Owning them, and denying the like to His Majesties ships, contrary to the Treaty between both Crowns; his forcing the Marriners that were put on shore by Blake, on board the said Admiral, and making them serve the Rebels a∣gainst their wills, &c. The like he declared against the Genoese, from whom he had taken another Vessel; the objections against them being their Entertain∣ment of Captain Hall, sent into those Seas before Pen. As for the recognition of this State, the Genoese did not that till afterwards, when they saw what Influ∣ence the potent Fleets of this Commonwealth had upon all the Trade of Italy. With these two Vessels and his own Men of War, the Prince sailed to the Isles of Madera, upon a designe against the Spanish Plate-fleet, and Domingo; but his ship the Reformation was so crazy and leaking, that they could hardly bring her thither, where it had been happier she had been broken up, than so bung∣lingly mended; those Carpenters and Ship-wrights not well understanding the Repair of such our Ships; but indeed she was too Old for any slight Remedy. While Cromwel attended the Scots at Tor-wood, within a mile and a half of them at Falkirk, at length the long-expected success of a Transportation in∣to Fife manifested it self; for Colonel Overton with 1400 Foot of his own, and Colonel Daniels Regiment, with four Troops of Horse of Colonel Lydcots, having with the loss of a few men gained a place called North-ferry on the other side the Frith, on the 17 of Iuly had as the time served intrenched themselves; and before the Scotch Army then beyond Sterling could reach them with a suf∣ficient Force to drive them out, Major-General Lambert was passed over to them, it being an Arm of the Sea, on the 19 being Saturday, in the afternoon; whereupon Sir Iohn Brown Major-General of the Scotch Forces, drew down up∣on them; but Lambert with his Foot defended himself till his Horse came o∣ver, the next day, and then he drew out; which Brown perceiving, and that the Enemy was stronger than himself, he wheeled about, intending a retreat; but being closely followed, he Embatteled himself on the side of a Hill, inten∣ding to protract time (unless Lambert would venture up to him) till more Forces then neer him were come up. Lambert perceived as much, and there∣fore committing the right Wing of the Horse to Okey, himself in the Battel, and Overton in the Reserve, and Colonel Lydcot in the left Wing of Horse; a furious fight began,A fight in Fife between Sir John Brown and Maj. Gea. Lambert, July 20. The Scots worsted, Sir John Brown taken, and a while after dies. Okey couragiously charging up the Hill, and was as gallant∣ly charged by the Scots Lanciers; the Highland-Foot did likewise good service, for the whole Army, was in a trice Engaged, and in a trice ceased, the brunt of it not continuing above a quarter of an hour: the slaughter was very great, occasioned (said the English) by reason of the Highlanders not understan∣ding English, and so uncapable of crying Quarter; but by others it's more just∣ly imputed to Command, for that the Highlanders were most hateful of all Scots to the Army, as being more Loyal than the other, the onely cause of the Quarrel. However it were, here were no less than 2000 slain, and some 1600 taken Prisoners; few of 4500, as they were computed (the English far Excee∣ding them in number) escaped with the lamentable tidings. Sir Iohn Brown their Major-General, and Colonel Buchanan and Scot were taken Prisoners: in which condition Brown died not long after at Leith.
Before this defeat the Scots marched over Sterling-bridge to step this Inva∣sion; but understanding the remedilessness of it, and Cromwel marching to∣wards Sterling, made him to retreat thither again: in the mean while most of the Army was boated over. Major-General Harrison who had attended about Carlisle and Cumberland, to stop the Kings advance if He should have come that way, when Cromwel lay about Edenburgh, which was the shorter cut to London, was now marched by Edenburgh way, and the charge of the Army on this side the Frith (with Colonel Riches and Colonel Bartons Forces then upon the same march) committed to his Command, while the English Army in Fife advanced to Saint Iohnstons, from whence the Parliament and General Assembly had fled to Dundee, affrighted with this news.Inchigarvey-Castle and Brunt-Island delivered to the English. Inchigarvey-Castle standing in the midst of the Frith, having been delivered on the 24 of Iuly with the Guns therein, and Brunt-Island followed the said fortune on the 27, on which day Cromwel having sate down before Saint Iohnstons with his whole Army, though a relief of two Regiments of Foot had been newly put in from over the Water, yet despairing of holding out against so prevalent and nume∣rous an Enemy,St. Johnstons delivered to Cromwel. upon the Englishes opening their Sluces, Rendred upon Brunt-Island Articles, which were the usual Military ones of Drums-beating, &c. on the third of August. On the first whereof, Cromwel had notice of the Kings re∣moval from Sterling; but nevertheless resolved to proceed with his business at Saint Iohnstons; which being thus over, he marched his men with all hast to Brunt-Island, where he Ferried to Leith, leaving General Monke to Command in Scotland, with 7000, and on his march to reduce Sterling, and hastned after the King. The King mar∣ches for Eng∣land, July 21.It had all along been the Kings desire to have marched into England before this fatal opportunity, and His coming was expected by His Friends every day, though in no condition able to help Him, being so spent, wasted and terrified with the late and yet grievous Sequestrations and Sales; but the King was ima∣gined here by His Party to be able to do His business without them; and the late immature discovery of Loves designe and his Sentence, had quite bogled his Pres∣byterian well-wishers, whatever they muttered to themselves of their adventu∣rous Loyalty. Indeed nothing so much heightned the hopes of all good men, as those fears, and distrusts, and ill looks which the Phanatick-party discovered upon this occassion, the rather because Harrison had lain so long in those parts by which the King entred, on purpose and by express order to keep him out if pos∣sible, or at least retard Him so in the Borders, that Cromwel might overtake him there, who was now three days march behind, and Harrison also not very for∣ward in his march: And surely Cromwel was very sensible of his loytering at Saint Iohnstons, through a proud humour of not rising without it, since England was of the far greater concernment; and it set him a little awry in the opinion of his Partisans. The Parliament no sooner had notice of this Emergency by several Expresses (who Rid as if their Necks had been at stake) but out come three Acts or Proclamations together;The Parl. settle the Militia. Royalists forbid to depart their Houses. the one for the Militia, setling it as it stood established, and further forbidding all Royalists to depart from their Houses, and Comman∣ding all other people to give an account of their Servants to the next Officer, if they shall absent themselves. An Act forbidding Correspondence with the King or His Party.Correspondence with the King or his Party forbid. And therewith another product of Treason in grain against the King, His Person and Authority: which said Decrees they did with confi∣dence command to be published, setting a good gloss and resolute Face upon their despairing and misgiving thoughts, lest they might not seem (what they were most sure of from the people) to be wanting to themselves, in this perplext and unconsulted occurrence. The King at Carlisle, Pro∣claimed there King of Great Britain: He publisheth his Declaration.The King departed from Sterling the last of Iuly, and came into England by the way of Carlisle; and upon His first footing there, was Proclaimed right∣ful King of Great Britain, and did thereupon publish his Declaration, where∣in He offered His free Grace and Pardon (to be confirmed by an Act thereafter)
to all His Subjects of England,Offereth an Act of Pardon to all but Cromwel, Bradshaw, and Cook. of whatever Nature or Crime their Offences, were, excepting Cromwel, Bradshaw, and Cook, the more immediate Murtherers of His Father; and therewith prosecuted His march, being Proclaimed in the same manner through all the Towns He passed. The English that accompa∣nied Him of Note, were the Duke of Buckingham, Earl of Cleaveland, Lord Wentworth, Lord Wilmot, Colonel Wogan, (I finde him in all Services) Colonel Matthew Bointon, Major-General Massey, and Colonel Graves, Titus, and Major Ashurst. The King marched directly North-west to Lancashire, whither Harrison with some of Lamberts men had got before Him, intending to stop His further pas∣sage at Warrington;Warrington-fight. Lambert and Harrison de∣feated by Mas∣sey. to which service they had obliged and animated the new-raised Cheshire-Foot, amounting to neer 3000; but both they and Harrison re∣ceived a notable defeat at that place by the conduct of Colonel Massey, who set them a forerunning with a greater speed than they had made hitherto to over∣take the King; to whom in this County came the Earl of Derby, who landed at Wye-water from the Isle of Man,The Earl of Derby joyus with the King in Lancashire. though not with the same instantaneous (or indeed any) success, which his great Ancestor the noble Stanly brought to His Majesties Royal Progenitor King Henry the seventh, upon his like dispute, for the regaining of the Crown. With the Earl of Derby the King left some Forces of English under his Major-General Sir Thomas Tildesly, to strengthen what Forces he brought with him, and to countenance those Levies he was to make in that County, where he was very well beloved, both for his own and his Ancestors worth, and most liberal Hospitality. Massey was left here behind, but presently recalled. From Warrington the King passed with quick marches through part of Cheshire to Newport in Shropshire,The King sum∣mons Shrews∣bury, in vain. whence He sent His Invitations and Sum∣mons to Colonel Mackworth Governour of Shrewsbury, and Sir Thomas Mid∣dleton. Mackworth confidently refused, directing his answer to the Commander in chief of the Scotch Forces, not owning the King for so much as their Sove∣raign. On the 22 of August, the Van of the Kings Army entred Worcester, some re∣sistance being attempted to be made by some new-raised Forces under one Co∣lonel Iames,The King comes to Worcester, Aug. 22. and by the influence of Baron Wilde; but the Towns-men saved them the labour of driving them out, and most joyfully welcomed these weary guests, and such too as in 1645. had been extremely oppressive and intolerably burdensome, at the Siege of Hereford: but their gladness at the Kings presence, and hope of his Restitution, obliterated all other considerations and remem∣brances whatsoever. The Mayor and his Brethren at the Kings Intrado did him the customary, but most chearful Obeysances, tendring Him the Keys and the Mace upon their Knees, and bidding Him and His Forces welcome to this His Majesties Antient and Loyal City; where the same day with great solemnity He was anew Proclaimed, and the tired Souldiers most abundantly provided for, being in all, Scotch and English, some 13000, who had marched 300 miles out∣right in 3 weeks. In the mean time the Parliament had amassed a numerous Militia in all the Counties of England,The Parl. raise the Militia and London-Regiments. and had mustred the London-Regiments in Morefields, with a full, yet not quarter appearance of such as would fight for them against their Prince, as they witnessed by that dumb silence which was obstinately kept, upon the Reading of their Proclamation against the King, and burning his Declaration at the head of every Regiment; who were designed onely for the service and security of the City. The Country-Troops in the mean time ad∣vanced, and glad were the Members that the King stayed for them; for no∣thing was more dreaded than His continued march to London, which place would have soon ridded their fears, upon an approach of the Kings Army but 30 miles further from Worcester: but to prevent that, as Essex did before at the beginning of the War (whose first efforts took this way) Cromwel by long marches through Newcastle, Rippon, Ferrybrigs, Doncaster, Mansfield, and Co∣ventry,
had interposed himself, and joyned with his Army at Keynton, where a General Council of all his Officers was held, and a speedy advance to Worcester resolved on; Lieutenant-General Fleetwood being dispatcht to bring up his For∣ces then on their way at Banbury, the gross of all the Forces amounting to a∣bove 40000 effective, Militia and all. The King Sum∣mons the Coun∣try.The King had Summoned in all the Country to his assistance, and Rendez∣vouzed on the 26 of August upon Pitzfodder-Heath neer that City, and went on with the Fortifications and rearing the Mount. Of the chief of those that came in was the Lord Talbot after Earl of Shrewsbury, and Colonel Howard, Colonel Sir Edward Broughton, and Captain Benbow, and some adventurers from London, who were forced to pass through the Parliaments Army; nor could it be expected any could appear, when such powerful Militia's were up every where, so that all the new accessional strength the King received, was no way consider∣able, save for the Gallantry and Noble Loyalty of such as in these disadvantages owned His Majesties Cause and Fortunes. Yet there was a Noble Person, and some few of his partakers, whom fro∣ward unkinde Fate had banded from one ruine to a worse, and had added to that number of English at Worcester. This was the truly Honourable Earl of Derby, that was left behinde in Lancashire to raise that County, whose Le∣vies with that Force left him did not amount to above 1200 men, though a little more time had rendred him formidable; with those he was marching upon a designe to fall upon Cromwel's own Regiment, quartering upon their march in Lancaster, when in the nick comes Colonel Lilburn with 10 Troops of Horse sent by the General from York upon this very Service, having with him two Regiments of the Cheshire-Foot, and other additions of Horse. The Earl was now in the midst of both these Parties, and therefore resolved to fight with Lilburn, finding his men couragious and desirous to engage, though most Horse, and in Lanes, and accordingly charged them so furiously, that he totally routed their first Troops,Wigon-fight, August 25. Lilburn de∣feats the Earl of Derby. Slain on the Kings side, Lord Wid∣drington, Ma. Gen. Sir Tho. Tildesly, Col. Mat. Boynton Sir Francis Gamul, &c. and made an impression into their Body so far that they began to run, while other fresh Reserves coming in, they were forced to face about, being annoyed with the Musquets; yet did they renew the charge again, and had they had but another Reserve, they had in all probability won the day; for it was upon a second Turn, when another supply resisted the tor∣rent of their Valour, which left undeniable proofs of it self, in the death of most of the Commanders of their Wounds in and after the Battle; the names of which were the Lord Widdrington, Major-General Sir Thomas Tildesly, Colo∣nel Mat. Boyton, Sir Francis Gamul, Lieutenant-Colonel Gallyard, and Major Trollop, and Chester; the Prisoners were Sir William Throckmorton, Colonel Ri∣chard Leg, Colonel Robinson, Bayns, Gerard, Lieutenant-Colonel Rigby, Con∣stable, and Major Gower, and some 300 Prisoners, among whom were some Re∣formadoes, and some 80 slain, for the chief slaughter fell on the other side du∣ring the fight. The Earl of Derby having lost his George and Garter, fled with some 30 towards Worcester,The Earl lsing his George and Garter escapes. having by the good providence of God, who alone is able to bring Evil out of Good, sheltered himself one night in a house called Boscobel, which Heaven by this means had prepared for the Kings retreat and preservation. Cromwel sur∣rounds Wor∣cester, Au. 13. and possesseth Upton-Bridge.By this time Cromwel had surrounded that City with his spreading Host, in as neer a compass as the Rivers and Passes would suffer him, the Kings Army as yet lying out of the Town a mile in the fields. The first Pass endeavoured to be taken, was Vpton-Bridge on Fleetwoods side, which Major-General Lam∣bert attempted with 500 Horse and Dragoons, and after a brisk dispute wrested from Col. Massey, who in defence thereof received a wound in his Hand, the first mark of his redeemed honour, in that member which had been so unhappily active and successful against the King. The Scots having thus abandoned the place, it was presently possest by a strong party of Horse and Foot, in order to the present advance of the rest of the Army. The Scots now drawn closer to Worcester, made many Salleys, breaking down
two or three Bridges over the River Team, and shewing a well-ordered and governed courage; but September the 3 that ominous day being arrived, Crom∣wel resolved to venture the event upon its former auspicia, and to that purpose having his Boats in readiness pass'd over his men: in the afternoon of that day he drew out from his own Post, and (having given the signal to the whole Ar∣my to fall on) began the Fight in this manner. Cromwel himself in person (about three a clock,Worcester-Fight. with his Life-Guard, and Colonel Hacker's Regiment of Horse, with part of his own Regiment and Co∣lonel Ingoldsby's, and Fairfax's entire) passed over his Bridge of Boats upon the Severn, and marched towards the City; after him, Lieutenant-General Fleet∣wood, who had been most part of that day marching of five miles from Vpton to Powick-bridge, which the Kings Army had broken down, passed with Colo∣nel Goff's and Major-General Dean's Regiments, and joyntly advanced; the Kings Forces encountering them at the Hedges, and disputing every field with them, in such order, and with such gallantry, that these already over (lest they should not be wholly discouraged with the hotness of the Service) were reliev∣ed by Reserves, and they by others; no considerable progress yet made, the Highlanders proving excellent fire-men, and coming to the But-end at every foot, till weary, and their Ammunition spent, the King being then upon the place Commanded them in some haste into the City, and hastened himself to the other side, where Colonel Hayn's Regiment with Cobbet's stood about Powick-Bridge, and were entertained with no less manhood and slaughter: and though Colonel Matthews was the Reserve to the other two Regiments, yet did the Scotch Foot fairly drive them from their ground, till their little Army being every way engaged, and no seconds or supplies to be expected, after some whee∣lings in a careless regard of the Enemy, as if they feared not to make which way they pleased, they drew likewise into the Town, as did that Brigade which opposed the Regiments of the Lord Gray, Colonel Blague, Gibbons, and Marsh. But they stayed not long there; but as if their pent spirits had broke out with greater fury, they sallied out in great Bodies upon the Generals side, who had now brought the Militia-Forces into play, the Veterans wisely detrecting to engage first upon the Storm which was then intended; but there was yet field-matter enough to do. In the head of one of those Squadrons, the King him∣self Charged with that gallantry which would have become our admiration in other men, and shewed he had not forgot the Discipline of War in which he had been brought up from his youth: In one of those Charges he made, Duke Hamilton, a better Souldier, and noble gallanter person than his Brother, received a shot in his Thigh, whereof presently after he died. The loss that was sustained by the Enemy, fell principally upon the Essex-Foot, and those of Cheshire and Surrey, who returned in thin Troops and Companies to their Counties: but fresh and entire Brigades and Regiments, in Reserves, namely Desborough's Regiment of Horse, Cromwel's of Horse, Major-General Lam∣bert's of Horse, Whaley's, Harrison's, and Tomlinson's Brigades, with other Foot re-inforcing them; the Scots by the over-powering multitude were dri∣ven into the Town, Lesley with 2000 Horse (upon what account not known) not stirring out of the Town to relieve them, when the Enemy entred pell∣mell with them, and gained the Fort-Royal about seven a clock at night, at which time the King left the Town,The King de∣feated at Worcester, Sep. 3. it being dusk, and accompanied with some 60 Horse of the chiefest and most confident of his Retinue, (though many more pressed to bear him Company) departed out of St. Martins gate; and it was reported that Cobbet very narrowly mist of him as the King left his Lodg∣ing, whither he first hastned. The Enemies Foot was now got into the Town, and according to their or∣der fell a Plundering the Town in a most barbarous manner, as if Turks were again Sacking of Constantinople, and giving no Quarter to any they found in the Streets: Through this their greediness of spoil, they kept the Horse out,
lest they should have shared the better part, and to that purpose kept the Gates fast as they were, and so favoured (as God would have it) the Kings escape. Some Scots who had got into one of the Churches held out till next morning, when they obtained Quarter for Life, by which time there was not an Inhabi∣tant in Worcester Friend or Foe left Unplundered:Worcester miserably plun∣dered. but the Loyal Inhabitants soon recovered themselves, being supplied with fresh Wares to their desires from London, without any scruple of credit or payment, and their Debts forborn till such time as God should enable them; which the Gentry and Inhabitants round about them endeavoured to bring to pass, by thi more than ordinary resort to that Market, for all necessaries, and upon all occasions. The Mayor (be∣ing Knighted by the King) and Aldermen were Committed to Prison, and the Wife of one Guyes (who for betraying the designes of the King in that Garrison was Hanged) was rewarded with 200 l. per annum,A Traytor hanged, and his Widow bountifully re∣warded. and 200 l. down. There were slain in Field, and in Town (in the last the most) and in pursuit, some 2000, and some 8000 taken Prisoners in several places, most of the English escaping by their Shibboleth; the principal were Duke Hamilton,Slain of the Kings side Duke Hamilton. who presently died of his wounds; and at Newport the Earl of Lauderdale, the Earl of Rothes, the Earl of Carnwarth, the Earl of Kelly, the Earl of Derby, the Earl of Cleave∣land, Sir Iohn Packington, the Lord Spyne; Sir Ralph Clare, Sir Charles Cun∣ningham, Colonel Graves, Mr. Richard Fanshaw Secretary to the King, 6 Colo∣nels of Horse, 13 of Foot, 9 Lieutenant-Colonels of Horse, 8 Lieutenant-Co∣lonels of Foot, 6 Majors of Horse, 13 Majors of Foot, 37 Captains of Horse, 72 Captains of Foot, 55 Quarter-masters, 89 Lieutenants: there were taken al∣so some General Officers, with 76 Cornets of Horse, 99 Ensignes of Foot, 90 Quarter-masters, 80 of the Kings Servants,The Kings Standard, his Coach and Hor∣ses, and Collar of SS, taken. with the Kings Standard which he had set up when he Summoned the Country, the Kings Coach and Horses, and Collar of SS; but that which was ten times more worth than all, the Kings Per∣son, they had no power to touch. He (as was said before) departed in the dusk, leaving Colonel Carcles (now by the King (in honour of his carefulness of his Majesties person) Named Car∣los, and a Coat of Arms pointing at this service added) in his Rear, to keep the Enemy in dispute while he was something onward on his way, and the dusk and deliberation might favour his escape. To which end, all persons about him were Commanded to speak French;The King deli∣berates whither to fly. and a present consultation was held which course they should steer, and it was resolved by the Earl of Derby, that they should make what speed they could, and recover a place called Whiteladies be∣fore morning, which was some 25 miles from Worcester; and thereupon one Mr. Giffard then in the Company was called, for his guidance thither, it belong∣ing to his Family, and one Walker that had been formerly a Scout-master in the Kings Army was his assistant; yet the way was mistaken as they passed a Heath, but by good providence soon recovered. Betwixt three and four a Clock the King reached this place, and Mr. Giffard (after some knocking at the Door) called up one George Penderill, a servant in the House, who heating and knowing his Voice, an down in his Shirt and opened the Door, and the King and his Retinue entred; where after a little de∣bate about the security of his person, the said Earl having called thither Wil∣liam Penderill the House-keeper of Boscobel, and another dispatcht towards Tong to see if the Coast was yet clear; His Majesty having had his Hair cut off, and his Buff-doublet and Linnen-breeches Buried, and disguised in Country-Habit, was with adjuration of the Fidelity of the Penderills (who were with their Brother-in-law George Yates in number five) Committed and intrusted by the Earl of Derby to their Tuition, which they most solemnly and dutifully promised. Then the Earl and the rest of the Lords,The Lords leave him at White∣ladies. viz. the Duke of Buck∣ingham and that train, with Tears took their leave (Derby would have staid; but there was no probability of secrecy for two) and the Lord Wilmot with Iohn Penderil withdrew himself from that Company to another retreat: The
rest (except the Duke, who lay concealed in other friends houses about that Country) were taken as aforesaid at Newport by Lilburns Horse, the same who had defeated the Earl of Derby, who now rendred himself a Prisoner to one Captain Edge of Lancashire, on promise of quarter for Life. As soon as the King was thus left by his Company,The King in the wood Thurs∣day morning Sep. 4. with a Wood-hill in his hand he was conducted into a Wood or Coppice neer adjoyning, borrowing the Name of William Iones a Wood-cutter newly come thither for Work, and was accordingly instructed in his Tongue and Behaviour. That day proved very wet, so that Yate's Wife brought him a Blanket to cover him, and a dish of Milk and Apples for his refreshment, and at night against his coming home (where the Mother of the Penderils at her Son Richard's most joyfully welcomed him) provided an ordinary Country Supper: which ended, the King with Richard his Guide resolving for Wales, went to one Mr. Wolfe's of Madely,The King at Madely. where for fear of search, the King was fain to take up his quarters in the Barn; Mr. Wolfe and his Wife attending on him there, while no accomodations was good enough for his Rebels, now lying in multitudes up and down that Country. Here his Majesty understood that the Passes over the Water and the River Severn were so guarded, that it was unfeasible or him to adventure over into Wales, so that on Friday-night the King retreated in his Woolen accoutrements about his Legs, in which he had lain in that hard lodging in great pain and soreness, to Bosco∣bel,To Boscobel. where he found Colonel Carlos, who had also betaken himself thither for shel∣ter: by his direction that Saturday the King went into the Wood, from the plea∣santness whereof the House took its name, and by his assistance ascended into the top of that most Celebrated Oak,Col. Carlos directs the King to the Oak. which being thick with Branches stretch∣ing and shaddowing foreright, was altogether impervious to the sight; and here the Colonel bore him Company while He laid his Head and slept upon a Pil∣low in his Lap: At night they both descended and came into the House, and re∣fresht themselves. The King perceiving the secrecy of the place, was not willing to keep longer abroad: Sunday the King past away in a kinde of Arbour or Banquetting-house at the end of the Garden. At this House Iohn Penderil found him, being sent before by the Lord Wilmot, to conduct him to Mr. Whit∣graves at Mosely, whither with much difficulty and danger he himself had ar∣rived; but the safety there answered all. The King approved of the Lord Wil∣mot's Residence, and on Munday night (with the guard of the five Brethren) on Humphrey the Millers Horse, and like accoutrements, came to Mr. Whitgrave's,At Mosely with Mr. Whitgrave. where he was joyfully welcomed by the Lord and that Gentleman, and con∣veyed into a secret place; and there consultation was held, for a further pro∣gression in this happy escape;To Bently with Mrs. Jane Lane for Bristol. and to this purpose one Colonel Lane of Bentley was made acquainted with it, and by them agreed, that Mrs. Iane Lane, upon pretence of assisting at the Child-bed of her Sister, should Ride to Bristol, and the King as her Servant before her, with Mr. Lassels and his Wife behinde him; a Pass accordingly having been procured. On their way thither, the Lord Wilmot (as of chance) met with them,The King met by the Lord Wilmot. ha∣ving a Hauk on his Fist; and so they journeyed together to Bromsgrove, where the Kings Horse losing a Shoe, His Majesty was forced to carry the Horse to a Farrier, who enquiring of News of the King, and being answered with the suc∣cess of the Fight at Worcester, but that the King was escaped into Scotland; re∣plied, that no doubt the King was secretly somewhere in England,The dangerous Expression of a Farrier. and wisht he knew where, for that he could get 1000 l. by taking of him. That he pro∣videntially mist, the King departing from thence to Evesham,The King by Evesham. where advising how to avoid Troopers then Grazing their Horses in the Meadows adjoyning, they light upon them in a neer Village, but were civilly past: from thence to Cirencester to the Crown,At Cirencester to Mr. Nor∣tons at Leigh. where one night they Lodged, and so to Bristol, with∣in three miles of which place was the House of Mr. Norton at Leigh, the design∣ed Journeys end. Here the King feigned himself sick, and took his Chamber by the order and care of Mrs. Lane; but the next morning coming into the Celler, He was taken notice of by the Butler, one Iohn Pope, a Souldier formerly
in His Majesties Army, who upon an intent look discerned him, and in all dutiful manner discovered to him his trusty discovery of the King, which gain∣ed His Majesties belief so far as to employ him in getting a Ship for his Trans∣portation. Thence the King was conducted by the Lord Wilmot to one Co∣lonel Windham's at Trent in Dorsetshire, where, though to the knowledge of six or seven persons of that Houshould, He yet continued almost three weeks, in expectation of a passage from Lime. Soon after his arrival here, Mrs. Iane Lane with Mr. Lassels parted, being openly entertained as Kinsfolk, and came in safety back again to Staffordshire. The occurrences that happened here, I cannot certainly relate, onely the King was disappointed of a Passage, which a Merchant had procured for him at Lime; but by some strange accident (though it pleased God no dangerous one) he performed not his Word, though a very Loyal and True-hearted person. The King was a while Sick at this place. The King and Lord Wilmot in danger of discovery at ChayermouthThe Lord Wilmot who lay hereabouts, was employed about this shipping with Colonel Windham; but this errour or disappointment had like to have proved his ruine, by the shooing of his Horse, (there was one Mr. Hen. Peters that attended him for his Guide.) The Ostler and the Smith, who discovered by the Shoos that they and the Gentlemen were come somewhere from the Nor∣thern parts by their manner of Nailing them, presently raising a rumour of the King being thereabouts, and some Horse presently scoured the Road to Lon∣don; but his Lordship was got away by providence, and the King directed also out of his way,Adventures of the King. and came to Bridport; where, as 'tis since reported, he had like to have been known by an Ostler, as he was setting up the Horses, who wel∣comed him, as having formerly seen him at Exeter, but did not fully at present discern him; and the King with a proffer of drinking with him when he was more at leisure, withdrew himself from any further sight of him. That night they touched at Broad-Windsor, where again the King met with some distur∣bance by Souldiers, then filling those places in order to their shipping for Iersey. The King now returned to Mr. Windham's with the Lord Wilmot, who had overtaken them, and passed by them at Bridport as was agreed, and thence (for it could not be safe to continue longer in that place) was sent to Salisbury to look out for another Sanctuary, and to confer to that purpose with Mr. Coven∣try, who agreed to bring the King to Mrs. Hides,At Heal at Mrs. Hides. at a Village called Heal, (the King in his way to Salisbury, came to a Town called More to the George at one Christ. Philips an acquaintance onely of the Colonels, where drinking in the Cel∣ler, the Host seeing the King stand off (as a Servant) said, Thou look'st like an honest Fellow, here's a Health to the King; who unreadily answering it, made the man expostulate with the Colonel what Fellow he had brought:) Here the King (the Servants being sent abroad) was introduced to a secret place, having visited Stonehenge upon that plain, attended onely with Colonel Robert Philips (also Dr. Hinchman since Bishop of Salisbury had the honour to be made acquainted with the Kings Condition) and the Colonel presently dis∣patcht away to procure some shipping at Southampton, where the Barks being taken up and employed by the Juncto, after he had hired one, he returned with his labour lost, save that he met with Colonel Gunter, who being informed of the business, happily ingaged another at Brighthemstead in Sussex, wither the King (and the Lord Wilmot) having taken leave of this Noble Matron,By Ports∣mouth to Brighthem∣stead. ac∣companied with Colonel Philips by night, neer Portsmouth, came in two days to an Inne at Brighthemstead, where Colonel Gunter and Mr. Maunsell the Mer∣chant that hired the ship, and the Ship-master Tetershal (since a Captain in his Majesties Navy, the ship that Transported the King being since brought up and preserved in the River for a perpetual memorial of this Happy Deliverance) met him, and at Supper sate down together with his Majesty, when the Master presently discovered the King,Tetershal dis∣covers the King. having formerly seen him in the Downs, when he obtained the release of his ship loaden from Newcastle.
Whereupon the King was beckoned to come and confer with the Master,Tetershal re∣solves to pro∣ceed in his voy∣age with the King. who being wrought upon by promises, and Money paid down, and his own Loy∣alty, agreed to perform his bargain, and departed to call up his Marriners then on shore, pretending his ship half laden with Coles was a drift; and coming home for a Bottle of Aqua Vitae, his Wife by the unseasonableness of the night suspecting the truth, encouraged him to the undertaking, not caring (as she said) if she and her little ones begg'd their Bread so the King were Transpor∣ted in safety. The Iune-keeper also guessing at the matter, gave the King an apprecation,King Em∣barques. and himself the hopes of being somebody hereafter. About five a clock, in the dark of the morning, about the 20 of October, the King Embar∣qued, with the Lord Wilmot; and keeping the shore all that day, in the evening crost over, and at dark night landed neer Diepe in France.A notable pas∣sage. [In their passage the King sitting upon the Deck, and observing and directing the course, or as they call it, Conning the ship, one of the Marriners blowing Tobacco in the Kings Face, the Master bid him go further off the Gentleman, who murmuring, un∣wittingly replied, That a Cat might look upon a King.Arrives at Rohan, to Pa∣ris.] At Rohan the King had his Cloaths changed by two English Merchants residing there, and was there saluted (though at first hardly known) by Doctor Earls after Lord-Bi∣shop of Worcester; and upon notice of his arrival, the Queen-Mother, and Duke of Orleans, and that whole Court went out to meet him, and congratulate his wonderful Deliverance. A Providence indeed not parallell'd in History, and able to have convinced his Rebels, if their rage had not blinded them; but it cheered the mindes and hopes of his Subjects, by this pledge of their salvation in this marvellous protection of Gods Anointed: no less than 50 men and wo∣men being privy to his escape. But very few of his Nobles and Officers that came in with him escaped.Most of the Scots taken Prisoners. Da∣vid Lesley and Lieutenant-General Middleton were taken in Lancashire, and car∣ried Prisoners to Chester, whence the Earl of Lauderdale, Earls of Kelly and Rothes, &c. were Committed to the Tower, from whence the Lord Middle∣ton happily escaped; the rest were (not long after) sent to Windsor-Castle, where they continued till the Restitution. On the 21 of September,Cromwel and his Prisoners to London, Sep. 12. Cromwel came to London, and was met about Acton with the Speaker and the Members, and the Lord Mayor, and Recorder Steel, who in a set Speech congratulated his great Successes, and like a false Prophet, by a mistaken Prolepsis, applied these words of the Psalmist, — To binde their Kings in Chains, and their Nobles in Fetters of Iron,The Prisoners sold. The Colours ta∣ken, hanged up in Westmin∣ster-hall. in an arrogant Exaltation of his Atchievements. Next day the Common Prisoners (being driven like a herd of Swine) were brought through Westminster into Tuthill-Fields, (a sadder spectacle was never seen, except the miserable place of their defeat) and there sold to several Merchants, and sent to the Barbadoes; the Colours taken, were likewise hanged up in Westminster-hall, with those taken before at Preston and Dunbar. The heart of the Scotch War was now broken; yet some strugling there was in the Limbs and extremities thereof for Life.Sterling-castle surrendred, Aug. 14, to Gen. Monke for the Parl. Dundee stor∣med Sep. 1, and taken by Gen. Monke, the defendants put to the Sword. Sterling-Castle seeing it to no purpose to endure a Storm or a Siege, rendred upon Articles August the 14 to General Monke: a more sumptuous stately building than Edenburgh-Castle, where the Kings Royal Robes, the Cloth of State, and all the Scotch Records were found and seized. From hence the General came before Dundee (whither the Scots had conveyed the best part of their Moveables as a secure depository) and Summoned it; which the Governour slighting, having 800 men besides the Ci∣tizens in Garrison; General Monke gave order to Sorm it, and accordingly Horse and Foot about noon September the first having a piece of white out be∣hind, fell on resolutely, and the besieged being then in their cups, and worse drunk with a haughty confidence, after a short but sharp resistance, mastered the place; and put all they found in Arms to the Sword, and plundered the Town of all its former and newly-put-in wealth,The Town mise∣rably plundred. which amounted to vast sums. Houshould-goods were of so mean an account, that nothing but Plate and Mo∣ney was regarded, and for which Feather-beds were ript, and the Feathers thrown
about; for it was absolutely the richest Town in Scotland, but now lest not worth a groat: there were taken here also 60 sail of all sorts of ships that lay in the Harbour, which likewise came into the Conquerours hands.Aberdeen yielded. Aberdeen (40 miles further Northwards) yielded without any further constraint; and St. Andrews (the other University) was fined 500 l. for not surrendring upon the first Summons;St. Andrews Fined 500 l. but upon their humble Petition, setting forth that the Town was no more than a Receptacle for poor Scholars, it was most part remitted. Just a little before the storm of Dundee, a party sent under Colonel Matthew Allured,Scotch Nobles taken at Ellet in the High∣lands, and Sir John Daniel and Col. Doug∣las taken at Dumfreiz, Aug. surprized a Convention or Pack of Scotch Peers and Presbyters at Ellet in the Highlands, not without suspition of their own setting themselves, or at least of some treacherous persons among them; their names were, General Lesley, Earl Marshal, Earl of Crawford, Earl of Keith, Lord Ogilby, Lord Burgenny, Lord Humly, Lord Lee, Sir Iames Fowles, Sir Iames Lockbart, and 20 more Knights and Gentlemen, Mr. Mungo Law, and Mr. Robert Douglas, eminent Kirk-men, and Mr. Iames Sharp, now Lord-Arch-bishop of Saint Andrews, and five or six more, with 70 Servants: the Souldiers that took them had as good (if not a better) Market than the Dundee-blades, getting many of them 500, or 400 pounds apiece, and all of them very considerable sums. These Lords and Lairds, and their fellows the Ministers, were hipt for London (that they might give no disturbance to the Parliaments new-intended settlement and union of that Kingdom with this:) old Lesley obtained the favour from Sir Ar∣thur Hasilrig (stopping at Newcastle) to stay at his Son-in-laws Mr. De la Val of Northumberland. A New Repre∣sentative deba∣ted of.The first thing the Parliament now debated upon after Cromwel's sitting in the House, was a new Representative, at his instance and motion; which same project he had hinted covertly in all his Letters to the Parliament, under the true interest of a Commonwealth-Foundation: but that which was least talkt of, and mainly intended, was an Act for the encouragement of the English Navigation; the Soveraignty at Sea, being the main controversie which both in point of Honour and Interest, neither State (we nor the Dutch) would ac∣knowledge to the other.The High Court of Ju∣stice pardons Mr. Jenkins and others. The Judges of the High Court of Iustice now pro∣ceeded where they left off with Mr. Love, in the Presbyterian-Plot; and accor∣dingly on the 10 of October Colonel Vanghan a Leatherseller, Captain Hugh Massey, Mr. Ienkins, Mr. Drake, did all of them confess their fault and guilt, alledging onely for defence their Oath of Secrecy, &c. After this confession they were remanded to Prison; but at the intercession of the Lord Fairfax, as 'tis supposed, and to honour their late-acquired Victory, the Parliament was plea∣sed upon their Petitions (that of Mr. Ienkins coming home to their haughty humour, and acknowledging their Authority from God, and which was Printed here by their Order for a pattern to the rest of the Presbyters, and reprinted at Holland, to divulge their other Conquest over the stubborn Rabbinical Tribe) they were quitted of their Imprisonment, and restored. But though they escaped, it was not other persons good hap: A Court Mar∣shal was now established at Chester, whither divers English Prisoners taken at Newport and in the pursuit had been brought; ten whereof were Comdemned by Vertue of the Act against holding correspondence with the King; and five Ex∣ecuted, among whom was one Captain Symkins,Cap. Symkins, Sir Timothy Fetherston∣haugh, and Col. Benbow Executed, Oct. a Gentleman that carried the Kings Letter of Invitation to Sir Thomas Middleton; and presently after Sir Ti∣mothy Fetherstonhaugh, Colonel Benbow, and the Earl of Derby, were Tryed by the same Court-Marshal, wherein Colonel Mackworth (above mentioned) sate President, and Major-General Mitton assisted, with other standing Officers. The Earl would fain have been heard by the Members at Westminster, and writ up to the General, and sent a Petition, offering the surrender of the Isle of Man; but nothing would move the inexorable Rhadamanths of the Parliament, though he had subjoyned an account of the designe, at their own or their Agents desire: whereupon, he held to his Plea for Quarter given him by Captain Edge; which
being over-ruled with the same argument and solution as they made to the Lord Capel, they avowing the Court to be a Civil Authority, as proceeding upon and by direction of Authority of Parliament, he, as the other two Gentlemen after∣wards, was adjudged to dye; the Earl at Bolton,The Earl of Derby Behead∣ed at Bolton, Octob. 15. the 15 of October, Sir Ti∣mothy at Chester by the Axe, and Colonel Benbow to be shot at Shrewsbury. Af∣ter Sentence the Earl made an escape out of the Window, being as 'tis supposed, Tranpann'd out of some money in hope and proffer of an Escape; but was pre∣sently retaken upon the sands of the River Dee, and secured and guarded till the day of his Martyrdom at Bolton aforesaid, where to the publike grief and la∣mentation of the Inhabitants, who refused to lend a Nail or Stick to the buil∣ding of the Scaffold though the very pretence of his Execution there, was for the Blood spilt there by him on Prince Rupert's Storming the Town in 1644.) which was the reason it was late ere he suffered, and beyond his ap∣pointed time by three hours, piously spent by him: He most Christianly and worthy of all Memory gave up his Soul to his Redeemer, being a little troubled at his longer detainer in this Vale of misery, by the Executioner's missing the Signe. And this sad occasion will direct us to a further account of those English Royalists who were taken in and after the same defeat;Several other Royalists taken: among whom were, besides others mentioned, the Lord Grandison, Sir Iohn Packington, Colonel Blague the late Governour of Wallingford, Colonel Broughton after Sir Edward, and Colonel Massey, who having escaped the fate of that day at Worcester, and being tired with Riding, having wounds yet green, threw himself at last upon the Countess of Stamford, engaging his parole for his true Imprisonment in her House till he was cured; when he was removed likewise to the Tower, and by a disguise shortly after made an escape. The often-to-be-with-Honour-men∣tioned Colonel Wogan came off and got away untouched, and recovered the Highlands, with an indesistible courage of prosecuting the Kings quarrel, even where Nature had fixt her non ultra;James Hinde the sam'd High-way-man taken and Hang'd, drawn and quartered at Worcester. while Iames Hinde the famous High-way-man (some time before in England) for Robbing of the Parliament-par∣ty, adventuring Southward, was betrayed in Fleet-street at his lodging, and be∣ing from Newgate carried to the next Assizes of Abington and Worcester, was at the last place, when none would come in to swear against him, either to Felony or Treason in the late Invasion (as 'twas called) by the King, betrayed by a Minister of their sending, whose name I cannot get, and by his Evidence Convicted, and Hanged, Drawn and Quartered in that City. An Act for sale of Delinquents Lands had passed some time before; now their Trustees with Boon Courage resolved to proceed, the danger of voiding their Trusts and the Authority conferred on them being now past, and some more Grist being like to come into their Mill by new Forfeitures; wherefore they appointed the 8 day of September for their sitting down, in pursuance of those powers granted by the said Act of Sale,The Estates of the Lord Cra∣ven and other Royalists expo∣sed to sale. and chose Drury-house (the Mansion of the Lord Craven) for the place of their Sitting; where they made several conveniencies for their Registers, Accountants, Cashiers, and Clerks, like to any other legal Office, and there with other Estates exposed that Lord's to common sale. The Members had appointed the second of October for the Thanksgiving-day for this Worcester-Victory; but because they would have it Celebrated with the greater solemnization by notice thereof throughout the three Kingdoms to∣gether, they adjourned it till the 24 of the same Month; in the Evening where∣of, General Popham one of their Admirals at Sea,General Pop∣ham's Funeral, Octob. 24. deceased on the 19 of Au∣gust before, attended by Cromwel and most of the Members, was Interred in Westminster-Abbey. This day was without any more scruple punctually obser∣ved; the Presbyterians, who were in the best Livings generally, (and indeed no body else scarce in any) not offering to mutter against the Command of these their (not-to-be-contended-with) Lords and Superiors. The Scotch affairs were now the consultation of the Parliament: for having
reduced that Kingdom to neer a plenary Conquest, no English Forces, or scarce a single man having passed so far as their Army was now Quartered and in Gar∣rison, the Civil Government was very fit to be considered of, and how it should be managed. In the beginning of the raign of King Iames, much pains and endeavours were used by Him, about the draught and accomplishment of an Union between both Kingdoms,The Scotch U∣nion projected. which might be so comprehensive as to be equally advantagious to both people; and the Lord Bacon writ an Elaborate discourse and project of it; but all came to nothing, so many Scotch proud and surly difficulties were thereupon raised: but now one Weeks work finished that mighty matter in a short Vote and Resolution, That England and Scotland shall be Incorporated into one Commonwealth;Commissioners named to go into Scotland. and Commissioners were na∣med to go into that Kingdom, viz. Oliver Saint Iohn, Sir Henry Vane, Alder∣man Titchburn, Major Salway, Major-General Dean, Colonel Fenwick, and General Monke, before whose arrival (onely Major-General Lambert and Dean were upon perambulation of the limits already gained, and receiving submis∣sions and granting terms) several of the Scotch Nobility (whose Ancestors thought the English Union a diminution of their Greatness, and disdainfully rejected all tendencies thereunto) came quietly in, having made a bluster of doing something in the Highlands; such were the Marquess of Huntly (who to be repaired of some injuries done him by Arguile, though his neer Kinsman, thought good to prevent him by a timely acquiescence, upon pact of having right done him in the said controversie) the Lord Balcarris, the Earls of Weems, Angus and Calendar: and Arguile himself was now in Treaty; but to shew him∣self more considerable, held it on foot almost half a year, guarding his Castles the County, and Levying Assessments like a Prince upon the Country. The late Marquess of Montross his Children and Family were honourably taken into protection by General Monke.Gen. Monke protects the Marq. of Montross his Children and Family. Nor were the Royal Party half so averse and intractable to the English Usur∣pation (for they had (as they well hoped) shaken off the insupportable Ty∣ranny of the Presbytery, and could hardly suffer more by any power what∣soever, which might in time veer about unto its lawful Scepter) as the Kirk∣men and that brood, who having lost their Arbitrary and most Tyrannical sway over the Consciences, Estates, and Lives of men, raged at this Change, the ra∣ther for having fooled and bewitched themselves into an opinion, that they should be able by the Keys of the Kirk (which they doubted not to re-esta∣blish in that Kingdom) to oversway the Sword of the Sectary, and to bring him to conform, there being such a proximity in many of their Principles, assigning to themselves that time-serving Complement of Oliver's, The good peo∣ple of the Nation of Scotland, that were to be preserved in their Rights, Civil and Spiritual; and accordingly the Grandees of the Western Remonstrants took upon them to indict an Assembly, and there they damned all which had been done by the late Parliament and Assembly, and published a Fast, with the grounds wherefore they were to humble themselves (which being ridiculous Crambs of miscarriages about the King, are purposely omitted) and pro∣ceeded afterwards to that boldness, as to expostulate and refuse in Print the Tender of Union for several Reasons, which we shall hint in its proper place. Limerick be∣sieged by Depu∣ty Ireton, for the Parl.In Ireland, while the Deputy Ireton lay before Limerick, which Siege had continued most part of the Summer, the Irish played pranks, offering at a redemption of their losses; but were too far spent: for though Colonel Vena∣bles, Hewson, and Reynolds were out in parties to attend their motion, Sir Wal∣ter Dungan Stormed Ross-Town, and Castle-Iordan, and had carried the Castle of Ross, but for want of Provision, which made him in hast to retreat into his Fastnesses, where the Marquess Clanrickard kept about Slego and the County of Cavan; they surprized likewise three Troops of Colonel Sanchy's Regiment, and the notable Quarter-beater Nash killed Colonel Cook coming with a party from Cork; but was slain in the onslaught, though his party were victorious.
The besieged likewise in Limerick made many fierce Salleys, refusing to hear∣ken to any Conditions,Hugh O Neal Gvrour tereof. being governed by that right-valliant Hugh O Neal▪ who defended Clonmel so resolutely, and resolved to hold this out to extremity. In one Salley of 1000 men they killed above 300, five whereof were Captains, two of thm in Colonel Henry Cromwel's Regiment; and upon the English attempt made upon the Island before the Town, which was encompassed with a Line, and a Fort in the middle of it, (by reason the Boats not being able to carry above forty men, and being but three Boats in all, could not return with seconds to make good the Landing and footing that was made in time) the whole party consisting of 160, was partly cut off and drowned with their Leaders, Major Walker, Captain Graves, and Captain Whiting, in the view of the Leaguer, but out of their power to relieve them. This happened on the 15 of Iuly;Ireton defeted before Lime∣rick. and being so signal a defeat, was imputed by Ireton who pretn∣ded too great acquaintance with Gods Counsels) to breach of Articles, (as to Quarter promised to the Irish, who delivered a Castle neer adjoyning) by Co∣lonel Tuthil, who after caused the men to be knockt on the head, and for which he was worthily by Ireton cashiered the Army. Ireton was nevertheless resolute not to depart without it, though the Gover∣nour, in hopes that Winter would force him to draw off, or else some happy rn∣counter, might relieve him, was as obstinate on the other side; but at last the Victuals being all spent, about the middle of October he was forced to embrace a Treaty, hoping for those Articles which Ireton had offered the Town three months before; but they would not be granted, so that in conclusion himself and 21 more were constrained to yield to mercy;Limerick , Octo∣ber 29. of whom the chief were, M. G. Patrick Purcel, who lost the Leaguer at Dublin by his Treachery or Cow∣ardise, David Roch the Lord Roch's Son, Sir Richard Everard, and the Mayor of the Town, and an Alderman, through whose resolution the Citizens were encouraged to hold out; the rest were Fryers, and persons guilty of the Massa∣cres in the first years of the Rebellion, whom divine Vengeance found out here, (and a general Article of that nature was inserted upon all surrenders thereafter) and delivered them on the 29 of October upon some hard terms for the Citizens and Souldiers.Sir Charles Cot  a party of Irish. About the same time Sir Charles Coot defeated a party of Fitz Patrick's and Odwyr's Forces, (who had re-gained Meleck Island, after the ta∣king of it by Colonel Axel) after a resolute defence thereof, to the quite ba∣fling of his Foot, who were worsted two or three times together; but the gal∣lantry of the Horse recovered the day, and made 300 desperate Irish accept of Quarter onely for their Lives, some 300 more being slain and drowned. Limerick being taken, Ireton marched to joyn with Sir Charles Coot to at∣tempt something further, and together took in Clare-Castle; but the weather not proving so seasonable,Clare-Castle taken by the English. and the Souldiers tired out with duty at the Siege of Limerick, they parted into Winter-Quarters; Coot to straighten Galloway, neer which he had built some Forts; ships of War lying about the Harbour to inter∣cept Relief, (and a Summons having been sent in to G. Preston, by way of Catechizing that vanity of a Souldiers Honour, with a Letter to the Citizens from Ireton, offering Limerick's first Terms, and laying open their suffering from their stubbornness, on purpose, as Preston elegantly answered, to divide them to their common Ruine) and Ireton back again to Limerick, in the way whither he fell sick on the 15 of November, and after Purging and Bleeding, and other means used,Ireton dies of the Plague at▪ Limerick, Nov. 25. Edmund Lud∣low constituted in his place. Ireton lies in state at Sum∣merset-house. died of the Plague in that City, on the 27 of the same month; the Commissioners for the Parliament there substituting to his Command in the Army (while the Parliament or General) (for Cromwel was lately so made of Ireland) should otherwise appoint) Edmund Ludlow the Lieutenant-General of the Army in that Kingdom. On the 17 of December his Carcass was lan∣ded at Bristol, and pompously dismist to London, where it was for a time in State at Sommerset-house, all hung with black, and a Scutcheon over the gate with this Motto, Dulce est pro patria mori; how suitable, that Countryman best told, who Englished it in these words, It is good for his Country that he is dead. On
February 6 following he was Interred in H. 7's Chappel; but hath since found, to say no more,His Character. a more fitting and deserved Sepulture. A man of great parts and abilities; but natured to mischief, and the evil of those times he was born to make worse, and most prodigiously Infamous: no man came suited with so great capacity to the overthrow of the Government, reckoning his impiety, or rather vizarded piety, into his indowments. The Council of State was now, November the 24, the one half of it changed, according to the annual custome, in which month all that remained of the Eng∣lish Dominions unreduced was attaqued, namely Iersey-Island,Jersey surren∣dd, Nov. and Dec. to the Parliament. Mount Orgueil and Elizabeth Castle urren∣dred. where Colonel Iames Heyns, who Commanded in chief, landed his men up to the Neck in the Sea, and bravely withstood a gallant charge of the Island-horse, and got firm footing thereon, and forthwith fell a Summoning the Castles: Mount Orgueil, wherein was Sir Philip Carteret, yielding presently upon good Conditions, which that civil Commander ever used to offer; but it was the 18 of December before Elizabeth-Castle, one of the most impregnant places in the World, came to a surrender, upon very honourable and advantageous terms, as the importance of the place deserved; (Sir George Carteret having order from the King to make what terms he could for himself:) there were some Morter-pieces first played, one of which lighting and bursting in the Chappel of the Castle, killed some 20 men, and tore the stones into shivers, and made him the willinger to Treat. Sir George having clearly indemnified himself and the Islanders, and some way bettered his condition, departed into France; and General Blake came home by Gernsey-Castle, which having faced, not willing to attempt or stay before it, he let order to buy it; which was now about this time effected, as we have ante∣related it, (in the account of its storming by Major Harrison, the Commander in chief of that Island, and since at Iersey) for fear so little a spot of ground should have mist our observation. Isle of Man re∣duced, Dec.The Isle of Man was also at the same time reduced by Colonel Duckenfield, without any considerable opposition: Rushen and Peel-Castle stood out a while; but upon the news of the Death of the Earl, whom Duckenfield in his Letters (not thinking a Summons befitting him to a woman) had stiled the late Earl of Derby, grief overcame their courage; and it being resolved before to deliver it, as the Earl had proffered: that former resolution daht any other, so that though Sir Thomas Armstrong who was come thither out of Ireland, a famous Souldier, offered to have maintained Rushen-Castle, where the Lady was; yet upon very slender terms it was rendred: Into such distractions do the continued strokes of persecuting Fortune drive the most resolute mindes, that the most constant magnanimity (for which this Countess was highly famous, as at La∣tham-house) is at last depressed, and forced to submit to her arbitrary and un∣controlable Tyranny. The Isle of Barbadoes, where the King had been Proclaimed, and was now in open defiance of the Parliament, and prosecuted their Trade onely with the Hollanders, was the next and onely place to be reduced, with some other of the Caribbe-Islands there adjacent. About the 16 of Octob. Sir George Ayscue having coasted several places about Spain and Portugal, to finde out Prince Rupert, ar∣rived at Barbadoes,Barbadoes re∣duced by Sir Geo: Ayscue, Jan. in Carlisle-bay, where he found fourteen sail of Hollan∣ders in the Road; and to prevent their running on shore, sent in the Amity Fri∣gat commanded by Captain Peck, with three other ships, to seize them; who presently Commanded the respective Masters aboard, and so gained the Ves∣sels, and kept them as prize, for Trading with the Enemies of the Common∣wealth in that Island, with three other Hollanders, as they were sailing to the other Islands. The Fleet having plied up and down in the sight of the Islanders, who were now in Arms to the number of 4000 Horse and Foot, came to an∣chor at Spikes-bay: and the Virginia-Merchant-Fleet arriving in December, Sir George advised it very advantageous for the Service, by the countenance of those ships which seemed as his reserve of Men of War, to attempt a landing; which accordingly was done by a Regiment of 700 men, made up with 150 Scotch
Slaves, the rest being Seamen. This was effected on the 17 of December, and the Islanders beaten up to their Fort, which on a sudden was by them deserted, after the loss of some 60 men on both sides, and the same Fort, and four pieces of Ordnance gained by them; and then the Seamen retreated again to the ships, which lay crusing up and down continually to intercept any Trade or Traffick coming thither. That inconvenience made some of the Islanders weary of the War: which Sir George very well understanding, negotiated with one Colonel Muddyford, a chief man in one part of the Island, about a peace and accommo∣dation; and the conclusion of that transaction was Muddyford's publike declaring for Peace,Lord Wil∣loughby Go∣vernour thereof. and joyning with Sir G Ayscue, to bring the Governour the Lord Wil∣loughby to reason, as it was called. Sir George and his Forces made up 2000 Foot, and 100 Horse, so that to avoid the uncertainty of battel, and the Effusion of blood, both parties agreed to treat, and the 11 of Ian. agreed upon the Ren∣dition on Articles every day comprehensive and honourable. Commissioners names for Sir George were, Captain Peck, Mr. Searl left Governour there, Colo∣nel Muddyford, and Mr. Colleton; and for the Lord Willoughby, Sir Richard Peers, Mr. Charles Pym, Colonel Ellice, and Major Byham: his Lordship having his de∣sired Conditions of Indemnity, and freedom of Estate and person, not long after returned into England,St. Christo∣phers the same. as did Sir George, having vised Mevis and St. Christophers. Before his coming, Major-General Poyntz newly Governour thereof had shipt himself for Virginia, the onely retreat for Royalists, as lying so far up in the Continent, and affording subsistence of it self. Thus nothing remained of all the British Dominions, either of profit, honour, or security to the Nation, which their Handmaid Success had not attained to; and that in as short a space of time, as the most indulgent Fates ever apportioned to their greatest and whitest Favou∣rites; whose Glories of Conquest they increased, by sparing and lessening their sweat and travail in the Atchievement. In Scotland, the Major-Generals-Lambert, Dean, and Lieutenant-General Monke, had brought things to that pass, that the people were rated by Assessments towards the charge of the Army: and this the Kirk in their new Assembly (since it could not be otherwise) would permit to be paid; but expresly forbad the people to comply, or give meeting, or cause any to be ad, in order to the closing with the Declaration of the Commissioners, who were to receive from the Depu∣ties of each Shire (who were ordered to chuse such) their Subscriptions to the projected Union, now directly remonstrated against, besides other arguments, yea and from the Covenant,The Scotch Kirk reject, and de∣clare against the Union. from this main one, because that incorporation would draw with it a subordination of the Kirk to the State in the things of Christ: for here the Shop painfully wrung them. This was dated Ian. the 21. The Parliament to correct this perversness, and in pursuance of their Com∣missioners Declaration to the same purpose, Decreed, 1. An Act for the Vnion, Abolishing Kingly Goverment, &c. and for punishing such as should con∣travne or offend against the meaning and purpose of the said Act. 2. That in Complyance with the said Vnion, the Shires or Burghs should Chuse their De∣puties or Burgesses in a proportionable number as the Parliament should think fit to represent them in Parliament; and this was stiled a great favour, and a freeing the Nation from the villanage of their Heritors, Lairds and Lords, most of whose Estates (that were in the two late Invasions with Hamilton and at Worcester) they had declared Confiscate, together with all the Crown-lands and Houses, to the use of the Commonwealth of England, towards the defraying of the charge of this their labour of Love, in the reducing of that Kingdom. The Bishops lands could not be found, for the Kirk had mingled and mixt them with their own sa∣cred rights and perquisites, so that the most quick-sighted sacriledge could hardly discern them. By these Summons the Deputies of the Shires of this side and the other side Tay, were ordered (the most remote) to appear on the 26 of February, and in the mean time, about the black 30 of Ianuary, the Commissioners proceeded with their instructions, and issued out several Proclamations against the King's, and Monarchical Government, and that Writs should no longer run in His Name,
and Mutatis mutandis in Scotland as in England;Monarchy abo∣lished in Scotland, Jan. His Arms defaced, and for an English Judicature to be there established, and to keep the Sessions, which was the Term. Thus far the Political and Civil Government was provided for already; nor was there any thing of Note among the Martialists, save the ta∣king in Dumbarton-Castle,Dumbarton surrendered, Jan. 5, by Sir Charles Ers∣kin, to the Parliament. which was rendred by Sir Charles Erskin upon Arti∣cles, Ianuary the 5, with a Salvo to the Duke of Lenox and Richmond of his Goods and Great Guns therein, as being the proper Goods of the said Duke. This surrender opened a way to the same terms with Bass-Island (the most dan∣gerous place in the Frith to the English Navigation) some time after. Some Forces under Colonel Overton landed in the Isles of Orkney, and Colonel Fitch's Regiment marched towards Innerness. The Dutch had rankled with spleen at the successes of this State, as no way compatible with, but surmounting those indifferent equal Proposals and Over∣tures made before the accomplishment thereof: and perceiving how regardless and cool the Parliament was now as to any further transaction of a League, but that on the contrary their Fishing was molested in these Seas upon the old Title of Soveraignty,The Dutch Com∣merce, and Fishing mo∣lested at Sea. and that upon any the least pretences of French Goods and Lading, their Merchant-ships were searched, stayed, and sometimes adjudg∣ed Prize; thought it advisable to send over Embassadors, as well to obtain reparation for those damages, as to provide for future security against the like, by a Treaty; and in case they perceived the aversness or untowardness of the State thereto, to fully inform themselves what Naval preparation there was in hand, and in what readiness, and how the Nation stood affected to or would yet endure the Government; as by a Copy of their Instructions since appea∣red. The Embassadors, Myn heeren Catz, Schaep, and Vande Perre of Zealand (as of custome and right one of that Province must be in the Embassie hither) were ordered to be gone with all speed, upon the notice of the Act for the en∣couragemnt of the English-Navigation, &c. But the Wind blowing at South∣west from the very day of the date of the said Act, neither they nor other ships bound thence from England with East and West-India Commodities, Spice and such-like, could stir out of their Ports, to the great exasperation of that people; who when they see the day elapsed,The 1 of Dec. the time limited by t Act, o∣macked by the Dutch. being the first of December, and had notice that the Parliament would not allow a day longer (even to the English them∣selves upon any account whatsoever, though to the breaking of several Mer∣chants, whose Estates were coming over in such Goods thence) procured the Lords to make an Arrest and Imbargo upon all English ships then in the Texel; but which the States were willing soon after to recal, and make shew of good Correspondence and Friendship, as in this and other occasions they yet testi∣fied. The Embassadors with the first opportunity (the rather to prevent Monsieur Speering, then at the Hague, and Commissioned by the Queen of Sweden for her Embassador into England, as unwilling to be the last should own this Common∣wealth) put to Sea, and arrived here about the middle of Ianuary; and for the greater credit of the sincerity of their intentions to Peace and Amity, they brought over their Families, by which it might appear they intended to stay till that great affair was finished by them; being also men for their particular per∣sons, very acceptable to the State here.The Dutch Em∣bassadors teat January. Soon after their Reception they had Audience in the Parliament-house, and a Committee appointed to confer with them, by whom they were at the entrance of their business choaked with our claim to and their dues for the Herring-fishing, with the old story of bloody Amboyna, and a demand of a Free-trade in the Schelde from Middleburgh to Antwerpe, where the English had a good Trade once within 100 years, then the most famous Mart of the Low-countries, yea of Europe; but by the Hollan∣ders seizing of Flushing, and building the Fort Lillo opon that River in their Wars against the Spaniard, the Merchants and Inhabitants, disaffected other∣wise to the King of Spain, in the beginning of that War betook themselves to
Amsterdam, which by the sudden breaking in of the Sea, and breaking down of Dams, became a most convenient and capacious Harbour, and consequently a great Mart, as lying most opportune for the Trade of the East, and North-East Seas. Monsieur Speering arrived here likewise, and was well received a short while after, and laid a foundation of that Treaty, which was afterwards concluded by the Lord Whitlock with that Queen: but he deceasing here, soon after Mon∣sieur Appleboom, Resident also at the Hague, was substituted to his Embassie in like manner.The Parliament publish an Act of Oblivion. The 24 of February came out their Act of Oblivion, whereout Sir Iohn Webster of Amsterdam was totally excluded, together with the Execu∣tors of the Arch-bishop of Canterbury, the slayers of Dorislaus and Ascham, the Viscount Mansfield, and Lord Goring, and General George Lord Goring, and Charles his Sons: which particulars out of a multitude of publike exceptions (as H. Martin discanted on it) I thought fit to give the Reader a hint of, that such a precious Record of their absolute greatness (as the taking upon them to pardon, when they needed it onely themselves,) might not totally be lost: the Preface and Induction to it being a fallacy, a non concesso, that because the generality of the Nation had shewed themselves ready to suppress the late Scotch Invasion at Worcester; therefore the Parliament out of meer grace, &c. but all this favour to be of no benefit to any one without taking the Engage∣ment. Their Committee for Regulation of the Law had likewise proceeded so far, as to take an account of all Courts and Offices concerning their Fees, and to see they did Execution of Justice; for corruption wherein, Iohn Lilburn and Iosiah Primate having taxed their Commissioners at Haberdashers-hall (about a Cole-pit Primate pretended to, but Sir Arthur Haslerig had possession of, by vertue of one Colonel Wray's Delinquency) the said Lilburn was banished on the 30 day of Ianuary,John Lilburn Banished. Josiah Pri∣mate fined 4000 l. and Primate fined 4000 l. to the said Commissioners and Sir Arthur, and committed to the Fleet; but upon submission Released. In Ireland the War was almost at an end, nothing considerable but Galloway and some few Castles holding out, and some loose parties forraging the Country; whereupon the Lord lanrickard then in Galloway, about the beginning of March sent a Letter to Lieutenant-General Ludlow,Lord Clanric∣kard sues to Lieu. Gen. Lud∣low for a peace. to desire of him, that in or∣der to a composure and conclusion of that bloody wasting War in that King∣dom, he or the Commissioners would give safe-conduct for the chief persons of the Irish, out of every County, to meet and to agree of terms about a Peace; not doubting, as he expressed, if it should be refused, but that they were able to maintain themselves, till supplies from abroad, and courage at home, and their wants and discouragements from England, should alter the case. To this was answered by Ludlow,His Answer; That the Commissioners could not, nor would allow such a thing as a Council of the Irish to settle the Kingdom; but that if they would submit, they should have such Articles and Conditions as was fit for them. For that the Parliament, whose that Kingdom was, would have the ordering and Government of it; and that it was not for those in Arms against their Authority, to think of such an absurd condescention. This Answer being returned to two or three offers of surrender, took not effect; yet prevailed on several parties, as the Lord Muskerry's, Fitz Patrick's, and the Odwyr's, to come in and submit, with liberty of transporting their Forces in∣to the service of the King of Spain, or to abide at home under such and such fines; but none to be indempnified by any Articles, that should be found guil∣ty of any Massacre in the first year of the Rebellion. Galloway had before of∣fered to capitulate; but because the Articles were somewhat of the largest de∣mand, they were first transmitted to the Parliament; for there was no plenipo∣tence then in Ireland; Lambert was nominated, but by Cromwel mockt of the honour of Lord-Deputy; a person too brisk (and understanding, and seeking his Interest too much) for that employment, it being reserved for Fleetwood after his Marriage with Oliver's Daughter and Ireton's Relict. The English had now a meeting with the Marquess of Arguile, after many
delays and put offs,Arguile treats with Commis∣sioners, at Dumbarton. and fine excuses for them, about the 20 of March at Dum∣barton-Castle, whither within an hour after the arrival of the Parliaments-Com∣missioners (Major-General Dean, and Major Saloway; for Dean was not thought Mercurial enough of himself, to word it with the Scot) he came at∣tended by some 30 persons, having ordered before the most of his Name and Septs of Highland-Gentry to wait on him. He insisted much upon the Salvo Iure of the Kirk, who had fasted and prayed for a blessing on this meeting, the Marquess being the Patron and principal defender of their mouldering Pres∣bytery. After two or three days conference, the Sophie's parted, having enter∣tained their time with some Godly descants upon providence, the Parliaments most Supreme Authority,Blackness-Ca∣stle ordered to be blown up. and his Highland mightiness. Blackness-Castle was now ordered to be blown up with Powder by Dean, who passed by Newark-house, (Garrisoned as was said last Summer by the English, but retaken soon after by Colonel Massey in his march upon the Lancashire designe) to Ayre, where the platform of a Citadel was now laid, as being most convenient for the Trade either of France or Ireland, lying the most Westward part of Scotland to the Highlands.Moss-Troo∣pers busie and mischievous. Several mischiefs were about this time done by the Moss-Troo∣pers about the Borders. A considerable party of Horse and Foot under Commissary-General Reynolds, were sent to Athlone, which lies in the center of Ireland, where he in this month of March reduced Bally League,Several places in Ireland ta∣ken by the Eng∣lish. and two other Garrisons in the Collough, and thereby gained a very considerable Pass over the Shannon, and firm hold and footing in the County of Longford, so that in all with Logh-rea, Portumna, Bal∣linaston, Melecha, Ragera, &c. thirty several places were taken: Galloway was now likewise upon Treaty of a surrender, and had sent out their Propositions, in the framing whereof some disputes and difference arose betwixt the Souldiers and Citizens; but by the wisdome and menage of the Marquess Clanrickard were again accommodated. That which made this willingness of yielding, was the several losses of Vessels with Corn and Provision intercepted by some ships of the Parliament, who watched that Harbour; and Lorrain was despaired of, be∣ing now engaged upon a march into France. Those Articles being thought too high by L. G. Ludlow then Commander in chief in Ireland, were by him and the Commissioners transmitted to England. An Act for re∣moving obstru∣ctions in the sale of Crown∣lands.The year ends with an Act for removing obstructions in the sale of the King, Queens Lands, &c. the Commissioners being, Sir William Roberts, Francis Mus∣senden, and others, who made quick work of the Royal Revenue. Anno Dom. 1652. Black-monday March 29, predicted by Will. Lilly.THis Year began with a most dreadful expectation of an approaching Eclipse on the 29 of March, the effects whereof one William Lilly (a man infamous for Prognosticks and Divinations against the King, His Cause, and His Party) and others of that Astrological Tribe had predicted should be sudden and most pernicious; and during the time thereof, it should be so dark, that men should hardly be able to Read or Write without a Candle; the day it happened on be∣ing therefore called by them Black-munday: But Lilly so shot beyond the mark, (it proving not half so gloomy and terrible, though most people were so foo∣lishly fearful, as to take Antidotes and keep close for fear of some maligne In∣fluences and Vapours) that his credit of Vaticination was utterly lost, and re∣garded no more for the future than one of his old worthless Almanacks. I men∣tion this the rather, because this mans wilde presages were the Oracles of the Vulgar; for on his fatidical Lips they depended, which never failed of pronoun∣cing successes to those Worthies of Westminster, whose Balaam he might have been said to have been, being hired by them to detract from the King.
The Parliament having the Dutch business mainly in their Eye, it was neces∣sary that a full and plenary deliberation and resolution should be used in that affair; and therefore they ordered the vacating of several Committees, that the House might be better attended, and the Publike first served: the powers of the Committees for the University and Indemnity (which it had been happy for the Royalists had never been in .) were now recalled; the one was utterly extinct, the other revived soon , in that of-it-self-enough injurious Judicature at Haberdashers-hall, the Cmissioners thereof being Authorized to proceed in this. The King was yet at Paris during the Commotions and Broils between the French King and the Princes of the Blood,The King at Paris, April. more especially the two Princes of Conde and Comi; for the Duke of Orleans, the Kings Uncle, was rather an abet∣tor than a principal in the Quarrel, which arose from Cardinal Mazarine's pre∣valency and Authority at Court. Paris was then troubled with the same Mea∣grome that whirl'd the City of London into those tumultuous Uproars in 1641. and as mad against the Errours of Government and evil Counsellors; and had the like, nay, greater advantages and countenance of a Nobility and the Blood Royal, though that King was not then to seek for Arms, Money, or his Castles, but with a well-furnisht Army was able to chastise these undutiful demeanors of His Subjects. The Spaniard (whose Interest it was to keep these dissentions on foot) foreseeing the weakness of the Princes Forces, offered them his assi∣stance (having almost mastered Barcelona the Capital City in Catalonia held by the French, and Graveling in Flanders just upon the surrender and Dunkirk de∣signed also to the same Conquest) and presently sent in the Duke of Lorrain with all his Forces into France, while in the interim Marshal De Turenne the Kings General had defeated the Duke De Nemours with the Princes Army at E∣stampes. But these Auxiliaries seemed so to turn the ballance of that Victory, that the King our Soveraign, who had from his first arrival laboured in the intrigue of that difference, perswading the French King to some condescentions of Peace, and had passed personally betwixt both parties, advising that King, from the un∣happy Issues of the War in England, which had so fatally evened to Himself, not to refuse an Accommodation; and accounting to the Princes the Kings strength and power, and probability of reducing them, though to little effect: Now to save the further effusion of Blood, and to prevent that Ruine which he saw so neer at hand, wherein He was so much concerned (by the obstinacy of the Princes party, who would not yield to any thing without the Cardinals re∣moval, which the King and Queen-mother would no way grant at the Com∣mand of their Subjects) He betook himself to the Duke of Lorrain then at Dampmartin, where he was received with all possible demonstrations of Honour, by that Army drawn up in Battalia, the Irish Officers of three Regiments of that Nation being admitted to kiss his Hand. In this encounter at Estampes, the Duke of York (then on the Kings side) did so nobly and valiantly behave himself,The Duke of York Renown∣ed for this Ser∣vice. that the Marshal de Turenne his Ge∣neral, gave a very obliging Character of him in his Letters, as the onely me∣riting person in that Service; which procured him especial regard and Honour from that Court, and all the Grandees of that Nation, which they abundantly testified on all occasions. In the interim of that Action, the King, His Brother, after some Conference with the Duke of Lorrain, had engaged him to a kind of Neutrality, which he declared and made evident; just as the two Armies of the King and Princes were facing one another, to the disappointment of a resolu∣tion and desperate Engagement on the Princes ide, who were compell'd to re∣treat to Paris, and resume those thoughts of Peace, which from their Confi∣dence in Lorrain they had totally abandoned. The frantick Parisians were so in∣censed at this peaceful conclusion, that they publikely taxed the King and His Mothers menage thereof with that Duke; so that till the advantages thereof should reclaim their mistake, the King withdrew himself for some time to St.
Germains,The King at St. Germains with the Marq. of Ormond and E. of Ca∣stlehaven. whence upon the conclusion of the whole affair he returned most in∣finitely welcome to those so lately-passionate and inconsiderate people. Whither a while before, the Marchioness of Ormond, having left Ireland, came to meet the Marquess her Husband, and was followed by the Earl of Castlehaven. We must back again return to that Kingdom, now quite spent with the con∣tinued Calamities of a luckless War, which after several Surrenders and Capitu∣lations, was managed there by flyi , and sudden Excursions and Re∣treats; the sum of which was in :Several parties of the Irish submit. On the third of April, Roscommon-Castle was yilded (as likewise -Town) to Commissary-General Rey∣nolds, by Major Daly; and Colonel Connor Teige O. Roe submitted at the same time upon Articles; soon after the Earl of Westmeath, and Sir William Tungan, Sir Francis Talbot, and many others, to the number of 800, after a Treaty at Kilkenny did the same▪ and the Lord Muskerry was sending the same way, but thought his past Actions and his Condition more considerable, than to be hud∣led up in common and ordinary Terms. Onely the Lord-Marquess Clanric∣kard, according to the Tenour of his past promise upon his first undertaking the Service, and after the sole Command of the Army, resolvedly and Loyally wai∣ved the proffer of those Kilkenny-Articles (which were now tendered as their standing Rule to all the Irish, namely, upon submission, protection; and those who ever they were that should be found guilty of the Massacres in the first Re∣bellion, to be questionable for it, and to be excluded from any benefit of Condi∣tions) and prosecuted the War afresh. On the 16 of May, with the Connaught-Forces he marched to Ballishannon, having drawn with him some Ordnance from Slego,Lord Clanric∣kard takes Ballishannon, and Dungal-Castle. and after two days Battery made a breach and Stormed it, and af∣ter two repulses carried it by main force, and gave such Quarter as his Party on the like occasion used to receive; next he took Dungal-Castle, and there the Vlster-Forces under Sir Phelim O Neal, the O. Relies and Mac Mahon's joyned with him; but upon notice of Sir Charles Coot's advancing thither after him, and of Venable's Brigades to assist him, he departed to Armagh, intending for Ra∣phoe; and in the mean time Lieutenant-General Ludlow marched towards Ross in Kerry, to attaque that strength of the Lord Muskerries: and Lieutenant-Colo∣nel Throckmorton May the 6 defeated a party of 500 Foot and 400 Horse neer Wexford, under Commissary-General Duncan, at the same time in Treaty with Ludlow, who now likewise had reduced the Lord Muskerry to a necessity of such Terms (a party of his Forces being defeated by the Lord Broghil, 300 killed, and Colonel Supple and other Officers taken Prisoners) as he bogled at first, his strong Hold of Ross having yielded on the 27 of Iune,Lord Musker∣ry yields. and his Field-forces laying down their Arms upon Articles for Transportation, Iuly 5. And Colonel Grace had a brush from Colonel Henry Ingoldsby, and another part of that Army of the Vltoghs under Mac Reli defeated in Gavan by Sir Theophilus Iones on Iune the 14. These Losses and Defeats, together with the rendition of Gallo∣way on the 12 day of May,Galloway sur∣rendered. and Proclamation of the Commissioners for Out∣lawing the County of Wicklow and parts adjacent to it, (out of which those salleys of Tories were frequently made, and not pursuable therein by reason of the Fastnesses and Bogs) it being the Store-house and Magazine of Victual for the Irish, and now miserably harassed with Fire and Sword without mercy by the English (the rather for the death of Colonel Cook,Irelands R∣ines, Submis∣sions, and sur∣renders. slain by Nash and his party of Irish, though Nash died also upon the same spot some while before) made Ireland a Scene of blood and misery, and the stubborn Natives, and the resolute Loyal English-Irish, a mournful consideration to their Friends, and a wanting laborious defence to themselves; nothing being to be afforded further upon the most considerable Surrender, than common protection and Indem∣nity from the Parliament.Ballishannon retaken, and Slego surren∣dered to the Parliament. Ballishannon was again retaken upon quarter for Life; and Slego Rendred to Sir Charles Coot; Colonel Grace got over the Sha∣non from Colonel Ingoldsby, having lost 2 Colonels, 7 Captains, and 800 Soul∣diers killed and taken, Iune 20. In May the Commissioners of the Parliament for the settlement of the Nation
of Scotland,The affairs of Scotland. having had conference with the Deputies of some Shires, who accepted the Union, and refused to Treat with others, that came not with a Plenipotence for their acquiescing therein, and engagement to it, and the Au∣thority of the Parliament; and to the fuller effect thereof, had caused Proclama∣tion to be made, that such Deputies as should acknowledge and accept the said Union, should proceed to the Election of 14 Deputies of Shires, and 7 for the Burghs, by August, to attend the Parliament at London, in the behalf of the whole Kingdom; departed out of Scotland for London to make report of their trans∣action, which had hitherto met with very obstinate averseness to the Parlia∣ments tender of Incorporation; the provincial Assemblies of the Kirk every where declaring against it, & forbidding the people to accept or embrace any such moti∣on. Nor did the new English Judges finde better welcome than the Commissioners, though three of them were noted men of the Scotch Nation, the chief of whom was the Lord Swinton and Colonel Lockhart; and though at their opening of the Session or Term, they declared the Parliaments resolution of not altering any thing from their Laws, save the Stile and Form of proceedings in the Kings Name; nor would lay aside their Church-Government if peaceable, nor suffer long such as were Ignorant and Scandalous persons to preach, or Exercise in pub∣like, the great Eye-sore to that Kirk-governed people. At first the Officers of the several Courts refused to give their Attendance, and absented them∣selves; but seeing their places woud be without demur disposed of, they as sud∣denly complied. As to Martial Affairs,Dunotter-Castle yielded, May 28. Dunotter-Castle after the Cannon had played two days against it, was rendred to Colonel Morgan, with several Regalia and Goods be∣longing to the Crown (though that and the Chair of State and Scepter, sup∣posed to be there, could not be found) and the Earl Marshal, on the 28 of May: the Garrison having yielded upon Souldier-like Honourable Articles: Colonel Fitch's Regiment was sent to Innerness, where a little Frigat of four Guns, built six mile up Land, was brought down by the strength of Men to the Logh where∣in the Highlanders passed to and fro, to secure and provide for the Garrison, and hinder the entercourse of the Scots. A Citadel was likewise now designed here,Citadels built in Scotland. and another at Ayre, by Major-General Dean, consisting of six Bulworks, which be∣ing to be raised upon Sand, it was ordered that within and without it should be lined with Lime; and these two Fortifications, with two more, one at Leith, and another at St. Iohnstons, being all built with Free-stone, became the most artful and impregnable places, and a Bridle to any Scotch Insurrection or National de∣signe of Liberty. Some Companies of Colonel Overton's were likewise shipped for the Orkney and Shetland-Islands, the most Northern parts and point of Scot∣land, who forsooth had readily embraced the English Union, to no other purpose I wis than to give friendly Entertainment and Harbour to General Blake, upon his sailing neer this time thither, after Van Trump and the Dutch East India ships then expected home that way. The Treaty continued yet with Arguile and other the Highland Hogens, where he, and Marquess Huntly and Montross's Sons had another conference at Saint Iohnstons; but neither concluded nor abrupted the matter of their meeting, sa∣ving promises, and protestations of Friendship, and Peaceableness, and a kinde of neutrality, in order to satisfie the expectation of a Plenary compliance, of which Arguile was most prodigally complemental; so that now neither from Irish nor Scot, nor other of the Kings Dominions, was there any thing more to be feared, than that the States of England would loose the profit of Seizure and Confisca∣tion by the submission and timely application of those in Arms against the Au∣thority of their Victorious Commonwealth. And they had sufficiently cau∣tioned against such retrenchments of their Conquest, except in case of Articles to important places and persons (in Ireland (as is said before) it being taken for a known and unvariable Rule:) as for England, there were now more. Forfeitures hastening to their Corban, by a new List of Papist-Delinquents, to be Limboed by the States Inquisitors General at Drury-House.
These were their civil Garlands and Ovations, not because they had saved, but because they had ruined so many of their fellow-Subjects, whose For∣tunes and Estates Oyled the Wheels of their Triumphant Chariots, and galloped it over all Obstacles and Impediments, even through Rivers, nay an Ocean of Blood. For their precipitant Successes, disdaining to be taken off their Glorious Career, made the Belgick Lyon stoop to the Yoak, and draw his part in the progress of their Fame, which flew swift to all the parts of the World; more to the wonderment than expectation of all Men: who thinking the Circum abient Seas of their new-acquired Do∣minions, not Water enough to wash off that Pollution and deep-dyed Guilt of the Murther of their Soveraign, saw them most officiously to receive and swallow a further tribute of Blood, as due to their challenged Soveraignty there∣on, and their impatient ambition of being supreme Lords over the High and Mighty, and to domineer far and wide without Rivals or Competitors, in this extended Empire of the Ocean. The rise of the Dutch War.The rise of this War on this side, we partly hint here, and have partly touched before, namely the rejectment of their civil offer and Embassie made to the Dutch by Saint Iohn (from the similitude of their Governments, and their Arrival to it, the danger they feared from Monarchs and Princes, and from the interest of the Prince of Aurange with these States, which by all means was to be weakened by the neerer alliance of both Commonwealths) their indignation and disdain to be thus refused, and lastly the proud felicity of their Atchievements, which gave the advantage of Quarrel with whom they pleased; and especially, to revenge those Contumelies done to Dorislaus and Saint Iohn, in the very presence of the States General; their displeasure whereat they gave the Dutch a tast of, in their Act forbidding forrain ships to trade hither, &c. the last October. On the Dutch side the Quarrel arose chiefly from a vain presumption that they were able to Master the English at Sea, for that people naturally measure their interest by Power, not by Justice; and there wanted not those great ones (rela∣ted to the Prince of Aurange) who mainly promoted this Rupture among the States themselves; and indeed they proved the Major part, hoping then well of his Majesties affairs in Scotland. But they proving bad, the States of Holland and Zealand, being maritime Provinces, who had at first stickled for an alliance, as was tendered, had prevailed that three Embassadors, to wit, Myn Heeren Cats, Schaep, and Vandeperre, should immediately pass into England, up∣on the notice of the above-mentioned Act, and resume the Treaty offered at the Hague: these being at last come, found very cool & difficult tendencies or inclina∣tions to Peace; for the case (as Saint Iohn said) was now altered: whereupon another Embassador the Lord Newport was sent, with private Instructions, (but no power to conclude) to enquire and inform himself, in what readiness and preparation the Parliament were for a Naval War; what discontents from the Royalist, or Faction in the Army, or Ambition among the Grandees them∣selves, might effect to their advantage: where though he mist of the main, a∣bout Cromwel's intended overthrow of the Parliament; yet they had encou∣ragement enough to proceed on the designe of the Oceanmastership, and ma∣king themselves absolute Lords of the Worlds Commerce: for having beaten and overcome the English, and having their Harbours at command, no Prince or people whatsoever, should be able on dare to offend them; but endure all whatsoever they should insolently enough command and re∣quire. This was the main original and Bottom of that War, though hastened and ur∣ged by some peremptory unexpected demands made here to their Embassadors, concerning the old duty of the Herring-fishing, the opening of the Scheld Custom-free from Middleburgh to Antwerp, the Right of the Flag, and the business of Amboyna; which shewed they must now enter into League upon unequal Terms, and that the Market was risen, and the Exchange higher here than it was at the
Hague; so that without further trifling away time in such stiff-neckt debates, it was resolved that the Dutch Lyon should no longer couch and fawn, but raise up himself, and try by one seizure how the English Pulse beat, whether to Fear or more Courage; and so accordingly govern themselves. They had besides, about the time of this resolution, several Advertisements of injuries done their ships and Traffique upon account of the said Act, purposely laid in their way to give them the occasion. Just before, and at the entrance of War, several fore-running Accidents were taken notice of: in Scotland, a great Fire at Glascow,A great Fire at Glascow. which defaced that City, and did damage to the value of 100000 l. Congleton-Church in Cheshire fired by Lightning,Congleton-Chuh in Cheshire fired by Lightning. The like Fire in Essex. The State-house of Amsterdam burnt. Sa-fights seen in the Air. with 1 men killed thereby; the same fire at East-Okendon in Es∣sex, preceded by a great and continual drought. On Holland-side, the State-house of Amsterdam was burnt, much money lost, and other Writings and Goods lost and burned. At the mouth of the Maze, Sea-fights were seen in the Air at noon∣day with English and Dutch Colours; and such other the like Prognosticks, which much amazed all people, who were now solely intent upon the Issue of this War. To the riddance of this anxious Expectation, the Dutch had prepared a Fleet of War under their old Admiral Van Trump, and given order for the spee∣dy equipping of another Fleet of 150 sail, while the Parliament was yet un∣provided of an answerable Force; for General Blake plied then about the Downs with about 25 sail, and no more: thither the Dutch Fleet came, in pretence of Convoy to some of their Merchant-men from the Straights; attempted by some Parliament-Frigats under Captain Young; and thereupon ensued an Encounter,An Encounter between the Forces of Eng∣land and Hol∣land. to the open breach of Amity and Peace between the Commonwealths: In which, because both parties pleaded the Defensive part, though apparently the Dutch began it in the Downs, it will be best to give you what either of the Ge∣nerals or Officers said and writ themselves on this occasion: Whereunto are ad∣ded the Memorials of the Dutch Embassadors, and the Answer of the Parlia∣ment upon the same. The open rupture was honested on both sides with a punctilio of Honour, the Right of the Flag, which the Dutch could not without prejudice to their more Antient State give to this puisny Commonwealth; who contrarily more confidently expected it: and therefore take these accounts from several of their Commanders. The first, in a Letter from Capt. Young. Right Honourable, As I was coming to the Westward to take the Command of the West-guard,Capt. Young's Letter. the twelfth instant, off the Start, I descried a Fleet of ships about a dozen sail, coming from the Southward, being Admiral, Vice, and Rear in the Fleet, so that I did conceive them to be Sir George Ayscue's Fleet; but I making sail off to them, found them a Fleet of Hollanders come from Genoa and Legorn; those three with Flags were States-men of War their Convoyers, the other Mer∣chants ships, some upwards of thirty Guns, and some under; so I bore with the Admiral, and did send to him by my Master, that he should strike his Flag, and did desire a right understanding might be between us before any Blood was shed in the controversie; on this the Admiral took in his Flag, and put abroad a Pen∣dant: he said he did belong to Amsterdam, but his Name I know not, but the ship hath two wilde men or the like in her Stern, and some other things between them; she hath some 38 Guns: to then the Vice-Admiral came up with me with his Flag abroad, being a ship of 42 Guns; so I called to perswade him to strike: he bid me come on board and strike it; so I sent my Boat on board to perswade him to it, to prevent the loss of Blood, if it might be; but he sent me word by my Master he would not strike; so then being fitted for it, I came up
very neer on the Weather-quarter; but before I fired, I called to the Captain my self to take in his Flag, but he said he would not; so then I commanded a Broad side and a Volley of small-shot to be fired on him, and I received the like from him again: thus we past some four or five Broad sides each at other, though I was forced to be at some further distance from him than at first, I fearing the Admi∣ral would have laid me on Board on the Weather-side, he having fitted his ship, and come up Main-sail, and all to gain the Wind of me, forced me to keep the Wind of him; then Captain Reynolds being come up fair within shot of his Weather-quarter, having fired six Guns before at the Rear-Admiral, as he came in amongst us; so he fired part of a Broad side at the Vice-Admiral, just at that instant as he was taking in his Flag, the Recovery being come up even within shot just as his Flag was in, and the Rear-Admiral struck likewise: So I sent aboard the Admiral, That I did demand the Vice-Admiral, either in his person or his ship to carry into Port, to make good what damage was done: he told my Master, he did not meddle in the least himself as yet, as long as it was onely a∣bout striking the Flag, the which he said was now taken in; but if I sought any further matter, as the Surprizal of him or his ship, he was bound and would assist, she being the States-ship as well as he, not then knowing, or could take any notice of any further intentions: So I desired Captain Reynolds and Captain Chapman to come on board to consult with me what further to do in it; it be∣ing neer night; and it was the Judgement of us all, not to proceed any further in it, the Flag being taken in, by reason the Treaty being between the Nations at present, the case of Breach of the Peace might not be any way imputed on our part. I have received some damage in my Hull, Sails, and Rigging, the which I shall soon; God willing, get repaired again. I had one man even as good as killed out-right, died ince, and some four wounded, but I hope they will recover. For my own part, I bless God for it, I am very well: I do be∣lieve I gave him his Belly-full of it; for he sent me word he had Orders from the States, That if he struck he should lose his Head; but at length he did strike, which makes me conceive he had enough of it. Your Honours humble Servant at Command, Anth. Young. President, Plymouth-Sound, May 14, 1652. The second, in a Letter from Gen. Blake. Right Honourable, Gen. Blake's Letter.I have dispatcht away this Express to your Honours, to give you an account of what past yesterday between us and the Dutch Fleet. Being in Rye-bay, I received intelligence from Major Bourn, that Van Trump with 40 sail was off the South-sand-head, whereupon I made all possible speed to ply up towards them, and yesterday in the morning we saw them at Anchor in and neer Dover-Road; being come within three Leagues of them, they weighed and stood away by a Wind to the Eastward: we supposing their intention was to leave us, to avoid the dispute of the Flag; about two hours after they altered their course and bore directly with us, Van Trump the headmost; whereupon we lay by, and put ourselves into a fighting posture, judging they had a resolution to en∣gage. Being come within Musquet-shot, I gave order to fire at his Flag, which was done thrice: after the third shot he let flie a Broad side at us. Major Bourn, with those ships that came from the Downs, being eight, was then making to∣wards us: we continued fighting till night; then our ship being unable to sail, by reason that all our Rigging and Sails were extreamly shattered, our Mizen∣mast shot off, we came with advice of the Captains to an Anchor about three or four Leagues off the Ness, to refit our ship, at which we laboured all the night this morning we espied the Dutch Fleet about four Leagues distance from ours
towards the Coast of France, and by advice of a Council of War, it was resolv∣ed to ply to windward to keep the Weather-gage, and we are now ready to let fail our Anchor this Tide: what course the Dutch Fleet steers we do not well know, nor can we tell what harm we have done them; but we suppose one of them to be sunk, and another of thirty Guns we have taken, with the Cap∣tains of both; the Main-mast of the first being shot by the Board, and much wa∣ter in the Hold, made Captain Lawson's men to forsake her. We have six men of ours slain, and nine or ten desperately wounded, and 25 more not without danger, amongst them our Master and one of his Mates, and other Officers. We have received about seventy great shot in our Hull and Masts, in our Sails and Rigging without number, being Engaged with the whole Body of the Fleet for the space of four hours; being the Mark at which they aimed. We must needs acknowledge it a great mercy that we had no more harm, and our hope is the Righteous God will continue the same unto us, if there do arise a War be∣tween us; they being first in the Breach, and seeking an occasion to Quarrel, and watching, as it seems, an Advantage to brave us upon our own Coast, &c. Your most humble Servant, Robert Blake. From aboard the James, three Leagues off the Hydes, the 20 of May, 1652. The third, in a Letter from Maj. Bourne. Upon the 18th of May,Maj. Bourne's Relation. the Wind being at North-East, the weather some∣thing hazy, about ten in the morning we saw a great Fleet on the back-side of the Goodwyn-sand, which lay with their Sails hayl'd up, and drove to the South∣ward, the latter Tide of Ebb in land; about twelve they were so nigh, that we plainly descried them to be all Men of War, consisting of 41 in number, one whereof had a Flag at the Main-top-mast-head, the rest Jacks and Ancients, Hollands Colours, at which time they were neer the South-sand-head. There was in the Downs, the Andrew, Triumph, Fairfax, Entrance, Centurion, Adven∣ture, Assurance, Grey-hound, and the Seven Brothers, all the rest of the Fleet being with the General to the Westward, by whose special Command I wore a Flag at the Main-top-mast-head; the appearance of which I humbly conceive was one cause amongst others which moved their General to send two Frigats towards me; which as soon as I perceived plying into the Road, I sent out the Grey-hound to Examine them, and know the ground of their Approach; who retur∣ned this Answer to the Captain, That they had a Message from their Admiral to the Commander in the Downs; at which he made sail towards me, and permit∣ted them to come in: the two Frigats came neer and saluted the Flag, and then the Captains came on Board, whose Names were, one Tyson, and the other Al∣dred, who brought this Message from their Admiral Van Trump, That by reason of much Northerly Winds, he with his Fleet was put to the Southward further than he intended, and having Anchored the day before off Dunkirk, many of his ships had lost Anchors and Cables, and so were forced to Leewards; but withal declared, that they had special Command from their Admiral to signifie thus much, That it was the onely cause of their coming to prevent any thoughts or misapprehensions, for that he had not the least purpose to offer injury to any of the English Nation; but for fear lest any Noise or Alarm should be gi∣ven either at Land or Sea, he thought good to send this Message. And further, the one of them in discourse said, that their Admiral Trump would have come himself into the Road, but that he was not willing to breed any difference a∣bout his Flag, forasmuch as he had not order to take it down. To whom I replied, That I presumed there would be no new thing required of them, and neither more nor less would be Expected from them, but what they knew to be the Antient Rights of this Nation; and withal I desired them
to return this Answer from me to their General, That their Message was civil, that our General was to the Westward, whom I looked for hourly, and that received; and if what they delivered was so intended, I desired the Reality thereof might be manifested by their speedy drawing off from this place with their Fleet, for else this their appearance would be otherwise expounded: and so I dismiss'd them, who made sail to their Admiral, who lay off the South-sands-head. I expected them to come into the Road every moment, and therefore was in readiness with the small strength I had under my charge. So soon as the two Frigats (before mentioned) came back to their General, they all made Sail and stood towards Dover, and there they came to an Anchor that Tide. At the first appearance of them, after I had made them certainly to be the Holland-fleet, I did according to my Duty give such an Account thereof to the Right Honou∣rable the Council of State, as the time and other business would permit; and withal I immediately dispatcht a Ketch to our General, who met with the ad∣vice thereof that night about Ness. All the next night we lay in readiness, our Anchors apeak, and kept two Frigats one at a distance from the other betwixt us and them, giving them Instructions to make a Signal to me, either night or day, that I might understand their motion, whether towards the General or elsewhere, to the end I might the better be able to order my self and the party with me to the best advantage, for security of the General's Fleet and our selves. In the morning about ten a clock I received-advice from the General, being a little to the Westward off Foulstone; and according to Order received from him, Calculated the Time and Tide, so that we might most opportunely make Con∣junction of our Forces. About twelve a clock I set sail out of the Downs, the Wind being Easterly: immediately after I prceived the Hollanders to be under sail some of them, and the rest making ready. We Steered alongst, and when we came as high as the South-foreland, the Holland-Fleet was got off the Shore, and were half Channel over, plying to Windward towards Calice; at which time I saw our General and those with him; and within an hour after or there∣abouts, the Holland Fleet bore up and made sail towards him: We hastened towards him, and hope I may say, seasonably came in, for by that time the Guns were fired betwixt the Admirals, we were with the Body of their Fleet, and En∣gaged with them from half an hour past four in the afternoon till it was dark: What Execution we did upon them they best know, I shall not determine it; but surely they were sensible of us, for they did their utmost to decline us, and avoid our coming near, which we endeavoured by all means; but their Admi∣ral leading the Van, they all made Sail after him, and so shot themselves to Leeward of us, and so left the Rear of the Fleet to us, which we endeavoured to sever from the rest, and accordingly did in part break the Body; and some of us who were the neerest, and had the advantage of the Wind, fell upon the Stern∣most, who I suppose found it hot work: the one of them of 30 Guns we took, which fought stoutly; another of the same force so lamed, her Main-mast shot down, and having much Water in Hold yielded, and the Captain thereof came into our Boat to save himself; the night coming on and no hope left him: I presume she sunk in the night. We not knowing what might be the Issue of this beginning, endeavoured to finde out our General, to the end we might receive Instructions how to order our selves in the morning, expecting certainly to prosecute the business then, for which end we presently came to Anchor because we would be neer them in the morning; but they did not stop, so that, in the morning we could scarce discern them at Top-mast-head; by which we concluded that they were bound over to the Coast of France, and were not wil∣ling to try it further at this time, and therefore that evening emplyed it up to∣wards Foulstone, and between that and Dover Anchored again, and the next day came into the Downs. Your very assured Friend and Servant in the work of God, N. Bourn. May 29, 1652.
To which may be added, the Translation of the Letter of the Admiral Trump to the States General. High and Mighty Lords, My last Letter was of the tenth instant,Admiral Trump's Let∣ter to the States of Holland. sent by the Messenger that brought my Instructions aboard, since when I crossed the Sea before the Mase, Vilistrin∣gen, Ostend, and Newport, until the 24 of the same Month, when we were forced to cast our Anchor, and stay there in a hard Weather and a rough Sea, until the 26 in the Morning. The Weather growing fairer, and being under sail, divers Captains of the Direction came aboard, complaining, That they had lost their Anchors and Cables, some having but two Anchors and two Cables left; so it was resolved, because the Wind did grow big, to go under the point of Dover, to prevent the loss of our ships. At one of the clock, coming before the Downs, we did send the Commander Iohn Thissen of Flissingen, and Captain Peter Al∣ders towards the Downs, to the Commander Bourn, who was there with some ships of the Parliament, whom they saluted in my Name, advertising him that we were bound to cruse the Sea about our Coast; and that having lost some Anchors by the last hard Weather, we were forced to Anchor under Dover, to help one another, and so to return to our appointed limits; having also no o∣ther order but to protect our Merchant-ships and Fishermen, and to maintain the Honour of our Country. That we therefore thought it fit to acquaint the said Commander with the same, because he should not suspect any thing to the contrary; who also did salute me, and thankt me for this notice. Upon the 19th, at two of the clock, we made sail, the Wind North-East, good Wea∣ther, sailing towards Calice, with intention to cross towards our Coast, to pro∣vide us of Cables and Anchors: Coming about Calice-cliff, we met with Cap∣tain Ioris van Sanen of Amsterdam, coming out the Streights, with Captain Hugeluyt, having in their company 7 rich Merchants ships, who are esteemed at above 50 Tuns of Gold, whom he left the 19th at Anchor right against Feverly, where about 12 ships of the Parliament did lye, and divers Frigats came to see them: and forasmuch as the said Ioris van Sanen upon the 12 of May, about Goutstart, was met by a Frigat of the Parliament, who fiercely set upon him to make him strike, and against whom he defended him neer about two hours, and so was left by the said Frigat; whereupon the said Commander Hugeluyt, and the said Van Sanen, did endeavour to finde out our main Fleet, and to give us notice of it; as he did accordingly, fearing much, that the said Merchants Vessels already might be taken: Thereupon I presently went thither, to take them under my protection, and if they were taken, to put them at Liberty, if it was possible, according to the seventh and eighth Articles of my Instruction of the 6 of May instant. Upon the way we met 15 Ships and Frigats of the Parliaments, among whom one was an Admiral, whom I intended to view, taking in all my Sails, except both my Marsh-sails, whom we did avail until the midst of the Stangs. Being within a Cannon-shot, he shot a Ball over our ship, we answering not, he shot another, to which we answered with one; presently he gives me a Broad side, being within a Musquet-shot, and shot all his side through our Ship and Sails: Divers were Wounded, some with the loss of their Arms, some otherwise; whereupon we presently gave him our Broad side, not knowing what they intended, which as yet I know not, because they did not speak a word to us, neither we to them; and we fell there∣upon to a general Fight. In the mean while came the Commander Bourn out of the Downs, with 12 of suchlike ships and Frigats mounted, as he told himself to the said Commander Iohn Thyssen and Captain Peter Alders, being aboard of him, with 60 to 70, and the Frigats with 38, to 50 pieces of Ordnance, who in the same while Assaulted our Fleet from behinde; and we fought thus from half an hour past four, till nine of the clock, the dark∣ness
parting us from one another; when both the Admirals a little beyond the reach of our Ordnance cast their Sails towards the Lee, to gather their Fleets, and to mend what was shot to pieces, we floted the whole night with a Light on every ship. The 20th in the Morning we saw the English Fleet driven Windward from us, who made sail and went towards Dover. We wanted two of our Ships, who were in the Rear of our Fleet; the Captains, Tuynman's of Middleburgh, and Siphe Fook's of Amsterdam, both ships of the Direction; whereof we found that of Captain Siphe Fook's about noon, floating without Masts: The Skipper and the Officers declared unto us that they were taken by three ships of the Parliament, two hours after Sun-set, who took from aboard the Captain and Lieutenant, with 14 or 15 men more, and put instead of them many of the English; but they fearing that the ship would sink, they took the flight, after they had plundered all in hostile manner. They declared also, that they see the said Tuynman's (being with them in the Rear of our Fleet) an hour before he was taken. We intend with this Easterly wind to cross to and fro, that we may finde out the said Streight vaerders, if it be possible, and with all other Ships with whom we may meet, to bring them safe in our Coun∣try. So ending, was Subscribed, M. Harp Trump. Dated the 30 of May, 1652. from aboard the Ship. The Lords Embassadors Paper, Exhibited 3/3 Iune, 1652. To the Council of State of the Commonwealth of England. Most Illustrious Lords, The Datch Em∣bassadors Pa∣per to the Coun∣cil of State.Even as both by word of mouth, and also by Writing, we have signified to this Council on the 3 and 6 days of this Month, taking God the searcher of Mens Hearts to witness, that the most unhappy Fight of the Ships of both Commonwealths did happen against the knowledge and will of the Lords States General of the Vnited Netherlands; so also are we daily more and more assured both by Messages and Letters, witnessing the most sincere hearts of our said Lords, and that with Grief and astonishment they received the Fatal News of that unhappy rash Action; and that upon what we thereupon presently sent them word of, they did consult and endeavour to finde out what Remedy chiefly may be applied to mitigate that raw and Bloody Wound: To which end, they have written out for to gather a solemn Meeting or Parliament of all the Provinces, whereby we do not doubt but there will be provided for these Troubles (by Gods favour) such a Cure and present help, whereby not onely the outward cause of all further Evil may be taken away; but also by an Intrn comfort, the mindes may be redressed and reduced again to a better hope of our Treaty in hand; which thing being now most earnestly agitated by our Lords, for the common good of both Nations, to shun that detestable shedding of Christian Blood, (so much desired, and would be dearly bought by their common Enemies of both Nations, and of the Reformed Religion) We again do crave of this most Honourable Council, and beseech you by the Pledges both of the common Religion and Liberty, mean while to suffer nothing to be done out of too much heat, that afterwards may prove neither revocable nor repairable by too late idle Vows and Wishes; but rather, that you would let us receive a kinde Answer without further delay upon our last Request. Which we do again and again desire so much the more, because we under∣stand, that the Ships of our Lords and of our Skippers, both on the broad-sea, as in the Ports of this Commonwealth, some by force, some by Fighting are ta∣ken by your men and kept. Given at Chelsey, 13/3 Iune, 1652. Signed, I. Cats. G. Schaep. P. Vanderperre.
The Answer of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, to the Papers presented to them by the Council of State, from the Embassadors Extraordinary of the Lords the States General of the United Provinces. The first whereof was dated the 3 of June, the second the 6 of June, and the last dated the 13 of June, 1652. new Stile, upon occasion of the late Fight between the Fleets. The Parliament of the Commonwealth of England calling to minde with what continued Demonstrations of Friendship and sincere Affections,The Parlia∣ments Answer thereunto. from the very beginning of their Intestine Troubles they have proceeded towards their Neighbours of the Vnited Provinces, omitting nothing on their part that might conduce to a good Correspondence with them, and to a growing up into a more neer and strict Union than formerly; do finde themselves much surprized with the unsutable Returns that have been made thereunto, and especially at the Acts of Hostility lately committed in the very Roads of England, upon the Fleet of this Commonwealth; the matter of Fact whereof stated in clear Proofs, is hereunto annexed: upon serious and deliberate consideration of all, and of the several Papers delivered in by our Excellencies to the Council of State, the Parliament thinks fit to give this Answer to those Papers. The Parliament, as they would be willing to make a charitable Construction of the Expressions used in the said Papers, endeavouring to represent the late Engagement of the Fleets to have happened without the knowledge, and a∣gainst the minde of Your Superiours: So when they consider how disagreeable to that profession the Resolutions and Actions of Your State, and their Mini∣sters at Sea have been, even in the midst of a Treaty offered by themselves, and managed here by Your Excellencies; the extraordinary preparations of 150 Sail of Men of War, without any visible occasion but what doth now appear (a just ground of jealousie in your own Judgements, when Your Lordships pre∣tended to excuse it) and the Instructions themselves given by Your said Supe∣riours to their Commanders at Sea, do finde too much cause to believe, That the Lords the States General of the Vnited Provinces have an intention by Force to Usurp the known Rights of England in the Seas, to destroy the Fleets that are, under God, their Walls and Bulworks, and thereby expose this Common∣wealth to Invasion at their pleasure, as by their late Action they have attempted to do: Whereupon the Parliament conceive they are obliged to endeavour, with Gods assistance, as they shall have opportunity, to seek Reparation of the Wrongs already suffered, and Security that the like be not attempted for the future. Nevertheless, with this minde and desire, That all Differences betwixt the Nations may (if possibly) be peaceably and friendly composed, as God by his Providence shall open a way thereunto, and Circumstances shall be conducing to render such Endeavours less delatory, and more effectual than those of this kinde heretofore-used have been. This Answer Insinuating the intention of a War, being Communicated to the States General, they ordered their remaining Embassador to insist upon, and demand a Categorick-Answer (so was it called) to their Proposals in the Treaty, positively off or on; which being made, The House took into debate the business of the Embassador Extraordinary from the States General of the Vnited Provinces, and thereupon Passed these Re∣solutions, to be sent to the Embassador in Answer to his fourth and last Paper. 1. That the Lords the States General of the United Provinces do pay and satisfie unto this Commonwealth the Charges and Damages this State hath su∣stained,Their Demands. and been put unto by the Preparations of the said States General, and
their attempts this Summer, the Particulars whereof shall be in due time pro∣duced. 2. That upon the payment of the sum to be agreed upon (as aforesaid) for Char∣ges and Damages, or securing the same to the satisfaction of the Parliament, there shall follow immediately thereupon a Cessation of all Acts of Hostility, and the Ships and Goods taken since the Difference shall be Released. 3. The two former Propositions being assented unto, and put in Execution, the security for the time to come which the Parliament doth expect, is by both States contracting a firm Alliance and Consistency of Interest for the good of both, which the Parliament of England is willing on their part by all just ways and means to endeavour. And so we pass from these civil Debates, to the prosecution of the War. This rude accost being over by reason of the night, the two Fleets parted, Van Trump to the back of the Goodwyn-sand, whence he sailed for Zealand; and being recruited to the number of 120 sail (while General Blake with 70 Men of War was gone Northwards to seize upon their Busses and Fishing-trade, and to meet their East-India-men, five in number, coming as usually since Am∣boyna home that way) came into the Road of the Downs again, where Sir George Ayscue, who arrived at Plymouth, May 25, from the Barbadoes, and came thither on the 6 of Iune, was ordered by the Parliament to attend, till a Fleet was made ready in the River of Thames to joyn with him; having in the in∣terim on the first of Iune seized on 10 sail, with a Man of War of 22 Guns, sent to give notice to all Merchant-men; and on the 17, fourteen more, some whereof were stranded, with three Men of War of twenty, twenty six, and thirty Guns. Trump in the Downs.Van Trump (having understood the aforesaid opportunity) clapt in be∣tween the River and Sir George, leaving part of his Fleet to the Westward, re∣solving to surprize those ships coming out, or to sink those under Sir George Ayscue; but advice being immediately given from Dover of the posture of the Enemy, the Navy within budged not; and thereupon the Dutch presently ad∣drest themselves to the other part of the designe, and the opportune time of Ebb coming on, the 8 of Iuly they sailed towards Sir George; but the Wind failing, they came to an Anchor a League off, and the next Ebb (against which time, a Platform was cast up between Deal and Sandown-Castles, and Cannon plan∣ted thereon to bear upon them as they came in, and the Militia thereabouts in Arms at the shore, from whence several Mariners reinforced the Fleet, which consisted of no more than 15 ships) as they were under sail the Wind came fully about South-west (which the Dutch afterwards said was the Witch-Act Wind) and blew so directly in their Teeth, that they could not possibly make up to them; and it being likely to continue so, for it came in with a brisk gale, Trump that had no longer time to stay, the Fleets of Merchants for the Nor∣thern, Eastern, and West-India Seas, waiting his return for their Convoy North∣wards, departed for Holland; and having received the said charge of ships, and order about the Fishing, sailed towards the Sound, whence having secured and left that part of his Fleet to their Voyage, he proceeded with the rest towards the Northermost point of Scotland, the Isles of Orkney, where General Blake was newly in Harbour,The English and Dutch Fleets July-Encoun∣ter. after a Squadron of his Frigats had spoiled the Herring-fishing, by driving most, seizing some other Busses, which after the accustomed Toll of every tenth Herring, as was in gross computed, being paid, were re∣leased, with a charge of Fishing there no more without English leave, and the taking of their 12 Men of War that guarded them, 3 whereof were after∣wards sunk. (They made a stout and gallant resistance, and killed abundance of the English.) They are scat∣tered by a Storm.It was Trump's Resolution to have here Engaged likewise with Blake, having met already with the Dutch East-India Fleet of five Sail; but upon a sudden such a Storm arose, that he was glad to put to Sea, and there his Fleet was
so scattered and dispersed, that he came home but with 42 sail; the rest came after much tossing to an Anchor, some at Norway, the rest in Scotland, with two of the East-India ships which at first were given for lost, with those War-ships that were missing, but shortly after, all except six came home in safety: Trump to Scheveling,Blake takes several of their Frigats, and divers Priso∣ners. and so to the Hague, to give an account: Blake first to the Coast of Holland with six of the Dutch Frigats he had taken, and 900 Prisoners in them, and thence to Yarmouth for Victual, and cross again to the Enemies Coast; several losses having happened to both Nations in the mean time by private Free-booters, and some small Men of War taken from us. While Van Trump's Fleet was now rigging and fitting out, another Fleet of 50 Men of War set to Sea from Zealand to go Westward, and Convoyed a Fleet of Merchant-men the same way where Sir George Aycue's station was a∣bout Plymouth (at which Port two Streights-men newly arrived,De Buyter and Sir Geo: Ays∣cue's Engage∣ment at Ply∣mouth, Au. 16. and five East-India ships came in soon after in safety) in expectation of them. They were seen first at Bright hemstead in Sussex, where they chased and took some Barques, and so Westward  the back of the Isle of Wight; advertisement whereof being given, it was resolved that Sir George with his Fleet of 40 Men of War, most Merchant-men except the Flag-ships, should stretch over to the Coast of France to meet them. Accordingly on the 16 of August, between one and two of the clock in the afternoon, they got sight of the Enemy, who quit∣ted their Merchant-men, being 50 in number. About four the fight began, the English Admiral with 9 others charging through their Fleet; but received most damage in the Shrouds, Masts, Sails, and Rigging, which was repaid the Dutch in their Hulls: Sir George having thus passed through them, got the Weather-gage and Charged them again; but all his Fleet not coming up, and the night already entred, they parted with a drawn Battle. Captain Peck the Rear-Ad∣miral lost his Leg, whereof soon after he died; several Captains were wounded, but no ship lost, onely some shattered and torn; of the Dutch not one was said to be lost, though many of them shot through and through, but so that they were able to proceed in their Voyage, and Anchored the next day after, being followed by the English, at the Isle of Bassa; but no further attempt was made by our Fleet, by reason, as 'twas pretended, of the danger of the French Coast, from whence they returned to Plymouth sound to mend and repair their damage. Whatever the matter might be, Sir George was never employed more in their Service; but 'twas judged not any default here, but the Honourable largeness of his Articles at Barbadoes were the cause thereof; and Dean was now reman∣ded and returned from Scotland, as a more confiding deserver, on whom ano∣ther Sea-General was to be conferred.Sir Geo: Ays∣cue rewarded for hs service. The States of Holland excite several Princes to assist them. Sir George had 300 l. in Ireland per an∣num, and 300 l. in Money for his pains. In the mean time the States of Holland sent away Messengers and Expresses to Denmark, and the Hans Towns, to Sweden and Poland, to give notice of the Commencement of this War, and to gain these several States to their party, Cordage and Tar being no way else to be had, as also to give timely advice to their Merchants, how to manage and secure their Estates from the English. A Proposal was likewise framed of sending for Prince Rupert (then about the Western Isles of America, having taken some West-Country Ships, being known by his black Ancient which he wore in his Poop, as a mourning Emblem of the Kings Death, attended but with a Fleet of six ships) and espousing the Kings Quarrel; but those were but high-flown vapours of their own without any ground, save that the Prince of Aurange was generally and publickly commen∣ded to, and almost enforced upon the State as Statdholder, and Captain-Gene∣ral as was his Father; and some affronts were done to those that were known to be disaffected to that Family, among whom was the Lord Embassador Paw, whose house they attempted to Storm; nor was De Wit, one of their prime Sea∣men, much more in favour, as the Zealanders soon after evidenced. Their In∣terest indeed was so much the more considerable, because of the Marquess of Brandenburgh, the next ally but the King (whose Usurped Rights, it vindicated
and asserted, would much conduce to the advantaging of them in a vigorous prosecution of the War) from whom they had already promises of a large as∣sistance of 10000 men, upon no other score but his Nephews, as appeared in his non-performance of that proffer, when the States of Holland boggled at the Overtures and Demands made by the other Provinces about the Prince; and in the same kinde he served them, having engaged their concernment in the Polish War not long after, leaving them in the lurch after the Elbing-Treaty: So that of all Princes, their Friends, they now relied most upon the Dane and the French, with whom they doubted not to make a League Offensive and De∣fensive against the English, Slily assisted by the Spaniard, and hoping of a fair be∣ginning of Amity with Sweden onely. Yet nevertheless confident were our States of going luckily through this hazardous and potent Enmity, or would their proud stomacks (Drunk with success, as the Dutch Declaration twitted them) abate a sillable of what they had determined: for having given that Categorick or positive Answer above re∣cited, upon the Dutch Embassadors desire of leave to depart, according to their Superiours as peremptory orders; they without any more ado, presently offer∣ed them Audience in order thereunto (Monsieur Paw in a Latine Speech de∣livered the sense of the Quarrel and Breach in very equal words) without any further expedients mentioned by them to resume the accommodation. Paw at his return quickly died of a surfeit of broyl'd Salmon,The Lord Em∣bassador Mon∣sieur Paw di∣eth of a surfeit by broyld Sal∣mon. no way lamented by the house of Aurange: a man suspected of ill Counsel given against the Martyr-King, he being sent hither about the time of his Martyrdom, and known to have some of his Majesties Houshold-goods and Jewels as Bribes (however hone∣sted by a pretence of purchase) for his service to the English States. The Lord Wil∣liamson and his colleague, Embassadors of Denmark demanded the same Audience the same time, being about the 29 of Iune. In Ireland, after Sir Charles Coot had taken in Ballymote, he pressed so hard upon the Lord Clanrickard, that he was forced for shelter to betake himself in∣to the Isle of Carick, while Sir Charles quartered at Portumna resolved to re∣duce him; which being inevitable, the gallant Marquess came now at last in this desperate Juncture to an Agreement, which was no more than ordinary Li∣berty to Transport himself and 3000 Irish more into any Pieces Country and service then in Amity with England,Marq. Clan∣rickard lays down Arms. within a short limitation of time. Not long after, Colonel Richard Grace being pursued into his Fastness, being the strong Fort of Inchlough in a Bog, yielded upon the like Terms, on the first of August, to Colonel Sanckey; there marched out with him 1050 men for Trans∣portation. O Brian yet held out in the Mountains of Kerry and Cork; Birn, Phelim, Mac Hugh, and Cavenagh, in the Fastnesses of Wexford and Wicklow; O Neal and Rely in Vlster: to all which places, under Reynolds, Venables, San∣chy, Sir Charles Coot, and Lieutenant-General Ludlow, distinct Forces were ordered to march. Fitz Patrick and Odwire's men were also now shipt, the Commissioners for the Parliament very willing to be rid of their Company, and they as glad to be gone, to avoid the Halter, then threatned by a High Court of Iustice. In Scotland there were some stirs in the Highlands, by Glen∣gary, the Frazers, and Mac Reynolds, and some other Septs, whereof one Mac Knab was killed, with some more of his men, being in a party which was met with by the English Highland-Forces of Lilburn and other Regiments Encam∣ped at Innerara one of Arguile's strong Castles; but nothing else happened, though the Scots were 1500 strong: but Arguile absolutely complied with the Parliament, sending them provision and supplies of all sorts; yet before Sum∣mer was quite spent, the Highlanders had made a shift to surprize two of their new-Garrisoned Castles in these parts, and made good their several Clans and pos∣sessions. Cromwel's designe upon the Parliament ap∣pears.At home the Parliament had a greater mischief breeding against them, than they feared from the most dangerous of their Forrain Enemies: A dangerous Imposture of Ambition, whose quabbing beating pains gave them no rest, nor
could all their skill tell how to asswage or cure it. It swelled every day more and more, in continual Addresses, Desires, Petitions, Declarations, till it came to be ripe, and then burst out to the dissolution of this Political body. This was the reiterated and inculcated story of the Parliaments providing for future equal Representatives, and putting a period to this; than which, nothing could be more distastful, and of greater antipathy to the present Members: which yet they did most artfully conceal and dissemble, in a hundred complying Votes and Resolves, even to the ascertaining of the longest day, November the 5, 1654. for their sitting; but that was two years too long for Cromwel, whose Fingers itched to be managing a Scepter. In order to this delay, the Committee that first sat and hatcht upon this Bill, were removed from the Nest, and the addle Eggs put under the chill incumbency of other Wilde-towl, and they to proceed therein with all expedition: a thing so unlikely, that Sultan Cromwel, who ex∣pected a Grand Cairo brood, resolved not to be baffled much longer, or await the leisure of his Mercenary servants, as after a Fast and Humiliation of him and his Council of Officers, and the Communication of the grounds thereof to the whole Army in England and Ireland (which was a Lamentation for the tedious continuance of self-interested persons in the Authority, and other Religious me∣lancholy about Charity, the want whereof was greatly bemoaned) we shall ful∣ly discover. An oblique glancing hit of Fortune now saluted the successful Forces of this State by Sea:Dunkirk taken by the Spa∣niard, and the French Fleet with relief sei∣zed by Ge. Blake. yet far more advantageous to, and directly concerning the Spa∣niard, to whom a more obliging good turn could not any way be done. The Arch-Duke Leopold now Besieged Dunkirk about the middle of August, and the French prepared to relieve it by Sea; to which purpose their Lord Great Admi∣ral the Duke of Vendosme had equipped a Fleet, which from the Coasts of Nor∣mandy and Britanny came to an Anchor at Calice-road, where some of General Blake's Frigats, Crusing up and down from the Body of the Fleet with Him, espied them; who thereupon weighed, and made what sail they could towards Dunkirk; but were presently fetcht up by those nimble Vessels, and 7 of that Kings ships (the Admiral whereof was the Triton of 31 Guns, and aboard her the Sieur Dimulet, who Commanded in chief) having most of them between 20 and 30 Guns, with a little Frigat of 8, were taken and brought to Dover; by which disaster the Besieged were necessitated to capitulate, and the Governour the Count d'Estrades (who was also after in the same Command) yielded it there∣upon: a more difficult task than so, had the Broils in France not been so high, or we so neer, or the Dutch proffer of Money for it (as well knowing what a good stationary Port it would be for their Navies upon all occasions) would have been admitted: of which injurious imprudence, their Embassador Boreel very highly and angerly complained. It was taken with a great loss of men, and troublesome Siege, by the Prince of Conde, in the 1647. and the expence of some English Blood of the Oxford-Disbands in 1646. under Colonel Tillier; after retaken, and hath since suffered many vicissitudes under the Dominations of three Princes and one Usurper. A General Assembly now convened themselves at Edenburgh,A General As∣sembly in Scotland. with as much Authority as they did heretofore, when they began the War; but such a Chat∣ter there was of Remonstrants and Protestations, and such-like knacks amongst these crums of the Kirk, which was now in a hundred fractions, that for very quietness sake, and some small considerations of the publick Peace (whose dan∣ger in their former more unanimous Rebellion was not quite forgotten) one Lieutenant-Colonel Cotterel was sent to dismiss them from their Seats;Dismist by Lieu. Col. Cotterel. which he roundly did, charging them upon their peril not to attempt any such further meeting; and that to that purpose, not any three of them should presume to meet or be seen together. So that what the King by Proclamation, by the force of Laws, by his Vice-Roys or Governours General could not effect, an Ar∣med Officer quickly speeded, to the perpetual shame and infamy of that leud Convention. Episcopacy had the honour to precede (nor could Monarchy
be abolished while it stood) and Presbytery had the disgrace of following the Regal Ruines; so after King exit Kirk. The Judges there now went their Circuit, where they met with innumerable Accusations and Indictments of A∣dultery, and Fornication, and Incest, and as many almost of Witchcraft, the ordinary and most publick frequent crimes of that Nation; but such the Kirks cruel usage of those supposed Sorcerers, and upon such weak conviction, that though at first the same severity was exercised towards them, yet the Judges finding there was sometimes more deviish Malice in the Accuser than the Ac∣cused, superseded that numerous Condemnation of them as formerly. Some Murderers and Moss-Troopers were likewise Executed, for that no small parties could go any whither without danger of being knockt on the Head, the ways were so infested. De Ruyter with a Fleet at the mouth of the Channel.Return we to the Dutch. That Fleet under de Ruyter, that fought with Sir George Ayscue in the West, lay now at the Mouth of the Channel, crossing to and ro, to stop and seize all English Ships and Goods coming from the Southern and Western parts of the World; yet notwithstanding, six East-India (and two from the Streights) whereof the Eagle was the chief, arrived safe at Plymouth, and there staid in Harbour till the Fleet of War Convoyed them home, having fitted and Armed themselves for the Encounter. De Ruyter was ordered to stay here, upon this designe, till de Wit, another Admiral, should be sent to bring him home through the Channel, with what Merchant-men he had ready in his Convoy, and such as should casually light upon him at Sea, where he ranged at pleasure. He sent Sir George Ayscue word, in a Bravado, by a Vessel he took and freely discharged, that he stayed there for him to fight him; but Sir George had no such orders; nor indeed was he in a condition, ever since his last Encounter with him. In the mean time de Wit appeared,De Wit joyns with him. (while General Blake was gone Westward to bring about the Plymouth-Fleet) on the 21 of September, at the South-sands-head, (and it was no more than time, for Blake had seized five West-India ships of good value, sneaking by the French Coast; and Vice-Admiral Pen had taken six Streights-men most richly laden, that had been, and were newly come out of the Duke of Venice's Ser∣vice, worth above 200000 l. being laden with Piece-goods, and the best Com∣modities of those parts) and came in ight of the English Fleet neer Torbay in Devonshire, with the Wind almost in his Teeth; but it proving thick and hazy Weather, by the obscurity thereof, he slipt and made aboard to the French Coast, and joyned with de Ruyter, and received six Plate-ships, laden from Cadiz, into his Convoy, and set sail homewards; and Blake having touched at Portsmouth, came Eastward likewise, and on the back of the Goodwyn dis∣covered him again, having dismist his charge into Holland; but the Wind blow∣ing hard, could not Engage him; nor would de Wit move from his station, then on the side of the North-foreland, knowing most of the English ships to be very great, and to draw much Water; and there was a Shallow and sand lay betwixt the Fleets. On the 28 of October, notwithstanding, General Blake in three Squadrons (as the Dutch were divided, one Commanded by himself, the second by his Vice-Admiral Pen, and the third by Rear-Admiral Bourn) sailed towards him; and as de Wit had fore-laid it, struck most of them upon the Sand; among the rest the Soveraign, Rigg'd and Mann'd for this present ser∣vice, the first she ever was in, was on ground; but was presently got off again, and stood aloof, till de Wit came freely from his advantages to the Engage∣ment, which was first begun by Bourn, and seconded immediately by the whole Fleet, and was fought stoutly on both sides (a courageous Drunken Dutch man of War presuming to give the Soveraign a Baoad-side, and a vapour of Boar∣ding her, was presently sunk by her side, so that she obtained among them, the Name of the Golden Devil;) soon after a Rear-Admiral of the Dutch was Boarded and taken, and two more of their Men of War were sunk, and ano∣ther Blown up at the same time; so that de Wit was glad to give over the Con∣flict, and to ply his Sails (being followed till the English Fleet was no more
than 12 Leagues East-South-East off the Maze,De Wit wor∣sted by Blake. and that Coast of Holland, which was no good shore for them to trust to) and with the remainder of his Fleet, pitifully torn, came into Goree, and there Harboured. This Defeat he imputed to several of his Captains, who did not their devoir in the Fight; so that Commissioners of the Admiralty were appointed, to try such as he should charge for their Cowardise or Failure; he also added, for another Reason, the over-match of the English in number and ships, which being beyond expe∣ctation, more troubled the States, than this easie Discomfiture. Blake with Triumph came into the Downs, and the most of his Fleet into Port, to mend and recruit the Damages they had received, having lost besides neer 300 men, and as many wounded (the Dutch twice their number) for whose cure and entertainment, several Houses in the nature of Hospitals were erecting on the Coast of Kent, neer Dover and Deal, by order of Parliament, who enacted also the return of all Sea-men out of the Service of any other Prince or State into England in 40 days, in these parts of the World, allowing a twelvemonth to those in the East-Indies; confirming the usage and custom of Death without mercy, by throwing over-board such Carpenters and Ship-wrights as should be found in the Enemies ships, &c. The Noble Marquess of Worcester lately come from beyond Seas (where his wants and distresses suffered him not to con∣tinue any longer) was this Month of September taken in London, and Com∣mitted to the Tower,Marq. of Worcester ta∣ken, and com∣mitted to the Tower. and ordered for a speedy Trial; but after consideration of the matter, it was superseded, and his Lordship left in that forgotten durance. There had been great discontents among the Vnited Provinces, concerning their chusing of a Stadholder,Mutiny in Holland. and Captain-General, which was to be the Prince of Aurange, as was said before; and these Disorders and Misfortunes at Sea did rather improve the Pince's Interest (and therefore the States of Hol∣land and Friesland prudentially bethought themselves of a means to be rid of both, and that was by sending a Letter tending to an accommodation into Eng∣land; which at the worst should happen, would be of much advantage to them: this came about this time after the Fight, and was in like manner answered as their other Papers) so that as de Wit went out with a Mutiny, (the Sea-men refusing to go on Board till they were paid for their service already done in this War; for which two of them were Executed at Amsterdam,Some of their Seamen Exe∣cuted. and some Burgers shot upon a sudden surmise of a Rescue) so was he welcomed home with the like Uproar of the Women of Flushing, who hated him the rather, because he was a main Anti-party to the Family of Aurange, to which that Province was always so addicted, that though the States of Holland sent an Embassie to them, to disswade them from their resolution taken in favour of the Prince; (and they hardly laboured it with Arguments of the Common Safety, and the Nature of the War in hand, which would thereby upon all events be made Irreconcilable) yet they prevailed not, but were dismist to the next General Vergadering or Assembly of all the Provinces, who had effected their designe in Denmarke, by making sure of that King to their Interest, he refusing to let the 22 English Merchant-men go away out of his Port, being laden with Hemp, and Tar, and such other necessaries for shipping, and had recalled his Embassadors here in England; but till their Arrival, proceeded no further than a bare Imbargo, having brought them within the Booms of his Castle at Else∣nore, for the better securing of them. The want of those Commodities (which mightily retarded the equipping of the English Fleets) caused the Parliament to give order to Blake to send away Captain Ball with a Squadron of 18 Men of War,A Fleet of War sent to the Sound, &c. to sail for the Sound, and to carry a Letter to the King, desiring him to deliver the said Ships and Goods, to be Convoyed (for the Dane at first pretended his care of saving them from the Dutch) home by the said Fleet, who in ten days time, came to an Anchor within a mile of Elsenore-Castle, and sent the Letter ashore by one of his Captains, (who was affronted by some of the Dutch there seizing his Boat)
but received a cold Answer, that the King would not deliver them, and did won∣der they did approach so neer his Royal Residence with so great a Fleet: which being received, Captain Ball concluded presently to return; but the night of his departure, on the last of September, the Antelope (a new stately built Fri∣gat, of 50 Brass Guns) run upon a Rock on Iutland side (by the unadvised∣ness of the Pilot) about three in the Morning, and was there bulged and broke to pieces. In his return he met and took 14 Holland Fisher-men; but the Ty∣ger-Frigat, after a fight, took and Boarded a Man of War of 20 Guns, having killed and wounded 40 of them, and brought them all up to Yarmouth. Upon fur∣ther dispute of this detainer, which was of such evil consequence to our States, it was at last alledged by that King, that he kept those ships and Goods in lieu of those Moneys due to him from the late King, according to his engagement with his Father in the German-War, for the maintenance of so many Regi∣ments against the Emperor, and for other Sums accruing to him, in the right of his Aunt, the Mother of the said King: and the Dutch were very willing to be dealing and chaffering on that account, offering him the value of the Goods, to what they should be rated at there, in ready Money; or rather than fail, they would content the English Merchants that were concerned in those Bottoms and Ladings. Myn Heer Boreel was likewise instant with the French King at this time for a speedy Conclusion of a League Offensive and Defen∣sive. Captain Pen having been recalled out of the Streights to this Service here, Captain Badiley was sent in his place, with the Paragon, a Navy-Ship, and 3 nimble Frigats, the Phoenix, the Constant Warwick, and the Elizabeth, who meeting with four Merchant-men from the Streights, were set upon neer Por∣tolongone in the Kingdom of Naples, belonging to the Spaniard, by Van Galen, Commander of the Dutch Fleet of War in those Seas; and after a day and a halfs dispute, the English being sore battered, and having by the ill managing of the fight, by the ships crue of the Phoenix, lost that Frigat, were forced to retire under the protection of the Fort of Longone, where the Dutch would have fallen upon them, but were not permitted; which made the Dutch block up the Port for a while; but the Governours Command, and another Fleet of the English under Captain Appleton, then at Legborn, engaging of their Ships away, the two Frigats made away from Longone, and took a ship claimed by the Ge∣noese, and brought her to their Fleet, whose Commander was now at Legborn, interceding with that Duke for the liberty of Captain Appleton, there restrai∣ned upon some picque; for the Great Duke of Florence, in whose tuition that City is, was not over-qualified with respect to this Republick; however, his Interest, and advantage of our Trade, and famous Mart there, kept him neutral and indifferent. Lord Hopton dyes at Bruges in Flanders, September.The Lord Hopton, that most Renowned General in the West for the King, departed this Warfare of Life in the end of September, at Bruges in Flanders; an Heroe worthy of Pompey's distanced Urns, that each Region of the World should have inhumed a piece of him, that his Interment might have been as large as his Fame, which hath told the Universe the Glory of his Actions; but what is so envied him, was direfully indulged to the Royal Cause, and the as∣sertors of it. —Iacere, uno non potuit tantae ruina loco. All Nations and people saw and felt the woful Effects and Conse∣quences of our subverted Monarchy, and in that overthrow nothing was more miserable than the undeserved Wandrings and Distresses of these Loyal and most Noble Exiles, whose Condition mindes us to attend it a little further. Against the French Kings returning in peace to his tumultuous City of Paris, in this Month, wrought by the means and counsel of our Soveraign, He with the rest of his Lords and Nobility, then of his Council at Paris, in great State went out to meet him, and welcome him home to his Palace of the Louvre.
A most acceptable glad Complement to that Prince, but a sad reduction to his own minde, of that untamable force and injury, by which he was kept out from his Kingdoms; though now the progress of Providence did seem to verge and dispose events to the former course of the English Soveraignty: For the French King before the Cardinals return, gave most express assurance of his utmost as∣sistance to the regaining his Crowns, as soon as he had setled his own, and was thereby rendered capable of doing it; and the Dutch had now likewise made overtures to him of espousing his Interest, and had granted him already free Ports in their Country for his Men of War to harbour in, and sell their Prizes they should take; and there was every day expectation of Prince Ru∣pert to come and command a Squadron in that Service, upon the Kings ac∣count. The same forward hopes he had likewise received from several Prin∣ces of Germany, viz. The Emperour himself, with whom the King had one Mr. Taylor his Resident in honourable esteem; the Marquess of Brandenburgh, the Dukes of Brunswick and Lunenburgh, and the rest of those Potentates: (His Couzen the Prince Elector Palatine was yet raw in the World, having new∣ly Frankendale delivered to him by the Spaniard, who had kept it neer forty years) as also from the King of Denmark. A Diet was now also to be held at Ratisbone, for the Election of a King of the Romans; the onely opportune time for m to prosecute his business, for supplies and assistance to recover his Rights, finding all the respective Princes personally present. Therefore the Lord Wilmot, now honoured upon this grand Affair with the Title of Earl of Rochester,The Earl of Rochester to the Diet in Germany. (the Duke of Buckingham was designed his Colleague) was honour∣ed with the Embassie thither, and provision made to discharge the State and expence of it, that the King might appear not altogether lost in the world, or as an abject and forlorn Prince; since not pitty of his misfortunes, but in∣dignation at his injuries, was the best motive to his assistance: and this becom∣ing Grandeur was in good time set out amply and honourably enough, by the liberal Purse of his dear Relations, and the seasonable payment of his Money out of the French Treasury. His Lordship departed home but in Ianu∣ary, and by the way of Heidelberg (where the same Prince Elector was gone before) arrived at Strasburgh, and was with all possible evidence and expres∣sions of Honour and Devotion to his Majesties cause, and present business, re∣ceived by that most Illustrious and grand Assembly. The Lord Wentworth was afterwards sent in the same Employment to the King of Denmark, and by him welcomed and entertained with all demonstrations of love and affection, be∣coming his Relation; where the Dutch upon their engagement of saving that King harmless from any demand, or whatsoever pretence of the English, had engaged him to joyn in a League Offensive and Defensive with that State, and to concur in any other designe whatsoever. The King yet at Paris amidst a hundred Caresses, Gratulations, and Treatments given him by the King, the Queen-Mother, and all the Grandees of that Court, upon the happy occasion of the late peaceful settlement. The Dutch with extraordinary diligence and intent care of their honour and interest in this Quarrel,Van Trump at Sea with a Fleet. had equipped another Fleet, which was now committed to Van Trump, (though some rumours were spread, as if he should be honourably laid aside in the administration of another Land-Office in the inspection of the Admiralty) a Fleet of 300 Merchant-men bound for France, and the Levant, and these Occidental parts, being ready for his Convoy. Intelligence was now likewise given him, that (as formerly the States had been informed) the English Fleet was no way recruited, but that the most part of that Fleet with which De Wit Engaged, was gone into Ports, and that now Blake might be easily beaten in the Downs, and so the Mouth of the River stopt, the War come to a period, and the Dutch have satisfaction for the damage done them, and Sea-Towns in England put into their hands for future security; and no∣thing less would content Hans in this Top-gallant humour. On the 29 of November, Trump presented himself with 80 Men of War,
and ten Fireships,Blake defeated in the Downs by Trump, Nov. 29. on the back-side of the Goodwyn again, and according to expe∣ctation found General Blake attended with no more than forty and odd fail, as if he had been ignorant how to use his late Victory (which came now to the dispute, and to be an undecided controversie again:) yet Blake generously disdaining to be affronted again in the Downs, having called a Council of War, it was concluded he should fight, though at so unequal disadvantage: but the Wind rising, the Engagement was hindred till the next day; and Anchoring the night before a little above Dover-road, fair by the Enemy, neer morning both Fleets plyed Westward, we having the Weather-gage, and about eleven or twelve a clock Engaged, neer the same place where the first Encounter was; but not with the same success; for half the Fleet did not Engage; the Victory, Vantguard, and the Triumph, the Admiral-ship, bore most of the stress of the Fight, being at one time engaged with 20 Dutch men, and were sorely torn in their Rigging, Sails, Yards, and Hull; yet they fought till after it was dark; a little before which, the Garland, (whose venturous Captain, out of a noble resolution, boarding Van Trump himself, was slain in the fight, and overpow∣red with his Reserves:) a Navy-ship of the third Rate with forty Guns, was boarded by two Dutch Flags, and taken; as likewise the Bonadventure, attemp∣ting to relieve them, its Captain Hookston being slain before the Tryumph, could succour them: and this was not done without great hazard; for Blake was boarded twice, and had his Top-mast shot by the board, and had not the Vant∣guard and Saphire stood resolutely to him, might have gone neer to be lost; the Hercules was likewise run on shore, and all the whole Fleet that engaged, was miserably rent and torn, and had it not been for the night, would hardly have come off, whereas now they retreated to Dover, and so into the River against Leigh, to save themselves. The Dutch Triumphantly continued where they were, resolving to fall upon Blake with their whole Fleet and Fire-ships the next day at two of the clock;The Dutch Sea∣men steal Sheep at Rumney-Marsh, and come off with loss. but missing of them, sent their Scouts to Harwich and Yarmouth, to see if they were there, purposing to pursue the same Resolution. In the mean time, some of their Sea-men went ashore into Rumney-marsh to steal Sheep; but the Troopers were in a readiness, and killed six of them, and took eight more. Trump neer the Isle of Wight.Trump still continued with his Fleet plying between the Isle of Wight and the North-foreland, somewhat betwixt Calice and Dungenness, having put ashore the Lieutenant of the Garland and other Sea-men, who informed, that one Dutch ship was blown up, and but two men saved; and that Trump, and another Flag-shi, and de Ruyter, had received damage. Amidst all this Fray, a rich Streights English ship, called the Employment, valued at 200000 l. got safe into Harbour at Portsmouth, being pursued by seven Dutch sail of Frigats. And a little be∣fore this Grand Engagement, the Diamond had more luckily light upon a Hol∣lander from Spain, laden with 100 Buts of Sack, a great quantity of Coche∣neal, 60 Bags of fine Spanish-wool, 2000 Bars of Silver, 400 West-India Hides, to a great value: the Ruby and the Portsmouth had likewise set upon two Dutch Men of War, and were just upon boarding of them, having disabled their sailing; but at the very instant, an unlucky shot came and carried away the Ru∣by's Masts by the Board, and put her into the same condition, being Towed home by the Portsmouth, and leaving the Hollanders a drift at Sea: but for that disappointment, see a more successful, and deservedly famed English Exploit. It was related before, how the Dutch at Portolongone-fight had taken the Phoenix Frigat and brought her into Leghorn-Road, where they blockt up Cap∣tain Appleton and his Squadron; this was  an eye-sore to the English, as well for the scandal and dishonour of it, she lying in view, Commanded by young Van Trump, as also for the ill consequences of it, being a pattern or mo∣dule for the Dutch to build by (for she was an excellent Saylor) and might be made use of also to decoy other ships: that Captain Cox (the former Lieu∣tenant of her) having imparted his designe to the rest of the English, on the
twentieth of November at night, being St. Andrews day (which is an usual Feasting day with the Hollander, as well as the Scot) accompanied with three Boats, in which were about 100 men, Rowed close on board the Phoenix,The Phoenix regained, Nov. 30, by Capt. Cox. and answering the Sentinel that they were Fisher-men, got under her Stern, and so by her Sides, and presently entred, and having shut down the Hatches, and secured the Decks, they made towards the Great Cabin, where Van Trump and other Captains were making merry: one of those with his Servants about him, made some resistance, and killed one with a Pistol: Trump got out of the Win∣dows in the mean while into a Boat that was tyed at the Stern, and escaped. 'Twas an hour and a half before they had subdued the Dutch to a submission, being nevertheless all the while under sail, and no noise, so much as of a Mus∣quet (to give notice to the Dutch Fleet) being to be heard; and so came with her cleverly away to Naples; having killed in the Conflict nine of that Company. The Parliament had now constituted three Generals,The Parlia∣ments three Gerals, Blake, Dean, and Monke. for the next years Sea-service, namely Blake again, Dean, and General Monke; and had constituted a Committee for the better managing of the Navy, viz. young Sir Henry Vane, Mr. Saloway, Colonel Thompson, and Iohn Carew; and for the more vigorous prosecution of the War, now looking with a very ill aspect towards them; but sink that must,A Maque on the Taxes. they would swim; the Tax was raised again to 120000 l. per mensem (at which rate it had almost continued since their Stateship, and out∣lived them but two Months.) And lo, a new Scene, the Council of State shif∣ted for the next year again, 21 of the old customarily to stand, and 20 new ones added, that it might be share and share like, and every man have his Cue in this Play of Princes. Van Trump having thus in part effected his designe upon Blake, who avoided sinking or stranding by his getting into the River, plied somewhat more West∣ward betwixt Calice and Dungenness, and there met with some English ships come from the Barbadoes, wherein were most of the Goods and other things belonging to the late Governour for the King, the Lord Willoughby of Parham; and so leisurely crossing up and down the Channel to Guernsey Island (on which it was voiced they had concluded an attempt, having examined a Master of a Barque belonging to the place concerning its Ports and Havens) intending there∣by with Fleets of War to impede altogether our Navigation. And so confi∣dent were they grown by this success,The Dutch Bra∣vadoes. that they reported their General wore a Broom in his Main-top, intimating that he would sweep the Narrow Seas of all English shipping; who in this Rant and Vapour arrived at the Isle of Rhee, to stay there for his re-convoying the Merchants from those quarters. The States of Holland were not more perplext about their admission of a Stadtholder, than ours were cunningly and imperceptibly undermined, by a (would be) Protector; who to leave no Competitor to that single Greatness he grasped at, and was to lay hold on, very dexterously quitted his fears from those dangers his ambition of being a Monarch did so fairly invite, from the indubitable Right, and neer assumption, and ascent to the Throne, of Henry Duke of Gloucester,The Duke of Gloucester sent away from Carisbrook to Dunkirk, Feb. whose claim and person was ready against his intrusion, and at hand upon any such occasion. On the 17 of December, he carried a Vote of Transporting him beyond Sea, on pretence of lessening the charge of the Commonwealth; all which should now allow him a pittance, and that quamdiu se bene gesserit, as long as he should please them, and not keep his Bro∣ther company: which condition was sure to discharge their fine Exhibition be∣fore any payment would come about. Accordingly in February ollowing they sent him away to Dunkirk from his Prison at Carisbrook, (where none but a Barber and a sorry Tutor attended him, besides Anthony Mildmay his Keeper) where he was very joyfully received, and thence conveyed to Brussels, where he had further grandeurs and civilities done him, and brought thence in the Prin∣cess of Aurange's Coach, to Breda in Holland, to the great joy of the Royal Family, who every day feared his Life from those Bloody Usurpers. Soon after
he had enjoyed the Company of his Sister,Conducted into France by the Lords Lang∣dale and In∣chiqueen. he was conducted into France by the Lord Langdale, and the Lord Inchiqueen, to visit his Mother, his Royal Brothers, and the Princess Henrietta, whose delight and content in the fruition of him, as one risen from the Dead, I will not be so bold as to take upon me to express. Some while before his arrival at Dunkirk, and just upon the news of his leave and dismission out of England, the French King had by the advice of the Cardinal Mazarine (who was returned in great state to Court and Council, being accompanied by most of the principal persons of that Kingdom, and more particularly by the Duke of York, who was in high Reputation in the Army, and met by the King of France himslf out of the Town) notwith∣standing all the perswasions and obstructions that were used by the Queen-Mo∣ther of England, and her Interest in that Crown, sent hither Monsiur Bour∣deaux Neuville,The French En∣vy M. Bour∣deaux owns the State, &c. December. (a creature of the said Cardinals) his Envoy hither to the Parliament, who delivered his Letters to them on the 14 but the Superscrip∣tions not being as full and as ample as other Princes wee, they were returned again unbroken up to the Embassador, who having others by him (as was sup∣posed) presented them shortly after; which were well eceived, and an An∣swer promised to be with all speed returned.The Portugal Embassador concludes. The Portugal Embassador (who had been in Treaty here about the Damages-done the English in 1649.) came now to a conclusion thereof; and there remaining 15500 l. in difference betwixt Him and the Parliaments Commissioners, upon his submission, and reference of it to the Parliament, they defaulked and abated the said sum, as a token of their respect and good will to that King. M. Bourdeaux's Negotiation was most abominably resented here, as well as abroad, for a piece of the un∣civilest policy the French were ever guilty of; but the Cardinal could not be secure, nor better ingratiate with the Traffiquers and Traders, which consists of the Commonalty, who had suffered more by English Sea-Rovery, than by a Peace here; the Superscription of those Letters being a meer Falsifie, and a present satisfaction to the desires of the said Queen. The Dutch Lion was now Rampant, and roaring out Proclamations and Placas against bringing in any English Manufactures, or holding correspon∣dence with us; as if he had the Prey under his Paws, and were sure of Victory: all Princes were made acquainted with this late success, which lost nothing by carrying, and their Friends and Allies encouraged to come in and take part of the spoil;The Dutch for∣bid any to sup∣ply the English with provisions of War. and to Friend and Foe, they peremptorily forbid by a Declaration the supply of the English with any Utensils or provisions of War; and Trump had already seized eleven Lubeckers, laden with Eastland Commodities, preten∣ding to Ostend; by which Lubeckers and Hamburgers, most of the Holland-Trade in single ships was disguised, so that the English ships resolved to seize all those that spoke IA, without any Shiboleth or distinction. Torce of their Hamburgh ships laden with Plate ta∣ken.Upon this score, three Hamburgh ships, laden with Plate, coming from Cadiz, were brought into Plymouth, though they pretended to be bound for Flanders, and that the Money belonged to the King of Spain, and was consigned for the pay of his Armies: immediately upon notice of their Seizure, the Spanish Em∣bassador at London made application by a special Audience in Parliament for their delivery, and did most industriously sollicite and prosecute the same; but the Wealth was too considerable, and of as great concernment to their occasions in this Dutch War, as the Spaniard could alledge any; and therefore they re∣mitted the Examination of the business to the Judges of the Admiralty, where it proved a most tedious Affair; one Mr. Violet a Goldsmith, and Prosecutor for this State, engaging himself most busily, in procuring their adjudication for lawful Prize. A High Court of Iustice in Ireland.In Ireland the High Court of Iustice was now erected and in Circuit; the first place of their sitting being at Kilkenny, where the Grand Council of the Re∣bels in 1641. had their Residence; and thence to Waterford, Corke, Dublin, and Vlster, &c. They were attended and sate in very great State, neer the pattern
in England, with 24 Halberdiers in good Apparel for their Guard, and all o∣ther Officers sutable. The President of this Court was one Justice Donelan,Iustice Done∣lan President thereof. an Irish Native, pickt out on purpose for the greater terrour of the Delinquents; to whom as assistants were joyned Justice Cook the Infamous Sollicitor against the King, (whom they would have most wickedly, and by all abominable artifices (by urging and soothing their Prisoners to confess as much) entituled to that Rebellion; but found not by all their scelerate practises what they sought for) and Commissary-General Reynolds:Several persons Condemned. many persons were by these Condemned; some of the chief whereof, as Colonel Walter Bagnal, Colonel Tool, Colonel Mac Hugh, and a greater number of lesser Quality, suffered Death; Bagnal being Beheaded, a manner of Execution not usual in Ireland: the Lord Clanmallero, the Viscount Mayn, and some others escaped; but the Nation was was so generally scared, and in such a fright, that happy was he that could get out of it: for no Articles were pleadable here; and against a Charge of things done 12 years before, little or no defence could be made; and the cry that was made of Blood, aggravated with the expressions of so much horrour, and the no less daunting aspect of the Court, quite contounded the amazed Prisoners, so that they came like Sheep to the slaughter, which had been such ravenous Wolves in preying upon the Lives of the poor unarmed English: but the Spanish Army was so full of them, and their late revolt at Burdeaux to the French side made them so suspicious, that thereafter they became very unwelcome Auxiliaries; and upon that account the Lord of Muskerry, who had according to Articles Transported himself, came back again to Ireland without leave, and was taken and committed to Dublin-Castle,Lord Musker∣ry taken, and committed to Dublin Castle. Sir Phelim O Neal the great Rebel hanged, &c. and some while after Tried at the same High Court of Iustice. Sir Phelim O Neal, that great and prime Ringleader of the Rebellion, was likewise betrayed by his own party in February following at Vl∣ster neer Charlemount, and brought Prisoner to the Lord Caufield's house, whose Father he had treacherously Murthered; and sent with a Guard to the same place, and Hanged and Quartered. Insomuch that all Ireland was now whol∣ly reduced: for Colonel Barrow had taken most of the places in Vlster, save what Forces were skulking in the Fastnesses, and made a kinde of thieving War, and that was yet very desperate. Captain Gibbons with 100 men staid in Ker∣ry, where the Irish out of fear and distrust of any preservation or favour from the English, rose in Arms again: there remained too the Island of Enisbuffin, whose Forces had in December, to the number of 500 in Boats, fallen down upon the Isles of Arran, Garrisoned by an English company of 150, under a Captain, who upon the first Summons rendred the Fort in that Island upon leave to depart; for which he was condemned to dye, and the Officers under him Ca∣shiered. To recover this Isle, being of consequence to the peace of the Neighbouring Country, Commissary-General Reynolds was sent with a sufficient Force, and likewise to reduce Enisbuffin. At his approach to Arran, it rendred to him upon the first Summons, as before it was lost, on the 15 of Ianuary; where he left some ships for the better securing of it, their absence being the occasion of the loss of it before; and so marched to Enisbuffin, but with more hast than good speed, 300 of the Van of his Forces being cut off: but the Island being blockt up, Colonel Csack the Governour accepted of the usual Articles for Transpor∣tation, and Surrendered that place.The Condition of Ireland. Never were any Christian people or Na∣tion in such a wretched condition as those Irish, who from a vain conceit of ob∣taining their Liberty, and shaking off the English Yok by their Rebellion, now found i set closer and harder on, suffering the very extremity of Revenge, and the dregs of Rage, from a merciless Conquering Enemy, to whom first the crying Sin of their barbarous Massacres, and then their contempt of the Kings Authority when received among them; and lastly their fatal divisions among themselves, caused by their Fryers and the Nuncio-party, had given them o∣ver. As to the Priests,The Priests Banished. they were by Proclamation, upon pain of Death, Ba∣nished for ever out of the Kingdom, as the like had been done lately before
in England, and many of them had already been snapt by the Irish High Court of Iustice. The Parliament were no way insensible of the Damage and disgrace they had suffered from the Dutch in the Downs,Cromwel and his Officers keep a Fast. (and to minde them the more of it, Cromwel and his Officers kept a Fast by themselves upon that occasion, but added other causes, viz. the delay of the new Representative, according to the old strain) and therefore thinking the meanness of their Pay might dishearten the Seamen from serving in the Fleet,Seamens Wages raised. they raised their Wages from 19, to 24 shillings a month, and 20 Nobles for every Gun in any ship they should take from the Enemy, with other advantages as to the shares of the Prizes: and the better to defray this allowance,The Kings Houses of Hampton Court to be sold, &c. Moneys there∣pon at six per cent. they ordered the Sale of Somerset-house, Windsor-Castle, Greenwich, Hampton Court Va hall in Lambeth & Cornbury-Park. For the invitation to which purchases, and all other Forfid Lands, they had abated the interest of Moneys from eight to six per cent. that the advantages of laying out their Money with them, might appear to the Usurer, who by such Bar∣gains could not get less than 50 l. per cent. provided it would last, and the Lands continue in their possession. Those Houses notwithstanding escaped, by the hinderance and artful delays of Oliver Cromwel, who designed them for his own greatness and State in his projected Supremacy. He was now debating in Council with his Bashaws about the very same matter, and the Parliament fell presently upon the Bill to prevent him and his Armies desires for the same Representative, and offered fair, Ianuary the fifth. The Danish Embassadors had in the beginning of October departed England; and by the way visited Holland, and continued their Journey by Land home; where upon their arrival, that King had declared himself for the Hollander; yet the Parliament hoping to reclaim him, and the want of those Merchandizes he had seized urging them to it,Agent Brad∣shaw to Co∣penhagen. sent Bradshaw a bold fellow like his Kinsman who preferred him, to Copenhagen from Hamburgh, where he resided with that City as their Agent. He came to the Court before Christmas, but was delayed Audience till after the Holy-daies; and when he had it granted, it was to so lit∣tle purpose,He is affronted and in danger. and of so great danger to him at his return, he being besides affron∣ted highly in the streets, that he wisht himself quit of his Employment, and at home again. At his request for a Guard to convey him back, and his pay∣ment of them, and passing by-ways, and over several Waters, he at last in much fear (being certainly way-laid) recovered Hamburgh, whence he sent the Par∣liament an account of his fruitless Negotiation, (for the goods were unladen and sold, and the Merchants Books of Accompt seized, and in the Kings hands, desiring also the repayment of those Moneys he had disbursed, for the carrying the Masters and Seamen of those ships to Lubeck and those parts, being not able to stay in Denmark any longer; where a Comet newly appeared, the effects whereof were very visible in those calamities that presently began in this and the Swedish War, in which that King was desperately Engaged. The Dutch had been Commanded to Sea from Porto Longone some while be∣fore, by the Spanish Governour, so that the English ships were at liberty; and Badiley was now at Leghorn, of whom the Great Duke demanded the Phoenix to be restored to the Dutch, at their instance to him, as taken in his Port; which being refused, he commanded that those English ships that then lay within the Mole, being six in number, should put to Sea within ten daies: the debate had lasted a good while before this resolution, which the Duke said he could not in justice and by the Law of Nations deny to the Hollander; the event of which we will presently relate. At home the Dutch were still far perter; Songs, and by words, and Pictures, made of this English defeat; the names of the ships discanted upon that were taken, as ominous to us, having lost the Garland, &c. and the like devices: this the Vulgar: the Great ones were consulting of sending a Fleet to seize all our America-Isles, and to Lord it there, as their Ships did in the Streights; and de Wit was also now almost ready to put to Sea, with another Feet of 40 ships,
and Van Trump was ordered to come away speedily, with such Merchant-men as were rdy to set Sail, and Anchor at the Thames mouth, and block up General Blake, and the Fleet that was there ready: but he came too late to ef∣fect it,English under Blake at Sea. for on the 8 of February, from Quinborough, the General set sail with about 60 men of War, intending to joyn with 20 more from Portsmouth; such a Force, and of so sudden a rise, that the Dutch found themselves much de∣ceived in their designe abroad, and Conclusions at home. On the 11 of Fe∣bruary, the Portsmouth-Fleet, the Wind blowing Eastward, joyned with the General at Beechy head, and thence sailed over against Portland, where they lay a cross the Channel, half Sea over, to discover Van Trump on either Shore he should pass by.Van Trump returns through the Channel, Feb. On the 18th, just at break of day, the Southermost ships, a∣mong whom was the Admiral, having General Dean aboard also, descryed the Dutch Ships, being betwixt three and four hundred Vessels, close by the Land, betwixt them and Portland; and immediately the English made what sail they could towards them; and Van Trump having recollected his Ships of War, did the same: About eight a clock in the Morning, the Triumph with 12 ships more (for all the Fleet could not get up) Engaged Board and Board:Portland-fight Feb. 18, be∣tween Dutch and English. the Triumph was hardly put to it, and was as gallantly relieved by Captain Law∣son in the Fairfax; for which Service he was much looked upon afterwards: Both were lamentably shattered, and lost 100 men out of each ship; it being Trump's resolution and Command, if possible, to have carried them both: the Vantguard plaid her part here again, but lost her Captain Mildmay, as the Tri∣umph lost her Captain Ball, and Mr. Sparrow the General's Secretary; Blake was wounded in the Thigh with a piece of Iron a Shot had driven, and Dean's Coat and Breeches torn therewith; the Prosperous, a ship of 44 Guns, was boarded by the Dutch, but presently recovered by the Merlin Frigat, Comman∣ded by Captain Vessey: the Assistance, the Vice-Admiral of the Blue Squadron, was disabled in the very beginning of the Fight, and was brought off to Ports∣mouth, whither followed the Advice, being not longer able to keep the Sea. The Dutch lost six Men of War taken and sunk, the Rigging of those that were taken being besmeared with Brains and Blood in a most terrible manner: Night coming on, they parted. Saturday-morning they were seen again, being judged seven Leagues off Weymouth, and over against Dungenness, whi∣ther the English plied, and in the afternoon began the Fight again, the Fri∣gats fetching upon them, while the whole Fleet came up: Trump now had put his Merchantmen afore him, and fought retreating towards Bulloign, in his way whither, the English Frigats at large, snapt many of his Merchants, and Cap∣tain Lawson boarded a Dutch Man of War, and carried her, and brought her to the Downs. Sunday-morning the Dutch were at Bulloign, where the Fight began again, but with little effect, and in the dark Trump slipt away (having sent his Merchant-men before) to Calice-sands, where he Anchored that day with forty sail, (the Wind lying cross at N. N. E. but no further dispute or encounter happened) and thence Tyded it home, whither a Fleet of 100 sail from Roan, Guarded by ten Men of War, had slipt through the Channel a little before, during the Fight) having lost in all eleven Men of War, and thirty Merchants, 1500 killed, and as many wounded. On our side we had one ship, named the Sampson, shot through and through, and the Captain Button woun∣ded, was sunk by him in the fight, the men being saved aboard other Vessels. Though it could not be dissembled that the Dutch had the worst of it, yet Van Trump was highly magnified for his good conduct, especially for his bringing off the Fleet from Calice, which argued the English had no more minde to fight, as they said in Holland. It was a stiff bout, especially the first day, and both English and Dutch did very gallantly,Stoutly main∣tained on ei∣ther side. more especially our Red-Coats, who were put on board for want of Sea-men, did most gallantly and undauntedly behave themselves, perpetually firing and keeping their Station, in all danger either of Fire or Water, so that half of the Victory belonged to them; there being little odds on either Side, save that we were the cleaner, being newly
Tallowed and trimmed, and just set out to Sea. Several Collections were made in the West Country of Money and Linnen for the maimed and wounded Sea-men and Souldiers, and Provision made for their Reception into Hos∣pitals. A Fight at Leghorn, March 2.The next Encounter we had with this Enemy, was off Leghorn; for Captain Appleton (according to the Duke's Command) now put to Sea, divers Vo∣luntier English freely adventuring themselves on board for their Countries Ho∣nour, the whole Coast being filled with Spectators to see the Combate; for the second of March was the longest day allowed for their stay in that Port: Now it was agreed between Captain Badiley and Appleton, that as soon as Appleton should see the Dutch set sail after him, for he was come from Porto Ferraio with 9 ships and a Fire-ship, that he should come out and make hast to joyn with him. Accordingly as soon as Badiley appeared, and the Dutch made semblance of making to him, the Wind blowing off the Shore, he weighed and came out; which the Dutch observing, they ceased their prosecution of Badiley, and turning the Helm, sailed directly upon Appleton, not any way to be relieved by Badiley as the Wind stood; who suspecting the event, with all speed got off to Sea and away, left when that Encounter was over, the whole brunt would fall also on him. Nevertheless these six ships resolved to make a stout resi∣stance, being in sight of that City and Country where their Reputation had been hitherto nobly maintained: in the very first Engagement the Henry Bonad∣venture was unluckily blown up, by a shot from Van Galen the Dutch Admital, that came into the Powder; the Sampson (another of the six) was Boarded on both sides, and Entred by young Van Trump, and afterwards fired by a Fire ship; the Peregrine was set upon by four Dutch Men of War, and having her Masts shot by the board, was entred and taken; the Levant having fought four hours side by side with two Dutch Flag-ships (one whereof was the Vir∣gin of Enchuysen) was likewise taken;The English worsted. but the Mary (amidst the Smoak and confusion of the fight) got clear away, there remained only now the Leopard, a Navy-ship of 50 Brass Guns, who after six hours fight with Van Galen him∣self, and another Flag-ship, by Name the Sun and the Iulius Caesar, after a great slaughter was commanded by Appleton to be blown up, to prevent the coming into the Enemies hands; but the Marriners securing the Gunner, and forcing him to yield, the ship was possest by the Dutch, Van Galen having lost one of his Legs in the fight, whereof soon after he died. There were taken Prisoners in this fight 400, one hundred whereof were wounded (among them was Captain Wood of the Peregrine) who were set on shore and at liberty, and care taken by the English for their return home and recovery. Prince Rupert had been Sea-faring about the aribbe Islands with seven or eight ships,Prince Mau∣rice drowned in the West-India's. and had taken four or six Prizes, but lost his Brother Prince Maurice by a Hurricane, either at St. Christophers, or neer the Isle of Tortudas, where∣abouts the Prince had carefully expected him some two Months; but not hear∣ing of him (for Death had Transported him to farther Regions, and left no accompt of that most Excellent Personage, eminently beloved for his Conduct, Valour, and Civility in our late War, and whose great Actions well deserve a particular History; so that though his Death be unknown, yet his Life and the Renown of it is famous, and the Glory of it Proclaimed throughout the World) he set sail from those unfortunate Islands,Prince Rupert arrives in France, Mar. and arrived at Nants in Briany in March, with the Swallow, and a Prize laden with Tobacco, and a lit∣tle Frigat, and soon after his Arrival fell Sick; but happily recovering, he was invited to Paris, and Complemented by the French King, who sent the first Gentleman of his Chamber to salute him; and highly and cordially welcomed by our Soveraign yet in that Court, where now the whole Royal Family were very neer met together. Monsieur Borel Embassador from the Queen of Sweden (being the third within the space of a year) arrived in England about the same time, and other Letters came again from the States of Holland and West-Friezsland to the Parlia∣ment;
the Dutch at the same time meditating on a speedy Peace, and a potent carrying on of the War, having prohibited the Greenland-Voyage again for that year, and making all Expedition to set de Wit with another Fleet to Sea;De Wit at sea with another Fleet. the Ballance of Victory standing still in aequilibrio, for what was lost in the Channel, was gained in the Streights; and 'twas concluded, they that could raise most Men and Ships, would be sure to carry it. And their first designe was now upon our Colliers,The Dutch de∣signe of weak∣ning us by ta∣king our Col∣liers. the great Nursery and Seminary of Sea-men for the Service, whom if they could intercept, being about 150 sail, and but ten Men of War for their Convoy, the Work was done. A Fleet of 20 great ships and some little Frigats was dispatcht first, and de Wit followed; which first Squadron having been descryed by the Colliers at Sea, they with their Convoy put into Scarborough, and there under the protection of that Castle, and new Platforms raised to gall the Dutch if they approached (which was well per∣ceived by them) they Anchored till the Dutch drew quite off (having pre∣tended it twice before) upon the coming of Vice-Admiral Pen with his Fleet that way. The year ends with the release of Sir Iohn Gell,Sir John Gell and several Scots released from the Tower, and others pre∣ferred. and some Scotch Prisoners out of the Tower, among whom was Mr. Robert Douglas; and submission of the Lord Iniskillin, Colonel Conuer, and Mac Guire in Ireland, upon the usual Terms of Transportation, and an Act Constituting Iohn Bradshaw their bold President and their great Favourite to be Chancellor, and Bartholomew Hall one of the Lord Whitlock's Dependants to be Atturney of the Dutchy of Lancaster, that they might do something for their Friends before they dye. And lo a Revolution.
A CHRONICLE OF THE CIVIL WARS OF ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, and IRELAND. THE THIRD PART: BEING The Protectorate. Anno Dom. 1653. NOw to the reproach of Fortune, and her glorious Pa∣geant of an English Commonwealth, which she had set up for another Wonder in the world, to brave the Py∣ramids of Stone, Colossus of Brass, as to the defence of Times injury, having subdued all likelihood or appear∣ance of danger from without (all Princes being ready to entertain their Friendship:) See the frailty of this stru∣cture, the undermines, and the cheating deceitful labour of their Architect and prime Workman in the Ground∣work of this Republican Fabrick. That Foundation was laid upon the Ruines of Monarchy, the seeds whereof being laid in the King's Death, through a four years corruption of time, reared its Head now, though with a forced and precoce blade (a fading verdure that bespoke its unseasonableness and sudden perishment in the Family and Person of this Usurper) and exerted it self afterwards in the Hundredfold Fruits of an yielding and obedient people to their Rightful Soveraign. It was perceivable now what Chimera's were in the projection of the
Commonwealth, which had so many ambitious and covetous Masters, every one of them managing his designe, and stretching it to the same measure of perpetuity; Sons and Nephews being brought into the Parliament, and the same Relations upon the score of Inherent Merit brought into the Army, and these interessed∣ly opposite and contrary to one another; the Single self (to the reducing of it to Monarchical Regiment in this very Democratick form) being solely inten∣ded; so that it was little labour for Cromwel with his Instrument in his Hand to charm the several divided Factions of that Individuum vagum, there being no other cement or obligation of their holding together, but that glutinous and sticking Guilt of the Kings Blood; and all places of Command and Pro∣fit were already in the Hands of his Friends and Favourites, without any quarrel, or indeed without any perceivance of his Grand designe, which as it had wor∣ried the Kingdom to the destruction of the King, so was it after to weary them with another Parliament, by their barbarous and strange proceedings, and so recommend himself to the People. He indeed took a very happy juncture for the Execution of it, just as the Scale of the Dutch difference was turned, and Victory was inclining to the English, and when a very potent Fleet was out at Sea, and the Moneys at the rate of 120000 l. per mensem was just coming in, and their Exchequer and o∣ther Receipts pretty full with the several Incomes, Forfeitures, and Revenues: and as to his assurance of it, he wanted not any assistance, the Army onely his, and a third part of the Parliament joyning with him in his Conspiracy; which yet was a rash and hazardous venture. There had been no Law nor Govern∣ment before; now even Prudence and Wisdom forsook the Grandees and Prin∣cipals in the proceeding Rebellion. For it was then clearly and truly judged, that the setting up of this private, and indeed debaucht Person and Family in opposition to the King (the memo∣ry of whose super-excellent Vertues, Gifts and Graces, and His cruel Martyr∣dom, were yet recent) and His Heirs, would presently ruine the Usurper: for it being like to prove a War betwixt the Crown and Iack Cade, it was rightly concludible, that no longer than his Rebel-rout could be maintained and kept together, could it be expected that Oliver's bloody house could stand. The prosperous Rebel never boded this, nor did he think it within his conside∣ration: his great aims were upon the Parliament, an impotent and feeble Crue that stood upon his Crutches, and yet threatned to beat him with them; such Masters of Defence they were. This made him forsake his Wiles and Fabian delays, and with his Sword riddle the Oracle of this Delphick Parliament by its dissolution. Fate never played such a frolick prank, nor was there ever such a Scene of Mirth in all her Mazes and Varieties of Government. Nor often do wicked great men survive the infamy and dishonour of their Actions, and live the in∣famous obloquie and reproach of themselves: but as if God would invert the threatned punishment of the breach of the fifth Commandment, these unex∣ampled parricides were decreed to outlive the desire of Life, and to see all their Greatness buried; their Reputation abroad, and their Dread at home, fallen in∣to such Ignominy and Disgrace, that it was turned to a Ballad, Twelve Par∣liament-men for a penny. in the most scummy and vilest Language conceivable; and this so all of an instant and sud∣den, that the Portugal Embassador, who then attended them here, said, That his Masters assumption to that Crown in 1640 was very speedy and miraculous, but this Revolution did far exceed it, both as to the bloodlessness and stilness of it; it seeming to be done as in a dream, so pitifully and abjectly did these pet∣ty Princes behave themselves in this rencounter, which happened on the 20 of April, in this manner. Oliver himself, attended by Major-General Lambert, Harrison, and some 8 more Officers (having after several conferences with their Committees (who shewed him the danger of calling a new Representative, as the case then stood with the Commonwealth, for that no Qualifications could sufficiently secure
the Interest thereof; and that the onely way was to recruit the House, which could judge of such Elections by their own Authority) received no satisfa∣ction) entred the House, (some Members being made privy to his designe be∣fore, especially Sir Gilbert Pickering, who had held consultation the night be∣fore with him, and was up armed in his Chamber till the very time) and after a Speech therein, shewed the reasons and necessity of their Dissolution, did de∣clare it to be so, and desired them to depart: and presently Major-General Harrison peremptorily bid the Speaker to leave the Chair;The manner of dissolving the Parliament. which he refusing to do without the Order of the House, and till he was pulled out, Harrison desi∣red him to lend him his Hand, and gently heaved him out. Cromwel also com∣manded that Bauble (as he called the Mace) to be taken away, and to be car∣ried no more in State before him: and so having turned them out of Doors, lockt them up, and clapt Guards before them, and about all the Avenues of the Palace, to keep these Spirits out from possessing it again. The news of this Luciferian fall, was quickly spread throughout the City, and from thence into the Kingdom, being related and received with all ima∣ginable gladness, while the Members slunk away, muttering to themselves the affront they had received, and laying their Heads together how to retrieve themselves; for loath they were to suffer this violence, or acknowledge their Dissolution, which they would by no means hear of. But what ever they fan∣cied to the contrary, raving at this boldness and audaciousness of their Servant, as they stiled Cromwel, he minded it not, but went on in his work. The Government (such as it was) was now lodged in the Council of Offi∣cers of his own making and preferring; and the first thing done by them after this new Model, was the emitting of a Declaration from him and his Officers, shewing the grounds and reasons of this Dissolution of the Parliament, with an account of their Intentions as to the present and future Government of the Nation: which that it may appear by how slender a Thread the Sword of this Lawless Commander hung over the Heads of those Parliament-Tyrants, is very requisite to be inserted, it holding forth the present intrigues of Cromwel's de∣signes and method of Ambition. A Declaration of the General and Council of Officers about the Dissolu∣tion, &c.OVr intention is not to give an account, at this time, of the grounds which first moved us to take up Arms, and engage our Lives and all that was dear unto us in this Cause; nor to minde in this Declaration the various Dispensations through which Divine Providence hath led us, or the witness the Lord hath born, and the many signal Testimonies of acceptance which he hath given to the sincere endeavours of his unworthy servants, whilst they were contesting with the many and great dif∣ficulties, as well in the Wars, as other transactions in the three Nations; being ne∣cessitated, for the defence of the same Cause they first asserted, to have recourse unto extraordinary actions; the same being evident by former Declarations published on that behalf. After it had pleased God not onely to reduce Ireland, and give in Scotland, but so marvelously to appear for his people at Worcester, that these Nations were redu∣ced to a great degree of Peace, and England to perfect quiet, and thereby the Par∣liament had opportunity to give the people the Harvest of all their Labour, Blood, and Treasure, and to settle a due Liberty both in reference to Civil and Spiritual things; whereunto they were obliged by their Duty, their Engagements, as also the great & wonderful things which God hath wrought for them: it was matter of much grief to the good and well-affected of the Land to observe the little progress which was made therein; who thereupon applied to the Army, expecting redress by their means; notwithstanding which, the Army being unwilling to meddle with the civil Authority in matters so properly appertaining to it, it was agreed, that his Excellency and Offi∣cers of the Army, which were Members of Parliament, should be desired to move the Parliament to proceed vigorously in reforming what was amiss in Government, and to the setling of the Commonwealth upon a foundation of justice and righte∣ousness; which having done, we hoped that the Parliament would seasonably have
answered our expectations: But finding (to our grief) delays therein, we renewed our desires in an humble Petition to them, which was presented in August last; and although they at that time, signifying their good acceptance thereof, returned us thanks, and referred the particulars thereof to a Committee of the House, yet no considerable effect was produced, nor any such progress made, as might imply their real intentions to accomplish what was petitioned for; but on the contrary, there more and more appeared amongst them an aversion to the things themselves, with much bitterness and opposition to the people of God, and his Spirit acting in them; which grew so prevalent, that those persons of Honour and Integrity amongst them who had eminently appeared for God and the Publick good, both before and through∣out this War, were rendred of no further use in Parliament, than by meeting with a corrupt party, to give them countenance to carry on their ends, and for effecting the desire they had of perpetuating themselves in the supream Government. For which purpose, the said party long opposed, and frequently declared themselves against ha∣ving a new Representative, and when they saw themselves necessitated to take that Bill into Consideration, they resolved to make use of it to recruit the House with per∣sons of the same Spirit and Temper, thereby to perpetuate their own sitting. Which Intention divers of the activest amongst them did manifest, labouring to perswade others to a consent therein: And the better to effect this, divers Petitions prepa∣ring from several Counties for the continuance of this Parliament, were encouraged, if not set on foot by many of them. For obviating these evils, the Officers of the Army obtained several Meetings with some of the Parliament, to consider what fitting means and remedy might be applied to prevent the same: But such endeavours proving altogether ineffectual, it became most evident to the Army, as they doubt not it also is to all considering per∣sons, that this Parliament, through the corruption of some, the jealousie of others, the non-attendance and negligence of many, would never answer those ends which God, his People, and the whole Nation expected from them, but that this Cause which the Lord hath so greately blessed, and bore witness to, must needs languish under their Hands, and by degrees be wholly lost, and the Lives, Liberties, and Comforts of his people delivered into their Enemies hands. All which being sadly and seriously considered by the honest people of this Na∣tion, as well as by the Army, and Wisdome and Direction being sought from the Lord, it seemed to be a duty incumbent upon us, who had seen so much of the power and presence of God going along with us, to consider of some more effectual means to se∣cure the Cause which the good people of this Commonwealth had been so long enga∣ged in, and to establish Righteousness and Peace in these Nations. And after much debate, it was judged necessary, and agreed upon, that the Su∣pream Authority should be by the Parliament devolved upon known persons, men fearing God, and of approved Integrity; and the Government of the Commonwealth committed unto them for a time, as the most hopeful way to encourage and counte∣nance all Gods people, reform the Law, and administer Iustice impartially, hoping thereby the people might forget Monarchy, and understanding their true Interest in the Election of successive Parliaments, may have the Government setled upon a true Basis, without hazard to this glorious Cause, or necessitating to keep up Armies for the defence of the same. And being still resolved to use all means possible to avoid extraordinary courses, we prevailed with about twenty Members of Parliament to give us a Conference; with whom we freely and plainly debated the necessity and justness of our Proposals on that behalf; and did evidence that those▪ and not the An Act for filling up the Parliament. Act under their Consi∣deration, would most probably bring forth something answerable to that Work, the foundation whereof God himself hath laid, and is now carrying on in the World. The which notwithstanding found no acceptance; but in stead thereof, it was of∣fered, that the way was to continue still this present Parliament, as being that from which we might reasonably expect all good things. And this being vehemently in∣sisted upon, did much confirm us in our apprehensions, That not any love to a Repre∣sentative, but the making use thereof to recruit, and so to perpetuate themselves, was their aim.
They being plainly dealt with about this, and told, that neither the Nation, the honest Interest, nor we our selves, would be deluded by such dealings; They did agree to meet again the next day in the Afternoon for mutual satisfaction; it being consented to by the Members present, that Endeavours should be used, that nothing in the mean time should be done in Parliament that might exclude or fru∣strate the Proposals before-mentioned. Notwithstanding this, the next Morning the Parliament did make more hast than usual in carrying on their said Act, being helped on therein by some of the persons engaged to us the night before, none of them which were then present endeavour∣ing to oppose the same; and being ready to put the main Question for consummating the said Act, whereby our aforesaid Proposals would have been rendered void, and the way of bringing them into a fair and full Debate in Parliament obstru∣cted. For preventing whereof, and all the sad and evil consequences which must upon the grounds aforesaid have ensued, and whereby at one blow the Interest of all ho∣nest men, and of this glorious Cause, had been endangered to be laid in the Dust, and these Nations embroyled in new Troubles, at a time when our Enemies abroad are watching all advantages against us, and some of them actually engaged in War with us; We have been necessitated, though with much reluctancy, to put an end to this Parliament; which yet we have done, (we hope) out of an honest heart, preferring this Cause above our Names, Lives, Families, or Interests, how dear soever; with clear intentions, and real purposes of heart, to call to the Government persons of approved fidelity and honesty; believing, that as none wise will expect to gather Grapes of Thornes, so good men will hope, that if persons so qualified be chosen, the fruits of a just and righteous Reformation, so long prayed and wished for, will (by the blessing of God) be in due time obtained, to the refreshing of all those good hearts who have been panting after these things. Much more might have been said, if it had been our desire to justifie our selves by aspersing others, and raking into the Mis-government of affairs; but we shall con∣clude with this, That as we have been led by Necessity and Providence to act as we have done, even beyond and above our own thoughts and desires; so we shall and do, in that of this great Work which is behinde, put our selves wholly upon the Lord for a Blessing; professing we look not to stand one day without his support, much less to bring to pass any of the things mentioned and desired without his assistance: And therefore do solemnly desire and expect, that all men, as they would not provoke the Lord to their own destruction, should wait for such issue as he shall bring forth, and to follow their business with peaceable spirits; wherein, we promise them protection by his assistance. And for those who profess their fear and love to the Name of God, that seeing in a great measure, for their sakes, and for Righteousness sake, we have taken our Lives in our hand to do these things; they would be instant with the Lord day and night on our behalfs, that we may obtain Grace from him: And seeing we have made so often mention of his Name, that we may not do the least dishonour thereunto; which indeed would be our confusion, and a stain to the whole profession of God∣liness. We beseech them also to live in all Humility, Meekness, Righteousness, and Love one towards another, and towards all men; that so they may put to silence the Ig∣norance of the Foolish, who falsly accuse them; and to know, that the late great and Glorious Dispensations, wherein the Lord hath so wonderfully appeared in bring∣ing forth these things, by the travel and Blood of his Children, ought to oblige them so to walk in the Wisdom and love of Christ, as may cause others to honour their holy Profession, because they see Christ to be in them of a truth. We do further purpose, before it be long, more particularly to shew the grounds of our Proceedings, and the Reasons of this late great Action and Change, which in this we have but hinted at. And we do lastly Declare, That all Iudges, Sheriffs, Iustices of Peace, Mayors, Bayliffs, Committees, and all other Civil Officers, and Publick Ministers whatso∣ever,
within this Commonwealth, or any parts thereof, do proceed in their re∣spective Places and Offices; and all persons whatsoever are to give Obedience to them as fully as when the Parliament was sitting. Signed in the Name and by the Appointment of his Excellency the Lord-General, and his Council of Officers. William Malyn, Secret. White hall, the 22 of April, 1653. The next thing they published, was an Injunction to all the Officers and Souldiers in the Army, forbidding them to make any disturbance in Churches, or affronting of Ministers and people in Congregations; which was done to gain them an opinion of Religious Piety and Zeal for the Worship and Service of God, now frequently profaned by the Sectarian Principles of Anabaptism, Quaking, and Ranting, (the two later whereof began to spread about this time, and be very infectious in the Army and their Quarters) which were licen∣sed among the Souldiery, who were every where drawn together to Rendez∣vouzes, to subscribe Addresses to their General,Addresses to Cromwel. declaring their approbation of what he had done to the Government, and promising to assist him in his un∣dertakings with their Lives, with their hopeful expectation of the great and glorious Work to be accomplished by him, to the building up of Sion, &c. The like he received from the Fleet upon the news of the Change communicated to them, who resolved with the same courage to proceed against the common E∣nemy the Dutch;Vice-Admiral Pen in the Downs, with a Fleet of 70 sail. Vice-Admiral Pen being now in the Downs with seventy sail of out Men of War, and General Monke and Dean expected with some more of the Western squadron, with which they now Anchored at Saint Hellen's Point. The first Forrain Address that was made to this DICTATOR, (for such another Regiment was that of Lucius Scylla, and C. Marius amongst the Romans, for by that term of Authority he is bt distinguished▪ was from the Agents of the Rebel-City of Bourdeaux, (then maintained by the Prince of Conti against the French King) while his Embassador Bourdeaux was here for a Peace; whose offering a more advantageous Treaty to the Interest of Cromwel, was one occa∣sion of crushing that transaction; and Cromwel besides was ready to Prince it himself; and those Examples were no way to be encouraged by him. The Dictator having held the Supreme Power some few days,Cromwel a Dictator. devolved it by a Declaration to a Council of State; (his ignorant conceited Officers soar∣ing such flights, and such their extravagant notions of Government, and their pertness in them, that made him quickly weary of such Counsellors or Compa∣nions:) these were partly the greatest Officers in the Army; as Lambert, Dean, Harrison; and partly Members of the late Parliament, (among whom the Lord Fairfax was by name now listed into this Juncto) and some other new Gamesters of Cromwel's Cabinet Counsel. At the latter end of this Declara∣tion, he limited the time of their power till the persons of known Fidelity and Honesty should meet, according to the nomination & appointment of his Coun∣cil, to take upon them the Supream Authority;A Council of State. and in the interim, to this Council all obedience upon Peril was required, and all Justices and Sheriffs, and other Officers were ordered to continue in their respective Commissions and places, and Writs to run in the same stile, of the Keepers of the Liberties of England. The first work this Council did, was the publishing of an Ordinance for six months Assessment, from the 24 of Iune, and was obeyed in all points like an Act of Parliament, and better welcomed than any of the late ones, for its de∣crease of the Tax to a considerable fall; another Artifice to gain the people: but the Treasuries were now reasonable full by the Providence of all Parlia∣ment. The Town of Marlborough was reduced almost to Ashes April 28,Marlborough burnt, Ap. 28. an ominous Commencement of this Incendiaries Usurpation, whose red and fiery Nose was the burden of many a Cavalier-Song.
This turn and Translation of the Government was very acceptable news to the King at Paris, his Friends and Counsellors saluting and complementing him with the infallible hopes of his Restitution by those means; and much Jollity and Gladness there was concerning it, and many Treatments given the King. The Earl of Bristol,Lord Digby honoured with the order of the Garter. late Lord Digby, was now honoured with the Order of the Garter at Paris, and great expectation there was of a successful Issue of the Earl of Rochester's Negotiation at the Diet at atisbone, and of potent as∣sistance from other Princes His Allies and Confederates, among whom the Dutch were now reckoned not the least considerable; General Middleton be∣ing on his Journey thither to Treat with them about furnishing an Expedition into Scotland, where he was to Command in chief: but the Dutch having of∣fered a Treaty at any neutral place, which was now refused by Cromwel except at London, they would not presently Engage, till that Issue was known. The King of Denmark now also published his Manifesto against the English, and declared a War, and Rigged his Fleet, and secured and strengthned his Castles against any attempt of their Fleets, if they should approach so neer as they had done when Captain Ball commanded a Squadron thither the end of last Sum∣mer. In Ireland, the main of the Forces of Vlster under the Command of the Lord Iniskellin, Colonel O Rely, and Mac Mahon, and Mac Guire, yielded, and put an end to that War,Ulster-forces in Ireland sub∣mit. May 18, upon the old Articles for Transportation. On the 4 of May, Trump with 80 Men of War set sail again from the Texel, to meet a Fleet of 200 sail from Nants and other parts in France coming round about by Ireland, and to secure other ships from the Eastland laden with Cor∣dage and other Ship-materials and necessaries; which the Nants Fleet being ready for him, he nimbly effected, missing of our English Navy, who having Rendezvouzed at Humber-mouth, sailed to Aberdeen, and so to Shetland, and thence passed over to the Danish Shore, where they had intelligence that Trump had dispatcht his errand by that lucky meeting of his Nants Fleet, and had re∣turned for Holland: whereupon they presently steered for England; but before their arrival in any Port, Van Trump having quitted his Merchant-men, and de∣livered them sate, to the great rejoycing of the Dutch, came instantly into the Downs,Trump in the Downs, ha∣ving given the English a go-by. with a resolution to fire and seize all such Ships as were before Dover, there being no Guard nor protection neer them; and on the 26 of May, mis∣sing of his aim, rantingly battered Dover with his whole Fleet all that day, to the Alarming of all the Coast adjacent; while the English Fleet, having visi∣ted the Coast of Holland, put them into no less consternation and wonder how we were able to Equip and Man 100 sail of War-ships in so short a time, and in such a distracted condition of State. Next day Trump having laid his Scouts abroad to get intelligence of the English Fleet, as also to intercept all Trade and ships coming into the Downs and River, Anchored on the back of the Goodwyn; Generals Monke and Dean being in Yarmouth-Road, and General Blake fitting himself to joyn with them; for Trump stayed in his Station. On the second of Iune in the Morning, the English Fleet discovered them, and a∣bout eleven or twelve a clock Engaged them, and Fought till six at Night: in the bginning of the fight, and the first Broad-side, General Dean was shot almost off in the Middle by a Cannon-Bullet,Engaged by Gen. Monke and Dean, &c. June 2 Gen. Dean slain. as he stood by General Monke, who without any disturbance bad his Servants and Seamen to remove him, and continued the Service without further notice of the accident. Of the Dutch side an Admiral was blown up, the Captain Cornelius Van Velso, and Captain Bolter's ship and three more sunk; which made Trump sail for the Dunkirk-Coast between, and some of his ships over the Flats, in hope to strand the English upon the pursuit; and in case the great ships should with more heed desist from the Chase, that the nimble and formost Frigats being too far Enga∣ged, and that without succour from them, in those Shallows might fall with∣out recovering into his hands, by his turning upon them with his ablest and lightest Vessels, of which he had store, and so escaped that night. In this days fight, Rear-Admiral Lawson so Engaged with de Ruyter and two
other Flag-ships, and part of their Squadrons with his, that Trump was forced to come in to his Relief, with other of his best ships, whilst the ordinary Men of war were catcht up and Boarded; there being six more reckoned taken and sunk: in the night whereof, Trump by good Piloting made to the Coast aforesaid over those Shallows; but the English found them again, and Engaged them a∣bout eight in the Morning, (General Blake being now joyned with them, with a Squadron of 18 more Men of War) and continued till eleven or twelve, when the Dutch began to flye for it, and Van Trump to fire at those ships that ran; but they being not to be staid, run all into a huddle, which made them an easie prey, by reason of their confusion; ninety Men of War being so ming∣led one with another, that they could not come to do any Execution upon us, without greater damage to themselves. This lucky pursuit was continued till night,Trump defea∣ted, June 2, 3. and some fifteen more ships taken; and had day lasted, few of them had escaped. Trump now steered S. and by E. with a fresh Eastward Gale, it ha∣ving been calm before; and General Monke E. N. E. to Zealand, and came to an Anchor at seven Fathom water, and found the Dutch Fleet arrived at Blac∣kenburgh, one of those places of strength pawned to Queen Elizabeth for secu∣rity of that assistance in men and money she afforded those States. Van Trump laid the misfortune of this Defeat upon the ignorance and unskilfulness of his Cap∣tains. And thus ended this Dutch Bravado upon our Coast, and in the Downs, where they had first attempted the tryal of strength, and to wrest the Soveraignty of the Seas;The Dutch hang out a white Flag, and send a Messenger to the English, in order to a Peace. A new Parli∣ament called. to the so breaking of their Stomacks, that a resolution for Peace and Agreement was presently taken up, and a Vessel with a white Flag, and a Messenger to prepare the way for two Embassadors, was sent into England: so uncertain and ridiculous is the greatest Humane confidence! The Council of State now issued out Summons for the Parliament-men the Officers had nominated and presented to Cromwel, being persons of Integrity and Fidelity to the Commonwealth, as the project was, because there was no choice could be made by the Country without apparent hazard to the good Cause so long contested for, for that the disaffected would creep in; and there∣fore this extraordinary Proceeding was to be Authorized by the safety of the people, the Supreme Law. This was Sophistry in the Parliament: it was the highest reason now with Oliver, though the most palpable and bold subversion of the English Freedom that could be imagined; but Oliver had the Sword, and thought he gratified the people another way in exchange, by freeing them from the Task-masters of the Parliament, than whom, with the Old Woman, they thought they could not have worse, whoever came next. And that the new Commonwealth and its friends might see that there was no good to be done by a Parliament after the utmost experiment of it, and to prepare the greater acceptableness of his Image of Government; (which had the Brass, the Iron, and the Clay to its Composition, in its rise, maintenance and perishment) he gave them a tast and sight of the gross and most absurd destructive errours of this Purest Convention, men differenced from the rest by the Character of Nathaniel, being without Guile; to whom he directed this Paper. Forasmuch as upon the Dissolution of the late Parliament,The Summons. it became necessary that the Peace should be provided for; and in order thereunto, divers persons fearing God, &c. and of approved Fidelity and Integrity, &c. are by my self and the Council of Officers nominated to the Trust, &c. and having good assurance of your Love, and courage for God, and the Interest of his Cause and good people: I Oliver Cromwel, Captain General of all the Forces raised, and to be raised within this Commonwealth, do require and Summon You — being one of the persons no∣minated, to appear in the Chamber commonly called the Council-Chamber in White∣hall in the City of Westminster, on the 4 of July, there to take upon you the Trust, &c. to which ye are called, and appointed a Member for the County of A. — And these good men and true resolved to come together and give their Verdict against the Publick.
A good juncture now offered it self to the Scotch Nobility, and the Loyal Party their adherents, to redeem themselves and Country from the slavery of their new Master, a great deal more costly and absolute than their Kirk-Rulers, as having no other Communion with this,New Scotch Troubles. than in the perillous concerns of Per∣son and Estate: The chief of these Nobles were the Earls of Glencarne, Sea∣forth, and Athol; the Lairds Mac Cloud, Mac Renalds; the Frazers; the Lord Kenmore, the Earl of Kinoule, though at present a Prisoner in Edenburgh-Castle, from whence he, Colonel Montgomery, and Lieutenant-Colonel Peter Hay very nearly afterwards escaped into this Party. They had lately received a Commission from the King, (and in Parties appeared up and down) in order to their raising new Levies, which they encreased to some competent numbers, expecting additional supplies from beyond Sea, and their Friends in the Low-lands, and some English Auxiliaries; of all which, and the Velitatory War made by them, hereafter in its place expect an Abstract and Epitome. Nothing remarkable in Ireland but the raging of the Plague, which followed the Sword, and accompanied the High Court of Iustice; as if no affliction could satisfie for the Barbarous Wickedness of that Nation; on whom notwithstanding it fell not alone, but spread it self afterwards into the English Quarters, and carried away a great number of people. Colonel Sullyman was now defeated in Ker∣ry, and his Major Fitz Gerald taken Prisoner; and the Transplantation now begun. The English still lay upon the Coast of Holland, (having for a while refresh∣ed themselves at Soal-Bay) into whose Ports and Harbours, upon the pursuit as far as the Texel, they had driven and scattered the Dutch Fleet; which had so brought down the stomacks of the Hollander, that that Province having as before sent away a Boat with a white Flag, with a Messenger for a Pasport and a Safe-Conduct for two Embassadors; and having obtained it, sent away the Lords Youngstall and Vande Perre, to follow two others newly gone before. These arrived the 20 of Iune, and had Audience the 22, their Message being of such importance: for every day their Merchant-ships were taken coming home, and there was no stirring out for any, so that there was an absolute Ces∣sation there of Trade,The Dutch Trade at a stand. no less than 30 ships of good lading having been taken by our Fleet riding up and down about their Havens. But this expedited and the more hastily and intently carried on their preparations for War, if Peace should not be presently concluded; the major part of their Fleet being put into Zealand and that Coast, was new Rigging there, and some new ships off the Stocks, and this Van Trump supervised: another new Fleet was equipping at Amsterdam, and that De Wit took the care and charge of: the Marriners Wages (though there was no other Employment for them) were now raised: the Lords States themselves came down to the several Ports, and saw the men imbarqued, to whom they gave Money in hand, and took them by it, requesting of them now to do valiantly for their Country; and telling them, that if they fought well this time, they should fight no more: and for the better incitement, and to see every man do his duty, two of the States went on board a nimble-Frigat, to be present at the Fight, now with all speed resolved on; and in confidence of suc∣cess, this Fleet was Victualled for five Months, which time it should continue abroad, blocking up our Harbours in like manner as we did theirs; for as yet in Forrain Courts and Countries they would not confess we were too hard for them; and this bout would rectifie all, and adjust their Stories. The last Dutch Engagement between Gen. Monke and Van Trump on the Coast of Holland, July 29.This happened in the end of Iuly; it having been so ordered, that both the Fleets under Van Trump from the Weilings in Zealand, and De Wit from the Texel, should meet upon the Engagement: General Monke with the English Fleet lying as it were in the mid-way. On the 29 of Iuly, the Scouts a Head discovered this Dutch Fleet, whereupon the General made after them; but they standing away for De Wit, it was five a clock at night ere any of our Frigats got up to them, when they appeared to be 90 sail of Men of War, and ten Fire-ships: about 7 that night, General Monke (aboard the Resolution) got up
to them, with some 30 ships and Frigats in all, and charged through their whole Fleet; when it beginning to grow duskish, the Masters advised the General not to stand to them again that night for fear of the Fire-ships: but the noble Ge∣neral turning himself with indignation towards them, commanded them in some disgraceful, but more unproper terms, that they should To um again, for, said He, The very Powder of the Guns of this Ship is able to blow away a Fire-ship from it; and so they tackt about, and through the Dutch again: in which by a Ball from the Enemy (both Fleets being close to one another) the Mizen-shrouds of the Resolution were fired, but quickly put out again by the courageous Activity of one Captain Ioseph Taylor, then assisting and standing by the General. Nothing of more remarque was done that night, save that the Garland with the Enemy received much prejudice, being known and saluted by every ships Broad-side, though the Dutch had altered her Decks: and so the English stood to the Southward, and Van Trump to the Northward that night, and joyned with De Wit, and withal got the Weather-gage, by reason his sailing Northwards was no way suspected by our Fleet. The next day there being much Windy and foul Weather, both Fleets could not Engage, the Sea was so high, but found it a difficult work to get off of a Lee-shore, which was so much the worse to the English, being on an Enemies Coast; but a most gallant delightful sight it was to see the two Fleets so neer one another, plying their Sails, fill'd with as much Revenge and desire of En∣gagement, as with those envious Gusts that kept them asunder. But next mor∣ning being Sunday, the Weather proving fair, and little Wind, Iuly 31, both Fleets Engaged again in a most terrible Fight; the Dutch animated with the equal if not the inclinable success of Friday, and the English loth to contest so long for a resolved Victory, as if three days were always to be the apportioned time of their labour in Conquest. It is impossible to give a distinct account of this Battle, in Fire and Smoak, Board and Board, for eight hours together in∣cessant. The Garland was the first disabled, and the Dutch Fire-ships notably managed their business: the Andrew, Victory, Triumph, and Rainbow, the great ships (at whom the Dutch spight was greatest) being so endangered, that out of the Triumph (which was fired by one of them) several of the ships crue threw themselves into the Sea; but others of better spirits (remaining be∣hinde) with great gallantry quenched the Fire, and gave a merry occasion of a Civil Law or Admiralty-Controversie, Whether the Chests, Goods, and Cloaths (which those that stayed in the ship had got on) of those that deserted it, and when the danger of the Flame was past got in again, should belong to the pre∣sent Possessor, who refused to d'off or re-deliver them to the former owner, who was much troubled to see other men in his Apparel. The Victory (in which was Captain Lane) was stoutly beset with a Vice-Admiral and two o∣ther Flemish War-ships, and so distressed, that another Dutch Vice-Admiral (in an East-India-ship of 60 Guns) coming up by her Quarter, and mistaking the Condition as well as Resolution of that Captain, proffered him Quarter, and bid him yield; which was answered with the thanks of a Broad-side, that sunk the Dutch-man immediately by his side. No less gallant service did the Speaker-Frigat, so well known to the Dutch by the name of the Prater; and truly there was nothing but the antient glory & right of the English to be Superiors to that Nation, which differenced the valour of both; since had the Dutch fought upon a juster Quarrel, Fortune might have been as equal. Besides, the Death of their Admiral (the brave Van Trump) in the beginning of the Fight, by the shot of a Musquet-bullet in his left Pap,Van Trump slain, and the Dutch defea∣ted, July 31. mainly contributed to their Defeat: His Flag, the Original of the War, was strucken with a shot; and whether they would not, (for a signe to their Fleet to revenge his Death) or could not make it stand, there was no such Ensigne the greatest part of the Fight; which having continued from seven in the morning till one or two in the afternoon, the Dutch at last gave out and fled towards the Texel, having but one Flag standing among them, the English Frigats pursuing them; the smalness of some
whereof made an Admiral-ship turn the Helm, and stand to them and Engage; but just upon his Boarding of one of them, the biggest Frigats came in and took the Dutch-man, whose Commanders with Lights in their Poops (for day was so far spent in the Chace) recovered the Texel; and the English not daring to venture too far upon that Coast, rode some ix Leagues that night over against it, having lost two ships, the Oak, who perished by fire, thrusting her self be∣tween, to preserve the Rainbow from a Fire-ship; and the Hunter-frigat, an Eng∣lish Fire-ship, who attended the orders of the Rear-Admiral Lawson, whose behaviour this day, also of Vice-Admiral Pen, was very noble and Renowned: most of the Fleet were maimed in their Rigging, Shrouds, and Masts; especial∣ly the Merchant-men, (whose Captains having withdrawn themselves former∣ly from the brunt of the Engagement, to save their Owners, were now trans∣ferred to one anothers Commands, and sought here stoutly,) especially the May-flower was terribly battered, and hardly able to keep above Water: but the greatest loss was of Commanders, whose Names and their respective Ships out of which they were killed and wounded, were as followeth. The Dutch lost, and had Burnt and Sunk 26 Men of War; 30 were first reckoned, but two of that number got into the Elbe much torn, and two into Zealand; the particulars of whose Captains taken Prisoners were as follows; the rest were lost beyond our research, for the Dutch would never publish them. English Captains Slain. Andrew, Captain Thomas Graves, Golden Cock, Capt. Edmund Chapman. William, Capt. Iohn Taylor. May-flower-Merchant, Capt. William Newman. Prosperous, Capt. Crisp. Phoenix, Capt. Owen Cox, that took her from the Duth before. And 500 Common Souldiers Slain. English Captains Wounded. Triumph, Captain Peacock, Lawrel, Capt. Iohn Stokes. Dragon, Capt. Iohn Seaman. Portland, Capt. William Rou▪ Assurance, Capt. P. Holland. Tulip, Capt. Ioseph Cubit. And 800 Common Souldiers Wounded. Dutch Captains taken Prisoners, the Slain unknown. Cornelius Evertson, Vice-Admiral of Zealand, and Captain of the Zealand-Ly∣on, 28 Guns, and 130 men, Sunk. Glause Iohnson Zanger, Captain of the Westcappall, 26 Guns, and 104 Men, Sunk. Andrew Fomeen, Captain of the Concord of Zirick-Zee, 22 Guns, 100 Men, Burnt. Gerbion Scotter, Captain of the Golden Dolphin, 30 Guns, 110 Men, Sunk. Iohn de Hayes, Commander of the Garland, a ship formerly taken from us by the Dutch, 44 Guns, 180 Men, Burnt. It is suspected there were more Captains Prisoners, but they were not discovered. At least 4500 Dutch slain and wounded; and it was certain, of 120 Sail, there re∣turned but 90 into the Texel.
To honour and recompence the desert of the Generals,Gold Chains and Meddals ordered by the Parl. to be gi∣ven to the chief Commanders and Officers. and the Vice-Admi∣ral, and Rear-Admiral, and their Flag-Officers, the Parliament ordered them respectively Gold-Chains, and to all the Officers and Captains Meddals of Gold. Provision and Maintenance was likewise ordered for the Widows and Children of those that were slain; as also care taken for the Wounded, the moiety of all Hospital-revenues applied to their particular Cure, as likewise the Tenths of all Prizes formerly belonging to the Lord-Admiral; and lastly, as an acknowledgment of this Victory,A Thanksgiv∣ing appointed. a Thanksgiving on the 25 of August, managed by Owen and Cradock. The Dutch had given their Reward before, having ordered 1000 l. besides the ship and furniture, to those that should take the chief Admiral, other Admi∣rals 600 l. their Flag-ships 400 l. and 100 l. to those that with a valiant and courageous hand should take down the Admiral's Flag, and so proportionably; but none of these Payments were ever claimed, for the attempt was found more unfeasible. The Dutch got upon the Steeples at the Hague, and other high places about Scheveling, and saw something of the Fight, which they fancied to their advantage; but the perfecter fight at Amsterdam undid their belief: notwithstanding the English presently leaving their Coast, heightned them to a vapour, that it was an equal Combat; and they gave it out accordingly. General Monke having staid 12 Leagues to the Westward of the Texel some three or four days, sailed for Soal-Bay again, and met upon the English Coast with a terrible Storm, to the endangering the Fleet, but especially such ships as were shattered; and thence some while after sent away Vice-Admiral Lawson to the Coast of Holland, while De Wit was got ready, and to Sea and home again, with a Fleet of 60 Sail of War, to fetch home 300 Merchant-men from the Sound,De Wit con∣veys a great Fleet from the Sound. from the East-Indies and all parts of the World, (the Sound being the appointed Rendezvouz of them all) and brought them in safety home, to the no little rejoycing and Triumph of the Dutch Merchants, and to the asswaging the publick discontent at their late defeat. The States had been in election of a Lieutenant-Admiral in place of Van Trump, and at last agreed upon the Lord Opdam,Lord Opdam made Lieute∣nant-Admiral in place of Van Trump, who was Interred at Delf in great State. one that had been a Colonel of Horse in their service, and of good Conduct and personal worth, whom, in imitation of the English, they chose to this Sea-employment. Trump's Funerals were ordered to be solemnized in the beginning of September, when he was Interred at Delf in great State, becom∣ing so great a Captain, the honour and defence of his Country, in which he nobly fell. A person of great affection to the Family and person of our King, and very much an English-man in all things but his Nativity. Of such an in∣terest in this War, that with him it begun, and with him expired, he being the soul that actuated it throughout. In his glorious Urn we will deposite there∣fore this History and Record thereof, and re-assume the mention of the Dutch in more friendly and amicable language: but it is very necessary to look first homewards, and retrospect the elaps'd sitting down of Oliver's Juncto at West∣minster. According to their Summons, on the fourth of Iuly,Little Parlia∣ment met July 4. the Members of appro∣ved Fidelity, &c. met at the Council-chamber in White-hall, where Cromwel in a zealous Speech, much to the purpose of his Declaration, and the occasion of the present meeting, stuft with various citations of Scripture (I am loth to nauseate the Reader with any more of his Harangues at large) to his (but far from the) purpose; devolved the supreme Trust, which they translated into more common English, adjourning themselves after a short Consultation to Westminster, ad giving themselves the Title and Authority of the Parliament of England, voting Mr. Francis Rouse for their Speaker; but with a Collateral Vote,Mr. Francis Rouse their Speaker. that he should continue in the Chair no longer than for a Month. They were persons for the most part of such mean and ignore extractions, that so far were they from being taken notice of by the Shires each of whom but two or three represented▪ that they were scarce known in the very Towns they were born, or afterwards inhabited, till the Excise, then Committees for Sequestra∣tion,
and the War in the respective Counties, made them infamously known. The rest were of his Partisans in the Parliament and High Court of Iustice; and for credit-sake some two or three Fanatick-Noblemen, (excepted always the latent honour of the Renowned Monke, Howard, and Montague) and some Knights, and amongst them, for honesty sake, Sir A. Ashley Cooper; though for all those Titles and Generosities, it was better known like it self by the Name of Barebone's Parliament,Called Bare∣bone's Par∣liament, a Leather-sellers Name in Fleet∣street, one of the said Con∣vention. whose Christian-Name was Praise God, a Leather-seller in Fleetstreet, a Brownist, or such kinde of Separatist from the Church of England, long before the War, and now a Member in this Convention, into which these Evocati had adopted Cromwel, Lambert, Harrison, Thomlinson, and Desborough; because forsooth none of the Army would intrude; and generally none to be ad∣mitted, but such of whom this House should be satisfied of their real Godliness; and this by a preliminary Vote, Iuly 5. These strangers to our Israel, but Pro∣selytes of the Good Cause, and Iewish in every other respect, since they obtained the Name of a Parliament, are as well worth a shew, as the other a Ballad: and these are the Names of the Monster. The Names of the Parliament men.Berks. Samuel Dunch. Vincent Goddard. Thomas Wood. Bedford. Nathaniel Taylor. Edward Cater. Buckingham. George Fleetwood. George Baldwin. Cambridge. Iohn Sadler. Thomas French. Robert Castle. Samuel Warner. Chester. Robert Duckenfield. Henry Berkenhead. Four Northern Counties. Charles Howard. Robert Fenwick▪ Henry Dawson. Henry Ogle. Cornwal. Robert Bennet. Francis Langdon. Anthony Rous. Iohn Bawden. Derby. Iervas Bennet. Nathaniel Barton. Devon. George Monke, one of the Generals at Sea. Iohn Carew. Thomas Sanders. Christopher Martin. Iames Erisey. Francis Rous. Richard Sweet. Dorset. William Sydenham. Iohn Bingham. Essex. Ioachim Matthews. Henry Barrington. Iohn Brewster. Christopher Earl. Dudly Templer. Gloucester. Iohn Crofts. William Neast. Robert Holmes. Southampton. Richard Norton. Richard Major. Iohn Hildesly. Hertford. Henry Lawrence. William Reeve. Hereford. Wroth Rogers. Iohn Herring. Huntington. Edward Montague. Stephen Pheasant. Kent. Lord Viscount Lisle. Thomas Blount. Wiliam Kenrick. William Cullen. Andrew Broughton. Lancaster. William West. Iohn Sawrey. Robert Cunliff. Leicester. Henry Danvers. Edward Smith. Iohn Prat. Lincoln. Sir William Brownlow. Richard Cust. Barnaby Bowtel. Humphrey Walcot. William Thompson. Middlesex. Sir William Roberts. Augustine Wingfield. Arthur Squib. Monmouth. Philip Iones. Northampton. Sir Gilbert Pickering. Thomas Brook.
Norfolk. Robert Iermy. Tobias Freere. Ralph Wolmer. Henry King. William Burton. Nottingham. Iohn Oddingsels. Edward Clud. Oxon. Sir Charles Wolsley. William Draper. Dr. Ionathan Goddard. Rutland. Edward Horseman. Salop. William Bottrel. Thomas Baker. Stafford. George Bellot. Iohn Chetwood. Suffolk. Iacob Caley. Francis Brewster. Robert Dunkon. Iohn Clarke. Edward Plumstead. Somerset. Robert Blake, one of the Generals at Sea. Iohn Pyne. Dennis Hollister. Henry Henley. Surrey. Samuel Highland. Lawrence March. Sussex. Anthony Stapley. William Spence. Nathaniel Studeley. Warwick. Iohn St. Nicholas. Richard Lucy. Wilts. Sir Anthony Ashly-Cooper. Nicholas Green. Thomas Eyre▪ Worcester. Richard Salwey. Iohn Iames. York. George Lord Eure. Walter Strickland. Francis Lassels. Iohn Anlaby. Thomas Dickenson. Thomas St. Nicholas. Roger Coats. Edward Gill. London. Robert Titchborn. Iohn Ireton. Samuel Moyer. Iohn Langley. Iohn Stone. Henry Barton. Praise God Barebone. Wales. Bushy Mansel. Iames Philips. Iohn Williams. Hugh Courtney. Richard Price. Iohn Brown. Scotland. Sir Iames Hope. Alexander Bredy. Iohn Swinton. William Lockart. Alexander Ieffries. Ireland. Sir Robert King. Col. Iohn Hewson. Col. Henry Cromwel. Col. Iohn Clark. Daniel Hutchison. Vincent Gookyn. Such an Assembly, or Trim Tram, was very unlikely to settle the Nation, who though they expected all mischief imaginable from them, yet could not forbear with the Sun in a Cloud to smile at their ridiculous unhappiness. In∣deed it was but a Cloud, for it soon vanished and disappeared at the storm of Oliver's furious Ambition; and therefore there needs not much more to be said of it, than Astrologers do of Comets and Eclipses, who reckon onely their continuance, which was from the 4 of Iuly, to the 12 of December, in which these angry products were visible. First, an Act for Marriages by a Justice of Peace,Act for Mar∣riages. (having been in debate by the Long Parliament) the Banes to be published in the Market three several days, and the words of that Sacred Ordinance onely inverted, and the fashion changed, with an Appendix concerning Church-Registers, and a Proviso that no other Marriage should be valid and Lawful: whereupon all civil people were forced to be twice joyned, though but once Married. Next after this Matri∣monial Coupling, in a wilder humour they fell upon a Consultation of Repudi∣ating the Body of the Law,A new Body of the Law to be made. by divorcing it from the People, and a new Foun∣dation to be laid, and Systems of their own projections to be brought in the place of it; and these were to be adequated to the measure and square of a Fifth Monarchy, and those Monstrous absurdities. Then in order thereunto, an
Act was hammering for abolishing of Tithes, ejecting scandalous Ministers, and constituting Commissioners to go the Circuit to enquire and visit the Parishes: and most of their Debates were spent hereupon. And lastly, in prepara∣tion to Oliver's designe, (who yet managed and put them upon those enor∣mous Whimseys, to the making them most odious, and all Parliamets with them) though under pretence of grievance to many Godly people especially, and the whole Nation in general; the non-procedure at Law without subscri∣bing the Engagement, was taken away; also all Fines upon Bills, Declarations, and Original Writs, were taken off, and the Chancery very neer a total subver∣sion, a Bill being ready to that purpose. Those were their devices as to the Law, and the Regulation of Government; see the rest to the maintenance of it▪ and the carrying on of the Affairs of the Commonwealth, as their Secretaries tmed it. First, an Act was framed out of an Ordinance of the late prece∣ding Council of State, for a Lottery of the Rebels Lands in Ireland, in which one Methuselah Turner, a Linnen-draper in Cheapside, and one Brandriffe a Cloth-drawer, were Named Commissioners, and had already sate in Grocers-Hall, with such other most incompetent Judges of the affair: In this Act, the Rebel∣lion was declared to be at an end,An Act for h Adven∣turers and Al∣lotments. and that the several Adventurers and Soul∣diers for their Arrears should have ten Counties set out and assigned for their satisfaction; and if that should not satisfie, the County of Louth should be ad∣ded to make it up; with many other clauses of length and restriction: and this was passed as an Introduction to the Grand Grievance of Publick Faith-money, undertaken by those shrimps, which was able to crush their House full of such as Hercules; but it was well applied to cajole the People, (many of whom had been very forward in supplies of Money to the Irish war) and the Souldiers there, that were to be made firm to Cromwel's Interest, by such obligations of Lands and Estates. A new Council of State was now of the same teeming, but of a mightier strain; Oliver, and his Grand Officers and Partisans entirely constituting it, not a puny of those Dwarfish Politicians being admitted into the number. Those Hogens of the Council did all the business, transacted with Forrain States, kept the Wheels of Government on going here and abroad, received Embassadors, particularly the Spanish, Dutch, and French Residents, and a new one from the Great Duke of Florence, and other Princes▪ and put upon the Parliament all their Intrigues and ill-looked necessities of Money, so that this Convention at first dash ran the Tax up again to 120000 l. per mensem for six Months; as if Pluto kept Court there again, and that like possessed men they could speak nothing else but that and Excise, now continued, and an ad∣ditional Act for sales of Fee-farm Rents, Forrest-lands, and more Delinquents Estates, for the finishing of that whole affair. Whitlock Embassador to Sweden.The Lord Whitlock (between whom and the Lord Lisle the Embassie of Swe∣den was in dispute for a while, till Cromwel had made sure of Whitlock) was now recommended to the Parliament for their Approbation and Commission to proceed in his Voyage with all hast, to pursue those designes of Agreement which had been layd by that Queens Embassadors here; that Kingdom labour∣ing with such another Change, in some manner, as we did here: and accordingly he was dispatcht, and his Instructions (as all other things of designe and con∣sequence) referred to the Council of State. He departed about the beginning of November, in the Phoenix and Elizabeth Frigats, and arrived the 15 at Goten∣burgh in that Kingdom, with a Retinue of 100 persons very gallant, with a suitable state of Furniture; and travelled from thence in very ugly way, and base Accommodation, (no Beds being to be had for Money) to Vpsal, an University, where the Queen then resided, because of the Plague at Stockholme, the chief City and Metropolis of that Kingdom. General Blake, Monke, Desborough, and Pen, were commended likewise to be Generals at Sea for the next year, (a suitable Change with that inconstant Element) and approved of. And lastly, that they might in all things be like a Parliament, and alike odious to all peo∣ple; and that the Cavaliers might have recent cause to hate them, a High Court
of Iustice was Enacted again, and Lisle made President: for Bradshaw, as a great Commonwealths-man, and Enemy to a Single Person, was quite lain a∣side. This is the sum of what these Sages and men of Fidelity did during their Session,A Summary of what the Par∣liament did. besides their Prayers and Preachments in the House, so that from the something Honourable Stile of a Convention▪ it raised not it self above the Re∣putation of a Conventicle; and in effect, the Parliament was but a Sub-commit∣tee, that truckled under the Council of State and Oliver for their occasions, and Feake's (a great Fifth-Monarchy-Preacher) Congregation held at Black-fryers, (this Hy of the Commonwealth being betwixt Sylla and Charybdis) who cut out every days work for the House; the very last knack of their Legislative-power being a Bill formed in Paper, and ready drawn to the last Clause, (and would have presently passed) for the perpetual meetings of Parliament one upon the Dissolution of another, (the very Coloquintida of their Counsels to Oliver) and that the people should be judged by Committees, and no Courts remain at Westminster, but the Mosaical Law should take place; Magistracy and Ministry both being to be abolished, that the Saints of the Earth might Rule in all things. — But see the Evil Spirit laid by their own artful Con∣jurer. On the 12 of December,Barebone's Parliament dissolved, Dec. 12. (as it had been directed by the Council of State) the Parliament being sate, some of the Members stood up, one after another, and made a motion for a Dissolution thereof, for that it would not be for the good of the Nations to continue it longer: this Court-Air almost Blasted the Men of Fidelity and Committee-Blades, who had scarce warmed their Fingers ends in the Government, and were newly setling themselves and their Friends in a thriving way, as they had done in their Offices they had passed before; and thereupon they began one after another to make Perorations of the Cause of God and the Godly people committed to their charge: which they could not tell how to answer to Him, if so easily they should give it up, and leave the Commonwealth in such a distraction as would inevitably ensue: and Major-General-Harrison,Squib's, and Harrison's Speeches upon this occasion in the House. and Arthur Squib (the great Sequestrator of Haberdashers Hall) were very copiously zealous in defence of their Authority: but the Mili∣tary or Court-party being the Major part, not thinking them worthy of a dis∣pute or longer Debate, the Speaker being of their side, rose, and left the House, and them sitting in it, where to Prayers they went, and then resolved to con∣tinue itting. In the mean time Rous the Speaker (with the Mace before him and his fol∣lowers) came to White-hall, and there resigned the Instrument he gave them,The Speaker re∣signes the In∣strument. by which they were constituted a Parliament; and gave him likewise to un∣derstand and how they had left their Fellows. Their Surrender was kindely recei∣ved by Oliver, and they thanked for the pains they had taken in the service of the Commonwealth; however he and they had missed of their intentions of the good should thereby have come to the Commonwealth, which a strange spirit, and perverse principle in some of the Members had solely hindered. And as to them yet sitting in the Parliament-house, he dispatcht away Lieutenant-Colonel White, a confident of his, to dislodge them; who accordingly with a guard of Red-coats came thither, and entring the House, Commanded them in the Name of the General to depart, for that the Parliament was Dis∣solved: who replying to the contrary, and telling him they were upon Business, and ought not to be thus disturbed; he asked, What Business? they answered, We are seeking of God. Pgh, saith he, is that all? that's to no purpose; for God hath not been within these Walls these twelve years. And so fairly com∣pelled them out, muttering with the same wrath, and sorrowful look-backs, as those that had sate 30 times the same term, and could almost have pleaded pre∣scription. Thus was the Power emptied from one Vessel to another, as the Scribes and Chaplains of the Grandees phrased it; and could finde settlement, till Oliver was called to it by his Council of Officers, to supply this Gap in Government.
And now a Single Person with a Council is the onely expedient for the safety of the People, for that there is no Trust nor Truth in Parliaments, as their of∣ten aberrations and failures had sufficiently declared: and it was discursed by the Abettors of this Change, that 'twas not Monarchy which was quarrelled at, but the corruptions and abuses of it, in its unlimited, unbounded Prerogative; all which would be avoided, by the circumscription of it in a Protector, by his Council, and a new Instrument of Government, and the Supreme power of a Trienial Parliament, in whom during their Session the Soveraign Authori∣ty should reside. So they said, and so they did: for after four days time (in which Feak and his Freaking Partisans were almost run from their Wits in rage and madness) Cromwel was Appointed and Declared for Protector of this Infant-Common∣wealth, (and it was a tedious interval to him:) the Chancery-Court at West∣minster-hall being prepared for the Ceremony of the Instalment in this manner, after the usual seeking of God by the Officers of the Army. The Protector Install's, Dec. 16.The Protector about one of the clock in the afternoon came from White hall to Westminster to the Chancery-Court, attended by the Lords Commissioners of the Great Seal of England, Barons of the Exchquer, and Judges in their Robes; after them, the Council of the Commonwealth, and the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Recorder of the City of London, in their Scarlet Gowns: then came the Protector attended with many of the chief Officers of the Army. A Chair of State being set in the said Court of Chancery, the Protector stood on the left hand thereof uncovered, till a large Writing in Parchment (in the manner of an Oath) was read; there being the power with which the Protector was In∣vested, and how the Protector is to Govern the three Nations: which the Pro∣tector accepted of, and subscribed in the face of the Court, and immediately hereupon sate down covered in the Chair. The Lords Commissioners then de∣livered up the Great Seal of England to the Protector, and the Lord Mayor his Sword and Cap of Maintenance; all which the Protector returned immediate∣ly to them again. The Court then rose, and the Protector was attended back as aforesaid, to the Banqueting-house in White-hall, the Lord Mayor himself un∣covered, carrying the Sword before the Protector all the way: and coming into the Banqueting-house, an Exhortation was made by Mr. Lockyer; after which, the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Judges departed. The Instrument or Module framed to be the Foundation of this present Go∣vernment, was chiefly made up of these following Heads. The heads of the Module of Government.1. The Protector should call a Parliament every three years. 2. That the first should Assemble on the third of September, 1654. 3. That he would not Dis∣solve the Parliament till it had sat five Months. 4. That such Bills as they of∣fered to him, he not Passing them in twenty days, should Pass without him. 5. That he should have a select Council, not exceeding one and twenty, nor under thirteen. 6. That immediately after his Death, the Council should chuse another Protector before they rose. 7. That no Protector after him should be General of the Army. 8. That the Protector should have power to make Peace or War. 9. That in the Intervals of Parliament, he and his Council might make Laws that should be binding to the Subjects, &c. With some other popular Lurdes and common incidencies of Go∣vernment, not worth the recital, which were confirmed and strenuously valida∣ted by this his Oath. The Protector's Oath.I Promise in the presence of God, not to violate or infringe the matters and things contained in the Instrument; but to ob∣serve, and cause the same to be observed; and in all things to the best of my understanding, govern the Nations according to the Laws, Statutes, and Customs; to seek their Peace, and cause Justice and Law to be equally administred.
The Feat needed no more security, as good altogether as its Authority, in this folowing Proclamation, which was published throughout England, Scotland, and Ireland, in these words. Whereas the late Parliament Dissolved themselves,The Proclama∣tion of the Protector. and resigning their Powers Authorities, the Government of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, in a Lord Protector, and successive Triennial Parliaments, is now established. And whereas Oliver Cromwel, Captain-General of all the Forces of this Common∣wealth is declared Lord Protector of the said Nations, and hath accepted thereof: We have therefore thought it necessary (as we hereby do) to make publication of the Premises, and strictly to charge and command all and every person or persons, of what quality and condition soever, in any of the said three Nations, to take notice hereof, and to conform and submit themselves to the Government so established. And all Sheriffs, Mayors, Bayliffs, &c. are required to publish this Proclamation; to the end none may have cause to pretend Ignorance in this behalf. Great shooting off Guns at night, and Vollies of acclamations, were given at the close of this mock-solemnity, by Cromwel's Janizaries, while the Royalists were more joyfully disposed at the hopes of the King's Affairs; but no body of any ac∣count giving the Usurper a good word or miskiditchee with his Greatness, save what was uttered in Fur by the Lord Mayor and the Complices in this Fact, who tickled his Ears with the Eccho of the Proclamation done with the usual Formalities. These Triumphs so disgusted Harrison,Major-Gen. Harrison, and other Colonels disgust the U∣surper. (as also Colonel Rich) that he withdrew himself from the Gang, and turned publick Preacher or Railer against his Comrade Oliver, who was glad to be rid of such a busie and imper∣tinent Assistant in the moduling of Government. So Cromwel had now two Commonwealth contra-divided Factions against him, the old and the new Par∣liaments; and therefore it neerly concerned him to make much of the Ana∣baptist and Sectary,The Anabap∣tists and Se∣ctaries favou∣red by the Protector. which now succeeded Independency as the Religion main∣tained and favoured above all other; and Kiffin a great Leader and Teacher was now in great request at the Court at White-hall, and contrarily Sir Henry Vane jun. was looked on a-skue, as also Sir Ar. Hazilrig, and Bradshaw, and Scot. And so the Babel-builders were confounded one amongst another. The Council appointed by Officers, or taken rather by himself, by whose ad∣vice he was to govern, were 14 at first. Lord Lambert. Lord Viscount Lisle. General Desbrow. Sir Gilbert Pickering. Major-General Skippon. Sir Anthony Ashly-Cooper. Walter Strickland, Esquire. Sir Charles Wolsley.His Council. Colonel Philip Iones. Francis Rous, Esquire. Richard Major, Esquire. Iohn Lawrence, Esquire. Colonel Edward Montague. Colonel William Sydenham. By these another Proclamation came out, enabling all Officers, Sheriffs, and Justices of the Peace to continue in their respective places:The Dutch Em∣bassadors have Audience. and Audience and Conference was given to the Dutch Embassadors, who besides their last loss by Fight, had suffered very greatly by the same storm that endangered our Fleet, as De Wit was returning from the Sound; which made them ply hard for a Ces∣sation, in order to a speedy Peace: And General Monke was now riding at St. Hellens-point, by the Isle of Wight, with a considerable Fleet:Col. Lilburn chief Comman∣der in Scot∣land. Colonel Lilburn was likewise ordered to Command in chief the Forces of Scotland, who had defeated the Earl of Kinoule and his party; and Sir Arthur Forbes (another Chieftain of the Royal party) was routed neer Dumfrieze,He defeats the Royalists. and himself despe∣rately wounded, while the main Army Quartered in Murrey-land, and thence to Elgin; Colonel Morgan being sent to attend their motion. The Noble Wogan,Col. Wogan slain. who from France had by the way of Durham and Bar∣wick,
and through a Fayr in open day, marched into Scotland, and had joyned with those Scotch Royalists, and done excellent service in beating up of Quarters, and attempting them in all their marches and advances, came now at last to his End; Providence having reserved this honourable Destiny for him, that he alone of all the English of Note, should fall in his Majesties last Quarrel in the Kingdom of Scotland, the manner thus. Being abroad with his party of some 60 English, he met with Captain Elsenore's Lieutenant, ranging upon the same adventure, with some more than his number, neer Drummond and Weems, and fell upon him; and after a very sharp and stout Conflict (for they were Armed with Back and Brest, and were Veteran Blades, and never fled before) routed them, but was Wounded himself with a Tuck, whereof not long after he died, and was buried in great State, and much lamentation, with a Military Funeral in the Church of Kenmore; and Captain Ker a valiant Scot was killed with him: the said Lieutenant was killed also upon the place, with 30 of his men, to ac∣company the fate of this Noble person; so that he fell not unrevenged. Great indignation there was against Robinson the Surgeon that Drest him, for his neglect of him, the Earl of Athol having threatned to kill him; so dearly was this Heroe beloved by that Nation, who constantly envied the worth and gal∣lantry of ours. And here we must leave him till some grateful Learned Muse shall sing the Honorable Atchievements, and most laudable high actions of this famous and renowned Captain. Mortogh O Brian, the onely remaining General of the remnant of Irish in Arms, had lately fallen into the Quarters, and defeated several parties, and took some small places; but upon the approach of a Body of English, retreated again to his Fastnesses, where he better bethought himself of his sculking condition; and therefore sent and obtained the usual Articles of Transportation;Mortogh O Brian submits, March. there be∣ing reckoned now above 27000 men that had departed that Kingdom within a year: and the transplantation of most of the rest into Connaught, (a Province environed on one side by the Sea, and lockt up by Rivers and Garrisons on the other, for the security of the Peace, and enjoyment of English Lands and Estates in other Counties) had so dispeopled that Kingdom, that the Commissioners there, and their Commander Fleetwood, sent over Letters, desiring some Colonies of English to be sent over to them; very good Conditions being offered such as would Transport themselves: The chief Towns of Limerick, Galloway, and Waterford, to enjoy the like Priviledges with Bristol, &c. and Cromwel failed not to confirm Mannours and Hereditaments upon his Confiding Creatures there, who were very industrious to procure Tenants and Inhabitants to make Rent for them, with the same Expedition as he himself would here have sold the For∣rest-lands, now ready for a Purchase. The King was yet at Paris, having lately received a considerable sum of Money from Germany, where the Lord of Rochester continued at the Diet, and promises from the Emperour of his appearing in his behalf, and of Engaging the other Princes with him, upon his declaring for his Interest at the same Diet. The French King was yet very uncertain how to carry himself in that Affair, it being yet doubtful whether the Spaniard or he should first be Leagued to Crom∣wel; and some suspition there was of his Rupture with him first, as lying most opportune for his Arms, and most aimed at, because of his Relation to the King; and therefore underhand he gave the King assurance of his inviolable respects to him, and laboured by all means to stave off the Dutch from an A∣greement, offering them very largely: but by the sagacious policy of Car∣dinal Mazarine, Cromwel was inclined to Friendship with the French; and the King being sensible whereto that would tend,Cromwel in∣clined to Friendship with the French. resolved to depart. There was notwithstanding a kinde of Pyratical War excercised by the French, and some English and Irish, upon the Western Trade, by some 15 sail of little Men of War,The Frigats at Brest rove at Sea. who harboured on the Coast of Britany, in Brest, and thereabouts, and did very much mischief; the chief and Admiral of whom, was one Cap∣tain Beach, in the Royal Iames, of 38 Guns, whom at last the Constant Warwick
met with. (other Frigas plying up and down to free the Channel) and after a long fight forced to yield. Beach coming aboard demanded his Articles of being set ashore in France. Captain Potter denied any such; and if he did not like the Terms he had given, he bid him go abord his own ship again with his men, and right for better: which Beach seeing the bravery of the man, refused, and was brought Prisoner to Plymouth, and so that Nest was broken. Cromwel now supplied the Benches of the Courts at Westminster with the ablest of the Lawyers,Serjeants at Law made. whom he had invited to the publick service: and Mr. Maynard, Twisden, Nudigate, Hugh Windham, were made Serjeants, and Mr. Hales one of the Justices of the Common-Pleas, where Saint Iohn yt sate, and of the Cabi∣net to this Protector besides; having preerred his Man Thurloe (his Secretary at the Hague) to be his Secretary of State; the Candle or Light of that Dark-Lanthorn, which Saint Iohn was said to be in these mysterious times to Crom∣wel, in all his attempts and designes of consequence and moment. Colonel Mackworth the Governour of Shrewsbury was called now to the Council, and to partake of the Cabal of the Usurpation, as a person of fit Interest and prin∣ciples to strengthen it: And the Dutch Peace now concluded on by their Embas∣sadors, and the Commissioners of the said Council for the Protector, between whom this private Article was agreed, That the Prince of Aurange should never be restored to the Dignities, Offices, and Charge his Ancestors held and enjoyed: and this was urged, for the better Conservation of the peace, which would in his restitution be endangered, because of his Relation to the King. This was ill resented by the other six Provinces; but Holland, whose Interest was to have a Peace, and who paid more than half of the publick charge, stood to it, alled∣ging there could no Peace be made without it: The rest of the Articles, save the restoring of the Ships and Goods detained by the King of Denmark, or 140000 l. in lieu of them, and taking that King into this Treaty, according as the Hollander had engaged to the Dane, and paying the damages of the War, and giving reparation for all private injuries, (Amboyna-business being an ex∣press Article of it self, and the Massacrers to be punished if living) were usual and of course; save also that the Right of the Flag was acknowledged and Ar∣ticled to be given to the English in all Rencounters; and Mr. Thompson, Mr. Winslow, and Mr. Russel, and others of this side, were appointed Arbitrators of the said differences, and about the ships kept by the Dane. Cromel was the willinger to conclude this Peace, by reason of his new set∣tlement in the Throne; and the Dutch Friendship was very necessary for his establishment; besides, the Money was very welcome: both of them added repu∣tation to him, though the Wiser sort knew and discoursed that he might have brought the Dutch to any thing.The Dutch Peace. The Peace, though now concluded, was not ratified and proclaimed till April, after the arrival of the Embassadors Newport and Youngstal, in March, towards the end of this year, when it was done with great Solemnity; especially the Dutch here were very magnificent in Treat∣ments, and Fireworks set up in the nature of Beacons in the Thames neer their House. The Protector Dined in great State upon an Invitation from the Lord Mayor, &c. at Grocers-Hall, the eighth of February, being Ash-Wednesday, a very un∣suitable day for any Festival but his entertainment, who inverted all things, the streets being railed from Temple-Bar thither, the Liveries in their Gowns in their Gradual standings there: he was met at the said Gate by Alderman Vi∣ner the Lord Mayor, who delivered him the Sword there, and having received it from him back again, bore it on Horse-back before him all the way; through which the ame silence was kept, as if a Funeral had been en passant: and no doubt, it was that muteness which Tacitus mentioned in Tiberius, quale magn Ire vel magni Metus est silentium; no apprecations, or so much as a How do ye, being given during the whole Cavalcade.The Protector Dines at Gro∣cers-hall, and Knights Alder∣man Viner, Feb. 8▪ After Dinner, he was served with a Banquet, in the conclusion whereof he Knighted Alderman Viner, and would have done the same to the Recorder Steel, for his learned Speech of Govern∣ment,
calculated and measured for him; but he for some reasons avoided it; the Lord Mayor was forced to carry it home, and anger his Wife with it, who had real honour both in her Name and Nature. Oliver at his return had the second course of a Brick-bat,A Brick-bat flung at the Protectors Coach. from the top of a House in the Strand by St. Clements, which light upon his Coach, and almost spoiled his digestion with the daring∣ness of the Affront. Search was made, but in vain; the person could not be found, and Vengeance was not yet from Heaven to rain upon him. General Middleton now landed at Vney-Ferry in the Highlands with two Vessels from Holland, with the Lord Napier, Sir George Monro, Major-General Dalyel, Colonel Lodwick Drummond, and some 200 more, in March, with some Arms, with a Commission to Command in chief all his Majesties Forces in that Kingdom, who under the Command of the Earls of Glencarn, Athol, Seaforth, and Kenmore, being followed and attended by Colonel Morgan, had marched up and down from Eglin into Ross, and had lately been met withal at Cromar, where they lost after a short dispute some 140 killed and taken; and pre∣sently the Garrison of Kildrumny the Lord of Athol's house rendered to Mor∣gan, and Colonel Cotterel was sent to follow the Enemy, whose purpose was to protract the War by running from place to place, and weary the English out with uncouth and weary marches, till Middleton came, whose additional strength signifying little, (besides the Kings Authority in so eminent a person and Of∣fice now amongst them) and General Monke being sent from London to com∣mand in chief there for Oliver,Gen. Monke sent by the Pro∣tector to Scot∣land, to com∣mand in chief▪ their condition was little better than before; Colonel Brayn being likewise ordered into the Highlands with 2000 Foot by Sea from Ireland, to surround them in on all sides, and hem them in to an En∣gagement. A Plot.At home (prevention being Oliver's best State-physick) a Plot was started in February, and a great many committed to the Tower; the chief whereof were Colonel Sir Gilbert Gerrard,Col. Gerrard, &c. seized, Feb. Colonel Iohn Gerrard his Brother, one Iones, and Tudor an Apothecary; and afterwards Somerset Fox, young Mr. Charles Ger∣rard another Brother; and lastly, Mr. Iohn and William Ashburnham, Mr. Vow∣el a School-master at Islington; the Earl of Oxford, Mr. Philip Porter, Mr. Finch, Mr. Wiseman, Mr. Bayly, and Sir Richard Willis, who to keep himself unsuspe∣cted of Intelligence, now and ever after, was sure to make one of the number of those in Custody. The Plot was said to be, by him that best understood it, to be an Assassinate upon Oliver's person, though most rationally refuted by those who were tried about it. Tuder attending his Examination at White-hall, pre∣tending to ease himself, escaped down the House of Office, and got away; but was afterwards retaken in Norfolk and re-committed, but never Arraigned. The rest of them were kept in custody, till a High Court of Iustice was erected of the old stamp to try them. This was one of the first acts of Cromwel's Tyranny, with which he exercised the Royal party throughout his Domination; and most necessary to his security, as a main principle of Government, according to the policy of such wretched Times. Cromwel sends his Son Henry into Ireland.The Protector now sent his Son Henry Cromwel into Ireland, to shew him∣self there in State against his approaching Viceroy-ship there; whence the Lord Broghil, and Colonel Rich. Coot were sent with Addresses to him from that Kingdom, the like about the same time from Coventry, being a most zealous Complement. General Monke was likewise sent as aforesaid into Scotland; so that he had made sure of the three Nations: and that no Enemy of his might remain in any place of Trust,Cromwel en∣sures himself. Command, or Judicature, the Chancellorship of the Dutchy of Lancashire was taken from Bradshaw, and by Ordinance trans∣ferred to Thomas Fell, and the Seal likewise given him: yet Richard Bradshaw was graced with the Title of Oliver's Resident at Hamburgh, as he was before, because there were no Candidates for the place. The Lord Embassador Whit∣lock likewise owned Him to the Queen of Sweden,Whitlock Embassador to Sweden owns the Protector. with the Title of His most Serene Highness my Master; having staid there all that Winter to conclude that Treaty, which depended upon the Dutch here, and was made up after, for
the Swede would be governed solely by that; the Agent or Embassador of the Country of Switzerland, Myn Here Stockhart, to whom the Umpirage between the Dutch and the English was committed, took leave of his said Highness, and departed by the way of Holland, where he proffered his Superiours best endeavour between them both. Monsieur Burdeaux appeared in March,Monsieur Bur∣deaux Embas∣sador in Ordi∣nary to the Protector. in the quality of an Embassador in Ordinary to the Protector, and Sir Anthony Ashly Cooper, Colonel Sydenham, and Mr. Strickland, were appointed Commissioners to confer with him. In such a fair way was Cromwel already of fixing his Soveraignty, and being accepted for a Prince abroad and at home; but as the French insinuated into his Friendship, the Spaniard abated in it, and Mazarine was the onely Privado and confident Friend. An Ordinance passed for continu∣ance of the Imposition on Sea-coal for the use of the Navy. The year ends with another Ordinance for the tryal and approbation of Ministers, wherein Philip Nye,Commissioners, Nye, &c. for approbation of Ministers, March. Goodwyn, Hugh Peters, Mr. Manton and others, were named Commissioners. The Question these men put to the Examinants, was not of abilities or Learning, but Grace in their Hearts; and that with so bold and saucy inquisition, that some mens Spirits trembled at their interroga∣tories; they phrasing it so, as if (as was said of the Council of Trent) they had the Holy Ghost in a Cloak-bag, or were rather Simon Magus his own Disciples: and certainly there were never such Simoniacks in the World; not a Living of value, but what a Friend or the best Purchaser was admitted into, to which Humane Learning (even where a former Right was) was a good and suffi∣cient Bar; no less to the Ruine than the Scandal of the Church of England, and the Protestant Religion and professors thereof: several ignorant bold Laicks being inducted into the best Spiritualities, as best consisted with Oliver's Interest, which depended upon the Sectaries, and their hideous divisions in Reli∣gion. Anno Dom. 1654. HAving thus described the Foundation of this Stratocracy or Army-power, we shall not be obliged to any tedious survey of the superstructure, which was onely for shew, and of little duration, supported with temporary shifting Props in every emergency; for this great one rather inhabited a Labyrinth, than a Court; which shewed much variety of Art, but like a House of Cards was ready to be whelmed over his Head with every gust of adverse Fortune: a cross Restive Government he had of it, and was never able to keep it in the right Road, and true way of policy. And so we proceed in a brief account of State-Oc∣currences. The 6 of April came forth an Ordinance settling Commissioners for Proba∣tion of Wills, and Administrations, &c. by want of which power, there having been no settled Judge of the Prerogative-Court, (whose Name abolished the thing) very great and many inconveniencies had happened to the Nation. A∣nother Ordinance prohibited Cock-matches,Cock-matches, and Horse-ra∣ces prohibited, and all such concourses of people. and Horse-races, and all such con∣fluxes or meetings of people: for a Plot was now a hatching at White-hall, and this was the first overt-signe of it. Next, the Commission of the Great Seal was altered, and Whitlock, Lisle, and Sir Thomas Widdrington were made Com∣missioners. A Prohibition by another Ordinance to the Committee at Salters Hall concerning Prisoners,The Commission of the Great Seal altered. which were selling of Estates, though never so bar∣red by Law, to satisfie the Creditors; which would have made a quick confusion of Propriety:Hannah Trap∣nel a Qua∣king Prophetess secured. And the Dutch Peace (the charge of the War being now paid by that State, according to private agreement of the sum) was fully concluded, and in April Proclaimed. A Quaking Prophetess, named Hannah Trapnel,
a forerunner of Iames Naylor, now appeared, who reported her Visions and Raptures, and was attended by several of the Grandees of the male-contented party, as Carew and others: the most of her delusions she acted in the Counties of Devonshire and Cornwal, till she was with some of her Partizans secured in Prison. The Scotch Affairs were reputed finished, as to any War, though the Bustle yet so held and encreased in the Highlands, that the spoils of the Conquest were now set out, and made accomptable to the Victor. The Lords Estates and Hereditaments of the Scotch Nobility and Gentry who Invaded England under Duke Hamilton, and came in with the King to Worcester, and were yet in Arms,Scotch Estates sold. were ordered to be sold; and to that purpose were invested in the Trust of Sir William Hope, Lockhart, Sir Richard Saltonstall, Lieutenant-Colonel Wilks, and others, and were actually seized into their hands; and the rest of them were Fined in several sums of Money, to be paid within six Months; some 2000 l. some 5000 l. some few 10000 l. but none under 1000 l. amounting to a greater mass of silver than Scotland was worth in ready Cash▪ so that those who were compell'd to obey, (though many complemental and humble ap∣plications and addresses (as is customary to that Nation) were made for miti∣gation) were forced to take up Money at unreasonable Interest; which rose at last by the like occasions to 30 in the hundred. An Ordinance passed with this, for uniting of Scotland into one Commonwealth with England, (it seems the Act of Parliament to the same purpose was not sufficient) and the Arms there∣of ordered to be quartered, as were the Irish, with our Cross and Harp; and Oliver's Lion Salant was placed in the middle, which is as good Herauldry as this Escutcheon deserves: That Kingdom by vertue thereof to be charged no otherwise in Assessments and Tax, than proportionably to England, and to pay no greater Excise, &c. An Ordinance likewise for mending and repairing Highways and Bridges which the War had spoiled, and were yet every where unrepaired: a very necessary and good work for the benefit of the Nation; no Waggon being suffered thereafter to travel with above five Horses, nor six Oxen and one Horse; and care was taken likewise about the shodding of the Wheels. General Monke arrives in Scotland,Gen. Monke proclaims Oli∣ver at Eden∣burgh. Arguile sides with the Eng∣lish. and Proclaims Oliver in great state at Eden∣burgh; and Arguile plainly and openly sides with the English, and foments di∣visions among the Scots; his Son the Lord Lorn departing in a discontent and quarrel from the Earl of Glencarn, and returning to the old Fox his Father. The French King Crowned at Rheims, having been declared Major, and our Soveraign invited to the Solemnity, while the Intrigues of Mazarine were dri∣ving a conclusion of peace with Cromwel. The Designe now appeared, which Oliver had hatched for some while, and had laboured by his treacherous Agents to mature to something: therefore first of all, a general search is made throughout London for Cavaliers; and thereupon Colonel Iohn Gerrard, as before, Mr. Vowel, and Somerset Fox, were brought be∣fore the High Court of Iustice,A High Court of Iustice. Proclaimed the 13▪ and sitting the 31 of Iune: in which interval they had prepared their business, and provided Witnesses, and drew up the Charge. After twice or thrice Conventing of the aforesaid Gentlemen, an Accusation was brought of their intention to assassinate the Pro∣tector, with one Major Henshaw and others fled; to the proof whereof, they produced young Mr. Charles Gerrard against his Brother, as also one Wiseman, and one Mr. Hudson a blinde Minister (whose Brother was that eminent per∣son who accompanied and guarded the late King in his flight from Oxford) that had been cherished by Mr. Vowel, against him; who yet retracted from his Examination, and could not be brought by the threats of the Court to make it good, and yet they made it valid: Somerset Fox (as he was instructed before) by promise of Life confessing the Guilt, (thereby involving the other two in∣nocent Gentlemen) and craving mercy. It availed not them to deny this Charge, though never so much reason and strength of argument on their side: Lisle the President summing up the prejudiced suffrages of the Court,Lisle President thereof. gave Sen∣tence
of Hanging, which was Executed Iuly the 10, on Mr. Vowel at Charing-Cross, where with a Roman Spirit, tempered with Christian Patience, he suffer∣ed his Martyrdom, off from a Stool etcht from the Guard, the adjacent Neigh∣bours refusing to lend any thing to his Death, the Executioner having his Lad∣der not in readiness.Col. Gerrard and Vowel Executed, Ju∣ly 10. Colonel Gerrard was Beheaded on Tower-hill, who ex∣presly denied the intention of the Fact; and from this reason, because he thought it might be far from the honour and great minde of the King (whose in∣junction this was said to be) to consult any such thing, though by the like practi∣ses his Father, lost his Life; and that he feared he should not die right in his Fa∣vour, for being suspected of such a thing: and then most courageously stooped to the Block. With him upon the same Scaffold suffered the Portugal Embassador's Brother, (then Residing with Oliver) by Name Don Pntaleon-Sa He had a while be∣fore made a Riot in the New-Exchange, upon conceit of an Affront or some scorn cast upon him there, and killed one Greenway a Gentleman standing qui∣etly at a Stall,Col. John Gerrard ad the Portugal Embassador's Brother Behea∣ded, July 10. no opposition being made but by this Colonel Gerrard, who was now fatally joyned with him in Death. The Murther was Committed by a Knight of Maltha, who escaped; but this Nobleman and four more of the Embassador's Servants, among whom was an Irish youth, were arraigned before Chief-Justice Rolls, Sir Henry Blunt, and Recorder Steel, Tichburn and others, joyned in a Commission of Oyer and Terminer, and Tried by a party-Jury of English and Forrainers, as of custom: and though he at first refused to Plead, alledging his Quality, he was at last Convicted and Condemned. He had made an Escape by the civil industry of the Lady Philip Mohun, and attempted it a∣gain; but was retaken, and now Beheaded. After the Priests and he had prayed upon the Scaffold, he shewed some little aversion of Dath; but whether out of anger or fear, is uncertain; the people and spectators shewing different passions at the fall of both these Victimes to crafty Tyranny and impartial Ju∣stice. This was done upon the King of Portugal's order, to whom the cause and Execution of Justice in his own Kingdom was first remitted. The Embas∣sador soon after the conclusion of a Peace disconsolately departed. The Irish Youth suffered at Tyburn; the rest were Reprieved, and afterwards Relea∣sed. In the same month a ship on Southwark-side took accidental Fire as she lay at Anchor,Ships blown up neer London-Bridge. which being cut away, the ship (as Providence would have it) was driven by the flowing Tide upon a Shelf neer the Bridge, where she stuck, and blew up her powder. There were 8 persons killed▪ one a Draper upon his Leads on the Bridge, by a Plank of the said ship; and had the blow been any nigher, it would have broke that famous Pile. Another ship neer the same time fired in Fresh-wharf, neer the Bridge likewise: and generally there were many and very sad Conflagrations that attended this Boutefeu and his Usur∣pation; and as memorable unruly accidents ended it, as by the sequel will appear. We will now cursorily run over the Highland-War of Scotland,A short account of the Highland War. where not∣withstanding those many divisions and animosities concerning Command that were between the Commanders in this Scotch Army, the Earl of Glencarn sto∣macking the supream Command to be conferred upon General Middleton, which was thought the best expedient to unite all Divisions amongst them, the said Royal Party was yet re-inforced to the number of 3 or 4000 men, whom both General Monke and Colonel Morgan (in distinct Bodies and several ways) at∣tended: Morgan was about Loughaber and Loghness, in the Western Highlands, about Arguile's Country, and keeping close at the Heels of them; who ever and anon took over the Mountains and gave them the slip: for it was by no means advised to venture an Encounter, but tire their Enemy out; and nothing but in∣vincible patience and resolution could have endured it: For beides the want of Provisions in that scarce, barren Country, against which the Souldiers were ar∣med onely with Bread and Cheese, which they eat 20 days together, that Na∣ture
could hardly discharge it self: the Ways were most times so abrupt, that hardly more than one could go abreast; and over the Hills if a Horse-Foot slipt, men were in danger of breaking their Necks down the Precipices, and Horse and Man sure to be lost: no Quarter to be had but in the Glens; and great hap∣piness was it counted to meet with them and fresh Water, neer which to pitch Tents; the General chearfully undergoing the same necessities. After much Traversing these difficult ways, which were notwithstanding easie (as usual) to the Highlander, it was the Fortune of Colonel Morgan to light upon Gene∣ral Middleton neer Badgenoth, at one of those narrow Passes, now proving in∣commodious to the Natives themselves; for they could neither well fight nor re∣treat, so that they Engaged in no order nor figure; and after a short Medly or Tumult, rather than Battle, were forced to flie: the General endeavouring what he could to resist his misfortune, was so neer being taken, that he lost his Commission and Instructions, and one of his rich Coats, with a Sumpter-horse. This happened on the 19 of Iuly, and was the total defeat and suppression of that War:The Earl of▪ Glencarn sub∣mits to the English. For immediately the Earl of Glencarn with 500 men submitted, at Dumbarton; and though there happened some puny Skirmishes afterwards, as the defeating of a party of the Earl of Athol, Captain Elsmores taking of Sir Arthur Forbes, and routing of Mac Naughton at Glenlyon, and Captain Lisle with a party from Colonel Cobbet Governour of Dundee defeated the Earl of Kinoule, and took him (and the Lord Diddup, and Lieutenant-Colonel Mer∣cer) Prisoner, who was returned now to Edenburgh-Castle, and the young Marquess of Montross routed by Blair-Castle; yet Submissions and Treaties spent most of the time that the Lord Middleton with the Earl of Seaforth staid in Scotland, who now with a small party of the Clans were in Catheness; the Lords Forrester and Kenmore, the Earl of Athol and Marquess of Montross capi∣tulated, desiring onely the Terms (and mitigation of Fines) the Earl of Glen∣carn had at his Rendition at Dumbarton-Castle. Lorn now flew again into Arms, (to colour those late Treacheries and Treasons he now underhand managed for Cromwel) and joyned with Mac Naughton, who had surprized Colonel Brayn and Captain Nichols Governour of Innerra-Castle, as they, thinking themselves secure in the Confines of the Lowlands, had dismiss'd their Convoy, and made his Terms by that lucky surprize to his advantage. Generally the No∣ble General Monke gave very obliging Conditions, and so did Twisleton and Mor∣gan, by his order, to those that capitulated with them, and shewed all the fa∣vour that could be expected in point of Fines and Forfeitures; which firmly ob∣liged the Nobles and Gentry to him for the future; (which no doubt he had then principally in his Eye) and also invited General Middleton and the Earl of Seaforth to enter into Treaty with him; which was managed and in a man∣ner concluded by Major-General Drummond; but rescinded by Middleton, as was alledged here, because of the English insistency upon the former Fines and Se∣curity; but judged as proceeding from a principle of Honour and Right, since this departure of the King's Lieutenant with Conditions obtained from the E∣nemy, might be construed a Cession of that Kingdom to the Usurper, as the Lord Ormond with great Punctilio given him a very noble Precedent. He departed not till the beginning of the next year; and Glengary had the honour (for Mac Cloud and Mac Eldow had Articled some time before) to render the last Arms that were taken up for his Majesty in that Kigdom.The Farewel to the Scotch War. And so we dismiss that War with this valedictory Elogie to both those honourable Gene∣rals; the one of them just ceased his indefatigable industry for the Recovery of the Kings Rights, and had a Royal Conge and Writ of Emerius est; and the other like an Altern Luminary, began, or rather renewed his auspicious aspect upon the Kings Restitution; so that the brightness of the Majesty of Scotland was never totally obscured; and long may they now shine together, without diminution to each others lustre, in this glorious Firmament of his Ma∣jesties present and perpetual Empire. In England, the French Embassadors prosecuted the Treaty amin, and with
very great secrecy: but some mistake happening in point of civility and cere∣mony by Monsieur de Baas, Bourdeaux's Colleague, he returned into France to meet a report of his carriage at Paris; from whence upon timely overture of the proceedings in that affair, our Soveraign withdrew, and departed to the Spaw by Leige,The King through Leige to the Spaw. where he was magnificently treated by that City; and so onward in his journey to meet the Princess of Aurange his Sister, who had left her Son the Prince in Holland, where the divisions about his being Stadtholder were as high as ever; and to help them forward, Cromwel writ to the States of Zealand, to perswade them to the Holland-resolution: which the Towns of Campen and Swol had so far withstood, as to accept and Swear Prince William of Frizeland to be their Stadtholder, during the minority of the Prince of Aurange, which was 19 years, or till he should be capable of the Government. The Duke of York was to have Commanded as Lieutenant-General of the French Army in Italy; but this unhandsome Peace disobliged his better-deserving and victorious Arms, and turned them afterward against such thankless and regardless Rela∣tions: he continued yet nevertheless at Paris till after the said Treaty was con∣cluded, and then took his Farewel of that unkinde and politick Court. Prince Rupert was now at Vienna, where he was highly Complemented and presented by the Emperour, and from thence came back to Heydelberg. Prince Cromwel,Cromwel falls from his Coach-box. who was now wholly out of action, having laid his Scene in the Counties and Boroughs for Elections to the ensuing Parliament, gave him∣self and the Town a little recreation. It happened on a Friday in Iuly, that desirous to divert himself with driving of his Coach and six Horses in Hide-park, with his Secretary Thurloe in it, like Mephistophilus and Doctor Faustus ca∣reering it in the Air, to try how he could govern Horses, since Rational Crea∣tures were so unruly and difficult to be reined; like another Phaeton he fell in the Experiment from the Coach-box, which was presently posted into the City, and many ominous and true Conjectures made of his certain Catastroph; one of the ingenious Songs on the occasion ending in this presagio Rythme. Every Day and Hour hath shew'd us his power, But now he hath shew'd us his Art.Mr. Scrugg's Counsellor His first Reproach, was a fall from a Coach, His next will be from a Cart. According to the late Instrument of Government of 42 Strings or Articles,A Parliament, and met, Sep. 3. one whereof was, that a Parliament should be calld every three years, the first the third of September next; He accordingly Issued out his Writs, the Election to be made one and the same day throughout England: most of the Boroughs had but one Burgess, and the Shires some of them six or seven Knights; all of them under sure qualifications of not having been or being of the Cavalier-party: There were 30 also by the Instrument Elected for Scotland, and as ma∣ny for Ireland; all or most of whom were English Commanders. On the third of September they met, and adjourned from the House to the Abbey, where Mr. Marshal Preached; and so to the Painted Chamber, where they had a Mes∣sage from the Protector to invite them to a Sermon the next day again, when Dr. Goodwyn Preached; and the Protector came in great State in his Coach; Cleypole the Master of his Horse, and Strickland the Captain of his Guard, bare-headed on both sides. At his entrance into the Church, Lambert carried the Sword before him, and Whitlock the Purse. The Sermon done, to the Painted Chamber again, and there in a Speech he set forth these Heads: That some few years ago none would have thought of such a Door of Hope;Cromwel's Speech. that he knew there were yet many Humours and Interests, and that Humours were above Interest; that the condition of England was like Israel in the Wilderness, (of which the Sermon was) that this was a Healing day: there was neither Nobleman,
nor Gentleman, nor Yeoman before known by any distinction; we had not any that bore Rule or Authority, but a great Contempt of Magistracy and Christ's Ordinan∣ces: That the Fifth-Monarchy was highly cried up by persons who would Assume the Government, but that desired thing wanted greater manifestation than appeared for such men to change the Authority by. (And this directed at the late Parlia∣ment.) He desired this Honourable Assembly to remedy all these Disorders; shewed that the Wars with Portugal, French, and Dutch, do and did eat up the Assess∣ments; that swarms of Iesuits are crept in to make Divisions, which were grown so wide, that nothing but his Government could remedy them; and let men say what they will, he could speak it with comfort before a greater than any of them. Then he shewed what he had done during his Government. First, his endeavour of Reforming the Laws, having joyned all parties to assist in that great Work: Next, his filling the Benches with the ablest Lawyers: Then, his Regulation of the Court of Chan∣cery, and his Darling-Ordinance for approbation of Ministers, (which hindred all that list from invading the Ministry) by men of both perswasions, Presbyterians and Independents, &c. And lastly, his being Instrumental to call a Free Parliament, which he valued, and would keep it so above his life. Then he shewed the advantages of the Peace with Dutch, Dane, and Swede, and the Protestant Interest, which he would have them improve and intend chiefly: That they were now upon the edge of Canaan: That he spake not as their Lord, but their Fellow-servant. And then bad them go and chuse their Speakr; which they did without presenting of him, his Name William Lenthal, the old Chair-man▪ and next day fell upon the Instrument, as they had Voted, by Parts as it lay, and que∣stioned the Power: which Oliver understanding, to put them out of that Course, which touched his Copy-hold, after 9 days he came to the Painted Chamber, and sending for them, declared and asserted four Fundamentals in the Instrument, which they were not to meddle with or to alter. 1. The Government by a Single person and Parliament. 2. The Imperpetuity of Parliaments, or continued Succession. ▪ The Militia, which was his onely. And 4. Liberty of Conscience. And that a Free Parliament was but a reciprocation; for that power which made him a Pro∣tector, made them a Parliament; and therefore was very sorry they should go about to destroy the Settlement; which to prevent, and cease such Debates, (though he denied any Negative Voice) he was necessitated to appoint a Tst or Recognition of the Government as it was established (by every Member) before they sate in the House again. This bogled at the first three quarters of them, especially the Common∣wealths-men, and those of the late Long Parliament; so that of four hundred and odd, there appeared but two hundred; but were made up at last three hun∣dred, for the old ones would not be baulked so, and fell afrsh upon the same dispues, and ran out all the Articles, resolving to put the whole judgement of the House upon them into one entire Bill, and so present it; but in truth to spin out time, and work upon the Protector's occasions for Money, which was pro∣posed in the House, and coldly and slowly considered. Svera▪ Or∣nances pubih∣ed in Pia∣ment.Just at their sitting down, the Protector published several Ordinances; which being passed, and bore date before, were to pass as Authentick as Acts by the In∣strument: one for paying the Money into the Treay that was raised for the propagation of the Gospel in Wales; another for making Souldiers free of all Corporations, and to exercise any Trades; another to turn out all honest men under the notion of scandalous Preachers and Ministers, Common-Prayer be∣ing their chiefest imputation; and a fourth to survey Kings Lands, &c. and for doubling upon Deans and Chapters; which sales those many changes of Power had much retarded and depretiated. The more occult cause of the publi∣cation of these Ordinances, was to let the Parliament understand that Oli∣ver took his Instrument to be in a good Case, and sufficiently warranted al∣ready. Amidst these Jars and discords about it, the Serpentine Charms of Cardinal
Mazarine had lulled the Protector in an imaginable Dream of the worlds Wealth, and rich Empire of America,The designe on the West-In∣dies, Sep. to divert his neer designes upon the neighbourhood of France; to which War he was the rather enclined, from the near allyance of this Crown to that, and having excluded its Interest in Holland, to drive it out of that Kingdom: But the policy of the Cardinal so outreached that de∣signe, that it extended his thoughts to the other World, giving him the fruition of Great Alexander's Wish. This complot between them, which of the Spa∣nish and English side very much conduced to the French, was most pertinaci∣ously secreted to the very time of publick Hostility in those American parts, though it was guessed at, and the noise of Hispaniola was very rife in discourse about this time. The Protector began to Arm for the expedition, in November and December, 2000 men, old Royalists, and reduced necessitated persons ma∣king up the gross of the Army; to which some Red-coats for the more terrour and assurance were added, being drawn by Lot out of the several Regiments. The Command of the Land-service was conferred upon Colonel, now General Venables, a confident of Cromwels, who very unmanly carried his Wife with him; and General Pen for Sea, who at the end of December was ready at Ports∣mouth, where attended Colonel Hayns Major-General of the Army, and depar∣ted first with the Rear-Admiral Blag for Barbadoes, and was followed soon after by the whole Fleet, who had on board Commissioners for managing the Treasure that was expected from the Mountains of Gold; which Publicans, like Achans in the Camp, were one chief cause of the successlessness of this Indian War. On the 29 of Ianuary following, the whole Fleet arrived, after a good and speedy passage, at Carlisle-Bay, in the Isle of Barbadoes, all except the two Charities, which were driven by Weather into Ireland, putting out to Sea after the Fleet, and were much wanted, the Horses for the service being aboard them; and here for a while we leave them. The Parliament after they had chawed upon the Recognition, and voted it not to b taken as absolute in every point of the Instrument, limited it onely to the Single person, and successive Parliaments; and continued their debates as high as ever,The Parl. Ex∣amine the Cases of the Lord Craven and Sir John Sta∣wel. resolving themselves into a Grand Committee, to examine every particle of it; another to hear and examine the Case of the Lord Craven, and Sir Iohn Stawel, and to give redress to them, (for there were abundance of good Patriots in the House, and who were resolved to do their Country ser∣vice.) The Cases were accordingly heard; Mr. Serjeant Maynard of Counsel with the Lord Craven, and Latch for the Purchasers; who argued it very hard: but before a Report could be made, which was in favour of his Lordship, Crom∣wel terminated his hopes, (and it was in vain to look for remedy from him, for that would deter all future Purchasers) and the Parliaments sitting; for he had never heard from them since their coming thither; telling them after many good morrows, of a designe of the common Enemy, (to whose hands it was then agreed by some of themselves whom he could discover, to deliver the Cause, and the good people, &c.) and so they parted. Cromwel spake not without book; for at that time he held good intellignce with one Manning, one of the Clerks belonging to the Secretary with the King now at Colen, where he was most amply, and with more than customary honours welcomed from the Spaw and Aken in Germany. From Colen the King to convey his Sister in∣to Holland, brought her on hr way to Dusseldorp, to the Duke of Newburgh, where they were no less sumptuously treated; thence the King journeyed with the Princess as ar as Benningen on the way, and returned to Hunt with the said Duke,The Duke of Gloucester with the King at Colen. the King's Cordial and most Noble Friend. At his return to Colen, the Marquess of Ormond had conducted and brought away the Duke of Glou∣cester from the Jesuits Colledge at Paris, who with the Queen-Mother (that sent the Marquess of Praslin, and the Lord Abbot Mountague, to perswade him him to stay, and not to displease his Mother, but follow her advice, which was to have him trained up in the Romish Religion) laboured to that purpose: but the young Prince understanding his Brothers pleasure, answered according
as his blessed Father had enjoyned him, That he was to obey his Soveraign before his Mother: and so came away with the Marquess to the King. General Blake was in the interim set to Sea for the Streights, and it was given out to intercept the Duke of Guise, who was then going to invade the Kingdom of Naples; but he was landed 14 days before he came to that Coast, though he might have prevented him if he had had such Commission; but the League was certainly struck betwixt the Cardinal and Protector, however they vnted such talk to amuse the Spaniard; for every day there was news of a Rupture and an Embargo in France; and the Cardinals Regiment was in good arnest drawn down to the Sea-side by Deip, on purpose to countenance these rumours. Blake from Naples came into Leghorn-road, and demanded 150000 l. damages, for what we sustained in the Fight with Van Galen; but what satis∣faction he received, is uncertain. From whence he sailed for Algiers, being met at Sea by De Wit the Dutch Vice-Admiral, and saluted with extraordinary re∣spect, and civilly treated as yet by the Spaniards themselves, as also at Lisbon by that King. At Naples they would have invited him on shore; but the wa∣ry Commander excused himself by Command from the Protector not to leave his Charge;Gen. Blake a wary Com∣mander. in which we shall at present leave him. Cromwel's Mother dieth, and is Buried in State, in Hen. 7th's Chappel.On the 18 of November died (the unhappy Parent of this Usurper) His aged Mother, who lived to see her Son through such a Deluge of Blood swim to a perplexed Throne, in the best share of whose greatness she was concerned, as to the Princely accommodation of her maintenance in Life, and burial in Death; being laid in Henry the seventh's Chappel in great state. On the first of De∣cember following,Mr. John Sel∣den dyes. died that most Famous and Learned Antiquary Mr. Iohn Selden, a person of such worth and Use, that no Learned Eye could refrain a tear upon the consideration of Death, and its rude indifferencing hand, which mingled the Dust of this great Restorer, with the putrid Rottenness of her, that was the Womb to this Destroyer. Fleetwood made Deputy of Ireland, Steel Lord-Chancel∣lour, and Pe∣pys Lord-Chief-Iustice.In Ireland all things continued very quiet, Fleetwood being sworn Lord-De∣puty, Steel made Lord-Chancellour of that Kingdom, and Pepys Lord-Chief-Justice; and Corbet, Goodwyn, Thomlinson, and Colonel Robert Hammond of the Council: by whom the Transplantation was so prosecuted, that the first of March was the longest day of respit, upon very severe penalties. In the mean while this new Deputy and Council, till the arrival of Steel, diverted themselves in Progress through the Kingdom. In Ianuary arrived at London an Embas∣sador, the Marquess Hugh Fiesco, from the State of Genoa, and was splendidly received and dismissed. The Cavaliers and Fifth-Mo∣narchy-Plot.The effects of this Parliament-rupture, encouraged two most opposite par∣ties to conspire against the Protector, the Fifth-Monarchists and Cavaliers; (for as to the Commonwealth, having once lost their Army, they were miserably inconsiderable, and the Herd of the Rebellious multitude followed any thing that could continue it in what form soever.) A Monarchy was sought on by all hands; the true Royal party (for we must so distinguish it) longed for their rightful Soveraign Charles the Second; the Fifth-Monarchy expected King Iesus; the Courtiers and those engaged by them or with them with Cromwel himself, desired King Oliver: and every of these manifested much im∣patience▪ but none o them could attain their Wishes; and when Oliver might afterwards, he durst not. The Protector was no way ignorant of this, and therefore he resolved to deal with the weakest first, which yet by underminings was more dangerous than the other. The Army was corrupted by that Mille∣nary Principle, and that was to be purged; so that as Harrison and Rich had been laid aside, and not long after committed with Carew and Courtney into several remote Castles:Maj. Gen. O∣verton, Col. Okey, and o∣ther Officers Cashiered: Overton Com∣mitted to the Tower. so now General Monke had order to seize Major-Gene∣ral Overton, and the Majors Bramston and Holms, and other Officers, and Ca∣shire them, after Fines and good Security for their Behaviour. Overton was sent up to the Tower, and his Regiment conferred on Colonel Morgan. Colo∣nel Okey's Regiment was likewise taken from him, and given to the Lord
Howard; and so the danger from the Army was quickly supprest. Cornet (but since Colonel) Ioyce was likewise male-content at this change, and signi∣fied so much to Cromwel's Face, whom he upbraided with his own service, and his faithlesness; but escaped any other Censure than a bidding him be gone; Crom∣wel well knowing him to be one of those mad-men that would say or do any thing they were bid. But the Royalists designe was of a more potent combination,The Kings de∣signe discovered by Manning. and had been truly formidable, had it not by Treachery and Treason been revealed to the Protector, who came by that means to know the rise, progress, and first appea∣rance of those Arms against him; and this was Manning's perfidy, which the King too late discovered. All the Gentlemen in-England of that party were one way or other engaged, or at least were made acquainted with it; but the snatching of the principal of them up throughout the Kingdom a little before the Execution of it, frustrated the most probable effects of that Rising. The Lord Mayor, &c. of the City of London was likewise sent or, and in∣formed of it, and the Militia established; Skippon being made their Major-General there: several persons under the character of dissolute persons were seized by vertue of a Proclamation to that effect; as also all Horse-races were forbidden; Counterplots were used, and all sorts of Ammunition were sent down to several Gentlemens Houses with Letters unsubscribed, and the said Gentlemen upon receipt secured, and brought up Prisoners, to bear company with the old standers of that party; and a Ship-chandler, one Frese, and a Merchant or two trepan'd this way:Sir Ralph Vernon Impri∣soned. Sir Ralph Vernon of Derby-shire, an old Royalist, was Committed, and Examined before Oliver, concerning a Trunk of Pistols, and who sent them: Who resolutely answered, His Self; which so dasht him, that he was without one word more dismist, but not from his Imprison∣ment. Notwithstanding all these discouragements and warnings to give over, the Western Association thought themselves in Honour engaged to rise upon the day which they had agreed upon with one another in the other parts,Western Insur∣rection. and had notified to the King, who was now removed from Colen, and absconded himself neer the Sea-coast, upon the first success of the Affair to be ready to pass over to his Friends. Accordingly on the 11 of March, being Monday, (very early in the Morning) a party of 100 under the Command of Sir Ioseph Wagstaff,Sir Joseph Wagstaff, Col. Penruddock, and Grove, at Salisbury. Colonel Penruddock and Grove, entred the City of Salisbury, (at which time the Judges Rolls and Nichols were there in Circuit) and seized all their Horses; and having declared the cause of this appearance (without any further injury or medling with any Money which lay in the Chambers of Serjeant Maynard and other Lawyers) departed, promising to return and break their Fast with the Judges Provisions; which they did, and encreased their number to 400; and had they returned once more, the whole City had risen with them. Thence they marched to Blandford, where Colonel Penruddock himself Proclaimed the the King in the Market-place,The King Pro∣claimed at Blandford, March. and so marched Westward; Captain Butler with two Troops of Cromwel's Horse keeping at a distance in their Rear, to give them opportunity of encreasing; but, by the means aforesaid, very few came in; which made a great many more slink away from the party, when they saw no hopes of that great number promised and expected. But the Noble Penruddock resol∣ved yet to try what could be done in Devonshire and Cornwal: and as to him, it was all one whether he retreated or went forward, for he was engaged too far already. In this condition some 100 of the most faithful and cordial of the party, Hungry, Sleepy, and Weary, having staid no where, reached South∣molton in Devonshire, hoping at worst to get away by Sea; but that night, on the 15 of March, their Quarters were beaten up by Captain Crook, about ten a clock,Penruddock and Grove taken. and some Houses forced: but Colonel Penruddock maintained his quar∣ters till he had Quarter promised, and Articled; which Crook afterwards un∣worthily and basely denied. There were taken with him Colonel Iones a Kins∣man of Cromwel's, and Colonel Grove an old Royalist, and some 60 other Priso∣ners,
and 120 Horse, Sir Ioseph Wagstaff,Sir Joseph Wagstaff es∣capes. Mr. Robert Mason, Esquire Clark, and Mr. Thomas Mompesson escaped beyond Sea; and so this unhappy effort was suppressed. There were some shadows of the like at Rufford-Abbey in Nottinghamshire, at Hessen-moor in York-shire, neer Wrexham in Montgomery, in Northumberland; for which some were Executed; and a like rumour of a de∣signe upon Shrewsbury, (Sir Henry Slingsby in Custody, and Sir Richard Maleverer and Mr. Hutton taken, who fled for it, and were retaken at Chester, from whence they made a final escape) and Sir Thomas Harris and the Lord Newport secured therupon; but all vanished and came to nothing, and those mighty and pregnant hopes of the King's Restitution, now in every mans Mouth and Wish proved frustraneous hac vice; and Oliver very prajeant that he could thus over-reach the King in his own Designes. This Treason came to be discovered to the King in this manner: Some Gen∣tlemen that were seized upon their coming home, having visited his Majesty at Colen, who was pleased upon their parting to go to the Stairs head with them, and expressed some good apprecations of a designe, which at their Examina∣tion were verbatim interrogated, if they were not spoken at such a time: Ad∣vice hereof was given to the King, who remembring none but Colonel Tuk and this Manning, who light the Candle, to be present at the parting the same time, declared the whole matter to the Colonel, who surprized with the news, having protested his Innocency, by the Kings command went directly to Man∣ning's Chamber, and not staying the opening of the Door, forced it, and found him a chawing of Papers, and a Packet by him newly come from Thurloe; but so agast, that he knew not what to say: His Father had been slain a Colonel in the Kings Service, as is afore related; he himself had been the Earl of Pem∣broke's Secretary; and for these considerations admitted into this Trust, which he so basely abused. At the instance of the whole Court, the King was prevailed upon to let him be shot in one of the Castles of the Duke of Newburgh,Manning shot in the Duke of Newburgh's Country. (to terrifie all other faithless and disloyal Servants, and to satisfie for some of that Blood Cromwel had spilt upon the score of his Peridy) where he wretchedly and most abjectly died. Cromwel had drawn 4000 Foot out of Ireland, under Colonel Axtel and Sadler, and 600 Horse were marching out of Scotland, two Troops whereof came from Ireland by that short cut of Sea to Ayre; but upon the quelling of this Western-rising they all were remanded. In February happened another terrible Fire in Fleet-street,A terrable fire in Fleet-street London, ano∣ther at Abet∣soyle in Scot∣land. neer the Horn-Tavern, which begun in a Grocers house, and consumed eleven more; the like happened at Aberfoyle in Scotland; but far greater for quantity. Major Wildman, a great Leveller, was taken neer Marleborough inditing Declarations against the Protector, and was committed to Chepstow; and the Lord Gray of Grooby was brought Prisoner to Leicester;Major Wild∣man Commit∣ted. but upon application made to Oliver not long after released. Lockhart (one of the Scotch Judges) Married Oliver's Niece about this time, and grew famous thereby in the process of the Rebellion. The regulation of Chancery and Hackney-Coaches took force now.The Chancery and Hackney-Coaches regula∣ted. Another horrible Fire in Thredneedle-street, to the loss of 200000 l. and upwards. One Harris (that was Hanged afterwards in 1661. for Counterfeiting the Lord Chancellor Hide's Hand, and breaking of a house therewith by armed Souldiers,A great fire in Thrednee∣dle-street London. and was one of those that carried a Javelin at the Kings Martyrdome) about this time Cheated one Man∣ton and other Merchants with a counterfeit License, (as from Cromwel) for Importing some Oyls and Whalebone from Holland,Harris a great Cht. which were forbidden by the Act, and got neer 1000 l. of them. Commissary-General Reynolds was made a kinde of Major-General of North-Wales; which Module obtained all over England soon after; but this was the proto-type. Heresies and Sects.The insensible and uregarded growth of all Heresie and Errour, in this licen∣tious Toleration which invaded the Church, among many other most pernicious Tenets besides, &c. made the Socinian to pass unobserved in this Chronicle, since it would have been an Augean labour to cleanse the Current of time from that
Sink and Colluvious Filth of those Monstrous Opinions. Upon this score, the Racovian-Catechism, its divulgation, and the suppression of it by the Ececutio∣ner's Hands in the Fire, came to be omitted in the year preceding: As like∣wise Biddle the famous Seducer and Teacher of those Blasphemous Principles,Biddle a fa∣mous seducer, Publisher of the Racovian Ca∣techism. who was by this Dumb Parliament (as Oliver called it) committed to the Gate-house, and thence sent to a remote Prison, and his Books Burnt in the same manner, (besides the Englishing of the Alchoran, and the three Grand Impostors damned for shame) mist his due observation,The Turkish Alchoran Eng∣lished. The three grand Impostors, a seditious piece. which therefore are here added in the close of this year. Anno Dom. 1655. THe Cabal of Cardinal Mazarine and Cromwel's designe was now visible in the West-Indies, and that formidable and amusing Expedition displayed to those parts of the World: The rich Conceits the Usurper cherished from thence, appeared in those frequent divertisements he gave himself beyond his usual re∣servedness, and from that more than ordinary Pomp and State he arrogated to himself, like another Grand Seignior: nothing but Golden Smiles to be seen in his Court, where the solemn Cringe and the parasitical Glaver were as much now studied, to humour this Greatness, as matriculating and introducing Piety, and austere Hypocrisie. And never was such a strange mixture in the Arts of any Courtier as these Times beheld, much like the mysteries of the as strange∣ly framed and tempered Government. With much impatience did all men indeed await the issue of this grand Affair; and to be certain, the Hours could not be less tedious to them, to whom belonged the approaching Golden Age: but Parturiunt montes, — The following abstract will admonish the great ones, that Fortune is not to be over-tempted; and that without the Concurrence of good Deliberation, Conduct, and Valour, she is not always obliged to her Favourites. But to proceed: during the abode of the Fleet at Barbadoes, the Generals, Colonels, and inferiour Officers were not negligent in their several stations. General Pen caused the Carpenters of each ship to set up those Shallops which were brought over in quarters out of England; and ordered the Coopers to trim and fit Water-Casks: Besides, he sent two Frigats to St. Christophers and Mevis, for raising of Voluntiers there. In the mean time, General Venables for∣med a new Regiment of Seamen to serve upon occasion at Land; these were put under the conduct of Vice-Admiral Goodson; the rest of the Regiments brought out of England, were easily compleated to a full number; likewise a Troop of gallant Horse were raised by the Islanders,Hispaniola and Jamaica Expidition. at their own cost and char∣ges: (the Carcases of which were afterwards buried in the Souldiers Bellies, for want of better food.) But these were not all the strength; for the Planters Servants understanding that if they would serve the State, their time should still go on, and that at last (in spight of their Masters) they should enjoy their Free∣doms in as ample a manner as if they had served them; this spurred them on to become Souldiers of Fortune; and many were presently listed into several Regiments accordingly. The Fleet was also augmented by twenty sail of Dutch Vessels, which were made prize for presuming to traffique with Prohibited Goods, contrary to the Articles of Peace betwixt the two Nations. The Land-Army being now in readiness, their number was found to be so great, that eve∣ry ships share was as many as it could carry. March 31 they set Sail from Bar∣badoes, and in six days after came by the Lee under St. Christophers: Here joy∣ned with them about 1300 more, which came off from several Islands, in hopes to be made for ever: from hence they shaped their course directly for Hispani∣ola.
On the 13 of April, the whole Navy came fair by the Island, and plainly discovered the sown of Sancta Domingo: Immediately hereupon a Council was called, and the Guides consulted withal: here it was concluded that Gene∣ral Venables should to Land. According to which resolution, the next day he landed about ten Leagues to the West-ward of the Town, with 7000 Foot, a Troop of Horse, and three days Provision of Victuals. No sooner were they landed, but every mans Tongue was tipt with Gold; nothing could be thought on, but the plunder of Plate and Jewels; small things could not enter their minds: as for Hangings, Housholdstuff, &c. they would be cumbersome to carry; and therefore they resolved to leave such things behinde them. In this extasie of joy was the Souldiery; when behold, upon a sudden there appeared a Procamation from the General, commanding, that when they entred the Town of Sancta Domingo, no man should plunder either Money, Plate, or Jew∣els, neither kill any tame Cattle, on pain of Death. This made the Army look Sower on their imaginary Sweetness; their Golden Hearts were now turned to Leaden Heels; so that it was indifferent to them, whether they went farther, or tarried there: yet for all this, on they marched through Woods of incredi∣ble thickness, meeting no Enemy, except the excessive heat of the Sun, which caused an intolerable drought, that oppressed them sorely, having not had one drop of Water in many miles march, but what they carried in their own Blad∣ders; so that Urine was as White-wine to them that could swallow it. General Pen, after the landing of these men, set ashore three Regiments more, under the Command of Colonel Buller, in a Bay where a fair Fresh-water-River disburdened it self; this was within two Leagues of the Town, and ap∣pointed to be the place for conjunction of the whole Army. It was not long before the General, (according to the appointment) having peaceably past the Woods, came to the River, and joyned himself with Buller's Brigade. Here up∣on view, the Army was sound to be 9700 (but few fighting) men. From this River the Army hasted away to take possession of the Town, which in imagina∣tion was already won: there marched on before the rest, a Forlorn Hope, con∣sisting of 500 men; afterward followed the main Body of the Army. In this order they marched within four miles of the Town, when on the sudden, a small party of Spaniards encountered the Forlorn Hope,A sudd and strange Deeat to the English. and in an instant for∣ced them in confusion through the next Regiment, which was also routed: the Body of the Army coming up to their rescue, made the Enemy to retire to a Fort hard by in the Woods, without any considerable loss at all to the Spaniards. On the English side was slain Captain Cox, the chief Guide for the place, and many others. The General having now seen the imbecility of his men, through want of Water and many other necessaries, he caused them to march back again to the River, from whence they came to refresh themselves, in order to a full prosecu∣tion of the designe in hand.They Rally. To which end, Scaling-Ladders were made, and two small Drakes mounted, with a Morter-piece and Granado-shells, which were landed from the Fleet: these were conveyed by Water to be set on shore at a convenient place neer the Fort. All things being now in readiness, to try conclusions, the Army once a∣gain dislodged, and were by the Guides promised to be brought upon the Town of St Domingo by a private way, where they might pass thorough the Woods free from any Fort. Such a way there certainly was; but these blinde Guides taking another to be it, the whole Army were brought neer to the place where before they had been shamefully repulsed. The Spaniards in the mean time having certain intelligence by Negroes and Molattoes of the English march, prepared to entertain them in their passage. April 25, 1655. the whole Army approached near to a Fort which the Spaniards had in the Wood, built of Brick, in a triangular form, without Flankers: in it were nine pieces of good Ordnance, and 300 resolute fellows to manage them. The English Army, a little before noon, approaching neer this Fort, were upon the sudden charged
by a party of the Enemy that lay undiscovered among the Trees. These resolute Spaniards, being about seventy in number, at first fired a round Volley of small shot upon the Forlorn Hope, and then flew in like mad-men with their sharp Steel-Lances upon the English, (who were already even suffocated with Thirst, and hardly able to stand, much less to fight) so that in a moment the General's running-Regiment,And are again Defeated by the Spaniards. with half the Army, flew back to the Rear, and possest their fellows there with such a Pannick fear, that every one began to shift for himself. Mean while the Spaniards pursued the Victory with the greatest slaughter they were able to make: for meeting with no resistance, (but what that ever-Re∣nowned Gentleman Major-General Hayns was able to make with twelve men, (whom he engaged by the honour of their Country) one whereof was Ensigne Boys, who died not unrevenged in the midst of their Enemies) they wreaked their fury at pleasure on these frighted men; till at last, being overcome with killing, they retreated back in Triumph with seven English Colours, the evi∣dent Trophies of their Victory. The retreat of the Enemy gave opportunity for the Living to number the Dead. Upon view, it was found that 600 were slain outright, 300 Wounded, (most in their backs) and besides 200 more crept into Bushes, and ran away to save themselves; which afterward were knockt on the head by Negroes and Molattoes. Upon this sad disaster, the Army that night drew up nearer the Spanish Fort, as if they intended some mighty matters; and having planted a Morter-piece in a convenient plot of ground, and all things being ready to do Execution on the Fort; upon a sudden the Souldiers were ordered to draw off: So the Army without doing any thing marched away to their old Watering-place in the Bay. To what intent and purpose this was, could never yet be comprehen∣ded. The Army being come into the Bay, had not that supply of Victuals from the ships as formerly, but were necessitated by parties to go into the Woods to catch Cattle, which many times cost them dear: for the Negroes instead of hunting Cows, would oftentimes change their Game, and breathe them back again to their Quarters. These things brought the Army to such distress, that (fearing to fight for Food abroad) they exercised their Valour at home upon the Troop-horses be∣longing to their own Army. Thus did they continue for some days, till a re∣solution was taken to Imbarque them, and with all speed to make for Iamaica. May the third day, (all the remaining part of the Army being shipped with∣out the least disturbance from the Spaniard) the Fleet set sail for the aforesaid Island. This disastrous defeat was rightly imputable to these foregoing causes;Considerations of this defeat. but there were others also, as namely the Discipline, or rather the Licentiousness and Debauchery of those Auxiliary-Islanders; a crue of such dissolute Fellows, that were fitter to work and slave in the Mines, than to fight for the Gold. But they did not alone frustrate the assured hopes of Victory, (for it is supposed they were not listed but for number, and to make Drudges) but made the defeat far more miserable, by eating up the Provisions designed for the Army, who were set on shore very weak and feeble, at so strange and unreasonable distance, when the advice was they should have landed at the Bay of Domingo, while the Spaniard was in his Cups, and the Town overflowed with Drink and Gladness for the arrival of their Fleet thither, they supposing this Armada of ours to be their own about that time expected. There was such a complication of errours and misfortunes, through the insufficiency and ill Conduct of the General, to say no worse, and the faintness of the Souldier, caused by the carelessness of their Friends, who should better have Provisioned them, and the terrour of their Enemies, besides the scorching heat of the Sand, which made it painful to stand or go, that hardly any Expedition in History can parallel it; for they were beaten in a manner without a Blow. Yet these miseries were not at an end; it was not yet easily resolvable what
should be done with this frighted and pestering multitude; for all the Victual was spent, and it was impossible to turn to Windward with such a company and so little sustenance: and some thoughts there were of abandoning this impo∣tent wretched Crue, and return to the Barbadoes; but it was their kinde and undeserved fate that proposed the Island of Iamaica, whither on the 3 of May they directed their course, and without any opposition Landed; there being a resolution made by the Council of War, (to prevent the like Cowardise) that if any man turned his back to the Enemy, his Bringer-up should kill him. The Spaniards having no intelligence of the late overthrow at Hispaniola, nor indeed suspecting any Hostility, fled away at the approach of this formidable Army, and withdrew their Goods; their pretended Governour staving off the English with a Treaty, while all was conveyed away into the Woods, whither parties were sent, to follow and to kill Cattle for the Army, of which they found very good, and good store, without any fighting: which no doubt was a great com∣fort, and gave them time to recover their Spirits; so that afterwards they dreaded not a Molatto, as they lighted upon them in parties in those Forrests of Cedar, and other excellent Physical and useful Trees; where for a while we leave them. At home another Portugal Embassador arrived, and brought a Ratification of the Treaty; that King having consented to the Damages adjusted in one of the Articles thereof. A Commission passed under the Seal likewise for the Try∣al of those Western Gentlemen taken at Southmolton; two of whom, Colonel Penruddock and Iones, being brought up from Exeter, were Examined here by Cromwel; but nothing could be extracted to the prejudice of their Confede∣rates, whose Estates he aimed at; and so they were re-guarded to their former Custody.James Duke of Richmond dieth. In the interim whereof, Iames the noble Duke of Richmond died of a Quartan Ague, that had held him above a year, contracted as 'tis supposed from a continued and Consumptive grief for the King and his Affairs; nor was he ever in any healthful condition since the Martyrdom of King Charles the first. An Ordinance now came out, for setling the Revenue of the poor Knights of Wind∣sor;Windsor-Knights. and the Trust thereof, formerly in the Dean and Chapter, was now vested in the Lord-Commissioner Whitlock, Colonel Montague, Sydenham, and others; and the five Knights Sir Richard Crane and Sir Peter Le Meir had added, were in∣corporated with the rest; the Executors being enjoyned to make good the said Testators Wills to this Use: and several of Cromwel's old Trojans were now Tituladoed with this Pensionary Honour, and none else to be admit∣ted. The Tryal of Penruddock, &c. May.The Commissioners for the Tryal of the Western Insurrectors now fate at Salisbury, April 12. Judge Windham President, Dove High-Sheriff, and the Jury like him: there were Condemned six,Six Condemned at Salisbury. viz. Iohn Lucas a Mercer of a very good Estate at Hungerford, who staid in the Town when he might have escaped, and fatally lost his Head: much ado there was for a Reprieve, and expected by the Prisoner; but he was basely disappointed. Mr. Dean, Mr. Kensey, Mr. Thorp, Iohn Laurence, and Iohn Fryer, all but Dean Hanged at the Common place of Execution: Mr. Henry and Edward Zouch and Mr. Willoughby were acquitted; Mack the Apothecary pleaded Guilty, and was pardoned. Thence they pro∣ceeded to Exeter, where one of Oliver's Knights Sir Iohn Coppleston was Sheriff, and Condemned 26,26 at Exeter. eleven whereof (besides Colonel Penruddock and Grove, that were Beheaded, where they both Loyally and undauntedly justified their designe, and the Kings indubitable Right) were Hanged, and buried afterwards in a very solemn and decent manner in that City; which generally, to a great number of people, attended their Corps, and defrayed the charge thereof; ex∣tending the same civility to them dead, which they afforded liberally to them living, providing for them in Prison, even to superfluity of the best Provisions; to the regret and anger of Cromwel, who was contriving how to diminish this plenty of the Royal party, or at least to be revenged of them, at and by ano∣ther RATE. At Chard in Somerset-shire,And sive at Chard. in their return, they Condemned
five, the principal whereof was Major Hunt,Major Hunt's handsome es∣cape. whom his Sisters coming to vi∣sit and take their farewel of him over-night of his Execution, he changed Cloaths with one of them, (pretending before to be indisposed, and to keep his Bed) and with a Handkerchief (as weeping and sobbing) before his eyes, was let out, while a Guard at door watched his Sisters sleep that night; who next Morning waking the supposed Major to make ready for Death, perceived the Stratagem: this incensed Cromwel farther, so that he commanded all that were in Prison for that Rising should be forthwith Transported to the Caribbe-Islands;Transportation of Royalists, June. and some Argier-Merchants, or worse, undertook it, and sold them to the Barbarous and inhumane Flanters, (worse than ever were the Natives) for Bond-men and Slaves.Iesuits Exiled. About the same time all Jesuits and Seminaries were anew Exiled; and all suspected Catholicks to abjure the Pope, Pur∣gatory, Transubstantiation, and all the Doctrines of that Church, or else all their Estates to be seized.Iudges Thorp and Newdi∣gate, lay down their Commis∣sions. The Judges Thorp and Nudigate laid down their Com∣missions in May. During the War in America, and for all our Fleet lay in those parts, the Spa∣nish Plate-Fleet, which was thought the main aim of our preparation, and was therefore much feared for desperate, was now at Sea; and presently the Mar∣quess De Lede,Marquess De Lede in Eng∣land. who defended Maestricht so bravely some time before against the Prince of Aurange, was sent Embassador to the Protector, that the honoura∣bleness of his Person might gratifie Cromwel's ambition of Courtship, and sweeten him to the Friendship and Alliance he had in his Instructions to offer, and more easily to insinuate into the mystery of this conjunct designe. He was nobly attended, besides a numerous train of Lacqueys in silver and Green Live∣ry, and had Audience May 5, and continued his Complement and Cabal toge∣ther the space of five Weeks, in which time most of the action had passed in America; and returned unsatisfied, and re infecta, though dismist with more than ordinary respects, about the middle of Iune. Now happened an occasion, or rather Cromwel made it one, for him to shew his zeal to the Protestant Cause, and to shew himself to the World the Cham∣pion or Hector thereof: this was also one secret step and reach to the Crown, by invading the sacred Title of the Defender of the Faith, due onely to the He∣reditary Soveraigns of England. Herein also he aimed, as in the Proverb, to hit two Birds with one Stone, not doubting but to finde another Mine in the Charitable mindes and compassion of this Nation towards the parallel suffering of the old Waldenses in Piedmont to the Irish Massacres;Cromwel pre∣tends to com∣passionate the Waldenses. which were set out and drest here with greater skill of Butchery than the actors could handsomely do it there; and it was said the Copy was drawn from that Original. Most cer∣tain it is, that they were in Rebellion, and that the Duke of Savoy their Sove∣raign did chastise them to their Obedience, though the Marquess Pianella a very zealous Catholick, and the Earl of Quince the French Kings Lieutenant-General of his Italian Armies, then joyned with that Dukes, (and stranger-Souldiers have little regard to any Religion, where they may ravage without controle) might exceed their Commisson in inflicting the extremity of War, which they had brought upon themselves, and were before also odious, more than enough to their Catholick Neighbours. Whatever the matter was, Crom∣wel takes the Massacre for granted, enjoyns a Fast, and at the close of that, a Collection; not limited and terminated in the liberal contributions in the Church at the Bason, but the Collectors and other Officers of the Parish, with the Mini∣ster, were to go from door to door, and stir up the Richer sort to a chearful Con∣tribution; which indeed was very forwardly and charitably given and intended: and forthwith Mr. (now Sir Samuel) Moreland, one of Mr. Thurloe's Secreta∣ries, was sent away as Envoy to the Court of Savoy:Mr. Moreland in Savoy. Mr. Pell was dispatcht to the Protestant Cantons of Switzerland upon the same account; and Mr. (now Sir George) Downing was sent after Mr. Moreland, by the way of France, where he began the complaint, and proceeded. All those three met together at Geneva, to advise with that State how to manage this importance of Religion: but
Mr. Downing never pursued this Project farther, being remanded hence to go Secretary of the Council newly made for Scotland. Pell was snt of his formr errand to the Cantons, and Mr. Moreland returned to Turin to the Duke's Court; where perceiving this fraud of Cromwel, it was no great matter to bring him over soon after to the Kings service, in which he continued. Alderman Viner and Pack were made Treasurers for this Money, which amounted to a very large sum, and reaching the designe of the Protector; a small parcel whereof was now remitted to Geneva, the French King having newly before accommodated the business, the Duke refusing to admit Cromwel's Medi∣ation. By this conclusion the truth appeared; for in the very liminary words, they acknowledged the Rebellion in express terms, and begged pardon of their gracious Lord his Royal Highness; which was here imputed and charged to the prevaication and collusion of the Cantons Mediation, and the three Pa∣stors their Commissioners in that affair. There was one Artifice of the Pro∣tectors to set this business forward, and to countenance it, omitted, which was, Addresses from the Army here and abroad, offering their service in this com∣mon Cause of the Protestant Religion, no way doubting but that God in his due time would confound those Enemies of his People, as he had shewn his Salvation by themselves in the same Controversie to that day. Several Fires yet burst out in many parts of the Kingdome; one in Barnaby-street in Southwark; and new diseases were most rife and mortal. This Easter-Term, one Mr. George Coney a Merchant having been commit∣ted by the Commissioners of the Customes to the Serjeant at Arms, for refusing to obey their Orders and Fine set, for not paying the dues of some Merchandi∣zes, brought his Habeas Corpus in the Kings-Bench, where he intended to dis∣prove the Authority and Legality of his Commitment, and baffle-their War∣rant. To this purpose Serjeant Maynard,Serj. May∣nard, &c. to the Tower. Twisden, and Mr. Wadham Wind∣ham were retained of Counsel by him; who pleading such matters for their Client, as entrenched upon the Protector's pretensions, and his Publicans Power in that place, (into which profitable Employment they had scrued themselves, by a pretence of serving the publick gratis, and without any Salary) were in∣stantly committed to the Tower, to consider better of Cromwel's Prerogative, and to help his Jaylor Berkstead the Lieutenant thereof with the Fees of that chargeable Imprisonment, where no Habeas Corpus would be allowed, except upon the Knee; their enlargement being granted upon their Petition and Sub∣mission to the Usurper. Those and the like Forces and violences in the Law, and the fear of infaming the Bench and his own Credit, made Chief-Justice Rolles relinquish his place, and sue for a Quietus est; just as old Sir Henry Vane deceased, entailing his Estate upon his Grand-son, as divining what his Son (with whom he died in feud) would come to. General Blake was yet in the Streights, demanding satisfaction of the Algier-Pirates for the depredations committed on the English, and required the de∣livery of the Captives of our Nation, whose number was very great: but nei∣ther of these would be hearkned to; whereupon Blake sent in a threatning Message; to which they returned in scorn and contempt this Answer: — Here are our Castles of Guletto, and Castles of Porta Ferino, do what you can; do ye think we fear the shew of your Fleet? A Council of War being called upon this daring affront, it was resolved to Burn those ships in Ferino, in defiance of their Stone-line Forts, and Castles well furnished with Ordinance, and manned with the whole Country adjacent.Porta Ferino fight, Apr. 4. On the 4 of April the attempt was made. Blake and the greater ships, with their seconds, coming within Musquet-shot of the Castle and Line, which in two hours time they rendred defenceless, dis∣mounting all the Great Guns, and clattering the Stones so about their Ears, that the Enemy abandoned them, having seen their nine Ships and Frigats bur∣ning in the mean time; which was done by Boats from every ship during this hot service, atchieved in this honourable manner. Blake set sail again to the same place, and renewed his Demand, and was Answered in another strain, that
not Ours, but now Those, were the Castles and ships of the Grand Seigniour, who would be sure to require an account of them. In conclusion they came to Treat, and did what they were beaten to, for else they saw their Thieving Trade would be short. Nathaniel Fiennes,Nath. Fien∣nes made Cromwel's Lord Privy-Seal, Steel made Lord Chief-aron, Lambert Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, and Glyn made Lord Chie-Iustice. second Son to the Lord Say, and the once-famous Gover∣nour of Bristol, was made Cromwel's Lord Privy-Seal; Recorder Steel (a grow∣ing Favourite for his Speeches) Lord Chief-Baron; and Lambert (yet above∣board) Lord-Warden of the Cinque Ports; and soon after, Serjeant Glyn was made Lord Chief Justice of England; Mr. Parker, and Vnton Crook the Father made Serjeants. For Military Commanders, Colonel Reynolds was ow Knight∣ed, and ordered to carry it with him to grace Henry Cromwel then preparing or his journey into Ireland, to be inaugurated Lord-Lieutenant in place of Fleet∣wood; where he arrived in the middle of Iuly: and Captain Vnton Crook was rewarded for his late service with 200 l. per annum. The Scoc Council was nominated and dispatched also,Cromwel gives preser∣ments to seve∣ral Officers and others. viz. General Monke, Lord Broughill President, Colonel Howard (now Earl of Carlisle) Colonel Adrian Scroop, Colonel Coo∣per, Colonel Wetham, Mr. Desborough, Colonel Lockhart, Laird Swinton, and Downing Secretary. It was omitted that Sir Gilbert Pickering was entituled Lord-Chamberlain to Oliver, and that he had a Guard of Halberdiers in Grey-coats, Welted with Black-Velvet, in the same manner and custom as the Kings of Eng∣land used them: but this Satellitium and Band of Bailiffs, was rather out of fear,Sir Wil. Con∣stable one of the Kings Iudges dieth, and is buried in Hen. 7th's Chappel. A terrible fire at Lambeth. than in regard to the honour of their Attendance. Sir William Constable (one of the Kings Judges, Governour of Gloucester, and the last of his Name, which rots in his dust) died now, and was buried in the Military way in Henry the 7th's Chappel, lighted into his Tomb with a terrible Fire in the opposite Town of Lambeth. A new Plot was now started, and most of the Nobility and Gentlemen of England secured; Sir Geoffrey Palmer, Lord Willoughby of Parham, Lord Love∣lace, Earl of Lindsey,The Nobility and Gentry of England secu∣red. Lord Newport, and Sir Richard Wingfield, Lords May∣nard, Petre Lucas, and Faulkland, Sir Frederick Cornwallis, &c. and this done by Manning, whose Villany was not yet discovered; though to render an entire account of him, his death was before related. County-Troops were now also established for security to his Highness, such Trooper 8 l. a year pay, and more in case of service; a Captain 100 l. and Officers proportionably: and as these new Forces were raised here, so were other old ones disbanded in Scotland and Ireland; in which last place, the Disbanded were yet to be the same kinde of standing Militia, they being setled in the Rebel Forfeited Lands, their Tenure being their service;An Agent from the Prince of Transilvania departs. and thus that Kingdom was re-peopled. An Agent that had come hither from Ragotski Prince of Transilvania, now departed; the Conspiracy betwixt whom and the King of Sweden, and the Swede and Cromwel, was just ripe for Execution. For the terrible news came,The King of Sweden in Poland. that Carolus Gustavus with an Army of 20000 Swedes was landed in Pomerania, and fallen into Poland; and that the Palati∣nate of Posen had submitted, and the Vice-Chancellor Radzikousky was come in and complied with that King; and little doubt was made of his over-running that Kingdom: the like Treachery and other divisions among the discontented Nobility opening him a way. Cromwel's reach in this War was to divert the Emperour (who was arming apace in aid of the King of Spain, and defence of the House of Austria against the French (as foreseeing also the rupture of the Peace with the Spaniard by Cromwel) in the Low-Countries, and a Peace once by this ballance effected, to espouse the quarrel of our King:) to the same purpose the Transilvanian was engaged, who like a stormy Cloud hung over the Imperial Dominions; so that no assistance could be had from this part of the World. This highly disappointed the Spaniard, and retarded those hopes of our King, in order to his Restitution by Arms. He was yet at Colen, and ca∣ressed by several Princes, who Honoured his Privacy: among many others, the Landtgrave of Hessen gave him an honourable Visit, and Prince Rupert, returned
from the Emperour, gave him his due attendance, to evidence that the Rela∣tion of a King in some such cases may be without a Kingdome or Sub∣jects. A Swedish Embassador.A Swedish Embassador Named Christian Bond arrived here neer the same time, and was in great State received, according to the Amplitude of his High∣ness: and Rolt a Bed-chamber-man of this Altess was sent recipocrally to the King of Sweden; but was neer quitting the Cost of his Journey by a terrible Storm. About the time the news came of his getting ashore in safety. Han∣num a most notorious Thief,Hannum the infamous Thief, breaks Prison and escapes. suspected of the Robbery of the King at Colen, (in which parts he was no stranger) broke Prison and escaped likewise. From the noble Exploit of Porta Ferino, Blake sailed to Cadiz and those parts of Spain, where he found that the Armada of Spain was at Sea, to look after the arrival of their India-Fleet; and it fell out that the English and Spaniards met together in those Seas, the Spaniards being 32 ships in all; but no quar∣rel happened, for neither had Commission to right. The same indifferent (but more cowardly) temper at the same instant (in August) made the Ia∣maica-Fleet (returning home) suffer the longed-for Plate-Fleet to pass un∣tought, when discovered in the Gulf of Florida upon their Voyage to Spain; so that none of the Fates were wanting to make this the most unglorious un∣dertaking of the English. Upon a resolution taken by a Council of War at Iamaica, the greatest part of the Fleet under General Pen set sail for England, and neer half way home lost the Paragon a Navy-ship by fire; none of that company daring to come in to her relie, because of her Powder; so that neer 140 men were lost by fire and water; those that could swim escaped, being taken up by Boats after the Blow. On the 3 of September,Pen returns and Venables, Sept. General Pen arrived at Portsmouth, and on the ninth Venables (with his Wife) very sick and much altered, and Quarter-Master-General Rudyard landed at the same place in the Marston-moore, Com∣mand by Rear-Admiral Blag; the Fleet at Iamaica consisting of some 20 sail, being left under the Command of Vice-Admiral Goodson. Upon their coming to London, (where Venables alledged the danger and encrease of sickness for the cause of his return, Pen the resolution of the Council of War) they were both Committed to the Tower, to satisfie the expectation of the people, more than any intention of bringing Venables to an account for this base and dishonou∣rable Expedition. The Cavils at the Isle of Rhee's unfortunate business were now regested, and retorted upon those Enemies and Traducers of the King, whose party was very well pleased with this disgrace done to Oliver, which car∣ried with it future advantages against the Usurpation, that had designed this Forrain Exchequer for the perpetual pay of his everlasting Red-coats. Gene∣ral Blake (as was said before) having met with the Spanish Fleet under the Command of General Paulo di Contreras, waiting for the Plate-Fleet about the Southern Cape, and mutually saluted one another, returned to Victual and re∣cruit in England, and landed at Chattam. The Mart at Frankfort in Germany was held this September, which with o∣ther affairs invited the King from Colen:King Charles at Frankfort. He went rom Bonne by Water, be∣ing Towed in a Pleasure-boat, and two other necessary Vessels for his dressing Provision and accommodation, and was saluted by all the Towns neer which they passed, with most ample Ceremonies; and where he entred, with the like presents. In his Company were the Prince of Aurange and the Duke of Glou∣cester, attended by the Marquess of Ormond, Earl of Norwich, Lord Newburgh, Colonel Dan. O Neal, Doctor Frazer, the Lady Stanhop, and Lord Hemfleit her Husband, and other Domesticks▪ An interview had been appointed at a Village called Koningsteyn or Kingston, betwixt Queen Christina of Sweden, then journeying to the Arch-Duke of Inspruck's Country for Italy, where she was highly Treated by the said Arch-Duke, and there professed her self a Roman-Catholick. The King at this Village (after the publick Ceremonies were o∣ver) had private Conference with this Princess the space of an hour, and then
the Duke of Gloucester and Princess of Aurange did the like; which passed, the Noblemen and neer Attendants had reception given them. The Prince Ele∣ctor of Heidelburgh, with Prince Rupert, gave her likewise a visit in this Town, and had the same converse with her: Both the King and She were invited by him to Heidelburgh, but they took several ways; for his Majesty having con∣tinued some time at Frankfort, where the States and Deputies of the Empire were assembled, to finish what was left at the Diet, (the Kings business there depending before that Assembly) and having been splendidly entertained,He is honoura∣bly treated by the Prince E∣lector of Mentz. (as in all places of Germany where he came) and there received an honourable pressing invitation from the Prince Elector of Mentz, by his Earl-Marshal, who was sent on the Embassie with a Train to conduct him from Frankfort, dpar∣ted thence with the noise of the Cannon, and the Volleys and Acclamations of the Citizens, and arrived at Mentz, having been feasted at a magnificent Sup∣per in a Village by the way; whence next morning in all the State that Prince could set out or furnish his entrance with, the King departed for Mentz, and was there entertained two or three days with an Expence befitting his Digni∣ty, and diverted with all honourable Recreations; and with the same Gran∣deurs departed for Colen. Most abominable impudent scandals were Printed in the News-Book here of the King, and the meanness of those Respects done him; when it is most true, greater Honours were not done to any Prince in the World; so much did the injury of his Condition advance these peoples Civility. While he progressed hereabouts, one Dury a Minister,Dury a Mini∣ster one of Cromwel's Agents. sent by Cromwel, was perambulating these parts with Credentials, or Commission from him, (who would needs be doing in Religious Plots as well as Civil, to make himself fa∣mous) to discourse and Treat with all the Churches of the Reformed Perswa∣sions, Calvinists, and Lutherans, about an Agreement and Union; and that the Doctrine might be one and the same; and that his Highness desired to be In∣strumental in such a Pious Work of general Communion: but the main of his Mission being to set forth Oliver,An Embassa∣dor from Ve∣nice comple∣ments Crom∣wel. this Will in the Wisp vanished and returned for England; whither an Embassador from Venice, that had layn some while here incognito, appeared in that quality, in the room of Signior Pauluzzi recal∣led, and did notably complement Cromwel with his puissance, valour, and pru∣dence, and offered the respects and Friendships of that Signiory.Arguile comes to kiss his Hands. And Arguile from Scotland came to kiss his Highness Hands. On the 24 of October, the French Peace having been some while before con∣cluded, was solemnly Proclaimed; first in the Court at White-hall, next at Tem∣ple-Bar, and so in other places:French peace concluded, Octob. 24. and Monsieur De Bourdeaux the French Embassa∣dor next day treated at Dinner by the Protector. In this Treaty the Royal Family of England,The Royal Family of Eng¦land Exclu∣ded. all but the Queen-Mother, were totally Excluded, though the Duke of York still continued at Paris, (till after the arrival of Lockhart Cromwel's Embassador thither soon after) when he departed for Brussels, having been complementally invited to the next Summers Campagnia. Thus Cor∣ruptio unius est generatio alterius, the Spanish Peace was all to pieces; for the same day that the French Peace was Proclaimed, an Embargo was laid upon all Goods in the Canaries,The Spaniard declare a war with Eng∣land. and the Spanish Embassador Don Alonso de Cardenas departed hence, and by Gravesend shipt himself for Flanders; and a Trader at Vigo in Spain was taken and seized; and a Declaration of War published by that King: Whereupon, Cromwel presently erected a Committee of Trade, of which his Son and Heir apparent, Richard, was the first named, to consult how to manage and secure it. An Embargo was likewise soon after laid here upon all ships, and one Mr. Maynard dispatcht to the King of Portugal, to make sure of his Ports, and with some other intrigues: a Fleet was likewise preparing to set out to Sea, and the Footing in Iamaica resolved to be kept: Maj. Sedgewick and Colonel Humphries, with a Squadron of ships, and a Regiment to 1000 fresh men, having toucht at Barbadoes, being landed there now; where Sedgewick sent to Command in chief, with Colonel Fortescue of the old, and most of the
new comers died of the Infection that was among them: Humphries with much ado, and danger of Death, returned home in safety. This Humphries was the Son of him that carried the Sword before Bradshaw at the High Court. With the commencement of this Rupture, the Protector began new practi∣ses against the Cavalier-party, whose Interest and Spirit against his Govern∣ment was as high as ever. He had foreseen, that by this Peace, the King onely shifted and changed that storm from one quarter to another, and was as yet as neer as ever, and in a more opportune and advantageous posture, for that the King of Spain and he would certainly concur against him, and so the Low Coun∣tries, his Provinces and Ports, be open and at the service of our Soveraign; therefore his party was by all all ways, how unjust and Tyrannical soever, to be crusht and supprest.The Loyal Cler∣gie supprest. It began with the Clergy, who were neither to keep School nor Cure, nor be Chaplains, except they gave signal Testimony of their Apostacy from the Church: It next extended to all sorts of men, the reviving Act of 1652. forbidding all Royalists, or such as meant well to the Peace of the Kingdom in their subscription to the prsonal Treaty in 1648. by a new Proclamation to that purpose, from giving voices of Electing, or to be Ele∣cted themselves, upon their utmost peril. Then came out a Declaration for Decimating such who were actually in Arms, and to shew the reasons of such proceedings against them. Cromwel therein taking it for granted, that the whole Mass of them were engaged in the late dsigne of Penruddock's; and observing their malignity to the Government, by their refusing to match their Relations but within themselves, and so to propagate the Quarrel from one generation to another: that they supplied their King (as they called him) with Money: that their Clergy were as refractory as ever; and that therefore since by them the Peace so endangered could not be kept, nor the Cause and the well-affected scured but by keeping up a standing Army by a constant pay; it was requisite the charge should be born by those who caused it. omwel  a new Authority Au∣ty.For the better dispatch of this affair, He had erected a new Military Autho∣rity, like the Turkish Bashaws, distributed into several Provinces or Counties, with an unbounded power; England being now cantoned into this Hendecarchy, viz. Kent and Surrey under Colonel Kelsey; Sussex, Hampshire, and Berkshire under Goff; Gloucester-shire, Wilts, Dorset, Somerset, Devon, and Cornwal, under Colonel Desborough; Oxford-shire, Buckingham, Hartford, Cambridge, Isle of Ely, Essex, Norfolk and Suffolk under Lieutenant-General Fleetwood; London, un∣der Major-General Skippon; Lincoln-shire, Nottingham, Derby, Warwick, and Leicester, under Whaley; Northampton-shire, Bedford, Rutland, and Huntington, under one Major Butler; Worcester-shire, Hereford, Shropshire, and North-Wales, under Colonel Berry; Cheshire, Lancashire, and Stafford, under Colonel Worsely; York-shire, Durham, Cumberland, Northumberland, and Westmerland, under Lord Lambert; Westminster, and Middlesex, under Colonel Berkstead. Their Com∣mission was to take a Roll and account of all suspected persons of the Kings party; and such as were actually so, to receive security of them, in which they were to be bound to act nothing against the Government, and to reveal all Plots that should come to their knowledge: they were to suppress all Horse-races, Cock-matches, and other concourses of people; to secure the Highways, to take engagement from Royalists for their Servants and Children; and those that did not so, nor give security, to commit to prison; and to rate and receive Money rising from this Decimation. In short, there was nothing which they might not do, nor which they did not; such an Arbitrary vast power they had from the Protector. To this purpose a Fast was kept by the charitable Gentlemen, and an Office was erected here in London, called the Major-Gene∣rals-Office, somewhere in Fleet-street, as other Courts had, where these Recog∣nizances were entred, and all other the like Affairs, Dependencies, and con∣cerns thereof entred and Recorded. By this means the Tyrant intended to in∣form himself of the value and quality of every Estate and Person, together with the number of that Party in every County throughout the Kingdom. Most of
those Loyal persons formerly secured, were hereupon set at Liberty; but by a∣nother twenty-mile-Proclamation driven into the Country, into the bounds of the several Major-Generals, who presently took Cognizance of them, and sum∣moned them to their respective Residences: they sate sometimes without, o∣ther times with some of the old Committees, where they received accounts of Estates, which were rated to the tenth peny yearly. Some bought off that Tax and incumbrance by a present Sum, at three years purchase; which was very ac∣ceptable, for Money was the thing the Usurper wanted: others looked for a nearer Redemption, and to be constrained to that payment. The well-affected and Godly people still voiced this to be a just and reasonable Imposition; for when should they be at quiet, and enjoy themselves in the Goods they had got, free from the interrupting endeavour of this old and restless Enemy? so that there wanted not Abettors and Assistants to this most Religious work of the Major-Generals; who had ordered in the first place, that no Royalist should keep or wear either Arms offensive or defensive,Royalists for∣bid to wear Arms. but straightways deliver them; so that they lay at the mercy of whomsoever they met, and at the discretion and charity of whosoever resorted to their Houses, for what they had left. Several persons were apprehended again, for breach of the 20 miles Procla∣mation, and other Loyal guilt, and committed to a neglected restraint to the Marshal at St. Iames's, which yet continued a Goal; three of whom being spent almost with the charge and tediousness of their Confinement, endeavour∣ed an escape, having obtained of the Marshal's Wife the liberty of walking in the Park with a Souldier, who withstanding their endeavour of escape,Mr. Davison, &c. escapes at St. James's. (and being hair-brain'd, resolved to hinder their flight) was by them, after several warnings of the mischief, if he yet held them, as one of them he did, shot in the Arm with a Pistol,They kill a Souldier, and are retaken: are Indicted for Murther, but found guil∣ty onely of Man-slaughter. whereof he died. This bustle brought in other Souldiers, who took them again. They were tried for this Murther (as the Indictment run) at the Upper Bench, before Chief-Justice Glyn, and by a serious Jury found onely Guilty of Man-slaughter; at which the Court seemed much incensed, and Chief-Justice Glyn in a seeming anger discharged the honest Foreman of the Jury, one Mr. William Sanderson of Shoreditch, from all Service thereafter. It madded Cromwel the rather, because Mr. Davison (the other two were Mr. Henry Hol∣der, and Mr. Robert Thorold) was highly suspected of Colonel Rainsborough's Death. Cromwel was resolved to have Money one way or other, and therefore be∣sides the late rapine of Decimation, and the Piedmont-Sacriledge, (for the speedier bringing in of which Money, he had appointed a great and numerous Commit∣tee, who were to credit the receipt) now he would venture upon a greater im∣piety, to the derogation of the Saviour of the World: that nothing might be wanting to fill up the measure of his Wickedness, he had dealt underhand with some Agents from the Nation of the Iews,Cromwel and the Jews treat about a Tolera∣tion. Manas∣seh Ben Is∣rael their A∣gent. who had proposed a Toleration, their own Judges, their Burying-places, the revocation of all Laws and Statutes against them, protection from, the fealty to him; and had strengthned the rea∣son of this with a round sum of Money. Cromwel wanted not plausible Argu∣ments of his own, from the hopeful juncture of time of making the flock of Christ but one Fold; and others cited places of Scripture: several Conferences were held about it before him,Note that it cost the people of England a whole fifteenth to get them ex∣pelled, in Ed. r. with the Judges, as Steel, &c. and Ministers, as Ienkins, Manton, &c. who being not satisfied with what appeared from the arguments of Manasseh Ben Israel the Jewish Agent, the publick admission of them was laid aside, and the Iews gull'd of their Money they had upon that account already paid. The Ships at Iamaica had been roving abroad, and burnt St. Martha, and took some spoil, while Doyley the Commander in chief by Land had made some Inroads into the Country under Colonel Wood, and was building or planting a new Town at Cagway-Point. In Scotland, new Commissioners were added for the sale of Delinquents Lands; and to prevent their frauds in the purchasing thereof, a New great and Privy-Seal and Signet was likewise sent down thither
from England, and the Protestors and Resolution-men continued at the same distance. A Proclamation there to stop all Comers to that Kingdom, upon pretence of Infection in Holland, and of all going out without License. The Earl of Glencarn, upon suspition of a Plot, being taken and secured by General Monke in Edenburgh-Castle.Earl of Glen∣carn Prisoner in Edenbo∣rough. In England, to affront the Spanish Imbargo, (which now turned to seizure) the price of Canary-Wines, which were feared to rise by the War, were now by Proclamation abated to nine pence a pint, having continued at twelve some years before. The Princess of Aurange de∣parted by the way of Antwerp, and Peronne in France, in Ianuary, to visit her Mother at Paris: and the King preparing according to invitation to go into Flanders, where neer Lovain, in February, he privately conferred with the Earl of Fuensaldagne neer Lovain; the Arch-Duke of Leopold being upon his depar∣ture for Germany, and Don Iohn of Austria to succeed in that Government for the King of Spain. From hence his Majesty, the War betwixt Spain and us being publique, came to the Royal Mansion of Treveur neer Brussels, in order to a nearer conjunction of Counsels: and Odwyr newly returned, and concea∣ling himself in Ireland, gave suspition here of some new designe upon Ireland; and thereupon all Papists and Irish were again disarmed, and commanded to keep at home within their Limits. The King's Family yet continued at Colen; but upon his remaining setling in Brugis, where soon after he was received in State, it removed thither also; so the Spaniards embraced and shook hands with his Interest, as their own affairs governed them. In England many sad accidents happened together: the Abbey of Spalding being let out into Chambers, in one of them as the folks were prophaning by Dancing and making merry therein,23 persons kil∣led by the fall of Spalding Abbey. Sir Tho: Ash∣cock cut his Throat. the Roof fell, and was the Death of 23 persons, Ianuary 22. Sir Thomas Ashcock cut his Throat, a Paper being found in his Chamber, where he had reckoned twenty several preservations before; and yet God gave him up to this Temptation. Mr. Skipwith a young Gentle∣man who had had a grudge against Sir Thomas Wortley, for keeping his Sister Company,Sir Thomas Wortley kil∣led. met with the said Sir Thomas; whereupon both drew their Pistols, but Skipwith killed him dead, though Wounded himself. A Stationer's Ser∣vant in Fleet-street, being taken in Bed with his fellow-serving-maid, got an op∣portunity and presently Hang'd himself.A Stationers Servant in Fleet-street hangeth him∣self. Colonel Gran∣thamson kil∣led. The Bp. of Ar∣magh dieth. Mr. Chamberlain of Oxford-shire killed Colonel Granthamson at Southampton-buildings in a single Duel. The most Reverend the Arch-Bishop of Armagh died March 21, a Prelate of great and incomparable Learning and Piety, as his Works do sufficiently declare; a person challenged as Indifferent to the Church-Government by Bishops, but no doubt falsly; however, it gave the Protector a fine occasion of personating a love to Learning and good men, in the expence of his decent and fitting Interment,Cromwel al∣lowes 200 l. towards his Funeral. 200 l. being allowed thereunto, out of the publick Money; the best and justest of all those sums he squandered upon his dying and perishing Ambition. He was not buried till the 17 of April ensuing, being then brought from the Countess of Peterburgh's, His great Patroness at Rygate, to St. George's, so to Somerset-House,Thames Ebbe and flow twice in two hours. Sir George Sonds his two unfortunate Sons, the one illing the o∣ther, and s  for it. and thence to the Abbey at Westminster. Mr. Bourdeaux Embassador returned for England, and Lockhart, as was said, dispatcht for France. The River of Thames Ebbed and Flowed twice in two hours, this Year; and the last twelve Years there was much alteration in them. Free∣man Sonds, the younger Son of Sir George Sonds, killed his onely Brother in Bed, and was Hanged for it: which sad and strange story had almost past observation.
Anno Dom. 1656. GEneral Blake and Montague began this year with their Fleet of War sailing for the Coast of Spain, having toucht at Tangier, and directed thence their course to Cadiz-bay; and the removing of the English-staple at Roter∣dam by Proclamation to Dort; and the arrival of Mr. Lockhart in France, as touched before; together with a rencounter at Sea, of the Advice, President, and Drake,A rencounter at Sea. English Frigats, with the Maria of Ostend, one Erasmus Bruer a Fleming Captain, off the Coast of Scarborough. It was stoutly managed by the Enemy from Morning till Night, when being totally disabled and over∣powered, he yielded, nothing but himself and Marriners remaining of the Con∣quest, and not many sound ones of those; for the ship sunk presently: she was the Admiral of that place.Maj. General Worsley dieth, and is buried in Hen. 7th's Chappel. Worsley the Major-General died before he could be good in his Office, and was buried with the Dirges of Bell Book and Candle, and the Peals of Musquets, in no less a repository than Henry 7th's Chappel, as became a Prince of the Modern Erection, and Oliver's great and rising Fa∣vourite. With him went down the Wrestling in Moor-fields, an exercise used time out of minde in that place,Wrestling in Moor-fields forbid. before the War, and now resumed again; together also with pitching of the Bar, and generally all pastime and sort of sports was dam∣ned: and to make his Exit the more remarkable, Hannam the most notorious private Thief in England,Hannam the great Thief Hanged. to expiate his sad villany at Colen, (having promised Cromwel some Papers taken at that time) was retaken in another Robbery in London, and had his due by being hanged. Forces under Colonel Brayn, who was to Command in chief in Iamaica, were now shipt from Port Patrick in Scotland, (where the Citadel of St. Iohn∣stones was fired and almost consumed,A great fire at St. Johnstons in Scotland. but Provisions saved) with 1000 stout Fellows: but Fate so crost Oliver, that no Governour of his sending and nomi∣nation survived long after their arrival; and Colonel Doyley was a kinde of an old Royalist, as were many or the most of the remaining Officers, whom he had made it his Religion not to trust. He had in England appointed at this time a Committee for inspecting of Charters;A Committee appointed for inspection of Charters. and some forward pragmatical Coun∣try-Burgesses were very busie to supplicate a renewal of some, augmenting of and granting others de novo; of this Committee Mr. Gabriel Beck his High∣ness's Sollicitor was chief, who were to report their Consults to the Council. Gloucester Cathedral was now very ruinous;Gloucester Cathedral a School-house and Church. and the Citizens begg'd it for a School-house, and afterwards had it for a Church, in some part according to its first pious institution. The Spanish War was like to prove too chargeable for Oliver's Purse, for all his devices of Decimation, Piedmont, and Iews; and therefore resolved to call a∣nother Parliament,Cromwel's designe in set∣ting up the Maj. Generals first to awe Elections. hoping so to awe the Elections, (having had time to im∣prove that power he had assumed to himself) together with the disappointment the late Parliament had met with, and the desire of Settlement (which the new acquired Wealth and Estates, by the vast purchases of Crown and other Lands vehemently enforced; together with the severe penalties on Royalists Electing and Elected, and the flagging wearied opposition of striving thus in vain against his uncontroulable will) would so propitiate his designes in this Convention, that under the pretence of the said Settlement, he might establish himself, and obtain supplies for carrying on the said War. He set up the Ma∣jor-Generals, to force themselves into the peoples trust and abhorence together: for as the mad actions of the Little Parliament were on purpose suffered and dictated to them, to make the people chuse any Government rather, and sub∣mit to a Single Person upon his own score: So these Major-Generals tyrannical
proceedings by vertue of his unknown unlimited Authority, would incline men to seek for a Government established by Law, to which he and his Officers un∣der him might be thought at least, and deemed accountable; and he was in a fair way to a Monarchical Form, and nothing wanting but a good Title, or the peoples Assent. These were his aims upon this Convention; for suffrages wherein, his party, and all that he could make to his side, were no less sedulous and industrious; and if they failed in the major voice, he could but use the same trick of Seclusion. The Major-Generals had pretty well prepared the way, by aspersing many, seizing others, and threatning the rest of the Gentry; by displacing Burgesses, and disfranchising one sort, and admitting another to Freedoms; and at the day of Election,The awe of E∣lections to Parliament. which was the 20 of August, attending at the places with Foot and Horse, and got themselves returned by this means, with others of their nomination. Thus Berkstead got himself, with Kiffin the Anabaptist, returned Knights for Middlesex. And when such persons were chosen in the very face of the Kingdom, little other choice could be expected in obscure and remoter parts. A rout was brought down for Kiffin, who together with Red-coats (that were onely the good people, and had most right to chuse) bawled, scuffled, and jug∣led away the fair Election of young Mr. Chute, his Father difficultly carrying it. And worse Jugling there was in Scotland and Ireland, of which 60 there could not be said to be any choice at all, further than the nomination of the respective Councils of both Kingdoms. To facilitate the effect of this project, Sir Henry Vane and Feak, upon the Commonwealth and Little Parliaments account; and Colonel Russel and other Royalists, upon the Cavalier-account, were seized and sent to Prison, and a Proclamation of 20 miles again the 12 of September. During this Cabal, and the serious carrying of it on, a Freak or Crotchet took Mr. Robert Villiers (next related to the Lord Purbeck) in the Head,Mr. Villiers changeth his Name by patent to Danvers. of changing his Name, by Patent of Cromwel, to Danvers, having Mar∣ried the Daughter of Sir Iohn Danvers, (Brother to the Earl of Danby) the last of that Family, being another of the Kings Judges, as was observed in Sir William Constable. The reason he alledged was, the many disservices his Name had done the Commonwealth, and he intended to become a probationer for a Parliament-mans place, and a Protectorian-Consider: but it was said some Na∣tural, not Political, reasons induced him to this alteration. The Parliament met.On the 17 of September the Members met at the Abbey-Church in Westmin∣ster, whither came Cromwel with his Guard and Gentlemen, and heard a Sermon Preached by Dr. Owen,Dr. Owen Preacheth be∣fore the Prote∣ctor. Dean of Christ-Church, upon these words in Isaiah, What shall one then answer to the Messengers of the Land? That the Lord hath founded Zion, and the poor of his people shall rejoyce. (A Sermon calculated to the device of the Settlement; and for which, next day, by Sir Iohn Berkstead (Knighted a little before) and Mr. Maidstone the Protector's Steward of his house, he had the Thanks of the Parliament.) At the entrance whereunto, after this Preachment,Exclusion of Membrs thr Parliament. the Members found a Guard, and an Officer standing with a List in his Hand, and demanding the Names of every of them; and such as were marked for non-admittance were turned back: for notwithstanding all this diligence and foul play, far the major part of the House were against the Single Person, especially against Oliver, whom the Republicans hated more than ever they did the Kingship in our Soveraign: those within nevertheless stood not to ask what was become of their Fellows without, but proceeded, and appointed a Fast; and to prevent application of the Secluded to them, as of right, they turned them over by an Order to the Protector's Council for approbation; which most of the Country-Gentlemen disdaining, quickly departed home; which others seeing that were admitted, not thinking the most of this remnant fit company for men of honesty or fashion, they also absented themselves, that their Names might not be abused by continuing with them to countenance their proceedings. Cromwel saw the Test of a Recognition would not serve turn; for they had learnt his own Art of time-serving Engagements, and therefore
went this illegal bold way to work, contenting himself with this pickt Juncto, which made a shew of a Parliament;Sir Thomas Widdrington chosen Speaker. but quota portio faecis Achaeae? Sir Thomas Widdrington was chosen Speaker. These fell to his business, and first of all to make room for the Olivarian Title,The King's Ti∣tle to the Crown annul∣ed. A Bill for the Protector's safety. The Pal. promise to assist him a∣gaint the Spa∣niards. a Bill was brought in for annulling the pretended Title of the King, by the Name of Charles Stuart; another or the Security of the Protector's (his Highnesses) Person, pursued with a Vote, that the Parliament declared the War against the Spaniard to be undertaken upon just grounds, and that they will assist hs Highness therein; and Voted the manner of the supply to be taken into consideration with all speed. And for their better encouragement, the first news they had since their Sit∣ting, was of a success of the English Fleet lying upon the Coast of Spain, in ex∣pectation of the Plate-flee coming in, or their Convoy of 40 Men of War go∣ing out from Cadiz, (one of which the Spaniard feared in earnest, and the other he threatned in a Bravado.) It happened thus: the Generals Blake and Montague being gone to the Bay of Wyers to take in fresh Water, let Rear-Admi∣ral Stayner with 7 Frigats to ply before that Port; who about the middle of September descryed at Sea eight sail, (as it proved from the West Indies) who having met and taken a Portugal Prize, and informed by them that the English were gone off the Coast,The Plate-ships taken by Capt. Stayner, Sep. made securely to Cadiz, where Captain Stayner and his Squadron (but two whereof engaged with him in the Speaker, viz. the Bridgewater and Plymouth, taken by them at first for Fisher-men, by reason of their lying so low in the Water) assailed them, and after a fierce fight (the Spaniard being loth to part with his Treasure) overcame them. There were two Sunk, two escaped, two run aground, and two taken by the Speaker-Fri∣gat. In one of them was the Marquess of Badajox,Marq. of Ba∣dajox one of the King of Spain's Gover∣nours killed. of the Family of Lopez, who had been Governour for the King of Spain's Peru, who was killed in the Fight, with his Wife and a Daughter; the Eldest Son and his Brother were sa∣ved, and brought safe to the Generals with this Prize, wherein were two mil∣lions of Pieces of eight, and as much there was in one of them that was Sunk. The Admiral who carried the Flag (for concealing of the chiefest ship) with the Portugal prize, recovered the Shore. Soon after General Montague with the young Marquess and part of the Fleet to convoy the Silver, returned into Eng∣land, and delivered the Bullion into the Mint; and the young Marquess was set at liberty. For this a Thanksgiving, with a Narrative to be read thereon, was appointed by the Parliament,The Parliament appoint a day of Thanksgi∣ving. who emitted their Declaration of War a∣gainst Spain. About the same time Five Frigats returned also from Iamai∣ca. According to the 34th Article of the Instrument, which this Juncto roundly danced to, Cromwel having Named Fiennes and Lisle to be Lord-Commissio∣ners of the Great Seal, and Serjeant Glyn to be Lord Chief-Justice of England, he now proposed them to the House for their approbation; which they did with Glee, and confirmed them in their places: and to reciprocate his officious comportment, they of their part opened the intercourse betwixt him and the Parliament, by presenting him several Bills to Signe and Ratifie as Acts; the chief whereof were the Annulling the Title of the King, for security of his Per∣son, taking away Wards and Liveries, and that the Passing those Acts should not determine the Session: these were firmed in the Painted-Chamber, in am∣ple manner and form, by this new-fangled-Legislator, Nov. 27. At the latter end of October died Iohn the 4th King of Portugal,The King of Portugal dies. who had so sucessfully wrested the Kingdom of Portugal from the unjust possession of the Spanish Monarchy, after almost 100 years Usurpation of it, in the remarkable year of 1640. He died of the Stone in his Kidneys in the fifty and odd year of his Age, leaving behinde him by his Queen, the Sister of the Duke of Medi∣na Sidonia in Spain, his Son Alphonso the sixth King of Portugal, and Donna Catharina the Illustrious Infanta of the same, since Married to our Gracious Soveraign King Charles the second.
The Sect of Quakers was grown to such a heigth of Impudence, by the presumptions and deceitful Revelations of the Light within, that there was scarce any Blasphemy which they would not say and act; and yet very many were bewitched with it. The Divinity of Christ had been oppugned by Biddle the Socinian, and now it was Personated (with reverence be it spoken) by one Iames Naylor a Quaker,James Nay∣lor the Qua∣ker appears. He psonates our Saviour. who resembling in his Proportions and Complexion the picture of Christ, had, in all other things, as the setting of the Beard and Loks in the same fashion, ard to counterfeit our Blessed Lord. To this purpose he had Disciples and Women ministring to him, whose Blasphemous Expressions, and aications of several Scriptures relating properly to the loveliness and Transcent Excellency of Christ () to this Impo∣stor, will (if repeated) move Horrour and Trembling in every Christian. His first appearance in this manner was at Bristol, where a man leading his Horse Bare-headed, and one Dorcas Erbury and Martha Symmonds going up to the Knees in Mire by his Horse-side, sung aloud, Holy, Holy, Holy▪ Hosanna, &c. For this they were seized by the Magistrates, and being complained of to the Par∣liament, were brought up to Town, into which (as in all places) they entred singing the same Blasphemies. At the Bar of the House (a Committee having reported their opinion concerning his punishment) he was Sentenced in De∣cember to be set in the Pillory twice,He is sentenced to stand twice in the Pillory, to be twice whipt, to be Stigma∣tized, and to be Bored through the Tongue. and Whipt twice, and his Forehead to be Stigmatized with the letter B. for Blasphemer, and Bored through the Tongue, with which he used to answer to any Question, Thou hast said it, and the like. He was likewise Whipt at Bristol, and thence returned to Bridewel, to be kept close, and to eat no more than what he earned. In Newgate (after his punishment) the Impostor continued: one Mr. Rich (a Merchant of credit) that held him by the Hand while he was in the Pillories, with divers others, licked his Wounds: the Women were observed some to lay their Head in his Lap, lying against his Feet; others to lean it upon his Shouldiers: and question∣less the Quakers would have persisted in this delusion, and set up, and made something of this Idol, if he had not been kept from them (for as soon as ever any came into his Company, they would first take him by the Hand, and in a strange note say, Holy, &c.) But being thus removed, after three days wilful abstinence, having weakned himself even unto Death, he begged some Victuals, and then was set to work, which he performed, and came by degrees to himself, and to reduction. At the return of the Rump he got his liberty, but survived it not; his additional pretended Divinity having attenuated and wasted his Humanity; and that Body sublimed and prepared for Miracles, went the way of all Flesh. It is to be noted,Lambert ap∣pears in his be∣half. that Lambert stickled much to have sa∣ved him from Sentence and punishment, he being his Souldier: but the truth was, Lambert perceived what Cromwel was driving at, to engross the Soveraign∣ty to himself and Family; and it was high time therefore to ingratiate with all parties, the better to be able to oppose him: and henceforth sprung and ap∣peared the feud betwixt these two Army-Potentates. The King at Bruges.The King kept his Court at Bruges, some eight Leagues from the Court at Brussels, where Don Iohn was now Governour for the King of Spain, and had had several consultations together about the carrying on of the War, and many fair overtures made. The Duke of York was newly arrived, as also the Prin∣cess of Aurange; so that all the Royal Family, except the youngest Daughter and Mother, were present together. He had newly listed some Regiments of his three Nations into his service and pay, which were now quartered about Flanders.Several Priso∣ners released. Several Prisoners of both sorts were now released, as Sir Henry Vane, Mr. Feak, Mr. Rogers, Judge Ienkins Esquire; as little time before, one Mrs Lucy Barlow committed, upon the score of some Letters of the King's found about her. Sindercomb's Plot.A most formidable Plot was again whispered to be discovered, that tended to the destruction of the Nation; and most terrible expectations there were. What more monstrous wickedness could be practised, than what the Nation had already
seen perpetrated. — The Fox had a Wound he could not tell where, — The Drudgery of Mr. Thurloe, (Cromwel's Second in the Plot) had most la∣boriously undermined a sap-headed fellow, one Miles Syndercombe a Leveller, Casiered in Scotland about Overton's business, to designe the Life of his most Serene Highness. This was effected by the hired combination of one Cecil, and one Toop of Cromwel's Life-guard, who drew in this male-content. There was another vizarded or disguised person, said to be a Priest sent from Don Alonso the Spanish Embassador in Flanders, who was engaged as principal. Several opportune Houses taken to Shoot him, with Engines, Calivers, Blunderbusses, at his going to the Parliament, to Hampton Court, at a convenience in Hammer∣smith, in Hide-Park, the Gates whereof were unhinged: and lastly, by firing the Chappel at White-hall, with a strange combustible matter. Those horrible cir∣cumstances Master Secretary delivered in such anxious, and the discovery of it in such grave words, that the House was resolved into a joyful wonderment of this good Providence,The Parliament congratulates Cromwel's deliverance. for which they first ordered a Thanksgiving, and a Nar∣rative of the Plot, and the House to come and congratulate his Highness up∣on this deliverance at a day he should appoint; which was the 23 of Ianuary, when the House with their Speaker went to the Banquetting-house, and met their live-like Protector with a Sospital Oration (consisting of these Heads) by the Mouth of Sir Thomas Widdrington. First,The Contents of the Speaker's Speech. the danger and Ruine of the Reformed Churches abroad, and three Na∣tions at home, who were struck at in this Blow. 2. Then the cunning secrecy of it, no more than two to know the whole designe. 3. The extensiveness of it, if they failed in one place, resolved to do in another; that if Cicero were living, he would want expression to set out the Danger or the Mercy, and that being so unparallell'd unprecedented a Mercy, the Parliaments Hymn was, O cantemus canticum no∣vum, O come let us sing a new Song, &c. This Speech (like the Plot) had neither Head nor Tail, yet was well e∣nough taken by the Sword-men, who had no other acuteness than what was in their Scabbards: but the disaster that was the preface to this Lame Story, was taken in dudgeon. As the Members were ascending the Stairs of the Banquet∣ting-house, a press of people crowding with them, the Stairs broke under them, and spoiled the Cringes and Obeysances of many of these Parliament-gratula∣tors, particularly Mr. Ellis (afterwards Knighted by Cromwel) his Sollicitor-General broke his Leg, and lost the Fees of a whole Term for a Complement. Cromwel's Son Richard was much bruised, and lay in. Syndercombe was the same Term for this Treason prosecuted by direction from the Parliament at the Kings-Bench,Syndercombe Condemned at the Kings-Bench, by Iu∣stice Glyn. before Chief-Justice Glyn and Warbur∣ton, and by Cecil's and Toop's Evidence (who discovered, &c. and craved mer∣cy) Convicted: He resolutely denied and retorted the Plot, and interrogated the Court about it; but it availed not, Justice Glyn condemning him, when he declared that the Statute 25 Edw. 3. was declaratory of the Common Law provided in that Case before, and that by King was understood any Chief-Ma∣gistrate. He was carried thence to the Tower,He is sent to the Tower, and the night before his Execution found dead. He is buried under the Scaffold at Tower-hill, a Stake being driven through his Body. where the night before his Ex∣ecution, it was supposed (and so the Coroners Jury gave their Verdict) that he Poysoned himself: He went well into his Bed, desiring a while before a space of half an hours privacy for his Prayers; which time elapsed, he opened the Door, and rubbing his Hands together, and his Nose with them, chearfully bid his Guard good-night. His Body afterwards was tied with his Head forwards to a Horses Tail, and drawn Naked to the Scaffold at Tower-hill, and under that Buried, and a great Stake driven through him, which was covered with Iron at top. At the Thanksgiving-day, February 20, Gillespy the Scotch Presbyter preached the Sermon at St. Margarets, and thence they marched to the same Banquetting-house to Dinner with the Protector their Host,The Parliament dine with the Protector, Jan. where they were gaudily enter∣tained,
in respect of the Fast they had kept within their own Walls on the 12 of Ianuary, to conjure for the Plot, six days before Thurloe (his spirit) brought them the intelligence, which was on the 18. Kindnesses follow one upon the neck of another. Alderman Pack motions Cromwel for King.For the next day Alderman Pack (a great Excise-Commissioner, and in greater arrears for it, to 30000 l. and deep in the Piedmont-account) from the advantage of this Royal Treat, suddenly started a motion like a Puppet jerkt with a Wire, That in regard of the strange unsettlement and discomposure of the Nation, and the mindes of men, and the ill aspect it had upon Forrain Prin∣ces, and all Trade; that therefore the Protector might be desired to assume the Stile of King, as the most known and most agreeable Government. And pre∣sently Tooth and Nail the Court-party were at it; and after sundry Consulta∣tions, passed a Resolution in order to his being King'd, by the second part of the Instrument, called the Humble Petition and Adice of the Parliament; which being now in debate, we must leave to the ensuing Year. The Peace with Portugal Pro∣claimed.The Year ends with a Proclamation of the Portugal Peace, which had been ratified so long before: and a fright given Lockhart by a pretended Quarrel be∣tween some Embassadors Lacqueys, at his stately going to Audience to the French King at Paris, where notwithstanding his Guards, he very seldom as yet, but upon publick occasions, appeared abroad. Anno Dom. 1657. THe sutable political talk of the party of the Usurper, was now engaged in strained arguments for a Monarchy in the person of this their Ring-leader; and this Maxime was broacht in the News-book, That there was no everla∣sting principle in Government as to any particular Form; That Government is but a temporary expedient; that it is like Vltima tabula post naufragium, in the hazard of the Commonwealth, the next shift may be made use of. The same was the inspired reason into the Humble Petition and Advice; which after se∣veral Debates and Resolutions, was drawn into that Consistency; the main whereof, was to desire the Protector to change that Title for the other of King. On the 9 of April, the Parliament having desired a meeting with him, came to the Banquetting-house in White-hall, where Sir Thomas Widdrington in a Speech commended the Title and Office of a King,Sir Thomas Widdrington commends the Title and Office of a King. as setled here with Christianity, approved by our Ancestors, consisting with our Laws and Temper of the peo∣ple: and then presented him with the Module of the Humble Petition, &c. To this tender, Cromwel in a fit of Devotion answered, That it was a weighty mat∣ter, and therefore desired space to seek God: that the Charge laid upon him was too great for him to bear without His assistance: that the English were the best people in the World, and required therefore all tenderness and consideration of their Liber∣ties, &c. Cromwel courted to ac∣cept it.The next day a Committee was appointed to attend him, and receive his Answer; which being insignificant, but that the Protector desired satisfaction, they upon report thereof resolved to adhere to their Petition, and appointed a Committee of above half the House to attend him, to receive from him his doubts and scruples touching any of the particulars contained in the, &c. and to offer Reasons for his satisfaction, for the maintenance of the Resolution of the House; and wherein they cannot satisfie, to report. The chief of this Com∣mittee were, Whitlock, Lord Chief-Justice Glyn, Lord Broghall, Lenthall, Lisle, Philip Iones, Fines, Strickland, Thurloe, Sir Richard Onslw, Sir Charles Woolsley, &c. These wanted not arguments from the Law, from the Safety and Honour of the people to have a King; under which Government it had flourished so
many hundred years, and from the safety and honour of his own person: to all which they were answered from a mixt result of ambition and anger, till the deliberated certainty of the latter had crusht the Airy conceit of the other. The danger and his scruples consisted in these Objections. First, That the Title of King is a name of Office, which any name that may imply the Supreme Magistrate hath the same signification, and therefore no necessity of change. Answer, that the Name of a King is onely adequate to, and com∣prehensive of the Office of the Supreme Magistrate. It is a Rule, that the Kings of England cannot alter the Laws, by reason of their Name; and that there is no obligation upon any other. That the very Title was declared necessary in 9 Edw. 4. in the controversie betwixt him and Hen. 7. every action done by the King in possession was valid, for it was his Jurisdiction Royal: so in Hen. 7. the same of a King de Facto. That there is a prius a former, and primum a first; the Name King had beginning with our Laws: that for Protector there must be a new Law introductive of such a Title. The other Objections of danger, namely, The difficulty in altering the same Government to a Commonwealth, and the refusal of some Iudges, and actings of o∣thers upon that ground; that another Parliament might change those Resolutions; the dislike of the good people, and the bent of the Army; that Providence had laid aside this Title of the King after seven years War, and many of the chief of those instruments dissatisfied (of which presently) were answered with his own Lo∣gick of Providence, which would (was bound, they would have said) to wait upon these beloved and glorious necessities: and that as to Dissatisfied Persons, there never was any the most just and happy Government free from them. But because the most material part and effect of our Civil-War came to Entitle it self to this grand Event, it will be very just and equal to shew it in its full proportion, and in its genuine sense, from the Mouths of the then Lord Whit∣lock and Cromwel himself. I omit to acquaint the Reader at large with the Protector's Jealousie, that they would fortifie his Title, and dis-enable his Reve∣nue; for he demanded no less security to his Greatness, than 190000 l. a year, and the charge of the Spanish War besides. The Lord Whitlock's Speech, the 26 of April. SIR, I Have very little to trouble your Highness with;The Ld. Whit∣lock's Speech to the Prote∣ctor. so much hath been already spoken, and so well, that it will be hard for me or any other to undertake to adde to it: onely the duty of my Employment, and something due to your Highness, occasions me to speak a few words, to acknowledge with very humble thanks the Honour and Right which you have done this Committee, by the clear and free Discourses and Conferences which they have had with your Highness; and for your frequent Expressions and Testimonies of affection and respect to the Parliament, whose sense in this I may presume to speak, that never any persons met their Supreme Magistrate with more Love, Duty, and Honour, than the Parliament have met your Highness with, in their present Addresses; which argument of love deserves the esteem and force, which I doubt not but your Highness will put upon it. I am fearful to be too tedious at any time, especially at so late an hour, and therefore shall speak but short, to some things which I remember not to have been mentioned. Your Highness was pleased at the last meeting, to say, that the Original Institution of the Title King, was by common consent, and that the same common consent might institute any other Title, and make it as effectual as that of King. This must be acknowledged; but withal you may be pleased to observe, that the Title of King is not onely by an O∣riginal common consent, but that consent also approved and confirmed, and the Law fitted thereunto, and that fitted to the Laws, by the experience and industry of many ages, and many hundreds of years together; whereas any other Title will be onely by present common consent, without that experience and approbation: for that
experience which your Highness mentioned to have been of other Titles, and the due administration of Iustice under them: this experience is far short of the other; and for the course of Iustice, we have cause to thank that care which plac'd so good Iud∣ges and Officers over us; yet give me leave to say, that in private Causes between party and party; and in publick matters in nominal causes, it was not easie to finde justice to be done by some Iurors: and many questions have risen upon the occasion of those new Titles, concerning that tender point of good mens satisfaction. I think it requires a very great regard from us, and I doubt not but those good People will be fully satisfied, if they consider the Covenants, Promises, and Precepts, which in the Scriptures are annex'd to the Name of King: and although some have alledged, that they belong to any chief Magistrate as well as to King; yet no man did ever read the Original word translated otherwise than King, neither do I finde the present Title once mentioned in the Holy Text. If the present Authority be a lawful Au∣thority, which I hope none of us will deny; surely those good men, who are so well-principled in Godliness, will not forget that precept of submission to Authority, and to be satisfied with that which Lawful Authority shall ordain. Their Rights and Liberties are the same with ours, and the Parliament cannot advise any thing for the preservation of the Peoples Rights, but these good men are included; which I hope will be no dissatisfaction to them. In all the changes which we have seen, there hath been a dissatisfaction to some; yet still the Blessing of God hath gone along through all these Changes, with those who carried on his interest; and the Cause be∣ing the same, the same Mercies have been continued: And I doubt not but if the in∣tended Change, or rather Restitution be made, (as I hope it will) the same God will continue his Blessings to that Good Old Cause wherein we are engaged; and that good men will receive satisfaction by it. Your Highness hath been told, that the Title of King is upon the Foundation of Law, and that a new Title must have a constitution to make the Laws relate unto it, and that unto the Laws. I shall onely adde this, that a Title by relation is not so certain and safe, as a Title upon the old Foundation of the Law; and that a Title upon a present single Constitution (as any new Title must be) cannot be so firm, as a Title both upon the present Consti∣tution, and upon the old Foundation of the Law likewise, which the Title of King will be. If any inconvenience should ensue upon your acceptance of this Title which the Parliament adviseth, your Highness satisfaction will be, that they did advise it. On the contrary part, if any inconvenience should arise upon your Highness refu∣sal of this Title which the Parliament hath advised, your burden will be the grea∣ter. And therefore whatsoever may fall out, will be better answered by your Highness complying with your Parliament, than otherwise. This question is not al∣together new; some instances have been given of the like, to which I shall adde two or three. The Title of the Kings of England in the Realm of Ireland, was Lord of Ireland; and the Parliament in the 33 year of Hen. 8. reciting, that inconve∣niencies did arise there by reason of that Title, did Enact that Hen. 8. should as∣sume the Stile and Title of King of Ireland, which in the Iudgement of this Par∣liament was preferred before the other. In the State of Rome, new Titles proved fatal to their Liberties. Their case was not much unlike ours; they were wearied with a Civil War, and coming to a Settlement, Cuncta discordiis civilibus ssa, nomine principis sub imperium accepit; some would not admit the Title Rex to be used, but were con∣tented to give the Titles of Caesar, perpetuus Dictator, Princeps, Senatus, Impe∣rator. Non sum Rx, sed Caesar, came at last to this, Voluntas Caesaris pro lege habebatur. The Northern people were more happy amongst themselves; a private Gentleman of a Noble Family took up Arms with his Country-men against a Ty∣rant, and by the blessing of God rescued their Native Liberties, and Rights of their Country, from the oppression of that Tyrant. This Gentleman had the Title of Marshal given unto him, which continued for some years: Afterwards their Par∣liament (judging it best to resume the old Title) Elected this Gentleman King, and with him was brought in the liberty of Protestant Religion, and the establish∣ment
of the Civil Rights of that people, which have continued in a prosperous con∣dition ever since unto this day. Sir, I shall make no other application, but in my pray∣ers to God, to direct your Highness and the Parliament (as I hope be will) to do that which will be most for his honour and the good of his people. Cromwel's Speech to the Parliament in the Banquetting-house at White-hall, the 8 of May. Mr. Speaker, I Come hither to answer that that was in your last Paper to your Committee you sent to me,The Protector's Speech to the Parliament concerning the Title of King. which was in relation to the desires which were offered to me by the House, in that they called their Petition. I confess that business hath put the House, the Parliament, to a great deal of trouble, and spent much time: I am very sorry that it hath cost me some, and some thoughts; and because I have been the unhappy occasion of the expence of so much time, I shall spend little of it now: I have the best I can revolved the whole business in my thoughts ▪ and I have said so much already in testimony of the whole, that I think I shall not need to repeat any thing that I have said. I think it is a Government, that the aims of it seek much a setling the Nation on a good foot in relation to Civil Rights and Liberties, which are the Rights of the Nation; and I hope I shall never be found to be of them that shall go about to Rob the Nation of these Rights, but to serve them what I can to the attaining of them. It hath also exceeding well provided for the safety and security of honest men, in that great Natural and Religious Liberty, which is Liber∣ty of Conscience: These are great Fundamentals, and I must bear my testimony to them, (as I have and shall do still, so long as God lets me live in this World) that the intentions of the things are very honourable and honest, and the Product worthy of a Parliament. I have onely had the unhappiness both in my Conferences with your Committees, and in the best thoughts I could take to my self, not to be convicted of the necessity of that thing, that hath been so often insisted upon by you, to wit, the Title of King, as in it self so necessary, as it seems to be apprehended by your selves: and I do with all honour and respect to the judgment of the Parliament, testifie, that (caeteris patibus) no private judgement is to lye in the Ballance with the judgement of a Parliament; but in things that respect particular persons, every man that is to give an account to God of his actions, he must in some measure be able to prove his own Work, that is, to have an approbation in his own Conscience of that he is to do or forbear; and whilst you are granting others Liberties, surely you will not deny me this, it being not onely a liberty, but a duty (and such a duty as I cannot without sinning forbear) to examine my own Heart, and thoughts, and judgement, in every work which I am to set mine Hand to, or to appear in or for. I must confess therefore, that though I do acknowledge all the other, yet I must be a little confident in this, that what with the circumstances that accompany Humane Actions, whether they be circumstances of time or persons, whether circumstances that relate to the whole, or private or particular circumstances, that compass any person that is to render an account of his own actions: I have truely thought, and do still think, that if I should (at the best) do any thing on this account to answer your expectation, it would be at the best doubtingly; and certainly what is so, is not of faith; whatsoever is not of faith, is sin to him that doth it, whether it be with re∣lation to the substance of the action about which the consideration is conversant, or whether to circumstances about it, which make all indifferent actions good or evil to him that doth it. I lying under this consideration, think it my duty; onely I could have wished I had done it sooner, for the sake of the House, who have laid so infinite obligations on me: I wish also I had done it sooner for your sake, for saving time and trouble; and indeed for the Committees sake, to whom I must acknow∣ledge publickly, I have been unseasonably troublesome: I say, I could have wished I had given it sooner; but truely this is my Answer, that although I think the Go∣vernment
doth consist of very excellent parts in all, but in that one thing the Title: as to me, I should not be an honest man, if I should not tell you, that I cannot ac∣cept of the Government, nor undertake the trouble and charge of it, which I have a litle more experimented than every man, as to what troubles and difficulties do be∣fal men under such Trusts, and in such undertakings; I say, I am perswaded to re∣turn this Answer to you, That I cannot undertake this Government with the Title of a King; and that is mine Answer to this great and weighty business. A rumour was spread during this juncture, which is too pertinent to be omit∣ted, that the King was sickly and languishing, and of a melancholy lost spirit; That his Brothers were Papists, and professed ones: which with the Act of an∣nulling, &c. plainly shewed Cromwel's first Ambitious intentions; but the truth was, he had consulted the Oracle of the Army, whom he had first Disci∣plin'd with Mutiny against the Civil Authority, or any coercive Jurisdiction whatsoever, and was therefore the best acquainted with their constitution: and they were at such a pitch, lately Sultning of it in the powers of their Major-Generals, that it was impossible or improbable to bring them to the Yoak of the Laws, which he must by this Title undergo himself; and Lambert was so stiff hereupon, perceiving how Cromwel prevaricated from the Contract between them of his succeeding to this Lawless Protectorship after, as to brave him with the Army-Interest, to brandish the same Sword, and to dispute the business in publick. A whispering there was, that his Lady was more familiar with Crom∣wel than suted with her Relation, and that she discovered his secrets as well as her own; insomuch that it became a Court-jest, that Oliver's Instrument was found in my Lady Lamberts Petticoat: but he was open enough of himself, and of too pregnant and forward a Spirit to conceal his disgust. It was time therefore, as the Protector had served Major-General Harrison before, to deal with Lambert,Lambert tur∣ned off. and to dismiss him from Council and all Command; but for fear of displeasing the Army, not securing him: which kinde of usage in the throwing off an old, but disgusted Friend, was credited into a by-word of Lambertizing. Thus Oliver chose the better part, betaking himself to the In∣terest of the Army, in this Title of their own making and forming; confiding more in the Arms and Embraces of the Souldiery, than in the Legs and Comple∣ments of the Parliament, and that a Cripple also. Fifth-Monar∣chy Plot.In the midst of this Regal Scene, appeared other Actors: the Fifth-Monar∣chy-men were contriving an Insurrection, and had had several Meetings in a house at Shoreditch, where they were all along betrayed, and seized, and at last some Arms and Ammunition taken with them, with a Standard of a Lyon Cou∣chant (of the Tribe of Iudah) with this Motto, Who shall rouse him up? The fellows taken, were Thomas Venner, with their Scribe (as they named their Se∣cretary) Gray, Gowlet, Hopkins, and Ashton, with others, (these named owe another more desperate and Trayterous account to this Chronicle.) About them was found a Declaration in Print, with this Title, The Principle of the Rem∣nant, &c. One Machlin  in his Age.A Miracle seconded this Millenary Phantasie: one Machlin a Scotch Minister, but Beneficed in Northumberland, aged one hundred and sixteen years, was re∣stored by a wonderful reviviscency beyond all Poetical Fiction, to his Teeth, Hair, and Eye-sight, so that he was as able in his Body as he was at the age of fifty. Several conjectures were made and applied to the Government of our Kings, and the issue credited them. Nor was the right of the King at any time so hopeful as now, not onely from these unpracticable Counsels at home, against his Crown and unextinguishable Authority, but also from those Aids and Forces he had abroad, and the assurance of a plenary conjuncture with the Spaniard to this purpose. The Marquess of Ormond, the Lord Wilmot, the Lords Gerrard and Wentworth, the Lord Taaf and General Middleton had their several Regiments Quartered up and down the Sea-Coasts; and the Dukes of York and Gloucester had Commands likewise in Flanders.
To oppose this growing strength,The King ∣tertains For∣ces in Flan∣ders. and to re-inforce the French, who had been worsted last Summer at Valenchienne, and lost other places, Cromwel sent over 6000 men under the Command of Colonel Iohn Reynolds, the Commissary-General in Ireland,Cromwel as∣sists the French with 6000 having trained and drilled most of them as Recruits to Co∣lonel Berkstead's Regiment of the Tower, and the like service, and then drew them out for this Forrain expedition. They Rendezvouzed at Black-Heath, where Hugh Peters gave them a Sermon for encouragement, and were shipped with a Months pay in hand at Dover, by the care of Major-General Kelsey, and landed at St. Iohns Bay, within seven miles of Bulloyn, whither Reynolds and their Major-General Morgan followed them towards the end of May: they had new Red-coats given them, for the terrible Name thereof. Of all the desperate attempts that ever were made in the World against an Enemy by Sea,Ge. Blake: desperate at∣tempt on the Spaniard. this of Noble Blake's is not inferiour to any. He lying upon the Spanish Coast, had intelligence given him that the West-India-Fleet were arrived at the Canary-Islands, and put into the Bay of Sancta Cruz, on the Island of Teneriff. Upon this the Fleet weighed Anchor on the 13 of April 1657. and by the 20 of the same Month, were fair in the Offing of Sancta Cruz, where they discovered how bravely the Spanish ships (sixteen in number) were barricado'd in this Bay, where they lay in a manner Semi-circular. Neer to the Mouth of this Haven, stands a Castle sufficiently furnished with great Ordnance, which threatned destruction to any that durst enter without its leave into the Harbour: besides this, there stood seven Forts more round about the Bay, with six, four, and three great Guns apiece; and united together by a Line of Communication from one Fort to another, which was manned with Musqueteers. To make all safe, Don Diego Diagues General of the Spanish Fleet was not idle in making Provision for the best defence of his Armado: he caused all the smaller ships to be mored close along the shore, and the six Great Galleons stood farther out at Anchor, with their Broad-sides towards the Sea. It happened at this time, there was a Dutch Merchants ship in the Bay; the Master whereof seeing the English ready to enter, and that a Combat would presently be commenced, it made him fear that among all the Blows that would be given, he could not avoid some knocks; therefore to save himself, he went to Don Diego, and desired his leave to depart the Harbour: For (said he) I am very sure Blake will presently be amongst you. To this, the resolute Don made no other reply, but, Get you gone if you will, and let Blake come if he dares. They that knew Blake's Courage, could not but know it needless to dare him to an Engagement. All things being ordered for fight, a Squadron of ships was drawn out of the whole Fleet to make the first onset; these were Commanded by Captain Stainer in the Speaker-Frigat, who no sooner had re∣ceived Orders, but immediately he flew into the Bay with his Canvas Wings, and by eight in the Morning fell pell-mell upon the Spanish Fleet,Sancta Cruz fight, Apr. 20. without the least regard to the Forts, that spent their shot prodigally upon him. No soo∣ner were these entered into the Bay, but Blake following after, placed certain ships to pour Broad-sides into the Castle and Forts: these played their parts so well, that after some time the Spaniards found their Forts too hot to be held. In the mean time Blake strikes in with Stainer, and bravely fought the Spanish ships, which were not much inferiour in number to the English, but in Men they were far the superiour. Here we see a resolute bravery many times may carry the day, and make number lie by the Lee: this was manifest; for by two of the clock in the afternoon, the English had beaten their Enemies out of their ships. Now Blake seeing an impossibility of carrying them away,The Spanish Fleet fired. he ordered his men to fire their Prizes; which was done so effectually, that all the Spanish Fleet were reduced to Ashes, except two ships that sunk downright, nothing re∣maining of them above water but some part of their Masts. The English having now got a compleat Victory,The English in danger, but de∣livered by a Miracle. were put to another diffi∣culty by the Wind, which blew so strong into the Bay, that many despaired of
getting out again. But Gods Providence was miraculously seen, in causing the Wind upon the sudden to Vere about to the South-West, (a thing not known in many years before) which brought Blake and his Fleet safe to Sea again, notwithstanding the Spaniards from the Castle played their Great Guns perpetually upon them as they passed by. The Wind, as it proved a Friend to bring the English forth, so it continued to carry them back again to their for∣mer station near to Cadiz. This noble Service made Blake as terrible as Drake to the Spaniard; there being less difference betwixt the Fame and report of their Actions and Exploits, than in the sound of their Names; and it was accordingly resented here by all parties. Cromwel (whom it most concerned) sent his Secretary to acquaint the House with the particulars,The Par. ap∣point a Thanks∣giving, and present their General Blake with 500 l. who ordered a Thanksgiving, and 500 l. to buy the General a Jewel, as a testimony of his Countries Gratitude, and the honour they bore him; One hundred pound to the Captain that brought the Tidings, and Thanks to all the Officers and Souldiers: and shortly after the Speaker returning home, (being so bruised and torn in the late Engagement, that she was unfit for further service till repaired) the Captain of her (Richard Stainer) was Knighted, who indeed deserved that Honour from a better Hand; nor did his merit miss of it.Capt. Stainer Knighted. This was atchieved on Munday the 20th of April. The Protector having refused the Title of King, (awaiting a more oppor∣tune time and advantage to reach that top and height of his Ambition which inwardly tormented him) was now by the Parliament to be confirmed in his former Dignity; and a Committee called of the Settlement was ordered to pre∣pare an Explanatory part to the Humble Petition and Advice, in respect of the Protector's Oath, his Councils, the Members of Parliament, the other House, which was to consist of sixty and odd Lords of Cromwel's Election, of which in their place we shall give an account: all which being prepared and finished, the Lord Craven thought it a fit time for him to offer his Case to the Parliament,The Lord Cra∣ven's Case of∣fered to the Parl. but de∣ferred by the Protector. by whom a day was no sooner set for Hearing, and the Protector's Council or∣dered to attend; but he sends a Letter, directed to Our Trusty and Well-belo∣ved Sir Thomas Widdrington, Speaker of the Parliament, to Adjourn: but un∣derstanding the main business of the Assessment was not yet finished, he sent another to forbid his former; but desired them to make it their sole Affair. Whereupon the Lord Craven was referred to the first day of their Access after the Adjournment. Cromwel Signes Acts.When all the Acts were ready for Signing, the Protector came to the Painted-Chamber and sent for the Parliament, where the Speaker tendered him these Acts of State, besides others relating to Trade, &c. 1. An Act for Assess∣ment of 60000 l. a Month, for three Months from March, for the three King∣doms. Another Money-Act for 50000 l. for three years, at 35000 l. for Eng∣land, 6000 l. for Scotland, and 9000 l. for Ireland. An Act for preventing mul∣tiplicity of Buildings in and about the Suburbs of London, and within ten miles thereof: and a whole years Revenue to be paid for every Dwelling or House built upon any new Foundation since 1620. (and this was the reason and soul of that Law.) An Act for punishing such as live at High Rates, and have no visible Estates. And lastly, for the observation of the Lords day. There was a Bill brought in for ascertaining and satisfying the Publick Faith, that these Patriots might seem to intend the ease of the people; but it was but once read and committed, and resumed afterwards to as much purpose very briskly by the Council of this Protector. At the signing of these, Cromwel made this short Speech. His Speech.I perceive, that among these many Acts of Parliament, there hath been a very great care had by the Parliament, to provide for the just and necessary support of the Commonwealth, by these Bills for Levying of Money now brought to me, which I have given my consent unto; and understanding it hath been the practise of those
who have been chief Governours, to acknowledge with thanks to the Commons, their care and regard of the Publick, I do very heartily and thankfully acknowledge their kindeness herein. The principal substance of the Humble Petition, &c. was this. 1. That his Highness under the Title of Lord Protector,The Humble Petition and Advice. would be pleased to ex∣ercise the Office of Chief Magistrate over England, &c. and to Govern according to all things in this Petition and Advice; also, that in his Life-time he would appoint the person that should Succeed in the Government after his Death. 2. That he would call Parliaments, consisting of two Houses, once in three years at farthest. 3. That those persons who are Legally chosen by a Free Election of the people to serve in Parliament, may not be excluded from doing their Duties, but by consent of that House whereof they are Members. 4. In the fourth, was shown the qualifica∣tions of Parliament-Members. 5. In the fifth, the power of the other House. 6. That the Laws and Statutes of the Land be observed and kept, and no Laws al∣tered, Suspended, Abrogated, Repealed, or new Laws made, but by Act of Parlia∣ment. 7. For a constant yearly Revenue, ten hundred thousand pounds to be setled for maintenance of the Navy and Army, and three hundred thousand pounds for sup∣port of the Government, besides other Temporary supplies, as the Commons in Par∣liament shall see the necessities of the Nations to require. 8. That the number of the Protector's Council shall not be above one and twenty; whereof the Quorum to be seven, and not under. 9. The Chief Officers of State, as Chancellors, Keepers of the Great Seal, &c. to be approved of by Parliament. 10. That his Highness would encourage a Godly Ministry in these Nations; and that such as do revile or disturb them in the Worship of God, may be punished according to Law; and where the Laws are defective, new ones to be made in that behalf. 11. That the Protestant Christian Religion, as it is contained in the Old and New Testaments, be asserted and held forth for the publick profession of these Nations, and no other▪ and that a Confession of Faith be agreed upon and recommended to the People of these Nations; and none be permitted by Words or Writings to revile or reproach the said Confession of Faith, &c. Which he having Signed, declared his acceptance in these Words. That he came thither that day,Cromwel's Speech at his acceptance thereof. not as to a Triumph, but with the most serious thoughts that ever he had in all his life, being to undertake one of the greatest Bur∣thens that ever was laid upon the back of any Humane Creature, so that without the support of the Almighty, he must sink under the weight of it, to the damage and prejudice of these Nations. This being so, he must ask help of the Parliament, and of those that fear God, that by their Prayers he might reive assistance from God: For nothing else could enable him to the discharge of so great a Duty and Trust. That seeing this is but an Introduction to the carrying on of the Government of these Nations, and there being many things which cannot be supplied without the assistance of the Parliament, it was his duty to ask their help in them; not that he doubted: for the same Spirit that had led the Parliament to this, would easily suggest the same to them. For his part, nothing would have induced him to take this unsupportable Burthen to Flesh and Blood, but that he had seen in the Parliament a great care in doing those things which might really answer the ends that were engaged for, and make clearly for the Liberty of the Nations, and for the Interest and Preservation of all such as fear God under various Forms. And if these Nations be not thankful to them for their care therein, it will fall as a Sin on their Heads. Yet there are some things wanting that tend to Reformation, to the discountenan∣cing Vice, and encouragement of Vertue; but he spake not this as in the least doubting their progress, but as one that doth heartily desire, to the end God may Crown their
Work, that in their own time, and with what speed they judge fit, these things may be provided for. There remained onely the solemnity of the Inauguration or Investiture; which being agreed upon by the Committee and the Protector, was by the Par∣liament appointed to be performed in Westminster-hall;His Investiture. where at the upper end thereof, there was an ascent raised, where a Chair and Canopy of State was set, and a Table with another Chair for the Speaker, with Seats built Scaffold∣wise for the Parliament on both sides, and places below for the Aldermen of London, and the like: All which being in a readiness, the Protector came out of a Room adjoyning to the Lords House, and in this order proceeded into the Hall. First went his Gentlemen, then a Herald; next the Aldermen, another Herald, the Attorney-General, then the Judges, (of whom Serjeant Hill was one, being made a Baron of the Exchequer Iune 16.) then Norroy, the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury, and the Seal carried by Commissioner Fiennes; then Garter, and after him the Earl of Warwick with the Sword born before the Protector Bare-headed, the Lord Mayor Titchborn carrying the City-Sword (by the special Coaks of the Protector) by his left Hand. Being seated in his Chair, on the left hand thereof stood the said Titchborn and the Dutch Em∣bassador, the French Embassador and the Earl of Warwick on the Right; next behinde him stood his Son Richard, Fleetwood, Claypool, and the Privy Coun∣cil; upon a lower descent stood the Lord Viscount Lisle, Lords Montague and Whitlock, with drawn Swords. The Protector installed, &c.Then the Speaker (Sir Thomas Widdrington) in the Name of the Parlia∣ment, presented to him a Robe of Purple-Velvet, a Bible, a Sword, and a Scep∣ter; (all which were precious Tokens of the Parliaments favour.) At the de∣livery of these things, the Speaker made a short Comment upon them to the Protector, which he divided into four parts, as followeth. The Speaker's Comment on the Ceremonies thereof.1. The Robe of Purple, this is an Emblem of Magistracy and imports Righte∣ousness and Iustice. When you have put on this Vestment, I may say you are a Gown∣man. This Robe is of a mixt colour, to shew the mixture of Iustice and Mercy. Indeed, a Magistrate must have two bands, Plectentem & amplectentem, to che∣rish and to punish. 2. The Bible is a Book that contains the Holy Scriptures, in which you have the happiness to be well vers'd. This Book of Life consists of two Testaments, the Old and New: the first shews Christum Velatum, the second Christum Revela∣tum; Christ Vailed and Revealed: it is a Book of Books, and doth contain both Precepts and Examples for good Government. 3. Here is a Scepter, not unlike a Staff; for you are to be a Staff to the Weak and Poor: it is of antient use in this kinde. It's said in Scripture, that the Scep∣ter shall not depart from Iudah. It was of the like use in other Kingdoms; Ho∣mer the Greek Poet calls Kings and Princes Scepter-bearers. 4. The last thing is a Sword, not a Military but Civil Sword, it is a Sword rather of defence than offence; not to defend your self onely, but your People also. If I might presume to fix a Motto upon this Sword, as the Valiant Lord Talbot had upon his, it should be this, Ego sum Domini Protectoris, ad protegendum popu∣lum meum, I am the Protector, to protect my People. This Speech being ended, the Speaker took the Bible and gave the Protector his Oath: afterwards Mr. Manton made a Prayer, wherein he recommended the Protector, Parliament, Council, the Forces by Land and Sea, Government, and People of the three Nations, to the protection of God. Which being en∣ded, the Heralds by sound of Trumpet Proclaimed his Highness Protector of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto belonging; re∣quiring all persons to yield him due obedience. At the end of all, the Prote∣ctor, with his Train carried up by the Lord Sherard, Warwick's Nephew, and
the Lord Roberts his Eldest son, returned in the same posture, the Earl of War∣wick sitting at one end of the Coach against him; Richard his son and Whit∣lock in one, and Lord Lisle and Montague in the other Boot, with swords drawn, and the Lord Claypool Master of the Horse led the Horse of Honour in rich Caparisons to White-hall. The Members to the Parliament-house, where they Prorogued their sitting to the twentieth of Ianuary. Great Rhodomontadoes of Proclaimings, and little less than Blasphemy in the several Addresses in and from all parts of the three Kingdoms, were the vapouring and ranting conclusions of this story▪ which reduceth to memory another terrible occurrence to the Protector, amidst those ambages and suspence of a Crown, namely a Book published under the Title of Killing no Murther,A Book called Killing no Murther pub∣lished now. by which it was proved, and that most evidently, that it was not onely Lawful but Honourable to slay this Tyrant: It was a very ingenious and Learned Piece, and frighted Oliver exceedingly, who searched for it as Herod did in another case; but it could not be discovered: whoever the Author was, his Book and he deserves everlasting memory. It was also attended like the pre∣ceding part of his Usurpation, with a most terrible blow of Gunpowder,A terrible Blow of Gun∣powder neer Wapping. out of a Mill neer Wapping, which ruined and destroyed several Houses, and killed several persons, and answered with its crack and vicine Eccho the but just-ceased Guns from the Tower of London upon that occasion; or as others said, it was an Introduction or Warning-blow of the intended mischief by the Committee for New Buildings, who now began their work in all earnestness, sitting in Salisbury-Court at Mr. Sadler's the Town-Clerk of Lonn. This was seconded with as remarkable an Earth-quake at Bickly in Cheshire,An Earth∣quake in Che∣shire. on the eighth of Iuly, where some twenty yards of Ground, with three great Oaks and other Trees, fell as with the noise of a Cannon (the same tenour of allu∣ding Fate in its portents against this Governour-General) thirty yards deep in the ground,Several Mur∣thers and other accidents, &c. where nothing but Water could be discovered. Other accidents of Murther and Slaughter there were: one Butler, a Comrade and Companion of one Knight's, Servant to one Worth a Silk-man, then upon his affairs at Bri∣stol, being tempted with the sight of the Money, which lying with this Knight in his Masters absence he had opportunity to observe, cut his Friends Throat after some strugling, and escaped with the Money; but was most providen∣tially discovered. One Parsons Lieutenant-Colonel to Pride, being set upon in the Highway for his Purse, and making resistance, was shot, for all the care of his Comrades the Major-Generals, whose Authority now began to wain. But that which is most remarkable of these occurrences and casualties, was the Execution of Captain Bernard, for Robbing the House of his Colonel Winthrop, Colonel in Harrison's place and Regiment,Bernards that betrayed Col. Andrews Hanged for Robbery. wherein, this Bernard, for betraying his former Colonel the Noble Eusebius Andrews, as before, had a Troop given him by the Long Parliament; so commensurate was the Divine Justice to his sin, punishing his Treachery against the one, by his crime of Burglary against his other Colonel. He made applications to Cromwel, and alledged his past, and proffered great future service for a Reprieve; but even Cromwel himself thought not such a fellow fit to live; besides, he was infamous, and too well known; and he had new ones of greater abilities retained to that purpose, no way in the world suspicable of such practises, namely one Corker a Minister formerly in York-shire, but a violent and Active Royalist in the War, and one that had a hand in that Exploit of killing of Rainsborough; and a Knight for∣merly Governour of Newark, far more eminent in the Royal service; of which presently. The Forrain adjunct transactions, were first the Danish War with the Swede, then engaged in a far distant War with the almost-subdued Pole. The reason of this suddain Rupture, was the like Invasion made by the Swede some thirteen years before, and wresting by his Arms some Provinces from that Kingdom, of which now this occasion offered them the recovery; however it answered not its promising beginnings.
The Duke of York, who Commanded a part of the Spanish Army, was mar∣ching to joyn with other Forces to the Relief of Montmedy-Castle in Lorrain, besieged by the French Marshal de Ferte. While the English Forces joyned with four Regiments of Horse; were advancing from Vervins, part of them, to the number of 300, quartered in a Castle something distant from the Body, the Duke with a Brigade attaqued, and thereupon they presently yielded and, took up Arms with him: notwithstanding this inauspicious entrance, they marched and joyned with Turenne, then at the siege of St. Venant,St. Venant taken by the United Forces. where Colonel Mor∣gan in an attempt made by his men, (who seeing some of their fellows in dan∣ger, bravely forsook their Trenches) took a Hal-Moon, and lodged themselves under the Counterscarp, (the custom of taking Towns there being by slower progressions) which mainly conduced to the speedy surrender of that place. Colonel Morgan received a Wound in his Arm at this siege. From thence the United Forces marched towards Dunkirk, having gained and secured the Passes upon the Colne, that they might march either to Gravelin or Dunkirk; but the latter being aimed at, they took up their first quarters at Bourbrock, designing upon Mardike-Fort: some of the English quartered at Watton, where there is a Colledge of English Jesuits, and where there was between them a reciprocation of civil usage. Mr. Talon Was dispatcht by Turenne for more supplies, and Colonel Reynolds followed him to London, and in the mean while, about the middle of September, the Armies sat down before Mardike, and put themselves between it and Dunkirk, General Montague riding before the Splinter with a Fleet of War: it w not long before a continual Battery had made the Besieged quit the Wood Fort; which so incommodated them, being seized by the Enemy, that they were forced to yield to Mercy, Sept. 23.Mardike ta∣ken Sep. 23. and put into English hands. Turenne not allowing bet∣ter, because they had refused his first offers: the Fort was immediately put in∣to the possession of the English, a party of French being added to them, under Colonel Morgan; and the rest of the Army (it being thought unadviseable to attempt a Siege against Dunkirk, the Winter growing so hard upon them) returned to Bourbrock where the English took up their Winter-quarters to be neer Mardike, and the French at Ardres. Afterwards it was resolved that two Regiments, to wit, Colonel Reynold's and Alsop's, should march into French quarters, and relieve (and be relieved) every two Months their fellows here∣abouts; to the strengthning of which place, and while the Fortifications were finished, Marshal Turenne staid some time with his Army. The taking of Mardike was very grievous to the Dunkirkers and Spanish∣side, and therefore it was resolved by Don Iohn to hazard a Scalado and Assault by night: The illustrious Duke of York and the Marquess of Caracene ordered and were present in the business; and the King our Soveraign, and the Duke of Gloucester, had conveyed themselves to Dunkirk, to see the management of this attempt. On the 22 of October at night, some 4000 English, Scotch and Irish,Mardike Stor∣med by night, Octo. 22. and some Spaniards, about ten a clock at night began the Storm with Hand-Granadoes, and all sorts of Assaulting Engines, and were got into the Trenches, and mounted their Scaling-ladders; but the English within being in a readiness, and Reynolds, Morgan, and Lillingstone, being at that same time there, the Assailants were with great slaughter repelled and beaten down; the Great Guns from the English Fleet (riding at the Splinter) firing their Broad∣sides, being directed by four great Links (set up in the Corners of the Fort) how to miss it: nevertheless, about four a clock the Duke commanded the Assault to be renewed again; which was done with greater fury, but to as little advantage; which event with the approaching day-light caused a retreat, the Dead being most of them carried off in Waggons. There were some hundreds guessed to be slain, but the number is uncertain. This was a rude accost and greeting of Country-men, which used to be the most obliging in Forrain Countries; but Rebellion is a Witch (as they are compared with a pejoration of the former in Scripture) that had transformed the Military part of the Nation. Often have we fought on both sides, but were
never opposed in any Battle one against another, much less to fight an home∣bred quarrel of our own in Out-landish ground. The Noble Duke therefore thinking the Hearts of the Leaders of this Garrison, if they had any true Eng∣lish Worth or Honour suitable to their Commands, might be touched with the unnaturalness of the Fact, and a sense of their Allegiance, and respect to their Rightful Soveraign, and himself the next Prince of the Blood, (against whom they indirectly and collaterally militated) as being now out of the Reach, Influence, and Awe of the Usurper, sought therefore by fair means to win this Party, which would highly and sufficiently conduce to his Majesties Service, to their obedience. In order to this, by the means of a Scotch Knight (whose Name slips our present use) well acquainted with Colonel Reynolds, he was prevailed upon to give the Duke a meeting in the mid-way betwixt Dunkirk and Mar∣dike, which are distant about two miles, with a party of Horse on either side. Reynolds at the approach of the Duke did the reverence which was redevable to his Highness, and shewed himself in all respects as became him towards such an Illustrious Personage, and with the same handsome demeanour departed to the Fort. What conference they had was never perfectly related, for it was private; but the very news of the meeting in that amicable respectful man∣ner, being conveyed with speed to Cromwel, caused in him such jealousies and distrusts, that inflamed with anger at this his great Confident and Favourite, he presently dispatcht away a Messenger to Command him for London; which he, and Colonel White, with one Mr. Devaux the Secretary to Reynolds, readily obeying, and taking the first ship was ready, and that would venture to go off; (which was a Dutch Pink of 10 Guns, in a stormy night the 12 of December, a Frigat offering to wait on him next Morning) he was cast away the same night on the back of the Goodwyn-sands,Col. Reynolds, &c. cast away on the Good∣wyn-sands. his Chest, Sword and Belt being found thereabouts, and thereby saved the ungrateful excuse of his duty, and pre∣vented the prejudiced revenge of his Master Oliver. Morgan Commanded in his place till the arrival of Marshal D' Aumont, (who brought with him Monsieur Mancini the Cardinal's Nephew, desirous out of curiosity to see this vicissitudinary Fortress) who had the supreme Command, but devolved the exercise and trust thereof to the same hand as before. Here Marshal D' Au∣mont was furnished with some ships of ours for a designe upon Ostend, which he had thought he had surely purchased: but of this hereafter. As to other Forrain News, there was great discourse about the right to the Vi∣cariat or Vicarship of the Empire, which now happened by the Death of the Emperour Ferdinand the 4 of Austria, his Son the King of the Romans being dead some while before. It did indisputably belong to the Prince Elector Pa∣latine; but upon the quarrel for the Crown of Bohemia, he was proscribed and degraded, and the Duke of Bavaria (a descendant of the younger House) did now assert and maintain that right, as lately confirmed on him by the Empe∣rour against the Palatine; and so it remained sub judice. The Protector (the War growing hot betwixt the two Northern Kings, the Dane having attaqued Bremerwarden, a very strong place, and soon after Mastered it) dispatcht away two Envoys Extraordinary,Sir Philip Medows the Protector's En∣voy to Den∣mark, Colonel Jephson to Sweden. viz. Sir Philip Me∣dows Knighted by himself (afterwards by that King with the Order of the Elephant) to the King of Denmark, and since by our Soveraign; being the same Gentleman that was employed before to the King of Portugal: and Co∣lonel Iephson to the King of Sweden, then journeying Post out of Poland to encounter this new Enemy. They were both well received, the first at Copen∣hagen, the other (by the way of Lubeck) at Wismar, whither the Swede was arrived: to whom, during this offered Mediation betwixt both, Cromwel sent supplies of 2000 Men and Arms from London, Yarmouth, and Hull, in several ships; so radicated was his Hate against the most offenceless and distant Allies and Relations of the Crown, as the Dane was; which he took all occasions, how villanous and base soever, to render of feared and damnifying consequence, and dangerous prejudices to all the neighbouring States and Princes. A Decla∣ration
of another Massacre of the Protestants in Poland, upon the return of that King into those hinder parts of the Kingdom which had submitted to the Swede, and were now by him deserted; but the designe of the other of Pied∣mont was yet recent and rank, and so it took not. Cromwel Swears his Privy Council. The Earl of Mulgrave made on, Rich. Cromwel a∣nother Lord of the Council, and Chancellor of Oxford.At home, Cromwel was now Swearing his Privy-Council over, according to one of the Articles of the Humble Petition and Advice, and the Earl of Mul∣grave was made one of them; and because the Parliament had declared the next succession into his Dignity should be at the appointment of himself by Act or publick Declaration, he thought it time to produce his Son Richard, and to train him in the Government. He was therefore made another Lord of the Council, and the Chancellorship of Oxford (which the Protector had resigned) was bestowed on him, and a solemn Instalment of him by Dr. Owen the Vice-Chancellor was acted with all the Formalities at White-hall. The course of his life before this calling to the State, spent it self in the pleasures and divertise∣ments of the Country, where he appeared in a medium of privacy and great∣ness, tempering one another to the estimate of a civil and noble disposition, manifested in several kindnesses obtained at his Fathers hands for the Loyal Gen∣try, to whose Converse and Familiarity he was out of policy addressed, to the captating their good will and favour, towards the easier ascent to his designed Soveraignty. Cromwel's other Son Henry was also in Progress in Ireland, shewing himself to the Army and People these,Cromwel's advancement of his Sons. upon the same account, that Kingdom being allotted to him for his Inheritance, to hold it or this in Fee. Fleetwood was intended for Scotland in the same capacity and Command, but Hic labor hoc opus, General Monke was not easily removed thence; fair means were not effectual nor practicable as things stood, and a Rupture or Revolt of that Kingdom was not to be ventured on by any open force or declared War against him. His third Daughter Mary was likewise promoted to an honoura∣ble Match, being Married to the Lord-Viscount Faulconbridge on the 18 of No∣vember,His Daughter Mary Marri∣ed to the Lord Faulcon∣bridge. with a great do of State at Hampton-Court, (the recess and delight of the Usurper, whither he went and came always in an hurry and post; nor did he dare to be further off from the City of London.) This Title was con∣ferred on the Family of Bellasis by the King in the War,His Daughter Francis Mar∣ried to the E. of Warwick's Grand-son and was taken for valid upon this Wedding. His youngest Daughter Francis was soon after Married to Mr. Rich the Earl of Warwick's Grand-son. A new Charter, constituting a new East-India-Company, (which Trade had lain in Common for some years) now passed the Seal,A new East-India-Compa∣ny constituted. Mr. Downing Cromwel's Envoy into Holland. Cromwel being one of them, and putting in a Stock: which turned to the account of his Majesty (as of due) some time afterwards. Mr. Downing was sent his Envoy into Holland. One Colonel Saxby taken at Gravesend on shipboard, (of Syndercombe's Counsel) being a Leveller, died (as was supposed of Poyson) in the Tower of London; which rendered Syndercombe's end more plainly suspected. The solemniza∣tions of Christ∣mass forbidden, &c.The Festival of Christmass, which had been abrogated by several Lawless Or∣dinances, and endeavoured to be suppressed, revived its head, and began to recover its pristine veneration. This greatly offended the Usurper, who per∣ceived that notwithstanding all his Edicts and Interminations against the Church and her Protestant-Professors,Dr. Gunning's Congregation seized and Plundered. the true Religion prevailed against him, and with that infallibly the Kings Interest would joyntly rise, the thought of which was most grievous, and not endurable. Notice being given him now of a private Assembly solemnizing the mercy and memory of that day, at Dr. Gunning's at Exeter-house in the Strand; he sent a Band of Red-coats to seize them, who over-and-above Plundered and Stript many of them, and carried some away Prisoners to answer this contempt against his Injunction. And so without any Blood (which was taken for a wonder) in this inter∣val, we are arrived to the return of the Parliament after the expiration of the Adjournment, when according to the 4th Article of the Petition and Advice, which provided for the freedom of Parliaments, and another for Another House, as 'twas called (Cromwel giving it that Nick-name or Mid-word, as bordering
upon an Upper-House of Parliament, and of the same new coyning as Prote∣ctorship, which entrencht upon the Soveraignty: ut Canis, sit Catuli.) They met together in two Houses, that of the Commons to their full number of Ele∣ctions, that of the What do ye call um's in the House of Lords, in and accor∣ding to the usual customs of the Peers. These conscious of their own worth∣lessness, and their inconsistency with the English honour, like the basest of Up∣starts, bewrayed their meanness by all manner of abject compliance,The Other House as in∣structed fawn upon the lower▪ and faw∣ning upon the Commons their half-Parent, who being rightly constituted, dis∣owned the spurious Brat, as a by-blow of the former Convention; and with such scorn and derision did they receive the notice of their meeting there, be∣sides the neglect of it, as if they had been the most ridiculous fellows in the World, a may-game, spleen-moving spectacle; with What did they there? who sent for them? what was their business? like intruding Fidlers to serious Company. Notwithstanding, these Imps of the Usurpers Prerogative, as instructed, persisted in their Courtships and Blandiments of the Commons as aforesaid. (It should have been mentioned, that Oliver in his Speech to them did highly magnifie the Settlement, as beyond all expectation that ever such brave things would have been done for England, and hinted much of the establishment of Religion, (the Neck whereof was just then broken, as we may say) and that if they persevered in that hopeful beginning, the Generations to come should call them Blessed.) That posterity may be fully informed of the Institution, Number, and Names of the aforesaid fellows of the other House, in brief take this account. The Parliament left the choice of them to Cromwel by the Humble Petition, and he graced with this Dignity most of his superiour Officers, some Grandee-Com∣nonwealths-men, some Presbyterians, some of the Nobility, as the Earl of Manchester, Lord Wharton, Lord Mulgrave, all of his Privy-Council and Re∣lations, and one or two private Gentlemen, of which Mr. Hambden was one: The Nobility prudentially forbore sitting with that riff-raff, the Presbyterians with much scruple, but Sir Arthur Haslerig utterly abominated it, and kept his station with the Commons, as so contra-distinguished. The whole number named was 62, of which some ten were the worst of Mechanicks, such as Pride, Hewson, Kelsey, Cooper, Goffe, Berry, &c. whom we refer to the ensuing Catalogue, to which the Names of the Judges and Serjeants are added. The Members of the other House, alias House of Lords. Lord Richard Cromwel.The Names of Cromwel's Other Houses. Lord Henry Cromwel Deputy of Ireland. Nath. Fiennes Commis. of the Great Seal. Iohn Lisle. Commis. of the Great Seal. Hen. Lawrence, President of the Council. Charles Fleetwood Lieut. Gen. of the Army. Robert Earl of Warwick. Edmund Earl of Mulgrave. Edward Earl of Manchester. Will. Ld. Viscount Say and Seal. Philip Lord Viscount Lisle. Charles Lord Viscount Howard. Philip Lord Wharton. Thomas Lord Faulconbridge. George Lord Evers. Iohn Cleypole, Esq. Iohn Desbrow, Generals at Sea. Edw. Montague. Generals at Sea. Bulst. Whitlock▪ Commis. of the Treasury. Wil. Sydenham. Commis. of the Treasury. Sir Charles Wolsley. Sir Gilbert Pickering. Walter Strickland, Esq. Philip Skippon, Esq. Francis Rous, Esq. Iohn Iones, Esq. Sir William Strickland. Iohn Fiennes, Esq. Sir Francis Russel. Sir Thomas Honywood. Sir Arthur Haslerig. Sir Iohn Hobart. Sir Richard Onslow. Sir Gilbert Gerrard. Sir William Roberts.
Glyn, Chief Justices of both Benches. Oli. St. Iohn. Chief Justices of both Benches. William Pierrepoint, Esq. Iohn Crew, Esq. Alexander Popham, Esq. Philip Iones, Esq. Sir Christopher Pack. Sir Robert Titchborn. Edward Whaley▪ Commis. Gen. Sir Iohn Berkstead, Lieutenant of the Tower. Sir Thomas Pride. Sir George Fleetwood. Sir Iohn Huson. Richard Ingoldsby, Esq. Iames Berry, Esq. William Goff, Esq. Thomas Cooper, Esq. George Monke, Gen. in Scotland. David Earl of Cassils. Sir William Lockhart. Archibald Iohnson of Ware∣ston. William Steel Chancellor of Ire∣land. Roger Lord Broghil. Sir Matthew Thomlinson. William Lenthal, Master of the Rolls. Richard Hampden, Esq. Commissioners of the Great Seal, and their Officers. Nathaniel Fiennes. Iohn Lisle. William Lenthal, Master of the Rolls. Officers Attending. Henry Middleton, Serjeant at Arms. Mr. Brown. Mr. Dove. Judges of both Benches. The Names of the Iudges of both Benches,Iohn Glyn, Lord Chief-Justice. Pet. Warburton, Justices of the Upper-Bench. Rich. Nudigate. Justices of the Upper-Bench. Oliver St. Iohn, L. Chief-Justice▪ Edward Atkins, Justices of the Com. Bench. Matthew Hale, Justices of the Com. Bench. Hugh Windham, Justices of the Com. Bench. with the Ba∣rons of the Ex∣chequer,His Barons of the Exchequer. Robert Nicholas, Iohn Parker, and Roger Hill. Serjeant at Law, Erasmus Earl. Atturney-General, Edmund Prideaux. Sollicitor, William Ellis. Serjeants at Law called by Him to the Bar. and Serjeants at Law.Richard Pepys, 25 Jan. 1653. Thomas Fletcher, 25 Jan. 1653. Matthew Hale, 25 Jan. 1653. William Steel, 9 Febr. 1653. Iohn Maynard, 9 Febr. 1653. Rich. Nudigate, 9 Febr. 1653. Tho. Twisden, 9 Febr. 1653. Hugh Windham, 9 Febr. 1653. Vnton Crook, 21 June 1654. Iohn Parker, 21 June 1654. Roger Hill, 28 June 1655. William Shepard, 25 Oct. 1656. Iohn Fountain, 27 Nov. 1656. Evan Sithe. But to proceed: after Cromwel had made that fair Speech, Fiennes the Lord-Commissioner of the Seal resumed (by his order) the discourse, which was to beg more Money: for Cromwel's Heart could not stoop to such Humble O∣ratory; declaring, That the Money granted (though thought sufficient) fell much beneath the expence and necessity of the State, especially that Tax of the new
Buildings failed altogether of what was expected and intended by it; and so recom∣mended the whole affair to their consideration. Being sate in the Houses (as aforesaid) the other House sent to the Commons (by two of their number) a Message for a day of Humiliation,A Humiliation day appointed but were returned with this Answer, The House would consider of it; and then they fell upon a Vote for two Months time to exhibite any Petitions against undue Elections, and assented to a Humilia∣tion, which was kept within the Walls of both Houses, by Dr. Reynolds, and Mr. Caryl, Mr. Calamy, and Mr. Griffith, half Presbyterian, half Independent, as was the temper and constitution of this Assembly. This past, they fell a questioning the Frame of the Government, which their fellow-Members had erected during their Seclusion; which yet notwith∣standing was carried but by two Voices in the Affirmative: and in a resolution of unravelling it all again they proceeded very fiercely; which being told at White-hall, allarmed on the other ear with danger from abroad, and that the designe had already footing in some of the adjacent Counties; Cromwel dallied not with this two-handed necessity, but to rid himself of the nearest first, ac∣companied with his Guards, he by Water came to the other House, and sent for the tother; and having ranted away a quarter of an hour out of the old Bias, (for now he plainly perceived the old stales would not serve, and that his Life and Greatness lay at the same stake;) to break them up, he broke forth into very rash and cholerick Language, to which, as a pertinent resolution, co∣rollay and period, he added an adjuration to the stain of his larved san∣ctity, in these or such Words,The Parliament dissolved. — By the Living God I must and do dissolve you. As to the Royal Enterprize, it was begun ever since the Investiture of Oliver, who suspecting such practises, had with Money debauch'd the Fidelity o Sir Richard Willis, and one Corker a Parson as aforesaid, that now professed Physick, and made always one at any Match or Horse-race whatsoever; and being a noted Royalist, scrued himself into all Royalists Company and Discourse. The Treachery of these men was employed, and now manifested in this affair, and thereby Cromwel was certified, that the Marquess of Ormond personally labour∣ed in t Intrigue, and for that purpose was arrived in England, to lead the Forces of the Loyal Combination, which were instantly to be seconded with an Army out of Flanders:Cavalier-Plot discovered, and Marq. of Or∣mond hardly escapes. Just therefore as the designe was ripe, he emitted out a Proclamation of twenty miles, and seized divers eminent Royalists, and among them Sir Richard Wills; and Feak the frantick roarer of Sermons was sent to bear them company, but soon after (when this danger from the Kings party was more compert) released. The Marquess of Ormond latitating some∣where in Sussex, very difficultly, by the assistance of one Mr. Graves a Gentle∣man of that County, got away in a small Boat, and escaped seizure; so neer was he set, and the designe so particularly discovered. While those were the private close Intrigues at White-hall, more publique ones were agitating in the Army, in the three Kingdoms; from every Regiment whereof Addresses were signed and sent to the Protector, wherein they glanced upon the late Parliament, and offered themselves, and more than they were worth, to the defence of his Highness's Person and Government, against the Common and Secret Enemy: the like came from Mardike; (who joyned with some French, had made an excursion towards Graveling, and surprized and taken two out-Forts, and so returned:) the same Complement came also from the County-Troops, and their Officers, who attended the Sheriffs, and succeeded in the room of the Major-Generals, (now (for their Exorbitances and dangerous power even to their Author, and because the work for which they were called was over) laid aside) in place of Liveries, to lessen (as was pre∣tended) the charge of that place; but in truth the Protector knowing he could not be served aithfully by the Gentry,Sheriffs dis∣charged of ex∣pence at As∣sizes. would name such, no matter whom, as he could confide in; and the expence of retinue and treating the Judges being taken off, a Yeoman or Tradesman of the well-affected might serve turn, and
make profit of his place, as in all other Offices of the Commonwealth; and in this very prick for the year coming of 58, Cromwel observed the Rule he had given, which was in its place omitted. The Victorious Blake returning into England from the Coast of Spain, ha∣ving awed all the Ports and Harbours thereof, fell sick by the way of a Disease his Seafaring had brought upon him,Blake dies re∣turning home. the Scurvy and Dropsie, and died just as the Fleet was entring into Plymouth-Sound, where he passionately enquired for the Land.His Character. A man of eminent Fortitude, both active and passive. A master of as many Successes and Atchievements, as any person except Cromwel, being never Worsted but once in his whole Warfare, and that was in the Downs by Van Trump, and had merited exceedingly of his Country, had he been as tender of its Home-bred as Forrain Honour, of which he was jealously observant, it serving for his argument to keep the Fleet free from any Divisions of Factions upon the news of the several changes in England. He was buried with a hand∣some Funeral, just in the same manner as General Dean was from Greenwich; but especial notice was taken of Colonel Lambert's (then in disgrace) atten∣dance on his Horse, between whom there was it seems a more intimate corre∣spondence. He was Interred in Hen. 7th's Chappel, as other of the Grandees that died in the Usurpation usually were, without any other Monument than that of his Indelible Renown for pure Valour. Anno Dom. 1658. NOw did the Usurper feel the Thornes of his unjust Acquists in the restless Fears and Disquiets, which measured every moment of his time, his sleeps being disturbed with the apprehensions of those dangers the day presented unto him in the approaches of any strange Face, whose motion he would most fixed∣ly attend. Above all, he very carefully observed such whose mind or aspect were featured with any chearful and debonair Lineaments; for such he boded were they that would dispatch him: to that purpose he always went secretly Armed,Cromwel's Fears and per∣plexed condi∣tion. both offensive and defensive, and never stirred without a great Guard. In his usual Journey between White-hall and Hampton-Court, by several Roads, he drove full-speed in the Summer-time, making such a dust with his Life-guard, part before, and part behinde, at a convenient distance, for fear of choaking him with it, that one could hardly see for a quarter of an hour together, and al∣ways came in some private way or other: he likewise never Lodged above twice or thrice in a Room, to which there was no passage but by twenty several Locks. Sometimes he would pretend to be merry, and invite persons of whom he had some suspition to his Cups, and then drill out of their opened Hearts such se∣crets as he fisht for. He had freaks also to divert the vexations of his misgi∣ving thoughts, calling in by the beat of Drum his Foot-guards, like a Ken∣nel of Hounds to snatch away the scraps and reliques of his Table. He saw every mans hand was against him, and that he ran daily into farther perplexi∣ties, out of which it was impossible to extricate, or secure himself therein, without running into further danger, so that he began to alter much in the tenour of his former converse, and to run and transform into the manners of the ancient Tyrants, thinking to please and mitigate his own Tortures with the suf∣ferings of others. Royalists or∣dered to depart from London.Thus began the year with a Proclamation of the old relish, for Royalists to depart London twenty miles, &c. and instantly Colonel Russel, Sir William Compton, Sir William Clayton, and other old Prison-guests of that party were Committed to the Tower; but many of those against whom the information from the two aforesaid intelligencers was given, were Gentlemen and Citizens
not in any service or designe before;A Plot disco∣vered, and the persons engaged in it secured. whether out of some reluctancy of con∣science they would not ruine their old Comrades, or for fear of discovering of his Spies, of which he should have perpetual need, Cromwel thought not fit to engage and set them upon such face to face, they being not otherwise to be de∣coy'd. These fresh-men were some of them Citizens of London; as Mr. Manly a Merchant, Mr. Carent, Mr. Iackson, and Mr. Sumner: the other principals, &c. were Mr. Mordant the Earl of Peterburgh's Brother, and Dr. Iohn Hewet Preacher then at St. Gregories by Pauls; Mr. (after Sir Thomas) Woodcock, Mr. Maunsel, both engaged in the Kings escape and shipping out of Sussex from Worcester; Mr. Mallory, Mr. Stapely, Mr. Hartgil Baron, and others: most of these were taken and kept close Prisoners, till such time as some were wrought upon to witness against their fellows, and then set at liberty. The Designe was laid in Kent, Essex, Surry, and Sussex; the King being ready to have passed over,The King in readiness with Forces under General Mar∣sin. (as before) with an Army under the Conduct of the Count of Marsin, the Prince of Conde's General, newly honoured with the Order of the Garter: but this Treachery frustrated the Designe. Which being so well known to Cromwel, and that other places, as Portsmouth, Hull, and such Maritime Fortresses were treated for and reckoned into the bar∣gain; he set afoot the like practises by his own Emissaries and Trepans, viz. upon Sir Henry Slingsby a Prisoner off and on ever since Worcester-fight in Hull, some of the Officers whereof insinuating into his acquaintance, and casting out some disgustful words against the Protector, and mixing some overtures of their good will to the King; withal intimating that if he could procure a Commission from his Majesty for them,Sir Henry Slingsby de∣coyed. the Town was at his service. The old Loyal Gentleman gladly embracing a proffer of such concernment, made use of an old Commission he had by him; which being the length of their Line, these Officers hooked him, and sent him up to the same Condemnation a Prisoner in the Tower. The Names of these Officers were Major Waterhouse, Captain Overton, and one Lieutenant Thompson. The chief Actors being thus secured, Cromwel, to Collogue with the City, sent for the Mayor and Aldermen, and communicated to them the Plot, naming several persons and particulars, many of which he accommodated to the dan∣ger of the City, and dressed them for their horrour and resentment, telling them that the danger was not over, though so happily foreseen; taking hereby the advantage of having a new Militia chosen of the most desperate Phanaticks, and his party in London, &c. A general Train was soon after made in Finsbu∣ry-fields, and Addresses by the Officers, testifying their resolutions to adhere to the Protector, delivered in very express and humouring Language. When he had thus raised the expectation of the story, (though the chief in the business understanding they were detected, and many of their associates in Prison, had defisted from any further Attempt) on the 16 of May he doubled his Guards,The City A∣larm'd with a pretended Plot, May 16. and sent an Alarm to the City, that that night the Royalists had appointed for their rising and firing the Town; and forthwith marched several Forces of Horse and Foot into the Liberties; the Drums of the Trained-bands likewise beat, and all the 6 Regiments appeared presently, and kept Guard that night, being employed for the most part in seizing some of those Citizens afore-mentioned, with divers others, as Mr. Southcot, Mr. Hern, and some young men and Ap∣prentices whom his Drags had Trepan'd. These made work for a High Court of Iustice, now founded and erected upon a Law of the late Parliament, the Act for security of his Highness's person; who restrained the power thereby given with this clause, that they should Try none but such as should be named to them by him or his Council; for it might be by the same Sophistry as the Par∣liament fought against the King for the preservation of his Person, they might try the Usurper for the security of his Highness. Such a strange Judicature was this High Court of Iustice, that they that advised, framed, and established it, could not tell how to binde or tye up the Mastiff from tearing his Masters Throat: — Nec Lex est Iustior ulla, Quam necis artifices arte perire sua. — Certain∣ly
haunted the minde of this Tormenter; most of the Lords of the other House were Commissioners herein, the Earl of Salisbury being named among them. A High Court of Iustice. The Tryal of Sir Henry Slingsby, and Dr. John Hewit.Before these, Sir Henry Slingsby and Dr. Hewet were first brought, and Sir Henry charged that he and one Gardiner (never heard of, but such another as Iohn Doe) did Traiterously Conspire against the Life and Dignity, &c. and the said Trepans brought as Evidence to prove it. He defended himself by alle∣gation that that which was said by him was but in jest and discourse, and that the Action was altogether impossible, he being but a single person. Dr. Hewit would not acknowledge the Court, but pleaded several Cases against it, and was taken or surprized for a Mute. Had he pleaded, it is thought he might have escaped; for Mallory (the main Witness against him) was fled for the present.Mr. John Mordant try∣ed and acquit∣ted. Next, Mr. Iohn Mordant was set to the Bar, who argued his Case so warily and pliantly, after a Demurrer to the Court, taking Notes of the Witnesses Evidence, that he alone of the three was quitted but by one Voice; Colonel Pride (his undoubted Fate, troubled with the Stone, and being long at Urine) withdrawing himself on that occasion, while in the mean time the Court by one suffrage agreed upon his acquittal; so that he may well be said Evasisse Calculis, it being the custom of the Court to give Sentence by plurality of Voices. Mr. Mallory being retaken, together with Sir Humphry Bennet and Mr. Woodcock, were charged next with the said Designes. Mallory pleaded Guilty, and was respited and saved. Sir Humphry Bennet's Cause was not then de∣termined. Mr. Woodcock so handsomely and bravely defended himself, that they could not fasten the Charge. In the mean while, on the 8 of Iune, Sir Henry Slingsbury and Dr. Hewit were beheaded on Tower-hill;Sir Henry Slingsby and Dr. Hewit Be∣headed on Tower-hill, June 8. Sir Henry suffer∣ing very readily and with submission; the Doctor most devoutly and coura∣geously, with prayers for the King. The Tyrant not satisfied with this, brought in more, viz. Mr. Carent, (in whose Ware-house Arms were found) and Iohn Summers, Edward Stacy, Iohn Bettely, Edward Ashton, Oliver Allen, and Fryar to the same Bar, where they were all but Mr. Carent Condemned, who escaped by the noble refusal of one Mr. Pits of the same party (whose Examination they relyed upon) to give Evidence against his Friends, and chose rather to suffer Imprisonment, and a Fine of 500 l. to be laid on him, than to be branded with the note of Treachery, how fairly soever to be excused. Three of the other,Ashton Bet∣tely and Sta∣cy hanged, &c. viz. Ashton (as before, and at the time of his seizure, a Prisoner to Newgate) and Iohn Bettely, were Executed at Tower-street and Cheap-side by Hanging and Quartering, both protesting their Innocency: Bettely after he had hung almost a quarter of an hour, pulled off his Cap with his Hands. Stacy two days after was Hanged against the Exchange in Cornhil. None of them but were worthy of far better ends; which made the Tyrant most Execrably Odious. Earl of War∣wick dieth.The old Earl of Warwick (presently after the Espousals of his Grand-son young Mr. Rich, with Frances the youngest Daughter of the Protector) died April 18. to whom, his late honorary services, and dishonourable Relations to this Protector, were none of the least unhappinesses. At the end of May the Lord Faulconbridge the other son (for Fleetwood nor Claypole had either Man∣ners or Worth to be employed in the Complement) was sent away with a great Train to Salute and Gratulate the French King, now at Calis, upon the opening of the Campania, and was received very splendidly, in the mean while that his Uncle Sir Henry Slingsby was adjudged to Death: and though he re∣turned on the fifth of Iune, three days before Execution, and did what he could to save him; yet all proved in vain: for since Mr. Mordant and Mr. Woodcock had escaped, there was no room for his life. Soon after, Monsieur Mancini, Ma∣zarine's Nephew, and the Duke of Crequi, came hither with the return of the Complement, and were entertained highly at Brook-house and at Hampton-court, with Feasting and Hunting, and presently returned; and that I may have done with this wretched Family of Cromwel,The Lady Clay∣pole dieth. the Lady Claypole died at Hampton-court
August 6, of a disease in her Inwards; and being taken Frantick with the stop∣ping of her Terms, raved much against the bloody cruelties of her Father, and about the death of Dr. Hewit, for whom (to give her her due) 'tis said she interceded. She was brought by Water to the Painted-chamber, and in State buried in Hen. 7th's Chappel; her Aunt Wilkins being Mourner, &c. The Earl of Mulgrave died coming up to London,Earl of Mul∣grave dieth. A great hale at Greenwich. August 21. and though misplaced, I must remember the great Whale 60 foot long, that  up as far as Greenwich, Iune the 2, to the wonder of all people, and the dangeous pastime and sport of such, who hunted him with Guns and other Weapons; thousands of people went down to see it upon the Sand.Sir Tho: Wid∣drington made Lord Chief-Ba∣ron. Sir Thomas Widdrington was made Lord Chief-Baron, and the High Court of Iustice Adjourned till Novem∣ber. And so we pass to the Flandrian-Coast, to take an entire view of the joynt Forces and actions in those parts against the Spaniard and our Soveraign, then concerned in that War. A formidable Sige was framed before Dunkirk,Dunkirk Be∣sieged by Eng∣lish and French Forces. by the joynt Forces of Eng∣lish and French, wch hotly Alarm'd the Spaniards in all their quarters: here∣upon Don Iohn of Austria takes these two things into serious consideration: first, the Importance of the place; or its Situation, it was a Key to Flanders, a Frontier to France, (next after Graveling) and a certain supply of Moneys, by continual Booties brought in thither by his Men of War. On the other side, should he lse Dunkirk, the English (in whose possession it would be put) had a Door opened, and fit opportunity to bid fair for all Flanders: Here might an Army be landed from England, and from hence incursions made into the heart of the Country. In the mean time, the Spanish Ports, Newport and Ostend, could expect no less than to be perpetually infested by Men of War; which would utterly spoil their Trade,Don John of Austria de∣signes to relieve Dunkirk. and ruine the Inhabitants. These and such∣like considerations, mounted Don Iohn upon fixt resolutions to undertake the Relief of Dunkirk, though it were to the hazard of his whole Army. In the mean while, the Confederate Forces Beleaguering this strong place, did in a small time (working like Moles) run their Trenches to the Spanish Counterscarp; and still encroaching upon the Wall, they promised fair to a speedy accomplishment of their Designe. These things were well known to the Spanish Army, who now saw the Relief of Dunkirk would admit of no delay; for were it not speedily accomplished, the Town of necessity must lie prostrate to the Enemies mercy. The better to effect which therefore, Don Iohn the Spanish General, having drained his Garrisons to fill up his Army, suddenly advanced with 15000 men to the relief of his distressed Friends; these by a swift march through Fuernes, quickly seated themselves upon some sandy Hills, within an English mile and a half of Turenne the French General's Camp. The report of the Enemies neer advance, made both the French and English Officers consult upon the best course that could be taken to repel the Force that now sate upon their Skirts, and endeavoured to frustrate their labours in the present Siege, if no worse success. Time for consultation being short, (for it was on the over-night) they agreed unamimously to give the Spaniards the next morning a warm Breakfast. All this night the Officers of both Nations were very busie to provide for the ensuing action; the Army being found suffi∣cient to fight a Field-battle, and at the same time to keep the Besieged from ranging abroad. For this service most of the English were drawn from their Entrenchment; and being joyned to the French Horse, they marched against the Enemy. In the morning (both Armies being come near together) it was perceived, the Spaniards posture was rather Defensive than Offensive; but the English Commanders knowing it was no time to dally, and being desirous withal to shew the Discipline of their own Country, (which is to make seeing and fighting all one) did presently mount the Sand-hills, with a Forlorn of 300 Musqueriers,Dunkirk Bat∣tle. Commanded by Captain Devaux; after these followed the newly-made General Lockhart's Regiment, and others successively. The Spa∣niards
perceiving that the resolution of these men was furiously to fall on at But-end, as highly resolved to keep them off at the Arms-end, by pouring down perpetually Volleys of Great and Small shot. General Lockhart (newly preferred to that Command, and Embassador ne∣vertheless to the French King) seeing the French unwilling to enter, now the English had opened the gap; and on the other side, seeing the gallantry of his own Regiment, who although they could no longer gain ground, yet still kept their station, notwithstanding they were exposed to the Enemies Assaults; caused a considerable Brigade of fresh men to reinforce those that had first born the brunt of the Battle. This Reserve (through General Lockhart's care) coming in time to the relief of their tired fellows, made no long delay, but fell into the Spanish Foot with the But-ends of their Musquets, who not being able to withstand their courage,The Spanish Army routed. left the Field, and fled towards Fuernes. The French Horse seeing the good success of the English Foot, did likewise make a Charge upon the Spa∣nish Cavalry, who being disheartned with the routing of their Infantry, thought it their safest course to run after them. But the French shewed excellent va∣lour in Pursuit: for the day being won, none durst stand in their way; the poor Spaniards were sadly handled by them, and hew'd down on all sides; and be∣ing extreamly scattered in their flight, both the English and French were put to the trouble of gleaning for Prisoners; the custody and benefit of whom re∣dounded only to the French, the English being meerly Auxiliary in this Field, and were to be recompenced by the Siege of Dunkirk, whither in Triumph they returned, and possessed themselves of their former Posts. The Duke of York's Con∣duct and Va∣lour in this ser∣vice.This Fight was managed chiefly on the Spanish side, by the noble Duke of York, (accompanied with his Brother the Duke of Gloucester) the Military Renown of whose actions very early raised it self in the French service, (as be∣fore) and was brighter far, and more eminent in the glories of this day, which suffering an envious Eclipse, drew greater admiration upon him: he did not only maintain the Fight till the irresistible daring gallantry of the Honour∣seeking Red-coats made the Spaniard abandon his Punctilio's, and mend his re∣treating pace, but sustained the impression upon the flight, and at least saved the day. Colonel Blague, who Commanded the Kings Regiment there of Foot, did very nobly likewise. Of that side were slain 1000 and odd, and 1500 taken Prisoners, with all the Artillery, Bag and Baggage, besides 800 Officers, (upon which account the French refused Ransome or Exchange, because Don Iohn should be straightned for Commanders to his new Levies.) Of the slain were the Counts of Motene and Mille, the Sieurs of Coligni and Boteville. On the French side were slain, the Marquess of Biragne Captain of the Cardinal's Guard, the Sieur Berbezet Lieutenant-Colonel to Turenne, with some Captains; the Marquess of Castelnau was mortally wounded through the Body, of which he died during the siege of Graveling (which was next besieged by the French alone under Le Ferte, where the Marquess of Vxelles, the Counts of Varennes and Moret were killed by one shot) the Marshals Staff of France being given him for a Cordial upon his Death-bed. On the English side were slain Lieutenant-Colonel Fenwick in ascending the Hill, who died of his Wounds; and one Co∣lonel Drummond a Scotch Voluntier: Capt. Iones, who Commanded the Horse in Hispaniola, did venturously and gallantly here; but was taken Prisoner, and recovered again, and Knighted after by Cromwel. Some 200 Red-coats were slain in the Battle: after which, the resolute Governour of Dunkirk the Mar∣quess De Lede (in a Salley he made) was shot with a Bullet by the English;The Governour Marquess De Lede killed. which Fate he owed more to his Honour than his Reason. He being dead, a cold damp seized upon the Dunkirkers,Th Dunkirkers treat, June 22. who seeing what pro∣digous Balls of fire were flung out of the English Morter-pieces into the Town, were sorely terrified thereby; and so much the more, in regard of their not being accustomed to such Engines, his Holiness the Pope having prohibited the use of Granadoes amongst his Catholicks, to prevent burning of Churches. Considering therefore that the longer they stood out, the harder would be their
Terms; and seeing all hope of Relief by Land was lost, the Sea secured against them, and daily discouragements arising every way; therefore, to prevent fur∣ther inconveniences, the Spaniards offered Capitulation; which being easily granted,And urrender∣ed upo Arti∣cles. it was agreed that the Town should be surrendered upon these fol∣lowing Articles. 1. That the Town should be yielded up with all the great Guns, their stores of Victuals, Magazine of Arms and Ammunition, without any Imbezlement. 2. The Officers and Souldiers to march out with Drums beating, Colours flying, two pieces of Ordnance, and their Baggage. 3. That they should have the liberty to march with a Convoy to conduct them to St. Omers. 4. The Inhabitants to re∣main indemnified in their persons, and to enjoy their former Customes and Priviled∣ges for two years, and not to be molested touching the Exercise of their Re∣ligion. These Articles being ratified by the King of France, this strong Town of Dunkirk was delivered up into the hands of the English,The English pos∣sess Dunkirk. by the King of France and Cardinal in person, upon Tuesday Iune the 25, 1658. The Spaniards at the same time quitting it. Here marched out 1000 Horse and Foot, and 700 more (that had been Wounded in the Siege) followed after, as their strength gave them leave. The English having possession of the Town, found in it 140 Guns, all Brass except eight, with Ammunition and Provision sufficient to maintain it for a great while longer than it was kept. Dunkirk thus possess'd by the English, the Inhabitants were sworn to Fealty and Allegiance to the Protector, and a Regiment of Foot, and  Troop of Horse were commodated to the French under Marshal Turenne, yet keeping the Field, while La Ferte carried on the Siege at Graveling, and the Cardinal at Dunkirk diverted himself with the delightful Wonder the Naseby, as he at his treatment on board the same by General Montague expressed himself. The Fortune of this Usurper, by its constancy and confluence of success in so many desperate hazards and adventures, in which his ambition had enga∣ged him, made the Nation give him over for impatible, and as one exempted from those Conditions to which other Mortals were obliged, and with a setled Terrour to expect the Extremity of all mischief, and that it would come at last to that Calamity and Tragical Slavery, of delivering our Children and Po∣sierity Tributaries and Vassals to the Lust and Dominion of his new-found Fa∣mily. Nothing was more certainly concluded on, than this, that before we should arrive at our Liberty, and our Fundamental Rights and Laws, we were to pass through another Red-sea, and its like coloured Element of Fire. Such his untractable obstinacy and fixed resolution of uncontroulable Empire or vast Ruine, that Nero's Jambick would better and more amply have fitted Oliver. . Blend Fire and Earth together when I die. Nor had ever any that confidence in any presages or Fortuning-accidents, as to suppose them of any manner of concernment or portent to him? no, though the loud voice of Heaven had Proclaimed it in a most mighty and ter∣rible Wind: for as to that of the Whale, and the approaches of Death to him, in his Family by the decease of Mrs. Claypole; it was thought a foolish curiosity and a wresting of Providence, (so much his Friend and familiar Favourite) to apply their Prognosticks to his departure; and I may safely say, that had it been Treason to Imagine the Death of this Protector, very few but his Doctors would have been guilty of it; and one reason was, the verdure of his Lawrel and yet-flourishing Triumphs, whose blooming Glories computed him very young and vigorous, (for Fortune is seldom seen a friend to Old Age) which his
trim and dress did help to personate. In short, his own Domesticks and those best acquainted with him, nay even himself, were presumptuously confirmed a∣gainst any thoughts of his death, in the very desperation of his life, as will presently appear. For it pleased Heaven, that had given us so many bitter Cups to drink, now to throw away the dregs of them in the Carcass of this Usurper, and empty this Vessel of his Wrath, which was as the 7th Vial, justly taking the forfeiture of all his Trophies and Victories, by his surrender on the appointed signal day of the 3d of September,Cromwel dies Sep. 3. that he might not die in debt to the exhausted credit of Prodigal Success. And who knows but he might decease on that his Ru∣brick day, which he annually celebrated with a Thanksgiving, to give the Na∣tion a most just and solemn cause of gratitude? not to be so uncharitable as to say, that he descended with the train and tincture of that days slaughter, as the further commaculation of his unrepented Parricide. He was taken sick at Hampton-court, having not been well in Minde some∣time before (troubled with the last frantick words of his beloved Daughter Claypole, who threatned Judgement like another mad Cassandra, and with the insinuations and encroachments of the Republicans party into the Army; nor were some of his Relations taint-free of those principles, but were winding towards them.) The Disease was a bastard Tertian, which appeared not at first of any danger; but after a weeks time it began to shew very desperate Symptoms; wherefore he was removed to White-hall, where his Chaplains, and others of that pious Family, kept private meetings and Fastings for his recove∣ry; of which they were so vainly confident (as before) that they obtruded their unseasonable thanks to God for the certainty of it, and with the same unseasonable flattery and pickthank with the Protector, deluded him into the like perswasion, so that he told his Physicians, He should not die this bout; but the Fits proving worse and worse,Cromwel senseless before his death. and causing him to talk Idlery, and to aint often, they in Council concluded, he could scarce survive another Paroxysm: at which the Privy-Council being astonish'd, they immediately repaired to him about his fetling a Successor, whom by the Petition he was to declare in his Life-time; but he was then scarce himself; which they perceiving, interroga∣ted him, if he appointed not his Son Richard? whereunto he answered in the Affirmative. It was thought that he had designed Fleetwood in his ultimate thoughts; but the distraction of the choice betwixt his Son and Son-in-law, had made him leave it undetermined: (a private Will relating to his Family he made at his first sickning at Hampton-court.) Continuing in this condition, he died on Friday the 3d of September, at three of the clock in the afternoon, though divers rumours were spread, that he was carried away in the Tempest the day before. His Body being opened and Embalmed, his Milt was found full of Corruption and Filth; which was so strong and stinking, that after the Corps were Embalmed and filled with Aromatick Odours, and wrapt in Cere∣cloath six double, in an inner-sheet of Lead, and a strong Wooden-coffin; yet the Filth broke through them all, and raised such a noysome stink, that they were forced to bury him out of hand: but his Name and Memory stinks worse. His Character.As to his Character, little can be added more, than what hath been said in the progress of this Chronicle: This various shifting Polititian, best shewing himself in his Contaction, nearness and present relation to the several Changes, and diversities of Affairs, Counsels, and Governments he passed; as the Cha∣melion appears in that colour that is next to it, and cannot otherwise be described. He was alter Ego, or with the Comedian, he might have given this devise, Ego∣met ipse non sum Ego; and certainly the first of his designes were Enthusiasted, and he acted beyond himself, as prevailing in many things beyond the power of Reason or Strength, and indeed all imagination; such was the subversion of the Government, a thing not to be thought possible to be projected by one of such (every way) Insufficiencies. He was as feat a Priest as a Prince,
yet acted them both very well, according to the humour of the times, which are the Standard of Government. Sometimes Alloy is as current as pure Metal; and he could never have Princed it, but through the distempers and misrules that raigned before him; and his Preaching was none of the unserviceablest Fun∣ctions to the preceding Anarchy and his own Usurpation: which made him ne∣ver quit it to the last. The Turkish Emperours have always a Trade; and Oliver's was this Knack, with which he was so much in love, that when in the Humble Petition there was inserted an Article against publick Preachers being Members of Parliament, he excepted against it disertly and expresly, Because he (he said) was one, and divers Officers of the Army, by whom much good had been done, and those things brought about; and therefore desired they would explain the said Article. But I am engaged far beyond my bounds. — He was, in sum, fit to have made a Prince of Tartars, or some other Cannibal Barbarous and Perfidious people; or had he been a Hun or a Vandal, we should have read him big and Famous in History. His Court-friends did so far extol him, that after his Death Sterry, one of his Sycophant Chaplains, was heard to preach, That he was certain, that that blessed Person (meaning Cromwel) was now sit∣ting at the Right Hand of God making Intercession, &c. which was more than any meer Humane Glory could reach unto: and his Funerals were set out to such a pomp and ostentation, to vouch that value which by such people was set upon him. Here should have been inserted the Honour he arrogated to himself by be∣stowing of Dignities: but there being but one Viscount seigned by him, and he the right Noble now Earl of Carlisle, and some Baronets and Knights that are weary of their Titles; I will not further weary the Reader. RICHARD'S SHORT Usurpation. THE Protectorian Government, like a Hybrida or Mungrii-Monster begot of two different Species, the Army the Sire, and the Commonwealth the Dam, could not be imagined in Reason propagable; however Fortune, that sports her self in strange productions, prevailed against the course of Nature in her Political principles, for this one Experiment or Curi∣osity, meerly to demonstrate the power of her proud and most scornful inconstancy. This miserable Person (as far as she could make him such) Richard the Son and Successor of Oliver, being meerly set up as the But and Object of all her disgraceful and contemptuous injuries, with which she Implacably exercised the deposed Estate of this Impotent Usur∣per. The Vulture died, and out of his Ashes rose a Titmouse, who with the Frog in the Fable, being swollen up with the flatteries and fond advice of his Coun∣sellors,Richard's Ad∣vi and Co∣sellors. durst vie his greatness with the Regal right, till the tumid Bubble burst and vanish'd into nothing. His great encouragers to his assuming the Title,
were Fleetwood himself, Desborough his Uncle, Sydenham the two Iones's, and Thurloe, who with other of the Council, (some of whom from this time pro∣vidd themselves of a surer interest in the Crown) upon notice of the death of his Father, immediately in a body attended him in his Lodgings, and decla∣red to him his Fathers appointment of him for his Successor; which they did most obediently acknowledge to him, as their Rightful and most Indubitable Prince and Governour; and the next morning, being Saturday, Proclaimed him in great State, (the said Lords, and most of the Superior Army-Officers attending the solemnity) at the usual places in London; the tenour of which was,Richard Pro∣claimed, That whereas it had pleased God by his providence to take away the most Se∣rene and most Illustrious Oliver Lord-Protector, who according to the Petition and Advice, in his life-time had declared the most Noble and Illustrious, his Son the Lord Richard Cromwel to be his Successor: the Council, the Lord Mayor, the Of∣ficers of the Army therefore do heartily and unanimously acknowledge the said Lord Richard as rightful rotector and Chief Magistrate, and do require all persons to yield obedience; beseeching God, by whom Princes Raign, to bless him with long life, and the Nations under him with peace and happiness. This being over, the Mayor ad Aldermen of the City of London, according to Order from the Council, that Saturday in the afternoon came down to White-hall, and Condoled and Congratulated Richard at once; and in their sight Fiennes the Lord-Commissioner gave him his Oath, Sworn. which was sufficient inau∣guration to the Protectorate, according to the said Humble Petition; and Mr. Manton the peculiar Chaplain to this Dignity, as Prelate of the Protectorship, said Prayers, and Blessed him, his Council, Armies, and People: and so the Scene ended. Notice was also given by Sir Oliver Fleming to all Forrain Ministers and Em∣bassadors of the Decease of the Father, and the setting up of the Son; who all came and Condoled, and then Congratulated him in very ample manner, especially the French; though the Cardinal then at Paris, immediately upon the news that Cromwel was Dead,French Cardi∣nal oys the Queen-Mother with Crom∣wel's death. hastened to our Queen Mother, and congratula∣ted her in a incerer and more effectual manner, telling her, that the grand Ene∣m of her and her Family was no removed, and that most certainly and in∣fallibly the Restauration of the King our Soveraign was at hand; as indeed it was concluded, and I will add, resolved on here by all his Friends, and some of his former Enemies: and from this very time the ground-work of his Restau∣ration was most artfully layed. But these Aiery Complements were nothing comparable to the Domestick Addresses which flw flocks from all parts of the three Nations of White-hall, to salute and  his assumption to the Soveraignty: he was celebra∣ted there for the excellence of his Wisdom and nobleness of Minde; even in some, for the lovely composition of his Body, as if he had been another Titus, Deliciae Gentis & Dominii Britannici. Nay some drops of this Court Holy-water stilled upon his Wife, his Father-in-law and Relations: his dead Father was stiled and compared to Moses,Addresses to Richard full of Blasphemous expressions of Oliver. to Zerubbabel, to Ioshua, to Gideon, to Elijah, to the Chariots and Horsmen of Israel, to David, to Solomon, to Hezekiah, to Constantine, to all that was either good or great in Holy or Humane writ; and in most, their parallels were nearer to Blasphemy than any of his qualities: he was lamented as the Father of his Country, (but 'twas in that sence no doubt in which he was caressed by that Book of Killing no Murther; for as long as he lived the people should never enjoy their inheritance:) the restorer of plea∣sant Paths to dwell in; of whom we were not worthy, and what not? every one striving to exceed the other in this monstrous and most absurd vanity; of which the Independent Churches were also most foully guilty, their Addresses being drawn by their Metropolitans, Goodwyn and Nye. These were ordered here first, and Instructions sent down where any of the Council had interest, to get the ablest Pens they could to indite and discant upon this solemn occasion. But the Army for powerful words and number outdid all the other; not a
sneaking Garrison but hired a Scribe to write their minde to their young Ma∣ster Richard. These Flies tainted the contented and private minde of the unhappy man, who having Maried one Major's Daughter of Southampton, with whom he had a very competent Fortune, aimed at no great things, till the Grandeurs done to him had insinuated Pride, and that inveagled his judgement to a persistency upon the ticklish point of the Supreme Power. He was learned and instructed now to keep State; and for the Government, his Council would take care: from whom, in his name, came first out a Proclamation, continuing all Officers and Justices of the Peace in the life of his dear Father, of most renowned and blessed Me∣mory, as the stile run; whose Funerals were under consultation, to be made and solemnized sutable to the Glory and greatness in which he had left this his Suc∣cessor. No less therefore than 60 thousand pounds was alloted to defray the ex∣pence thereof;60000 l. allot∣ted for the Ex∣pence. more by one half than was ever used to any King or Queen of England: Some said it was advised by none of his Friends, the designe being thereby to bring him into debt, and so ruine him, which in effect it did, and those that trusted him with Blacks and other Funeral-Accommodation; espe∣cially one Walton a Draper, who in his failure spoiled several Clothiers, whose Goods he had upon his Credit, notwithstanding that Colonel (after Lord) Pride was lately become his Father-in-law, and he himself moreover of Kin to the Protector. The Funeral (because of the great concourse it drew of spe∣ctators) is here fully described, it being one of the chiefest remarques of this short-lived Government, whose Exequies soon after followed. The Corps (presently after his expiration) being buried by reason of the stench thereof,Cromwel's Funeral. a Coffin was on the 26 of September, about ten at night, private∣ly removed from White-hall in a Mourning-herse, attended by his Domestick Servants, to Somerset-house, where it remained in private for some days, till all things were in readiness for publick view; which being accomplished, his Effigies was with great state and magnificence exposed openly, multitudes daily flocking to see the sight, which appeared in this order. The first Room where the Spectators entered, was wholly hung with Black; at the upper-end whereof, was placed a Cloth and Chair of State. In the like manner was the second and third, all having Scutcheons very thick upon the Walls, and Guards of Partizans placed in each Room for people to pass through. The fourth Room was compleatly hung with Black-velvet, the Cieling being of the same; here lay the Effigies, with a large Canopy of Black-Velvet Frin∣ged, which hung over it. The Waxen-Picture lying upon its Back, was Ap∣parrell'd in a rich Suit of Velvet, robed in a little Robe of Purple-Velvet, laced with a rich Gold-lace, Furr'd with Ermins: upon the Kirtle was a large Robe of Purple-Velvet, laced and furr'd as the former, with rich Strings and Tassels of Gold. The Kirtle was girt with a rich embroidered Belt, wherein was a Sword bravely guilt and hatched with Gold, which hung by the side of this Fine thing. In the Right hand was a Scepter, in the Left a Globe: upon his Head was placed a Purple-Velvet-Cap furr'd with Ermins sutable to the Robes. Behinde the Head was placed a rich Chair of Tissued Gold, whereon was placed an Imperial Crown, which lay high, that the people might behold it. The Bed of State whereon he lay, was covered with a large Pall of Black-Vel∣vet, under which was a Holland-sheet born up by six Stools covered with Cloath of Gold. About the Bed was placed a compleat suit of Arms, and at the Feet of the Effigies stood his Crest. This Bed had fix'd about it an ascent of two steps; a little from thence stood eight silver Candlesticks about five foot high, with white Wax-tapers standing in them, of three foot long. All these things were environed with Rails and Ballasters four-square, covered with Velvet; at each corner whereof there was erected an upright Pillar, which bore on their tops Lions and Dragons, who held in their Paws Streamers Crowned. On both sides of the Bed were set up in Sockets four great Standards of the
Protector's Arms, with Banners and Banrols in War, painted upon Taffaty. About the Bed stood men in Mourning bare-headed; and without the Rails, others to receive people in, and turn them out again. When this Show had been seen for many weeks together, the Scene was then altered; the Effigies being removed into another Room, it was there set up, standing upon an Ascent under a Cloath of State, being vested as it was before, lying; onely now his Purple-Velvet was changed for a Crown. In the same manner (as formerly) were men waiting upon him bare-headed. In this manner he continued until the 23 of November, which day was appointed to carry him with all solemnity to Westminster-abbey. This great Funeral was performed with very great Majesty, in this manner following. All things being in readiness, the Waxen Picture of the Prote∣ctor (with a Crown on his Head, a Sword by his Side, a Globe and Scepter in his Hands) was taken down from his standing, and laid in an open Chariot, covered all over with Black-Velvet, adorned with Plumes and Scutcheons, and drawn by six horses in Black-Velvet. The Streets from Somerset-house to Westminster-abbey, were guarded by Souldiers in new Red▪coats and Black-but∣tons, with their Ensignes wrapt in Cypres; which made a lane to keep off Spe∣ctators from crowding the Actors. The Procession. In the first place went a Marshal attended by his Deputy, and 13 more on Horse-back to clear the way; after him followed the Poor of Westminster by two and two in Mourning Gowns and Hoods; next to them, the Servants of those persons of Quality that attended the Funeral. These were followed by the Protector's late Domestick Servants, and his Barge-men and Water-men. Then came the Servants of the Lord-Mayor and Sheriffs of London. Follow∣ing them, were Gentlemen Attendants on Forrain Embassadors and publick Ministers. After marched the poor Knights of Windsor in Gowns and Hoods: then the Clerks, Secretaries, and Officers of the Army, Admiralty, Treasury, Navy, and Exchequer: Next, the Commissioners of the Excise, of the Army, and Committee of the Navy. Then the Commissioners for approbation of Preachers: behinde these followed all the Officers, Messengers, and Clerks be∣longing to the Privy-Council, and both Houses of Parliament. Next in or∣der followed his Physitians, the head-Officers of the Army, the Officers and Al∣dermen of London. The Masters of Chancery, and his Highness's Council at Law. The Judges of Admiralty, Judges of both Benches, and Lord Mayor of London. The persons Allied in Blood to the Protector, and the Members of the other House. The publick Ministers of Forrain Princes. The Holland-Embassador alone, having his Train held up by four Gentlemen. Then the Portugal Embassador, and the French Embassador, in the like manner. The Commissioners of the Great Seal. The Commissioners of the Treasury. The Mem∣bers of his Privy-Council. All the Grandees in close Mourning, (but it was once advised otherways, for fear of a surprize in the Streets) the rest but in ordinary. The whole Assembly passing along in divisions, were distinguished by Drums, Trumpets, Banners, and Horses, whereof there were eleven in all, four being covered with Black-Cloath, and seven in Velvet. These passing in fine order, at length came the Chariot with the Effigies, on each side of which were six Banner-Rolls, (twelve in all) born by several persons; and likewise several pieces of the Protector's Arms carried by eight Officers of the Army, attended by the Heralds. Next went Garter principal King of Arms, attended by a Gentleman on each hand bare-headed. Next came the chief Mourner. And to conclude all, came the Horse of Honour, in very rich Trappings embroidered on Crimson-Velvet, and adorned with White, Red, and Yellow plumes of Fea∣thers, being led by the Master of the Horse. The Rear of this brave Show was brought up by the Protector's Guard of Halberdiers, the Warders of the Tower, and a Troop of Horse.
The Effigies in this manner being brought to the West-gate of the Abbey-Church of Westminster, it was taken from the Chariot by ten Gentlemen, who carried it to the East-end of the Church, and there placed the Picture in a most magnificent Structure, built in the same form as one before had been (on the like occasion) for King Iames, but much more stately. There had been a Convention or Synod of the Independent Ministers resol∣ved upon,Independent Sy∣nod at the Sa∣voy. and called by Oliver in his Life-time, to make out a Declaration and Confession of their Faith, and to make a kinde of Canon or System of their Tenets and Doctrine; he of all Religions most favouring this: for by their means he began and carried on his Designes. (Sometimes he would offer to make an Agreement and reconcile and unite the Presbyters and them; but when any such thing came in agitation, he would be sure to divide them further than ever.) This Synod or Assembly met now at the Savoy, and Prince Richard had the honour to have his Reign ennobled with a discovery of what Indepen∣dency was, and its consistency, which the World never heard of before, nor was it the wiser or better satisfied now it was fully informed. There was a∣nother as notable a passage, and as memorable: Richard still followed his old Game of Hawking;Richard out∣runs his guards, and endanger∣ed at hawking. and being one day with his Horse-guard engaged in a flight, the eagerness of the sport carried him out of their sight; and his Horse Floun∣dring or Leaping short, threw him into a Ditch, where by the help of a Coun∣try-man he was taken out and preserved: he had carried himself very quietly thitherto to all about him; this disaster and accident made him angry, and to charge them roughly with this neglect, telling them, he expected more service and respect, and would have it from them. He began also to be weary of his Old Cavalier-Friends, and to require their absence from his Court, where now the Army beginning to swerve from their loving Addresses, the Republicans and Lambert secretly tampering with them, and undermining their Fidelity and Zeal to Oliver's house, (as it was timely enough discovered) a resolution was taken to call a Parliament to meet the 27 of Ianuary next,Richard's Parliament meet, Jan. 27. and (by pre∣tence of restoring the people to their antient way of Elections, but really) that the Court might command the more Votes, the Burroughs had Writs also set to them, and the Elections were all made in the ancient way; onely thirty Members were called by Writs from Scotland, and as many from Ireland, according to the late Combination of the three Nations into one Common∣wealth. This new kinde of Parliament being met at the time and place appointed, (having heard a Sermon of course at Westminster Abbey, the young Protector also in State coming to the other House, and making a Speech, which was secon∣ded by Fiennes, who began with a gross ridiculous flattery (though designed) What can a man say after the King? a quotation borrowed from the Proverbs) God had so well ordered the Elections, notwithstanding the practices of men, that their English spirit quickly appeared both against Impositions from Court and Army. And though their Counsels were at first interrupted with an Act of Recognition of the Protector, prepared and brought in by the Court, which took up the first fortnight of their time upon the very point of Recognition; yet they were at length extricated from that difficulty by the Expedient of an honest Gentleman, in passing these Votes on Munday the 14 of February 1658. without any division or Negative. Resolved, That it be part of this Bill to Recognize and declare his Highness Richard Lord Protector, and Chief Magistrate of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging. And 2. That before this Bill be committed, the House do declare such additional clauses to be part of this Bill, as may bound the power of the Chief Magistrate, and fully secure the Rights and Priviledges of Parliament, and the Liberties and Rights of the people: And that neither this, nor any other previous Vote that is or shall be passed in order to this Bill, shall be of force, or binding to the people, until the whole Bill passed.
Their next work was to appoint a Committee for inspection into the Ac∣counts and Revenue of the Commonwealth, which had been lamentably squan∣dered and wasted ever since 1648. and twelve Members versed in matters of account, whereof Mr. Scowen was in the Chair, were selected for this work, and fully impowered for the work they had in hand, in order to the retren∣ching and lessening the charge of the Commonwealth. On Saturday the 19 of February, they proceeded in the Act of Recognition, and resolved, That it shall be part of this Bill to declare the Parliament to consist of two Houses. An Expedient in Recognizing Richard,And had afterwards several days debate by order, concerning the bounding of the Chief Magistrate's power, and the Bounds and powers of another House, in relation to the former Votes; but could come to no resolution thereupon; the Court-party stickling hard for the Powers given them by the Petition and Advice, and the honest Patriots of the House (whose weighty Reasons then convinced the Commonwealth-party to go along with them) denying it to be a Law, being obtained by force and Exclusion of above a hundred Members in the year 1656. by which force also the Purse was taken from the Commons, by setling a Revenue of 1300000 l. a year, in perpetuity of the Command of the Single person; and the ruling Members of the other House being most of them Officers of the Army and Courtiers; which being allowed for Law, the people would have been absolute Slaves to their power, the Purse being stolen from the Commons as aforesaid. Whilest the Temper of the House was thus tried, and they appeared suffici∣ently to be English men, divers of the Members of Scotland and Ireland joy∣ning with them in the same resolutions. By the joynt advice of the Court and Army-party, the question of Transacting with the persons sitting in the O∣ther House, as an House of Parliament, was set before them, upon pretended grounds of Law and Necessity, and by Arguments of Force and Interposition from the Army, and of impossibility to proceed in any thing without the said Other House. This attempt was as stoutly opposed for fourteen days by the moderate honest Patriots of the House, as the former; the undoubted right of the antient Peers asserted, and all the said grounds and Arguments confuted, except that of Force; which was not to take place with any thing like a Free-Parliament of English-men. But in the close of the fourteen days debate, wherein much of the Honesty, Ingenuity, and Courage of the English Nation did appear, (seeing all Affairs at a stand till something were resolved in this point) they came in a very full House to this well-qualified Resolution: and the other House not Ex∣cluding the an∣cient Peers.Resolved, That this House will transact with the persons now sitting in the Other House, as an House of Parliament, during this present Parliament: And that it is not hereby intended to Exclude such Peers as have been faithful to the Parliament from their priviledge of being duly summoned to be Members of that House. The House of Commons (between the Protector, the Other House, and the General Council of Officers now summoned to meet at Wallingford-house) may well be conceived at this time to have had a Wolf by the Ears, and (ha∣ving shewed themselves English-men and not Slaves) had reason to entertain wary Counsels, having some of their own Members undermining them with∣out doors; and foreseeing a Dissolution, though not knowing whether they should die a Violent or Natural death, or have a mixt kinde of Disease, as it fell out afterwards. And therefore they resolved not to own them in the Other House as Lords, but called them, The persons now sitting in the Other House of Parliament; neither would they treat and confer with them in the usual way, as with the House of Peers, and therefore found out the new word of Trans∣acting; and not intending to have to do with them, but for a tryal, they limi∣ted the time to be during this present Parliament, which they foresaw would not be long: and to Muzzle the new inconsiderable Upstarts sufficiently, (if they should take too much upon them) they asserted the priviledge of the
ancient Peers as a good reserve, if the Parliament should by the Protector and Army be suffered upon second thoughts to sit longer than was first intended. And resolved also, That they would receive no Message from those persons sitting in the Other House, but by some of their own number. The House of Commons by this time had also by a Saving Vote concerning the Fleet, asserted their interess in the Militia; and had under consideration an Act for taking away all Laws, Statutes, and Ordinances concerning the Excise and new Impost, and concerning Customes, Tunnage and Poundage, after three years. And had vindicated the peoples Liberties, by setting Major-General Overton and Mr. Portman, and divers others (illegally committed by the late Protector) at Liberty without paying Fees, and declaring their Imprisonment and Detention illegal and unjust; and had their Lord-Jaylor Berkstead, and o∣thers at their Bar under question for the same (who was also Arrested upon the Exchange in London,The notable pro∣ceedings of the Parliament. at the Suit of the said Overton, for false Imprisonment.) And had also a high resentment of the illegal sending Free-born English-men against their wills to the Barbadoes, and other Forrain Plantations, and to the Isles of Guernsey and Iersey, out of the reach of the Writ of Habeas Corpus; and had appointed a strict Bill to be prepared for remedy thereof. And had Examined and discovered many other Grievances brought upon the people by the Officers and Farmers of the Excise, and others; and by Major-Generals, amongst which Butler was for his insolent actings and high affronts to the Law and Courts of Justice, put out of the Commission of the Peace, and a Committee appointed to draw up an Impeachment against him. The Committee also for Inspection (be∣fore-mentioned) had brought in and reported to the House the state of the publick Accounts, and of the Martial and Civil Lists in the three Nations, by which it did appear, That the yearly Incomes of England, Scotland, and Ireland, came to Eighteen hundred sixty eight thousand seven hundred and seventeen pounds:The Revenue and charges of the Kingdom. And the yearly Expences to Two Millions two hundred and one thousand five hundred and forty pounds: So that Three hundred thirty two thousand eight hun∣dred twenty three pounds of Debt incurred yearly by the ill management of double the Revenue that ever King of England enjoyed. And to maintain the unjust Conquest of Scotland, cost us yearly One hundred sixty three thousand six hundred and nineteen pounds more than the Revenue it yielded. Many other particulars were under their consideration, as to the Religion and Civil Rights of the people, too long now to be mentioned: but in short, to give them their due, they did some good whilest they sate, both to the pub∣lick and particulars, and intended much more; and did no hurt, gave no Offices nor Gratuities to themselves out of the publick Treasure, nor granted any mo∣ney from the people; which is more than can be said of any Parliament in our memory. Proceeding thus successfully and hopefully to the general satisfaction of the people in the three Nations who chose them, the Protector and chief Officers of the Army, who were jealous of one another before▪ and Competitors for Govern∣ment, grew now jealous of the House of Commons also, who being the Repre∣sentatives of the people, were become also their Minions and Favourites. It was therefore now thought seasonable to contend among themselves for the power,The Army and Protector jar. before the people should recover it from them both. In order to which, the General Council of Officers kept their constant Meetings at Wallingford-house, and the Protector with his party countermined them at White-hall. but we must interrupt the thred of this story, to itromit the year 1659. which began with the Voyage into the Sound.
Anno Dom. 1659. THe former respects and mutual designes betwixt the King of Sweden and Cromwel, which had been promoted so far as to a Treaty concerning pla∣ces of caution for our Engagement and Expence in the Danish War, (Elsenore-Castle newly taken by the Swede, Gottenburgh in his own Province being de∣manded, and Gluckstad and another place offered in lieu thereof) though without any conclusion by the Death of Cromwel, obliged his son Richard and the Coun∣cil, upon the request of the Swede, to send a Fleet into the Baltick-sea; and in the mean time Sea-Officers and Seamen were taken into his Service (who set to Sea in December before, but by stormy and cold weather were forced back again, divers of them by the hardship of the Voyage dying at their return) under the Command of Sir George Ayscue, who was upon his arrival to be Commissioned High-Admiral of Sweden, to mate the Dutch, who then openly sided with the Dane, and had a Fleet of War ranging thereabouts. The Par∣liament likewise, to secure the Commerce and Trade of those parts, conde∣scended to the Expedition, with the Conditions and Limitations aforesaid. At the end of March General Montague was Commissioned by Richard, with a Fleet of 40 sail of the best ships, and manned accordingly; who in ten days time from Yarmouth arrived at the Scaw,G. Monta∣gue with a Fleet to the Sound, Mar. 30. and so to Elsenore, where the King of Sweden was, before the Dutch Vice-Admiral de Ruyter, who was coming with another Fleet out of Holland to re-inforce his Admiral Opdam, then at Copen∣hagen. The General here met with Instructions from his Majesty, to whose Cause he had upon the disposition of affairs betwixt the Army and Protector devoted himself; and instead of aiding the Swede, stood more than neutral up∣on the Danes side, having received the like civilities from that King, to the murmur of the Swedes; and several intercourses of intelligence ad friendship, and other intrigues betwixt the Dutch Admiral and himself frequently passed. But to return to the Parliament. Now the Game began; out came a Remonstrance from the Army to Richard, setting forth in what danger the Good Old Cause was, (by which term it was cognized ever after:The Armies Remonstrance to Richard.) That the asserters of it were every where Vilified, the great Patriots and Patrons of it (the Judges of the King) put into Printed Lists, and marked for destruction, with the ruine of all the Godly and the Cause together: the Army was purposely kept from Pay that they might Mutiny▪ and therefore desired be would signifie as much to the Parliament, for some speedy redress. And in the mean while, the Souldiers that kept Guard made bold with his Victuals, and would stop it from his Table. This Remonstrance was Lambert's and the Republi∣cans project, who never left haunting of Fleetwood's house upon pious and Re∣ligious pretences, soothing him with the complements of his Gifts and Graces, and what happiness it were for the Nation if the Government were laid upon his Shoulders, as no doubt (they urged) it was intended by his Father-in-law. In the heat of this business died Mr. Chaloner Che, on the 15 of April, their Speaker; a man fit in every respect for the Chair, and of a judgement and resolution as cross to the sway of the Times, which he was designed in this place to oppose.The Speaker Mr. Chaloner Chute dieth. In pursuance of this Remonstrance, Alderman Titchborne, being set at work by the same hands that moulded Fleetwood, engaged Oliver's Militia-Officers of the last Establishment to make an Address to Fleetwood and the Army, whom they promised to stand by, in their defence of the same Good Old Cause; so that being now back'd with these seconds of the City, they resolved on the project of Ruining the Protector (though when too late, the Officers, hurl'd into such confusions that they could neither help themselves nor him (by the implaca∣ble ambition and revenge of Lambert, who had scrued and recovered his interest
in the Officers) would have made him a kind of Duke of Venice, with a Title and a Pension) and Parliament together.Richard offer∣ed terms by the Danish Embas∣sador. Several advices were given Richard all this while by his Friends Col. Ingoldsby, Goffe, and Col. Charles Howard, made a Vis∣count by Oliver; and he urged by them to seize upon the chief of those Army-Conspirators, and dispatch them, as the onely sure way to be rid of their Interest in the Army: he was likewise sollicited by other hands to embrace the Kings Ti∣tle, and close with his party; and there was a report that the Danish Embassador (then Resident here) had Instructions to treat with him about it, to offer him most honourable Terms, and to engage his Masters Word for the perfor∣mance: which hath since been confirmed to be true. As to the Counsel about seizing the Officers, Col. Ingoldsby his Cousen undertook it upon his own score, and engaged at his own peril with his order to effect it:The wretched suspence of Ri∣chard. but such the suspense and pusillanimity that possessed Richard, (his neer Relation to Fleetwood and Desborough prompting him to expect nor dread any harm from that party, where they were chief; and he thought himself well enough if he saved his Skin) that he could be brought to no resolution; and so the fair occasion of crushing that Cockatrice of the Rump, which was hatching at Wallingford-house, where Fleetwood dwelt, and by which House that party was distinguished, was totally lot. The Protector at last beginning, when it was too late, and but then thinking of securing himself from being surprized with their Complements, and stood upon his Guard. But the Commons-House, as became English-men, wisely and courageously resolved to let the Officers know, that they took them still to be their Servants, though they had for too many years ill deserved their Wages, Rebelling and Usurping the Government at their pleasure: and inten∣ding to try what they meant by the Good Old Cause; which, as they seemed to represent it, smelt of Gunpowder and Ball; and whether the Repentance held forth in their said Representation, were real or Military, passed these Votes on Munday April 18. Resolved,Resolves of Parliament a∣gainst Meeting of the Army-Officers. That during the Sitting of the Parliament, there shall be no Ge∣neral Council, or Meeting of the Officers of the Army, without direction and Au∣thority of his Highness the Lord Protector, and both Houses of Parliament. And secondly, That no person shall have or continue any Command or Trust in any of the Armies or Nations of England, Scotland, and Ireland, or any the Dominions and Territories thereto belonging, who shall refuse to subscribe, That he will not disturb or interrupt the free-meetings in Parliament of any the Members of either House of Parliament, or their freedom in their Debates and Counsels. And the same time, to shew their care of the Army, and to prevent jealousies, they passed these following Votes. Resolved, That the House do presently take into consideration the ways and means for satisfaction of the Arrears of the Armies, and providing present pay for them. And secondly, That Serjeant Maynard, the Attorney-General and Sollicitor-General, do forthwith prepare an Act of Indemnity for all such as have acted under the Parliament and Commonwealth. While the House spent the rest of their time in considering how to provide Money without laying new Burthens on the people, great contests grew be∣tween the Protector and the opposite Officers of the Army, both sides keeping Guards night and day againct one another; the Protector having, in pursuance of the Votes of the House, forbidden the meetings of the Officers. In this divided posture, affairs continued till Friday the 22 of April, on which Morning early, Fleetwood the Protector's Brother, Desborough his Uncle, and the rest of the mutinous Officers, carrying the greater part of the Army after them, and the Protector's party flinching, the Conquest was made without one drop of Blood, (which was strange in so Ancient, Hereditary, just, and un∣doubted a Title) and the Protectorforced to consent to a Commission and Pro∣clamation ready prepared, giving Desborough and others power to Dissolve the Parliament, contrary to the best advice, and his own Interest and promise.
And accordingly the same day, the Black Rod was sent twice to the House of Commons, (from Fiennes Speaker of the Other House) for them to come thither; but they admitted him not in, and much scorned the motion, having ever looked upon that Mushroom-house as the Lower-house, and their own crea∣ture; the language being to send down to the Other House, when they sent the Declaration for a Fast, for a trial of transacting with them. And there∣fore understanding there were Guards of Horse and Foot in the Palace-yard, after some motion made by Mr. Knightly, Sir Arthur Haselrig and others, where∣in Sir Arthur exceeded, That the House should first declare it Treason for any person whatsoever to put force upon any Members of the House: And next, that all Votes, Acts, and Resolutions, passed by any Members of Parliament, when the rest were detained from, or taken out of the House, should be null and void; and other motions becoming English-men to that end, judging them∣selves under a force, and finding they were very unanimous, though neer 400 in the House. In the things proposed they resolved no question, but adjour∣ned till Munday-morning the 25 of April, and attended the Speaker in order through Westminster-hall to his Coach in the face of the Souldiery. Now the Court (according to the guise of the World in like accidents) shrunk out of White-hall into Wallingford-house; and Fleetwood, Desborough, and the rest of the Officers, great and small; took the Government into their own hands,Richard thrown aside, and in danger of Arrests, and dares not ap∣pear. and discarded their Idol the Protector, whom they had Worshipped and Deified in their Addresses; the Milksop not so much as muttering at these Affronts and Indignities: a fine worthy Fellow and becoming the greatness of his House, out of which God wonderfully rescued the Majesty Royal and Honour of the Crown of England, from being sullied with such base and sordid wearing (and great talk there once was of such a thing as Richard the 4th.) Within two or three Mornings after this cast out of his Office, instead of his Guards, poor Richard was beset with all the Bayliffs of Middlesex, who had a Writ against him (for a Debt of the late Funeral-Expences) by the Name of Richard Cromwel, Esq. — Is curre per ALPES Vt pueris placeas & Declamatio Fias. The House of Commons was also shut up, and entrance denied to the Mem∣bers when they came on Monday (even to Sir Henry Vane and Sir Arthur Ha∣selrig themselves) according to Adjournment; the Court of Requests and all Avenues being full of Souldiers, who told the Members that they must Sit no more. THE RUMP. AFTER the new Officers had moduled themselves, Cashiering Whaley, Ingoldsby, Goffe, and divers others of the Protector's party, and restoring Lambert, Haslerig, Okey, and others dis∣placed by Protector Oliver, and played with the Government for a few days, and grew weary of it, (the inferiour Officers and the Pamphlets, that now flew about daily without controul) carrying
things beyond the intention of the Chief Officers; they sent to some of their old lackney Drudges of the Long Parliament then in London, who they knew would do any thing so they might be suffered to Sit, and on the fifth and sixth days of May had conference with them; the last of which was at their never-failing Speaker the Master of the Rolls's House in Chancery-lane, where both Officers, viz. Lambert, who had already gotten his old place, and others with him, and Members, viz. Sir Henry Vane, Sir Arthur Haslerig, Ludlow, Iohn Iones, Mr. Chaloner, Mr. Scot, and others, to the number of twenty, sollicited William Lenthal Esquire to sit Speaker again: but he objected scru∣ples in Judgement and Conscience, and the uncertain state of Commonwealth and Army; nevertheless fifteen Articles between the Officers and some of the Members (who it seems over-confidently undertook for the rest) being agreed on at some of their Meetings, they resolved to meet in the House on Saturday the 7 of May; yet that they might do it by surprize, they gave out that they would not sit till Tuesday the 10th of May: But the Itch of Ambition and Lording it over the peopl giving them no quiet, on Saturday the 7th of May early they met in the Painted-Chamber at Westminster; and to make up their number, sent for the two chast Cock-Sparrows, the Lord Munson, and Mr. Henry Martin, out of Prison, where they were in Execution for Debt; and Mr. Whit∣lock and Lisle off the Chancery-Bench: and with this addition, being two and forty in number, the Chancery-Mace for hast being carried before them, (whose Names from a Noble Hand, with this Account, I have Transcri∣bed.) viz. William Lenthal.The Names of the Rump-Par∣liament-Mem∣bers. Lord Munson. Henry Martin. Mr. Whitlock. Mr. Lisle. Mr. Chaloner. Alderman Atkins. Alderman Pennington. Thomas Scot. Cornelius Holland. Henry Vane. Prideaux, Attorney-General. Sir Iames Harrington. Ludlow. Oldsworth. Sir Arthur Haslerig. Iohn Iones. Purefoy. Colonel White. Henry Nevil. Mr. Say. Mr. Blagrave. Colonel Bennet. Mr. Brewster. Serjeant Wilde. Iohn Goodwin. Mr. Lechmore. Augustine Skinner. Mr. Downes. Mr. Dove. Mr. Iohn Lenthal. Mr. Saloway. Mr. Iohn Corbet. Mr. Walton. Gilbert Millington. Mr. Gould. Colonel Sydenham. Colonel Bingham. Colonel Ayre. Mr. Smith. Colonel Ingoldsby. Fleetwood. stole on a sudden into the House: the Invitation of the Army for the sitting of the Long Parliament, (as they call it) being first published in Westmin∣ster-hall; wherein, at the conclusion they added, that calling to minde that Gods presence and his Blessing was visible among the late Members of the Long Parliament, who sate till April 23. 1653. they did invite them to their Trust: and they answer this with a like Declaration, (not dashing at the least upon the Army) setting forth that they are resolved to apply themselves to the discharge of their Trust, and to endeavour a Settlement upon such a Foundation as might best secure all Christian and civil Interest, Liberty, and Propriety, without King, Single person, or House of Peers; and shall endea∣vour
the work of Reformation,Rumps Decla∣ration. so much desired, and often declared for; and a Godly and Faithful Ministry, to the glory and praise of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the reviving and making glad the Hearts of the Upright in the Land. Upon Notice of their sitting, there being double their number Members of the same Parliament in Town, and many of them in the Hall; to prevent the mischiefs of a surreptitious packed Parliament, they agreed among themselves in the Hall, (though they were doubtful that Parliament was dissolved) that about a dozen or fourteen of them should immediately go to the House:Secluded Mem∣bers offer to sit with the Rump. and the persons that did so were these, viz. Mr. Ansley, since Earl of An∣glesey, my (right Noble) Author. Sir George Booth. Mr. Pryn. Mr. George Montague. Sir Iohn Eveling. Mr. Gowen. Mr. Eveling. Mr. Knightly. Mr. Clive. Mr. Hungerford. Mr. Harley. Mr. Peck. Who though with much ado they got into the Lobby, (where they found Mr. Iames, and Mr. Iohn Herbert) they were not suffered, by the Officers of the Army, to go into the House, though they disputed their priviledge of Sit∣ting, (if the Parliament were yet in being:) but Reason as well as the Laws must be silent among men of War: and therefore after they had fairly made their claim, and found the House under force, they retired, and resolved by Letter to acquaint the Speaker, and those Gentlemen assembled with him, what usage they had received. And accordingly on Munday the 9 of May, they went to Westminster, where understanding that there were no Guards upon the House, Mr. Ansley, Mr. Pryn, and Mr. Hungerford went up to the House, and had free admittance, receiving the Declaration of the 7th of May at the Door, which was published the same day; but Mr. Ansley walking afterwards into the Hall (the House not being ready to sit) to let the Members know, that though they were repulsed by force on Saturday, the House was open for honest men this day: at his return, Captain Lewson of Goff's Regiment (as he confessed himself) and other Of∣ficers, denied him entrance: he asking them, whether they were a Committee to judge of Members without doors? they said, No, but they were Comman∣ded by their superiour Officers to let none in that had not sate till April 1653. After some reasoning the case with them, the Captain told Mr. Ansley, that if he would give his Parol to return without sitting, he might go in and speak with whom he pleased; so upon his Parol passed to the Captain, he was per∣mitted to go in the second time, and soon after returned, telling the Captain as he came out, that he had kept his Parol, and wished he and the Souldiers would do the like. Mr. Pryn continued still there, and resolved so to do, since he saw there was Force again upon the House; and had some discourse within doors, and made them lose that Morning, and adjourn by reason of his presence, with∣out the Speakers taking the Chair: he attempted to sit again in the Afternoon, but found there a Troop of Horse, and two Companies of Red-coats, Keepers of the Liberties of England, and so bid them farewel: immediately after which, to prevent further interruption in their works of Darkness from Honest men, they barred the Door against three parts of four of the Members of the House, by the following Vote. The Rump Ex∣clude the for∣mer secluded Members.Ordered, That such persons heretofore Members of this Parliament, as have not sate in this Parliament since the year 1648. and have not subscribed the Engage∣ment in the Roll of Engagement of this House, shall not sit in this House till further order of the Parliament. Whereupon, Sir George Booth, Mr. Ansley, Mr. Knightly, Mr. Pryn, and the
rest, who had agreed on a Letter to be sent to them, finding them in their old temper of trampling the priviledges of Parliament under foot, and Judging without Hearing, resolved to make no application to them. Thus we saw (to the vexation of the Kingdom) the same pretended Par∣liament as was sitting in 1653. (till the Protector Oliver by the best act of his life pull'd them out of the House) sitting again upon a Declaration of the Army (whose Slaves they were) to do what they please, as time discovered. And that we might see they could trust few but themselves, and were not chan∣ged, (for all their fained repentance) they were already returned to the Good Old Cause of preferring one another and their Friends into good Offices and Commands, and Counsellors places,Qualifications of the 9 of May as appeared by their Vote of the 9th of May, viz. The Parliament doth declare, That all such as shall be employed in any place of Trust or Power in the Commonwealth, be able for the discharge of such Trust; and that they be persons fearing God, and that have given testimony to all the people of God, and of their faithfulness to this Commonwealth, according to the Declaration of Parliament of the 7th of May 1659. And such their proceedings thereupon,A Council of State chosen. that forthwith they chose of their own Members for a Council of State, 21. viz. Sir Arthur Haslerig, or the Bishop of Durham. Sir Henry Vane. Ludlow. Io. Iones. Sydenham. Scot. Saloway. Fleetwood. Sir Iames Harrington. Col. Walton. Nevil. Chaloner. Downes. Whitlock. Herb. Morley. Sidney. Col. Thompson. Col. Dixwel. Mr. Reynolds. Oliver St. Iohn. Mr. Wallop. Of Persons without the House, 10. viz. Bradshaw. Lambert. Desborough. Lord Fairfax. Berry. Sir Tho. Honeywood. Sir Archi. Iohnson. Iosiah Berners. Sir Anth. Ashley Cooper, a Gentleman too wise & honest to sit in such company. Sir Hor. Townsend, a Gent. of too good an Estate to be hazarded with such a crew. Next they discontinued the Term,The Term dis∣continued. (to the great damage and discontent of the people) because many Suits were depending against Vane and Haslerig. In fine, what they were like to prove, or what good, rather what evil was dreaded and expected from them, to an utter despair and enragement of the whole Na∣tion, did sufficiently appear from the esteem the people had of them, in the E∣lections to the last Parliament; wherein, though none but persons well-affected to Parliaments had Votes, and the persons now sitting laboured hard to be chosen, very few of them were Elected, the people generally looking upon them as apostates from the Good Old Cause; and therefore no wonder they would have that Parliament to which onely they were chosen, never dissolved. Going about (by the example of the Army, whose Apes they were) to co∣zen the people of their Religion, Laws, Liberties, Parliaments and Money, with a Rattle, called the Good Old Cause, which was a Cheat greater than any of the former. Being thus reseated, and having entred for qualitie (though not for num∣ber) worse, if worse could be, than when they were turned out before, they fell as readily as if there had been no disaster on their power, upon selling the remainder of the King's Lands,Note, Richard was to have 20000 l. in all per an∣num, and his Mother 8000 l. more. as Hampton-court, Somerset-house, Greenwich, &c. All persons were commanded to quit White-hall, whence the miserable Richard (for whom the Army had conditioned for ten thousand per annum for his life, &c. in fear of Arrests, had withdrawn himself into the Country.) Thi∣ther
these his Masters sent to him a Committee, for his submission and resigna∣tion; to which they sweetned him, with a kinde demand of his Debts, of which by their Conditions they were tied to discharge him: He at first answered not home to the Resignation; but being urged (for they knew his Title was as good as theirs) to do it, he in express terms added, He had learnt not to be un∣quiet under Gods hand, and should cause all persons relating to him to behave them∣selves peaceably under the Government, from whom he expected Protection, May 25. Then he gave them a Transcript of his Debts, by the hands of his Steward; and they thereupon took him off a debt of 29640 l. and gave him a Prote∣ction for six Months, and together his dismission, having taken and seized all the Plate, Hoshould-stuff, and other Utensils whatsoever in White-hall, toge∣ther with what Jewels they could finde, into their possession; and so exit Ri∣chard in such a pitiful regardless condition, but by his Creditors, that we shall hear but little of him further in this Chronicle. They were next saluted with an Address from the Army in Scotland, where∣in they confessed and lamented their former miscarriages towards them; but at the end thereof there was a hard word subjoyned, That the defection was fo∣mented and caused by some of themselves: and this was afterwards construed as a bone of Contention and Jealousie thrown in amongst them.Benches suppli∣ed. At home the Judges Commissions being expired, they appointed Serjeant Nudigate for the Kings-Bench, Serjeant Atkins and Archer for the Common-Pleas, and Serjeant Parker for the Exchequer, where Wilde and Hill were afterwards placed; and Voted the Courts and the Term to be in as full force as if the Benches were full; afterwards they anew constituted all those Serjeants in Oliver's time; and Bradshaw, Serjeant Terril, (a Buckingham-shire-Gentleman, and one formerly of their party, but never in such publick Office before, and now making use of it to good purposes) and Serjeant Fountain (an eminent Royalist former∣ly at Oxford) were made Lords Commissioners of the Great Seal. Bradshaw was sick, the other two received it at the Hands of the Speaker, at the Clerk (Thomas St. Nicholas in stead of Scobel) his Table, and took the old Engage∣ment; whither came now a Petition or Address from the Army,Armies Ad∣dress. in prosecu∣tion of their condition of dividing the Judicative and Executive power; and to that purpose they had couched herein a project of a co-ordinate or select Senate, the product of Sir Henry Vane's Wisdome, and conveyed into their Heads by Lambert who was Dominus fac totum. This was promised to be forthwith con∣sidered, and the presenters had the Thanks of the House, who resolved to new Commissionate the Officers; which was done in the same manner as be∣fore, the Speaker in few words declaring, That the Parliament in confidence of their Ability and Fidelity did confer, &c. and this went throughout the Army one Regiment after another. Fleetwood, who (by another of those) by 15 Con∣ditions was to be Commander in Chief by Land and Sea, was made Lieute∣nant-General with the said express Command; the Transcript of an Act so In∣tituled (it being so agreed) being presented, and read, and delivered to him at the Clerks Table aforesaid, as his Commission. Captain Lawson was made Vice-Admiral, and to Command the Fleet for the Narrow Seas this Summer: This disposal laying aside General Montague, who was expected shortly from the Sound, as one in whom they had no confidence, nor any Interest. Addres∣ses likewise came from the Independent and Anabaptist Churches, some of whom kept a Thanksgiving, and invited all the other Congregations of that Sect to joyn with them in that Voluntary Solemnization of this good provi∣dence; the chief of these were one Iessey's and Canne's Disciples, the prime fa∣vourites of this RUMP; which Name it now universally obtained. And it will not be impertinent to the designe of this Chronicle to give an ac∣count of it, since it was the frequentest word or by-word of the times. This Term was first given them by one Mr. Walker,The derivation of Rump. who writ the History of Inde∣pendency, upon their secluding and debarring the House to their Fellow-Mem∣bers in 1648. when there remained a Fag-end or Tail; but was almost aboli∣shed
by the height and violence of their prosperity, nor was heard of again un∣til Richard's Parliament, when Major-General Brown, repeating the many injuries he had received from that party or Juncto, in a scornful Apostrophe, branded it with this Note of Infamy, The RVMP, which now upon their re-admission again, was their onely appellation, except among their own par∣ty. To court and oblige the Souldiery about Town, and who as their Guards attended them, they raised the Foot's Pay a penny, and the Horse three pence a day. Colonel Alured and Overton were taken into favour; the last made Go∣vernour of Hull, the other Captain of their Life-guard, which now they had established,Addresses from Forrain Prin∣ces. Sir Henry Vane's son being their Cornet. Lockhart was also con∣firmed Governour of Dunkirk, from which place they had received Addresses, as also an Embassador from France, another from the States General, from the King of Poland, an Evoy from Sweden, the like from the Hans Towns, from Genoa and Portugal; so far had the dread of those inconsiderable persons, by their former successes, possessed most of the Princes of Europe. Spain's friendship they made themselves sure of, with whom at their breaking up they were in most perfect friendship and correspondence. They had an eye also to Ireland, and by Dispatches thither had frighted the Illustrious Lord Harry to a tame surrender of that Government into the hands of the Lord Chancellor Steel,Henry Crom∣wel ordered to surrender the Government of Ireland. and Miles Corbet the Chief-Baron of that Ex∣chequer, upon the very first notice of such Orders coming; which to oblige them the more, he signified by an Express, and that he was preparing to fol∣low with all speed to give them an account of that Kingdom, which he left in a very good condition, and hoped his Successors might reap more content in the Government than he had found. He arrived post-hast immediately af∣ter; and having given his account to the Council of State, had liberty granted him of going into the Country, or whither he pleased, as his Order expresly and indulgently declared. To perform on their part with the Army,An Act of In∣demnity pub∣lished. now came out the new Act of Indemnity to all such as had been any way instrumental or active, or concer∣ned in the late Mutations of Government, from the date of the 22 of April, to the 7th of May 1659. with a Proviso of their taking the Engagement. Just in the publication of which, happened a Fray or skirmish at Enfield forrest;A Skirmish at Enfield-chace. the Country who had right of Commons, being deprived thereof by certain Enclosures to new-erected Buildings, by some Officers of the Army, who had purchased the Kings Lands there, and kept Guards there to secure this their Trespass and violence; but the Country-people mastered them, killing one or two, and wounded a Serjeant, took the rest, and got them committed to New∣gate, (for assaulting them as they were throwing down the Ditches and Hed∣ges) whence their good Masters ordered them soon after to be bayled, being nine in number. To the old trade they fell next against the Royal party, Priests and Jesuits being joyned with them in the same Condemnation; which was, that all such as had not compounded, or compounded and not paid their Fines, should first depart twenty miles,Royalists, Priests and Ie∣suits banished. and before the first of August leave the Kingdom, or else suffer as Traytors: notwithstanding the Council of State was impowered, up∣on subscription and security to do as they should see cause in that matter; for besides the old grudge, they had now information of a Cavalier-plot,A new Cava∣lier-Plot gene∣rally laid, and discovered by indiscretion and Treachery, &c. laid some time before, (by the same hands that betrayed the last to Cromwel, who fearing the quick reward of their Treachery, did the same Offices to this Rump.) Hereupon they began to settle their respective Militia's; and being fully satis∣fied concerning Mr. Mordant's actings for, and correspondence with the King, they required him by Proclamation to appear before the 17 of August, or else his offences should be taken pro confesso; the designe still opening by the unwa∣ry discourses of the Lady Howard, Daughter to the Earl of Berk-shire, and the indiscreet conveyance of some Letters: whereupon she, and Mr. Ernestus Byron,
and Mrs. Sumner, were committed to the Tower; as also Mr. Harlow for some reports and stories of their base actions, by the Council of State, in order to Tryal. The Duke of Buckingham, who had some while before Married the Lord Fairfax's Daughter, and was therefore spighted by Cromwel, who had designed one of his Daughters for him, and had been lately released by Ri∣chard's Parliament out of Windsor-castle, came in now, and gave security for his peaceable demeanour. Arms were every where privately bought up; and on the other side, Ireton the then Lord-Mayor, a very active person, Brother to Ireton deceased, raised a Regiment of City-Horse, though the City Petitioned against it; and the separated Churches raised three Regiments of their Mem∣bers, under Sir Henry Vane, Colonel White, and Skippon, who being through-paced for the Good Old Cause, was by them made Major-General of the City, and all Horses secured therein, Posts came now from several parts of the Kingdom, of Stirs and Insurre∣ctions; the two first whereof were at Tunbridge;Tunbridg and Red-hill Ri∣sings suppressed. but a party of Horse (the Council of State having right and punctual Information) were soon at the appointed place of Rendezvouze, so that those that would have met there dis∣persed themselves; some few being taken Prisoners. The other at Red-hill in Surrey, where appeared some 100, under the Command of the Earl of Litch∣field, since Duke of Richmond, who upon notice of the Armies Horse advan∣cing, got timely away; young Mr. Sackvile Crow, Mr. Penruddock, and some others of note, among whom was one Captain Elsemere, formerly a Captain in Ingoldsby's Regiment, being taken, and some former Troopers of the same, who were afterwards Sentenced.Massey like∣wise in Glou∣cester-shire. Colonel Massey appeared likewise in Glouce∣ster-shire; but by the same perfect intelligence at White-hall, he was no sooner up, but he was seized and taken by some of their Horse, and being put behinde one of the Troopers to bring him away, as they were marching down a Hill the Horse fell, and gave the Colonel an opportunity to shove the Trooper for∣wards, and to make his escape into an adjoyning Wood; which was the fourth he made during these troubles. Hertford shire and Essex were associated likewise in the same designe now forming and acting; but the like discovery prevented it; Sir Thomas Leventhorpe and Mr. Thomas Fanshaw hardly escaping a surprize and seizure. Major-General Brown was not idle all the while in London; several Lists being filled with undertakers of the Kings Quarrel: but such was the vigilance of the Council of State who sate day and night, and so many defeats and disappointments, and so many Prisoners evey day brought in, that nothing was done here. Lambeth Gate-house was made a Goal, and Sir Francis Vincent, and Colonel Brown of Surrey, concerned in the Earl of Litch∣field's attempt, were Committed thither. Sir George Booth's rising in Cheshire, Aug.But that which look'd indeed formidable, was the rising of Sir George Booth in Cheshire, who was a secluded Member of the Parliament; with him appea∣red the Lord Kilmorry, Mr. Needham Brother to the said Lord, Mr. Henry and Mr. Peter Brook a Member likewise; Sir William Neil, Major-General Randal Egerton an eminent constant Royalist, who brought his former Valour upon this Stage, and Colonel Robert Werden of the same party, (which last two were put into that Proclamation, wherein Sir George Booth, Sir Thomas Middleton, with their adherents were Proclaimed Traytors) the same Sir Thomas Middle∣ton and his sons who Garrisoned Chirk and Harding Castles, the last belonging of Justice Glyn: there joyned also with him, the Earl of Derby (whose Family Interest in that Country, with the same magnanimous Loyalty this young No∣bleman essayed to resuscitate, and gave great demonstration of his personal worth and Gallantry in the ensuing Engagement: but I may not be (as I ought) copious in his praise. Nec Deus intersit nisi dignus vindice nodus.) Colonel Gilbert Ireland, who seized Liverpole, Mr. Warburton, and Mr. Leigh,
the Lord Cholmondley, Mr. Marbury, Mr. (since Sir) Ieoffery Shackerly, and others: these Rendezvouzed at Routon heath, and appeared to the number of 3000 and upwards, where a Declaration was read and published, shewing that they took up Arms for a Free-Parliament, and to unyoak the Nation from the slavery of those men at Westminster. To second this, the noble Lord Byron with Colonel Charles White, with a party from Nottingham, Rendezvouzed at Sherwood-forrest, with a designe on Belvoyr-castle, but were frustrated; and so onward to Derby, where they published Sir George's Declaration, which the Towns-men very well approved of; but Forces under Colonel Sanders being on their way thither, they were forced to sit still, and cry peccavi; Colonel White was taken Prisoner. Another appearance there was about Shrewsbury, but all came to nothing; the Lady Littletons's Sons, and the Whittingtons were herein engaged. As soon as the news of this Sir George Booth's rising was publique, a Petition was presented to the Parliament from some pretended Cheshire-men, wherein they set forth, that to prevent the like Rebellious Insurrections, the Parliament should discharge all Tenants of their Tenures from Delinquent Land-lords, and that they should hold their Lands thenceforth of the Commonwealth at the same time; and straight a Committee was ordered to withdraw, and bring in a draught of this devie:Lambert sen to reduce Sir Geo: Booth. and Major-General Lambert was Commissioned to march with three Regiments of Horse and three of Foot, and some Dragoons, (Militia-forces being to joyn with him in his march) and some Forces out of Ireland under Colonel Zanchy and Axel to the reduction of Sir George and his Forces. Colonel Desb rough was likewise sent with the same Command, and some Forces into the West. Proclamatin came out at this time against Mr. Mordant, the Earl of Litchfield jor-Genral Brown, Sir William Comp∣ton, Sir Thomas Leventhorpe,Several Noble∣men Prisoner. and Mr. Fashaw; the three last of whom render∣ed themselves within the time; the two first fled; and the Major-General awaiting another opportunity, absconded himself at Stationers-Hall, by the faithful secrecy of Captain Burrough. The Earl of Stamford, who was like∣wise engaged in this business, was taken at his House in Arms, and carried Pri∣soner to Leicester, which was the condition of many other Gentlemen; the Earl of Oxford Prisoner to the Serjeant at Arms, the Lords Faulkland and De∣laware to the Tower, whither not long after was brought the Lord Viscount Falconbridge, the Lord Bellasis, and Earl of Chesterfield, Lord Charles Howard, and Lord Castleton. Lambert with no great hast marched to the Confines of Chester, desirous to make a War of it, and to settle himself in the Souldiers af∣fections; but such course had been taken by his Masters, that very few accessions of strength came in to Sir George more than what were first numbered, who nevertheless resolved to abide the fortune of Battle, and drew up neer Norwich (whither Lambert was advancing) in the Meadows adjoyning, having the Rivers before them, and the Bridges guarded; but Lambert's Horse and Foot resolutely falg on together at the Bridge,Sir George Booth defea∣ted, Aug. 19▪ the Fight was soon over, all the defence being made by one Morgan a gallant Gentleman, and some Horse of his Troop, who presently died of his Wounds. There were not above 30 kil∣led in all, and some 500 taken Prisoners, and most of the Gentlemen and Of∣ficers. This was August 16. and presently the Army advanced to Chester, (where Colonel Croxton yet held out the Castle) and had it presently delivered; from thence to Leverpool, which was yielded likewise by Colonel Ireland, while in the mean time Colonel Zanchy and Axtel took in Chirk-castle, delivered by young Mr. Middleton upon terms of having two Months time to make Addresses to the Parliament; the rest were to be Prisoners of War, and among them was Colonel (since Sir) Edward Broughton. Harding-Castle was yielded likewise upon the like Capitulations. Sir George Booth had made his escape out of the Field, and got away, accom∣panied with four of his Servants,Sir George Booth taken at Newport-pagnel. in a Womans Disguise; but at his Inne in Newport-pagnel was discovered; and being guarded and secured, one Gibbons a
Minister posted to give the Parliament account of it, and was rewarded by them, as were no less than three several Messengers sent before from Lambert, with the particulars of the Cheshire-defeat. Upon his bringing to London, Fleetwood was ordered to send a Guard and meet him at Highgate, and secure him to the Tower, whither the next day Sir Henry Vane and Sir Arthur Haslerig were sent to Examine him. It hath since been plainly confirmed, that General Monke was engaged with him in the same designe, under pretence of a Free-Parliament▪ (and that the Marquess of Ormond, in the Habit of a Pedlar, was seen ab his House at Dalkeith) but it was so secretly carried, that nothing appeared at this time; nor would Sir George be drawn to accuse any man. Most certain it is, the Kings Restitution was the bottome of this Designe: for before the appearance of it, he had withdrawn privately from Brussels, and lay ready upon the Coast of Britany about St. Malo's and those places,The King about St. Malos and Coast of Bri∣tany. to take shipping for England upon the first good event of those his Loyal Friends and Subjects; but Kent or Sussex was the place intended for his Landing, Turenne the French General having engaged to wait upon him if he would oblige it. But this unhappy account reaching him there, he resolved to give over the pro∣secution of his right by the Sword at present, (seeing the almost-impossibility of recovering it by his English Subjects against these standing Armies) and pass to St. Iean de Luz,At St. Jean de Luz. where the Treaty betwixt the two Crowns was then begun, and whither Lockhart (upon the arrival of a French Embassador hi∣ther) was ordered to Travel; where after several affronts done him (while the Ministers of the King (not to mention the Grandeurs of the Honours done to himself by the Cardinal and Don Lewis de Haro, and during his short stay in the Realm of Spain) who were first the Lord Iermyn his Plenipotentiary at that Treaty, the Earl of Bristol, the Lord Chancellor, Sir Henry Bennet the Kings Re∣sident at the Court of Spain, after Secretary of State, and others) he was better advised to return, and be gone with more hast than he came; His Ma∣ster's Concerns being wholly rejected, and his Majesty's most affectionately un∣dertaken by both those Potentates, in private distinct Articles agreed between them. As those Iuncto-men or Rumpers would have been taken into this affair of the Peace between France and Spain, so they thrust themselves into the diffe∣rence between the two Northern Kingdoms of Denmark and Sweden, sending Mr. Sidney and Sir Thomas Honeywood (Sir Henry Vane's Brother-in-law) their Plenipotentiaries to those Crowns;The Rumps Ple∣nipotentaries into the Sound who having said there to no purpose, re∣turned some time after to as much; their Masters at home being lurcht before: they had order to proceed in the same method, and as far as the French or Dutch, whose project of the Peace framed at the Hague being humbly tendered here by their Embassador, was approved, and these Commissioners to act accor∣ding to that Module. General Montague returned September the 24, about their coming thither; and having given an account (not of all he knew or did there) concerning the War there to the Council of State, was dismissed, having given the King very good assurance of his readiness and affection to his service.— The Parliament now were consulting what more standing Forces to keep in the Kingdom; and to keep in with the Sects and Quakers, now numerous, they repealed the Act of Iohn Lilburn's Banishment, and released Iames Naylor (as aforesaid) out of Bridewel;The Act for Lilburn's Ba∣nishment repea∣led. James Naylor released. then against the last Royalists, caused a new Sequestration-Act to be presently passed, and Commissioners Names expedited. Thus brisk they were always upon the Atchievement and accomplishment of every success; which when it tickled them to arrogance and confidence, scrat∣ched them soon after to their trouble and vexation: for Lambert having done the Feat for them, was now upon his progress in the Country to his own House at Craven in York-shire, caressing the people, having used his Victory very ci∣villy; although he was heard to say upon his setting forth, (questionless to make him more acceptable and less suspect to the Rump) That he would not
leave a Cavalier to Piss against the Wall, or words to that effect. Especially he made much of his Officers, having invited them to his House aforesaid, where their entertainment was concluded with a Draught of another Advice, stiled, A Petition to the Parliament.The General's policy in secu∣ring the Scotch Nobility. General Monke in the mean time (the better to conceal his affection to the King) caused most of the Scotch Nobility to be seized on a sudden, and upon the refusal of the Engagement secured them in Castles. Very many, yea most of them refused, besides the Earl of Glencarn, the General's Confident and Privado, as appeared not long after. Lambert was Voted a Jewel of 1000 l. for a gratuity from the Parliament for his Cheshire-service: but his ambition aimed at a higher Gem; he therefore desired the Parliament that they would think of paying off the Militia, who had deserved well, as also the Irish Brigades, and the Widows and relicts of such whose Husbands were drowned passing from thence to their assistance: which they readily promised, sitting brooding continually upon Acts of Sale and Forfeitures of such Estates whose last moities upon purchase had not been paid; as also in sifting out all the persons engaged with Sir George; and had traced it so close by their Beagles,Sir Anthony Ashley Coo∣per questio∣ned by the Rump. as to bring Sir Anthony Ashley Cooper (one of their Council of State) into suspicion; (as really he was a principal in the Plot, having been of the Cabal, and had kept intelligence with Sir George, and had a party in Dorset shire, which timely dispersed themselves) but the great opinion they had of him, stop'd the mouth of his Accusers; and he knew well enough how to defend himself at their Bar. They had likewise got one of the King's Letters, dated the 16 of May, and other Papers, which with the several Examinations were read in the House, and a Thanksgiving-day there∣upon appointed, for this their great preservation. They likewise Voted the Charter of the City of Chester void, and that it should be no longer a County of it self,Chester-Cor∣poration and Charter taken away. but lie in Common; as also the Ejection of the whole Ministry as Malignant; and received soon after an Address from the Leicester-shire Levites of gratulation upon this their success, and a disclaiming and renouncing of any hand in that business, (which was feared would prove most Fatal to the whole Presbytery, whose designe this was vogued to be by the insulting Secta∣ry, who could not endure to hear of Tithes, which the Rump in policy had late∣ly Voted pro tempore.) But Lambert's ambition interposed betwixt them and danger; for a Paper (sent to Colonel Ashfield, Cobbet, and Lieutenant-Colonel Duckenfield, from other of Lambert's Officers) coming to the notice of the Rump, they sent to demand it; and having it delivered, presently understood the device of it, and after a quick debate of this Petition, Address, and Proposals, angrily Voted,— That to have any more General Officers in the Army, than are already setled by the Parliament, was unnecessary, burdensome, and dangerous to the Commonwealth. Notwithstanding the Officers met in solemn Council about it, Lambert being come to Town, and sitting there in person, and acting his own designe among them, and bidding fair for it among the Rump, the ablest of whom he had made sure to himself, and What need was there of the other? Haslerig who was the most formidable, being known to dare and say more than he would do, as Cromwel's carriage towards him had sufficiently evidenced. At this Council the Petition was concluded on, and ordered to be presented to the Parliament on the 4 of October, by Major-General Desborough; which he accordingly delivered to the Speaker as the sense of the Army: which com∣ing in such attendance, and the countenance and awe of their Masters, made them put on another face, and very fairly answer the Sword-Grandee, with a Complement of taking it into their first Consideration, nothing to intervene, save the Dinner the City gave them (both Parliament and Army-Officers) after a Sermon preached at Christ-Church upon their Thanksgiving October the sixth, at Grocers-Hall, for the Cheshire-Victory; where they eat in spite, and would have better become a Fray than a Feast, though the Army-friends in London designed this Treat to conciliate the Rump by their surfeiting on the Memory of this day, which they owed to Lambert, as he that freed them
from a worser danger, than his whatsoever designements: but the result was, they fed heartily, and thanked the City next day heartily by Members, where∣of Atkins was one, sent to take the other repast and Bottle of this high Enter∣tainment; and withal the City obtained the favour of having liberty to chuse a new Lord Mayor, which was Sir Thomas Alleyn, (which had been before denied, and Ireton Voted to continue it again) so that the City-Cost was well expended. An Answer was now again required to be given to this Represen∣tation, as it was now called; and thereupon the Members (who had had un∣der their consideration an Act for Assessment of 120000 l. per mensem, which they had perfected some while before, and let it rest, as being informed of this device of Lambert,Army-Repre∣sentation de∣bated. on purpose to leave him Moneyless, and without any support to his Ambition) very closely and as cunningly applied themselves to the de∣bate of the Representation, which consisting of seven or eight immaterial de∣sires concerning maimed Souldiers, Widows, the Militia-pay, Lambert's Offi∣cers rewards, and such like, had this onely substantial Article, that the Parlia∣ment would Commission a General, whom they named, viz. Charles Fleetwood. The Rump answered readily in the affirmative to the rest; but to this Choak∣pear they by Resolve stoutly declared, That the Army, as other Free-men, have right to Petition, but must take care both in the manner and matter of it; and that the Wisdom of the Parliament is to be referred to in all matters, and what they had or should decree: and this for answer to their demand of a Ge∣neral; and withal Voted hereupon, (as knowing they were betrayed by some of their own selves) That it is the duty of every Member to inform to his know∣ledge of any thing that concerns the publick safety: and foreseeing the immi∣nent danger of a force, ordered the Council of State to seize all publick Pa∣pers whatsoever; and at the same instant passed an Act which did the feat, that it should be Treason for any person or persons to levy Money without the con∣sent of Parliament. Published by Lambert be∣fore answered.Before the whole answer could be framed, Lambert not liking a word of that about the General, which was the main, caused his Representation to be Printed, that the equity and justice of it might be publick, and justifie his future Actions, (for though Fleetwood was mentioned to that Supreme Command, it was resolved as easie a thing to supplant him as Richard, if the Rump had consented to the Proposals.) This no sooner appeared, together with a Letter delivered by Okey, a friend to his fellow-Regicides, to the House, that was sent him from some Officers of the Army to the same purpose, but the Rump Vo∣ted October the 12, that the several Commissions of Colonels Iohn Lambert, Iohn Desborough,Rump Resolute, and void the Commissions of Lambert, &c. Iames Berry, Thomas Kelsey, Richard Ashfield, Ralph Cobbet, William Packer, Robert Barrow, and Major Richard Creed, who subscribed the same Letter, should be vacated. Resolved also, that the Government of the Ar∣my should be managed by Commissioners: That an Act be brought in for re∣pealing the Act whereby Fleetwood was constituted Lieutenant-General and Commander in chief; and that Fleetwood, Ludlow, General Monke, Haslerig, Walton, Morly, and Overton do execute the powers granted to Fleetwood until the 12 of February, four months from the date of this Resolve, as also the next Officers in the respective Regiments of these Colonels do succeed in their pla∣ces, Lieutenant-Colonel Campfield to Lambert, and so in the rest; and the Serjeant at Arms was ordered to attend these Cashiered Officers with these Or∣ders and Resolutions. In the mean while Haslerig in a great heat, and Herbert Morley his Son-in-law, and other the Commissioners then present for the Army, by Order sare up all night in the Speakers Chamber adjoyning to the House, and issued out several Commands to such Forces and Commanders as they thought would stand by them, resolving to oppose Force to Force, and be baffled no more, with this Legionary Spirit, that had haunted and plagued them so often. But Lam∣bert was awake also, and at the same time marched several Regiments into King-street Westminster, and possessed himself of all the avenues to the Palace;
such Forces as these Commissioners had got to their side being forced to march round St. Iames Wall in the night time, and so through Tuttle-street into the Abby, and St. Margarets Westminster Church-yard, both parties standing upon their Guard till the Morning,The Speaker stopt, and a Fray expected. October 13. at which time about eleven a Clock, the Speaker coming to the House in his Coach, was stopped neer the Gate that leads into the Palace, by Lieutenant Col. Duckenfield, and his Coach turned and sent back: Lambert on Horseback then faced the Regiment of Morley and Mosse in the said Church-yard; and much stiffness, and ill looks there passed between the Officers, and some words, but never a blow, for the Soldiers were resolved not to Fight one against the other for the best Parliament or the best Cause that ever was in England. In this posture they continued till Night, when the Council of State,Lambert pre∣vailed against the Rump. who umpired the difference between the Red-Coats, com∣manded and ordered them to their several Quarters, as good friends as ever. It must be remembred, that the Rump suspecting of this Juncto of State, had privately named another to Act, if a dissolution should happen. The Army-Officers the next day after this Conquest, met at Whitehal, and declared Fleet∣wood for their General. They appointed also a select number of the Council of State to consider of fit ways to carry on the Affairs of the Common-wealth, and suspended all those Officers that were active on the other side, and referred them to a Court Mar∣tial for remedy;Army new mo∣duled. giving power to Fleetwood, Ludlow, Desborough, Lambert, Sir Henry Vane, and Berry, to nominate all Officers; and appointed the reviving of the old Laws of Military Discipline, and that Fleetwood, as before, should be owned for General, and Lambert and Desborough as Major and Commissa∣ry General; the latter in England and Scotland too; not a syllable mentioned of General Moncks consent to the bargain, save that Colonel Cobbet was dispatch∣ed thither to inform him of the Passages; as Colonel Barrough was sent upon the same errand to Ireland. That Committee just before mentioned,City invite Parl. and Ar∣my to a Dinner, on thanks-giv∣ing day, Oct. 6. of which Vane, Whitlock, Lambert and Berry were chief; (Fleetwood and Desborough must needs be in) begot or gigged themselves into another Committee called a Committee of Safety, some few more being added from the City, who were to consider of a form of Go∣vernment; and if they thought fit, to advise with the General Council of Officers,The Committee of Safety. and to bring in a Draught within six weeks, their power the same with the former Council of State; to which this was added, they were to call Delinquets to Tryal, and to give Indemnity to all that had acted for the Parli∣ament since 1641. to suppress Rebellious Insurrections, to Treat with For∣reign Princes, to confer Offices, and to state the Sales and Compositions of those late Delinquents; their Names were as follow, viz. Fleetwood, Lambert, Desborough, Steel, Whitlock, Vane, Ludlow, Sydenham, Salloway, Strickland, (Seven last Members of the Rump) Berry, Laurence Olivers's President of his Council, Sir Iames Harrington another Rumper, Warreston a Scotch-man, and Henry Brandrith a Cloath-drawer Citizen, Cornelius Holland a Member, Hew∣son, Clark, Bennet, and Lilbourn, Colonels of the Army. These by Letters of Invitation being brought together to consider of a Go∣vernment (which Vane had already Projected, the Cement whereof was an in∣tended Marriage betwixt Lamberts's Son, and his Daughter;) the Council of Officers emitted a Declaration,The Army De∣claration upon this change. shewing the reasons of the late Change, and do thereby disanul the pretended Act of Treason, Octob. 10. to Levy Money with∣out consent in Parliament, as done precipitantly and unduly, and not according to the Custome of Parliament; declare for Ministry, and the maintenance of it, by a less vexatious way than Tithes; for Liberty; and that the Army will not med∣dle in Civil Affairs, but refer the Civil and Executive Power to the Council of State, or Safety, to provide for the Government, and to set up a free State without King, single Person, or House of Lords: And for Conclusion, desire the Prayers of the Godly. The Judges were nevertheless (in this mad state of Affairs) perswaded to
sit in the several Courts, Whitlock officiating the Chancery; Sir Thomas Alleyn the Lord Mayor of London was likewise sworn before the Barons of the Exche∣quer. Sir William Waller and others that had been snapt up by the Rump, took advantage of it, and brought their Habeas Corpus to the Kings Bench. Sir William got his liberty; and shortly after the Earl of Northampton, Lord Bellasis, Faul∣conbridge, Faulkland, Castelton, Lord Herbert of Ragland, Lord Charles How∣ard, were all released upon bail. Bradshaw the President dieth. Novemb.That wretch Bradshaw died, at the Lodgings given him in the Deans-house at Westminster, the beginning of this Moneth of Novemb. in the same desperate impenitence in which since the Fact he lived, saying to a Gentleman on his Death-bed, that charitably advised him to examine himself about the matter of the Kings Death, That if it were to do again, he would be the first man that should do it. He was freed by this his Disease (which was occasioned by an Ague, as Cromwel's) from the terrour and fear of the ensuing Change, the ap∣prehensions whereof setled in him, ever since his Country the Cheshire Design. He was grown publiquely confident, and had left off his Guards he first kept about him; but his privacy was more than usually, and all his actions and gestures more reserved: He was carried out with a great Funeral, and much attendance of the Men of those Times, and Interred in the Abby, and his Crime published for his Commendation. A little before died Edmund Prideaux,Aturney Gen-Prideaux di∣eth. the Attorney-General throughout the Usurpation, by which he got a very vast Estate, leaving Sixty Thousand pounds in Gold (as credible report went) in his Coffers, besides Lands of very great demesnes. This Change (like a nine days wonder) was quite over, and the Army and Lambert here very brisk and slighting the Rump, and all it could do; when a Cooling Card came from the North, in a Letter from General Monk, declaring his unsatisfiedness with those proceedings of the Army: which hugely deceived their Expectations, because he had so readily concurred with their former mu∣tation, and the Officers there were many of them Phanaticks; but the Case was altered,G. Monke de∣clares his un∣satisfiedness with the Army proceedings, the the manner how, Oct. 18. he resolved to assert the Parliamentary Interest; and when Cobbet (sent hence) came to Berwick, he had him secured there, and sent with a Guard Prisoner to Edinborough Castle. The manner of his declaring for the Parliament, was thus: On the Eighteenth of October being at Dalkeith, he sent for Col. Wilks Governour of Leith, Lieutenant-Col. Emerson, Captain Ethel∣bert Morgan now made his Lieutenant-Colonel, Lieutenant-Col. Hubberthorne, Cloberry, and Miller, to come to him, whom he acquainted with his Resolution; and they engaged to stand by him, against the Factious part of the Army; as he characterized them. On the Nineteenth he come to Edinburgh, where his own, and Col. Talbot's Regiment with lighted Matches and Ball received him; to whom he declared the same, and promised them their Arrears, at which they loudly shouted: then he went to Leith, where he was entertained in the like manner; and at his departure had Seventeen Guns given him from the Citadel, and Volleys from the Regiment:Secures Ana∣baptist Officers. Then he turned all the Anabaptist-Officers out of the Regiments, and secured them in Timptallon-Castle. At the same time, upon pretences of consulting with Lieutenant-Col. Young of Cobbets Re∣giment, Lieutenant-Col. Keyn, and Major Kelke of Pearsons Regiment, he sent for them to him; and upon their coming clapt them up, but released Keyn up∣on his promise of adherence. Together with them, he had advertisement that Col. Read's and Col. Fairfax's Regiments were at his service. On the Twenty first he marched to Lithgow with some Horse and Foot, intending for Ayre; but understanding that his own Lieutenant-Col. Holms was got there before him, who was an Anabaptist, being loth to receive any opposition in the beginning of his Enterprise, he returned, and under his own Hand and Seal constituted and commissioned several Officers in the room of those he had secured; and forth∣with sent away for Fairfax's, Read's, and Cobbet's Regiments to March and joyn with him, leaving Captain Winter with Two hundred men to keep the Citadel of Saint Iohnstons; which like number, and no more, he left in the other Three,
upon his departure for England; and Rendezvouz'd his other Forces the last of October, and dispatcht away Letters to the Speaker,The Gen. sends Letters. Fleetwood, Lambert; as also to Hull, where Overton was now Governour, by the Pearl-Frigot: and lastly, a Letter to the gathered Churches; for he was to fight with these Hypocrites at their own Weapons. Colonel Pearson (one of General Monkes Officers in Scotland) was by order hence sent down as to his Charge there, but secretly to corrupt and incline the Army to Lambert: but arriving at Newcastle, and understanding by several transfuges from Scotland of the Anabaptist Perswasion, what course G. Monke had taken, he staid there, his Field-Officers being in custody already, except Lieutenant-Col. Keyn newly released: during his stay here, Letters were by his means intercepted as they were carrying to Exeter and Devonshire,And maintains correspondence, &c, sowed up in a mans Doublet, without any direction, but Signed with his own Hand, and Written by Master (after Sir) William Clark; wherein he gave his Friends notice to stand upon their Guard, and that as soon as the Army was drawn from London, the City would declare with him, as he expected likewise they would, &c. Pearson at the sending up of these Letters (a Treaty being then mentioned betwixt both parties, and to which end the discarded Officers, as Whally and Goffe, Mr. Caryl and Mr. Barker Independent Ministers, went in the way of Brotherly-love to move and perswade him) gave this Comment of them, as one well acquainted with his General, That what ever he pretended, he scorn∣ed all their messages and overtures, meerly winning time by them; and that nothing but force could reduce him. Col. (after Major General) Morgan upon the same pretences, with Col. Whally, &c. went out of Yorkshire to Scotland, and joyned with the General, as he had received an invitation from him by a private Messenger, and did mainly assist in this ground-work, to the conclusion and perfection thereof. In the mean while it was resolved by the Officers here, for fear of the worst, and to be ready against all accidents, if no good could be done by this fair way of Message, to send down Lambert with most of the Army Northwards, and there in that posture to expect the issue; and he very willingly (it being his own advice) undertook it, having refused and declined those tenders and offers, which particularly my Lord Hatton made to him in the name of the King;Lambert offer∣ed Terms from the King by the Lord Hatton. If he would now at last mind his own good, and the Kingdoms, in returning to his Alle∣giance; and convert his designs for himself, to the service of his Soveraign in his Restitution: the said Lord further assuring him, that if he did it not, it would be presently done without him, beyond his power of remedying it; and that therefore he should not let slip such an opportunity of raising himself and his posterity. But he replying upon the Army-Interest (which if it could have been cemented with money, would have caused a hazardous opposition to any other) and the Ana∣baptist-party (now very numerous,Anabaptist like Presbyte∣ry hath its turn. and at this time uppermost) for that had its turn too as well as Presbytery and Independency, but swayed not so long (all the other Sects centring here; for now was the time of the fulness, and visible power of Sion, as it was counted by these People) resolved to proceed on this Expedition; and if fortune favoured him there, he feared no other Enemy to his ambition. On the Third of November, a very ominous day, as it was observed, by reason the Long-Parliament sate down that day in One thousand six hun∣dred and forty, he departed from London by Ware-road, and hastned to New-castle, just as Col. Barrow was returned from Ireland, with the supposed acquie∣scence of that Kingdome in this change; Tomlinson, Iohn Iones and Corbet, who were then the Governours and Commissioners declaring as much, but Sir Charles Coot, Sir Hardress Waller upon different grounds, and his party combined against it. There was a project to get the City to write to General Monke for a good Understanding,Sir William Wild chose Re∣corder of Lon∣don. where Master (now Sir) William Wild very opportunely for the Times, he being a most knowing and upright Gentleman, was chosen Recorder in place of young Master Green deceased. General Monke removed the Officers he had secured in Timptallon-Castle to
the Basse-Island, out of all way of Communication, and sent Major Knight (of his own Regiment of Horse) with five Troops as far as Morpeth in Northumber∣land; and upon notice of the readiness of Lambert, drew out more Southwards for a Bravado, to let them see how resolved and prepared their General was, and departed. Doctor Clargis sent to the Gen. in Scotland, Novemb.In the same instant Col. Talbot and Mr. Thomas Clargis his Excellencies Bro∣ther-in-law were sent with another Complement from hence to ingratiate with the General: and now he is pleased (though he had refused Goff and Whally (Regicides) and Caryl their Priest, whose person he yet outwardly liked) to ac∣cept of a Treaty; and Col. Wilks, Lieutenant-Col. Clobery, and Major Knight were appointed his Commissiomers to go for London to Treat with Three more; and in the mean while his Forces should not stir further Southwards. These upon their journey Lambert met with; and hoping their Errand would end in an acquiescence as they promised, did acquisce himself, and await the Issue, which upon the arrival of them at London came to a speedy result (though Three Kingdoms were the subject of this Treaty) betwixt Six unlearned men; and like a happy Revelation was cryed about the Streets the next morning: the Heads were these. Moncks Commisioners agree, to no purpose, No∣vemb.Novemb. 16. They were proposed, the Seventeenth concluded, viz. The Family of the King utterly to be excluded, a Free-State Setled, the Ministry and Vniversities encouraged, the Generals Officers imprisoned to be released, and a gene∣ral Indemnity of the Parliament-party, and the Armies to retire presently into Quarters, and Three Army-Officers of each Kingdome, and a general Council of them, with ten Sea-Offcers, and I know not what Embryo, to meet on the Sixth of De∣cember at Whitehall, and to conclude as Vane had codled it: about which time Captain Robinsons's and Captain Deans's Troops deserted him, Robinson bringing his Troop away with him, his Brother being then Clerk of the Committee of Safety, and allied, by Marriage of a Daughter, to Sir Nicholas Crispe. But the General was intent upon another more taking Assembly at home, ha∣ving issued out Writs by his own Precept and Authority for convening some of the Nobles, and two for every County of Scotland (while as yet he lay in the Confines of England with some part of his Army, from which parts he sent away a Letter by Col. Markham and Atkins to the City of London, of the Te∣nour of the former intercepted to Devonshire, which being read at a Common-Hall, was by all means endeavoured to be blasted as fictitious, and the Messen∣gers imprisoned. General Monke calls a Scotch Conven∣tion, and ob∣tains his de∣mands.The Scotch Convention met the General according to his Summons, at Edenburgh, where he propounded to them; First, The security of the Peace in his absence; which, he said, He was constrained to, in defence of the Parliament, and our Laws (in general terms.) Secondly, That they would Assist him if any Trou∣bles should arise. And Thirdly, That they would raise him some money. To this they readily answered, (being Oracled,) That as to the first, they had no Arms, and therefore were in no condition nor capacity to provide against any Insur∣rections, but would endeavour. Secondly, That it could not be expected, nor were it reasonable for them to interest themselves in a War, which if prosperous, had no assurance of advantage; if unhappy, would be farther ruinous to them. Thirdly, That as to moneys, they were exhausted already; but yet confiding in his Noble and Honourable design, they would raise him a Twelve Moneths Assessement, which amounted to Sixty thousand pounds; and the Revenues of the Excise and Customes besides. The Earl of Glencarn Chair-man to that Conventi∣on.The Earl of Glencarn had the Chair here, one of the General's Privadoes, a former Eminent Royallist, and at present deem'd a moderate man; having in all things complyed with the General's Orders.—This is one of the Cur∣tain-stories which cannot be pryed into as yet, as are the other abstruse contri∣vances of the Kings Restitution; it is sufficient to mind the Reader, that some great Providence was at hand, when a revengeful and most desperate Enemy gratified his Conquerour by the opening of his Heart and his Hands, instead
of striving with this advantage, and arming himself to the recovery of that Peoples Liberty. The Committee of Safety (for all Vane's curious Modules) liked not themselves in this their Government; but to free themselves by a Proclamation, declared their resolution for another Parliament, and that they were upon qualifications, and summoning one speedily. One Barret sent out of Ireland with a Letter to Gen. Monke from the Army-party there, was likewise imprisoned: all the whole Force in Scotland were now together; to wit, the Generals Regiments, Wilks's, Talbot's, Fairfax's, Pearson's, Read's, Smith's, and Sawrey's of Foot; and His own Col. Twisleton's Morgan's, and Saunders's of Horse (the latter of whom was detained in a kind of restraint of Coventry) nevertheless the General pretended still to an Agreement, and therefore declaring not himself fully satisfied, desired the addition of two more Commissioners to treat with his other three at Newcastle, with five more of Wallingford-house; the chief of whom was Col. Clerk, who came post to Newcastle; where having conferred, the General sends for his Commissioners, to be fully informed of the transaction before he ratified it, because of the late mistake of his Commissioners at London; and upon their arrival, clapt up Col. Wilks for exceeding his Instructions. The General was now at Berwick, whence he sent Letters to Fleetwood, assuring him, that in all this difference there, he had no personal quarrel against him, but could return into a most firm friendship with him. But now his temporizing came to an end: for Hazelrig,Portsmouth seized by Ha∣zelrig, Decem∣ber 4. Morley, Walton, (Col. Norton was then also present) got into Portsmouth; and Whetham the Go∣vernour (formerly of the Generals Council in Scotland) siding with them, they presently seized upon such Officers as were thought to favour the Wallingfordi∣ans, of which were Captain Brown, and Captain Peacock, and declared for the Parliament; which coming to the Ears of the Council of Officers, they present∣ly ordered Major Cadwel with a Party of Horse to block them up, who accor∣dingly came to Gospur on the other side the water; and Riches and Berries Troops were sent to joyn with him; who instead thereof, being inveagled by Col. Vnton Crook and Major Bremen, marched into Portsmouth, and joyned with Hazelrig. Then began the Tumults in London,Tumults in London about a Free-Parlia∣ment, Decemb. throughout. and instant applications were made to the Lord Mayor and Aldermen to declare against both Army and Rump, the last of whom was most abhorred, and cryed out against with the general voice, of No Rump; and a Petition for a Free-Parliament, as the only way to preserve the City and Kingdome, was preferred for Hands; which the Committee of Safety under high Penalties forbid: but no regard being had to them, nor no application of any person to them, but their own Army-folk (save that Sir George Booth obtained his Liberty upon Bail, from them, because of indisposition, and for recovery of his health in better Ayr) the said Petitions were carried on, and high things resolved on; Shops being shut up, and the Publick only minded, people running in clusters in the middle of the Street, and hearing and telling of News, an threatning or expecting (as news came) nothing but De∣struction. These things being posted to Wallingford-house,Hewson Mar∣cheth with Ter∣rour into Lon∣don. Colonel Hewson with his Regiment was ordered to march into the City, and quell these Tumults and Up∣roars; who accordingly came strutting in, and seeing some gatherings of Ap∣prentices and others, having commanded them to be gone, bid his Musquetiers fire, who killed two men about the Exchange: Horse and Foot were also quar∣tered in the Streets, and round about the City. Lambert seeing no good was to be expected by this Treaty,Lambert would Fight. his Messenger Col. Zanchy being secured at Berwick, advanced to Perith, having almost spoiled and wasted the Country about Newcastle, with his numerous (and indeed gallant) Army; for he had the flower of it with him, both for Horse and Men: mo∣ney was wanting, and could not be had; so that free-quarter, on which he was forced to subsist (having almost undone himself, to supply his incident necessities
of the Expedition,) made him not only odious, but disheartned his men; which to remedy, he concluded to March forward; and so came to Perith, in∣tending to Fight. Nothing in the interim, but fears, rage, desperation, revenge, private and pub∣lick consultations about the redress of these mischiefs, filled the City of London; and nothing but a Free-Parliament could be thought of as a fit expedient: which, the Committee of Safety found it high time to personate; being already certain, that Portsmouth-story would spoil all: and therefore to prevent the Rump,A Free-Parli∣ament noised as the only expe∣dient. Proclaimed, December 15. a Free-Parliament to sit down the Twenty fourth of Ianuary, upon sundry qualifications, which were to be formed out of these Seven Fundamentals: 1. No King. 2. No single Person. 3. The Army to be continued. 4. Liberty of Conscience. 5. No House of Peers. 6. Legisla∣tive and Executive Power distinct. 7. Both Assemblies of the Parliament and Council of State to be chosen by the People; which was the Co-ordinate Senate of Sir Henry Vane's Fiction, of which he was desperate in love, with Narcissus, unto his death. These made the Commonalty worse mad than before, and made them more the scorn, than the fear of the People; which to lessen also, Lawson declares for the Parliament, and came up with his Fleet into the River; and the Portsmouth-blades began to stir; so that Wallingford-house began to look thin. Sir Henry Vane and Salway howsoever undertook to cajole Lawson; but Mr. Scot met them on Board the said Vice-Admiral (where the righteousness of these Actions was disputed) and spoiled their Game. Another Cavalier-Plot was discovered; which was the likeliest of all to take,Major General Brown in a new Design. being laid in the City, and under the Conduct of Major-General Brown; some part of the Forces being in Arms the Night appointed; but it was discovered, and divers Gentlemen and Horse ta∣ken at the White-Horse by More-gate. I should mention also a Plot upon the Tower, by Scot and Okey for the Rump, &c. but it taking no effect, I pass it. But the Reader will be weary of these traverses, and therefore to the event. Wallingford-House broke up, and Army sub∣mit.Things being thus brought about by the activity of some Rumpers, and the Army not likely to receive a penny pay more, as full information was given the Souldiery, the Wallingford people broke up House; and the Officers and Army in Town presently submitted to the Speaker; Rendezvouzing first in Lincolns-inne-fields, where they were headed by Col. Okey and Col. Alured; and thence they Marched down Chancery-lane through Holborn, where the Spea∣ker was come down to the dore of the Rolls, and there the Officers made their obeysance, and expressed their joy, and cheerfully returned to their duty; which done, the Speaker with Sir Anthony Ashly Cooper, &c. took Coach and went to the Tower, where they were likewise admitted, and had the Keys delivered by Lieutenant-Colonel Miller; and the said Sir Anthony, Mr. Weaver, and Iosiah Berners left by the said Speaker as Lieutenant-Commissioners in that place: This happened on the 24 of December. Lord Fairfax Arms against Lambert.Desborough's Regiment of Horse (sent out of the North to assist against Portsmouth, and to countenance the Wallingfordians) stayed at Saint Albans, and concluded on submission, as did their Clown or Colonel, while in the mean time Col. Salmon was sent away by the Officers here, to give Lambert an account of this turn, upon whose back the County of York was risen; the Lord Fairfax with a great party of Horse being then in York, whither Col. Lilburn came and joyned with him: the Irish Brigades also marched off in discontent, so that there needed not any Order of Parliament for Lambert to lay down, his Arms and be quiet;Lambert de∣serted. for as soon as Salmon came, the mighty design was crawl'd into an Inne, and a Pot-Consulatation held how to come off, not with Honour, but with Safety; and the next News heard of him, was, that he was seen at Northallerton, with about Fifty Horse, and no more, of all his great Army. And thus was Richard Cromwel's deposition revenged by Lambert's just de∣sertion; and the Rump victorious, returned again to their old House at
Westminster, with such proud surly looks, as made the Red-coats themselves to quake. The 26. of Decemb. at Night,The Rump re∣seated. Dec. 26. they got Possession again; and Voted several Orders, especially about the Souldiery: and because Sir Arthur and Morley, the former Commissioners, were not present, they Constituted new ones, viz. Mr. Alexander Popham, Sir Anthony Ashley Cooper, Scot, Okey, Thompson, Mark∣ham, and Allured; giving them power to suppress Insurrections, of which they were much in danger. However, the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen had stilled the clamours and Petitions for a Free-Parliament (for they scorned to ask the Rump's consent) with a promise it should be effected: for nothwith∣standing the Rump sate, which was thought by the Vulgar the only thing in∣tended after all this stir (for they did prank it like the Flie on the Wheel (in the Fable) who gloried that he raised the dust) the Mayor and Court of Aldermen sent away their Sword-bearer to the General with Letters of Cachet,The City sent their Sword-bearer to the Gen. which came safe to his Hands, and were with all affection and civility received, and an∣swered in time to the purpose. In Ireland, Sir Theophilus Iones and Col. War∣ren seize Dublin-castle; and after, Ludlow, Corbet, Tomlinson, and Iohn Iones were summoned into England, to answer an Impeachment of Sir Charles Coot against them. A new Council of State was appointed; and all what General Monck had done in displacing Officers, and carrying on the Service, was approved of, and thanks ordered him; and Hazelrig being come to Town,Hazelrig thanked, &c. and lighting at the Palace-yard in Triumph, at the Head of Thirty Troops of Horse, was thanked likewise most solemnly, as was Rich also in the House; and as much had Col. Henry Ingoldsby for his Relation of the taking of Windsor-castle. The next work was, to make sure of the City of London, and so to borrow some money, (for all the revenues of the Good Old Cause were not worth one farthing, besides Excise and Customes;) and therefore a Conference was held at Whitehall, Sir Arthur being the chief of the Committee of the Rump: but the one would not endure to hear of lending of money to pay their Enemies; nor would the other hear of a Free-Parliament. In the mean time, the Gene∣ral signified to the House, that because he supposed them not yet free enough, he would with his Army come to London: (his Souldiers were then very full of money by the Scotch advance, and some Thousands of pounds from London; which made them willing to undergo that hard duty (the necessity of guarding themselves from surprize and treachery had put them upon.) Upon Receipt of this Letter,General Monk signifies his in∣tentions of com∣ing to London. they Vote him a Thousand pounds a year; and that he be desired to come to London; and a hundred thanks again: and this News kept them from proceeding severely against Lambert; upon whom they had an eye, to oppose him against the General, if he should Army-master them: they discharged Sir Henry Vane of his Membership; as likewise they did Saloway, and committed him to the Tower, for their Committee of Safety project. All the Officers in Lamberts Combination, were commanded to their respective Houses in the Country; and Vane to his a Raby, in Durham Bishoprick; and Sir Anthony Ashley Cooper constituted a Col. of Horse— in very good time! Sir Henry Vanes's Phanaticks of the Three Regiments were disarmed, and their Arms ordered to be carried into the Tower; and new Commissions to the Offi∣cers in England; when news came of several stirs and commotions in Gloucester∣shire, Devonshire, and Cornwal, about a Free-Parliament. I ommitted, that the Officers here in London submitted, upon a promise of Indemnity, which was Passed by a Vote,Robinson and Scot sent to meet him. with this condition, That they return to their duty by the ninth of Ianuary; and Captain Chillingham was sent with this Order to Lam∣bert. But because of the frequency of these Commotions, and that matter of Fact will sufficiently shew this Transaction of the General with the several Counties, and the Commissioners of the Rump, Scot and Robinson, appointed to wait on him, meerly to sift out, and discover his intentions: I will give the Reader a bare Journal of the Affairs as they passed. But before I proceed, the Reader is to take notice, That our Soveraign having
been highly treated at his return from St. Iean de Luz, at Paris, by the Duke of Orleans,The King re∣turns in State, and with great Reception to Brussels and regarded now as the Monarch of great Britain, (such assured confidence there was of his Restitution;) passed in great State publiquely to Brussels, where His return was no less magnificently welcomed, and there abode till the dissolution of this Parliament, the Rump, which now, as their last Engine (and dying Efforts are most vigorous) against Monarchy, and its fortress of Loyalty, had under their consideration an Act for Renuntiation and Abjuration of the Title and Right of the King, and the whole Line of King Iames.Abjuration of the King in∣tended by the Rump. Oliver had proceeded to the disanulling it; this, to the damning of the Nation, who had sworn to maintain it. But rather than sink, as they plainly saw the King would at last be too hard for them, by the late Commoti∣ons and Insurrections in his behalf; therefore they bethought themselves of this Italian revenge, to ruine the Bodies and Souls together of their Enemies: this was afterwards prosecuted while the General was among them; and a Petition delivered by Barebones, and other Good-Old-Cause-men, and Fanaticks, and they most abominably thanked for this their love and care of the Common∣wealth. At the same time Sir Iohn Roll, and other Devonshire Gentlemen, list∣ed and engaged all that Country upon the account of a Free-Parliament; ac∣cording to the Cabal betwixt the General and him, Mr. Morrice now Secretary, and others. And this strength the General relyed on, upon all events, as his own Country-men; and doubtless this resolution of that County was of very great influence in the ensuing Affairs. Scot and Robinson were sent to cajole the General with another Letter of thanks to him; as also another was sent to Major-General Morgan; Col. Syden∣ham a Member of the Committee of Safety, and of Oliver Cromwels's Council, discharged the House. A tumult at Exeter about a Free-Parliament; Com∣missioners and Judges appointed for the several Courts. Alderman Fouk▪ Vin∣cent, and Colonel Bromfield▪ ordered by the City to meet and congratulate the General. The General at Nottingham, came our a Declaration of the Parliament against Kingship, but not a word of Dssolving themselves, or filling up the House. Sir Robert Pye and Major Fincher, for tendring a Declaration of the Coun∣ty of Berk-shire for a Free-Parliament, were committed to the Tower; which for∣ed a Vote for Qualifications, &c. The Lady Monck arrived at White-hall,Lady Monck arives at White-hall. the Mi∣nerva and great Patroness of this grand design. General Monck arrived at Leicester, and was met there by Scot and Robinson, who sent the Parliament a copy of his Letter to the Devonshire Gentlemen: great seeming kindness past between them. An Act passed the House, being a Bill of Assessment of One hundred thousand pounds a Moneth, for six Moneths, throughout England,The brief rela∣tion of the turn and chage by Gen. Monck, in is series and compendi∣ous view. Scotland, and Ireland: they had made it at first for Twelve; but it passed at last for Six. At Harborough the General was met with the London-Commissioners, to whom he speaks fair: the High Sheriff of Northamptonshire, and the Major of the Town, congratulate him; The Lord Falkland came thither also with the Oxfordshire Address for a Free-Parliament, attended by the Gentry of that County, and had a fair reception: at Stony Stratford the Gentlemen of Bucks: the like at Dunstable; and at St. Albans he received more of the same nature from the County of Norfolk, by the hands of the Lord Richardson, and Sir Horatio Townsend; and other places: to which he answered ambiguously and fairly, giving them all civil and most obliging Reception, even to the Apprentices of London, who came thither with a Petition of the same nature; the General parting with the expressions of his care and endeavour for their and the Cities good, and was uncovered all the while. Thence he desired the Parliament, that the Army in Town, for fear of Infection, be distributed into the Country, to make room for his own Forces: about which, Tumults arose in the Guards at St. Pauls; and more pertinaci∣ously at Somerset-house; which caused the General, being invited also by the Rump, to make extraordinary hast thither. Several Reports made to the House, concerning Qualifications and Elections. On the second of February
he Rendezvouzed that morning at Finchly-heath, where he drew up his Army, having marched from Barnet;Gen. Monck at London. and by St. Iohns-street and Holborn, down Chan∣cery-lane, came with his Army into the Strand, where at Somerset-house he was met by the Speaker. They saluted each other with the Title of Lord-Gene∣ral: The General afterwards waited on him to his Coach, and then to refresh; but he refused White-hall for his Quarters. Next day after he was conducted to his audience at the House, where he had a Speech made to him by the Spea∣ker, being a thankful Commemoration of his services; to which he modestly re∣plied, refusing to sit in the Chair placed for him by their order, declining all the praises given him (as he never intended any service for them) but desiring them to be very tender of the Gentry of this Kingdom, (which would prove their Interest) and of Oaths and Engagements, &c. so was with great respects re∣conducted and attended to his Lodging, where he continued in good intelli∣gence with them, till their politick Revenge put him upon this Adventure to make a Feud between him and the City: for the City refusing to pay the mo∣ney assessed upon them by the late Act of 100000 l. per mensem, the Rump order the Gates and Portcullices to be pulled down by the General,Gates and Portcullices pulled down, Feb. 9. and several Citi∣zens to be apprehended, viz. Sir William Vincent, Sir Thomas Bludworth, Sir Laurence Bromfield, Sir Richard Ford, Major Cox, Mr. Penning Lieutenant-co∣lonel Iackson, Mr. Spencer, Major Chamberlain, and Mr. Brown a Grocer in Wood-street, and sent to the Tower; which the General performed. They like∣wise ordered the discontinuance of the Common Council for that year, and proceeded to nominate another, and to settle a new Militia. The Gates were ac∣cordingly pulled down, the thumps of the Hammers even piercing the hearts of the Citizens. Such an affront and revenge never any of our Princes in his greatest rage did to this place, where likewise the Army was perforce Quar∣tered. But after the pulling down of the Gates, the General sent a Letter to the Parliament, acquainting them how grievous and distastful the action was to his nature, intimating also the great Merit of the City towards them throughout the War; and on Friday, after several Conferences managed before him by some of the secluded Members and City, and others of the Rump, (He pretending his desire of satisfaction for their Exclusion, of the evidence of danger of their readmission, which the Rump were now unarmed to dispute, (his Commission from them as Commissioner for governing the Army being then also expired) (and the publication of a Petition subscribed by Barebone's and others to abjure the King) as afterwards with the Mayor and Court of Aldermen at Guild hall, who used their endeavours with him in the business; he marched out of the City with his Army to their Quarters; and on Saturday sent another Letter to the Parliament, wherein he laid open the dangerous designes countenanced by themselves in conniving at Lambert, particularly the business of Barebone's Pe∣tition, setting forth that there had been Oaths too many already;The General rendezvoused in Finsbury-fields, and de∣clares for a free Parliament and City, Feb. 9. Bonfires and Rumps roasted that night. (and as be∣fore) in the afternoon he Rendezvoused in Finsbury-fields, and from thence mar∣ched into London, where he and his Army were joyfully entertained, declaring himself for the City and a free Parliament. Towards evening, the City rung every where with the news of it, with such Acclamations, and shone with so many Bonfires, (where they burnt and roasted all manner of Rumps in detestation of the Juncto then sitting) that it seemed a Theatre of mad & extasied people; nor is it possible any expressions of it should reach the sense and belief of Posterity; Money being thrown among the Souldiers, as if now there would be no more occasion for it, but that the Golden Age swiftly approached: The Speaker at his return from the House being in danger of his life. Innumerable the Ballads and Ribaldry made of this Rump. The General continued in London, and disarmed most of those Phanatick persons who had been listed by the Committee of Safety; and notwithstanding the Order of the Rump, yet kept their Arms. The aforesaid Conferences were yet held, and the General assisted at the debates between some of the Members
sitting, and those that were excluded in 1648, in order to some composure; ha∣ving promised to stand by the City in the attainment of such a settlement as should secure the Nation. These conferences coming to no Issue, and the Rump having at last finished their Qualifications, so rigid and unreasonable, that no good or fair meaning appeared in them, as he modestly and fairly told them; He came with his Army into Westminster, and parts adjacent; and having that morning convened the aforesaid secluded Members at White-hall, went with them to the House of Commons, and see them safely sit in Parliament; who presently vacated many Orders made by the aforesaid Remnant in 1648, in re∣ference to the Death of the King, and their own forcible seclusion;Secluded Mem∣bers restored, Feb. 21. as also all Votes lately made by them, touching new Members to be elected to sit and serve in Parliament: also all Orders referring to Sir George Booth's business, and all Imprisonments, and Sequestrations thereupon. Next, they constituted the Ge∣neral, Captain and Commander in chief of all the Forces of England, Scotland, and Ireland; discharged all Prisoners upon the account of a Free Parliament, and suspended the Power of the Council of State, till they had erected a new one, of which the General was made one. They likewise ordered the Gates and Portcullises of the City of London to be repaired and set up at the publick charge; more especially, care was taken by them for securing the Militia into honest and faithful hands, both in London and the respective Counties. The dispatch of the aforesaid Assessment was also re∣commended to the Commissioners, and a great advance of money lent by the City for the present occasions; their promptness now, overmatching the Force before. Sir Charles Coot wonder∣fully reduceth Ireland.Sir Charles Coot declares for a Free-Parliament, by the re-admission of the se∣cluded Members, and thereupon possessed himself of Dublin-castle, (having first of all surprized Galloway from Colonel Sadler in this manner: He invited him and his Officers, all Anabaptists, to his house over the water, to be merry; which doing, Sir Charles pretended a desire of drinking a glass of Wine in Galloway privately with Sadler: so they two secretly took Boat, with each a ser∣vant; and being on the other shore, Sir Charles said, Colonel Sadler, I am re∣solved for a Free-Parliament, and to have this Garrison: you have a Sword about you; draw and fight, or else engage your honour will make no disturbance in the Town upon our admission, and my Declaration: to which, Sadler amazed and troubled, answered, He would acquiesce. Whereupon he caused the Gate to be opened; and Sir Charles having declared himself, the Souldiers cried out, A Coot, a Coot, and a Free-Parliament: Whereupon, nevertheless, he secured and kept him prisoner, as he did Sir Hardr. Waller at Dublin aforesaid: and immediately all Ireland declared themselves satisfied in this most happy Change, offering their lives and fortunes in the maintenance and defence of the Parliament to be now assembled. Rich his Regi∣ment mutiny.Some Phanatick Troops of Rich's Horse rendezvoused at Bury in Suffolk, where they began to mutiny: but Colonel Ingoldsby and Captain Philip How∣ard (Captain of the Life-guard) being sent against them, they presently were quieted, and received their old Colonel Ingoldsby for their Commander: where∣upon a Proclamation issued for the better regulating the Army, and keeping it in obedience; requiring all Officers and Souldiers immediately to depart to their several Quarters, and not remove without the Generals order or license in that behalf. This made the Army sensible of that duty the Parliament expected from them: whereupon they, (one Regiment after another) presented their Addresses to the General, owning and congratulating his happy management of the Affairs of the Kingdome.The City Feast the General. Nor indeed was ever any man so deservedly courted: but especially the City shewed themselves most affectionate admirers of those great Services he had done his Country; most of the Twelve Companies ha∣ving invited him successively to their Halls, where he was feasted with all sump∣tuous Magnificence, love or charge could show and afford.
The Parliament had no less resentments of his glorious undertakings: for besides the Generalate they setled upon him the Stewardship of the Mannor of Hampton-court, to preserve, not Usurp and possess that Royal Mansion. Seve∣ral Prisoners of the Phanatique-Party, nothing being charged against them, were freed by the General, who was now also constituted one of the Generals at Sea;Made Gen. at Sea with Mon∣tague. and Col. Montague now Earl of Sandwich the other. The Scotch Lords who were taken Prisoners at Worcester, and had been long secured in Windsor-Castle, were now, by order of Parliament released; that Nation un∣der Major General Morgan quietly awaiting the issue of the Affairs in Eng∣land. The Presbyterian-party were now very busie to have their Profession Establish∣ed by Act of Parliament;Presbytery ten∣dring an Esta∣blishment. and therefore a Confession of Faith was tendred to the House, which having been seven times read, was passed, and ordered to be Printed; and likewise the Solemn League and Covenant was also ordered to be reprinted, and read in all Churches once in every year, and to be set up in the Parliament-house▪ but it soon after found a different entertainment. The Parliament resolved during their Session, which should continue no longer than the end of March, to proceed only with matters of Religion, the Militia, Qua∣lifications and Writs for Elections; and in the interim, endeavours were used, more especially at Hull by Major Gen. Overton, to debauch part of the Army at York; and the same tricks also at Chester with the Irish Brigades, but were De∣feated, and came to nothing. Therefore Col. Lambert refusing to put in secu∣rity of Twenty thousand pounds, was now at last Committed to the Tower, to prevent any future danger from the unsatisfied part of the Souldiery. About this time died Carolus Gustavus King of Sweden. The Engagement made by the remnant of the Parliament,The Engage∣ment annulled▪ Viz. I do declare and promise, that I will be true and faithful, &c. was now ordered to be ex∣punged out of the Journal-book of the House of Commons: which made the Phanaticks begin to fear their unjust Possessions. Hull was now delivered to Col. Fairfax, according to the Generals Order. The Inscription under the Statue of King Charles the first, in the Exchange London, Exit Tyrannus, was expunged and blotted out by a private hand. According to,Writs for a Free-Parlia∣ment. the Parliament resolves to Dissolve themselves; and being pressed by the General, whose well-governed impatience of the Kings return permitted not the least delay in that dangerous place; Writs were ordered to be issued out for the Election of Members in the ensuing Parliament, in the name of The Keepers of the Liberty of England,The Long-Par∣liament Dissol∣ved, Marc. 23. by Authority of Parliament; and the Bill of their Dissolution being read and passed, leaving a power in the Council of State, in the interval of Parliament, to govern the Nations, they broke up: and so this long-lasting Parliament, which hath done and suffered so many strange things, came with fair expectations to a peaceable conclusion; but shall never want the Elegies, and the doleful complaints of the three Kingdoms. The Parliament being thus Dissolved,Agitating for∣bid. the first thing the Council of State acted, was the emitting of a Proclamation, forbidding all Persons whatsoever to make applications to any of the Officers and Souldiers in the Army, in the way of Agitating; declaring that pernitious course was the ruine of the King and Kingdome, in the years 1647, and 48. This actuated with a diligent eye upon some suspected persons, and securing of others, happily retained the Army in their duty and obedience, to the bringing about his Majesties Restitu∣tion; which was every day more visible. The Council of State were hammering a Proclamation, requiring such qua∣lifications as were intended by Parliament for the Election of Members to be strictly observed, whereby Cavaliers were to be excluded; but there were enow Royallists besides, to do that great and happy work, which was soon after ac∣complisht; and yet in the mean while made Addresses to the King, some Let∣ters passing from them to him, being unhappily delayed by the death of Mr. An∣nesley, Brother to the now Earl of Anglesey, who was drowned as he was taking
Boat to proceed in his Voyage for the delivery of them to the King. Mr. Barebone and Mr. Scot signed an Engagement, wherein they promised to live peaceably; but divers others of that Faction, for agitating, and other misde∣meanors, were secured, and committed to prison: the Elections in the interim went hopefully on, and the Militia was every where well established. A Letter was sent by the Council to the Bassa of Algier, for releasing the Lord Inchequeen and his Son, who were lately taken by a Turkish Pirate neer the Port of Lisbon, and carried to Algier. Colonel Massey appeared in Gloucester∣shire with an intention to stand for an Election there:Elections for the Free-Par∣liament. he was ordered to ap∣pear before the Council; which he did, and was afterwards unanimously chosen one of the Burgesses for that City; as Major-General Brown, who sate with the secluded Members before, with the Recorder Sir William Wilde, and Sir Iohn Robinson, (with whom the General constantly conversed in the suspence of his declaring himself, but was riddled to the Royallists by the Company he kept) were Elected for London: both these eminent Captains were very active and in∣strumental in the King's Restauration. The City of London emitted a Declaration, wherein they clear themselves of the Guilt of the King's Death, and the Crimes of the Usurpation; their Coun∣sels being under a force of a desperate Juncto put upon them: and as a signet of the Revolution ensuing, suffered the same Tumults to the Restitution, which it had fomented and cherished in the beginning of the Wars, to the ruine and overthrow of the Kingdoms. Anno Dom. 1660. WE begin this mirabilis Annus, the wonderful year of 1660, (which by the old Philosophical Axiome of twenty years revolution was to return all things in statu quo, to wit, the same condition) with an occur∣rence of no seeming tendencie or aspect to the product thereof, viz. The Proclamation from the Council of State, against Election of any to this Par∣liament that had served his Majesty in the late Wars: which proceeded from the unreconciled Results of those secluded Members, who yet retained some grudge of their first Quarrel, and would fain do away the imputation of their unjust Arming themselves and the people against their Soveraign, by a Vote passed this last sitting, wherein they again declared, That the late King began the War with the two Houses; and this was now for a subsequent confirmation of that fallacious Maxime of the Rebellion. Mr. Saint Iohn that was of this Coun∣cil of State,St. John stic∣kles in the Council of State for Propo∣sitions and Terms with the King. now opened and discovered himself in the solution of his former actions, by his suspicions and fears of the approaching Revolution. He stick∣led first for the Qualifications which the Parliament, through the General's designed importunity, had left unestablished and undetermined; and that being thus decreed (though the Gentry found means to Elude this Paper-scare-crow) foreseeing the necessity and absolute combination of all things to the King's Re∣turn, he laboured to clog that also with limitations and conditions; but to less purpose than he had straightned this Free Convention ensuing, which was very unlike to prove so, if such designes had taken effect. For to the Honour and everlasting entire Felicity of this unparallelled Rovolution, and the noble General's Loyal, and most generous, and obliging Prudence (beyond all Par∣liamentory Engagements and Terms whatsoever) his Majesties Rights and un∣doubted Prerogative were left and returned to him most free and inviolate. A Convention in Ireland.A Convention was held in Ireland, in nature of a Parliament, till such time as one might be conveniently and rightly called, for to provide for the Peace and Safety of that Kingdom; from whence the L. Shannon, Sir Iohn Clothworthy, and Major Aston were sent as Commissioners to the Council.
During the Election of Members, it was wonderful to see the general chear∣fulness that possessed the minds and looks of all men, and the no less stupid con∣sternation of the Phanatick party (which term they likewise obtained, from a Letter of the General's from Scotland a little while before) so that it was plainly seen, God had disarmed their spirits of that violence that had so ong possessed them, even to their personating a concurrent Contentment in this strange muta∣tion of affairs. Only the vexed Rump, and furious Sir Arthur Hazelrig, were most outragiously disturbed, by finding themselves so out-witted, and to have made all this stir with Lambert, for no other purpose but to undo themselves: they recollected now,A Letter sent to the Rump by the King. what Idiots and desperate Fools they were, in rejecting a Letter from the King, which was presented by Henry Nevil, as casually put into his hand (and their Voting of it not to be read or opened in the House) full of all Princely tenderness to their monstrous Crimes and Treasons, which being now on their part in exorable and unexpiable, but in their deserved punishment, they resolved on another Essay and device, like the Foxes tyed by the Tayls with fire at them, to offer at another attempt, which though it would not revenge them, would if it succeeded indempnate and impunifie them. For while all things thus seemed to forward and further his Majesties Return into these Kingdoms, an Address being signed by the whole Army, wherein they vehemently testified their acquiescence in whatever the Counsels of the ensuing Parliament should produce, and their abhorrence of former practices by intruding into the Government, and interposing themselves against all Rea∣son and Duty in civil Matters;Lambert e∣scapes from the the Tower, April 11. Colonel Lambert (as the last dying effort of those monstrous Violences which had so long prevailed against the bars of Law and Authority) broke out from his imprisonment in the Tower; notice where∣of being given, a Proclamation was sent after him, requiring him to render himself within 24 hours at his utmost Peril, and prohibiting any to conceal him; declaring likewise, that whosoever should take him should have 100 l. for his pains. This Escape was thought to have been effected by the conni∣vence or permission of Colonel Morley Lieutenant of the Tower: whereupon the General sent four Companies of Foot, under Major Nicholas, of whose faith he had experience, to command there; and presently gave order for Forces to march, in order to the reducing and re-taking of the said Colonel Lambert; to which service, most of the Gentry and Nobility in Town presently offered themselves, as also in the Country, especially in Warwick-shire under the Lords Brook,Defeated and taken, Apr. 22. and Conway, where the first intelligence of him was had. He appeared first about Tocester, with a small company of Horse; from thence to Naseby, where Major Creed joyned with one hundred more, intending for Edge-hill; but within two miles of Daventry, Colonel Ingoldsby met him augmented to four Troops, and some Foot, making neer seven hundred; (but if he had stood two or three days, would have encreased to a formidable power, the Phana∣ticks of the Army marching from all parts of the Kingdom to this Rendez∣vouze) one whereof was Captain Haselrig's, who being surprized by Ingoldsby's Forlorn, promised upon his Liberty to bring over his Troop; which accordingly was done. Upon this, Lambert desired a Parley,Lambert pro∣poseth the re∣storing of Rich. Protector. thinking so to work upon the Souldiery; and there offered as a security to all Interests, the re-admission of Ri∣chard to be Protector: this being waived as a stale device, and Lambert seeing Colonel Ingoldsby ready to fall on,Lambert dis∣mayed and ta∣ken, Apr. 22. and that another Troop was revolted from him, he presently betook himself to flight, losing there the name of that Valour (especially among his enraged Phanaticks) which he had purchased through∣out the War; crying out twice, Pray my Lord let me escape; what good will my life or perpetual imprisonment do you? (he divined well) which, though mounted on a Barb, being on Plow-lands, he could not effect, but was taken by Colonel Ingoldsby's own hands: Creed, Axtel, and Cobbet escaped, though pursued some miles. Being thus secured, he was sent up in a Coach to the Tower, and came by Hide-park on Tuesday, April the 24, the day before the opening of the Parliament, when the City-forces, exceeding for gallantry and
number all former shows, Mustred there before the General, and the Council of State: the field resounding with the cry of King Charles the second. A Free-Parli∣ament.Now at last, our Right and desires, so long contended for, prevailed: for, April the 25. the Free-Parliament sate down in two Houses; they met first at Saint Margares Church,April 22. Westminster, where Doctor Reynolds Preached before them. The Lords chose the Earl of Manchester for their Speaker; and the House of Commons Sir Harbottle Grimston: Mr. Brown Clerk to the former; Mr. Iessop to the latter. I may not omit, that the Lord General was chosen Knight of his own County of Devon, and also by the University of Cambridge; and not above four Rumpers were returned. Scot made a bustle for his new E∣lection at Wickham, against Major-Gen. Brown's Eldest Son, but stood not to it; for he fled to Bruxels, where he was known, though he relyed on the Protecti∣on of the Spanish-Ambassador here formerly; and was taken, and sent hither back again not long after. The first thing of note done by the Parliament, was an appointment of a Thanksgiving-day to God, for raising up his Excellency, and other eminent persons, and making them instrumental in delivering the Kingdome from Thraldom and Misery; and ordered, that the said General should have the ac∣knowledgment and hearty thanks of the Parliament, for the eminent and un∣parallel'd Services done these Nations, in freeing them from Slavery; which was accordingly performed: Thanks also were given afterwards to Col. In∣goldsby, for his retaking of Lambert. Several persons, Officers of the Army, and other ill-affected people, were apprehended, and secured in several places, for the strengthning and establish∣ing the peace and happiness of the Kingdom, so forwardly and so happily be∣gun and advanced; for now at last we were arrived at the brink, and to the prospect of our ancient Government, and to the hopeful confirmation of our Peace, after which we had so long laboured in vain; and here our Troubles cease, to whom in this alluding rapture we bid farewel. Hunc Finem Belli quod res commiscuit omnes, Non Gladii, non Saxa dabant, non tela, sed ille Perfidiae vindex & tanti sanguinis Ultor, MONKIUS— Hic murus abeneus esto. Thus ends the War which overwhelm'd the State, Suffering a weaponless and bloodless Fate. MONK'S conquering Prudence did Revenge and cease Murder and Treason; HE, our Wall of Peace.
A CHRONICLE OF THE CIVIL WARS OF ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, and IRELAND. THE FOURTH PART: BEING The Restitution. THE suspence and stilness which ensued so many tempestuous Agitations, was so far from becalming the Passions of Men, and entertaining the Na∣tion in the present felicity and acquiscence of things, as is usual in the complacency of such unexpected and impatienced blessings, that it trans∣ported them at the same instant to more vigorous and active Resolutions in pursuance of that happy Auspicium which so faitly directed to a plena∣ry and compleat Establishment. It was enviously fresh in the minds of all Loyal and good men, with what scorn and con∣temptuous derision, the Enemies of the Kingdoms peace, and the brood of the Usurpation, had mocked at this Revolution, as a most ridiculous and impossible thing: withal, it ocurred, how insolently they had upbraided, and how impiously charactered all former endeavours that way; which the Wisdom of God (whose own time is best) was pleased to disappoint, (al∣though he thereby made the folly of those wretches the more desperately hardened, and the more calamitous) and to appear at last himself, beyond their contradiction, and the bold Sophistry of those Gainsayers. The same divine Wisdom had taught the afflicted to humble themselves, and to rely more immediately upon his Justice, than that of their Cause; and to wait his retribution, whose Na∣ture and Essence it is to vindicate Right, and deliver the injured and oppressed: and there∣fore now was the acceptable time, by this prepared reception of the Mercie, wherein the sole Glory of the Miracle was visibly ascribable to himself; as to himself it mainly and chiefly be∣longed, to rescue his own Honour & Veracity from the impudent Blasphemies of wicked men. The Triumphs of Atheists had almost prevailed unto Victory, and braved Heaven with their success, as if it were unconcerned below, and those Affairs were only at their disposal, which through so many shifts and variations had still reverted into the first hand, and seemed in meer fondness and play to have but hided from them: but they were now to be convin∣ced, that the Power they had seized and wrested, could never be aliened from the Crown of England, to whose Restitution so many Enforcements, both Divine and Humane, were obli∣ged to concur, in this most happy and present Juncture of the Almighty's own appointment. Indeed the former Disappointments, Defeats, and Disasters, which by irresistible Force and undiscoverable Treachery had hitherto all along exercised the Heroical patience of our Soveraign, had most severely afflicted the Loyalty of many of his Subjects in their Lives and Estates, and seemed to threaten the Constancie of the rest with the like Fate (the power circulating, like an ill winde, into the same corner whence our Tempest first arose, which by vulgar conjecture portended its boysterous duration there,) had so far indisposed the minds of men to desire or hope for any thing but a lingring death of the English Ho∣nour, Freedom and Laws, that it was a preceding Miracle to their Restauration, that there was vertue enough left among our selves, to resume and re-engage in that calamitous and
destructive Enterprise, or that any should be of that unshaken and noble confidence as to put himself upon those Rocks by which so many had already perished. The Restitu∣tion of the King and Kingdom.But (as in the Jewish servitude and slavery to the Philistins, and at the expiration of their Babylonish Captivity, God raised up men to be his great and glorious Instruments, in bring∣ing about those his gracious purposes) so did he inspire and animate some eminent persons of this Nation, now his displeasure was almost ceased, with Courage and Conduct suitable to the Atchievement of our Redemption. Indeed it may be said, that he caused the whole Chain and Series of his Providence to conspire and combine against this arrogant and most Rebel∣lious Usurpation; who forgetting that they were the Scourge in Gods hands to chastise us, would have his Omnipotence the Sword in theirs to consume us; as they had all along in∣tituled him to their actions and successes. To this purpose did he so often remove and change their Modules of Government, and some of those Leaders and Rulers themselves, never suffering them to come to any consisten∣cy; but in the fairest hopes of it, like the Apples of Sodom, caused it to moulder and perish: By this means at last exasperating and clashing them one against the other, while with impa∣tience and mutual hate, they pursued their Prey, the Estates of King and Kingdom; which the one having seized, the other never left snarling and baying at his fellow, while the Owner came in and recovered his right from them both. Nor were their Divisions much more favourable to this happy Juncture, than was the Re∣conciliation and firm Accord made between the two Crowns of France and Spain, at the same time proptious and promising. The Kings Affairs, as was touched before, being taken into the concern of the General Peace, and this the quarrelling Grandees here very well knew; but their fewds were so far advanced, and the blows of their Ruine fell so thick one upon the neck of another, that they durst not take off their eye to bestow a glance, to the foreseeing the consequences of that auspicious Intrigue. However, it pleased the Divine Wisdom to free us at once from the kindness and danger of Forreign assistance, and to put this his great Work into the hands of true English men, who a∣lone did operate in this wonderful change; that it might not be imputed to us the most famous Islanders in the World,The renow∣ned Gene∣ral, the hap∣py instru∣ment of the Restitution. that we stood in need of any thing from abroad; and ordered it so by the management of such an English man, the great Captain, the for-ever-renowned Monck that the beginners of our Troubles might see and be confounded, that as they raised Arms a∣gainst their Soveraign, by the Popularity and Fame of their first General; so their last (but far more dear & beloved than be in the heighth of the peoples Lovesick madness) should turn them against their own selves, and effect that judgment and vengeance which had been acted, and thought accomplished by Cromwel; and was in the like intentions of Lambert. A Fate they always feared from so many Experiences, yet was it not in their power to avoid, for so was their final overthrow most justly decreed. The Noble Duke of Ormond,The Duke of Ormond the next. who was likewise another principally concerned in this blessed Affair, cannot be denied to be an En∣glish man; however originally descended of a most honourable Irish Family, both of them Heroes extracted from the Loins of Princes, of the latter, this shall suffice, the other like a Tutelary Angel, occurs in every word and line I write. Prosenteni reddit Linea cuncta Ducem. The King the great Agent.Nor was the superior Orb or Primum mobile of this great Affair at rest; the King contri∣buted as much as any person to his Return to his people, by his extraordinary diligence and wisdom, which improved all advantages and opportunities to the accomplishing of it. He courted the very worst of his Enemies, in the worst of their condition, to be good, and be ten∣der of themselves; and to prevent his justice by his Clemency and super-added Munificence, even when he was as good as sure to effect his Restitution by insuperable means, and uncon∣querable hands. To the best and Loyalist of his Subjects, he spared no promises nor encou∣ragements: and though the great unalterable constancy of his life and word was as firm and valid Caution as could be of any thing under the Sun, yet did He strengthen them with most obliging, and kindest assurances. Nor did he omit any just ways or means from abroad, letting his Subjects see that he had a hand ready to strike and inflict the punishment of the Rebel∣lion, if they delayed his imbraces. In fine, it was an Affair, in which all the faculties and pas∣sions of the Soul, (Love, Fear, Hope, and Joy) were tempered together to a MIRACLE, by his skilful hand, and art of Government; and wherein Reason and Necessity jumpt toge∣ther, and to which the whole frame of Policie officiously humbled and submitted it self, at this his Majesties most absolute and uncontroulable disposal of his Empire.
—Tibi numine ab omni Cedetur, jurisque tui Natura relinquet: Quis Deus esse velis ubi regum ponere mundo? —All the Heavenly powers yield, And Nature as thy right and choice doth leave: Where thou wilt reign, what Realms shall thee receive? But besides those of the first Magnitude,All the Loyal No∣bility and Gentry, there were Illustrious persons, and others that ren∣dred themselves conspicuous by their conjunction in this Revolution: such were the Lord Chancellour, the Earls of Southampton, Oxford, Bristol, S. Albans, & the two Secretaries of State, the old Earl of Norwich Ld. Goring (a person whose memory is highly ennobled by such grand Events and Occurrences of State, as the Spanish Peace with the Low Countries, which owes it self to his Transaction and Accommodation) the Earl of Manchester, the noble Earl of Sand∣wich, whose hand was engaged with his head, and was the excellent General's second in this Affair; the faithful and couragious Lord Ashly Cooper, who intrepidly engaged himself a∣mong the Usurpers, and dreaded not their spies and quicksighted sagacious discovery of de∣signes and intelligence against them, which he constantly managed; the Lord Annesly, now Earl of Anglesey; Lord Hollis; Lord Booth of Delamere, who broke the Ice, and endangered his Life and Fortunes in the Attempt, but was bravely rescued by his Reserve, the General, who came time enough to preserve him:And of some formerly en∣gaged a∣gainst it. not to omit the Dii minores, persons of lesser Rank, but Eminent in their Qualities; Sir Samuel Moreland, Thurlo's Secretary, and Cromwel's Resident in Savoy, where he was set as Intelligencer, which he proved most punctually to his Majesty, and countermined all the designes of his Masters; and by which means the King came to have intelligence of those disloyal, treacherous, and ingrate persons formerly of his side, whom we have mentioned: (He came to the King at Breda, where his Majesty Knighted him, and made him a Baronet, and gave him this Testimony, That he had done him very signal Ser∣vices for some years last passed.) Neither was Sir George Downing unserviceable to the same designe, in his station, in Holland, as his Majesty's Respects to him at his coming to the Hague (with recommendation from the General) did sufficiently declare. To conclude, the whole Mass of the people had a hand (at the least) in it, conspiring the same purposes in their wishes and affections; with the effect whereof, in a compendious Narrative, (for the Subject grows upon me to a bulk) I am next to indulge and pleasure the Reader. The King was yet at Brussels, in a setled quiet expectation of the sitting down of the Par∣liament; the results of whose Counsels were not thought so quick by the deliberating and slow Spaniard, (who had allowed the King yearly the sum of 9000 l. besides the pay of his Forces which his Majesty kept there; which money was since repayed by the King, soon af∣ter his return) and therefore, upon the King's departure from Breda,The King departs to Breda, from Brus∣sels; Com∣plemented upon his de∣parture. (upon assurance that the Parliament would not fail of sitting down at the appointed time) he having traversed to and fro, back and again to Antwerp, the civil Governour of these Countries gave the King his Complement of departure, and honourably conveyed him on his way to the City of An∣twerp, the Road to Breda aforesaid; when it was feared by very many, that the slye Spaniard would have put some demur or stay upon him, in his Dominions: He afterwards indeed sent a Complement to him, by an Envoy well attended, intreating him to return that way, and to take shipping at one of the Ports of Flanders, for England; and acquainted him, that for his greater honour and satisfaction, he should see his Souldiers payed as he passed: but the King civilly refused that kind proffer. The King was no sooner come to Breda, the Town and Castle whereof belonged to his Ne∣phew the Prince of Aurange,Dispatches the L. Mor∣daunt and Sir John Greenvil from Bre∣da. but having notice the Parliament was ready to sit, he dispatcht away his Letters by Mr. (now made Lord Viscount) Mordant, (the Lord Goring having been sent before to the Council of State and General) and Sir Iohn Greenvil, now Earl of Bath, with his Letters to the Parliament in both Houses respectively; to the Lord-General and Ci∣ty: which were speedily made publick, and the Town in a kind of extasie for two days toge∣ther, the Press never ceasing to print them,His Maje∣sty's Letter: and Decla∣ration was brought. and all persons having no other thing to do but to read them; the substance of which Message, with the like Declaration to the House of Com∣mons, and his gracious Letters enclosed to his Excellencie the Lord General, to be commu∣nicated to the Officers of the Army; with a Letter likewise and Declaration to the Lord Mayor,Contents of the Decla∣ration; Aldermen, and Common Council of the City of London, was this: His Majesty granted a free and general Pardon to all his Subjects whatsoever, that shall within forty days after publication thereof, lay hold upon that grace, and by any publick Act declare their doing so, such onely accepted as the Parliament shall think fit to be excepted; which he will con∣firm upon the word of a King. And as to tender Consciences, none shall be called in question for
differences in opinion, which disturb not the peace of the Kingdom. For Sales & Purchases, he will refer himself in all matters to the determination of Parliament; that he will consent to an Act or Acts of Parliament for paying off and satisfying the Arrears of the Army and Navy; and that they shall be received into his Majesty's service upon as good Pay and Conditions as they then enjoyed. Received most hoou∣rably by the ParliamentThis gracious Message, with the Letter to his Excellencie, and the Declaration, were read in the House of Commons, with most extraordinary Ceremony and Reverence, as if some strange awe had seized upon the minds of the Parliament; every man at the Speakers na∣ming of the King rising up and uncovering himself, desiring the Letters might be forthwith read; the like also was done in the House of Lords: In the House of Commons, remark∣able was that of Mr. Luke Robinson, who being a great Commonwealths-man, first of all spoke to the Letters, and acknowledged his conviction. Nor was this Declaration less acceptable to all the people, who were overjoyed with the news, and the infallible hopes of having their gracious Prince and Soveraign restored to them in Peace and Honour. The Parliament resolved,Parliament resolves thereupon. That they do own and declare, that accor∣ding to the Ancient and Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, the Government is, and ought to be, by King, Lords, and Commons. And having a deep sense of the Miseries and Distra∣ctions in which this Kingdom hath been involved since the violent attempts to dissolve the Established Government; the best way to make up those breaches, is by all means to obtain the Restoration of the King to his people; and that in order thereunto, a Letter from both Houses, (drawn up by a Committee) shall be sent to the King, giving him thanks for his gra∣cious Offers,Sir John Greenvil rewarded with a 500 l. Iewel. and professing their duty and loyalty to him; and that Sir Iohn Greenvil have the thanks of the House, and 500 l. bestowed on him by the Commons, to buy him a Jewel, as a Testimony of the respects of the House to him; and a badge of Honour, which they thought fit to place upon him: all which was with great solemnity & punctuality performed. Moreover, to testifie their hearty obedience to his Majesty, they ordered the sum of 50000 l. as a Present for him; which was instantly borrowed, with 50000 l. more, of the City of London,The City of London express the like. who having desired leave of the Parliament, returned a like dutiful Answer, with a Present also to his Majesty, and his two Brothers; having honourably received the Lord Vi∣scount Mordant, and the said Sir Iohn Greenvil, who brought them his Majesty's Letters, who also acknowledged their Quality and good Offices, by 300 l. given them to buy them Rings. The Army the same.Nor were the Souldiery wanting to this concourse and stream of general Affection and Loyalty to his Majesty; for upon communication of his Majesty's Letters and Declaration, they quickly drew up an Address to the General, wherein they shewed their willing and ready submission, as formerly in all Transactions to him their General, so in this their perfect Duty to the King: To whom they doubted not to evince, that his Excellencie, and the Army under his Command, and those engaged in the Parliaments Cause, had complied with the Obligations for which they were raised: The Preservation of the Protestant Religion, the Honour and Hap∣piness of the King, the Priviledges of Parliament, the Liberty and Proprieties of the Subject, and the Fundamental Laws of the Land. The Fleet also, and Dunkirk.This was seconded by the Navy under the General Montague, now Earl of Sandwich, to whom (and the Fleet under him) the King had sent the like Letters and Declaration; the Sea ringing with the peals of Ordnance, upon the communication of the said Papers: and lastly, the Governour Colonel Harlow, and Garrison of Dunkirk, did the same by an Address to his Excellencie. A Committee was appointed to consider the manner of his Majesties Return, and to pre∣pare all things necessary for his Reception: they likewise ordered his Majesty's Arms to be set up in all Churches,The Rump's Arms de∣faced. and the Commonwealths to be taken down, and that all Proceedings be in the Kings Majesties name; and that the present Great Seal be made use of till further order, that there might be no hindrance or stop in the proceeding of Justice. Easter-Term was likewise prorogued, that no business might interfere with this grand and expected Affair of the Settlement of the Kingdom. All Officers (as Sheriffs, Justices) that were in commission the 25 of April, to continue and exercise the respective Offices in the King's Name. It was Resolved further,Parliament Resolves to∣wards the King's Re∣stitution. That the King's Majesty be desired to make a speedy return to his Parlia∣ment, and to the exercise of his Kingly-Office; and that in order thereunto, several Com∣missioners from both Houses be sent to the King at Breda, with their Letters to his Majesty (Doctor Clargys (now Sir Thomas) the General's Brother, having been before sent with his to the King) and to acquaint him with the said Desires and Votes of the Houses. To these Commissioners, others were added from the City of London; the Names of them all are as followeth.
For the House of Lords: Earl of Oxford, Earl of Warwick, (staid at London sick of the Gout) Earl of Middlesex, Lord Viscount Hereford, Lord Berckley, Lord Brook. For the House of Commons: The Lord Fairfax, Lord Bruce, Lord Falkland, Lord Castleton, Lord Herbert, Lord Mandevil, Sir Horatio (now Lord) Townsend, Sir Anthony (now Lord) Ashly Cooper, Sir George Booth, (now Lord De la mere,) Denzill (now Lord) Hollis, Sir Henry Holland, Sir Iohn Cholmley. For the City of London: Sir Iames Bunce Baronet, Alderman Langham, Alderman Reynardson, Alder∣man Sir Richard Browne, Sir Nicholas Crisp, Alderman Tompson, Alderman Fre∣derick, Alderman Adams, Sir William Wilde Recorder, Sir Iohn Robinson, Al∣derman Sir Anthony Bateman, Sir William Wale, Sir Theophilus Biddulph, Sir Richard Ford, Sir William Vincent, Sir Thomas Bludworth, Sir William Bateman, Sir Iohn Lewis, Master Chamberlain, and Sir Laurence Bromfield; all of them (not Knighted before) Knighted by the King at the Hague upon their ar∣rival, the King being removed thither from Breda, as nearer, and more con∣venient for his shipping; the disposal whereof, and of the whole Fleet, was remitted to his Majesty's pleasure; the General Montague having received Orders to obey his Majesty's Commands and Directions therein. The Instructions being delivered to the Commissioners, they set Sail in several Frigots appointed to attend them; and with some foul Weather Landed in Holland,Commissioners arrived at the Hague. where they were graciously and favourably received by his Majesty at the Hague: (I may not omit, that the reception of Sir Thomas Clergys from the General, was as an Embassador from a Prince; the Lord Gerard with many Coaches being sent to conduct him to Audience) where Mr. Hollis, into whose hands the Letters were intrusted for the delivery, spoke for the House of Com∣mons; the Earl of Oxford for the Lords; and Sir William Wilde for the City. Those that were there at their Audience, agreed in Opinion, that never person spoke with more affection, or in better terms, than Master Hollis. He insisted chiefly upon the Miseries the Kingdoms had groaned under by the tyranny of the pretended Parliament and Cromwel; which should now be exchanged into their repose, quiet, and lawful liberty: beseeching his Majesty in the name of his people to return and resume the Scepter, &c. and assured him he should be infi∣nitely welcome without any terms: a thing so much stomacked by the Phana∣ticks; but most just and honourable. After several Treatments given the King by the Dutch, which he shortned as much as he could,The King pre∣pares to dpart. and other Complements by Forraign Ministers, to whom he gave publick Audience, the Portugal only excepted, and Spaniard; having no∣tice of the Fleets arrival, which consisted of near Forty Sail of great Men of War, he prepared to depart: At this time came also to his hands the Procla∣mation made in London, as a little before returned Sir Iohn Greenvil with the happy news of his peoples love and entire affection. The Proclamation fol∣loweth, being very fit to be recorded; that which we mentioned in the second Part, being but an earnest of this. ALthough it can no way be doubted,King Charles the Second So∣lemnly Pro∣claimed. but that his Maiesties Right and Title to these Crowns and Kingdoms, is and was every way compleat by the Death of his most Royal Fa∣ther of Glorious Memory, without the Ceremony or Solem∣nity
of a Proclamation: Yet since Proclamations in such cases have been always used, to the end that all good Subjects might upon this occasion testifie their Duty and Respect. And since the Armed Uiolence, and other the Calamities of many years last past, have hitherto deprived us of any opportunity, wherein we might express our Loyalty and Allegiance to his Majesty: We therefore, the Lords and Commons now assembled in Par∣liament, together with the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Com∣mon-Council of the City of London, and other Free-men of this Kingdom now present, do according to our Duty and Allegi∣ance, heartily, joyfully, and unanimously, Acknowledge and Proclaim, That immediately upon the decease of our late So∣veraign King CHARLES the First, the Imperial Crown of the Realm of England, and of all the Kingdoms, Dominions, and Rights belonging to the same, did by Inherent Birthright, and lawful undoubted Succession, descend, and come to his Most Excellent Majesty King CHARLES the Second, as being line∣ally, justly, and lawfully next Heir of the Blood Royal of this Realm; and that by the goodness and providence of Almighty God, He is of England, Scotland, and Ireland, the most Potent, Mighty, and Undoubted King. And thereunto We most hum∣bly, and faithfully do submit, and oblige our Selves, our Heirs, and Posterities for ever. This was Solemnized with the greatest Magnificence and joy possible, the Lords and Commons, and Lord Mayor attending it: the shouts and acclamati∣ons at the reading of it in Cheap-side were so loud and great, that Bow-bells, or any other Bells in the Town (though all then Ringing) could not be heard. All was concluded with unspeakable mirth, and numerous Bonefires at night, which yielded not their flames but to the rising Sun. I shall not intrude other matters at home into this grand Affair; but reserve them until hereafter, and proceed. The Dutch also (as knowing it would please the King) enlarged their Civilities and respects to the Commissioners of the Parliament and City; who received them from their Deputies with much satisfaction: likewise, several Provisions were sent aboard the Fleet, and the General: He also complemented with the Kings Restitution. The Dutch magnificent Treatment of the King.For a Conclusion of those great Magnificences with which they had enter∣tained his Majesty a Fortnight, they resolved to give him a Farewel-Treat∣ment, with all the sumptuousness expressible; which they performed; and in the end, presented him with the richest Bed and Furniture, with Tapestry for Hangings, imbossed with Gold and Silver, and adorned with Pictures, as could be had: the Bed was made at Paris for the Princess of Orange; but her Husband dying Eight days before she was delivered, it was never used. A little before this time, Sir Samuel Moreland,Sir Samuel Moreland, and Thurloe's Agent for Oliver at the Court of Savoy, came to the King, where he was kindly received, (having done the King seve∣ral good Offices) and discovered the intrigues of Oliver and the Rump, and was Knighted; he revealed also several eminent Royalists, as Sir Richard Willis, Colonel Bamfield, and others, who betrayed the King's Affairs and Friends to Oliver. Hither also about the same time came Sir George Downing,Sir George Downing. who was
also graciously received, who had done the like good services for his Majesty, and was likewise Knighted, and continued his Majesties Resident with the States. On Sunday the 20th of May,Duke of York aboard the Fleet. the King heard Doctor Hardy (after Dean of Rochester) Preach before him: the place intended was the French-Church, after their Sermon; but they knowing of it, being greedy to see the King, would not come out of their Seats; so that it was done in the Princesses Lodgings. Here the King touched many of the Evil. In the mean while, the Duke of York took the Oath of Allegiance of the Fleet, having gone aboard the Naseby, where the General treated him; which Ship, at his departure, when the shore resoun∣ded with the Artillery, he called the Charles: as afterwards the whole Fleet was new Christened in their way homewards. The King having thanked the States General and of Holland in their Pub∣lick Assemblies, whither he went on foot, took his leave of them; recommend∣ing to them the interest of his Sister, and Nephew the Prince of Orange; and was re-saluted by them upon the same, as also by the several Ministers of the several Princes, one whereof, the Count of Oldenham, sent an Embassador with Credentials to the King just before his departure, being the sole Minister so qua∣lified while his Majesty staid at the Hague. On Wednesday the 22 of May, Stilo veteri, the King departed;The King de∣parts for Eng∣land. and it may be said, there was no night between Tuesday and that; particularly for those who found no place to put their heads in, the houses not being able to lodge the croud of people that ran there from all the neighbouring Towns, the most part whereof were constrained to walk the streets, though the wiser sort took up their Quarters for their advantage of seeing the King's departure on Downs and Sand-hills which bordered all along the Sea-coast, where they might see the Fleet and the King Embarquing; so that it is a question, whether the Hol∣lander more wondered, or we more joyed. The Speech spoken by the States of Holland, at his Farewel, for the notableness thereof, is here inserted. IF one may judge of the content which we have to see your Majesty depart from our Province,The Speech of the States thereupon. by the satisfaction we had to possess you, we shall have no great trou∣ble to make it known to you. Your Majesty might have observed in the Countenance of all our people, the joy they had in their hearts, to see a Prince cherished of God, a Prince wholly miraculous, and a Prince that is probably to make a part of their Quietness and Felicity. Your Majesty shall see presently all the streets filled, all the ways covered, and all the hills loaden with people which will follow you even to the place of your Embarquement, and would not leave you, if they had where∣with to pass them to your Kingdom. Our joy is common unto us with that of our Subjects: but as we know better than they the inestimable value of the Treasure we possess, so are we more sensible of this sad separation. It would be insupportable to us, Sir, if we re-entred not into our selves, & considered not that it is the thing of the world we most desired, and the greatest advantage also that we could wish to your Majesty. We acquiesce therein, because we know that this removal is no less necessary for us, than glorious to your Majesty; and that 'tis in your Kingdom that we must finde the accomplishment of the prayers we have made, and make still for you and us: so shall we not fail to profit thence, as well as from the assurances which it hath pleased you to give us of an immutable affection towards this Republick. We render most humble thanks unto your Majesty for them, and particularly for the illustrious proof which it hath pleased you to give us thereof, by the glorious Visit wherewith you ho∣noured our Assembly. We shall conserve the memory of it most dearly, and make the marks of that goodness to pass to our last Posterity, to the end they may acknowledge it with the same respect with which we have received it. The appointment wherein we see your Majesty ready to take horse for the pursuit of your Iourney, forbids us to enlarge our selves upon a Subject which would never weary us, if we had words conformable to our respectful sentiments. But we have no minde to encrease the just impatience which your Majesty shall have to see your self returned into your King∣dom.
We pray God, Sir, that it be quiet and happy; and that as he hath disposed the hearts and affections of your Subjects to acknowledge their Soveraign and law∣ful Prince, it will please him also to command the Winds and Seas to expedite your Voyage; and that after you have received on your own Coast the same Prayers which we shall reiterate, you may injoy in your Royal Person, and in your Posterity for ever, all the Felicity and Prosperity which your humble Servants wish unto your Majesty. 'Tis certain that their entertainment of the King, and their Presents, cost the Dutch above 100000 l. The King de∣parts, and em∣barques.The King departed (as before is mentioned) accompanied with Prince Wil∣liam of Nassau, and the Admiral of Holland, having the Prince of Orange be∣fore him, being in the midst of his two Brothers the Dukes of York and Glou∣cester on horse-back, the Ladies attending on him in their Coaches all along the way, where the Citizens, the Horse, and the Regiment of the Guards stood in Battalia; the Cannon thundred, being answered with peals of Musick, which conveyed the like Mirth to the English Fleet Riding at Scheveling. The King, with his Aunt, his Sister, and some other Illustrious Persons (ha∣ving taken his last leave of the States) went first on board a Barge prepared by the Dutch, whose Streamers and Flags had this impress, Quo fas & fata, alluding to Dieu & mon Droit; but upon the approach of a Brigandine from General Montague,The King Em∣barques for England, May 23. he entered therein, and came on board the Charles; the Seamen see∣ming to be in an extasie, being possessed of their beloved Prince. Soon after he came up to the Poop to behold again that multitude on the Downs of Scheve∣ling, saying, That he thought his own Subjects could scarce have more tenderness for him than those people, on whose Affections he saw he reigned no less than he was going to raign on the Wills of the English. Much ado there was to part the Princess of Orange from him, whom many other considerations as strong as Birth had rendred most dear to him, till at last the General, who with all possible demonstrations of Loyalty had received the King, having all the Retinue shipt, caused the Anchors to be weighed, and the Sails to be spread; and then with Tears and Embraces she left him, and was rowed back again with the same company to the Holland-shore, which lost fight of the Fleet about the evening. No sooner was the Fleet under sail, but the Cannon began to roar, giving notice that the Lord of the Sea was in his rightful possession; which Thundring continued till night: Next day they had little winde, but so much, as on Fri∣day-morning they came within sight of Dover; whereupon an Express was sent to the General (then at Canterbury) to hasten to Dover; which he did accordingly, and about one of the clock with a gallant Train came thither: About three of the clock in the afternoon,Lands at Do∣ver, May 25. his Majesty landed at the Beach neer the Peer of Dover, with the Dukes and his Nobles. Every man now put them∣selves into a posture to observe the meeting of the best of Kings, and best-de∣serving (without flattery is it spoken) of Subjects. The General meets him at his arrival.This solemn and unexampled meeting, did with the joy thereof infuse a suspence of fear, that the Congress of the King and the General would of one part or other fail in Affection or Ceremony; but this Interview dispensed with all punctilio, other than that the General kneeled, and the King kissed and em∣braced him, to the most pleasing satisfaction of Nobility and People. His Majesty then walked up with the General under a Canopy, a Chair of State being carried by his Coach-side. In the way, the Mayor and Aldermen of Dover, with the Minister, met his Majesty; who after a short Speech, pre∣sented him a Bible with Gold-clasps (the ordinary Present of the Presbyte∣rian Ministers.) Then his Majesty took Coach, he and the Duke of York at one end, and the Duke of Gloucester and his Exellencie at the other, the Duke of Buckingham in the Boot.The King rides to Canterbury. About two miles from Dover the King took horse, the Dukes on the right hand of the King, the General on the left, bare; followed
by the Duke of Buckingham,The King rides to Canterbury and the rest of the Nobility and Gentry, uncover∣ed, and came to Canterbury, where he was met and complemented by the Mayor and Aldermen, and Recorder of that City, and presented with a Golden Tan∣kard, and so conducted to the Palace. Here he made the General Knight of the Honourable Order of the Garter; the Duke of York putting the Order about his Neck. Saturday and Sunday he staid here, and on Munday-morning departed for Rochester, whither that evening he arrived, and went from his Lod∣ging to Chattam, to see the Soveraign, and other Ships of the Royal Navy, and at night returned to his Lodgings at Colonel Gibbon's,To Rochester at Col. Gib∣bons. where he was welcomed by an Address from the Regiment of the said Colonel, delivered by himself; which his Majesty graciously accepted. Betwixt four and five on Tuesday-morning, being the most happy and au∣spicious 29th of May, his Majesty's Birth-day, he departed from Rochester, the Militia-Forces of Kent lining the ways, and the Maidens strowing Herbs and Flowers; the Towns through which he passed, hanging out White sheets. Be∣ing come to Dartford,To Dartford, receives the Declaration of the Army. the Officers of the Regiments of Horse presented an humble Address to him, wherein they declared their readiness to sacrifice their lives in defence of his Majesty's Person and Government. At Black-heath the Army was drawn up, where his Majesty viewed them, using many gracious Expressions towards them; which were answered by loud acclamations. The several Regiments being there placed in order, His Ma∣jesty advanced towards London, and about one a Clock came to Saint George's Fields, where the Lord Mayor and the Aldermen were in a Tent ready to receive him. The Sword being there delivered him, he re-delivered it, and Knighted Sir Thomas Alleyn. After a short repast, the King proceeded into London by Southwarke: from the Bridge to Temple-Bar, the Streets were railed on the one fide, with standings for the Liveries; and lined on the other with the Trained Bands: to which were added some Gentlemen-Volunteers all in white Doublets, under Sir Iohn Stawel.The manner of His Majesties entrance into London. The manner of his Majesties Triumphal and Magnificent Passage through this orderly ranking, was thus: First marched a Troop of Gentlemen, led by Major-General Brown brandishing their Swords, in Cloath of Silver-doublets, being about Three hundred, besides Servants. Then another Troop of about Two hundred in Velvet-Coats; the Foot-men and Li∣veries in Purple. Next, a Troop under Colonel Sir Iohn Robinson, with Buff-coats, Cloath of Silver-sleeves, and Green-scarves. After this, a Troop in Blew Liveries and Silver-lace, Colours red fringed with Silver, about Two hundred. Next, another Troop with six Trumpets, seven Foot-men in Sea-green and Sil∣ver, their Colours Pink Fringed with Silver. Then a Troop with their Live∣ries Gray and Blew, Thirty Foot-men, Four Trumpets, about Two hundred and twenty, their Colours Sky, Fringed with Silver, under the Earl of Northamp∣ton. Another of Gray Liveries, Six Trumpets, Colours Sky and Silver, about One hundred and five, led by the Lord Goring. Another of Seventy. Ano∣ther Troop led by the Lord Cleveland, of about Three hundred. Noblemen and Gentry, another Troop of about One hundred, black Colours. One more Troop of Three hundred Horse, led by the Lord Mordant. After these, came Two Trumpets, with his Majesties Arms, the Sheriffs-men in Red-cloaks and Silver-lace with Half-pikes, Seventy two in number. Then followed the Gentlemen that rid out of the several Companies of London, with their respective Streamers, all in Velvet Coats with Gold Chains; every Compa∣ny having its Footmen with different Liveries. After these, a Kettle-drum, and five Trumpets; The Citizens being in number about Six hundred. After these, Twelve Ministers; then his Majesties Life-guard led by Sir Gilbert Gerrard and Major Roscarrock. The City-Marshal with eight Footmen, with the City-Waits and Officers in order: then the two Sheriffs, and all the Aldermen of London (among whom, much wondring there was at Aldermen Ireton) in their Scar∣let Gowns and rich Trappings, with Footmen in Liveries, Red-coats laced with Silver and Cloath of Gold. The Maces and Heralds in their Rich coats,
the Lord Mayor bare carrying the Sword, his Excellency and Duke of Buck∣ingham bare also; and then, as the lustre to all this splendid Triumph, rode the King himself between his two Royal Brothers; which order he had all along ever since the overture of his return observed. After them came a Troop bare with White Colours; then the General's Life-guard, and another Troop of Gentry. Last of all, Five Regiments of the Army-Horse, with Back, Brest, and Head-piece, which diversified the Show with delight and Terrour. Thus have you in a view all that pleased and gratified the Eye; but no Pen or Tongue is able to express those ravishing and loud musical notes of Acclamations and Vive le Roy's, which charmed the Ears of all Loyal Subjects, even to Extasie and Transportation, and with which his Majesty himself (who endured the din of it all that day) was so pleasingly affected. With these joyful accents he was brought to his Palace of White-hall; where after the Lord Mayor had took his leave, his Majesty went up to the Lords, where a Speech was made to him in the Banqueting-house, (where both Lords and Commons awaited him) by the Earl of Manchester Speaker of the House of Lords; by which, that Posterity may know the sense of the Kingdome up∣on this Miraculous Change, it is here Recorded. The Earl of Manchester's Speech to the King.THat this day may prove happy to your Majesty, is the hope, the Expectation, and the earnest desire of my Lords the Peers, whose Commands are upon me to make this humble Tender to your Majesty of their Loyal joy for your Majesties safe Return to your Native Kingdome, and for this happy Restoration of your Ma∣jesty to your Crown and Dignity, after so long, and so severe a Supression of your just Right and Title. I shall not reflect upon your Majesties Sufferings, which have been your Peoples Miseries; yet I cannot omit to say, That as the Nation in general, so the Peers with a more personal and particular sense have felt the stroke that cut the Gordian Knot which fastned your Majesty to your Kingdome, and your Kingdome to your Ma∣jesty. For since those strange and various Fluctuations and Discomposues in Government, since those horrid and unparallel'd Violations of all Order and Iustice, Strangers have Ruled over us, even with a Rod of Iron: But now, with satisfaction of heart, we own and see your Majesty, our Native King, and Son of the wise; a Son of the an∣tient Kings, whose hand holds forth a Golden Scepter. Great King! Give me leave to speak the Confidence, as well as the Desires, of the Peers of England: Be you the Powerful Defender of the true Protestant Faith; the Iust Assertor and Maintainer of the Laws and Liberties of your Sub∣jects: so shall Judgment run down like a River, and Justice like a mighty stream; and God, the God of your Mercy, who hath so miraculously preserved you, will establish your Throne in Righteousness and in Peace. Dread Soveraign! I offer no flattering Titles, but speak the Words of Truth: you are the desire of Three Kingdoms, the Strength and the Stay of the Tribes of the People; for the moderating of Extremities, the reconciling of differences, the satis∣fying of all interests, and for the restoring of the collapsed Honour of these Nations. Their Eyes are toward your Majesty; their Tongues with loud Acclamations of Ioy, speak the thoughts and Loyal intentions of their Hearts; their Hands are lift up to Heaven with Prayers and Praises: and what Oral Triumph can equal this your Pomp and Glory? Long may your Majesty Live and Reign; a Support to your Friends, a Terrour to your Enemies, an Honour to your Nation, and an Example to Kings, of Piety, Iustice, Prudence and Power; that this Prophetick Expression may be verified in your Majesty, King Charles the Second shall be greater than ever was the great∣est of that Name.
His MAjESTIES Gracious Answer to the Earl of Manchester's Speech. My Lord, I Am so disordered by my Iourney, and with the Noise still sounding in my Ears, (which I confess was pleasing to me, be∣cause it expressed the Affections of my People) as I am unfit at the present to make such a Reply as I desire; yet thus much I shall say unto you, That I take no greater Satisfaction to my Self in this my Change, than that I find my Heart really set to endeavour by all means for the Restoring of this Nation to their Freedome and Happiness; And I hope, by the advice of my Parliament, to effect it. Of this also you may be confident, That next to the Honour of God, from whom principally I shall ever own this Restoration to my Crown, I shall study the Welfare of my People; And shall not on∣ly be a True Defender of the Faith, But a Iust Assertor of the Laws and Liberties of my Subjects. This passed, the King retired to Supper, and soon after to his rest, where it was time he should find it, after so many difficulties and turmoils in the World for Twenty whole years together. But the Citizens were not so weary of their Joy and Triumph;The joy of the City. for as soon as Night came, an Artificial day was begun again, the whole City seeming to be one great Light, as indeed properly it was a Luminary of Loyalty; the Bon∣fires continuing till day-break, fed by a constant supply of Wood, and main∣tained with an equal excess of gladness and fewel. Thus far this memorable and miraculous Affair hath carried me: not wil∣ling to break off the gladsome speculation and review of his glory and happy Influences, I must now a little retrospect to what passed at home in the Par∣liament and Kingdome. Several Acts were in agitation;Affairs  home. one for removing and preventing all questi∣ons and disputes concerning the Sitting and Assembling of this present Parlia∣ment; as also, that of Oblivion and Indempnity; and another for Sales and Purchases: and in the mean while, it was ordered by the Lords, That a stop be put to the demolishing, defacing, or committing wast in any Houses or Lands belonging to his Majesty; and that no Wood nor Timber should be felled: and the like done in the Lands belonging to the Duke of Buckingham, the Lord Craven, and Sir Iohn Stawel. The Commons ordered Ten thousand pounds to be sent as a present to the Duke of York; also that the Scotch Colours taken at Preston, Dunbar, and Worcester, and hung up in Westminster-hall, should be taken down: which was accordingly executed, and the Kings Arms placed in the Courts of Judicature. Col. Harrison (one of the Kings most malicious Judges) was apprehended in Staffordshire, and brought up to London; and by his Excellencies Order Committed to the Tower, while Whitehall was then a preparing for his Ma∣jesty. The House of Commons taking into consideration the business of the Pied∣mont-Collection-money, declared their detestation and abhorrence of the diver∣sion of the said Money from the charitable uses to which pretendedly it was designed. The King was Proclaimed with great joy throughout the Nation; while divers of the Kings Judges (out of consciousness of their guilt) escaped beyond Sea.
And in Ire∣land.In Ireland also the King was by the Convention there Assembled, Proclaim∣ed with the usual Ceremonies. Several of the eminentest of that Nation were also ordered to be sent to his Majesty, in the name of that Kingdome, with a present of Four thousand pound to the Duke of York; so sympathetically did the Irish Harp move with the same touches on the English. The King and the Dukes to the House of Lords.The most Illustrious Princes the Dukes of York and Gloucester went to the House of Lords, and there took their places; whither the next day came the King himself by Water in the Brigandine which brought him aboard the Charles from Holland; the Yeomen of the Guard making a lane, the Heralds at Arms in their rich Coats,The King comes to the Parlia∣ment, and pass∣eth several Acts. the Maces, and the Lord General Bare-headed before him: being seated, the Commons were called; to whom the King in a Speech pressed very much the Act of Oblivion; and Signed some Bills, viz. One for Confir∣mation of the Parliament. Another for the Tax of Seventy thousand pounds per Mensem, for three Moneths, from the 24 of Iune. A third for continuance of Process, and Judicial Proceedings: and then returned to Whitehall, where he chose the Lords of his Privy Council; among whom, were several of the Long Parliament. His Majesty also graciously and judiciously provided for the Benches and Courts of Judicature: for the Chancery the Lord Chancellour Hide; for the Rolls, the Lord Culpepper (who soon after dyed, and the place was by the Kings favour bestowed on Sir Harbottle Grimstone;) for the Kings Bench, Sir Ro∣bert Foster, Justice Mallet, and Sir Thomas Twisden; in the Common-Pleas, Justice Atkins; and in the Exchequer, Sir Orlando Bridgeman; Sir Ieoffry Palmer Attor∣ney, and Sir Heneage Finch Sollicitor-General; Mr. Iohn Heath, son of Sir Robert, Atturney to the Dutchy. But of this a fuller account. A Proclamati∣on for the King's Iudges to render them∣selves.Several Persons guilty of the Murther of King Charles the First, making their escapes beyond Sea, a Proclamation drawn up by the Parliament was published by his Majesty, summoning the persons therein named, who sate, gave Judgment, and Assisted in that horrid and detestable Fact, to render them∣selves within Fourteen days after the Publication of that His Majesties Royal Proclamation, to the Speaker, or Speakers of the Parliament, or to the Lord Mayor of London, or to the respective Sheriffs of the Counties of England and Wales; and that no person should presume to conceal or harbour them, under misprision of Treason: whereupon divers came in, and submitted, and were secured in the Tower. Several Addresses were made to the King from the Nobility and Gentry of all the Counties, congratulating his Majesties Restitution to his Throne and Kingdoms, and testifying their exceeding joy and willingness to maintain his Majesties Royal Person and Authority. Divers eminent persons for their ser∣vice and affection to his Majesty, were honoured with Knighthood. The House of Commons ordered, that others, besides the Actual Judges of the King,Other persons excepted out of the Act of Ob∣livion. Hutch∣inson and Las∣sels crave Par∣don. should be excepted out of the Act of Oblivion (which was now ve∣ry far proceeded in) as namely, Andrew Broughton, Phelps, Iohn Cook, Hugh Pe∣ters, and Edward Denby. This so affrighted others who had a hand in that execrable business, that Colonel Iohn Hutchinson a Member in this Par∣liament, and Colonel Francis Lassells Petitioned the House, confessing their guilt, and withal the Artifices that were used to draw them in; and by this submission obtained Pardon, upon some forfeitures. Hugh Peters was taken about this time in Southwarke: at first he denyed his Name, but being brought before Sir Iohn Robinson, then made Lieutenant of the Tower, he was known, and acknowledged himself,Parliament lay hold on his Ma∣jesties Decla∣ration from Breda. and was there secured. The Parliament thought not themselves nor the people of England freed from that guilt and punishment which our unhappy times had contracted, unless they laid hold on his Majesties Grace, mentioned in his Declaration from Breda; and therefore Resolved, That the House doth declare, that they do in the Name of themselves, and all the Commons of England, lay hold on his Majesties gracious Pardon mentioned in his Declaration, with reference to the excepting of such as shall be excepted in an Act of Pardon: and accordingly a Declaration was made, and presented to the King by Master Denzill Hellis.
His Majesty was graciously pleased to signifie his readiness and willingness to comply with that his Royal Word, and gave direction for a Proclamation to that purpose: In the mean while, several of the eminentest in Offices under the Usurpation, to make sure of this Grace offered from Breda, got their particular Pardons exemplified under the Great Seal of England, as they were well advi∣sed by the notoriety of their Guilt, and their distrustful Consciences: to secure and discharge which trouble, the King was more than ordinary pressing for a speedy Passing of the Act of Oblivion; as on the other side his Sentiments of those services to his Restitution, gave him the immediate resolutions of digni∣fying those Illustrious Personages, who most instrumentally and principally did accomplish it. And therefore, on the 12 of Iuly,The General dignified with the Title of D. of Albemarle. he honoured the most noble General Monck with the Titles of Duke of Albemarle (which Dutchy formerly was appro∣priate to the Blood Royal, and was extinct in the Reign of Henry the Fourth, the Demeasnes and Jurisdiction whereof lay in the Dutchy of Normandy in France, under the English Soveraginty) and Earl of Torrington in his own native Coun∣ty of Devon, and Baron of Potheridge (his own Patrimony) Beauchamp and Teyes; by which he hath right of Peerage in the three Kingdoms, whose equal Felicity and Honour he advanced and raised before himself, and now most de∣servingly shared with them by his Investiture in these Dignities, which were compleated Iuly the 13, by his taking his place in the House of Lords, at∣tended by the House of Commons, and introduced by the Duke of Buckingham. In the same month General Montague was created Earl of Sandwich, Viscount Hinchingbrooke his famous Mannor in Huntingtonshire, and Baron of St. Neots in the same County; and on the 16 of Iuly took likewise his place in the House of Peers, where they both shine with that degree of splendor, by which the Duke reduced, and the Earl dawned at, the day of Englands Glory and Liberty.Several Digni∣ties and Offices conferred. The Duke of Ormond was likewise made Earl of Brecknock, and took his place among the Peers of England: he was also made Lord Steward of his Majesties Houshold, as the Earl of Lindsey was made Lord High-Cham∣berlain, the Earl of Manchester Lord Chamberlain of his Majesties Houshold, and the Earl of Southampton Lord High-Treasurer of England: Sir Frederick Cornwallis was made Treasurer of the Kings Houshold by an old Grant, and Sir Iohn Berkley Comptroller; and other Royalists were made Officers therein. Several presents were made to the King from the several Cities and Boroughs of the Kingdom, in Gold and Plate,Fee-farm rents resigned. and resignation of Fee-farm-rents pur∣chased from the Usurpers; among the rest, the City of London (with a Com∣plement of their good Stewardship, by the mouth of their Recorder Sir Wil∣liam Wilde) rendred their like Grant of New Parke in Surrey. All the Rents accruing at Michaelmas-day were now secured from the late Purchasers of Kings, Queens, Bishops, Dean and Chapters lands, for the use of the right and unquestionable Proprietors; to the defeating the miserable and unjust covetous∣ness of such undue and unwarrantable penniworths. A splendid Embassy came this Month of August from Denmark, to congra∣tulate his Majesties most happy Restitution; as a little before, the Lord Iermyn,Lord Jermyn Earl of St. Al∣bans Embassa∣dor into France. Prince de Ligne. newly made Earl of Saint Albans (the Title last failing in the renowned Mar∣quess of Clanrickard Vlick de Burgh, who had so eminently asserted his Maje∣sties Rights in Ireland, and after the reduction thereof came into England, and died in London in some distress, far unfitting his nobleness of minde, as well as former most honourable Estate, a while before the Kings Return) was sent to France in the quality of Lord Embassador Extraordinary to that Crown. Soon after, the Prince de Ligne, with a right Princely Train and retinue becoming the grandeur of the Affair, (he was sent to Congratulate from his Majesty of Spain, betwixt whom and this Kingdom a Peace after a six years War was lately Proclaimed) was with great state received, and had solemn Audience by the King, and departed; and was succeeded by the Baron of Battevile to be Resi∣dent and Embassador in Ordinary at this Court. From the French King soon
after came another Illustrious and grand Personage upon the same account, by name the Count of Soissons,Count de Soissons Em∣bassador hither. who had married the Cardinal's Neece, and entred and was entertained here with all sumptuous and extraordinary Magnificence. In sum, there was no Prince nor State in Europe who sent not, or were not a sending their Embassador upon this wonderful occasion. The Parliament, after many debates and disputes, alterations and insertions, at last finished the Act of Oblivion; which was extraordinary comprehensive and indulgent,Act o Oblivi∣on passed. to the regret of many injured Royalists, who found no better perswasive to their acquiescence in it, but their unalterable duty to the King, whose special Act this was. Out of this were only excepted the Regicides and Murderers of their late Soveraign, as to Life and Estate; besides Colonel Lambert, and Sir Henry Vane, and Twenty others, reserved to such Forfeitures as should by Parliament be declared: the principal of these were Sir Arthur Ha∣selrig, Oliver Saint Iohn, William Lenthal the Speaker, Mr. Ny the Indepen∣dent Minister, Burton of Yarmouth; and some Sequestrators, Officers, and Ma∣jor-Generals of the Army; amongst whom was Desborough, Pine, Butler, Ire∣ton, &c. They passed likewise an Act for a perpetual Anniversary Thanksgi∣ving on the 29 of May, the day of his Majesties Birth and Restauration; a day indeed memorable, and the most auspicious in our English Kalendar, and wor∣thy of a Parliaments Canonization: Both which his Majesty gave his Royal Assent to, as at the Adjournment to another for Disbanding of the Army (and paying off the Navy) which once looked upon us with the same feared perpe∣tual danger, as the Mamalukes or Ianizaries; but by this happy conjuncture of his Majesties Fortune with his Wisdom and Goodness, yielded (after many Modules) to its last Dissolution. Great sums by Pole-money and other Assess∣ments were imposed, and speedily and cheerfully levied and paid, to finish this desired work, which had before wasted so many Millions of Treasure. Mr. Scowen, Mr. Pryn, Col. King, and Sir Charles Doyley, were appointed Commis∣sioners to disband them; to which the Souldiery very willingly and with thanks to the King submitted; the King giving them a Weeks pay as a Dona∣tive and Largess. The Parliament adjourned till the 6 of November. These Felicities of the King we have hitherto insisted on, as the course of all worldly things is guided, were abated and allayed by the immature and most lamented Death of the right Excellent Prince Henry Duke of Gloucester, his Majesties youngest Brother; a Prince of very extraordinary hopes. Silence will best become our lamentation: for his vertues, and our loss of them, transcend expression.Duke of Glou∣cester dies, Sept. 13. Princess of O∣range arrives, Sept. He died of the Small-pox, Aged Twenty years and two months, after much Blood-letting, and was Interred with a private Funeral in Henry the Seventh's Chappel at Westminster, just before the arrival of his Sister the Prin∣cess of Orange, who came to joy and felicitate her Brothers in their happy Re∣stitution. With the King and Monarchy, the Ecclesiastical Regiment by Bishops reco∣vered it self,Episcopacy re∣established. by his Majesties Piety and Prudence; that Aphorism being most sadly verified, No Bishop, No King; and therefore, on the 20 of September, Dr. Iuxon Bishop of London, that antient and excellent Prelate, was by the King translated from that See to the Arch-bishoprick of Canterbury; which was performed with great Solemnity: and not long after, several new Bishops (per∣sons the most eminent and valiant assertors of the Church and Laws of England) were Consecrated in the Abby at Westminster, and all the Diocesses filled; of which together presently, in an ensuing Catalogue. The Kings Iudges brought to Tryal, Oct. 9.Divine Vengeance had with a slow foot traced the murtherers of our Mar∣tyr'd Soveraign, and through several Mazes at last overtook them; the iron hand of Justice delivering them to the punishment due to that grand impiety: nor was it the least of his present Majesties Felicities in his Restitution, that he should parentate, in this solemn manner, to His most vilely and rebelliously abused Father; That his justice might appear equally as resplendent as his cle∣mency to the lesser guilt of his undutiful people, in not suffering his innate
goodness to be wrought upon so far, that this unexampled parricide should pass with an unexampled impunity; since the Parliament in detestation, and to wipe away the stain of that perpetration, had given up these persons follow∣ing, as Sacrifices to the Law, and the Honour of their Country. On the Ninth of October, The Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer met at Hicks's Hall, of whom were several of the chief Nobility; the Lord Mayor and the Judges; Sir Orlando Bridgman, Lord chief Baron, sitting in chief: the Coun∣sel were Sir Ieffery Palmer the King's Attourney, Sir Heneage Finch Solicitor-General, Sir Edward Turnor the Duke of York's Attorney, and Serjeant Keel∣ing, Windham, &c. The Grand Jury being Sworn, Sir William Darcy Baro∣net their Foreman, Sir Orlando gave them the Charge, declaring the purport of their Commission, to Try those excepted persons out of the Act, for their Trea∣son in Murthering the late King of blessed memory, upon the Statute 25 Edw. 3d. by which it was made Treason, to compass and imagine the death of the King: which he largely, learnedly, and eloquently opened, the Statute being but declarative of the Common Law. Which ended, Thomas Lee of the Middle Tem∣ple Gentleman, was called to give the names of the Witnesses, forty two in num∣ber; the chief of whom was Sir William Clerk, the Duke of Albemarle's Secreta∣ry, who took the Proceedings of the High Court in short-hand; Mr. Masterson Minister at St. Clements Danes, then of that Party; Col. Hunks, Griffith Bodurdo Esq Stephen Kirk, Col. Matthew Tomlinson, Iohn Rushworth Esq Sir Purbeck Temple, William Iessop Esq Mr. Coitmore, and Anthony Mildmay, Brother to Sir Henry, one of those Criminals. Next day, the 10 of October, the Court by Adjournment sate in Justice-Hall in the Sessions-house in the Old-bayly; and the Prisoners having been brought the same day from the Tower to the Gaol of Newgate, the Keeper was com∣manded to bring down Sir Hardress Waller, William Heveningham, and Colonel Harrison, and set them to the Bar, where they were commanded to hold up their hands:Harrison, Waller, He∣veningham, with Adrian, Scroop, &c. but Harrison desiring to be heard first, answered, I am here; he at last held up his hand: then the Indictment was read in these words: That he, to∣gether with others, not having the fear of God before their eyes, and being instiga∣ted of the Devil, did maliciously, treasonably, and feloniously, contrary to his due Allegiance and bounden Duty, sit upon and condemn our late Soveraign Lord King Charles the First, of ever-blessed Memory; and also did, upon the Thirtieth day of January 1648, signe and seal a Warrant for the Execution of his Sacred Majesty, where also, &c. To which Waller after some debate, pleaded guilty; Heven∣ingham and Harrison, Not guilty: Then Isaac Pennington, Henry Marten, Gilbert Millingham, Robert Tichburn, Owen Roe, and Robert Lilburn, after the said In∣dictment read, were bid to plead, who did; except Henry Marten, who said, he was not excepted out of the Act of Indemnity, the person there being Hen∣ry Martin, not Marten: but the Court answered, A misname would not be pleadable, Mr. Sollicitor citing a Case in the difference of names betwixt Bag∣ster and Baxter. All of them insisted for Counsel. Then Adrian Scroop, Iohn Carew, Iohn Iones, Thomas Scot, Gregory Clement, and Iohn Cook were likewise set to the Bar; where seeing the Court insist upon a present Plea, as the rule of the Law, or else Judgement, pleaded to the Indictment Not guilty; Carew making this salvo, Saving to our Lord Iesus Christ his Right to the Government of these Nations. Next, Edmund Harvey, Henry Smith, Iohn Downs, Vincent Potter, and Augustine Garland; and after them George Fleetwood, Simon Meyn, Iames Temple, Peter Temple, Thomas Wait, Hugh Peters, Francis Hacker, Daniel Axtel, who all but the last presently pleaded, and would be tried by God and their Country: Peters would be tried, at first, by the Law of God, having pleaded Not guilty, no not for a thousand worlds; but the people laught him out of it. Axtel, not till informed of the danger of a mute, and that no man can justifie Treason; if the matter which he had to say be justifiable, it is not Treason; if Treason, it is not justifiable: and therefore he must go to the or∣dinary way of guilty, or not guilty.
Harrison tried, Oct. 11.Harrison was the next day set to the Bar, with Scroop and our more; but they severally challenging the Judges, the Court ordered to try them singly; and proceeded with Harrison, who excepted his full number thirty five of the Jury; and the other twelve being sworn, Mr. Sollicitor-General much Rhetori∣cally laid forth the nature and atrocity of the Fact: That the very thoughts of such attempts were in all Ages,Sir Heneage Finch opens the Indictment. and among all people, counted an unpar∣donable Treason, as the story of the two Eunuchs against Ahasuerus; Voluerunt insurgere, they only had a Will to rise up against him: and the testimony of Taci∣tus, qui deliberant desciverant; who consult of this Fact, are Rebels already. That it is not the sole interest of one Royal Person concerned in this parricide, but all of the Nation. That Sir Edward Cooke hath a Notion, that to the perfection of this Law of the 25 Edw. 3. a time to be limited to the accuser was requi∣site; but how great a mistake that was, would appear by this, That this Trea∣son had so long out-faced the Law, and the Justice of the Kingdom, that if there had been a time of limitation, there would have been no time nor place left to punishment; and so the guilt would have stuck upon the Kingdom, and this wickedness grown up into an impunity. That the scope of the Indict∣ment was, for the compassing of the King's death; the rest, as usurping power over the King's person, the Assembling, Sitting, and Judging, are but as so many overt Acts to prove the intentions of the heart; all which are not necessary to be proved against every particular person. That every other overt Act, besides what is laid in the Indictment, as incouraging of the Souldiers to cry Justice and Execution, or preaching up the Work as godly, may be given in evidence against the guilty persons, whose Crime was of that unmeasurable impiety, that it could neither be heightned by any aggravation, or lessened by any excuse. Then he traced the steps and gradations to this Villany from the Treaty in 1648, and shewed the wicked Circumstances and Formalities thereof; particularly he declared this person of those living (twenty six being already deceased, and six or seven reserved to other penalties, and a sorrowful repentance; and twen∣ty nine more before their Lordships) to be the onely chief Leader, Captain, and Conductour in this horrible Treason: and hinted at his sawcy demeanour to the King in his bringing him to his Tryal; his irreverend speeches and car∣riages then towards the King; at his malicious designe of blacking him to the people. Sir Edward Turner used the like harangue; and then the Witnesses were sworn; and after evidence given, Mr. Windham closed it with this Speech: That the Indictment was for compassing the King's death; there lay the Trea∣son: for there is not one word in that Statute of killing the King; insomuch that if after that sitting upon the King, they had acquitted him, yet would it have been Treason still: that this imagination of Harrison's was plainly proved, and the more confirmed by his mention of blacking the King: that he had con∣fessed he sat, and signed, and therefore there was no difficulty in the Verdict. This saying of his, of blacking the King, was proved by one Mr. Nutly, who having got admittance into the Committee that drew up the Charge a∣gainst the King, over-heard him say those words upon a dispute of contracting the said Charge; which Harrison rejected, for this Reason, as knowing [calum∣niare fortiter, aliquid haerebit] of a multitude of imputations, some of them would stick. It will be a trouble, cumberance, and labour to the Reader, to particularize any more Speeches of the King's Counsel, or their shewing the Record of the Warrant for Execution, &c. to every one of the Prisoners; or the Courts denying the Prisoners Counsel, because it is very neer the same throughout; and therefore there is here subjoyned only a breviate of each per∣sons defence, referring the more unsatisfied and curious to the Original and en∣tire Copy of them. Harrison began his by a strange argumentation, from the notoriety of the Fact, that it was not done in a corner; that he believed God was with his servants in those days, (however it seemed good to him to suffer this turn to come upon them:) that he had desired to know the minde of God in it; but he had recei∣ved
no conviction of the evil of it, but rather assurance; professed the harm∣lesness of his Nature to Man, Woman, and Childe; that he followed not his own judgement, but his Conscience to the Lord; that he had suffered impri∣sonment, because he would not turn aside from the Cause to Oliver, and refused his temptation of sitting at his right hand: That what he had done in this matter, was by authority of Parliament; and that this, nor any other inferiour Court, hath any Cognizance or Jurisdiction on that: and therefore, they could not question him that acted in obedience to that Authority; and that he did act in the fear of God. Hereat the Court and Auditory were agast, and cried, Away with him, for he made God the Author of his wickedness: and as to the pretended Authori∣ty, and his Actions he warranted thereby, It was answered, that if the Lords and Commons in full Houses had then taken upon them such Authority, it had yet been Treason: For the Lords and Commons do not, nor never did, con∣stitute a Parliament, without the King; but that there was not an eighth part of the House of Commons that contrived and ordered this Treason. And to this purpose spoke Mr. Annesly, now Earl of Anglesey, and Mr. (now Lord) Hollis, ripping up the violence and insolence of this Prisoner and his Associates in forcing the House of Commons, and secluding them and other Members thereof in December 1648. That this discourse was to infect the people; and Sir Edward Turner added, that he had the Plague all over him: and the whole Court unanimously, and severally, rejected that treasonable Tenet of an Autho∣rity in both or either Houses without the King; and over-ruled that Plea. To which Harrison was instant for Counsel to assist him. After some interlocuri∣ons, he began a discourse of the War; the Kings setting up his Standard a∣gainst the people (and that God is no respecter of persons) and shedding of innocent blood: and being interrupted there, avouching the same Authority again, he profest his abhorrence of blacking the King; aequivocated with his bringing the King to his Tryal from Hurst-castle; for he was commanded to do it from the General: At last he urged his impreparation for his Tryal, being six months a close Prisoner; but that he had some Acts of the Parliament rea∣dy to produce to his justification: and here he concluded. And Judgement be∣ing demanded, the Jury gave in their Verdict, (which they did without stirring from the place) and Sentence was past upon him,The Sentence. in these words: You are to be led back to the place from whence you came, and from thence to be drawn on a Hurdle to the place of Execution, and there you shall be hanged by the Neck; and being alive shall be cut down, your privy Members to be cut off, your Entrails to be taken out of your Body, and you living, the same to be burnt before your eyes; and your Head to be cut off, your Body to be divided into four parts, and your Head and Quarters to be disposed at the pleasure of the Kings Majesty. And so he was returned to Newgate, in order to Execution. Colonel Adrian Scroop was next set to the Bar;Col. Adrian Scroop. and after some challenge of the Jury, which (as Harrison did before, and all the rest after) was to pick out the meanest of them, afraid of the Gentry, over whom they had tyrannously and insolently Lorded; and convicted by the same evidence of sitting in the High Court, and subscribing the Warrant, &c. As also by the testimony of Sir Richard Brown, the Lord Mayor Elect for the next year, who witnessed that since the Return of the King, in some accidental conference, he seemed to al∣low and approve of the Fact, by saying, Many people did not think it such a heynous matter; or that some be of one minde, and some of another: which he denied now to have expresly said; but bewailed the misfortune of that En∣counter with Sir Richard; for whereas before he was not excepted out of the Act of Indemnity, the very last day it passed he was by that means even then excepted. He justified that Authority, and the Fact committed by that Authority, but not the person; protested he had no malice against the King, and that it was an errour of Judgement, not of his Will: that he took the Parliament's Authority for va∣lid, (but over-ruled by a precedent Tryal) acquainted the Jury that he lay under a great prejudice by the Fact, and desired them to consider his Case as they
would their own; and hinted at the benefit of the Proclamation: he was found likewise guilty, and sentenced. Carew tryed.Iohn Carew was next set to the Bar, who rambled into the discourse of Har∣rison; talkt of the Fear of God, and the Authority of the Parliament by which he acted: that he declined it at first, but being put in the Act for Tryal, could not disobey the Lord nor the Parliament; acknowledged his sitting and signing, but not his guilt therein, but highly vindicated the Parliament and their Power to the Jury; but was sentenced as the rest. Scot tryed, Octob. 12.To Thomas Scot the same Witnesses were produced in all things as the for∣mer; only he added, that the Authority of the remaining Members might be as good as the Parliament was when the Bishops were excluded; and if two E∣states may take away a third, if the second do not continue to Execute their Trust, he that is in occupancie may have a title to the whole: by which Ar∣gument, he affirmed the Parliaments Authority. To this was answered, that the Bishops were taken away by an Act, with the consent of the King, Lords, and Commons; and that the Justification of this blasphemous principle (as the Lord Finch termed it, as also Lord Annesly and the whole Court) was unsuf∣ferable, and High Treason. Mr. William Lenthall, Mr. Theophilus Biddulph, and Lord Mayor Elect, were sworn to prove, that he said he would have it written on his Grave, That Here lies Thomas Scot, one that adjudged the King to Death. And to this purpose, afterwards in the House, upon the Dissolution of the Parliament, he was heard to have added, Since it is your pleasure to Dissolve the House, I know not how to hinder; but when that is done, I know not where to hide my hated head. Gregory Clement waved his Plea,Gregory Cle∣ment. and confessed his Crime, and delivered a Petition, as Waller had done before. And Colonel Iones made little defence,Colonel Iones but acquiesced upon the proof of his sitting and signing; and so they all had Sentence as before. Cook, October 3.The Sollicitour Iohn Cook was next Arraigned, for Assuming a Power over the King's Life; for drawing and exhibiting the Charge; for demanding Judg∣ment; for pressing the Charge to be taken pro Confesso; in sum, for being instru∣mental in the Kings Death. To this he Answered very acutely, to the glory of his parts, and infamy of his practice, and to set up his Law above the Gos∣pel, from whence he borrowed St. Pauls elegant Defence, Neither against the Law, nor against Caesar have I, I hope, offended. He alledged, he was but Coun∣sel, and acted in his Sphere for his Fee: in that his Crime was avaritiae, of co∣vetousness; not malitiae, nor falsly nor Treasonably, in advising the Charge: that he was no Sword-man: that he executed no Power over the King: that in drawing the Charge, he discharged rather the part of a good Subject; for the King being Prisoner, to accelerate his Tryal was a Courtesie; that he had retrencht the prolixity of it to that purpose: he denyed the examining of any Witnesses against the King: that in demanding Judgment, he did not mean Judgment against the King of Condemnation, but of Absolution. He obser∣ved, that the word Instrumental in the exception of the Act, was insignificant, or otherwise incomprehensive of him: that by the Kings gracious Letter, a Free Parliament was to declare the excepted persons; which this could not be, not being called by his Majesties Writ. All which were fully Answered by Sir Heneage Finch; but for fear I may pervert or miss the sinewy strength of that Reply, this shall suffice to be the reduction; That his entring the Charge, and a protestation in the Conclusion of Liberty to put in a new one, and desiring that the King as a Traytor may be brought to Justice, was no such demand as could be imagined to end in acquittal: that to the Act of Indemnity, the Parliament having made a special proviso, and inserted him by name therein, the Words con∣cluding him, it is not material what the subsequent Reasons are; so that though he might say, the Parliament was mistaken in their Reason, yet not in their Conclusion. As to the Kings Letter from Breda referring all Crimes and Offences soever to a Free Parliament (that the Honour of the King might be for ever Sacred) he
said, that in case the Parliament, was not a right Parliament, that Letter in it self is no Pardon, until it had been under the Broad Seal, and in more express terms, as in the Case of Sir Walter Raleigh: but as to the Parliament, it is plain the King meant this Parliament, the Letter being directed to the Speaker of our House of Commons; to them it was left to provide for security and indem∣nity, and to expiate this crying Sin; and to dispence his Mercy and Justice in this particular: they then Address themselves to his Majesties Clemency for the whole Nation, and the Kings Proclamation grants a Pardon; so that this must needs be the Parliament, though as the times were, it were not so duly Consti∣tuted, but since Confirmed by his Majesty. It was added by Mr. Windham, that words and advice, when the Act follows, will make any Counsellor guilty: as if a Counsellor should advise one man to kill another, and he does it. All was sum'd up in an accurate repetition of it, with Evidence and Defence, by Sir Or∣lando Bridgman; and he thereupon found guilty. The Court used him very civilly, and he shewed very much respect and reverence to the Court, behaving himself to the removing of that prejudice which the generality had of him, as of a Mon∣ster. But see what a narrow Fortune, and the streights of Debt, and the Devils wide World, and vast Preferments can tempt man to, since his first Delusions bewitcht our understanding! Hugh Peters came to the Bar.Peters, Octob. 13. He was charged with contriving the Kings Death at Ware with Oliver Cromwel, at Windsor, at Coleman-street, at the Painted Cham∣ber, Bradshaw's House; that in a Sermon he had compared the King to Barab∣bas: that in another, the Text whereof was to bind Kings in Chains, &c. he had declared, that there was an Act of Gods own making, that they that spilt mans blood, by man should his blood be spilt; and that out of that Law nei∣ther the King, nor Prince, or Prince Rupert, nor none of that rabble are except∣ed: that on the Twenty seventh of Ianuary he had Preached before the High Court of Justice, at Westminster, on the 14 of Isaiah, 18, 19. verses; All the Kings of the Earth, &c. All he said to this, was to cavil at the Witnesses: he declared his course of Life, and his Orthodox perseverance; but, as to the pur∣pose, he said he was sorry to hear of his carriage towards the King, but he had no malice toward him, but was meerly engaged in he Army. He was also up∣on suspition of being the Executioner, but he proved he was sick a bed that day; so Cook and he were Sentenced together.Danil Axtel. Daniel Axtel was next set to the Bar, (He had escaped as he thought the exception in the Act, being lately added to this miserable number, for there was other blood barbarously shed by him, that lay upon him) and charged with imagining and compassing the Kings Death; the overt Act whereof was commanding the Guard at his Try∣al; his beating the Souldiers for not crying out Justice and Execution; for bid∣ding them to do it, and to shoot at a Lady, supposed the Lady Fairfax, whom he there termed Whore, for saying that Cromwel was a Rogue, and that the twentieth part of the People never consented to the Tryal of the King. For de∣fence he said, that he was Commanded thither by his General, whom the Lords and Commons had Commissioned: that they had declared themselves to be the Interpreters of the Law; and if he had not obeyed his Generals Command, he was then liable to the Punishment: that that Statute of 25 Edward the 3. did not extend to private persons in that Case: that Iermyn, Nichols, and Thorpe Judges, had declared, that it was lawful and justifiable to obey the Parliament: that if the Collected body in Parliament be guilty of Treason, where will they find a Jury to try him in the distributed part of the People? (Here he was charged for being one of those that actually and in person put the force upon the House, by Mr. Annesly, and made the Parliament a Juncto.) To this he an∣swered, That he was not to Justifie that fault; for being no Statesman, he did as commanded: produced his Commission; said, that Fairfax, nay General Monke were guilty for acting by the same Commission: that it was no Treason to silence a Lady that spoke impertinently: and being charged with smiling at the same time, he said that was no Treason; that he was set there to keep the
Peace: that the People and Souldiers did cry Iustice, Iustice; & to quiet the Soul∣diers, he might beat them; and say, I'le Iustice you, I'le Execution you. That at the worst, Justice being an Attribute of God, it were no Treason to require it; and that the execution of it is no more. He took much advantage of a Witness against him, who said he had been imprisoned by him: his Evidence was about hiring the Executioner; to which one Nelson likewise, and Hewlet was named. That, as Cook said before, he neither Sentenced, Signed, Sealed, nor Sate: that Throgmorton in Queen Maries days was acquitted for Words: that Words may make a Heretick, not a Traytor; and cited Sir Edward Coke, urged also the Statute of Hen. 7. ayding the King de facto. He was answered to all, that there are no excuses for Treason: That the Parliament could never give any Authority to Murther the King, nor the General; nor was it in his Com∣mission to Guard the Court of Justice at Westminster-Hall, nor to cry for Exe∣cution: that any of those things was an Overt Act of his imagination, and Proved sufficiently, that Justice and Execution was the intent of Murthering the King; and his wrathful Speech to the Lady discovered it. After a little Consultation, the Jury brought him in guilty; to whom he had pleaded his Fa∣mily and small Children. Colonel HackerColonel Francis Hacker was the next. He was Charged with Guarding the King at the High Court of Justice; of taking him from Colonel Tomlinson the day of Execution; for Signing of the Warrant of Execution to him that did it, (writ by Cromwel; but who the man was named in it, his memory could not tell, or he would not, upon much inquisition:) that he was on the Scaffold, and brought the King thither. He Pleaded little, and said, he was under Authority; and that he did not read the Warrant that Cromwel writ, and so could not inform the Court concerning the same. He was also found guilty, His being the most Overt Act in compassing the Kings Death. William Hew∣let.William Hewlet, a Serjeant of Colonel Hewson's Regiment, was Indicted for being the man that was in the Frock, and cut off the Kings Head: it was averred from his own Confession, by three several witnesses; and as many attest∣ed it was Brandon the Common Executioner: that he, viz. the Executioner, was put into a Boat, and trembled (after it was done) every joynt of him: that he affirmed as much to the Lord Capel at his Suffering by the same Axe, of which the Executioner assured him. He said, that he could make it appear he was not upon the Scaffold that day, nor near it, for that he and other Serje∣ants were secured that day, for refusing to be there; but the other Witnesses Evidence being express, He was found guilty. The Court gave him all the advantage that could be, and reprieved him, so that he Suffered not. Daniel HarveyThe other of the Judges that rendred themselves upon the Proclamation were called. Mr. Daniel Harvey was called first, who pleaded his ignorance, and no malice, for that he Signed not, though he was present at Sentence: then he proved by witness his Reluctancy of Conscience, his endeavours with few others to adjourn the Court upon the Kings motion; that he resolved to have no more to do with them; and that he endeavoured to save his Life. Isaac Penning∣ton.Isaac Pennington next, Pleaded his ignorance, and no malice, and utterly re∣fused to Sign the Warrant. Henry MartenHenry Marten, against whom the Sitting, Signing, and Sealing were proved, and also that at the meeting of the High Court of Justice, before they went in∣to Westminster-Hall, being in the Painted Chamber, and upon the Landing of the King from White-Hall to Sir Robert Cotton's House; Cromwel upon sight thereof, asking them this question, The first thing the King will demand of us, will be, by what Authority we bring him before us; what shall we say, by whose Authority? After a little pause, Marten replyed, In the Name and Authority of the Commons in Parliament Assembled, and the good People of England. To this he answered, that he had no malice to the King. It was replyed, It is evident he had against the Government. Further he said, that the Commission ran in
the name of the good people, and so it was no great matter for him to repeat it. Here Sir Heneage Finch took hold, and gave notice to the Jury of the entituling the good people to it, and hoped they would be none of them; and observed the impenitence of the Man: then he justified the Parliament; and though it were but a remnant of Parliament, yet in the case of Commons to a Cottage, if a stick be but left, the Commons appertained to that Cot∣tage. He added conclusively, his acquiescing in the Royal Government, since the King was called in by the People in Parliament, which he intimated as the Kings best right, and so added to his greater Condemnation. Gilbert Millington Confessed the Fact,Gilbert Mil∣lington. and the guilt of it; and was favoured with an acceptance of it from the Court. Alderman Tichburn did the same,Alderman Tichburn. with much candidness declaring his sin, and ignorance of the atrocity of the Crime; protested his inability of Contri∣vance, his raw years, his unskilfulness in the Laws; said he would have rather gone into a hot Oven than into this business, if he had known it; instanced that Paul was a Persecutor, and found Mercy; and had rendred himself, with the three before, upon the Proclamation. Owen Roe pleaded the same,Owen Roe. and his reluctancy to the Kings Sentence, and the Proclamation. Colonel Robert Lilburn did the same;Robert Lil∣burn. mentioned his endeavour for with∣drawing the Court of Justice, as Mr. Harvey said before: that he wept and mourned the day of the Kings Death. Mr. Smith pleaded the same,Mr. Smith. and desired the Courts mediation. Iohn Downes, Vincent Potter, Augustine Garland,Downs, Pot∣ter, Garland, &c. Simon Meyne, Iames Temple, Peter Temple, Thomas Wayt, and William Heveningham, set (again) at the Bar. Something extraordinary must be said of Downes, because he obliged the Court to hear him, in these words, (and they are worthy of mans memory) which he expressed in that abominable Judicature, upon the Kings request of hearing in Parliament, as he sate between Colonel Wauton, and Mr. Cawley, and Oliver Cromwel [said I, Have we hearts of stone, or are we men? They laboured to ap∣pease me; they told me I would ruine both my self and them. Said I, If I dye for it, I must do it. Cromwel sate just the seat below me. He hearing of me make some stir by whispering, he looked at me, and asked if I was my self; what I meant to do, that I could not be quiet. So I started upon the nick when the Clerk was Commanded by Bradshaw to Read the Sentence, I stepped up and said, My Lords, I have Reasons to offer against it, and I desire the Court may ad∣journ to hear me. Presently Bradshaw viewed me, and said, If any Member dissented, they must adjourn. So they did into the Court of Wards, where I alledged the Kings general satisfaction to the Parliament, (that a Common Prisoner was not used so, but that he might be heard.) I urged the Order of Par∣liament, that upon any emergency or renata in the Court, we should apply our selves to them. To which Cromwel answered, Sure you do not know that you have to deal with the hardest hearted man in England. And much other incitati∣on was used by some of those that are doomed (whom he desired favour not to nominate) telling me I was either a Sceptick or an Infidel. Vincent Porter was troubled with a fit of the Stone,Vincent Pot∣ter. and could hardly en∣dure standing; and had a Chair to ease himself, and confessed the whole guilt. Augustine Garland was further accused of spitting in the Kings face,August. Gar∣land. besides his sitting. He answered, he was a Parliament man but in 1648, and drawn into this business, and desired no favour from God if he was guilty of that in∣humanity; to avoid which imputation he made this troublesome defence. Simon Meyn, Iames and Peter Temple,Simon Meyn, James and Pe∣ter Temple. Pleaded ignorance, and no malice. Colonel Thomas Wayt Pleaded the same with Downs for withdrawing the Court, and his Courtesies to the Cavaliers Party, and preventing a Petition for the Kings Murther in Rutland-shire;Tho. Wayt. and that the first day he came to Town, Cromwel made him sit the last day of the Court of Justice.
Sir Hardress Waller.Sir Hardress Waller brought again to the Bar, gave evidence of his penitence; which my Lord Finch his kinsman allowed here, and deplored him. Hevening∣ham did shew his sorrow; but both were Condemned. Harrison Exe∣cuted.On Saturday the Fourteenth of October, One thousand six hundred and sixty, between nine and ten of the Clock in the morning, Mr. Thomas Harrison, or, Major-General Harrison, according to his Sentence was upon a Hurdle drawn from Newgate to the place called Charing-cross, where within certain Rails lately there made, a Gibbet was Erected, and he hanged with his face looking towards the Banqueting-house at Whitehall (the place where our late Soveraign of Eternal memory was Sacrificed:) being half dead, he was cut down by the common Executioner, his Privy Members cut off before his Eyes, his Bowels bur∣ned, his Head severed from his Body, and his Body divided into Quarters, which were returned back to Newgate upon the same Hurdle that carried it, the People loudly shooting at his Fall. His Head was since set upon a Pole on the top of the South-east-end of Westminster-Hall, looking towards London. The Quarters of his Body are in like manner exposed upon some of the City-Gates. Monday following, being the Fifteenth of October, about the same hour, Mr. Iohn Carew was carried in like manner to the same place of Execution,Carew Execu∣ted. where having suffered like pains, his Quarters were also returned to Newgate on the same Hurdle which carried him. His Majesty was pleased to give (upon intercession made by his Friends) his Body to be buried. John Cook & Hugh Peters Executed.Tuesday following, being the Sixteenth of October, Mr. Iohn Cook, and Mr. Hugh Peters were about the same hour carried on two Hurdles to the same place, and Executed in the same manner, and their Quarters returned in like manner to the place whence they came. The head of Iohn Cook was set on a Pole on the North-East-end of Westminster-Hall (on the left side of Mr. Har∣rison's) looking towards London, and the Head of Mr. Peters on London-Bridge. Their Quarters were exposed in like manner upon the tops of some of the City-Gates. Thomas Scot, Gregory Cle∣ment, Adrian Scroop, and John Jones Executed.Wednesday, October Seventeen, about the hour of Nine in the Morning, Mr. Thomas Scot and Mr. Gregory Clement were brought on several Hurdles; and about one hour after, Mr. Adrian Scroop and Mr. Iohn Iones together in one Hurdle were carried to the same place, and suffered the same death, and were returned and disposed of in like manner. Francis Hack∣er and Daniel Axtel Execu∣ted.Mr. Francis Hacker and Mr. Daniel Axtel were on Friday the Nineteenth of October about the same time of the Morning drawn on one Hurdle from Newgate to Tyburn, and there both Hanged. Mr. Axtel was Quartered, and turned back, and disposed as the former; but the Body of Mr. Hacker was (by his Majesties great favour) given entire to his Friends, and buried. Axtel's head was set up at the furthest end of Westminster-Hall. To dye impi∣nitent as to the Fact.Not any one of these at his Death expressed any sorrow or Repentance for the Fact, but justified the Authority by which they did it, and themselves there∣in: but whether they agreed now, by a Combination at their death, as in the Conspiracy of the King's, or whether it were not Diabolical infatuation, or the Sin and impiety of their Crime, that they were given over to a Reprobate sense, it is not in man to determine: their Party and Abettors in the Rebellion high∣ly magnified this their obstinacy for Christian Courage, and printed their Pray∣ers and Speeches with all the advantages Revenge and Rebellion could invent; and if they could have brought the Law, the sense of the Kingdome, nay, the whole Word into their mould, they might have passed for Martyrs: for as to the repugnant sffrage of Divine Authority, they could and did wrest that with an easie finger. Thus much therefore may suffice to Posterity concerning the ends of these men, That they were Convicted according to Law, whose utmost benefit they had, by a Jury of their Peers, against whom they had full liberty of exception: That the Person of the Prince they Murthered, was (beyond any parallel) by the confession of his Enemies, of some of these Cook the So∣licitor., a most vir∣tuous, most Innocent, most Religious, and Fit for the Government: That
these his Judges and Murtherers were for the most part, nay generally, mean and desperate persons, and their hands lifted up by Ambition, Sacriledge, Co∣vetousness, and success, against the Life of this incomparable Prince, whose lamented and barbarous Death God would not suffer to go unrevenged, nor His own sacred Name to be Blasphemed, as not only said by them to be the Author, but the maintainer of this impiety. And it is remarkable, that Hugh Peters, who by his Function, as a Priest, had most dishonoured God in Preaching and pressing this Parricide, making use of his holy Writ to this same wicked purpose, most plainly discovered the footsteps of the Divine Vengeance in his Tragedy.Hugh Peters's stupidity. The miserable Wretch had not a word to say for himself, or to God, of whom he said he was abandoned: he that was so nimble and quick in all Projects of this nature before, was now like a Sot or a Fool, playing with the Straw in the Sledge, as he went to Exe∣cution. Of which his sad condition, Cook, his fellow-sufferer, was so sensible, as to pray for some respite for him; but it was out of the Sheriffs power, who attended them in person to their respective Executions. It was observed also by Scot, who having wished the mention of this Fact to be graven on his Tomb, Digitus Dei hath written it on the Gates of London in such bloody Characters and Hieroglyphicks, that whoever passes cannot but read it. Those being thus Executed,Prisoners that came in upon Proclamation respited. the other Prisoners that came in upon Pro∣clamation, and were to be respited from Execution till the pleasure of the Par∣liament should be known, were after Sentence remitted to the Tower from whence they came, their Estates being seized on to the use of the King. The Quarters of the other had not long been set up, but a report was raised that a bright Star appeared over those at Aldgate, and this in favour of these Saints as they were termed, and as if it were a Constellation of their bright innocence: but it was observed and known to be the Planet Venus then in her greatest Elongation from the Sun, the same distance as their Phanatical stories were from the Truth. This parentation being over to his Father, His Majesties next respects were due to his Mother,Queen Mother arrives in En∣gland. whose welcome to his Kingdomes he could not better ma∣nifest, or oblige to her, than by rendring them innocent and free of that hor∣rible guilt which had divorced her from her Husband, and estranged her from his People. Nor was it just or civil she should be here received without satis∣faction and expiation of those Crimes, the very tendencies whereto had so rude∣ly driven her to seek her safety abroad. The King brought her back to his Palace at White-Hall, after Nineteen years discontinuance, the second of Novem∣ber: with her came the Illustrious Princess Henrietta, who had never breathed English Air, but some two years after her birth, which hapned in Exeter, Iune 16. 1644. as also Prince Edward, brother to Prince Rupert, and to the Prince Elector Palatine, an absolute stranger to these Kingdoms. The meeting could not but be as joyous, after so tedious and injurious an absence, as the en∣tertainment highly Magnificent. On the Sixth of November, the Recess of the Parliament being ended,The Parliament re-assemble. the Lords and Commons met again in Parliament, to resume their weighty task of setling the Kingdoms; and a Council for Trade now began their sitting, according to the Kings Commission. Several dange∣rous and pestilent Speeches and Rumours being daily uttered and vented, espe∣cially by the Fifth Monarchists at their Meeting-house in Coleman-street and other places, and Colonel Overton being the chief man of that perswasion; by Order of the Councel he was seized, and upon some further information against him committed to the Tower for Treason: which soon after appeared, in some of his Opinion. With him Mr. Lenthal, the Speakers Son, was Committed, upon suspicion of Counterfeiting the Kings Seal. Upon the Kings Restitution, the Marquess of Arguile had the confidence to come up from Scotland, hoping to have inveagled and obtained his Pardon for all those base Treasons he had acted so covertly in that Kingdom since his Majesties departure; and that his Majesty, according to his gracious inclination, would
have past by those many undutiful and irreverent usages of him, by him and the Kirk, while He was there among them: but such was the general hatred and detestation of that People (and especially of the Nobility) against him, that the King gave order for his Commitment while he was waiting at Court.Argyle com∣mitted. He desired to speak to the King, but could not be admitted; he desired to speak with Mr. Calamy, in his way to the Tower, but that was refused: from thence by Sea he was conveyed to Edenburgh, where his Process was making ready: The Earl of Middleton the Kings great Commissioner following him thither about the end of December. Death had tasted of the Blood Royal, in the immature decease and lamen∣ted Fate of that Noble Henry Duke of Gloucester, as aforesaid: and, as if there were not only a Circulation of it in every individual, but it naturally ran in the same Distempers round a whole Family, the Infection by a kind of Sym∣pathy in the same Disease of the Small Pox seized the Vitals of the most Illustri∣ous Mary Princess of Aurange;Princess of Au∣range dies, De∣cemb. 24. and in spight of all Art and Remedy (though the Blooding of her was causelesly and ignorantly taxed) carried her to the Grave, leaving the whole Court in very great and almost disconsolate sadness, and her Son the Prince of Aurange ten years old, and a Moneth over. She deceased on the Twenty fourth of December; her death being ushered with a sad accident, the oversetting the Assurance-Frigate Riding at Anchor at Wol∣ledge by a sudden gust of Wind; by which disaster several Persons of the Ships Company were drowned. This happy Parliament, which had rebuilt the Glorious Structure of the English Ancient and Renowned Government, and had assured the Foundation thereof in the Established Throne of our Soveraign, came to its Period. But that no Revolution of time should obliterate or blot out the memory of those Excellent worthy things had been done by it for the good of King and King∣dome,Parliament Dissolved. his Majesty Honoured it by his Royal mouth with the never-to-be-for∣gotten Epithet of the Healing Parliament; which will undoubtedly recom∣mend it to Posterity, as long as any grievance, or humours, or distempers shall remain in Church and State. The Princess of Aurange was buried with a private Funeral; in the narra∣tion of which, I shall crave leave for this digression: there was indeed as much Honour in that privacy, as there was vain and profane solemnity in the gewgaw Exequies of Oliver, which wanted of their due Grandeurs till his Execution. In opposition therefore to that rabble medley of a Funeral, it will not be extravagant to set down, here, the Compact, yet Illustrious manner of this Princess, to shew the difference betwixt Princes and Ring-leaders of the Rout. On Saturday December the 26th. but five days after her Decease, the chiefest of the Nobility met together in the House of Peers, to attend the Royal Corpse of the Princess, which was brought about Nine a Clock at Night from Somerset-House thither: from whence they proceeded with the Funeral,Princess of Au∣range her Fu∣neral, Decemb. 26. through a lane of Guards of the Duke of Albermarl's Regiment of Foot. First, went several Gentlemen and Knights; next, the Servants of his Highness the Duke of York; then the Servants of the Queen; after whom came his Majesties Servants; and next, those of the Deceased Lady: then two Heraulds before Iames Mar∣quess (now Duke) of Ormond Lord Steward of his Majesties Houshold, and Edward Earl of Manchester Lord Chamberlain of the same; after whom went Edward Lord Hide Lord Chancellor of England, with the Purse and Mace born before him: after whom came another Herauld with a Coronet upon black Velvet; and then the Royal Corpse carried by her own Servants, the Pall being supported by six Earls, and the Canopy carried over it by several Baronets. His Highness the Duke of York (as principal Mourner) followed the Corpse with a Herauld before him, divers persons of quality bearing his Train. In this order they came to King Henry the 7th's Chappel, where she was Interred in a Vault particularly set apart for the Royal Line.
This Princess, and the Duke of Gloucester who preceded her to Bliss, needed no Effigies to present them to our Eye, being (like Vertue) not to be Pictured, and can have no resemblances but in the mind, where with immortality they have placed their Monuments, to dure and last with Eternity it self. E contra, on the Thirtieth of Ianuary, that the Earth might no longer cover the Blood which was impiously and traiterously split on that day, Vengeance pursuing those wicked miscreants even beyond the Sanctuary of the Grave, the odious Carcasses of Cromwel,Sejanus ducitur unco spectan∣dus, gaudent omnes, quae la∣bra quis illis vultus erat? Ireton and Bradshaw, were digged out of the ground, from those sumptuous Monuments, which (as they did the Throne in their Life) they had now Usurped in their Death: they were drawn in a Cart from West∣minster, where they were first interred, to the Red Lyon in Holborn, and thence on Sledges to Tyborn, where they were pulled out of their Coffins, and hang'd at the several Angles or Corners of that accursed Tree,Cromwel, Ire∣ton and Brad∣shaw dig'd up and hang'd, &c. (with the dregs of Peo∣ples Curses and Execrations) from Ten a Clock till Sun-setting, and then cut down; their loathsome Bodies thrown into a deep hole under the Gallows: their Heads cut off, and placed aloft upon Westminster-Hall. Where they will con∣tinue the Brand-marks of their Posterity, and the expiatory remains of their accursed Crime. Notwithstanding the seizing of many suspected Persons, Fifth Monarchists, as Colonel Overton, of whom before, Cornet Day, Courtney, Major Allen, &c. yet that Sect persisted in a Devilish design, which soon after, in the beginning of Ianuary, they thus executed. This strange and unheard-of Action will afford the truest sight and judg∣ment of this Fanatick crew,Venner's In∣surrection. even beyond all Example or History of the most perdite sort of men: For but a handful of these wild People dared to at∣tempt the City of London, and that at two several times: First, on Sunday the Sixth of Ianuary 1660. After their meeting at Coleman-street in the same City (having then a gracious Liberty from the King for their Devotion) they Ar∣med themselves, and came to St. Pauls in the Dusk of the Evening, where ha∣ving Mustered and ordered their small Party, they placed Centinels for the time, one of whom killed an Innocent Person coming by accidentally, for saying, (when he was demanded by them who he was for) For God and King Charles. After this Exploit the Alarm being given, and some Parties of the Trained Bands coming upon them and Charging them, after they had repulsed those few Files, they Marched to Bishops-gate, where they passed, and from thence to Cripple-gate, where they came into the City again, and so to Aldersgate, where the Constable (being weakly attended) at their threatning him for the Keys, let them out again. Here they declared themselves for King Iesus, and their Friends or Masters upon the Gates: Thence they proceeded to Beech-lane, where a Headborough opposing them, they shot him, and killed him. [It is observable, that none whomsoever, or wheresoever they shot, recovered of the hurt; it being conceived they poysoned their Bullets and Slugs, by chaw∣ing or other destructive Art.] And so with all haste made towards Canewood, where they lurked a while, resolving to make another Insurrection in the City, till they were routed by a Party of Horse and Foot sent to drive them out thence, and some Thirty taken Prisoners and brought before the General, who sent them to the Gate-house. Notwithstanding the others, after they had quitted the Wood, returned for London, with assurance of success in their begun enterprize; Venner telling them (a Wine-Cooper by Trade) he was assured that no Weapons formed against them should prosper, nor a hair of their Head be touched; which their impunity in their first attempt made them very credulous of, even to an absolute confi∣dence. It may not be omitted, that just before this sudden eruption, the King was gone to Conduct his Mother and Sister (who feared the same mortal Infecti∣on of the small Pox, and had had some grudges thereof) to Portsmouth, in order to their Embarquing for France; which opportunity they took for their
Rebellious Tumult, having disposed, as they thought, the minds of their late Party to take part with them, by their Declaration, called, A door of Hope opened, stuft with abominable slanders against the whole Royal Family, and the General, who (with the Duke of York) appeared presently with part of the Life-Guards to suppress them. To proceed: on Wednesday-morning, Ianuary the Ninth, after the Watches and Guards were removed, they re-inforced their first Enterprize. Their first effort and appearance was at Thredneedle-street, where they alarm'd the Train∣ed Band that was to watch all that Day; a Party of whom being sent out to follow them, were forced to retreat to their Mainguard; who Marching in a Body towards them, the Fifth-Monarchists retreated into Bishops-gate-street, some of them into an Ale-house known by the Sign of the Helmet, where, after a sharp Dispute, two were killed, and as many taken; the same number being killed and wounded of the Trained-Bands. The next sight of them (for they were just like wild-fire) was at Golledg-Hill, by which way they went up into Cheap∣side, and so into Wood-street, Venner being their chief Leader, having a Murrion on his Head, and a Halbert in his Hand. Here was the main and fiercest Acti∣on; for they fought stoutly with two of the Trained-Bands of Foot, in very good Discipline and Order. Here also they received a Charge from the Horse of the Life-Guard, whom they put to the Retreat, till being over-powr'd, and Venner knockt down and wounded with Shot, Tufney and Crag, two more of the chief of their Teachers being killed by him, they began to give ground, and soon after dispersed themselves in flight, taking several routs and ways. The greatest part of them went down Wood-street to Cripple-gate, firing in the Rear at the Trained-Bands of Yellow, then in close pursuit of them. This Train-Band lodged ten of them in the Blew-Anchor Alehouse by the Postern; which house they maintained. Soon after came Lieutenant-Colonel Cox with his Company, and surrounded all places about it. In the interim, part of the Yellow aforesaid had gotten up into the Tylings of the next House, which they threw off, and fired in, the Rebels being in the uppermost Room, who even then refused Quarter; when at the very same time another File of Muskets got up the Stairs, and having shot down the door, entred upon them: six of them were killed before, another wounded, and one refusing of Quarter, then also was knockt down with the But-end, and afterwards shot with a Musket. The rest being demanded why they craved not quarter before? answered, They durst not, for fear their own Fellows should shoot them; such was their Resolution and Desperation. The whole number of this last Insurrection cannot be reckoned to more than Fifty Persons: though not above Forty were ever seen together, yet so great was their confidence in the Revelations of their Teachers, that they presumed to Subdue and Conquer with that small remnant, alluding to that History of Gi∣deon recorded in Holy Writ; admitting of no other Sect but the Quakers, (and but those also who agreed with them in the Tenet of their Monarchy) being the nearest of Affinity to their Enthusiastick Opinions, to have the ho∣nour of partaking with them in this their great and glorious Design, as they termed it in their aforesaid Declaration; wherein they further Blasphemously said, That if they were deceived or misled, 'twas God that deceived them; laying their delusions, and charging their sinful and desperate folly upon him as the Author. In this Tumult and Rebellious Insurrection were slain of the Kings Peo∣ple Twenty two, and as many of the Traytors, most whereof were killed in Houses; and some after being taken Prisoners, for refusing to tell their Names were presently shot. There were taken Twenty, besides a few upon suspicion: the Twenty were as followeth, viz. Thomas Venner the Wine-cooper their Captain, Roger Hodgkins a Button-seller in St. Clements-lane Lumbard-street; Leonard Gowler, Ionas Allen, Iohn Pym, William Orsingham, William Ashton,
Giles Pritchard A Cow-keeper, Stephen Fall, Iohn Smith, William Corbet, Iohn Dod, Iohn Elston, Thomas Harris, Iohn Gardener, Robert Bradley, Richard Marten, Iohn Patshal, Robert Hopkins, and Iohn Wells; five of these had been in the design against Oliver, as before. These were brought to the Bar together; the Wounded-men had Chairs allowed them: and after the Indictment read to them, which was laid both to Treason and Murther, Thomas Venner was first called, who, when he had held up his hand at his Arraignment, being asked Guilty, or Not Guilty, began a wild Phanatique discourse about his Conversation in New England, and concerning the Fifth Monarchy, and the Testimony within him above these Twenty years, with such like impertinent dis∣courses and stories. He confessed he was in the late Rising, but was not guilty of Treason, intending not to levy War against the King; and so sallied out into the same nonsensical defences as at first: but at the Court's instance of his Pleading directly to the Indictment, he answered Not Guilty, and put himself upon his Country. In the like manner Hodgkins, after some rambling diversi∣ons from his present Business, and the Threats of the Court of his being Re∣corded Mute, and the submission of the rest of his Fellows, (who all pleaded, after some previous excursions in their way and manner) pleaded likewise to the Indictment: whereupon the Witnesses being sworn, two against every par∣ticular Person, they made it appear, That Venner, Tufney, and Cragg, (the two last whereof were slain in the Business) did several times perswade their Con∣gregation to take up Arms for King Jesus, against the Powers of the Earth, (which were his Majesty, the Duke of York and the General:) That they were to kill all that opposed them: That they had been Praying and Preaching, but not Acting for God: That they Armed themselves at their Meeting-house in Coleman-street with Blunderbusses, Musquets, &c. and other particular Evidence against each to matter of Fact. The proof against Martin, Hopkins and Wells was not so full, and against Patshal only one Witness; who were acquitted by the Jury. The other sixteen being found Guilty, and brought to the Bar, were demand∣ed to shew Cause why Sentence should not pass against them, &c. The Lord Chief Justice Foster charging this Venner with the Blood of his Complices by his Seduction and leading of them; He answered, He did not. To which the Witnesses being produced again, he Blasphemously quibled, and said, It was not he, but Iesus that led them. Three of them confest their Crime and Er∣ror, and craved Mercy; so they were all sixteen Condemned to be Hang'd, Drawn, and Quartered. According to which Sentence, on Saturday Ianuary 19▪ 1660, Venner and Hodgkins (both uncured of the Wounds they received in their Rebellion) being guarded by two Companies of the Trained-Bands, were drawn on a Sledge from Newgate through Cheapside, over against their Meet∣ing-house in Swar-Alley in Coleman-street, and Executed according to their Sen∣tence. Venner spoke little but in vindication of himself and his Fact, and some∣thing of his Opinion, being confident the Time was at hand when other Iudg∣ment would be;There were two Executed in Cheap-side the same day Pri∣chard the Cow-keeper and ano∣ther of them. reflecting much upon the Government. The other, Hodgkins, raved and cursed in manner of Praying, calling down Vengeance from Heaven upon the King, the Iudges, and the City of London; nor would he give over, though the Sheriff forbad him to run on in that strange way, until the Hang-man was hastned from his Imployment of Quartering Venner, to turn him off; so as in that mad Religion they lived, in the same they dyed. Their Quarters were set upon the Four Gates of the City by the late Executed Regicides, whose Quarrel and Revenge they undertook in this their Phanatique Attempt; their Heads also set upon Poles by some of them on London-Bridge. On Munday the Twenty first of Ianuary Nine more of them were Execu∣ted all in one Morning, at five several places, by one Executioner; Two at the West-end of St. Pauls, two at the Bll and Mouth, two at Beech-lane, Two at the Royal Exchange; and a notable Fellow, the last, by name Leonard Gowler, at Bishops-Gate. They all obstinately persisted in their Error (especially the last, who began with Imprecations like Hodgkins, and was silenced the same
way by the Command of the Sheriff) excepting a Young man who was Harg∣ed in Redcross-street, who did relent and Repent of his Sin, and the Blood he had spilt, but yet dyed in the Opinion of Chilianism. After they were cut down, the Sentence was not Executed upon them to the full, only their Heads were cut off, and set upon London-Bridge. Most remarkable was the prudence and valour of the Right Honorable Sir Ri∣chard Brown the Lord Major, in this tumultuary and dangerous Insurrection. He it was whom they designed as a Sacrifice to their first outrages; and had they met with a person of indifferency of Spirit, had undoubtedly surprized the Ma∣gistracy and Government of this Famous City, and in him subdued (their great Quarrel) Authority. Sir Arthur Ha∣zelrig dies.Sir Arthur Haslerig died a Prisoner in the Tower of London, with impatience at the happiness of the Times; and Mr. Crofton, an eminent stickler for Presby∣tery, came in-his room.Mr. Crofton committed. But we must pass to the Glories of the entrance of the Year One thousand six hundred sixty one, the Thirteenth of the Kings Reign. Anno Domini 1661. AND now, lest any of these scattered Rays and refractions of this Mo∣narchs Glory should be dimmed or disappear in the obscurity of Time, we will translate them to their bright Orb (as Iupiter is feigned to have Stel∣lified his Heroes) encircle them in the Diadem, Eternize them in that Spherical Figure, and fix them in his Crown, the FIRMAMENT of his past, pre∣sent, and future greatness: the Celebrity of which Action is not less due to the intrinsick matter, than to the outward beauteous form; it being not so much an excess of Pomp, as a Boundary of Government; not so much height of Glo∣ry, as profoundness of State-reason; and in that large capaciousness may justly pass for the consummation and perfect excellence of all Regal felicity. This, was the Crown profaned by the lewd hands of those prostitute Members at Westminster, when the Regalia were seized on by them, and by H. M. his ad∣vice thought fit to be alienated to the Publique, that is, shared among the Usur∣pers. This was the Crown, afterwards violated, deprived, and widdowed of that Sacred and Royal Head of King Charles the Martyr. This was the Crown which alone of all the Insignia of Majesty, (as Elijah of all the Pro∣phets that had not bowed their knees to Baal) abhorred the Idolatry of Crom∣wel's Usurpation, and escaped the ravishing and polluted hands of that Tyrant, when like Caligula, that set the heads of the gods upon his own Statues, he assumed all the other Regalities of his rightful Soveraign, but could no way fit this Sacred Symbole of Majesty (though he could all other Holy things, and the Scripture it self,) to his impious designments. That was that Crown which the Malignity of a dire Pestilence had envied the sight and blessing thereof to the City of London, his Majesties Imperial Chamber (which sadly felt the other Plagues of War and Want in a more forcible absence of it thereafter) at his Royal Fathers Inauguration, and was now Boded and bespoke with the like Contagion; when never were the Influences of Heaven more curiously pro∣pitious, the two Serene days of that Solemnity exsiccating and exhaling those vapours, which a long moisture to the danger of a Flood did seem to portend. Lastly, this was that Crown, whose just and ancient Discent, under which we have flourished ever since we were a Nation, till our late Anarchy; upon the Head of this Miraculous Prince, now vindicated it self from the indignities and assaults of base and insolent Demagogues, who from our Kings regardlesness of State and Sovereignty, have evermore wrought their contempt in the Subject: who now, with a like joy of reverence, fear, and love, beheld this awful and most delightful Triumph which is here related.
HIS Majesty on the Twenty second of April early in the Morning passed from Whitehall to the Tower by Water, from thence to go through the City to Westminster Abby, there to be Crowned. Two days were allotted to the Consummation of this great and most cele∣brated Action, the wonder, and admiration, and delight of all Persons both Forraign and Domestick: and pity it was, that the solid and lasting happiness it portended should not have taken up a Month, and given it the name Coronalis. First therefore we begin with the City of London,The Kings pas∣sage through London to his Coronation. which participating the greatest share of that inexpressible happiness that the Three Kingdoms received by the auspicious Restoration of the King, took occasion to express in this Triumph of his Majesties Coronation their joy and gladness with the great∣est Magnificence imaginable: They spared not therein any cost to manifest their affectionate duty to the King, considering, that if ever excessive charges might be justified, this signalizing their affection at this time might well be al∣lowed. In his passage through Crouched Friers, He was entertained with Musick, a Band of Eight Waits, placed on a Stage. Near Algate, with another Band of Six Waits in like manner, with Musick, from a Balcony. In Leaden-Hall Street, near Lime-Street-end, was Erected the First Trium∣phal Arch after the Dorick Order: on the North-side, on a Pedestal, before the Arch, was a Woman personating REBELLION, mounted on a Hydra, in a Crimson Robe torn, Snakes crawling on her Habit, and begirt with Serpents, and her Hair Snaky; a Crown of Fire on her Head; a bloody Sword in one hand, a Charming Rod in the other. Her attendant, CONFUSION, in a deformed Shape, a Garment of several ill-matched Colours, and put on the wrong way; on her Head Ruines of Castles; torn Crowns, and broken Scep∣ters in each Hand. On the South-Pedestal was a Representation of BRITAIN'S MO∣NARCHY, supported by LOYALTY, both Women; Monarchy in a large purple Robe, adorn'd with Diadems and Scepters; over which, a loose Mantle, edg'd with blue and silver Fringe, resembling Water, the Map of Great Britain drawn on it: on her Head London, in her right hand, Eden∣burgh; in her left, Dublin: Loyalty all in White, three Scepters in her right Hand, three Crowns in her left. The first Painting on the South-side is a Prospect of His Majesties landing at Dover-Castle, Ships at Sea, great Guns going off, one kneeling and kissing the Kings Hand; Souldiers, Horse and Foot, and many people gazing. Above, ADVENTVS AVG. The whole Tablet representing his Majesties blessed Arrival. Beneath the Painting, this Motto, IN SOLIDO RURSUS FORTUNA LOCAVIT. Alluding to that of Virgil, Thus rendred, Fortune, reviving those She tumbled down, Sporting, restores again unto the Crown. Above the Arch, on two Pedestals, South-ward and North-wards, stood the Statues of King IAMES, and King CHARLES I. In the middle somewhat higher, just over the Arch, the Statue of his Sacred Majesty. Un∣der that of King Iames, DIVO JACOBO. Under that of King Charles I. DIVO CAROLO.
Under that of his Majesty, this following Inscription; D. N. CAROLO II. D. G. BRITANNIARUM IMP. OPT. MAX. UBIQUE VENERANDO, SEMPER AUG. BEATISSIMO AC PIISSIMO, BONO REIP. NATO. DE AVITA BRITANNIA, ET OMNIUM HOMINUM GENERE MERITISSIMO. P. P. EXTINCTORI TYRANNIDIS, RESTITUTORI LIBERTATIS, FUNDATORI QUIETIS, OB FELICEM REDITUM, EX VOTO L. M. P. S. P. Q. L. Upon his Majesties advance to the East-India-House in Leaden-hall-street, the East-India Company took occasion to express their dutiful Affections to his Majesty, by two Youths in Indian Habit; one attended by two Black-moors; the other Youth in an Indian Vest, mounted upon a Camel, led out by two Black-Moors, and other Attendants; the Camel having two Panniers filled with Jewels, Spices, and Silks, to be scattered among the Spectators. The next Entertainment was at Corn-hil-Conduit, on the top of which stood eight Nymphs clad in White, each having an Escutcheon in one Hand, and a Pendent and Banner in the other. On the Tower of the said Conduit, a Noise of Seven Trumpets.
NEar the Exchange, in Corn-hill, was erected the second Arch, which was Naval. On the East-side were two Stages Erected; on each side of the Street one. In that on the South-side was a Person representing the River Thames. In the other Stage on the North-side, which was made like the upper Deck of a Ship, were three Seamen, whereof one habited like a Boat-swain▪ A Shield, or Table, in the Front of the Arch, o're this Inscription. NEPTUNO BRITANNICO, CAROLO II. CUJUS ARBITRIO MARE VEL LIBERUM, VEL CLAUSUM. The first Painting on the North-side over the City-Arms, represented NEP∣TVNE with his Trident advanced; the Inscription NEPTUNO REDUCI. On the South-side, opposite, MARS with his Spear inverted, his Sheild charged with a Gorgon; by his Knees the Motto MARTI PACIFERO. Over the Arch, the Marriage of Thame and Isis. The Painting on the North-side, over Neptune, did Represent the Exchange: the Motto —GENERALIS LAPSI SARCIRE RUINAS. The uppermost great Table in the fore-ground represented King Charles the First, with the Prince, now Charles the Second, in his Hand; viewing the Soveraign of the Sea, the Prince leaning on a Cannon, the Inscription, O nimium dilecte Deo, cui militat Aequor, Et conjurati veniunt ad Classica Venti. For thee O Iove's delight, the Seas engage, And muster'd Winds, drawn up in Battle, Rage. At the Stocks, the Entertainment was a Body of Military Musick, placed on a Balcony, consisting of six Trumpets, and three Drums; the Fountain there being after the Thscan Order, venting Wine and Water. In like manner, on the top of the great Conduit, at the Entrance of Cheap∣side, there was another Fountain out of which issued both Wine and Water, as in a Representation of Temperance; and on the several Towers of that Conduit were eight Figures, habited like Nymphs, with Escutcheons in one hand, and Pendants or Banners in the other: and between each of them Wind-Musick; the number eight. On the Standard also in Cheap-side there was a Band of Waits placed, consisting of six Persons.
THe third Triumphal Arch stood near Wood-street-end, not far from the place, where the Cross sometimes stood. It Represented an Artificial Building of two Stories, one after the Corinthian way of Architecture, the other after the Composite, Representing the Temple of Concord; with this Inscrip∣tion on a Shield, AEDEM CONCORDIAE, IN HONOREM OPTIMI PRINCIPIS, CUJUS ADVENTU BRITANNIA TERRA MARIQUE PACATA, ET PRISCIS LEGIBUS REFORMATA EST, AMPLIOREM RESPLENDIDIOREM RESTITUIT, SPQL. In the Spandrils of the Arch there were two Figures, in Female Habits leaning: One representing PEACE, the other TRVTH. That of Peace had her Shield charged with an Helmet, and Bees Issuing forth, and going into it; the Word, PAX BELLO POTIOR. Truth on the other side in a thin Habit, on her Shield Time bringing Truth out of a Cave; the Word, TANDEM EMERSIT. Over the great Painting upon the Arch of the Cupula, was represented a large GERYON with three Heads Crowned; in his three right-hands, a Lance, a Sword, and a Scepter, in his three left-hands, the three Escutcheons of Eng∣land, Scotland, and Ireland; before him the Kings Arms with three Imperial Crowns; beneath in great Letters, CONCORDIA INSUPERABILIS. Here the City Recorder, Sir William Wild, made a Speech, and presented the King with a Purse of Gold. On the little Conduit, at the lower End of Cheap-side, were placed four Figures, or Nymphs, each of them having an Escutcheon in one hand, and a Pendant in the other. In a Balcony, erected at the Entrance of Pater-noster Row, were placed his Majesties Drums and Fie; the number of persons Eight. Between that and Ludgae there were two other Balconies erected: In one was placed a Band of six Waits; in the other, six Drums. On the top of Ludgate six Trumpets. At Fleet-Bridge a Band of six Waits. On Fleet-Conduit were six Figures or Nymphs, clad in White, each with an Escutcheon in one hand, and a Pendant in the other; as also a Band of six Waits. And on the Lanthorn of the Conduit was the Figure of Temperance, mixing Water and Wine.
IN Fleet-street, near White-Friers, stood the fourth Triumphant Arch, repre∣senting the Garden of PLENTY: it was of two Stories; the one of the Dorick Order, the other of the Ionick. Their Capitals had not their Just Measure, but inclined to the Modern Architecture. Upon the great Shield over the Arch, in large Capitals, this Inscription. UBERTATI AUG. EXTINCTO BELLI CIVILIS INCENDIO, CLUSOQ JANI TEMPLO ARAM CELSIS CONSTRUXIT S. P. Q. L. Over the Postern, on the South-side of the Entrance was BACCHUS in a Chariot drawn by Leopards, his Mantle a Panther's skin; his Crown of Grapes; a Thyrsis with Ivy in his left hand, a Cup in his right: underneath, LIBER PATER. The Painting over this, represented Silenus on his Ass, Satyrs dancing round about, in Drunken and Antick Postures; the Prospect a Vineyard. On the North-side opposite, Ceres, drawn in a Chariot by winged Dragons, and Crowned with ears of Corn: in her left hand Poppy; in her right, a Bla∣zing Torch. The Painting over her was a description of Harvest; with CERES AUG. His Majesty having passed the Four Triumphant Arches, was at Temple-Bar Entertained with the View of a delightful Boscage, full of several Beasts, both tame and savage, as also several living Figures, and Musick of eight Waits. But this being the Limit of the Cities Liberty, must be so likewise of the De∣scription.
Thus much for the City, now for the Court, which in order challenged the first place; but 'twas best to deal with the biggest first; and those Colossus in Lon∣don were indeed Gigantick and stupendious greatness: Come we now to the Knights of the Bath made at this Coronation, who appearing at the Court of Requests in Westminster, were called over by the Lords Commissioners appoin∣ted for that purpose, viz. The Dke of Ormond Steward of the Kings Houshold, the Earls of Northum∣berland, Suffolk, Lindsey, Manchester. Their Names were as follows. Sir Fiennes Lord Clinton Heir apparent to the Earl of Lincoln, Sir Eger∣ton Lord Brackley Son and Heir apparent to the Earl of Bridgewater, Sir Philip Herbert second son to the Earl of Pembrook and Montgomery, Sir William Egerton second son to the Earl of Bridgwater, Sir Vere Fane second son to the Earl of Westmorland, Sir Charles Berkley eldest son to the Lord Berkley, Sir Hen∣ry Bellasis eldest son to the Lord Bellasis, Sir Henry Hide now Viscount Cornbu∣ry eldest son to Edward Earl of Clarendon, Sir Rowland Bellasis brother to the Lord Viscount Faulconberg, Sir Henry Capel brother to the Earl of Essex, Sir Iohn Vaughan second son to Richard Earl of Carbery, Sir Charles Stanley Grandchild to Iames late Earl of Derby, Sir Francis and Sir Henry Fane Grand∣children to the late Earl of Westmorland, Sir William Portman Baronet, Sir Wil∣liam Ducy Baronet, Sir Thomas Trevor Knight and Baronet, Sir Iohn Scuda∣more Baronet; Sir William Gardner Baronet, Sir Charles Cornwallis son to Fredrick Lord Cornwallis, Sir Iohn Nicholas eldest son to his Majesties principal Secretary, Sir Iohn Monson, Sir Iohn Bramston, Sir Richard Temple, Sir Bourchier Wray, Sir Iohn Coventry, Sir Edward Hungerford, Sir Iohn Knevet, Sir Philip Botler, Sir Adrian Scroop son of Sir Iervas Scroop who received Nineteen Wounds at Edgehill in his Majesties service, Sir Richard Knightley, Sir Henry Heron, Sir Iohn Lewkor, Sir George Brown, Sir William Tyringham, Sir Francis Godolphin, Sir Ed∣ward Baynton, Sir Grevil Verney, Sir Edward Harlow, Sir Edward Walpool, Sir Francis Popham, Sir Edward Wise, Sir Christopher Calthorp, Sir Richard Edge∣comb, Sir William Bromley, Sir Thomas Bridges, Sir Thomas Fanshaw, Sir Iohn Denham, Sir Nicholas Bacon, Sir Iames Altham, Sir Thomas Wendy, Sir Iohn Man∣son, Sir George Freeman, Sir Nicholas Slanning, Sir Richard Ingoldsby, Sir Iohn Rolle, Sir Edward Heath son of Sir Robert Heath late Lord chief Justice of England, Sir William Morley, Sir Iohn Bennet, Sir Hugh Smith, Sir Simon Leech, Sir Henry Chester, Sir Robert Atkins, Sir Robert Gayer, Sir Richard Powle, Sir Hugh Ducy, Sir Stephen Hales, Sir Ralph Bush, Sir Thomas Whitmore. In Number sixty eight. After their calling over, they proceeded in their usual Habits, each of them between his two Esquires, and a Page following, the Heraulds going before them with their Coats not put on, but only hanging loose on their Arms, to King Hen. 7. Chappel, where after the wonted reverence performed, they took their seats. Prayer being done, they returned to the Painted Chamber and the other Rooms adjoyning, to repose themselves, till the Supper of Two hundred dishes at his Majesties Charge, was brought to the Court of Requests, where they placed themselves according to their Seniority at the Tables, by the Wall∣side, their Esquires and Pages waiting on them on the other. Supper ended, the Lord Cornwallis and Sir Charles Berckley (the Treasurer and Comptroller of his Majesties Houshold) gave them his welcome, and then con∣ducted them to the Painted Chamber, and the Lords House adjoyning, and some other near rooms, where their Bathing Vessels and Beds, which were Pal∣lets with Canopies, were prepared, being covered with red Say: There, after they had Bathed more or less as each of them found convenient, they remain∣ed all Night; and early in the Morning were bade good morrow by his Majesties Musick. Then arising, and Apparelling themselves in a Cordeliers Habit (be∣ing a long russet Gown, with wide sleeves, and a Hood tyed close about the middle with a Cordon of Ash-coloured and Russet silk, reaching down almost
to the knees, and a white Napkin or Handkerchief hanging thereat) they pro∣ceeded to Hen. 7. Chappel, in the same order as the Night before, doing the same rev, and heard Divine Service, and took the usual Oath before the said Lords ommissioners, which was read to them by Sir Edward Walker Prin∣cipal King o Arms, in these words. Right dear Brher, GReat Woshp be this Order to every of you.The Oath of the Knights of the Bath. You shall Honour God above all things. ut shall be stedfast in the Faith of Christ, and the same maintain and defend t yur Power. You shall love your Soveraign above all earthly things, and for yu Soveraigns Right live and dye. You shall defend Maidens, Widdows, and Orphans in their right. You shall suffer no Extortion as far as you may: nor sit in any place where wrong Iudgment shall be given, to your knowledge. And of as great Honour be this Order to you, as ever it was to any of your Pro∣genitors or others. This done, they returned in the same order they came to the Painted Cham∣ber, and put on the Habit of the Order, which was a Mantle, and Surcoat of red Taffata lined and edged with white Sarcenet, and thereto fastned two long strings of white silk, with buttons and tassels of red silk and gold; and a pair of white Cloves tyed to them, a white Hat and white Feather: in this Garb they Dined in the Painted Chamber; and thence, girded with a Sword, the Pum∣mel and cross-Hilt whereof were guilt, the Scabbard of white Leather, and Belt of the sme, with guilt Spurs carried by their Pages, they marched on Horse-back by Seniority to White-Hall, with the Heraulds before them, from the Old Palace round about the New, and so through Kingstreet, going round the place where Charing-Cross stood; and then to White-hall, where they alighted: and after they had gone about the first Court, they were conducted by the Heraulds to the Banqueting-House, where His Majesty sate under a Cloath of State to receive them. They were brought up by six and six, each be∣tween his two Esquires, with his Page carrying his Sword before him. In their approaches towards his Majesty they made three Obeysances, and each Knight being presented by his two Esquires upon their knees to the King, (the Lord Chamberlain of His Majesties Houshold receiving the Knights Swords from the Pages, and delivering it to the King) He with the Sword of State ready drawn conferred upon them their respective Knight-hoods, by laying the Sword upon their shoulders, and so put the presented Sword upon the Knights Neck, in such sort, that it might hang on his left side; and then the said Scabbard, with the Order hanging at it. Which done, the Knight made his obeysance of Gratitude to His Majesty; and falling back, the rest were brought up and Knighted in like manner. After this, they went down into his Majesties Chappel, and there heard Di∣vine Service, with the Organ and Anthems, and then went up six at a time to the Altar, and offered up their Swords; where Gilbert Lord Bishop of Lon∣don, Dean of His Majesties Royal Chappel, received them, and laid them upon the Altar, and afterwards restored them, with this Admonition. By the Oath which you have taken this day, I exhort and admonish you, to use these Swords to the Glory of God, and defence of the Gospel; to the mainte∣nance of your Sovereigns Right and Honour, and to the upholding of Equity and Iustice, to your power. So help you God. This done, they returned from the Chappel, where the Kings Master-Cook stood, with his Chopping-Knife in his hand, challenging their Spurs, which were severally redeemed with a Noble in Money. As they passed by, he said, Gen∣tlemen, you know what a great Oath you have taken; which if you keep, it will be great honour to you; but if you break it, I must back off your Spurs from your heels.
When they came unto the great Hall, the Officers at Arms acquainted them, that on Monday following they were to attend his Majesty from the Tower to White-Hall on Horseback in the same Robes wherein they were Knighted, and on Tuesday to meet early in the Painted Chamber in their Purple Sattin Habits, thence to go before his Majesty to his Coronation at Westminster. Creation of Earls and Ba∣rons at the same time.This Ceremony being over, the King to honour this great Solemnity, ad∣vanced some eminent Persons to higher degrees of Dignity, to be as Jewels to that Crown which should be placed on his Head: they were Twelve in num∣ber; six Earls, and six Barons. The Names of whom are as followeth: Ed∣ward Lord Hide of Hendon Lord high Chancellour of England, was created Earl of Clarendon; Arthur Lord Capel was created Earl of Essex; Thomas Lord Brudenel was created Earl of Cardigan; Arthur Viscount Valentia in Ireland was created Earl of Anglesey; Sir Iohn Greenvile Gentleman of His Majesties Bed-Chamber, and Groom of the Stool, was created Earl of Bath; Charles Howard of His Majesties Privy Council was created Earl of Carlisle; Denzil Hollis Esq was created Lord Hollis of Ifeld; Sir Frederick Cornwallis was cre∣ated Lord Cornwallis of Eye in Suffolk, an antient Barony; Sir George Booth Baronet, was created Lord de-la-Mere; Sir Horatio Townsend was created Ba∣ron of Lyn-Regis; Sir Anthony Ashly Cooper was created Baron of Winterbourn St. Gyles; Iohn Crew was created Lord Crew of Stene. The Earls at their Creation, had two Earls their supporters, their Cap and Coronet carried by one, their Sword by another, and their Mantle by a third. The Lords were likewise supported by two Lords, their Cap and Mantle in the same manner, but no Sword. These Peers being thus led up, Garter King of Arms attending them to the King; upon their several approaches, their Patents were presented by Sir William Walker, Principal King at Arms; which being by the Lord Chamberlain deli∣vered to the King, and from him to Secretary Nicholas, were by him read, and then given by His Majesty to the Respective Nobles, who after they were vested with their Robes, had their several Caps and Coronets placed upon their Heads by His Majesties own hands, as he sate in a Chair of State. These likewise were ordered to attend the King at his Coronation, which Commenced its glories Monday the Twenty second of April aforesaid: it having rained a Moneth together before, it pleased God that not one drop fell on this Triumph, which appeared in its full Lustre and Grandeur; but as soon as the solemnity was past, and the King and his Train at Dinner in Westmin∣ster-Hall, it fell a Thundering, Lightning and Raining, with the greatest force, vehemence, and noise, that was ever heard or seen at that time of the year. The Streets were gravelled all the way, and filled with a multitude of Specta∣tors out of the Countrey, and some Forreigners, who acknowledged themselves never to have seen among all the great Mgnificences of the World, any to come near or equal this: even the Vaunting French confessed their Pomps of the late Marriage with the Infanta of Spain, at their Majesties entrance into Paris, to be inferiour in its State, Gallantry and Riches, unto this most Illustrious Ca∣valcade. Which proceeded on this manner, as the NOBILITY and GENTRY were placed within and without the Tower. First went the Horse-Guard of his Highness the Duke of York, the Messen∣gers of his Majesties Chamber, the Esquires of the Knights of the Bath, One hundred thirty six in number; the Knight Harbenger, the Serjeant-Porter, the Sewers of the Chamber, the Quarter-waiters of the six Clerks of the Chancery, the Clerks of the Signet, the Clerks of the Privy Seal, the Clerks of the Coun∣cil, the Clerks of both Houses of Parliament, the Clerks of the Crown, the Chaplains in Ordinary having Dignities, ten in number; the King's Advocate and Remembrancer, the Kings learned Counsel at Law, the Master of the Chan∣cery, the Kings puisne Serjeants, the Kings Attorney and Solicitors, the King's eldest Serjeants; Secretaries of the French and Latine Tongues, the Gentlemen-Ushers,
daily waiters, the Sewers, Carvers and Cup-bearers in ordinary, the Es∣quires of the Body, the Masters of standing Offices being no Councellors, viz. of the Tents, Revels, Ceremonies, Armory, Wardrope, Ordnance, Master of Requests, Chamberlain of the Exchequer, Barons of the Exchequer, and Judges of the Law according to their Dignity; the Lord chief Baron, the Lord chief Justice of the Common Pleas, the Master of the Rolls, the Lord chief Justice of England; Trumpets, the Gentlemen of the Privy-Chamber, the Knights of the Bath sixty eight in Number, the Knight Marshal, the Treasurer of the Cham∣ber, Master of the Jewel-house, Knights of the Privy Council, Comptroller of his Majesties Houshold, Treasurer of his Majesties Houshold. Two Trumpets and Serjeants, Trumpets, Two Pursivants at Arms; Barons eldest Sons, Earls youngest sons, Viscounts eldest sons, Barons, Marquesses younger sons, Earls el∣dests sons. Two Pursivants at Arms. Viscounts, Dukes younger sons, Marquesses eldest sons. Two Heraulds. Earls, Earl Marshal, and Lord Chamberlain of the Houshold, Dukes eldest sons. Serjeants at Arms on both sides the Nobility. Cla∣rencieux and Norroy, Lord Treasurer, Lord Chancellor, Lord High Steward, Duke of Ormond, two persons representing the Duke of Normandy and Aquitain, Gentleman-Vsher, Garter, Lord Mayor Sir Richard Brown. The Duke of York alone. The Lord High Constable of England Earl of Northumberland, Lord Great Chamberlain of England Earl of Lindsey. The Sword by the Duke of Richmond. The KING. Equerries and Footmen next and about his Majesty, Gentlemen and Pensioners without them, the Master of the Horse Duke of Albemarl leading a spare Horse, the Vice-Chamberlain to the King, Captain of the Pensioners, Captain of the Guard, the Guard, the Kings Life guard Commanded by my Lord Gerrard, the Generals Life-guard by Sir Philip Howard; a Troop of Voluntier Horse, and a Com∣pany of Foot, by Sir Iohn Robinson. The way from the Tower to Aldgate was guarded by the Hamlets, from thence to Temple-Bar by the Trained-Bands of London, on one side, and lined with the Liveries on the other side, with the Banners of each Company. The Win∣dows were all along laid with the best Carpets and Tapestry; Bands of Musick in several places, and the Conduits running with Wine. In St. Pauls Church-yard stood the Blew-coat boys of Christ-Church Hospital. One in behalf of the rest declared their joy for his Majesties wonderful pre∣servation in his absence, and his Arrival thither; humbly beseeching his Maje∣sties Gracious favour and indulgence, according to the example of his Royal Ancestors, and his Father of blessed memory. The King was very well plea∣sed with this Speech, and after conferred something on the Boy that spoke it. In the Strand, and through Westminster also the ways were gravelled and rayled, being guarded on both sides with the Trained bands of that Liberty and City; and his Majesties two Regiments of Foot, under the command of his Grace the Duke of Albemarle, and Colonel Russel brother to the Earl of Bedford. The houses were also richly adorned with the Carpets and Tapestry; and Musick, (particularly a stage of Morice-dancers at the Maypole in the Strand) in the several places all along his Majesties passage. When his Majesty came through Temple-bar into his Antient and Native City of Westminster, the Head-bayliff in a Scarlet Robe, and High Constable in Scarlet, received his Majesty with loud Musick; where alighting off their horses, and kneeling down to his Majesty, the Head-bayliff on behalf of the Dean and Chapter, City and Liberty, signified their joyful reception of his Royal person into that Liberty; declaring how much more happy they were than any part of the Nation, in that their Sovereign Lord and King was born within their
Liberty, and humbly desiring his Majesty to continue his Grace and Favour still to them, whereby that City might still be enabled to do his Majesties Ser∣vice. When the Head-Bayliff had ended his Speech, he and the High-Consta∣ble mounted their Horses, and fell in next after his Majesties Servants at Mace; in which order they attended his Majesty to White-hall. Infinite and innumerable were the Acclamations and Shouts from all the parts as his Majesty passed along, to the no less joy than mazement of the Spe∣ctators, who beheld those glorious Personages that rid before and behinde his Majesty. Indeed it were in vain to attempt to express this Solemnity, it was so far from being utterable, that it is almost inconceiveable: and much won∣der it caused in Outlandish persons, who were acquainted with our late Trou∣bles and Confusions, (to the ruine almost of three Kingdoms) which way it was possible for the English to appear in so Rich and Stately a man∣ner. It is incredible to think what costly Cloathes were worn that day; the Cloaks could hardly be seen what Silk or Sattin they were made of, for the Gold and Silver-Laces and Embroidery that was laid upon them: the like al∣so was seen in their Foot-cloaths. Besides the inestimable value and treasures of Diamonds, Pearl and other Jewels, worn upon their Backs and in their Hats: To omit also the sumptuous and rich Liveries of their Pages and Footmen; (some suits of Liveries amounting to fifteen hundred pounds;) the nume∣rousness of these Liveries, and the orderly march of them; as also the state∣ly Equipage of the Esquires attending each Earl by his Horse-side: so that all the World that saw it, could not but confess, that what they had seen before, was but solemn Mummery, to the most August, noble and true Glories of this great day. In this order the King arrived at White-hall a good time before the Even∣ing, and then retired himself to Supper, and so to his Rest, to recommence the next day, and to put an end to this Triumph. On the 23 of April, St. George's day, to consummate the Coronation, the King came from his Privy-stairs to the Old Palace, to a Room called the Princes Lodgings, behinde the House of Lords, and stayed there till the Lords and his Train had Robed and ranked themselves in Westminster-hall; who being ready, the King placed himself on a Throne at the upper end thereof, when the Dean of Westminster (with the Prebends in their rich Copes, each having a part of the Regalia) with St. Ed∣ward's Crown, came and delivered them to the Lord High-Constable, and he to the Lord Great Chamberlain, who set them on a Table; and the King im∣mediately bestowed them on this manner; (Sir Gilbert Talbot the Master of the Kings Jewels, having laid the Sword of State and Sword called Curtana with two others on the same Table) St. Edward's Staff to the Earl of Sandwich, the Spurs to the Earl of Pembrook the pointed Sword on the left hand of Curta∣na to the Earl of Derby, the pointed Sword on the right to the Earl of Shrews∣bury, Curtana to the Earl of Oxford, the Sword of State to the Earl of Man∣chester, the Scepter with the Dove to the Duke of Albemarle, the Orb with the Cross to the Duke of Buckingham, St. Edwards Crown to the Duke of Or∣mond, the Patina to the Bishop of Exeter, and the Chalice to the Bishop of Lon∣don: and then his Majesty set forward on foot (in the same order as before al∣most) upon blue Cloath laid upon the ground from the Hall to his Chair in the Abbey,The Kings pro∣cession to the Abbey. by the appointment of Sir George Carteret, His Almoner appointed for that day. The King was supported by the Lord-Bishops of Bath and Dur∣ham; his Train was carried up by the Lords Mandevil, Cavendish, Ossery, and Percy, assisted by the Lord Viscount Masfield, Master of the Robes: then came the Earl of Lauderdale Gent. of his Majesties Bed-chamber, next came Mr. Sey∣more, Mr. Ashburnham, Grooms of the same, the Captain of the Guard, Captain of the Pensioners, and Yeomen. All the Peers with their Coronets in their hands came up along with his Majesty, till his Majesty was placed in a Chair of State (not in his Throne:)
then the Lord Bishop of London▪ for the Lord Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, went to every of the four-sides of the Throne, and at every of them spoke to the People in these words. Here I present unto you KING CHARLES the rightful Inheritor of the Crown of this Realm. Wherefore all you that are come this day to do your Homage, Service, and bounden duty, be ye willing to do the same? Whereupon all the Peers in their Parliament-Robes, and People, gave a shout, testifying their willingness. This while the King standing from his Chair, turned himself to every of the four sides of the Throne, and at every of them spake to the People, who again with loud acclamations signified their willingness all in one voice. After which the Choire sung an Anthem, in the interim whereof his Majesty, Supported by the two Bishops of Durham and Bath and Wells, and attended by the Dean of Westminster, went to the steps before the Communion-Table, where upon Carpets and Cushions the King offered a Pall and a piece of Gold. After his Majesty had offered, he went on the right hand, and kneeled down during a short Collect or Prayer; and then Sermon began, which was Preached by the Lord Bishop of WORCESTER. Sermon being ended, the Lord-Bishop of LONDON went to the King, for the Lord Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, and asked if he were pleased to take the Oath usually taken by his Predecessors; to which his Majesty shewed himself most willing. Then his Majesty rose out of his Chair, and by those two that before Assisted Him, was led up to the Communion-Table, where he made a solemn Oath to observe those things he had before promised. After this Oath, the King return∣ed to his Chair, and kneeled at his foot-stool, while the Hymn of the Holy Ghost was singing; which ended, the Letany was sung by two Bishops. After which, the Lord Arch-Bishop of Canterbury began and said, Lift up your hearts, &c. Then his Majesty arose from his Devotion, and dis-robed himself of his upper Garment (his under Garment being so made, as the places to be anointed might be opened by undoing certain loops; which the Arch-Bishop un∣did, his Majesty sitting in a Chair.) The Archbishop first Anointed the Palms of both his hands, the Choire singing an Anthem; after which and certain Prayers, the Lord Arch-bishop proceeded and anointed his breast between the shoulders, on both the shoulders, the bending of his Arms, and the Crown of his Head: whereupon the Dean of Westminster closed the Loops, and the Lord Arch-bishop said several Prayers; which ended, the Coif was put on His Majesties Head, and the Colobium syndonis or Dalmatica, then the Super-tunica of cloth of Gold, with the Tissue buskins and Sandals of the same; then the Spurs were put on by the Peer that carried them: then the Arch-bishop took the Kings Sword and laid it on the Communion-Table, and after Prayer restored it to the King, which was Girt upon him by the Lord great Chamberlain: then the Armil was put on, next the Mantle, or open Pall; after which, the Lord Arch-bishop took the Crown into his hands, and laid it on the Communion-Table, Prayed, and then set it on the Kings Head; whereupon, all the Peers put on their Coronets and Caps, the Choire singing an Anthem: next, the Arch-Bishop took the Kings Ring, prayed again, and put it on the Fourth Finger of the Kings Hand; after which his Majesty took off his Sword, and offered it up; which the Lord great Chamberlain redeemed, drew it out, and carried it naked before the King. Then the Arch-Bishop took the Scepter with the Cross, and delivered it into His Ma∣jesties right Hand, the Rod with the Dove in the left; and the King kneeling, blessed him: which done, the King ascended his Throne Royal, the Lords Spi∣ritual and Temporal attending him, where after Te Deum the King was again Enthroned, and then all the Peers did their Homage; The Arch-Bishop first, who then kissed the Kings left Cheek, and after him the other Bishops. After their Homage, the Peers all together stood round about the King, and every one in their order toucht the Crown upon his Head, promising their readiness to support it with their power. The Coronation being ended, the Communion
followed, which his Majesty having received and offered, returned to his Throne till the Communion ended, and then went into St. Edwards Chappel, there took off his Crown, and delivered it to the Lord Bishop of London, who laid it upon the Communion-Table: which done, the King withdrew into a Traverse, where the Lord great Chamberlain of England disrobed the King of St. Edward's Robes, and delivered them to the Dean of Westminster, then His Majesty was newly arrayed with his Robes prepared for that day, and came to the Communion-Table in St. Edward's Chappel, where the Lord Bishop of Lon∣don, for the Arch-Bishop, set the Crown Imperial, provided for the King to wear that day, upon his Head. Then His Majesty took the Scepter and the Rod, and (the Train set in order before him) went up to the Throne, and so through the Choyre and body of the Church out at the West-door, to the Palace of Westminster. The Oathes of Fealty being casually omitted, are here subjoyned as they were sworn in order. I William Arch-Bishop of Canterbury shall be True and Faithful, and true Faith and Truth bear unto you ou Soveraign Lord, and your Heirs Kings of England; and shall, and do, and truly acknowledge the service of the Land which I claim to hold of You in right of the Church. So help me God. Then the Duke of York did the same, in these Words (Garter principal King at Arms attending him in his Ascent to the Throne.) I James Duke of York become Your Leigeman of Life, of Limb, and of Earth∣ly Worship; and Faith and Truth shall I bear unto You, to live and dye, against all manner of Folk. The Dukes of Buckingham and Albemarle did the same for the Dukes. The Marquesses of Worcester and Dorchester for the Marquesses. The Earl of Oxford for the Earls. Viscount Hereford for the Viscounts. And the Lord Audley for the Barons. Note, that there were Collects and Prayers said upon the putting on of the Regalia, as the Armil, the Pall; the delivery of the Scepter, the Sword, all according to ancient Form; and upon the setting on of the Crown, a peculiar Benediction. The Bishop of Worcester's Sermon was Preached upon the 28 of Prov. verse 2. Before the King, the Peers now according to their Ranks and degrees procee∣ded to the said Palace, and not as they entred the Abbey, but with their Coro∣nets on; at the upper end whereof there was a Table and Chair of State raised upon an ascent: on the South-East-side of the Hall were two Tables placed; the first for the Barons of the Cinque Ports, the Bishops and Judges; the other for the Masters and six Clerks of Chancery; at which Table▪ by some mistake or distur∣bance, the Barons dined. At the North-East-end the Nobility at one Table, and behinde them, close to the Wall, the Lord-Mayor, the Recorder, the Alder∣men, and twelve principal Citizens: in the Court of Common-pleas dined the Officers at Arms. Which Tables being served (each had in all three Cour∣ses and a Banquet) the King came in from the inner Court of Wards, where he had staid half an hour, and sat down, and the Duke of York sate at the end of the same Table on the left hand: the Earl of Dorset was Sewer, and the Earl of Chesterfield his Assistant, the Earl of Lincoln was Carver; the Dishes were most of them served up by the Knights of the Bath: at the second course came in Sir Edward Dymock who by the service of this day, as the King's Cham∣pion, holds his Mannor of Serivelsby in the County of Lincoln; as several other services were performed upon the same account: (particularly Mr. Henry How∣ard, in behalf of his Brother the Duke of Norfolk, for a Mannor in Norfolk; gave the King a rich right-hand-Glove, during the Coronation, with which he held the Scepter.) He was mounted upon a goodly White Courser, himself Armed at all points; and having staid a while, advanced a little further, with his
two Esquires, one bearing a Lance, the other a Target, and threw down his Gantlet; the Earl-Marshal riding on his Left, and the Lord High-Constable on his Right hand, when York the Herauld read aloud his Challenge, which was done the third and last time at the foot of the Ascent where the King dined, and his Gantlet by the Herauld returned to him at every of the three times, after it had layn a little while: the Challenge was in these words. If any person of what degree soever, High or Low, shall deny or gainsay our Soveraign Lord King Charles the second, King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, defender of the Faith, &c. and Son and Heir to our Soveraign Lord Charles the first, the late King deceased, to be right Heir to the Imperial Crown of the Realm of England, or that he ought not to enjoy the same: Here is his Champion, who saith that he lyeth, and is a false Traytor, being ready in person to Combate with him, and on this quarrel will adventure his life against him, what day soever he shall be appointed. Which read aloud, the Earl of Pembrook presented the King with a Guilt Cup fill'd with Wine; who drank to his Champion, and sent him the said Cup by the said Earl; which after three Reverences, and some steps backward, he drunk off, and kept it as his Fee, and departed. Then Garter Principal King-at-Arms Proclaimed the King thrice with his Title in Latine, French▪ and English, and at every time at the end cried Largess, and the people shouted God save the King: then the Lord Mayor Sir Richard Brown presented a Golden Cup and Cover full of Wine, which the King drank off, and gave it the Lord Mayor for his Fee. By that time the third course was carrying in, the King called for Water; which the Earl of Pembrook assisted by another Earl brought in a Basin and Ewer; and the King having washed, with∣drew to his Barge: but before his departure, it fell a Thundering, Lightning, and Raining, as if it imitated the noise and fire of the Cannon which played from the Tower; and it was observed that they kept time in this loud Musick, so that they were distinctly to be heard; the Thunder intermitting, as if it staid to receive and answer the reciprocated and ecchoed Boation and clashes of the Guns. And in all ancient Augury, such signes were taken for the most auspici∣ous, however the mad remnant of the Rebellion would have it parallell'd to Saul's inauguration, never considering the season, nor the different occasion and case between the most ancient Kingly Right and descent in Christendom, and that a new Title and Government in Iewry, which had before the most special presence of God among them. All the Kingdom over, great rejoycing was made by Feasting and other Shows, as Training the several Bands of the Countries, with the additional Voluntary Gentry in a new and gallant Cavalry, which shewed the resurrection of their former Loyalty, in its immutable state of Peace. But to proceed to the disclosing the whole lustre of this our present and most delightful Subject (omitting the same Triumphs in Scotland and Ireland, in the express resemblances of this Magnificence; several Honours being conferred both by the Lord-Commissioner his Grace, and the Lords-Justices on that So∣lemnity) we will take a full view of all our personal Dignities at home. We proceed then to those Magnificences of the King which are in him Ho∣norante, not in Honorato. After the miserably vulgarly multitude of those evil Counsellors we had been oppress'd with for so many years (who had rai∣sed themselves to the mysteries of Government by their publick scandals there∣of in its former administration, following the impious politicks of Absalom) we saw an Assembly of Princes met in his Majesties most Honourable Privy Council, whose superlative and eminent endowments, assisted by their conspicu∣ous Grandeur, restored the form of the Brittish Empire, such, as Pallas gloried to be in the midst of her Heavenly descent; such their Noble Extractions, and their excellencies in all prudent menage of the Publick, accomplished to Her own AUTHENTICAL INSTITUTION of true policy: such Pilots, whose happy and skilfull hand could guide the tossed Bark of the King∣dom
in the darkest Night, and the most frightful Tempests, when there was nei∣ther Sun, Moon, nor Stars, no face of Authority nor Rule, no Directions nor Chart to follow, in the unexampled case of our late Distractions, and without any other Compass than their Piety to God, Duty to their Prince, and love to their Country, by which they confidently steered through all those Shelves, Rocks, and Sands, which imminently threatned its Shipwrack and Destruction. Their sacred Names, for perpetual Memory, and to the Eternal Fame of this their blessed Conduct, (understanding that by his Majesties call to this sublime eminent dignity, their precedent Services were signated and notified to the World) as most Religiously and gratefully is due, are here transmitted among the rest of his Majesties felicities to inquisitive Posterity. The Names of his Majesties most Honourable Privy Council. HIs Royal Highness the Duke of York. Earl of Clarendon Lord Chancellor of England. Earl of Southampton Lord Treasurer. Lord Roberts Lord Privy Seal. Duke of Albemarle. Earl of Lindsey Lord High-Chamber∣lai of England. Duke of Ormond Lord Steward of his Majesties Houshould. Marquess of Dorchester. Earl of Northumberland. Earl of Leicester. Earl of Berkshire. Earl of Portland. Earl of Norwich. Earl of St. Albans. Earl of Sandwich. Earl of Anglesey. Earl of Carlisle. Viscount Say and Seal. Lord Wentworth. Lord Seymor Chancellour of the Dut∣chy of Lancaster. Lord Hollis. Lord Cornwallis. Lord Cooper. Earl of Lauderdale. Lord Berkly. Sir George Carteret. Sir Charles Compton. Secretary Nicholas. Secretary Morice. To which have been since added Christopher Lord Hatton, Rupert Duke of Cumberland, the Duke of Buckingham, Earl of Middleton a Scotch Lord, the Kings Commissioner there. From these Glories of the Crown, we are next invited to as Illustrious, those of Chivalry, a medium betwixt War and Peace, that there might be no∣thing that his Majesties Fortunes could not comprehend. The most Honoura∣ble Order of the Garter, Famous for its Martial and Civil Atchievements, had been drag'd in the Dirt, and trampled under Foot of Plebeian Anarchy and U∣surpation; when the innocent charm of its Motto, Hni soit qui mal y pense, Evil be to him that Evil thinks, which had preserved it so many Ages, found not veneration nor respect, being ridled by that Monster of Rebellion, to be a badge and significator of its certain, though long-look'd-for Vltion and Avengement, in its own dire Retorts, and self-punishing Revolutions. It is not, nor ever will be forgotten, how they abased this Royal Ensigne, the highest Order of Knighthood in the World, when it was derided by the most abject and meanest degree of the People; when its True Blue was stained with the Blot of Faintise and imbecility of courage, till another Saint George a∣rose to be its Champion, Assertor, and Restorer of its Renown and Glory. Some of these most Honourable Knights survived his Majesties Restitu∣tion; some he made abroad, others he decreed so; and they were so de ju∣re, having had the Order sent them, but the Investiture wanting. The rest of these Noble Companions were allied to the Restoration; all of them are ranked in the manner as they sate at Windsor, April 16. 1662, being St. George his day; where after the usual Magnificent Procession, His Majesty renewed the usual Solemnities and Grandeurs thereof; Himself being there in Person.
The Fellows and Companions of the most Noble Order of St. GEORGE, commonly called the GARTER, as they were the 23 of April, in the Thirteenth year of King Charles the Second, 1661. CHarles the Second, King of Great Bri∣tain, France, and Ireland, Sove∣raign of the Order. Iames Duke of York the Kings only Bro∣ther. Charles Lodowick Prince Elector Palatine. Frederick William Marquess and Elector of Brandenburgh. Rupert Count Palatine of the Rhine, and Duke of Cumberland. Edward Count Palatine of the Rhine. William of Nassau Prince of Orange. Barnard Duke of Espernon. Charles Prince of Tarante. William Cecil Earl of Salisbury. Thomas Howard Earl of Berk-shire. Algernon Piercy Earl of Northumberland. Iames Butler Duke of Ormond. George Villiers Duke of Buckingham. Thomas Wriothesley Earl of Southamp∣ton. William Cavendish Marquess of New∣castle. George Digby Earl of Bristol. Gasper Count of Marsin. George Monk Duke of Albemarle. Edward Montague Earl of Sandwich. Aubery de Vere Earl of Oxford. Charles Steward Duke of Richmond and Lenox. Montague Berty Earl of Lindsey. Edward Montague Earl of Manche∣ster. William Wentworth Earl of Strafford. A Roll of the PEERS of the Kingdom of ENGLAND. according to their Birth and Creations. Dukes of the Blood Royal. JAmes Duke of York and Albany, Lord High Admiral of England. Rupert Duke of Cumberland. These take Places in respect of their Offices. Edward Earl of Clarendon, Lord Chan∣cellour of England. Thomas Earl of Southampton, Lord Trea∣surer of England. DUKES. Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolk. William Seymour Duke of Somerset. George Villiers Duke of Buckingham. Charles Stuart Duke of Richmond. George Monk Duke of Albemarle. MARQUISSES. Iohn Paulet Marquiss of Winchester. Edward Somerset Marquiss of Worcester. William Cavendish Marquiss of Newcastle. Henry Peirrepont Marquiss of Dorchester. EARLS. These three take places in respect of their Offices. Montague Berty Earl of Lindsey, Lord High Chamberlain of England. Iames Butler Earl of Brecknock, Lord Steward of his Majesties Houshold. Edward Montague Earl of Manchester, Lord Chamberlain of his Majesties Houshold. EARLS. Aubery de Vere Earl of Oxford. Algernoon Piercy Earl of Northumber∣land.The Dukes of Norfolk and Somerset were restored by Act of Parliament 12 year Caroli Secundi. Francis Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury. — Gray Earl of Kent, Infra aetat. Charles Stanly Earl of Derby. Iohn Mannours Earl of Rutland. — Hastings Earl of Huntingdon, In∣fra aetat. Thomas Wriothesly Earl of Southamp∣ton. Wiliam Russel Earl of Bedford.
Philip Herbert Earl of Pembrook and Montgomery. Theophilus Clinton Earl of Lincoln. Charles Howard Earl of Nottingham. Iames Howard Earl of Suffolk. Richard Sackvil Earl of Dorset. William Cecil Earl of Salisbury. Iohn Cecil Earl of Exeter. Iohn Egerton Earl of Bridgewater. Robert Sidney Earl of Leicester. Iames Compton Earl of Northampton. Charles Rich Earl of Warwick. William Cavendish Earl of Devonshire. Basil Fieldig Earl of Denbigh. George Digby Earl of Bristol. Lionel Cranfield Earl of Middlesex. Henry Rich Earl of Holland. Iohn Hollis Earl of Clare. Oliver St. Iohn Earl of Bullingbrook. Mildmay Fane Earl of Westmorland. Edward Montague Earl of Manchester. Thomas Howard Earl of Berk-shire. Thomas Wentworth Earl of Cleveland. Edward Sheffield Earl of Mulgrave. Henry Cary Earl of Monmouth, decea∣sed without Issue male. Iames Ley Earl of Marlborough. Thomas Savage Earl of Rivers. Montague Bertue Earl of Lindsey, Lord Great Chamberlain of England. Nicholas Knollis Earl of Banbury. Henry Cary Earl of Dover. Henry Mordat Earl of Peterburgh. Henry Gray Earl of Stamford. Heneage Finch Earl of Winchelsey. Charles Dormer Earl of Carnarvan. Montjoy Blunt Earl of Newport. Philip Stanhop Earl of Chesterfield. Iohn Tufton Earl of Thanet. Ierome Weston Earl of Portland. William Wentworth Earl of Strafford. Robert Spencer Earl of Sunderland. Iames Savil Earl of Sussex. Charles Goring Earl of Norwich. Nicholas Leak Earl of Scarsdale. — Wilmot Earl of Rochester, Infra aetat. Henry Iermin Earl of St. Albans. Edward Montague Earl of Sandwich. James But∣ler Duke of Or∣mond, was Created Earl of Brecnock Ba∣ron Butler of Lawthy. Iames Butler Earl of Brecknock. Edward Hide Earl of Clarenden. Arthur Capel Earl of Essex. Thomas Brudenal Earl of Cardigan. Arthur Annelsley Earl of Anglesey. Iohn Greenvile Earl of Bath. Charles Howard Earl of Carlisle. The Right Honourable Elizabeth Vis∣countess of Kynelmeky was by Letters Pattents Iune 14 Created Countess of Guildford for her life, in the Twelfth year Caroli Scundi. VISCOUNTS. Leicester Devereux Viscount Hereford. Francis Brown Viscount Montague. Iames Fiennes Viscount Say and Seal. Edward Conway Viscount Conway. Baptist Noel Viscount Camden. William Howard Viscount Stafford. Thomas Bellasis Viscount Faulconberg. Iohn Mordant Viscount Mordant. BARONS. Iohn Nevil Lord Abergavenny, lately Deceased. Iames Tutchet Lord Audley. Charles West Lord De la Ware. George Barkley Lord Barkley. Thomas Parker Lord Morley and Mon∣teagle. Francis Lenard Lord Dacres. Conyers Darcy Lord Darcy. William Stourton Lord Stourton. William Lord Sandys De la Vine. Edward Vaux Lord Vaux. Thomas Windsor Lord Windsor. Thomas Wentworth Lord Wentworth. Wingfield Cromwel Lord Cromwell. George Eure Lord Eure. Philip Wharton Lord Wharton. Francis Willoughby, Lord Willoughby of Parham. William Paget Lord Paget. Dudley North Lord North. William Bruges Lord Chaundos. Iohn Cary Lord Hunsdon. William Petre Lord Petre. Dutton Gerrard Lord Gerrard. Charles Stanhop Lord Stanhop. Henry Arundel, Lord Arundel of War∣der. Christopher Roper Lord Tenham. Foulk Grevil Lord Brook. Edward Montague Lord Montague of Boughton. Charles Lord Howard of Charleton. William Gray Lord Gray of Wark. Iohn Roberts Lord Roberts. William Craven Lord Craven. Iohn Lovelace Lord Lovelace. Iohn Paulet Lord Paulet. William Maynard Lord Maynard.
Thomas Coventry Lord Coventry. Edward Lord Howard of Escrick. Warwick Mohun Lord Mohun. William Botiller Lord Botiller. Percy Herbert Lord Powis Edward Herbert Lord Herbert of Cher∣bury. Francis Seamour Lord Seamour. Thomas Bruce Lord Bruce. Francis Newport Lord Newport of Higharchal. Thomas Leigh Lord Leigh of Stone-Leigh. Christopher Hatton Lord Hatton. Henry Hastings Lord Loughborough. Richard Byron Lord Byron. Richard Vaughan Lord Vaughan. Charles Smith Lord Carrington. William Widdrington Lord Widdrington. Humble Ward Lord Ward. Thomas Lord Culpepper. Isaac Astley Lord Astley. Richard Boyle Lord Clifford. Iohn Lucas Lord Lucas. Iohn Bellasis Lord Bellasis. Lewis Watson Lord Rockingham. Charles Gerrard Lord Gerrard of Bran∣don. Robert Lord Sutton of Lexington. Charles Kirkhoven Lord Wotton. Marmaduke Langdale Lord Langdale deceased. William Crofts Lord Crofts. Iohn Berkly Lord Berkly. Denzil Hollis Lord Hollis of Ifeild. Charles Lord Cornwallis. George Booth Lord De la Mere. Horatio Townsend Lord Townsend. Anthony Ashley Cooper Lord Ashley. Iohn Crew Lord Crew. The Lords Spiritual being restored to their Honours and Places in Parliament since the Coronation, and to all the precedent Honours, we have observed the Order of Time, and not of Dignity, as they should have been Ranked before the Lords Temporal. A. DOctor William Iuxon, Lord Arch-Bishop of Canterbury his Grace, Pri∣mate and Metropolitan of all England, was consecrated Bishop of London 1633. Translated from London to Canterbury 1660. A. Dr. Accepted Frewen Lord Arch-Bishop of York and Metropolitan of Eng∣land, was consecrated Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield 1644. Translated from thence to York 1660. Dr. Gilbert Sheldon Lord-Bishop of London, was consecrated October 28, 1660. Dr. Iohn Couzens Lord-Bishop of Durham, was consecrated December 2, 1660. Y. A. Dr. Brian Duppa Lord-Bishop of Winchester, (this See is now possessed by Dr. Morley, Translated thither from the See of Worcester) Prelate of the Gar∣ter, and Lord Almoner; he was consecrated Bishop of Chichester 1638. from thence Translated to Sarum 1640. and from thence to Winchester 1660. and since deceased 1662. A. Dr. William Piers Lord-Bishop of Bath and Wells, consecrated 1632. A. Dr. Matthew Wren Lord-Bishop of Ely, was consecrated Bishop of Here∣ford 1634. thence Translated to Norwich 1635. from thence to Ely 1638. A. Dr. Robert Skinner Lord-Bishop of Oxon, was consecrated Bishop of Bri∣stol 1636. thence Translated to Oxon 1640. A. Dr. William Roberts Lord-Bishop of Bangor, and Sub-Almoner, was con∣secrated 1637. A. Dr. Iohn Warner Lord-Bishop of Rochesters consecrated 1637. A. Dr. Henry King Lord-Bishop of Chichester, was consecrated 1641. Dr. Humphry Heuchman Lord-Bishop of Salisbury, was consecrated October 28. 1660. Dr. George Morley Lord-Bishop of Worcester, was consecrated October 28. 1660. since possessed by Dr. Gauden, after by Dr. Earles late Dean of West∣minster.
Dr. Robert Sauderson Lord-Bishop of Lincoln, was consecrated October 28. 1660. since deceased, and Dr. Laney Translated thither. Dr. George Griffith Lord-Bishop of St. Asaph, was consecrated October 28. 1660. Dr. William Lucy Lord-Bishop of St. Davids, was consecrated December 2. 1660. Dr. Benjamin Laney Lord-Bishop of Peterborough, was consecrated December 2. 1660. Dr. Hugh Lloyd Lord-Bishop of Landaff, was consecrated December 2. 1660. Dr. Richard Sterne Lord-Bishop of Carlisle, was consecrated December 2. 1660. Y. Dr. Brian Walton Lord-Bishop of Chester, was consecrated December 2. 1660. Y. This See was possess'd by Dr. Fern, who dying also, Dr. George Hall was Lord-Bishop thereof. Dr. Iohn Gauden (who dying, Dr. Seth Ward is since Lord-Bishop there∣of) Lord-Bishop of Exeter, was consecrated December 2. 1660. Dr. Gilbert Ironside Lord-Bishop of Bristol, was consecrated Ianuary 13. 1660. Dr. Edward Reynolds Lord-Bishop of Norwich, was consecrated Ianuary 14. 1660. Dr. William Nicholson Lord-Bishop of Gloucester, was consecrated Ianuary 13. 1660. Dr. Nicholas Monke Lord-Bishop of Hereford, was consecrated Ianuary 13. 1660. who dying, Dr. Herbert Crofts was consecrated in his place 1661. Dr. Iohn Hacket Lord-Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield. A. Notes the ancient Bishops. Y. The Diocesses in the Province of York. All the rest are in the Province of Canterbury. The Names of the Iudges. EDward Earl of Clarendon Lord High-Chancellor of England. Sir Robert Foster Knight, Chief-Justice of the Kings-Bench. Sir Harbottle Grimstone Baronet, Master of the Rolls. Sir Orlando Bridgeman Knight and Baronet, Chief-Justice of the Common-Pleas. Matthew Hale Chief-Baron of the Exchequer. Sir Thomas Mallet Knight. Justices of the Kings-Bench. Sir Thomas Twisden Knight. Justices of the Kings-Bench. Sir Wadham Windham Knight. Justices of the Kings-Bench. Sir Robert Hide Knight. Justices of the Common-Pleas. Sir Thomas Terril Knight. Justices of the Common-Pleas. Sir Samuel Brown Knight. Justices of the Common-Pleas. Sir Edward Atkins Knight. Barons of the Exchequer. Sir Christopher Turner Knight. Barons of the Exchequer. Sir Ieoffrey Palmer Knight, Attorney-General. Sir Iohn Glynne Knight. The Kings Serjeants at Law. Sir Iohn Maynard Knight. The Kings Serjeants at Law. Sir William Wilde Knight. The Kings Serjeants at Law. The two Principal Secretaries of State, persons eminent for their faithful and industrious Loyalty, Sir Edward Nicholas, of the same place to his late Ma∣jesty▪ and Sir William Mrice, the onely Confident the Renowned General the Duke of Albemarle used in those blessed Counsels toward the Restitution of the King and Kingdom.
The Names of the BARONETS made by Letters Patents since his Majesties most happy Restauration, Anno 1660. With the times of their several Creations. Anno Duodecimo Caroli Regis Secundi. SIR Orlando Bridgeman Knight, was created Baronet Iune the 7th, in the Twelfth Year of the Raign of our most Gracious Soveraign Lord King Charles the Second, in the year of our Lord 1660. Sir Ieoffery Palmer Kt. created Baronet Iune the 7. Sir Heneage Finch in Com. Bucks Kt. created Baronet Iune 7. Sir Iohn Langham in Com. Northampton Kt. created Baronet Iune 7. Sir Robert Abdy in Com. Essex Kt. created Baronet Iune 9. Thomas Draper in Com. Berks Esq. created Baronet Iune 9. Humphrey Winch in Com. Bedford Esq. created Baronet Iune 9. Ionathan Rease Esq. created Baronet Iune 9. Henry Wright in Com. Essex Esq. created Baronet Iune 12. Hugh Speke in Com. Wilts Esq. created Baronet Iune 12. Nicholas Gould of the City of London created Baronet Iune 13. Sir Thomas Adams of the City of London Kt. created Baronet Iune 13. Richard Atkins in Com. Surrey Esq. created Baronet Iune 13. Thomas Allen of the City of London Esq. created Baronet Iune 14. Henry North in Com. Suffolk Esq. created Baronet Iune 15. Sir William Wiseman in Com. Essex Kt. created Baronet Iune 15. Thomas Cullum in Com. Suffolk Esq. created Baronet Iune 18. Thomas Davy in Com. Essex Esq. created Baronet Iune 20. George Grubbum How in Com. Wilts Esq. created Baronet Iune 20. Iohn Cutts in Com. Cambridge Esq. created Baronet Iune 20. William Humble of the City of London Esq. created Baronet Iune 20. Solomon Swale in Com. York Esq. created Baronet Iune 21. Gervas Ews in Com. Suffolk Esq. created Baronet Iune 22. Robert Cordel in Com. Suffolk Esq. created Baronet Iune 22. Sir Iohn Robinson of the City of London Kt. created Baronet Iune 22. Iohn Abdy in Com. Essex Esq. created Baronet Iune 22. Henry Stapleton in Com. York Esq. created Baronet Iune 23. Iacob Ashly in Com. Warwick Esq. created Baronet Iune 25. Sir Robert Hilliard in Com. York Esq. created Baronet Iune 25. Sir William Bowyer in Com. Bucks Kt. created Baronet Iune 25. Iohn Shuckbrugh in Com. Warwick Esq. created Baronet Iune 26. William Wray in Com. Lincoln Esq. created Baronet Iune 27. Francis Hollis in Com. Dorset Esq. created Baronet Iune 27. Nicholas Steward in Com. Southampton Esq. created Baronet Iune 27. George Warberton in Com. Pal. of Chester Esq. created Baronet Iune 27. Oliver St. Iohn in Com. Northampton Esq. created Baronet Iune 28. Sir Ralph Delaval in Com. Northumberland Kt. created Baronet Iune 29. Andrew Henley in Com. Somerset Esq. created Baronet Iune 30. Thomas Ellis in Com. Lincoln Esq. created Baronet Iune 30. Sir Iohn Covert in Com. Sussex Kt. created Baronet Iuly 2. Maurice Berkley in Com. Somerset Esq. created Baronet Iuly 2. Peter Harr of the City of London created Baronet Iuly 2. Henry Hudson in Com. Leicester Esq. created Baronet Iuly 3. Thomas Herbert in Com. Monmouth Esq. created Baronet Iuly 3. Thomas Middleton in Com. Denbigh created Baronet Iuly 4. Verney Noel in Com. Leicester Esq. created Baronet Iuly 6. George Ruswel in Com. Northampton Esq. created Baronet Iuly 7.
Robert Austen in Com. Kent Esq. created Baronet Iuly 10. Robert Hales in Com. Kent Esq. created Baronet Iuly 12. Iohn Clarke in Com. Oxford Esq. created Baronet Iuly 13. William Thomas in Com. Essex Esq. created Baronet Iuly 13. Sir William Boothby in Com. Derby Kt. created Baronet Iuly 13. Wolstan Dixey in Com. Leicester created Baronet Iuly 14. Iohn Bright in Com. York Esq. created Baronet Iuly 16. Iohn Warner in Com. York Esq. created Baronet Iuly 16. Sir Iohn Harbey in Com. Hartford Kt. created Baronet Iuly 17. Sir Samuel Moreland in Com. Berks Kt. created Baronet Iuly 18. Sir Thomas Hewet in Com. Hartford Kt. created Baronet Iuly 19. Edward Honywood in Com. Kent Esq. created Baronet Iuly 19. Basil Dixwel in Com. Kent Esq. created Baronet Iuly 19. Sir Richard Brown of the City of London Kt. created Baronet Iuly 20. Marmaduke Gresham in Com. Surrey Esq. created Baronet Iuly 20. Henry Kernor in Com. Salop Esq. created Baronet Iuly 23. Sir Iohn Aubrey in Com. Glamorgan Kt. created Baronet Iuly 23. Thomas Sclator in Com. Cambridge Esq. created Baronet Iuly 25. Henry Cway in Com. Flint Esq. created Baronet Iuly 25. Edward Green in Com. Essex Esq. created Baronet Iuly 26. Iohn Stapley in Com. Sussex Esq. created Baronet Iuly 28. Metcalf Robinson in Com. York Esq. created Baronet Iuly 30. William Dudley in Com. Northampton Esq. created Baronet August 1. Hugh Smithson in Com. York Esq. created Baronet August 2. Sir Roger Mostyn in Com. Flint Kt. created Baronet August 3. Sir William Willoughby in Com. Nottingham Kt. created Baronet August 4. Anthony Oldfield in Com. Lincoln Esq. created Baronet Aug. 6. Peter Leicester in Com. Chester Esq. created Baronet Aug. 10. Sir Willam Wheeler of the City of Westminster Kt. cread Baronet Aug. 11. Thomas Lee in Com. Bucks Esq. created Baronet August 16. Iohn Newton in Com. Gloucester Esq. created Baronet Aug. 16. Thomas Smith in Com. Chester Esq. created Baronet Aug. 16. Sir Ralph Ashton in Com. Lancaster Kt. created Baronet Aug. 17. Ihn Rous in Com. Suffolk Esq. created Baronet Aug. 17. Henry Massingbeard in Com. Lincoln Esq. created Baronet Aug. 22. Iohn Hales in Com. Warwick Esq. created Baronet Aug. 28. Ralph Bovey in Com. Warwick Esq. created Baronet Aug. 30. Iohn Knightly in Com. Warwick Esq. created Baronet Aug. 30. Sir Iohn Drake in Com. Devon Kt. created Baronet Aug. 30. Sir Oliver St. George in Com. Letrim in Ireland created Baronet Sep. 5. Sir Iohn Cowyr in Com. Stafford Kt. created Baronet Sept. 11. Sir William Wilde Kt. Recorder of London created Baronet Sept. 13. Ioseph Ash in Com. Middlesex Esq. created Baronet Sept. 19. Iohn How in Com. Gloucester Esq. created Baronet Sept. 22. Iohn S. burn in Com. Northumberland Esq. created Baronet Sept. 26. Iohn Trot in Com. Southampton Esq. created Barone Octob. 11. Humphrey Miller in Com. Kent Esq. created Baronet Octob. 15. Sir Iohn Lewis in Com. York Kt. created Baronet Octob. 16. Iohn Beal in Com. Kent Esq. created Baronet Octob. 6. Sir Richard Frankline in Com. Hartford Kt. created Baronet October 26. William Russel in Com. Carmarthen Esq. created Baronet November 8. William Barkhouse Esq. Grand-childe of Rowland Barkhouse, of the City of London created Baronet Nov. 8. Thomas Boothby in Com. Essex Esq. created Baronet Nov. 9. Sir Iohn Cutler of the City of London Kt. created Baronet Nov. 9. Giles Mottel of Leige Esq. created Baronet Nov. 16. Henry Gifford in Com. Leicester Esq. created Baronet Nov. 21.
Sir Thomas Foot of the City of London Kt. created Baronet Nov. 21. Thomas Manwaring in Com. Palatinate of Chester Esq. created Baronet No∣vember 21. Thomas Bennet in Com. Cambridge Esq. created Baronet Nov. 22. Iohn Wroth in Com. Kent Esq. created Baronet Nov. 29. George Winn in Com. York Esq. created Baronet December 3. Humphrey Monoux in Com. Bedford Esq. created Baronet Decem. 4. William Gardiner of the City of London Esq. created Baronet Dec. 4. Heneage Fetherston in Com. Hartford Esq. created Baronet Dec. 5. Iohn Peynton in Com. Cambridge Esq. created Baronet Dec. 10. Iohn Fagge in Com. Sussex Esq. created Baronet Dec. 11. Edmund Anderson in Com. Lincoln Esq. created Baronet Dec. 12. Matthew Herbert in Com. Salop Esq. created Baronet Dec. 18. Edward Ward in Com. Norfolk Esq. created Baronet Dec. 18. George Marwood in Com. York Esq. created Baronet Dec. 21. Ralph Ashton in Com. Northampton Esq. created Baronet Dec. 21. William Killigrew in Com. Cornwal Esq. created Baronet, entailed upon the Heirs-Males of his Body for ever: and for default of such Issue, to Peter Killigrew, Son of Sir Peter Killigrew Kt. and the Heirs-Males of his Body for ever, by Letters Patents bearing date at Westminster, December 22. Iohn Keyt in Com. Gloucester Esq. created Baronet Dec. 22. Iohn Buck in Com. Lincoln Esq. created Baronet Dec. 22. William Frankland in Com. York Esq. created Baronet Dec. 24. Richard Stydalph in Com. Surrey Esq. created Baronet Dec. 24. William Iuxon in Com. Sussex Esq. created Baronet Dec. 28. Iohn Leggard in Com. York Esq. created Baronet Dec. 29. Iohn Iackson in Com. York Esq. created Baronet Dec. 31. Sir Henry Pickering in Com. Cambridge Kt. created Baronet Ianuary 2. Henry Bedingfield in Com. Norfolke Esq. created Baronet Ian. 2. Walter Plomer of Inner Temple in London Esq. created Baronet Ian. 4. Herbert Springet in Com. Sussex Esq. created Baronet Ian. 8. William Powel in Com. Hereford Esq. created Baronet Ian. 23. Robert Newton of the City of London Esq. created Baronet Ian. 23. Nicholas Soughton in Com. Surrey Esq. created Baronet Ian. 29. William Rokeby in Com. York Esq. created Baronet Ian. 29. Baronets made in the 13th year of the Reign of our most gracious Soveraign Lord King CHARLES the Second. Walter Earnly of New Sarum in the County of Wilts Esq. created Baronet the 2d of February, 13. Carol. 2. 1660. Iohn Husbands in Com. Warwick Esq. created Baronet Feb. 2. Thomas Morgan in Com. Moumouth Esq. created Baronet Feb. 7. Iohn Lane in Com. Roscommon in the Kingd. of Ireland created Baronet Feb. 9. George Wakefren in Com. Gloucester Esq. created Baronet Feb. 13. Benjamin Wright in Com. Essex Esq. created Baronet Feb. 15. Iohn Colleton of the City of London Esq. created Baronet Feb. 18. Sir Iames Modiford of the City of London Kt. created Baronet Feb. 18. Thomas Beaumont in Com. Leicester Esq. created Baronet Feb. 21. Edward Smith in Com. Durham Esq. created Baronet Feb. 23. Iohn Napier, alias Napier, alias Sands Esq. created Baronet March 4. Thomas Gifford in Com. Meath in the Province of Lemster, in the Kingdom of Ireland Esq. created Baronet March 4. Thomas Clifton in Com. Lancaster Esq. created Baronet March. 4. William Wilson in Com. Sussex Esq. created Baronet March 4. Compton Reed in Com. Berks Esq. created Baronet March 4. Sir Brian Broughton in Com. Stafford Kt. created Baronet Mar. 10.
Robert Slingsby in Com. Hertford Esq. created Baronet March 16. Sir Ralph Verney in Com. Bucks Kt. created Baronet March 16. Iohn Crofts in Com. Suffolk Esq. created Baronet March 16. Robert Dicer in Com. Hereford Esq. created Baronet March 18. Sir Iohn Bromfield in Com. Surrey Kt. created Baronet March 20. Thomas Rich in Com. Berks Esq. created Baronet March 20. Edward Smith in Com. Leicester Esq. created Baronet March 25. Walter Long in Com. Wilts Esq. created Baronet March 26. Iohn Fettiplace in Com. Berks Esq. created Baronet April 8. Walter Henly in Com. Sussex Esq. created Baronet April 8. William Parsons in Com. Bucks Esq. created Baronet April 9. Iohn Cambel in Com. Essex Esq. created Baronet April 9. Sir Charles Gawdy in Com. Suffolk Kt. created Baronet April 20. William Morice in Com. Devon Esq. created Baronet April 20. Sir William Cayly in Com. York Kt. created Baronet April 20. Sir Charles Doyly of the City of London Kt. created Baronet April 26. William Godolphin in Com. Cornwal Esq. created Baronet April 29. Thomas Crson in Com. Oxford Esq. created Baronet April 30. Edmund Fowel in Com. Devon Kt. created Baronet May 1. Iohn Cropley in Com. Middlesex Esq. created Baronet May 7. William Smith in Com. Bucks Esq. created Baronet May 10. George Cook in Com. York Esq. created Baronet M 10. Charles Lloyd in Com. Montgomery Esq. created Baronet May 10. Nathaniel Powel in Com. Sussex Esq. created Baronet May 14. Denny Ashburnham in Com. Sussex Esq. created Baronet May 15. Sir Hugh Smith in Com. Somerset Kt. created Baronet May 16. And so we have glided through this Sphere of Glory, in which the ancient honour of the Government is refixed, and gives us the full and compleat fight of this wonderful Revoluon; each Luminary shining in its proper Orb, and in its Degree; the Soveraign, Nobility, Clergy, and Gentry recovered to their former and distinct Lustre: and to say no more, the whole community of En∣glish Freemen, whose state and condition no Nation can parallel, from being the servants of servants, are become their own Masters, and are arrived by this Change, to be again the envy, that were but lately the scorn and derision of the World. In this Consistency the King was desirous to meet this Illustrious Body in Parliament, to close those distances and separations, and redintegrate the mutu∣al affections, endearments, and natural kindnesses, which the unnaturalness and perverse malignity of the times had by our Divisions abrupted and hitherto discontinued: the King had promised so much at the Dissolution of the late Free-Parliament or Convention, and accordingly issued out His Writ, (soon af∣ter) for their sitting down the Eighth of May (a little before which,A new Parlia∣ment, May 8. several Mu∣sters had been made in England of the Militia; and a General Train in London, in Hide-Park of Horse and Foot, Fourteen Regiments whereof the King was pleased to view there.) In these Elections it appeared how much a Com∣monwealth, or those Actions which were pretended to be done by the People in Parliament (by a few modulers thereof) were ever approved; for not such a man had a Voyce, and the Election of the Free Parliament gave little Encou∣ragement to stand for it: the main stickling was between the Episcopal and Presbyterian Parties; and even that numerous Party (as was said by themselves) found how much they were mistaken in the Suffrages of the Kingdome, when under no awe, nor in the phrensy of misguised Zeal: several Letters were in∣tercepted from the chief Ministers of that Perswasion, exhorting their Cor∣respondents to do their utmost for favourable Elections to their Discipline, and that very confidently, after the choyce made at London, of persons the most of them of their way. But nevertheless, that there might not the least remain of
the Government be left unjustified and unreared; it so happened, that far the major part of this House of Commons were not better affected to the Peace of the Kingdome, than to the Restauration and Settlement of the Church. To this Parliament the King with his Nobles, according to the splendid cu∣stome of opening these grand Assemblies, rode in State and Triumph: but be∣cause so full a Narrative of such Glory hath already preceded, I will not fur∣ther dazile the Reader. The House being met, the King sent for the Commons into the House of Lords, where most obligingly he declared, His content in meeting them; most of them being known to him: that he was as confident, as of any thing whatsoever, that it would be a happy Parliament; and in conclu∣sion, acquainted them with his Resolution of marrying the Infanta of Portugal, which Match (he said) he had proposed to his Privy Council, and they had every one highly approved it; that he thought none of them would willingly have him live and dye a Batchelour, and therefore he had newly made and signed a Treaty with the King of Portugal by his Ambassadour Don Francisco De Mello here Resident,Portugal Match mentio∣ned by the King to the Parlia∣ment. and now upon departure with the same Treaty, in which this Article of Marriage was inserted. And then my Lord Chancellour, by His Order, gave the Parliament a further Account of His Majesties calling them. Sir Edward Turner the Dukes Attourney General was chosen Speaker for the House of Commons; who in his Speech to the King expressed the hopes of the Commons, that as His Majesty had manifested his great Indulgence to that Adopted, so that he had a Blessing left for this his Natural Parliament. These Ceremonies being over, wherein the dutiful respects of the Houses an∣swered the favour and affection of the King; the Parliament proceeded to the Affairs of the Kingdome. Near that very time, a Parliament began in Ire∣land (after a like happy Convention had been by his Majesties Order, from their Adjournment upon his Restitution, reassembled in that quality) Sir Audly Mer∣vin being chosen Speaker. The Convocation of the English Clergy, all emi∣nent and most learned pious Persons, met on the sixteenth of May at Westminster. And the Queen of Bohemia his Majesties Aunt, from a long absence of forty eight years;The Queen of Bohemia re∣turns into En∣gland. returned to White-Hall, where She was Married in One thousand six hundred and twelve to the Prince Elector Palatine. He return was further signalized by the reviviscency of the memory of the most renowned Marquess of Montross, whose Limbs having been set upon the Gates of four distant Cities by the Kirk and Argyles party there, were taken down, and in State, and in all fit Solemnity, and with the same Honour brought together,The Marquess of Montross en∣terred in State, May 11. and by his Majesties Order (whose love and memory of his Servants is one of his many other Princely vertues, and great evidence of the sweetness of his Nature) and the resolution of the Parliament, Interred with a Funeral becoming his Family, and (as far as such too late evidences and expressions of Grief and Honour could reach his merit) his own personal Renown and Glo∣ry; so much the more indeed conspicuous, by the Death and deserved Execution of the Marquess of Argyle,Arguile be∣headed, May a and Guthrey and Giffn Hang'd, June 1 who was this Hero's mortal and spightful Ene∣my, that now expiated by a juster Sentence, those barbarous violencies he had done to Montross: he cunningly defended himself, and Pleaded the Kings Pardon, and the Treaties in One thousand six hundred and fifty, and One thousand six hundred fifty one; but there were Crimes of a later date (besides the never-to-be-forgotten Treachery of Selling King Charles the first to the English) which Condemned him. He seemed at his Death to be resolved enough, and justified the Covenant, and had his Head taken off with the Maiden, so is the Axe called in Scotland. Near the same time Mr. Iames Guthery one of the Remon∣strators, and a violent Adversary of the Marquess of Montross and all the Loyal party, together with Captain Giffan a enegdo to Cromwel, by Sentence and Decree of Parliament, were Hanged in Edenburgh: so far the Laws, and a suffering-sense of the Miseries and Reproaches that Nation lay under by these men, and their Partizans guilt, did now prevail against the Domini∣on
of the Kirk, which had Inslaved and Inchanted the whole mass of that people. And for a final blow (as these mens Fates did usher out what their devi∣ces had introduced (as great Events never go unattended) the Solemn League and Covenant, (first invented by Arguile and his Complices) which had raised such a Combustion in the three Kingdoms, was Sacrificed to the Flames by a Vote in Parliament; the common Hang-man in ample manner burning it in several places in London; which also was done all the Kingdom over with great Acclamations; which being omitted hitherto, when so often unwelcome occa∣sion hath been given to recite it, take it now in this its Mittimus. A Solemn League and Covenant for Reformation and Defence of Religion, &c. WE, Noblemen, Barons, Knights, Gentlemen, Citizens, Burgesses, Mini∣sters of the Gospel, and Commons of all sorts, in the Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, by the providence of God, living under one King, and being of one Reformed Religion, having before our eyes the Glory of God, and the Advancement of the Kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, the Honour and Happiness of the Kings Majesty and his Posterity, and the true Publick Liberty, Safety, and Peace of the Kingdoms, wherein every ones private Condition is included. And calling to minde the Treacherous and Bloody Plots, Conspiracies, Attempts, and Practises of the Enemies of God, against the true Religion and Professors thereof, in all places, especially in these three Kingdoms, ever since the Reformation of Religion; and how much their Rage, Power, and Presumption, are of late, and at this time encrea∣sed and exercised, whereof the deplorable Estate of the Church and Kingdom of Ireland, the distressed estate of the Church and Kingdom of England, and the dangerous Estate of the Church and Kingdom of Scotland, are present and publick Testimonies: We have now at last (after other means of Supplication, Remonstrance, Protestations, and Sufferings) for the Preservation of our selves and our Religion from utter Ruine and Destruction, according to the commen∣dable practice of these Kingdoms in former times, and the example of God's People in other Nations, after mature deliberation, resolved and determined to enter into a Mutual and Solemn League and Covenant, wherein we all subscribe, and each one of us for himself, with our Hands lifted up to the most High God, do Swear, 1. THat we shall sincerely, really, and constantly, through the Grace of God, en∣deavour in our several Places and Callings, the Preservation of the Refor∣med Religion in the Church of Scotland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Go∣vernment, against our Common Enemies: The Reformation of Religion in the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Govern∣ment, according to the Word of God, and the Example of the best Reformed Chur∣ches: and shall endeavour to bring the Churches of God in the three Kingdoms to the neerest Conjunction and Vniformity in Religion, Confession of Faith, Form of Church-Government, Directory of Worship, and Catechising. That we and our Po∣sterity after us, may as Brethren live in Faith and Love, and the Lord may de∣light to dwell in the midst of us. 2. That we shall in like manner, without respect of persons, endeavour the ex∣tirpation of Popery, Prelacy, (that is, Church-Government by Arch-Bishops, Bi∣shops, their Chancellors and Commissaries, Deans, Deans and Chapters, Arch-Deacons, and all other Ecclesiastical Officers depending on that Hierarchy) Super∣stition, Heresie, Schism, Prophaneness, and whatsoever shall be found to be contrary to Godliness, and sound Doctrine, and the power of Godliness; left we partake in other mens sins, and thereby be in danger to receive of their plagues: And that the Lord may be one, and his Name one in the three Kingdoms. 3. We shall with the same sincerity, reality, and constancy, in our several Voca∣tions,
endeavour with our Estates and Lives, mutually to preserve the Rights and Pri∣viledges of the Parliaments, and the Liberties of the Kingdoms, and to preserve and defend the Kings Majesties person, and Authority in the preservation and de∣fence of the true Religion and Liberties of the Kingdoms, That the World may bear Witness with our Consciences of our Loyalty, that we have no thoughts or intentions to diminish his Majesties just Power and Greatness. 4. We shall also with all faithfulness endeavour the discovery of all such as have been or shall be Incendiaries, Malignants, or evil Instruments, by hindering the Reformation of Religion, dividing the King from his people, or one of the Kingdoms from another, or making any Faction or parties amongst the people contrary to this League and Covenant: that they may be brought to publick Trial, and receive con∣digne punishment as the degree of their offences shall require or deserve, or the su∣preme Iudicatories of both Kingdoms respectively, or others having power from them for that effect, shall judge convenient. 5. And whereas the happiness of a blessed Peace between these Kingdoms, denied in former times to our Progenitors, is by the good providence of God granted unto us, and hath been lately concluded and setled by both Parliaments. We shall each one of us according to our place and interest endeavour that they may remain conjoyned in a firm Peace, and Vnion to all Posterity; and that justice may be done upon the wil∣ful opposers thereof in manner expressed in the precedent Article. 6. We shall also according to our Places and Callings, in this common Cause of Religion, Liberty, and Peace of the Kingdoms, assist and defend all those that enter into this League and Covenant▪ in the maintaining and pursuing thereof, and shall not suffer our selves directly or indirectly, by whatsoever Combination, Perswasion, or Terrour, to be divided and withdrawn from this blessed Vnion and Conjunction; whether to make defection to the contrary part, or to give our selves to a detestible indifferency or neutrality in this Cause, which so much concerns the Glory of God, the good of the Kingdoms, and Honour of the King; but shall all the daies of our lives zealously and constantly continue therein, against all opposition, and promote the same according to our power against all Lets and Impediments whatsoever. And what we are not able our selves to suppress, or overcome, we shall reveal or make known that it may be timely prevented or removed. All which we shall doe as in the sight of God. And because these Kingdoms are guilty of many sins and provocations against God and his Son Iesus Christ, as is too manifest by our present distresses and dan∣gers, the fruits thereof: We profess and declare before God and the World our un∣feigned desire to be humbled for our own sins, and for the sins of these Kingdoms, e∣specially that we have not as we ought valued the inestimable benefit of the Gospel: That we have not laboured for the Purity and Power thereof; and that we have not endeavoured to receive Christ in our Hearts, nor to walk worthy of him in our Live which are the Causes of other sins and transgressions, so much abounding amongst  and our true unfaigned purpose, desire, and endeavour, for our selves and all others under our Power and Charge, both in publick and in private, in all Duties we owe to God and Man, to amend our lives, and each other to go before ano∣ther in the Example of a real Reformation, that the Lord may turn away his Wrath and heavy Indignation, and establish these Churches and Kingdoms in Truth and Peace. And this Covenant we make in the presence of Almighy God, the Sear∣cher of all Hearts, with a true intention to perform the same, as we shall answer at that great day, when the secrets of all Hearts shall he disclosed; most humbly be∣seeching the Lord to strengthen us by his Holy Spirit for this end. And to bless our desires and proceedings with such success, as may be deliverance and safety to his People, and encouragement to the Christian Churches, groaning under, or in danger of the York of Antichristian Tyranny, to joyn in the same or like Association and Co∣venant, to the Glory of God, the Inlargement of the Kingdom of Iesus Christ, and the Peace and Tranquility of Christian Kingdoms and Commonwealths.
It consisted just of 666 Words, as some curious Criticks observed the num∣ber of the Beast in the Revelations. Most certain it is, the baiting and disputing of it, made the Field, the Pulpit, and the Press, a sad Theatre. Plots and De∣signes laid by the Fanaticks.The good Progress was made by this Parliament in this way, to return us where we were, did highly urge the discontents of the late Anarchy; and their anger suggested to them some hopes of undoing all again; and in this revenge they parted themselves, because they saw the Presbyterians concerned, who ei∣ther must comply, or equally Suffer with them by such proceedings; and there∣fore new designs were meditated, and divers Conspiracies framed, and Councels and Meetings had by several of that Party, who afterward were seized into cu∣stody, after they had vainly endeavoured and projected new troubles; such were Praise God Barebone, Samuel Moyer, Colonel Salmon, Major Wildman, late Alderman Ireton, since secured in a remote Castle, Major Hains, and others, some of them since released and discharged by the Kings favour. Sir Charles Lucas re-inter∣red with So∣lemnity, Jun. 7.In the like manner as the renowned Montross had been interred, so with pro∣portionable solemnity the two most Loyal Commanders Sir Charles Lucas and Sir George Lisle were re-interred at Colchester the Seventh of Iune, the same day thirteen year they took up Arms for the King in that Town, which extremity they nobly defended: the vicine Gentry and Townsmen in Arms and Mour∣ning attending their Hearses; both Corps being laid in the Vault set apart for the Sepulchry of Sir Charles his Family. The Earl of Sandwich (the Streights and the Levant-seas being infested with the Pirats of Algier, Tunis and Tripoly, notwithstanding our late League) by the right of Porta Ferino (for since the departure of Captain Stoaks, who was left by Blake in 1657. with eight Ships, and returned in 1659. the old Pi∣y was frequently exercised) was sent with a Fleet of War, to reduce them  better : He set sail with his Vice-Admiral Sir Iohn Lawson, leaving -Admiral Sir Richard Stayner on the 19 of Iune, and the 29 of Iuly cme before that Port of Algier, sending in a civil Message to the Dy or Bashaw  the place that he came to confirm the League made formerly between us ; and a Treaty accordingly ensued: but they refusing to deliver the pves, except upon hard conditions, and not to be brooked by those who had made them feel the smart of their former Insolence; the General weigh∣ed, and stood into the Harbour; but they ever since their former disaster had with new Fortifications and a Mole with Forts so secured themselves, that after the firing of some of their Ships, and doing some Execution on them, it was advised the Fleet should make out again; which they did with the loss of some men, and the Wounding and maiming of others; as also of their Yards, Sails and Rigging. After which Enterprize, the Earl leaving Sir Sohn Lawson to block them up, and their Thieving-trade being stopt, departed with part of his Fleet to the Coast of Spain, to Tangier, and so at length to Lisbon, according to his Orders. Several Laws confirmed and made, &c.In the mean time the Parliament, at the special instance & desire of the King, had passed an Act for Confirmation of the Act of Oblivion; which being done by the Free Parliament not called by his Majesties Writ, was not thought by the guilty valid, and security enough to them. They likewise ratified most or all of the other Laws Enacted by the same Authority. They framed another for Regulating Corporations, Impowring Commissioners to displace such as bore Offices, and were any way suspected as Ill-willers to the Government and his Majesties Authority, or should refuse to take the Oath of Allegiance and Supre∣macy; or finally, which was the onely Test, if they would not renounce the So∣lemn League and Covenant, as unlawful in it self, and illegally imposed; the Wisdom of the Parliament knowing what Seeds were sown of that Thistle, and how untractable it was. During this Debate of the House,Mr. Pryn que∣stioned, &c. Mr. Pryn could not refrain, against the priviledge of the House, of which he was a Mem∣ber, from publishing of certain Reasons against the said Bill, as contrary to
Magna Charta; which the House being informed of, the Serjeant at Arms was ordered to seize the Printer; and Mr. Pryn owning of it, he was brought to the Bar,Mr. Pryn que∣stioned by the House. and rebuked by the Speaker; but upon his submission, and the Houses favourable reflection on his great endeavours to the Restitution of the King, he was remitted the censure and punishment he had by this oversight incurred, not considering the necessity and Peace of the Kingdom required this course, and how usual and constant it was with the Usurpers; whereas now the Su∣preme Legislative Power, who may, and do substitute, Repeal and Enact such Laws as the times require, had thought fit to establish this. There passed also another Act repealing that of the 1 Caroli 7. against the Prelacy,Acts against Bishops repealed and the Bi∣shop medling in civil Judicature and Affairs, debarring them also from their Priviledges to fit as Peers in the House of Lords; to all which Honours, they were by this Repeal restored to all purposes, as if the same had never been En∣acted: a little before which, the whole Order of them were magnificently feasted at Sir Richard Brown's the Lord-Mayor his house, the 25 of Iune. The Free-Parliament having respited the punishments of several of the Re∣gicides, as well those that lay under Condemnation, as others not so fully guilty of that Crime; the Houses resumed the matter, and caused the Lord Munson,Lord Munson, Sir Henry Mildmay and Wallop senten∣ced. Sir Henry Mildmay, and Mr. Robert Wallop, to be brought to the Bar, where their Estates were declared confiscate, and they degraded from all Ti∣tles and Arms of Gentility, and farther Sentenced to be drawn from the Tower through the City of London to Tyburn on the 30 of Ianuary next, and so back again with Halters about their Necks, upon Sledges, and to suffer perpetual Im∣prisonment. Sir Iames Harrington was to have been in this very predicament, but he having his Liberty upon Bail from the Serjeant at Arms, left his Bail in the lurch, and fled for it, and put himself out of the benefit of this quali∣fication. Phelps, one of the Clerks of the Court of Justice, was marked for this, but was not Sentenced. The Earl of Middleton the King's great Com∣missioner, came about this time from Scotland to White-hall; and on the 30th of this Moneth the Parliament was adjourned by the King to attend their busi∣ness in the Country till the 20th of November;Parliament ad∣journed July. 30, to Nov. 02. the King and they parting with mutual satisfaction; the Lord-Chancellor declaring that the King's confidence in them had not in the least deceived him. Much discourse there was all the Summer, that his Majesty would take a Progress to visit his Loyal City of Worcester, and the places of his Sanctuary and Refuge in his escape thence; and to that end, his Tent-Office was held at Clarkenwell green, to prepare and make all things ready for the accommodation of his Progress: but the suspi∣tion of affairs, and the designes of the old Enemy, who as was said before was at work, deferred it this year, and a shorter journey took up the next. Com∣missioners likewise came from the Parliament in Ireland with an acceptable pre∣sent to the King at White-hall. The Duke of York, who had been chosen Captain to the Artillery-company in London, and by their Deputies humbly requested to honour them with his acceptance, which he was nobly pleased to do, and lead with them in their Ground, and see them Exercise to his good content; accepted now likewise from them an invitation to dine with them, on their annual Feast-day, at Mer∣chant-Taylors Hall; whither accompanied him with the same invitation the Duke of Buckingham, and divers other Persons of Honour. This Moneth of August was the Reading of that excellent Lawyer and most accomplisht Gentleman Sir Heneage Finch his Majesties Sollicitor, at the Inner Temple; whose Nobleness and Generosity were herein equal to his matchless Abilities in the Laws, as his magnificence in this Solemn occasion did make ap∣pear, especially in that particular Treatment he gave the King,The King is en∣tertained at the Inner Temple by Sir Heneage Finch. who to honour this, one of his best servants, was graciously pleased to accept of it, and to dine in that Hall; a favour not before indulged to any of these famous Societies by any of his Royal Progenitors: the most Illustrious Duke of York was present, and Dined here with his Brother, to both their likings and approbations.
Count Conningsmark, from the young King and Queen of Sweden, had been here some while; and now came another more splendid Embassy by Count Brahe, at whose reception near the Tower, a Fray or Conflict happened betwixt the French and Spanish Embassadours Coaches for Precedency which should first follow the Swedes Coach: both Parties came prepared for the Encounter; but the French were basely worsted, and seven or eight of them killed. This had like to have caused a new Rupture betwixt both Crowns, the French King sending a Messenger to Madrid to demand satisfaction; but at the intreaty of the new-Married Queen, the difference was put up. While I am relating this Forreign matter, I must insert, that the Prince of Spain, a Child about five years old, dyed, and a young Prince or Dolphin was born to the French King on All Saints day, and therefore Christned Lewis Tous Sancts. Several Prisoners in the Tower, Regicides and others, by reason of the practices of their Parties, were now in October sent a way from the Tower to several remote places, Castles, and Islands, for securing the Peace; and with them, the Market of Herbs, which usually stood before in Cheap-side, (and by Tichburn in his Ma∣joralty, because it cumbred up the ways, was placed in St. Pauls Church-yard,) and a Cross built there, which is yet standing, was by Proclamation, to avoid the scandal of selling and buying in that Ground, now removed into Aldersgate-street, and Aldermanbury. Several suspected persons of the Phanatick Party were now seized, and committed to several Prisons. The Right Noble Iames Duke of Ormond, after several uneffectual designments of others, was ap∣pointed by his Majesty Lieutenant of Ireland, which Place and Dignity he had before so prudently discharged. The Lords Spi∣ritual restored.After the expiration of the Adjournment of the Parliament from Iuly last, they met again the Twentieth of November, now in their full and entire Con∣stitution; the Lords Spiritual the Bishops, by virtue of the Act of Repeal made the last Session, taking their places; which the King in his Speech to the Houses did congratulate to them, as a felicity He much desired to see accomplished, in this goodly restored Fabrick of the Government.Regicides be∣fore the House of Lords, No∣vember. On the Twenty fifth of the same Month, the Regicides that came in upon Proclamation, and were respited after Sentence to the pleasure of the Parliament, were brought to the Bar of the House of Lords, to answer what they could for themselves, why Judgment should not be Executed: they all Pleaded the Proclamation, which they understood and supposed did extend to favour of Life upon the rendring themselves thereupon, as likewise that as to the Crime they were all of them guilty of no malice toward the Person of the King: Henry Marten added, that he never obeyed any Proclamation before but this, and hoped that he should not be Hanged for taking the Kings Word now. They were remand∣ed back again to the Tower from whence they came, and no further proceed∣ing had concerning them. The Lord Chancellour in his Speech made men∣tion of a Plot, which one Major White had discovered, and upon which seve∣ral Persons had been secured, that were Officers formerly in the Army; and what care had been taken by the King to prevent the danger, and to attain to a full discovery. And this Michaelmas-Term,John James Hanged and Quartered, Novemb. 27. one Iohn Iames (one of the Fifth Monarchists, a Small-coal-man by Trade, and ingaged in Venners business, but was absent, or saved himself the last day they broke out; but had not departed from his malice ever since that disappointment, but continued his Meetings and Conventicles with others of his desperate Crew, among whom he was a great Rabby or Teacher) flew out into several Traiterous Speeches and Invectives against the Kings Person, Government, and Family, which relisht of the same Design couched in Venners Declaration; which being over-heard by some Neighbours living near the same Conventicle, Iames was seized and carried before a Justice, who Committed him to Newgate, whence this Term he was brought to the Kings Bench Bar, and there the Words were proved against him, and he Convicted and Condemned as a Traytor: On the Twenty seventh he was drawn on a Sledge to Tyburn, some of his Sect and Opinion
throwing themselves into the same Sledge, and embracing him; so fond were they of this their silly though bold Seducer. At the Gallows he denyed the words, but owned and avowed his Chilianism and the Personal Reign of Christ, out of which respect he prayed not for the King, or any Authority, but with the usual confidence of his Party made an end. His Quarters were disposed of by his Majesties Orders, and his Head set upon a Pole in White Chappel near the place of his Meeting, for example to his Fellows. Some discourses there were of a Design about Dunkirk, and the Duke of York passed over there this Month, carrying the Garrison money, and upon his arrival viewed the Fortifications and Lines, and found it stronger by some new Forts the Governour the Lord Rutherford, now made Earl of Tiviot, and Governour of Tangeir, had raised thereabouts; and after a short stay returned again for England. In Ireland, Sir Charles Coot Earl of Mountrath,Sir Charles Coot died De∣cember. one of the Three Justices of that Kingdome died, and was buried in State, the power of the other Two re∣maining, being invested in Sir Maurice Eustace and the Earl of Orery till the ar∣rival of the Duke of Ormond. He had done excellent Service in that Kingdome against the Rebels; and though he afterwards sided with those here, yet did he by his last Actions in securing that Kingdome to the Interest of his Majesty, and helping on the Restitution, redeem his former demerits, which could be charged on him, no otherwise, than as a Souldier of Fortune! he was one of General Monck's right hands in carrying on the Change. The Duke of Or∣mond was by the Parliament of Ireland gratulated upon his appointment to that Government, by Letters sent from the Speakers of both Houses. The Council for the Principality of Wales was also erected by the King,A Council of the Principali∣ty of Wales re∣established at Ludlow. and setled at Ludlow the usual Residence; the Earl of Carbery Lord Vaughan was made President, the old Earl of Norwich Clerk of the Council, and others of the Nobility and Gentry Assistants; Judges also were established, and the said Lord President in great State brought into the Town, attended by a great Train of the chief Persons thereabouts, and joyfully welcomed and comple∣mented. This Christmass the Honourable Society of Lincolns-Inne renewed their Cu∣stom of the Inns of Court, by chusing a Prince, who during the Festival com∣mands like a Soveraign in the places adjoyning to the said Inne: the Gentle∣man chosen this time was one Iohn Lort Esquire, a Gentleman of Wales, by the Title of Prince Le Grange: he gave, and the King was pleased to accept a Treatment from him; the Ceremonies due to a Prince being exactly observed in every respect, a Council, Judges, and Officers of State Honour and Nobility attending this his Highness, whom the King at the expiration of his term of Royalty made a Knight Baronet. The Marquess Durazzo Embassador from the Republick of Genoa was about this time honourably received by the King attended through the City to Sir Abraham Williams his house by the Earl of Carlisle; Complemented from the King by the Earl of Bullingbrook, and brought to Audience by the Lord Buckhurst. In Scotland,Episcopacy esta∣blished in Scot∣land. Episcopacy which had been so long banished thence, was now reduced with all gladness and testimonies of a welcome reception, after the ex∣perience of so many miseries and confusions which had befallen that Nation, through the Fury and Zealotry of the Kirk. The four Bishops that were Con∣secrated at Lambeth a little before this, whereof Dr. Iames Sharpe Arch-Bi∣shop of St. Andrews Metropolitan of Scotland was one, Consecrating others in that Kingdom; the whole Order being there defunct, by the long Usurpa∣tion of the Presbyterian Discipline. To the confirmation therefore of this Sacred resetled Authority, the Lord-Commissioner, with most of the Nobility and Gentry accompanied the Arch-Bishop of Glascow, where the Kirk-Rebel∣lion was first hatched, to that City, where the face of things was quite alter∣ed; no Person or occasion ever welcomer or more acceptable than this, as their Bells and Bonefires declared. And here the Lord Commissioner put
sorth a Proclamation prohibiting the payment of any Ecclesiastical Rents o Tythe, or profits of the Ministry whatsoever, to any who in a short time limi∣ted should not acknowledge and own their Diocesan Bishop and his Authori∣ty, and receive Induction from him. Some few grand Factious Predicants stood out, and were cuted of their Livings, and others the most unquiet and re∣fractory Commanded to depart that Kingdom, now well cleared of that Clergy, the Original and Fountain of those bitter waters and Rivers of Blood which overflowed the three Nations. A like Church-work was taken in hand in England: the King at his En∣trance into London, upon his Restitution-day, May 29, fadly observed, and shook his Head at the Ruines of St. Paul's Cathedral▪The King re∣flects on the ru∣ine of St. Pauls London. and therefore the first vacan∣cy his affairs permitted him, was bestowed on the consideration of that Reli∣gious Structure; and thereupon he issued out a Commission to Sir Orlando Bridgeman, Sir Ieoffery Palmer, and others of the Long Robe, with other Gen∣tlemen, to take some speedy Order for the Repair thereof: and to that pious work he gave the Arrears of Impropriations and Ecclesiastical Livings excep∣ted out of the Act of Oblivion; impowering to call all such as owed any Mo∣neys thereupon to account, and to lay it out to that use. The former Dean of which Cathedral (Dr. Nicholas, Brother to Master Secretary of State Sir Ed∣ward) died now of a malignant Feavor, called the Country new Disease: and Dr. Barwick, a man that had suffered all Extremities even of Dungeon and Famine in the Tower from the Rump, soon after the King's death was substituted by the King in his place, it being reckoned with the late improvement the best Deanry now in England.Fatality among the Clergy. Soon after Dr. Nicholas, died Dr. Nicholas Monke Bishop of Hereford, and Brother to the Noble General, whose private Contem∣plative lie, was no less observed than Jewels in the dark, which then shine brightest; his Illustrious Brother governing the conspicuous splendor of the Times, while he ruled with the recluse vertues of his minde in the obscurity of the Church: (which afterwards spread and lustre it borrowed from the Beams of this its Luminary, though now suddenly deprived of a great part of it in this his Setting.) And most fit it is, that his Name should be Canonized, and for ever had Sacred in our Kalendar and Church-Annals. About the same time died also Dr. Brian Walton Lord-Bishop of Chester, famous for the Polyglotte-Bible, and other Excellencies becoming a Prelate; nor did his successor Dr. Ferne many weeks outlive him, whose defences of the Church will never be forgot∣ten. And lastly died Dr. Thomas Fuller, known by his several Books and inde∣fatigable industry, better than by any account can here be given of him. Such a Train of Scholars and Learned men did barbarous Death lead in Triumph to the Captivating Grave, that her envious Pomp might draw our eye and tears to this sad spectacle, and that might honourably accompany the Fate of the Bi∣shop of Hereford. Another Fleet for Portugal and Tangier.A Fleet was Rigg'd and set to Sea to fetch home the Queen from Portugal, and to carry the Forces to Tangier, which was delivered by the Portugueze Gar∣rison to Sir Richard Stayner, who with 500 men was left to maintain it till the Earl of Peterborough, designed for that Command, should arrive. And for the Queens own Transportation, the Royal Charles, which brought the King from Holland, was sent with this Fleet. In the mean while, the Queen of Bohemia the King's Aunt died, February 13. aged 66 years, having been out of England 49 years, and survived all the misfortunes of her Family, which al∣most from the time of her Marriage in 1612. on St. Valentines day (on the eve of which she now died) had fallen very thick, and chiefly and solely upon it:Queen of Bo∣hemia dies Feb. 13. A Storm Feb. 18. She now came to her rest among her Royal Ancestors and Relations, whose Glories and Honours she left more flourishing and greater than ever. Her De∣cease was followed with a most violent and Tempestuous Winde, February the 18th, (by which several persons were killed, and much damage done in all parts of the three Kingdoms, and in Forrain Countries) which might give notice, that all those Troubles and Calamities this Princess had suffered, and by
which most parts of Europe were Tempested, were quite blown over, and she gone to her last Repose. A very unfortunate accident happened the same Month;An unfortunate Accident hap∣pened to the Lord Buckhurst and others. The Lord Buck∣hurst but now mentioned, his Brother Mr. Edward Sackvile, Sir Henry Bellasis Knight of the Bath Son and Heir to the Lord Bellasis, Mr. Bellasis Brother to the Lord Faulconbridge, and Mr. Wentworth Son to Sir George, accompanying an acquaintance out of Town, upon their Return, being informed there were High-way men and Thieves in the Road, meeting a Tanner, and suspecting him for one of them, after some resistance made by him, killed him: for this mischance they were Arraigned at the Kings Bench Bar, but by the Iury quit∣ted; it not being probable, that Persons of their Estates and Quality would set upon a single Person to do him injury, but it might happen meerly by a mistake, and good intent of freeing the Road. The Parliament had under their consideration the bringing of Lambert and Vane to their Tryal,Lambert and Vane ordered to Tryal. being excepted out of the Act of Oblivion, as main Au∣thors and Contrivers of those Troubles in the Rebellion, and therefore desired His Majesty that he would be pleased to send for them from their remote Pri∣sons they were in, that they might be brought to Tryal; that such bold Trea∣sons might not pass with impunity. On the other hand, that they might testifie their acknowledgments to the Duke of Albemarle, of his great merit and ser∣vices, in the Redemption of his Country; they by Act now resolved to settle some Mannors and Lands upon him,The General ho∣noured, &c. and confirmed the Kings Grants and Patents, or what should afterwards by Grants or Patents be conferred on him. The Duke of Ormond was likewise presented with the sum of Thirty thou∣sand pounds in Bills of Exchange, as a gratuity from the Parliament of Ireland, in respect of the Services he had done that Kingdome in the same capacity be∣fore; where also the Bill of settlement of Lands was the sole Affair in Debate, the difficulty about Claims of the English and Irish, intricating and perplexing the Bill; so that the Dukes presence was very much desired, as by whose prudence, understanding, and competent knowledge, together with his equal relation to both Parties, that tedious Work could only be accommodated, which brings with it the conclusion of the year 1661, the 14th year of the King. Anno Domini 1662. THE beginning of this, and the end of the last year, was remarkable with a very notable Providence, which for the more compact account of it, is totally referred hither. It hapned, that among other the Fugitives for the par∣ricidial Conspiracy in the Death of the King, Miles Corbet, Colonel Okey, and Col. Barkstead, which had traversed most parts of Low, and some of High Germany, where they had for a while resided at the City of Hanow, under borrowed names; about the beginning of March were returned to Delf in Holland, ha∣ving appointed their Wives to meet them there, to understand their Affairs in England; but these their Letters being intercepted and opened by the vigilance of Sir George Downing His Majesties Resident at the Hage, they were all three taken together at Barkstead's and Okey's Lodging, just as Corbet after Supper was going home,Miles Corbet. Colonel Okey and Barkstead taken in Hol∣land, sent over to the Tower. by the Thief-takers and the Marshal of that Town. Okey offered a resolute Escape; Barkstead denyed himself, and desired he might fetch his Cloak in the next Room, Corbet (as he said) having taken Physick that day, fell a Purging upwards and downwards in a very strange manner. Sir George himself was present at the seizure, and had them that Night secured in the com∣mon and ordinary Prison, and thence conveyed them by the States order on Board the Blackmore Frigot, then accidentally at Helvet-Sluce, having only brought over Mr. Armorer sent from the King to the Lords upon special occasions.
About the end of March they came to Gravesend, where Sir Iohn Robinson Lieu∣tenant of the Tower, by Warrant from his Majesty, with a Guard carried them to the Tower; whence on the 16th of April they were brought to the Kings Bench Bar, and there demanded what they could say for themselves, why they should not die according to Law, the Act of Attainder being read to them: To which they alledged, they were not the same persons mentioned therein; whereupon Witnesses being ready, were called, and a Jury impannel∣led, who gave verdict that they were the same persons; and so the Lord Chief Justice Foster proceeded to Sentence, which was the same with the former com∣plices and sufferers for that Fact,Sentenced and Executed Ap. 2. and was Executed on Saturday, April the 19, at Tyburn, where they with better ends than any of the rest, acknowledged their resolved acquiescence under the Kings Government, as of God, and ex∣horted others to do so; especially Colonel Okey, a person that for his valour and other good qualities was pitied by all men, for his being so blinded and ensnared in this Crime to his destruction. They all pretended no malice to his late Ma∣jesty, and their mistake of the Parliaments Authority for good and suffici∣ent. They were all three Hanged, Bowelled, and Quartered; but his Majesty was graciously pleased,Col. Okey's bo∣dy gien to his Friends. out of regard to Colonel Okey's Christian and du∣tiful carriage, to return his Quarters to his Friends to be interred; which was done in the Chappel of the Tower, by the Rites appointed in the Common-Prayer, to prevent the unruly concourse of the Fanaticks, who assembled in multitudes to accompany his Corps, insomuch that the Sheriffs were forced to disperse them. Barkstead's and Corbet's quarters were set upon the Gates, the Head of the former upon a Pole on Traytors Gate in the Tower; and Corbet's on London-Bridge. For this kindeness and civility of the Dutch States, the King ordered his Resident to thank them in his Name; from which parts several of the Fanaticks that fled thither upon the Kings Restitution, about this time tra∣velled into Germany, an invitation being published from one of the Princes there, for all Nations to come and inhabit (with full priviledges and immunities) certain waste places of his Dominions; and an invitation was sent hither from them to others of the same principles to follow them. Her Majesty Queen Catharina was now expected to be at Sea, and therefore his Majesty came to the Parliament and acquainted them with the same, and de∣sired that as a Complement to her, they would cause the Highways and Streets of London to be fitted and cleansed against her reception, and to make what hast with convenience they could, with the dispatch of those Bills under their con∣sideration. And soon after, to remedy the perversness and obstinacy of the Quakers against taking the Oaths of Allegeance and Supremacy, and their mee∣ting (and Conventicling publickly together) to the pestring of the prisons whither they were Committed, and their Enthusiast tricks (one Thomas for∣merly a Lieutenant of that party, poysoning himself; and one Powel a Wid∣dow poysoning of her Son-in-law and another person) a Bill was passed against them,Acts of Parlia∣ment passed. with the said Bill for High-ways, now ready for the King's as∣sent, which he gave by his Commission to the Lord Chancellor, Lord Treasu∣rer, Duke of Albemarle, and Earl of Manchester. By this Act several incon∣venient passages in London are to be enlarged, and Houses that jutted into the street and obstructed the ways, were to be pulled down, as the upper end of Ludgate-hill, on the South-side of the street, and elsewhere. Having but onely mentioned the Kings Declaration of his Marriage, for his choice, whereof both the Lords and Commons returned him their thanks; it will not be impertinent in this place to give a larger and fuller account there∣of. This Royal Bride Heaven had more especially prepared and predisposed out of the Royal Family of the Kings of Portugal;An account of the Marriage of the King, &c. which having suffered an Ecclipse by the powerful interposition of the Spanish Monarchy, for the space of neer an hundred years, was now revisited in its Splendor in the as∣sumption of Iohn (Duke of Braganza) the fourth of that Name King of
Portugal, by almost as miraculous a Turn as that of our Captivity by the Kings Restitution. So Providence was pleased to adapt and fit both these Princes Conditions and Estates to this happy juncture of them in this Royal and happy Estate. This was designed by King Iohn in the beginning of our Troubles, and of his Reign; and was one of the first Acts of State he did with us, managed here by Don Antonio de Souza his Embassadour hither, who was very instrumental in transacting His late Majesties Affairs of Forraign Concernments, receiving and returning his Dispatches. One Ingredient no doubt in point of Civility and Honour, among those other of Affection and Interest, that make up this Princely Match. These were something, as also his Majesties reflection on his Personal picque with the Spaniard, who had very much disobliged him in the time of the Usurpation, by courting and owning his Rebels, to satisfie him∣self of some pretended injuries done him by his Grandfather and Father, by loss of his Spanish Fleet in the Downs, which the King had a most inviting opportunity here to remember. Upon the return of the Conde de Mello, as aforesaid, with the Articles of Treaty and Marriage to Lisbon, they were presently noysed about the City, and more loudly reported from all the Cannon in the River, both Portuges and Forraigners; by which means, without further Proclamation, it was publick about the Town; who like over-joyed People, betook themselves to the pre∣sentest, yet most solemn de monstrations thereof, by Bonfires and Entertain∣ments, &c. the Streets resounding with Healths, al Re del Grand Brettanna; which continued that Night and the next Day. Not long after, by an Express from England from the King to her, she was Complemented with the Stile of Queen of Great Britain; which put that Court into a new Splendor, both to her Retinue and Attendance; and all Honours and Duties done her, as if she were actually Crowned. It will not be much mate∣rial to insist on all the other particulars, viz. those several Messages sent and returned betwixt those two Royal Lovers, together with the intercourse betwixt the Two Crowns in point of Alliance and Security; nor the numerous resort of the English every day to Worship this Sun of the East, and pay their Early Devotions to her: It will be more unnecessary to relate those Romances and Fictions made by the Phanatick Crew at Home, that there were a Fleet of Spa∣niards and Hollanders that lay ready in her way to intercept her Passage into England. We will only mention the happy Arrival of that Fleet and the Royal Charles from England, (with Sir Richard Fashaw sent to salute the Queen for his Ma∣jesty, who now impatiently expected her Arrival, as did the whole Nation to∣gether with him.) Just at the same time the Earl of Sandwich now the second time visited the Queen, being appointed to attend her departure, and to convey her into England; the King her Brother, and Mother, with his Nobles and the whole Court, in a solemn Procession and Cavalcade from his Palace, where the English Gallantry there present assisted, accompanied her, till she Arrived at the River-side (the Golden Tagus) where she entred a Stately Brigandine, and the Na∣val Triumphs commenced their Glory. For as soon as the King and Queen were reimbarqued for Lisbon,The Queen re∣Reimbarques April 13. and return∣ed with the discharge of all the Cannon, the Fleet immediately with a fair wind and leading Gale, began their course, being as they past the River saluted by all the Block-Houses, Forts, and Castles, with the imitation of their Thun∣der. That Night, and part of the next day, the Wind and Weather was very pro∣pitious; but then coming clear about and contrary, it so retarded the Voyage, that in a Fortnights time they hardly got into the middle of the Bay of Biscay, where the Queens Majesty dispatcht away Mr. Montague, Sir Tho. Sands, and Sir Ioseph Douglas, on the 29 of April at Seven at Night, to give an account to the King of Her Condition; which the untowardliness and averseness of the
Wind had much altered, by protracting her longing desires of meeting the King; and also incommodating her by the tossing and topping of the Sea, so that she lay sick for the most part of the Voyage; until about Fifth of May, with indefatigable working and skill, the whole Fleet reached the Islands of Scilly▪ the furthermost Western Dominions of England. The Duke of York at Sea to attend the Queens Arri∣val, with the Duke o Os∣mond, &c.Her Arrival had been every day expected a fortnight before; which caused the King to send down his only Brother the Duke of York, Lord High Admiral, to attend on her upon the Coast, and to Complement her in his Name: where∣upon his Highness hasted to Portsmouth; and on the Eleventh of May attended by the Duke of Ormond, the Earls of Suffolk and Chesterfield, the Lord Berckley, and other Persons of Quality, went aboard the stately Yacht, with which the City of Amsterdam presented the King, to Coast about the Isle of Wight to meet her Majesty. On the same day Sir Ioseph Douglas making towards Portsmouth with an Express from her Majesty to the King, was met by his Highness the Duke of York, five Leagues off the Isle of Wight, who commanded him back with him to the Fleet. On Sunday morning about ten a Clock, they disco∣vered the Royal Iames; but there was so great a Calm, that they could not reach the Royal Charles till six at Evening. No sooner had the General espied his Highness Yacht, but he went out in his Barge to meet him, the Royal Ban∣ner being all the while vayl'd till he was aboard. When his Highness came into the Ship, the Souldiers gave three several shouts, and all the great Guns in the Royal Charles (which from that time to the Queens Entrance had been silent) proclaimed his Welcome; after which, several Ships of the Fleet paid him their Salutes. Being conducted to her Majesties Cabbin, he was placed in a Chair on her right hand, where after several expressions of Joy for her Ma∣jesties happy Arrival on the Coast of England; and having presented his Ma∣jesties high respects to, and as exceeding Affection for Her; his Royal High∣ness took his leave, to retire himself to his Yacht for that Night: and the next morning Sir Ioseph Douglas was again dispatched to the King, in the illustri∣ous Company of the said Duke of Ormond and Earls; but was forced to Tide it thence, and sometimes lay at Anchor, and could not reach Portsmouth till the Evening, Thirteenth of May, from whence Sir Ioseph took Post, leaving the Duke of Ormond to make preparation for the Reception of her Ma∣jesty. Queen Arrives May 13.That Night the Royal Fleet with the Princely Bride came to St. Helens point, the Eastermost Promontory of the Isle of Wight, almost opposite to Portsmouth, from whence, had it not been too bold an adventure to hazard her Majesty in that narrow Streight of Sea, and in a Night-Tide, they might have reached Portsmouth the next morning; but making use of the Day-tide, which served about Ten of the Clock, on Wednesday the Fourteenth of May, the Queen land∣ed at Portsmouth, about Four of the Clock in the Afternoon, where She was received with all possible demonstrations of Honour; the Nobility and Gentry, and Multitudes of Londoners, in most rich Apparel, and in great numbers, wait∣ing on the Shore for her Landing; and the Major and Aldermen, and the Prin∣cipal Persons of that Corporation, being in their Gowns, and with a Present and Speech, ready to entertain Her; the Cannon and small shot, both from round that Town, and the whole Fleet, Ecchoing to one another the loud Proclamations of their Joy. The King stays to give his con∣sent to Bills Preparing.The King having received the express of his Queens Landing, prepared to be gone forthwith, to Salute her upon her Arrival: but his great Affairs of State, and Bills to be ratified by him into Acts of Parliament, which were not quite ready for his Royal Assent, delayed him at Whitehall till Monday-night the 19th of May, having sent before him the Bishop of London, who departed the Seventeenth, in order to the Solemnizing of the Marriage aforesaid. Which Bills being numerous, and very important, when passed into Acts, set us right where we were the same time Twenty years, designing and enacting Remedies against those Mischiefs which prevailed against the happy Estate of
the Kingdome before, such as their Act passed in the former Session against Armed, or Army-like Multitudes, and number of Petitioners, which are not to exceed seven or eight; and have, as far as humane Wisdome can, provided against the like dangers of our late Confusions. There passed likewise many several private Bills for selling of Lands,The Nature of several private Bills. and alienating them for payment of Debts; which gave his Majesty occasion to take notice of the depravity and corruption of manners in the late times; and to declare, that his goodness in passing them now, should not be brought into pre∣cedent for the future, and he himself would become an example of frugality, and would provide sumptuary Laws against the Excess and Vanity of the Age, whose looseness and superfluity did so sadly affect him. But to return. His Majesty having Signed all the Acts, which are now so many wholesome and good Laws, as no Age of our Fore-fathers can boast of, to adorn and Ho∣nour his Queens Arrival, posted away at Nine a Clock that Night, with his ordinary Guards, in the Earl of Northumberland's Coach, Prince Rupert with him only, to Kingston, where he came soon after Ten; and at the end of that Town entered into the Earl of Chesterfield's, there set ready for him, and the Duke of York's Guards to attend him, and came before Twelve at Night to Guilford, being Twenty five miles, where he Lodged that Night, and next morn∣ing Posted with the same speed to Portsmouth,King at Ports∣mouth. where he arrived about Noon; and because of the Queens indisposedness, which yet held her in her Chamber, the King satisfied himself by giving her a Visit privately that day, and then withdrew to his own appartments. Yet it pleased God to restore her Majesty to such a degree of Health, that she was able to Consummate the Marriage Sacred Rites, which were perfor∣med in that Town, in private; after which the Nuptials were concluded there, by his Majesties Bedding his Queen that night. During the rest of the stay, Visits were given to the Grandees of Portugal who came over with the Queen, by all the English Lords and Ladies, and by them again returned, until the removal of the Court next week to Winchester, thence to Farnham, to Windsor-Castle, and so to Hampton-Court, where their Majesties took up the most part of this Summer 1662. as well for the Salubrity as Majesty of it, being one of the most Magnificent Structures of all the Royal Palaces. Here the Queen received the Addresses of all the Nobility,Queen at Hampton-Court. and Submissions of the several Deputies for the Cities of England; more particularly, from the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of London, who by Sir William Wylde their Re∣corder (who pronounced a Spanish Oration) presented her with a Purse of Gold, Iune 2. On the Twenty third of August she was in great Triumph brought by Water from Hampton-Court to finish her Voyage to Whitehall; all the Companies in their Barges nobly set out, attending the Lord Mayor at this Solemnity; and several Pageants were placed upon the River, and Speeches designed. All which made a very noble sight, illustrated by the rich and glorious setting out of the King's Barge. About seven at night, their Majesties arrived to that Palace; as somewhat before, the Queen-Mother, being fetch'd and attended by the Earl of Saint Albans, arrived at Greenwich, where for a while after she resided, till her setling at Somerset-House, as the abode of her remaining Widdow∣hood. The Parliament of Ireland had likewise agreed upon an Act for raising One hundred and twenty thousand pound, in two years, by Subsidies. In Scotland, six Bishops were Consecrated, in the Abbey-Church of Holy-Rood-House at Edenburgh, with great satisfaction and solemnity; where also the King had gra∣tiously Pardoned Lorn the Marquess of Arguile's Son,Lord Lorn par∣doned by the King. his Life, which he had forfeited by judgment in Parliament; the merciful disposition of the King de∣clining the instigates of his justice against the demerits of so obnoxious and Capital a Deliquent.
While the main Fleet, with the General the Earl of Sandwich, was upon re∣turn with the Queen from Lisbon, Vice-Admiral Sir Iohn Lawson, with the Frigots left with him, yet plyed to and fro about the Barbary-shore, taking and sacking all Vessels belonging to the Pyratical Trade of those Places, to the almost breaking the Nest of those Infidel Thieves; and on the Twentieth of April, having notice of some of their Ships in a Port called Bugia, he fell in with his Frigots in spight of their Castles and Guns, and burnt and rendred them unserviceable, and came out again with little loss, April the Twentieth; which, with the despair of being rid of him and his Fleet, made the Algier Bashaw stoop now to the offer of a Treaty, and to former Articles, with the required advan∣tage to our Commerce in those Ports and Seas, which were sent from Sir Iohn Lawson about Iune, and brought to the King at Hampton-Court, who very well approved of it; the Dutch having concluded a very shameful Peace or Truce with them about the same time. Tangiers con∣dition.Our Prossession of Tangier alarm'd the adjacent African Potentates with the danger of our encroachments, and the Fame of our Warlike Martial Atchieve∣ments by Land as well as by Sea; which consideration drew down into the confines of that Place one Gayland a Warlike Prince, but then a Rebel against the King of Morocco and Fez, and usurping part of his Dominions; who con∣tinued there, appearing and disappering for a space of time, upon pretence of a League and Friendship, when meeting of a suddain as he was ranging there∣abouts with his Horse (the swiftest in the World,) with some of our Forces For∣raging for Provision and Horse-meat, he surprized and defeated them. Their manner of fight being to leave and take as they see advantage, which they do with very active and quick force and resolution. Since, we requited it upon some of his venturing straglers: not long after, he came very freely and entred into Treaty, which he finished, and is in good Amity at present with us. Shortly af∣ter, the Earl of Peterborough returned thence, and gave his Majesty an account of the place, and the Lord Rutherford late Governour of Dunkirk, and newly made Earl of Tiviot, is now the Governour thereof; and Colonel Alsop, an antient Souldier throughout the War, Commands under him. The King hath made it a Free Port, and granted it all the Priviledges of a Merchant-City, being seated very conveniently for Commerce, especially by reason of the security thereof. This Trinity-Term Sir Henry Vane and Colonel Lambert, at the request of the Parliament, having been brought from their remote Prisons in Scilly to the Tower, were Arraigned Iune the Fourth, before Sir Robert Foster Lord chief Justice at the Kings Bench Bar, and Indicted; Sir Henry,Sir Henry Vane and Co∣lonel Lambert Condemned. for imagining and com∣passing the Death of the King, and for taking upon him, and usurping the Government; and Colonel Lambert, for Levying War against the King in Middlesex, Cheshire, Yorkshire, and other places of the North of this Kingdom. Sir Henry Pleaded the Authority of Parliament, and justified it, and put the Court to a deal of needless trouble and impertinent repetition, but disowned his medling or making with the Kings Death. Colonel Lambert behaved him∣self very civilly and respectively to the Court, and pleaded as his last Plea, that it did not appear by any additional word, that he was the same Iohn Lambert mentioned in the Indictment: but he was told it was Iohn Lambert Esquire; and then he confessed civilly his not minding it before, and submitted. The Counsel then craved Judgment against him; the Sollicitor-General saying, That good manners cannot commute for Treason. Both were Sentenced as Tray∣tors, but the Colonel Reprieved at the Bar by the King's favour, and regard had to the report the Justices had given him of his submissive and handsome deportment at his Tryal and therefore desired the Judges to return unto his Majesty his most humble thanks for his so unexpected mercy (which the Judges said might have been, and was) once thought to be extended to Sir Henry, if his frowardness and contemptuous behaviour had not precluded the way to it: He nevertheless had this favour shown him, at the intercession of some of his Re∣lations,
who had deserved well of the King in his service,Sir Henry Vane Executed June 1. that his Majestie miti∣gated the Sentence to a Beheading only, which was Executed on the Fourteenth of Iune, on the Scaffold at Tower-Hill (where the Earl of Strafford bled first by his Fathers Treachery,) and there he ran out into Treasonable Discourses, but was stopt; and after two or three warnings, his Notes endeavoured to be taken from him; which to prevent, he tore them in pieces, and in that Passion submitted to the Block. Several Contrivances and Designes being related to the Councel,A Proclamati∣on for Twenty miles, againt Rump. Officers. hatched by the Phanatick Party, caused the King in their usual method to retort their Twenty Miles Proclamation upon their own heads, commanding all Officers, &c. under any of the late Usurped Powers, that had been disbanded, to de∣part Twenty miles from the City and Suburbs of London, and not to return with∣in Eight Moneths; such only excepted as by the Privy-Councel upon their Ap∣plication to them, should obtain licence. The only Discourse and Disputation throughout the Kingdome was, what the Presbyterian could expect after the Act of Uniformity was passed, and St. Bartholomews day the Twenty fourth of August expired, which was the time limited for their Conforming to what the Act had required, by renouncing the Covenant, and reading Divine Service and Common-Prayer in Church-Vest∣ments, as the Surplice (the main thing bogled at.) Many endeavours there had been before in Parliament for some Toleration,Presbyterians endeavours for Toleration. and their Friends sollicited to the utmost; but not able to carry it there, they Applied themselves to his Majesty and the Privy-Councel, (the most of them having deserted and relinquished their Livings, which the Bishop of London with much prudence and foresight had provided of able and pious Minister, and exceptionless, whom he setled in their places) but upon full debate of their Petition, and as full a hearing, the Councel laid it aside, there being none present to answer and dispute their pre∣tences to a superseding the express meaning of the Act, but the aforesaid Bi∣shop; and so all their Chimaera's or expectations they had raised in the Coun∣try by their Letters, to the obstinating of the more indifferent to the resistance of this Law, from which they made sure to get a Dispensation (to the ruine of some Families) came to nothing: and now nothing but Transportation was talked of, for using the free Exercise of that Religion. The Commissioners for Regulating Corporations had likewise proceeded to the dismission of such from all Offices and Places in Councel, and otherwhere, who refused to renounce and declare the said Covenant Illegal, and Suspected, and not cleared for disaf∣fection to the Government; but not many they were that were upon this ac∣count outed and discharged. By virtue of the Allyance and Treaty with the Crown of Portugal, several Forces were sent hence to Assist that Kingdome against the prevailing Power of the Spaniard, who just at the Majority of that King, and his taking the Go∣vernment into his own hands, had made a formidable Invasion and Progress into those Dominions.Forces sent un∣der the Earl of Inchequeen to Assist the King of Portugal. These Forces most of them immediately set Sayl from Dunkirke, some Troops and Companies Landing there from Leith, all Com∣manded in chief by his Excellency the Earl of Inchiqueen (the famous Souldier in Ireland) Colonel Morgan late Governour of Scotland being his Major-Gene∣ral: they arrived well and in good health there, on the Twenty ninth of Iune; and after a little refreshment, (and being prohibited to eat the Fruit of the Countrey for fear of Fevours and other Distempers) advanced towards the Campania: but the Spaniard having notice thereof, thought it not advisable to Fight with them in their strength and vigour, but to waste them with the usual incommodities of those Climates to us, and retreated back again immediately into Spain. In Iuly following, the Duke of Ormond Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, His Majesty having given him a very Honourable and friendly farewel,Duke of Or∣mond arrived in Ireland. and having received the like civilities from the whole Court, set forwards in his Journey and Voyage to that Kingdome, where he Arrived three weeks after, and was
most Magnificently received into the City of Dublin, and congratulated and welcomed by the whole Body of that People in Parliament; to whom in their Assembly he delivered himself in a most Excellent Speech. There was mention made before of the Commissioners for Regulating Cor∣porations, for the securing of the peace of the Kingdome; by these Gentlemen named for each County, City and Borrough, it was ordered, besides the displa∣cing of Officers, that the Walls of the respective Cities and Towns of Glou∣cester and Coventry,Gloucester Walls, &c. De∣molished. Northampton, Taunton, and Leicester, and other places which had Bulworks and Garrisons, and maintained them throughout the War against the King, and were the Reception of and maintenance the Rebellion, should be demolished, as Examples and Security to successive times: the County-Troops and respective Trained Band-Regiments guarded these places when they were Demolished. Dr. Gauden the Bishop of Exeter died about this time, Septem∣ber; as also William Lenthal the Speaker of the Long Parliament, very peni∣tently. The Town of Dunkirk taken from the Spaniard in One thousand six hun∣dred fifty eight, and kept ever since at a vast and great charge, was by advice of the Lords of his Majesties Privy Councel, as being never annexed by Act of Parliament to the Crown of England, returned to the French King, who upon surrender of it in the year aforesaid delivered it unto us. Now, for the sum of Five hundred Thousand pounds fully paid, that Fortress was delivered into the Possession of the French,Dunkirk re∣turned to the French King, October under the Government of the Count d'Eirades and his Deputy the Marquess of Montpear; two English Companies with the Go∣vernour only Guarding the Gates at their entrance, and delivering the Keys of the same Town. The Honourable Sir Edward Nicholas, having served his Ma∣jesty and his Father as Secretary of State for many years, obtained his Quietus est from the King, who would have dignified his Merit with a Barrony, which Sir Edward modestly declined, because His Majesty should not increase the No∣bility; and Sir Henry Bennet, late the Kings Resident in Spain, a very excellent Person, was named to that Preferment. Among these and the like Honours conferred by the King upon his Faithful and Loyal Servants and Subjects, which the purport of this Chronicle obliged me to take notice off, and be their Herauld; this time challenged my observance of a Dignity conferred on that eminent and worthy Personage Dr. Iohn Berken∣head,Dr. John Ber∣kerhead Knighted. Knighted with a Testimony from his Majesty that he had done his Fa∣ther and himself very signal and great services during the last twenty years Revolution: and there is scarce any Honest man in the Three Kingdoms who will not say Amen to this his Majesties EVGE. There had been suspition of a Plot, and the City Trained Bands had watch∣ed and warded every Night, for the most part of the Summer, ever since the Kings departure to meet the Queen: but now, the Design appeared; the first named was one Captain Baker a New-England-man, an acquaintance of Hugh Peters there, and preferred to be one of Olivers Band of Pensioners: this Fellow acquaints one Hill,A Plot disco∣vered. the Son of a Phanatick or Independant Preacher in the Street, and tells him of a Designe, and brings him acquainted at several Meetings of divers of the Conspiracy, which he having good information of, revealed, with the names of the Conspirators, to Sir Richard Brown. Some of those enga∣ged thus, only met, and heard, and reported their discourses of Arms and other preparations to their own gang, but approved the Treason so well, that they never discovered it. This Plot was against the Sacred Life of the King, the Duke of York, the noble Duke of Albemarle, and Sir Richard Brown; and generally the Bishops, Nobility, Gentry and Commonalty that were not of their Opinions, and Assisted them not: and they had ready prepared a draught of their Government: their Councels were carried on by six, who never sate twice in a Place; nor could be known to any two: their Commander in chief was Ludlow, Colonel Danvers, Mr. Nye, Mr. Lockyer, and one Lieutenant Strange; the Captains, Spencer and Taverner, were favourable to the Design, and would
surprize Deal Castle in Kent, as Windsor was certain to be theirs: and the Word the Night they were to fall on (which after several put offs, was appointed the last of October) was to be given them by George Phillips a Serjeant in the Colonels Company of the White Regiment. For this, the Eleventh of December, the said George Phillips, Thomas Tongue a Distiller of Strong Wa∣ters, Francis Stubs being a Cheesmonger, Iames Hind Gunner, Iohn Sellers Compass-maker, and Nathanael Gibs Felt-maker, were Convicted by Evi∣dence of their fellow-Conspirators, Edward Rigge, Bradley and others; only Hind Pleaded Guilty, and craved the King's Mercy: they alledged, they never Acted such Trayterous intentions; but the Design was proved to have been communicated and laid open to them: after their full Defence, they were all found Guilty; and on the Twenty second of December, Phillips,Philips, Tongue, Gibs and Stubs Ex∣ecuted Decem∣ber 22. Tongue, Gibs and Stubs were Executed according to Sentence: but His Majesty was graciouly pleased to give their Quarters to be buried, but their Heads to be set up upon several Poles, two on each Tower-Hill, the nearest place to the Tower. On the Twenty sixth of December, his Majesty, to satisfie the Kingdome of his intents, in reference to the unsatisfiedness of Dissenters to the Esta∣blished Settlement of the Church, expressed his Indulgence to their Consci∣ences, so far as such Liberty would not Disturb the Publick Peace; nor entrench upon the Orthodox Religion professed; and that he would use his best endeavours with the Parliament to that end. About the same time came hither a very splendid Ambassy from the Emperour of Russia, delegated to three of his Knez or Princes; the one of them came some time before the other,Embassadors with Presents from Russia. to prepare all things suitable to the State of their Reception, and had Audience by the King in privatate at Hamton-Court. The Principal was Knez Peter Simonewitz formerly Governour of Archan∣gel, our Port of Trade in those Dominions: he was received in greater State than any former Ambassadours from any Prince whatsoever, both in re∣spect He useth the same Honours to our Soveraigns Publick Ministers, and the great Immunities and Priviledges the English enjoy again there; as also from that particular Affection which is between these Two Mo∣narchs: as hath been hinted before. At his Receipt, the whole Military Force of the City was in Arms, Trained Bands, Auxiliaries, Hamlets, Westminster-Regiments; several of the Companies and Liveries of the City on Horseback in their Gold Chains, with the Aldermen of the City Ri∣ding before him, who near York-House (where he was to be entertained by the King, during his stay) made a Lane for Him to pass through them thereunto: Two of them Rode in the Kings Coach; the Principal was at that time sick, and came by Water to his House: their Retinue, according to their Countrey Fashion, were Vested in a long Robe girt about the Middle, loop-laced on the Breast, and caped behind; His two Coachmen and Postilions the like, though English men: there were some Thirty Servants that Rode a Horseback with Hawks on their Fists, as Presents. On New years-day they were Conducted to White Hall, where they deli∣vered their Presents of Furs, as black Fox Skins, Ermins, many Timber or scores of Martins, Beavers, and the like; Persian-Carpets, three Persian Horses, Argamarick, and other Commodities of that Country, as Damask, Silks, and Embroyderies; also a Ship Loading of Hemp: there were Presents of the like Nature from the Empress to the Queen; and from the Prince of Russia likewise: they were all received with that affection and kindness which the King on all occasions hath manifested to have for that great Potentate. Two of those Embassadors departed hence for France, and so to Italy; the Chief stayed to to return in Iune with our ships for his own County. On the Twenty sixth of December at night, in the House of one Mr. . la Noy, an Hamborough Merchant, who had lately married Sir Thomas All
Daughter of Middlesex, being now with Child, as the Family were in Bed, a suddain fire, without breaking out into the Street (which was the new Buil∣dings in Loathbury, where others stood) or being discerned, suddenly con∣sumed all that were within, goods and all, the Chambers and Goods being all burnt from top to bottom, and not a shreik or cry heard, it being sup∣posed the greenness of the Timber, smoking more vehemently at the eruption of the fire, instantly smothered them. A very sad and much-lamented pro∣vidence, seven being reckoned that were killed in this manner. The fire was perceived at last by the heat it caused in the next House; but the Bricks and the shutters in the Windows kept it from breaking out. Notwithstanding the inhibition to Non-conforming Ministers to Preach or Exercise their Ministry, and the penalties thereof; yet Mr. Calamy, late Pastor of Aldermanbury, by reason the Parish was disappointed on Sunday the Twenty eighth of December by a blind old Minister that should have Preach∣ed there, as he pretended, went into the Pulpit and Preached; and by his Text, and Sermon, and Inferences, did reflect hardly and strangely upon the state of the Church, and beyond his Last, if he had been also capacitated to Preach.Mr. Calamy Committed. For this Transgression and Contempt, he was by Warrant of the Lord Mayor committed to Newgate, where many persons came to visit him, to his no little advantage; but within two or three days, was by his Ma∣jesties gracious Clemency and his Order discharged from this Imprisonment, though it were an Offence done, as it were, to affront that tenderness held forth in His Majesties Declaration aforesaid. The Bishop of Lincoln the fa∣mous Casuist, Dr. Sanderson, died in the middle of Ianuary; as many of that Function had preceded him since the King's Restitution, and left his See to the Lord Bishop of Peterborough, Dr. Laney. Lord War∣reston in the Tower.The Lord Warreston, a Committee of Safety-man, and infamous for his Treason in Scotland, and a Fugitive there, being Proclaimed Rebel and Tray∣tor, was taken and secured in France, and sent over hither, where he was Committed by his Majesties Order to the Tower, in order to his sending for Scotland: from thence Gibs the Brother of the aforesaid Nathanael, who fled, and was lately retaken, was sent to the Sessions at the Old Baily, Febru∣ary the Twentieth, and with the before-mentioned Baker, Condemned for the same former Treason, and both Executed at Tyburn in like manner. The Nineteenth of February the Parliament met, where the King took notice of his said Declaration of the Twenty sixth of December,Declaration of the King, and Resolutions of the Parliament. wherein he cleared himself of any mistakes, as favouring Popery: though he acknowledged the Services of many of that Profession, yet he was so far from Tolerating or qualifying them thereby to hold any Office or places of Trust in the Go∣vernment, that he desired Laws might be made to hinder the growth of their Doctrine: That his Zeal to the Protestant Religion and Uniformity shall not yield to the Bishops themselves; and yet, if the Dissenters will demean them∣selves peaceably and modestly under the Government, he could heartily wish He had such a Power of Indulgence, to use upon occasions, as might not need∣lesly force them out of the Kingdome, or staying here, give them Cause to Con∣spire against the Peace of it. In Answer to this His Majesties Explanation of Himself, and his Declaration of the Twenty sixth of December, the House of Commons distinctly and se∣parately, to every particular thereof, gave His Majesty their most humble Thanks; withal, by their Votes and Addresses to him, Vindicating their set∣tlement of Religion in the antient Form, Discipline, and Government there∣of, from the Calumny and danger of Schism; and promised to Assert it with their Lives and Estates, as their particular and Parliamentary Honour: which Resolutions and Reasons being of so recent Date, and the Answer of the King not yet given thereunto, which out-measures the time of this Chro∣nicle, I do remit to another unwearied and unperplexed Pen. Scotland in a most Peaceful state and condition; and the Kingdome of
Ireland in a tendency thereunto: but through so many variations and vicissi∣tudes of Domination and propriety the Lands thereof had passed, that it was not imaginable the total subversion thereof by the Rebellion of both Parties there, the Irish and Long Parliament, could devolve things into any presumed security, it having been the first and last Stage of the War.—sed Tucro Duce & Auspice Tucro — But the Eminence and Prudence of this Lord Lieu∣tenant, the most noble Duke of Ormond, who hath so often Governed this Realm, hath given the greatest pledges of assurance of an happy Establish∣ment, whose beginning I will not trouble with the short-lived rumours of Commotions and Stirs now very frequent and rise by the Arts of our Male-Contents. Thus far have I deduced the account of the Three Kingdoms from the most Funest War, to a blessed and most promising Peace to us and our Posterity: and may there be in the succeeding years of His Majesties and his Royal Progenies Reign (which Almighty God derive through innumerable descents) no other occa∣sion of our Pens than the gratulatory Records of our undisturbed, unalterable Repose, Plenty and Tranquil∣lity.
A BRIEF ACCOUNT Of the most Memorable TRANSACTIONS IN ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, and IRELAND, AND Forein Parts: From the Year 1662, to the Year 1675. LONDON: Printed by I. C. for T. Basset, at the George near Cliffords-Inne, in Fleetstreet. 1676.
A BRIEF ACCOUNT OF TRANSACTIONS IN ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, and IRELAND, &c. THere is a justice due to the Memory of Actions, as well as the Memory of Men; and therefore since the times of Usurpation have had the favour done them, as to have the Transactions of those Years publike∣ly recorded, though to the shame of those Times, that had nothing but Enormity to signalize 'em; with more justice may we assay to take a short view of those great and Noble Actions, perform'd in the succeeding Years: Not that we pretend to a History, but in short nals, and brief Collecti∣ons, to facilitate the way for those that shall hereafter take a larger and more considerable pains. Anno Dom. 1663. THat which the expectations of people were most fix'd upon,Parliament begins. the beginning of this Year, was the Session of Parliament, which beginning on the 19th of February 1662, continued to the 27th of Iuly 1663. The first thing remarkable, was a Petition of both Houses, Represent∣ing, that notwithstanding his Majesties unquestionable zeal and affection to the Protestant Religion, manifested by his constant prosession and practice against all temptations whatsoever; yet by the great resort of Iesuits and Ro∣mish Priests into the Kingdom, the Subject was generally much affected with jealousie, that the Popish Religion might much encrease, and the Church and
State be thereby insensibly disturb'd:esuits banish. upon which the King set forth a Procla∣mation, Commanding all Iesuits, and Irish, Scotch, and English Priests to depart the Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales, before the 14th of May then next ensuing, upon pain of having the penalty of the Laws inflicted up∣on them. But while they are bringing other Consultations to maturity, many other things preceding the Conclusion of their deliberations, are to be related. In April his Majesty kept the Feast of St. George at Windsor, where the Duke of Monmouth, and the Prince of Denmark, by his Deputy Sir George Carteret, Vice-chamberlain, were install'd Knights of the Garter. Campeach tak.Toward the later end of May, came News from Iamaica, that the English under the Command of Capt. Mymms, being about 800 men, had made an at∣tempt upon the City of Campeach, in the Golden Territories of the King of Spain; and that they took the Town, though defended with four Forts, and 3000 men. But the Spaniards having intelligence of their coming, had sent away their Women and Riches; yet though they miss'd their chief aim, they took the Governour, brought away 50 pieces of Ordnance, and 14 Ships which were in Harbor. Irish Plot.The beginning of Iune brought News of a Conspiracie of several wicked persons in Ireland, who were endeavoring to raise a new Rebellion there, by surprizing the Castle of Dublin. The Designe was to have been put in execu∣tion upon the 21th of May, and the Dke of Ormond first to be seiz'd. To which effect, divers persons with Petitions in their hands were to wait in the Castle, while 80 Foot in the disguise of Handicrafts-men, attended without. Their business it was to trifle about for an opportunity to surprize the Guards. The Plot was discovered, and 500 lib. a head set upon five of the Ringleaders, to what persons soever should apprehend them. Earl of otes Commissioner in Scotland.About this time, his Majesty caus'd the Earl of Middleton's Commission, as Commissioner of Scotland, to cease; and appointed the Earl of Rothes to suc∣ceed him in the same Quality. Bills passed by Commission.On the third of Iune, His Majesty by his Commission under the Great Seal of England; to the Lord Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, Lord Privy Seal; Duke of Albemarle, Marquess of Dorchester, and Lord High Chamberlain, pass'd ten Bills, which were all private ones, but three; of which the chiefest was, for repair of the High-ways of Huntington, Hertford, and Cambridge-shires. About the beginning of December, Mr. Paul Rycaut, Secretary to the Earl of Winchelsey, came from Constantinople,Mr. Rycaut comes from Constantino∣ple. bringing with him the Grand Seigniors Ratifications of the several Treaties made with Argier; and as a mark of the Kings satisfaction in the management of his Employment, and the Message he brought, His Majesty was pleas'd to honour him with a fair gold Chain, and a Medal. Jersey a new .No less mindful was he of the Loyalty of his Island of Iersey; and as a re∣ward thereof, mu bout the same time, he order'd a stately silver Mace, rich∣ly gilt, to be bestowed upon the Bayliff, or Chief Magistrate of the Island, to be born ever after before him and his Successors, as an honourable Badge of his Majesties affection to them, for their constant adhering both to his Father and Himself. It was received with all imaginable demonstrations of joy; and the first that had the honour to have it born before him, was Philip Carteret, Esq. Brother to Sir George, Vice-Chamberlain to his Majesty. Northern Plot discovered.But now so loud and so hainous were the rebellious Treasons daily discover∣ed in the North, that it was thought convenient to give requitals of another nature, and in the depth of winter to send a Commission of Oyer and Terminer to York, for trial of the most notorious Offenders in that Conspiracie. Seven∣teen were first arraign'd; ten of which appeared to have been actually in arms at Farnley-wood. The Plot was excellently open'd, to have been a Designe which came from the Bishoprick about a year before; and that an Intelligence was settled between the disaffected there and in Yorkshire, as also in Ipswich, in
Suffolk, and other Counties; an Oath of Secresie taken, and Agents employ'd at London, and in the West of England, for assistance. In Iune preceding, two Agitators were sent into Scotland, to reconcile the Sectaries there; who were entertained at one Oldroyd's house in Deusbury, com∣monly known by the name of the Devil of Deusbury; and afterwards divers meetings were appointed at a place called Stanh-house in York-shire. Whereup∣on Marshden and Palmer were sent to London, as Agitators to the Secret Com∣mittee there; and at their return, brought Orders to rise the 12th of Octob. with assurance, that the Insurrection should be general, and Whitehal be attempted. Nottingham, Glocester, and Newcastle were to be seized, as Passes over the Severn, Trent, and Tine; and Baston in Lincolnshire, for a Sea-port to receive Succours out of Holland, and other Foreign parts. All the Gentry were to be secured, and persons were dispatch'd abroad for assistance. York they aim'd at, but of Hull they absolutely despair'd, as Walters affirmed; who, to give him his due, dealt most sincerely. Their pretences were to have been the opposal of Excise, Subsidies, &c. to re-establish a Gospel-Magistracie and Ministry; to restore the Long Parliament; and lastly, to curb the Gentry, Clergy, and Lawyers. Fifteen of the seventeen first arraigned,Plotters ri'd. were found guilty; the chiefest of whom, was one Captain Oates. Afterwards several others were arraigned; who farther confessed, how the Designe had been carried on by a private Committee at London: That Lambert, or Ludlow, was propos'd for to have headed them: That the Rising was to have begun in Ireland, to have followed in England, and then in Scotland. Of these, Cotton, Denham, and Atkins were the chief, who all behaved themselves with a notorious insolence; Cotton protesting, that he valued his life no more than the Judge did his Handkerchief. There was also among them one Corney a Preaching Anabaptist. Most of them being convicted and condemned, were afterwards executed,Executed▪ some at York, some at Leeds, and others in other places. Immediately after this, Iames Turner, a person for nothing more known than for the confidence of his behaviour, came upon the Stage to plead for himself, who had been a Sollicitor for others before; he was Indicted for Felo∣ny and Burglary, as one that had robb'd his own most intimate friend, Mr. Sa∣muel Tryon, breaking into his house, and binding him in his bed, and then ri∣fling away what he pleased in the house:Turner tryed and hanged. the matter of fact was so ill defend∣ed by a tedious Speech of his own, that he was condemned, and shortly after executed in Leaden-hall-street, near Lime-street-end. But to go on where this necessary digression interrupted me, and to shew how the links of their treasonable Combination hung together; at London short∣ly after was tried a Printer,A Printer tri∣ed, and execu∣ted. for having had a hand in Printing one of the most execrable Libels that was ever brought to light; being a designe all at once upon the Life, Honor, Authority, and Royal Family of the King, wherein there was a general Call to a Rising, in these very words, [If there be any City, Town, or Coun∣ty in the three Nations that will begin this Righteous and Glorious Work, referring to the word Revolt, they may be assured, &c.] It was also ordered to have met the day appointed for the general Rising. He was found Guilty of having ad∣visedly, and malitiously Printed the said Libel; and was thereupon adjudged to be drawn, hanged, and quartered. After him,Others Pillo∣ri'd, and Fi∣ned. a Printer, a Bookseller, and a Book-binder, were tri'd for a Misde∣meanor, found Guilty, and fin'd: the one a hundred Mark; the other two forty Mark apiece; all of them to stand in the Pillory, and be return'd to Prison till the next Sessions; and then to confess their faults in such manner as the Court should direct; and to put in Security 400 lib. for themselves, and 200 lib. for their Surety, never to Print, sell, or publish any Book, but such as should be by Law appointed. The prementioned condemn'd Printer was executed accor∣dingly. The three others stood in the Pillory in Smithfield, and before the Roy∣al-Exchange, their Offence being expressed in these words, For selling, and utter∣ing malitious, scandalous, and seditios Books, against the King, the State, and Peace of the Kingdom.
A remarkable provience.Nor must we omit the particular Acts of Providence, as well as those which are universal. A Story very observable, in the preservation of divers Persons of Quality, in a house in Holborne; who being there met to a considerable num∣ber, a Link-boy passing under the wall of the House, observ'd the House fail∣ing; who thereupon immediately ran in, and bid the Company be gone, for the House was falling upon their heads. And so returning at the same instant, and the Company following him as fast as they could, they were no sooner out, and clear of the door, but the house fell indeed to the ground, without any harm to the Company. A barbarous murther com∣mitted by a Portugueze Servant upon his Master.This Month an Antient Gentleman, a Portugueze, lodging in Hart-street in Covent-Garden, having been abroad at his Devotions, sent his Servant out to provide him some Fish for his Dinner; which being dress'd and serv'd up, a lit∣tle while after, the people of the house heard the report of a Pistol, but took no farther notice of it. A while after that, the Gentlemans Servant, a Portugueze likewise, called Peter Caesar, came down and sate to Dinner with the people of the house, where he staid most part of the afternoon; and then went abroad, and came in again. Toward the evening he went forth another time, and cau∣sed a Porter to bring home a large Chest, which being carried up stairs, the Boy drew it into his Masters Chamber; and a good while after, called the Porter to help him down with it, which he did accordingly. But the Chest proving too heavy for the Porter and the Youth, another Porter was call'd, and so they carried it away to the water-side; where it was put into a Boat, and the Boy bidding the Water-man cross the water, pretending he was to receive mony for the Goods in the Chest, from a person that was to meet him there, staid a while; but no body coming, at length in a rage to see himself disappointed, caus'd the fellow to row him back again, and by the way slipp'd the Chest into the Thames, and left it as in a fury to see himself sent of an Errand to so little pur∣pose. After this, the Boy returned to his Masters Lodging; but some blood be∣ing discovered upon the stairs, the fellow was apprehended: next morning the Chest being taken up and opened, there was found the body of his Master shot through the head. That which moved him to this horrid Villany, was a sum of mony, between 3 and 400 hundred pound, which his Master wore about him in a List. He was afterwards condemn'd, and executed at Tyburn. The Lord Hol∣les Embassa∣dor to the French King.Upon the Nineteenth of March, the Lord Holles, Embassador from his Maje∣sty to the French King, received his Audience at Chasteauneuf, with great Justice to the Royal Dignity of his Master, and with honourable respect to himself. The sum of what his Excellencie delivered, which was in English, tending princi∣pally to signifie his Royal Masters Intentions to preserve an Amity and fair Cor∣respondence with that King, upon confidence of the like from his Christian Majesty. To which the French King's Reply was briefly, That his Excellencie might assure his Master, the King of Great Britain, of as much from himself: concluding with some expressions of particular respects to the Person of the En∣glish Embassador. And it was observable, that none of the Princes of the Blood, who had got the precedencie of several Embassadors of late years, were there to dispute it with Ours. June.This Month the King was gratiously pleas'd to dispence with the attendance of Sir Thomas Mallet one of the Judges of the Kings Bench,Iudge Mallet by reason of his age dispenced with, and Sir John Keeling sworn in his place. who had been Judge in the time of King Charles the First; and by consequence being now, by reason of his very great age, disabled, Sir Iohn Keeling was sworn in his place. He was a Person of eminent Loyalty and Fidelity to the Crown. The same month died the Learned and most Reverend Prelate, Dr. Bramhal, Archbishop of Armagh; to which See he had been by his Majesty translated from that of London-Derry.Dr. Bramhal departs this life. Of whom it is enough to say, that he was the be∣loved Darling of those two Renowned Patriots, Archbishop Laud, and the Earl of Strafford. Gayland as∣saults Tan∣gier.In Iuly came Intelligence from Tangier, that Gayland had made a very vi∣gorous Assault upon Tangier with about six thousand men, the May before. But
the Earl of Teviot, who was there newly arrived, gave him so warm a welcom, that he retired with the loss of above an hundred men,Rereats with . and the Commander of his Horse, who by his Crimson-velvet Coat, was thought to be a Person of Qua∣lity; besides that after he was slain, the rest went off immediately. Not long after he made a second Attempt,Makes another Attack, but is forc'd to retire with great loss. with 10000 men; but though he made a very sharp Assault, his Entertainment was far more warm than the former: for he lost a thousand men. After which Defeat, the Earl of Teviot sent him a Letter, to let him know, that though the King of Great Britain wanted neither resolution nor ability to maintain his Right, yet he was a friend to Peace:Makes peace. which so prevailed upon Gayland, that he sent Messengers for a Treaty, and soon after came to an Accord. On the 22th of this month was Christened Iames,Duke of Yorks Son Christened. Son of his Royal High∣ness, in the Chappel of St. Iames's, by the Bishop of London, then Elect Arch∣bishop of Canterbury. His Majesty and the Lord Chancellor were God-fathers, and the Queen-Mother was God-mother. The State was born by the Earl of St. Albans and the Earl of Sandwich, and the Dutchess of Buckingam held the Infant. On the 27th of Iuly,Parliament Prorogud. his Majesty going to the House of Peers, where the House of Commons went to attend him; after a short Speech, declaring among other things, how he had proceeded by Commands and Directions to all his Judges, in all Affairs which the Season and other Necessities would not permit to pass into Acts, gave his Royal Assent to several Bills, and then Prorogued them till the 16th of March following. The chief Acts were. An Act for four entire Subsidies to his Majesty, by the Temporalty. An Act to confirm four Subsidies granted by the Clergy. A third in behalf of Indigent Officers; and for settling the profits of the Post-Office and Wine-Licences upon the Duke of York and his Heirs. And for bet∣ter Collecting the Duty of Excise, &c. Nor may it be amiss to relate the manner of the Translation of the Right Reverend,August. Gilbert Archbishop of Can∣terbury,The manner of the Translation of the Arch∣bishop of Canterbury. as being novel to the Reading of this Age, and a Solemnity not every day common. Just before the Bishops, came into the Chappel the Mace-bearer, the Arch∣bishops Steward, Treasurer, and Controller, all in their Habits, with white Staves in their hands. In the next place followed the Bishops in their Episcopal Robes. After these, the Dean of the Arches, the Judge of the Admiralty, and the Judge of the Archbishops Prerogative-Court, with divers Advocates in Scarlet Robes. Lastly, several Proctors in the Archbishops Court, in Hoods and Habits. The Congregation being placed in the Chappel, Divine Service was celebra∣ted by two of the Archbishops Chaplains; which being ended, the Bishops were brought up from the Seats they had taken, to that part of the Chappel, where all things were transacted relating to the Ceremony; in which having seated themselves, the Kings Commission under the Great Seal was presented to the Bishops, by the Archbishops Vicar-General, and was publickly read by the Dean of the Arches: whereupon the Bishops accepting of the Commission, the Vi∣car-General went forth and conducted the Archbishop into the Chappel, the Mace-bearer, Steward, and Controller marching before, and presented him to the rest of the Bishops; who being then seated in a Chair before them, the Bishops Commissioners proceeded in course of Law, and at length to a definitive Sen∣tence; which was publickly read by the first Bishop in Commission, and then subscribed by himself and the rest of the Bishops; whereby the Election was confirmed, and made good in Law. It being now Vacation-time,Kings Pro∣gress▪ His Majesty went his Progress Westward from London to Bath▪ and from thence through Gloucestershire to Oxford▪ being pre∣sented at Reading and Newbury with Purses of Gold; receiving where-ever he
came, very high and splendid Entertainments; particularly, at Littlecot, from Sir Popham; at Newbury from Sir Thomas Dolman; from the Lord Seymor at Marleborough; from Sir Iames Thyn at Ling-leet; at Badmanton from the Mar∣quess of Worcester; and at Cornbury, from the Lord Chancellor. Coming to Oxford, he was met half a mile from the City by the Doctors and Scholars in all their Formalities; and entring the Suburbs, by the Militia of the City, through which he pass'd from his first Entry to his Lodgings. During his a∣bode there, he visited the Schools, where a Noble Banquet attended him: He also toucht above 300 Persons; with which impression of duty and reverence left behind him, he return'd in October to London. Scotch Parlia∣ment.The Parliament of Scotland had this year sate ever since the 18th of Iune; in which time the main thing which they did of general Concernment, was their Condemnation of Archibald Iohnson, alias Laird Wariston, a Member of the Committee of Safety, who was executed on the 22th of Iuly at the Market-Cross of Edenburgh, having receiv'd his Sentence in the Parliament-House. In the next place was their Constitution of a National Synod, or Assembly of the Church, the first that ever was constituted in that Kingdom under Bishops; whereby the ordering and disposal of the external Government of the Church, and the Nominations of the Members of the Synod, were to be in the King, by vertue of his Prerogative Royal in Causes Ecclesiastical: As to the Members constituting the same, they were to be Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, and Arch-Deacons, the Moderators of Meetings for Exercises, with one Minister of each Meeting, to be chosen by the Moderator and plurality of Ministers for the same. The Synod to meet at such time and places as his Majesty should appoint by Pro∣clamation; and to debate of such matters, relating to the Government and Doctrine of the Church, as his Majesty should deliver to the President. And lastly, no Assembly to be held without the presence of his Majesty, or his Com∣missioner. Their second Act was for an Army of 20000 Foot, and 2000 Horse, with forty days provision, to be in readiness, as they should be call'd to march to any part of his Majesties Dominions, for suppressing any forein Invasion, or for any other Service of his Majesty. Bishop of Lon∣don one of the Kings Council.Upon the 9th of December, the Right Reverend Humphrey, Lord Bishop of London, was sworn one of his Majesties most Honorable Privy Council, having for his great Worth, Learning, and Integrity, been a little before translated from New Sarum, to the more dignifi'd See of London. Iudge Jenkins dies.Soon after came news of the death of that Eminent, Loyal, and Renowned Patriot, Judge Ienkins, who died at his house at Cowbridge, in the 81 year of his age, in perfect Sence and Memory. He di'd, as he liv'd, preaching with his last breath to his Relations, Loyalty to the King, and obedience to the Laws of England; leaving behind him an unspotted Fame, and the Memory of a President, which this Age only could have needed, and the next will hardly out-do. Dutch sur∣priz'd by the Turk.A great storm threatned the Dutch Merchants trading in the Grand Seigniors Dominions, by the miscarriage of their Ships; which loading the Grand Seig∣niors Goods, and Merchandize of Turks, to the value of 170000 Dollars, was surpriz'd by a Malthese. But the Turks would not believe, but that the Com∣mander of the Dutch Vessel was privy to some Treachery; and therefore the Grand Seignior resolving not to lose what was in his power to recover, sent for the Hol∣land Resident, perswading him that he engag'd for the fidelity of the Master, to make him and the Dutch Nation responsible for his loss; in order whereunto, directions were given to secure the Dutch Merchants in Smyrna, and the Resi∣dent commanded to abide in Adrianople: so that there was no way to redeem him from ensuing mischief, but a quick promise of satisfaction. Pope and K. of France differ.In Italy, the Pope and King of France were like to have been engag'd in a very great Quarrel. For the Pope being incens'd against the King of France, for encroaching upon the Church, occasion'd by the Popes delay of giving him satisfaction for the injury done to the Duke of Grequi by the Corsi, began a se∣rious debate in the Conclave how to proceed against him, whether by Excom∣munication,
or otherwise; though carried in the end for moderation. How∣ever, the King of France possesses himself of Avignon. The Pope kept a great bustle at first, and made a fair shew as if he would have oppos'd the French King: but the King of France having already snt some Troops into Italy, and ready to advance with a greater Body;They come to an Agreement. at length Articles of Agreement were sign'd at Pisa, between Bourlemont, and Cardinal Rasponi. First, That the Cardinal Imperial should be confin'd to Genoa, during the Kings pleasure. That Dom Mario, the Popes Brother, should be banish'd to Siena for three years, not to return to Rome; upon any pretence whatsoever. That Cardinal Chigi, the Popes Nephew, should be sent into France; where at his first Audience, he should desire the French Kings Pardon, for himself and his whole Family: and in his second Audience, in the Name of the Pope, suppli∣cate the Christian Kings excuse, for the affront given to the Duke of Crequi. That the said Duke, in his return to Rome by Land, should be met at the Frontiers of the State Ecclesiastick, by Dom Augusto, another of the Popes Nephews: if by Sea, at a proportionate distance, by the Gallies of the Church. And the Dutchess of Crequi to be receiv'd at a Leagues distance from Rome, by the Wife of Dom Mario. That the Duke of Crequi being return'd to Rome, shall be there treated with all bn our due and customary to the Ministers of France. That the Duke of Cesarini be restor'd to his Goods and Honors, and indemni∣fi'd for the future; and all others who had suffer'd in the King of France's Quar∣rel. The Dutchy of Castro restor'd to the Duke of Parma, paying 1200000 Livres, at such and such payments. The Valley of Cornachio to the Duke of Modena, paying 500000 Livres, in consideration of the charge of Garrisons. That there be a Pillar rais'd in the Palace of the Corsi, with an Inscription bear∣ing the substance of their Condemnation. Out of which Articles, the ground of the Quarrel is easie to be gather'd; and how easily a Catholick Prince, though one of the Eldest Sons of the Church, can dispence with his obedience to the Pope▪ when he has a power and spirit to resist him; and that it is not the Law of Nature, that the Pope should trample upon the Necks of Princes. Rasponi, with great reluctancie, linger'd out to the last moment; but the Pope found himself oblig'd to yield to the King upon his own Conditions. While the Christian Princes are thus at difference,The Turks B∣siege New-hausel. the Turk enlarges his Do∣minions; laying Siege to New-hausel, one of the most considerable Passes and Forts which the Christians had in those parts. The Bassa coming before the Town, sent in a Summons to Count Fogats, the Governor, in these words: I, through the Grace of God, and through the Miracles of our Prophet, who is a Son of both Worlds, and by whom there is happiness and glory: I, that am the first in Council, and General of the most Mighty Emperor of the Turks, that is the King of all the Kings of the Earth: To you, Adam Forgats, that are the Chief of the Nobility of Hungary, Do make known, that through the Command of my gratious Lord, I am come with his Forces before New-hausel, to reduce it to his obe∣dience. Wherefore if ye shall deliver up the place to us, you shall have liberty to march out with what belongs to you, from the highest to the lowest, and to what place you please. And he that will rather stay, shall keep his goods and estate: But if you will not yield, we will take it by force; and every man of ye, from the highest to the lowest of you, shall be put to the sword. If the Hungarians did but know the Intentions of the Mighty Emperor▪ they and their Children would bless God for them. Peace be to the Obedient.
But for all this menacing Summons, the Town held out many a brisk As∣sault of the Besiegers, who lost near 20000 of their men before it: so that it was verily reported, that the Enemy would have quitted the Siege, had it held out a week longer.New-hausel surrender'd. But Count Forgats delivered i up at length, contrary to the will of the Germans, upon Conditions to march out Bag and Baggage to the next Garrison, leaving behind him 60 brass Guns, Powder and Ball in pro∣portion, 3000 fats of Wine, and plenty of Provisions. Count Serini beats the Turks at the River Mur.Count Serini watched all advantages, yet durst not attempt to relieve it, by reason of the smalness of his force; and yet in some measure, he quit scores with them shortly after. For hearing of a great Body of the Enemy, who were intending to lay a Ship-bridge over the River Mur, he march'd thither; and as soon as he understood that two thousand were got over the water, he set up∣on them at such a disadvantage, that he put them to the rout: their fellows that were coming over, fell into such a consternation, that they could neither get back, nor swim, nor defend themselves; so that the River was quite cover∣ed with men and Horses. The Count made use of the opportunity, not taking so much as one Prisoner; so that between killing and drowning, very few escap'd, though above 10000 in all: above a thousand of their Horses were taken com∣ing out of the water. A considerable prevention of their entring Stiermark, and coming up as far as Grats, without any possibility of opposition. The Portugals take Ginaldo in Galicia, and totally rout the Spa∣niards.The like success had the Portugals against the Spaniards, taking the Town of Ginaldo in Gallicia, wherein was the Magazine of Spain. Afterwards giving Battle to Don Iohn of Austria, who commanded 7000 Horse, 12000 Foot, and 18 pieces of Ordnance, they routed him in the open field, and took all his Bag and Baggage, being assisted by the English. They slew 1000, took 4000 Prisoners, and most of the eminent Commanders. But a worse fate had attended the Protestants of Piedmont, had not they sout∣ly defended themselves. For while their Delegates were pleading for them at Turin, under the Protection and Safe-conduct of the Duke of Savoy, their Sove∣reign Prince, protesting their Loyalty and Submission to him; his Forces, to the number of between 16 or 18000 Horse and Foot, entred the Valleys at Prerustine, St. Bartholomew, Rocheplate, and other places; endeavouring to possess themselves▪ of Angrogue, and St. Martins, two of the strongest Holds in all the Valley of Piedmont. In their way, they set all on fire, cut and tore the Vines, and destroy'd all. The Inhabitants seeing themselves assaulted, contrary to Faith given, and seeing they were undone,The Protestants of Piedmont defeat the For∣ces of the Duke of Savoy. made head: the Fight was hot for the time; but though the Savoyards were thirty for one, they were at length forc'd to retreat with the loss of above a thousand men kill'd and wounded, and many Officers. All which was said to be done by the Iesuits Council de Propaganda Fide. Anno Dom. 1664. WE shall begin this Year with the Trial of several persons for their Lives, being of the same Party with those last Year executed at York. The greatest part of their hopes of destroying his Majesty, was built upon the confi∣dence of a power they had, as well to divide and distract his Friends, as unite his Enemies; which they endeavour'd to do, by divers false and scandalous Ru∣mors, which upon all occasions they scatter'd among the people, as being one half of their business. The Tragedy was to have begun in the Counties of Westmerland, Durham, and Yorkshire, by seizing upon Carlisle, all the eminent Persons and Justices of the Peace of the said Counties, and what Publick Trea∣sure they could find. A small Party met at Kirkby-Steven, but failing of their number,Traytors exe∣cuted. soon dispers'd themselves again. Several were executed, particularly at Appleby, Robert Waller, Stephen Weatherhead, and Henry Petty.
But such was the inveterate malice of these kind of people, such was the In∣fluence of Ejected Ministers among them, that notwithstanding so many per∣sons had suffer'd the year before, yet at Newbury, the Mayor and Company of the Town being met upon Easter-Tuesday to chuse Church-wardens for the year ensuing,Disorders at Newbury. they were assaulted by a rude and confus'd multitude, of all sorts of Phanaticks, some crying one thing, and some another; and though sundry times excluded by the Constables that were call'd to keep the peace, yet they still broke in with fresh clamours, crying out, that it did not belong to the Mayor and Company, but the whole Parish to make the choice. In fine, they came to this at last, that they did not matter who was chosen, so one Pocock, render'd odious to the Rabble for his Loyalty to the King, were not one. But Sir Tho∣mas Doleman coming immediately to Town,Sir Thomas Doleman sei∣seth upon the chief sticklers. upon notice of the disorder, with a Guard of Soldiers, seiz'd the chief sticklers, who were afterwards proceeded against according to their demerits. And understanding that certain Grand Phanaticks, being charg'd with Arms, refus'd to send in their men, he with the rest of the Deputy-Lieutenants caus'd them to be fin'd, and levied their fines by distress of their goods. In the mean time, notice being taken of several dange∣rous applications made to some Prisoners in the Tower, Mildmay, Wallop, Fleet∣wood, and Garland were sent away to Tangier, and certain other Prisoners dis∣pos'd of into other places of security. This Month also brought Intelligence of the proceedings of the Earl of Te∣viot, then Governor of Tangier, who finding Gayland unwilling to comply with him in his propounded Articles of Peace, resolv'd to make use of Force; and having worsted the Moor in an Attack which he made upon the English, with great courage and vigor, for some time afterwards undisturb'd, began and fi∣nish'd a great part of the outermost Fortifications: and to make room for the English,Jews expell'd Tangier. and Strangers of better account, turn'd all the Jews out of the City. Now was it less welcom news,Sir Richard Fanshaw Em∣bassador in Spain. for his Majesty to hear, that his Embassador Sir Rich. Fanshaw was magnificently receiv'd and entertain'd by the King of Spain, in testimony of the high value which that King put upon his Majesties Alliance, and the reverence he had for that Correspondence, which so great an Embassa∣dor was sent to continue and preserve between both Kingdoms. But as if the heat of the Spring had warm'd the English bloods,English Com∣plaints against the Dutch. His Majesty and his Parliament, at this time sitting, began to take into their deep Conside∣ration, the great Complaints that had been made against the Dutch, whose in∣juries and affronts had not a little enrag'd the Nation. Whereupon, a Report being made by Mr. Clifford of their Encroachments upon Trade, from a Com∣mittee appointed to examine that affair,Resolves of the Houses there∣in. Thereupon the House made two Re∣solves, the Substance of which were▪ That the wrongs, dishonours, and indigni∣ties, the damages, affronts, and injuries done by the Subjects of the United Provin∣ces to our Merchants, were the greatest Obstructions to Forein Trade: That His Ma∣jesty should be mov'd to take speedy and effectual course for the redress thereof, and that they would assist him with their lives and fortunes, against all opposition what∣soever. The Lords concurr'd; and thereupon both Houses attended his Maje∣sty, who declar'd his Royal Sense,The King de∣clares himself. and high Esteem of their care and tender∣ness for the Honor and Good of the Nation. Letting them farther know, That he would examine and prove the particular Complaints; that he would demand sa∣tisfaction by a Publick Minister, and do his utmost endeavour to secure his Subjects from the like Violences for the future; depending upon the Promise of both Houses to stand by him. Upon which Declaration, both Houses return'd their humble and hearty Thanks. April 6th. Soon after this, the King came to the House, pass'd two parti∣cular Acts, the one for holding Parliaments once in three years at least; and re∣pealing a former Act, call'd, An Act for preventing the inconveniencies by long intermissions of Parliament. At the signing thereof, his Majesty gave them thanks for their ready concurring in a thing so advantageous to the Nation; and for recalling the other so prejudicial, and so much to the discredit of Parlia∣ments,
as if the Crown were jealous as Parliaments, or that Parliaments were jealous of the Crown. Sir John Lawson with a Fleet for the Streights.While these things were transacting, Sir Iohn Lawson, Admiral of the En∣glish Fleet, sent into the Mediterranean Sea to repress the Insolencies of the Pi∣rates of Argier, sent home seventeen Ships, and between two and three hun∣dred men, and great store of Goods, which those Corsairs had taken prize; to the Honor of the Publick, and private satisfaction of many. Buchanans Bank burned in Scotland.Nor can we omit the punishment of a Criminal Book, long after the Author's decease. For with the same justice may Books, as well as men, be executed for Treason. And therefore long after his death, about the beginning of May, was Mr. George Buchanans Book, De Iure Regni apud Scotos, call'd in and sup∣press'd, by an Act of the Parliament of that Kingdom; having been condemned before by another Act of Parliament, in the year 1584. A Proclama∣tion agint Contributions, &c.Nor was it less to the advantage of his Majesties Service, that at the same time they issued out another Proclamation, To prohibit all persons, to seek de∣mand, receive, or deliver any Contributions, or Supplies, but what were publickly allow'd and practiz'd, without allowance of the Lords of the Privy Council. For without Libels and Collections, the grand support of Conventicles, it is mo∣rally impossible to unsettle any Government. rous Tartar.Among such serious things as these, Historians have allow'd themselves to entertain their Readers with miraculous Accidents. Which puts us in mind of the portentous Tartar, which Count Serini was reported to have taken about this time. From the shoulder upward, he had the shape of a Giant-like man, his Neck long, and like that of a Horse, with a Man; the lower part of his face like a man, with a great wild Beard; the upper part like a Horse, with large Ears. He was arm'd with a great Bowe, and a Quiver by his side, with a long Dart. If this Relation may not gain sufficient credit, yet the Monster may serve to fight many Ages hence with Regulus's his Serpent. Barbado's eir.Another strange Accident was related from the Barbado's, then published not without great Authority; which was, that about 900 miles Eastward of the Barbadoes, a Vessel being in her full course, a certain great Fish struck the Ship on the Star-board side, and passing under it, touch'd the Rudder, and threw the Sers-man from the Helm; and when she came on the other side, heav'd a great Sea into the Ship. At her first stroke, she ran her Horn through the sheathing, a three-Inch Plank▪ and threw the Timber into the Cieling, where it broke short off, so that a piece of 12 Inches long, and 100 and a half weight, was left in the hole. Had not the Horn been broke in the hole, the Vessel had been lost; for notwith∣standing that stoppage, the water came in so fast, that it kept a Pump imploy'd. The Horn was like an Elephants Tooth, but more ponderous. Sir John Lawson pro∣claims War a∣gainst Argier.But passing over these Relations of lighter moment, the next Intelligence which we meet withal, is of Sir Iohn Lawson, who having offer'd all fair Ac∣commodation to the Pyrates of Argier, yet finding them disdain his proffer'd Peace, he declares open War against them; and immediately after took one of their Corsairs of thirty four Guns, and 260 men, which he sent into Majorca. Part of the Prisoners, being Turks and Moors, he sold to the Duke of Beaufort, Admiral to the King of France, then in those Seas. But now his Majesty mindful of the great work he had in hand, had given his particular Instructions to his Embassador in the Netherlands; who thereup∣on about the middle of May gave in his Memorandum to the States of the dama∣ges which the English complain'd to have suffer'd by the Subjects of those Provinces.A Memoran∣dum deliver'd the States. But the unprepar'd Belgian, not finding it convenient to give such speedy Answers, resolv'd to send their own Embassadors to the King him∣self; which, as it was a way of answering more magnificent, so it was the oc∣casion of greater delay. Upon the 17th of May, the Commons being met in the House of Lords, His Majesty in a gracious Speech, gave both Lords and Commons to understand his Royal Approbation of their Cares and Labors for the good of the Publick;
together with a Princely acknowledgment of their compliance with his plea∣sure in the dispatch of the business of the last Sessions. Afterwards his Ma∣jesty caused them to be Prorogued till the 20th of August ensuing.Pariat Prooged. Withal de∣claring, that unless something extraordinary should fall out, it was his Royal purpose not to call them together till November following, whereof they should have seasonable notice by Proclamation. Upon which, Sir Edward Turnor, then Speaker, represented to his Majesty the humble Thanks of the House for his Gratious acceptance of their endeavours in the Service of his Majesty and the Publick. After which, he particularly insist∣ed upon the unsettled condition of the Country, by reason of Phanaticks, Secta∣ries, and Non-conformists; and next to that, upon the Injuries complain'd of by our Merchants, concerning the frauds and practises of our Neighbours the Dutch, in the East and West-Indies, in Turkey, and Africa; which, besides the In∣dignities offer'd to his Royal Majesty and the Crown of England, were com∣puted to amount to no less than the value of seven or eight hundred thousand Pounds. Lastly, he presented the Heads of several Bills ready for his Royal assent. Accordingly, his Majesty sign'd several private, and some few publick Acts; among the rest, An Act to prevent and suppress Seditious Conventicles; which though it occasion'd great trouble to the Magistrates of the several Counties, yet it made apparent their faithful care, and Loyalty to his Majesties Service; so that indeed it was the whole employment of this Year, to apprehend and try the daily offenders against this Statute. His Majesty in the mean time finding it agreeable to his Royal wisdom forth∣with to equip two considerable Fleets, both to secure his Subjects in their free∣dom of Trade, and maintain the Honor and Interest of the English Nation, employ'd some of the Lords of his most Honorable Privy Council to the City of London,The King sends to the City for Mony. for the Loan of an hundred thousand pounds upon so extraordinary an occasion, referring them to the Lord Treasurer for terms of repayment. This was received with so dutiful a compliance by the Common Council of the City,Granted. that the said Supply was presently Voted; acquitting themselves at once both in point of Loyalty and prudence. Their present duty and Service to the King, manifestly redounding to the welfare and safety of themselves. While his Majesty is thus busied in his preparations at home,Earl of Tevi∣ot kill'd. we may look abroad; where we are forc'd to behold the fall of the Noble Earl of Teviot, who upon the third of May passing the Iews River, fell into an ambush planted there by Gayland, shelter'd by a thick wood, and seconded by his whole Army. The Party which the Earl commanded was totally lost, excepting a very few: his Memory however is there held in great Honor, as if the Memory of his Cou∣rage were the Soul of the Garrison. And seeing we are got so far abroad,Turks defeat∣ed. it may not be unseasonable to remem∣ber the famous Battle fought between the Turks and Christians, under the conduct of Montecuculi, it being one of the  famous Occurrences of this year, most fatal to the Infidels, who that day left dead upon the field the flower of their In∣fantry, to the number of 6 or 7000; among which, two Bassaes, all their Can∣non, above forty Colours, with Plunder inestimable. To which Honorable Victory, the wounds of the French did not a little conduce. Nor are we so slenderly to pass by another Atchievement of Geneal Souches,Turks a se∣cond time de∣feated. the general good of Christendom being equally concern'd in both; who with an unequal number of only six thousand, encountring above 15000 of the Enemy near the Garrison of Lewentz, with the loss only of 250, slew eight thousand; thereby gaining an absolute Victory, vast Booty, and Provisions of all sorts. All this while though there was open War with Argier, and that Lawson kept so vigilant an eye over them; yet by reason that either through Cowardize, or want of sufficient force, they were constrain'd to keep close in their Harbors, that sedu∣lous Admiral could do little good upon them, otherwise than by blocking up their Harbors, to keep them from Roving, & doing mischief: His Majesty therefore
having more occasion for so great and eminent a Commander at home, sent for both him and C. Berkley into England,Lawson calld home. to employ them against a more No∣ble Enemy; in pursuance of which Order, Sir Iohn Lawson returns for En∣gland, leaving Captain Allen to Command in Chief in his Room,Capt. Allen in his room. who in a short time after brought them to that distress, that they were glad to accept of Peace, upon terms advantageous enough for the King of England. The Divan disowning the Breach, and laying the fault upon some few, that for their own benefit, would not be rul'd by their Superiors. Embassadors sent abroad.As thus his Majesties Arms, so were his Counsels active abroad. The Earl of Carlisle is sent Embassador to Muscovy and Sweden, whither also Sir Gilbert Talbt was likewise employ'd as a particular Envoy; as likewise Mr. Coventry to Denmark. All upon such important Instructions, as the emergency of Af∣fairs at that time requir'd; but in general, to keep a strict union and Corre∣spondence with those Nations, Neighbours of his Enemies. Sir G. Down∣ing sent into Holland.Sir George Downing was presently after his return into England, sent back a∣gain with full Instructions what he had to do. Many Conferences he had a∣bout the Lists of Damages; but the Dutch would return no positive Answer to any thing, nor come to any Agreement, hoping to prove the event of certain great expectations which they had: not the least of which, was the return of a vast Treasure in several great Fleets of Merchant-men. His Majesty well knowing how strong a Nerve of War Mony is, resolv'd to way-lay those vast Masfes of Wealth, as they pass'd his own Channel; mov'd also by certain Intelli∣gence which he had, that the Dutch were resolv'd in contempt of his power, to send their Guinee preparations by Sea, and that Opdam should convey them through the Channel. To which end and purpose, that he might be before∣hand with the preparations of the Dutch, the King strives with all his Puis∣sance to make ready his Navy.Naval prepa∣rations. Whose Royal endeavours, and indefatigable pains in his own particular Person, were answered by the Success. For such was the alacrity of his Subjects, that saw him continually travelling from place to place, by the presence of his own Majesty to encourage & forward the work, and to see all things effectually and speedily done, that the City freely, at the first demand, made by the Earl of Manchester,A second Loan by the City. Lord Chamberlain of the Kings Houshold, suppli'd him with another Loan of another hundred thousand Pounds: which so highly promoted his Royal Designe, that while the Dutch, slattering themselves with vain suppositions of his want of Men and Mony and broken with the Ca∣lamity of the Pestilence, were only forc'd to look on, and with envy behold his vigorous preparations, the King had furnish'd out such a magnificent Navy to the Sea, as the Ocean had hardly seen in any former Ages. On the other side, the Dutch having consider'd the dangers of the Northern Passage, seemingly lay aside all thoughts of going about by Scotland, and resolve to force their passage through the Channel. The Commissioners therefore of the several Admiralties having revictual'd Opdams Fleet, from the middle of October to the middle of December,Dutch Brava∣do. gave him order to hasten out to Sea with the first wind, and to Conduct the Guinee-Succors through the Channel, having taken care for some other Ships from the Vlie and Texel to joyn with him; and in the mean time they sent a Galliot before to their Director-General in Guinee to give him notice of their Proceedings. Which resolution taken, and carried on with so much vigour, most men believ'd to have been extorted from them by the necessity of their present condition; for they had scatter'd many Contempts upon the English Nation, and yet falter'd in the point of execution: Nor was the Issue of this Bravado it self other, than what their ear presented; for a∣bout the middle of October,Prince Rupert at Sa. Prince Rupert arriv'd at the Spit-head with sixteen Sail of Men of War. The first thing he discover'd, was a small Man of War of 14 Guns, which the Prince suspecting to be employ'd for Discovery and Advice, sent his Smack out to Sea, with Orders to forbid him to beat there any longer, unless he were upon Trade: upon which Message he vanish'd.
At the beginning of November,The D. of York set forth to Sea. the Duke of York Lord high Admiral of En∣gland departed towards his Charge at Portsmouth, having receiv'd a most gracious farewel from his Majesty: in a short while after, he went aboard, and joyn'd with the Prince, and Earl of Sandwich; so that it was no easie thing to unlock the Narrow Seas. Opdam lay with his Fleet in the Goree,Opdam dares not adventure out. and great debates there were whe∣ther he should out or no; but the Wind continuing cross, put an end to that Dispute. And a fair excuse they had, for not adventuring upon so great dis∣advantages as they were like to have found; for, as we said before, the Duke was now joyd with the Prince and the Earl of Sandwich: Thereupon, about the beginning of December,The Dutch lay up their Fleet. perceiving great likelihood of Frosts and high Winds, they thought good to lay up till Spring; which was according∣ly put in Execution, to the great dissatisfaction of the Merchants, who now found themselves abandon'd and left to all the hazards of a Winter Voy∣age. Opdam return'd to the Hague, and the Seamen were paid off. And last of all, for the better Information of the King of France how Affairs stood, Monsieur Benninghen was dispatch'd away Post for Paris. To recompence the Stay of the Royal Navy to attend the Motion of the Netherlanders,Dutch Burde∣aux-Fleet ta∣ken. the Dutch Bourdeaux-Fleet, laden with Wine, Brandy, and other Commodities, fell all, or the greatest part, into our hands; which together with many other Prizes at other times this Year taken, made up the number of above a Hundred thirty five, with great Caution condemnd in the Admiralty of London. Nine Dutch Ships were brought into Dover at one time, laden with Canary, Salt, Oyl, Brandy, Spice, and other good Merchandizes. Certain it was, that the Hollander received a very great Foyl in the Opini∣on of the People, by that Action of withdrawing his Fleet; the Vulgar being supported till then, with an expectation of some mighty Actions, to Answer their Prodigious Boasting. This was all the Action of the English and Dutch Fleets at home. For his Highness the Duke of York,Duke of York returns to Lon∣don. finding that the Netherlanders had laid up their Ships, and that there was now no need of keeping so great a Navy abroad; with all his Train upon the seventh of December arrived at White-Hall, lea∣ving a considerable number of stout Vessels, under the Conduct of the Earl of Sandwich; having before his departure, by a Speech which he made them, inspired the Seamen with an admirable resolution and chearfulness to obey the Commands of their Admiral in whatever Enterprise he should have further Order to Prosecute.Earl of Sand∣wich keeps the Sea. This year were Launch'd the Royal Catherine,Royal Kathe∣rine, and Roy∣al Oak Laun∣ched. and the Royal Oak. And that noble Ship the London being by an Accident blown up, the City made their humble Addresses to His Majesty, that they might have leave to make a Contribution among themselves for the building another Ship of equal Good∣ness. The King graciously accepted their kind offer; and to shew his greater Acceptance, enjoyned them to add the Title of Loyal to the Name of London. As yet there was no publique Declaration of War on either side; Only the King seemed to Treat with his Arms in his hands. And therefore Sir George Downing still prest in the heat of all this Preparation and Action, accord∣ing to his Instructions,The States dis∣appointed by the English. for Satisfaction of Damages. The King had also made an Embargo upon the Dutch here in England; which was carried so privately, that Sir George Downing had Intelligence of it a full Week, before the States knew any thing thereof. By which means he gave timely Notice to fifteen or six∣teen Sail of the English to Ship away; insomuch that there remain'd nothing for the other to Seize, but two inconsiderable Vessels, and a Colchester Oyster∣boat. About the List of Damages there were several Conferences with Sr. George Downing, which prov'd all to little or no Effect: But that which pinch'd them most, was the Regulation propounded by Sir George for the Government of
Trade for the future; being very sensible, that the English did make themselves much more Popular among the Natives where they settled, than the Netherlanders had the fortune to do. Dutch Scanda∣lous Libel.At length, in Justification of their Proceedings, they put forth a Scandalous Libel, intituled, An Extract out of the Memorials of the States General of the Vnited Provinces, upon the Memorial of Sir George Downing. Envoyè, &c. wherein, they cast many Invective Aspersions upon His Majesty, and put Sir George to the necessity of a Printed Vindication. Dutch DesgnesThe reason of this delay, was to feel the pulses of their Neighbours, and to try what Assistance they could get from them▪ especially France, whither they had posted away Monsieur Benninghen, as was said before; but his Ne∣gotiation did no way answer their expectations: Besides that the Minister of the Crown of Sweden charg'd them in a large Memorial with a direct breach of Articles;The Condition  the Dutch with other Kingdoms. neither would Denmark Meddle with their Cause: The Bishop of Munster threatned 'um for the Eyler Fort: The Emperour sollicited 'um to do Reason to Malta: And Spain Visibly rejoyc'd for their misfor∣tune before Calice. Which, at the latter end of Sixty four, after all their Embassies and Negotiations, was their Condition with Forraign Princes. They were angry with His Majesty of England, for making a Peace with Argier without their Assent; whenas they had given order to De Ruyter, who Commanded the Squadron which was sent to the Assistance of the English, to leave that Enterprize, having designed him to destroy the English Factories in Guiny:De Ruyter Sayls for Gui∣ny. to which purpose, De Ruyter set Sayl from Gibralter about the latter end of September with Thirteen Ships, and Arriving in Guiny, made seizure of all that he found within his reach at Cape Verd, and the Island of Ggee; where the Governour with his men finding himself deserted, made Conditions to be Transported to Gambia. But this was in part retaliated, by the News which came from Captain Allen,Smyrna Fleet Encountr'd by Cap. Allen. who with the Ships under his Command discovering about thirty Dutch-men, which prov'd to be the Smyrna-Fleet, with their Convey, made up to them, and upon their refusing to strike Sayl, gave them a Salute; which they answered. After some Dispute, the Dutch made for the Bay of Cadiz, having lost four of their Richest Merchant-men, and one taken, and divers of the rest very much shatter'd; one of the Captains of their Men of War was kill'd. This Action was the more considerable, in regard that the Sea was so high, that Captain Allen could not bear out his lower Tire. About the seventh of Iune, Sir Thomas Modeford arriv'd at Iamaica with four hundred Passengers;Sir Tho. Mo∣deford Ar∣rives at Iama∣ica. whither he was followed soon after with Three hun∣dred more, where they found themselves very well pleased with the Country, and very much encourag'd to settle themselves, the Governour endeavouring with all diligence to settle a fair Correspondence with his Neighbours both in Sancto Domingo and Cartagena; to which purpose, he call'd in all Private Men of War belonging to the Island. On the 24th of November the Parliament met again, at which time the King in a Speech signified to them, how unkindly he had been treated by his Neighbours▪ yet that he had upon the Stock of his own Credit set forth a Navy that would not decline meeting with all the Naval Power of the Enemy: that he had borrowed very liberally out of his own Stores, and of the City of London; so that to discharge the one, and replenish the other, would require little less than Eight hundred thousand pounds: That he expected from them all necessary Expedition in their Resolutions; and that their Sup∣ply might be Real and Substantial. This was Answered by Sir Edward Turnor, then Speaker, with all Expressi∣ons of Loyalty and Affection to the King; setting forth the deep sence which the Parliament had of the Injuries of the Dutch, of His Majesties Expences, and the necessity of his Warlike Preparations: Assuring Him of their Con∣stancie and readiness to yield him all obedience▪ both with their Bodies and Purses.
To make their words good, they first past a Vote for a Supply of Four and twenty hundred seventy seven thousand and five hundred pounds; a great heart-breaking at that time, and that which shew'd the King would want no hands while he had such large Sums to carry on the War. In a short time, the Prpositions of the several Counties, and the Names of the Commissio∣ners, were agreed upon by both Houses of Parliament. Upon the Eleventh of February following, the King Sign'd the Act, be∣ing Entituled,Act for the Roy∣al Ayd. An Act for granting a Royal Ayd of Twenty four hundred three∣score and seventeen thousand and five hundred pounds. For which, his Majesty return'd his Royal thanks. In the beginning of March following,Parliament Prorogu'd. his Majesty having passed several other Acts presented him by both Houses, and receiv'd their good wishes for the prosperity of his undertakings, delivered in a Speech by the Speaker, Pro∣rogued them till the Twenty first of Iune 1665. A little before the Parliament met,Seamen Encou∣rag'd. His Majesty set forth a Declaration for Encouragement of Marriners and Seamen employ'd in the Service: Allow∣ing all Officers and Seamen after the rate of Ten shillings per Tun, for every lawful Prize; and to take to themselves as free Pillage, whatever they should take on or above the Gun-Deck; with his Royal Promise to provide for the Sick and Wounded, Widows, Children, and Impotent Parents of such as should be Kill'd; with several other advantages mention'd in the said De∣claration: His Majesties Wisdom and Goodness in that, and in all other things, plentifully providing for all Events both of War and Peace. In December following,Reprisals gran∣ted against the Dutch. His Majesty setting forth the Consideration which he had taken of the Injuries, Affronts, and Spoyls done by the Subjects of the Vnited Provinces, to the Ships, Goods, and Persons of His Majesties Su∣jects, notwithstanding many and frequent demands for Redress; by the Ad∣vice of His Privy Councel ordered, That general Reprisals should be granted against the Ships, and Goods, and Subjects of the Vnited Provinces. As this did not a little vex the Dutch, so with greater reason the action of De Ruyter in Guiny did Incense the King of England▪ and therefore in, the beginning of February he put forth a Declaration,Feb. 1664/5 Declaration of War against the Dutch. That the Subjects of His Majesty had sustained several Injuries and Damages from the Subjects of the United Provinces: That he had made Complaint thereof, and frequently de∣manded Satisfaction: That instead of Reparation, they had not only ordered De Ruyter to desert the Consortship against the Pyrats of the Mediterranean Sea, but also to do all acts of Violence and Hostility against His Majesties People in Africa: And that therefore His Majesty did with the Advice of his Privy Coun∣cel, Declare the Dutch the Aggressors; Impowring His Majesties Fleet to Fight and Destroy the Ships of the Netherlanders. This Declaration being a solemn Denuntiation of War, was proclam'd in the beginning of March, at White-hall, Temple-bar, and the Royal-Exchange, with the usual Solemnities. This Declaration charging them to be the Aggressors, stuck heavily in their Stomachs, and they took it into their serious consideration. But instead of answering to so high a Charge, they contented themselves with a second Libel,Another Dutch Libel. which they had publish'd somewhile before; which they call'd [A Summary Observation and Deduction, delivered by the Deputies of the States General, upon the Memorial of Sir George Downing, Envoy Extraordinary of the King of Great Britain.] As lewd a piece, for foulness of Language, and weakness of Defence, as ever came into the light, under pretence of Authority. In the mean while,Dutch Embas∣sies prove fr∣less. their Embassies to Swedeland and Denmark went slowly on; and instead of being befriended by France▪ the Embassador of that Crown is order'd to demand reparations for the loss of two very considerable East-India Ships, taken from the Subjects of that Kingdom. And at the same time, his Electoral Highness renewed his demands of satisfaction from the Governors of Wasel, for the affront offerd to the Son of his Excellencie the Earl of Carlisle,
of which it may not be unseasonable now to give the Relation. Earl of Mor∣peth affronted by the Hollan∣der.The Lord Morpeth, Son of the Earl of Carlisle, travelling from Munster to Collen, found a Toop of Horse drawn up in his way; the Captain whereof coming to the young Lord, told him, he had Orders to carry that Company to Wesel, by a Verbal Order from the Governour▪ which he did, and lodg'd the Company in two Inns. After they had been two days Prisoners, one Hayes, a Gentleman belonging to the Duke of Brandenburghs Council in Cleve, de∣manded the Prisoners in the Dukes name, threatning to seize the Goods of the States Subjects in the Dukes Dominions, in case of refusal. The Governor an∣swer'd, that he was inform'd, they were gathering a Party to fall upon his Gar∣rison; but finding the Information false, he gave them all free liberty to pro∣ceed in their Journey. But the Lord Morpeth and the English not so contented, went to Cleve, and there in the Dukes Court exhibited a Charge against the Governor. Major Holms committed.Not long after, Major Holmes was committed to the Tower, upon several Ac∣cusations laid against him. But when the whole matter came to be strictly en∣quired into and examined,Dischargd. he did so fully clear himself upon every point, that the King was not only pleas'd to discharge, but to honour him with a singular mark of his favour. Forein Mini∣sters complain in Holland.Toward the middle of March, several Memorials were delivered in by the Ministers of France, Portugal, and Swede, complaining of their Ships being detained contrary to the Usage and Practice of their Friends and Allies. To which the States gave little or no satisfaction, only permitted some French Bal∣last-ships to go out. Capt. Allen returns.About the latter end of March, Captain Allen arriv'd in the Downs with a considerable Squadron of his Majesties Fleet, and a Convoy of rich Merchants, together with a rich Prize, one of them that were taken at Cadiz, a lusty Ship, which was afterwards made a man of War, and carried above 40 Guns. Dutch Manu∣factures pro∣hibited.About this time, his Majesty publish'd a Proclamation, prohibiting the Im∣portation or Retailing of any Commodities of the Growth or Manufacture of the States of the United Provinces, occasion'd by a Prohibition on their parts, of the Importing or Vending any Goods or Wares made in any of the Kings Dominions. Peace with Gayland.But while we prepare for War at home, we make Peace abroad. For the English in Tangier had by this made an advantageous Accord with Gayland; the Mors being very ready to agree with them in all Amity and good Corre∣spondence. Sir C▪ Cotterel sent to Brux∣els.Nor was it less pleasing to hear of Sir Charles Cotterels reception at Bruxels; who being sent on his Majesties behalf, to preserve and continue the Ancient A∣mity, had an entertainment sutable to his Quality. If there were any thoughts of Peace among the Hollanders, it was only in shew; for their preparations for War were open and publick: and therefore the King with most indefatigable diligence, journey'd from Port to Port, to ha∣sten out his Fleet, already in great readiness; as also by his presence to incou∣rage the Seamen,English Fleet ready to set sail. that by the 25th of March, ending the Year 1664, the Fleet most magnificently prepar'd with all Provisions necessary, was ready to receive their most renowned Admiral, the Duke of York, who some days before went early in the morning to his Charge,Duke of York goes aboard. attended with divers Eminent and Ho∣nourable Voluntiers: It was a Navy, for number of Ships, and choice of men, such an one, as the Nation never set to Sea one more formidable nor more glo∣rious. This did not a little terrifie the Dutch; besides that some Weeks before, they had been put to a great disorder,English Fleet upon the Dutch Coast. upon the appearance of some part of the English Fleet, under the Earl of Sandwich, which though at a distance, and without any rational appearance of danger, set them into such a confusion, that it fell little short of a general Conseration. Nor were they yet able to come forth, though making all the haste they
could. Nor had they done any thing considerable all the Winter before; only sent Bankert to Sea; which, to what intent soever it was contriv'd, the Designe prov'd ineffectual. For attempting to go about by the North, he met with nothing but the boistrousness of a tempestuous Sea, making a quick return home, and leaving behind him four of his best Ships, unmercifully shatter'd in the storms. And thus, while the English are their Enemies at Sea, they will make use of none of the English friendship by Land;English Offi∣cers cashier'd in Holland. And to that purpose they order a Cas∣sation of the English and Scotch Regiments: only that the Officers might be admitted again, taking an Oath to be faithful to the Lords States General, and to the States of the respective Provinces whom they serv'd. But the English were so Loyal, as to throw up their Commissions, disdaining to serve, upon such monstrous Terms, the profest Enemies of their Prince and Country. Forein Affairs, 1664. That which was most remarkable this Year in Forein parts,Cessation of Arms between the Turk and Emperor. besides what we have already related as they fell in time, that is to say, the two great Victories obtain'd against the Turk by the Emperor, was the Cessation of War that en∣sued thereupon; of great Concernment, not only to those Empires, but to all Christendom; a solemn Peace not long after ensuing. The City of Constantinople was so fatal to the Grand Seignior then reigning,Grand Seig∣nior leaves Constantino∣ple. that he resolv'd to make this Year to be not a little fatal to it, by withdrawing his Court and presence from thence; and that with so much indignation against the Place, that he vow'd he would rather set fire to it with his own hands, than return to it again: whereupon he retired to Adrianople, a place seated fit for his Sports of Hawking and Hunting▪ Divertisements that made him seek Peace rather than War. But the joy of this Cessation was not a little disturb'd by the death of Count Serini;Sireni kill'd. who being upon the chase of a Boar, and seeing the Beast likely to e∣scape, quitted his Company, and follow'd him single; till coming near him, he fired his Pistol at him. The Boar finding himself wounded, furiously rush'd upon the Count, and then with four deadly wounds, the first in the neck, the next in the head, the third in his belly, and the fourth in his foot, tore him up, and dispatch'd him. The French this Year had a mind to get some footing in Barbary, and to that end got possession of a small Sea-port Town or Fort,The French at Gigery. call'd by the name of Gi∣gery. The Moors, to expel them thence, came down with great Forces, and in assailing and defending, great Numbers were slain on both sides. The Moors in one Assault they made upon it this year, lost six hundred men; the Duke of Beaufort being wounded on the French side. In which posture we shall leave them for this Year: Only it is not to be forgotten, that the Great Turk in re∣venge of the Battle of Leweniz, and the surprize of Gigery, caus'd all the French which he found in his Dominions to be put to death. But the Portugals with better success,Portugals Victory. under the Conduct of their General Pedro Iaques de Megalharma, gave battle to the Spaniards under the Duke of Ossuna; whom they utterly overthrew, with the loss of 500 men slain upon the place, 300 Prisoners, and all their Baggage and Provision, which became a Booty to the Conquerour. In Avignon happen'd a very great disturbance,Sedition in Avignon. insomuch that above twenty thousand Burgers gather'd themselves together against the Vice-Legat, having first fallen upon the Garrison, some of whom they threw over the Walls, and put the rest to flight. This Commotion was rais'd, upon a pretence that the Vice-Legat went about to impose something upon them, against the Liberty of the Inhabitants. But ot length, by mediation of their Archbishop, they were brought to terms of accommodation, upon condition that the Italian Garrison
should depart the Town and Country, and the Italian Provost with his Offi∣cers be banisht for ever out of their Territories. The Pope took very ill the proceedings of the Vice-Legat. But for better security, Monsieur de Merceur was appointed to do his best in conjunction with the Forces of the Neighbour∣hood, either by fair means or by foul to bring them to reason. At length a composure was made between the Pope and the King of France, and Avignon was restor'd into the possession of the Romish See, upon Conditions which will be hereafter mentioned. Lisle killd.In August came news from Losanna, that certain Irish-men having Intelli∣gence that a knot of the Murtherers of the late King were gotten together in that place, and there entertain'd and protected by the Magistracie of the Town, enter'd into a Consultation how they might seize and carry some of those Regi∣cides off, and deliver them up to the Justice of that Government which they had so hainously betrai'd. The Persons nam'd to be of the Gang, were Goff, Ludlow, Lisle, Whally, and Fare; whereupon, in the disguize of Lacqueys, they attempted them, as they were going to Church, under the very Guards of the Town, and accompani'd with the Magistrates, Bayliffs, and Burgomasters of the place: But finding it impossible to bring any of them off alive, they fell in particular upon Lisle, as one whom they knew to have been the Condemner of several of the Kings best and most Loyal Subjects, whom they shot dead up∣on the spot. After the act was done, they were forc'd to encounter the Guards, and several other people, who engag'd themselves on the behalf of the Rebels; wherein they acquitted themselves to a Miracle, wounding divers; and having broke through them, they cri'd with a loud voice, Vive le Roy d'Angleterre, and so ode quite away. Anno Dom. 1665. April 1655. English Fleet at Sea.THe Duke of York was now aboard, the English Fleet, well man'd, and in brave order, and furnish'd with all things necessary, and answerable to the indefatigable care and diligence of so great a Monarch, and the free expences of his large Dominions. The Dutch neither ready, nor likely to come forth, as in the event it prov'd; so that among them there was nothing memorable, but the bustle of Council, and hurry of unfinish'd preparations. French Em∣bassador expo∣stulates with the Dutch.The first Alarm they had was from the French Embassador, who began to deal roundly with 'um, and to insist upon the very Letter of a late Treaty for the restitution of two French East-India Ships, which had been so long and of∣ten demanded. The Dutch offer'd certain small Vessels, which they pretended would do the French business as well. Embargo in France upon the Dutch.Hereupon a general Embargo was order'd by the King of France upon all their Merchants Vessels, till the Dutch made satisfaction for the two Ships: for though the Netherlanders had the confidence to with-hold 'um, yet the King of France had effectually paid for 'um; so that at length they were forc'd, not on∣ly to part with the Ships, but the Lading to boo. Embargo in Holland upon the English.In the mean while they enlarg'd their Embargo upon the English, and not only made a Prohibition of Trade with England, but also provided that none of the Subjects of that State should ensure any Goods belonging to the Subjects of the King of England: And all Newters were forbid to carry Counterband-goods to the Dominions of his Majesty. The Reason why the States were so backward with the Fleet, was most certainly the aversness of the people, whom it cost the States not a little cunning to make tractable to their purposes. To which intent,Dutch endea∣vour to amuse the Common people. they insinuated into the ears and minds of the people, That the King of England was not in a condition to set out a Fleet; which they not only found to be otherwise, but also purely done upon the stock of his own proper
Authority and Credit. When they saw that brought to pass, the next thing they flatter'd the people withal, was, that though the King had strain'd himself to bring a Fleet to Sea, yet that the Parliament would never supply him with a sum of Mony answerable to the Charge of so expensive a War. Finding them∣selves deluded therein also, by their Act for the Royal Aid; the next suggestion was, that the people would never submit to pay it. But the voluntary Present made to his Majesty by the City of London, soon clear'd that mistake. To these they added, that they should find friends in England, together with great Aid and Support from Forein Princes; wherein they found themselves at length to∣tally disappointed. Among the rest of their disappointments, the King of Denmark's calling in all his Seamen out of Forein Service, was not the least; for thereby they were dis∣furnished of many able Sea-men, which otherwise they might have had for their Mony. This Month also arriv'd at London,French Em∣bassadors to England. the Duke of Verneuil, and Monsieur Cour∣tin, from the King of France; and from the King of Spain, the Conde de Moli∣na. The two former had their Audience within three days after their Entry, which was very magnificent. They were sent upon Mediation and Compo∣sure; the event whereof the Dutch did much depend upon, and extremely hearken after. Nor were the Dutch a little active,Dutch Libel against the English. in hopes to deceive Forein Princes, in Printing and publishing Libels, to the scandal and defamation of the English Nation. Among others, the most remarkable of their Papers were, the Re∣marks of the Deputies of the States General, upon the Memorial of Sir George Downing, Envoy Extraordinary, &c. A Discourse full of irreverence and false∣hood, of which the world was sufficiently convinc'd, when they read the Re∣ply of Sir George Downing thereto. In the next place,Valkenburghs Letter. they Printed a pretended Letter from one Valkenburgh, Di∣rector-General of Guinee to the States, feigning how that at Adia, the English after they had given quarter, with rusty Knives cut off the Noses of those whom they had taken alive, and exercised many other strange Amboyna-cruel∣ties upon the Hollanders in these parts. Therefore, that so great a scandal might appear the more notorious, there was publish'd an Account of the Guinee-Transactions. In brief, That Captain Robert Holmes,Guinee Rela∣tion. who was Commanded for the Coast of Guinee, in October 1663, coming thither, all people complain'd how ll the Dutch had treated the English, how they had engag'd the King of Barra to assault the En∣glish Factories; which Designe failing, how they had endeavour'd to corrupt the Officers of the Charles and Iames Islands, to deliver up their Forts. How they had counterfeited the King of England's Signe-Manual and Signet, to coun∣tenance their Entry into the River, had they not been frustrated by the notice which the King of Barra gave of the whole Designe. After this, Captain Holmes, for the better security of some English Ships dai∣ly expected, sailed to Cabo Verde, fearing one Iohnson, that was said to lie in the way; where without any provocation, they ired from the Fort, killing his Ma∣ster, and wounding divers of the Company; notwithstanding all which, the Governour surrendring the place next morning, he and all his Company were treated with all possible respect and civility by the Captain. At Sestos they had been dealing with the King of that place to throw out the English, inveigling the people abroad, and then abusing them under English Co∣lours, the better to attain their ends. The like was done upon the Coast of Castle de Mina, where Valckenburgh of∣fer'd a Bendy of Gold for every English head. At another time they shot at a Convoy of Capt. Holmes from a Fort of theirs; which so enrag'd the Moors, that they fell upon the Fort, and took it, and would have put all the Hollanders to the Sword, had not the Captain prevented them.
Lastly, Captain Holmes having sent a Drum to Ariamaboa, with Honorable Proposals; contrary to the Rule of War, they mangled, stript, and left him dead upon the place. Which Account being so far from the Accusations of Valckenburgh, gave no small satisfaction to the world; so that they lost their aim among all just and sober Persons. Dutch ill trea∣ted in Russia.But now the Netherlanders finding how little they could boast of their Alli∣ances near home, they made great Brags of the kindness shewn their Embassador at a distance by the Emperor of Russia, though by his reception no such thing appear'd; for as for his Present, which was of silver Plate, it was so misera∣bly thin, that it would scarce endure the carrying: His allowance was very or∣dinary; and the person appointed to attend him as Master of the Ceremonies, was only a Merchant and Alderman of the City, who having at a drinking Bout began the Prince of Orange's health before that of the States General, rais'd a very great Dispute; so that upon the whole, his Entertainment seem'd rather a matter of State and Custom, than of kindness. General Fast.In England was observ'd a general Fast, with a reverence befitting the So∣lemnity of the occasion; both Queens did most affectionately concern them∣selves therein, by express and particular Appointment commanding all their Servants to set themselves apart with more than ordinary Devotion for the Ser∣vice of the Day. Ships taken by the English.This was answer'd with the happy Omens of future Victory, from the fair success of small Enterprises. For not long after, were taken three men of War. The first a Caper of seven Guns, and 47 men. The other were Direction-Ships; the one of 32 Guns, and 80 men, taken by the Diamond; the other of 22 Guns, and 60 men, taken by the Yarmouth. They all made stout resi∣stance, till being upon the point of boarding, they cri'd for Quarter. Captain Golding in the Diamond, a brave Officer, was slain. One of the Direction-Ships was Commanded by young Evertse,Everts taken. whom the Duke treated with much courtesie. And a little while after being brought to attend his Majesty, He in consideration of respects formerly receiv'd from the Father of the young Cap∣tain, was generously pleas'd not only to give him his liberty,Dismiss'd. but to order him a hundred Pounds sterling, in testimony of his Royal Goodness and Bounty. Order and Di∣scipline of the English Fleet.Nor will it be here superfluous, while Action ceases, to speak of the extra∣ordinary Government and Discipline then in the Fleet. For upon a Complaint made to the Admiral, a Court Marshal was call'd aboard the Royal Charles. The matter in Question was, concerning some abuses done to a Swede by some of the Company of the Kent, and other injuries to a French Vessel by the Guern∣sey. The Offences were striking, wounding, pillaging and plundering. Three of them being found Guilty, had their fingers burnt with Matches, and one of them his head woolded with a cord. Three also belonging to the Guernsey-Frigat were sentenc'd; one to be whipt, and to receive three stripes by the side of every Rear-Admiral, five by the side of every Vice-Admiral, and seven by the side of every Admiral. The second to lie in Irons 48 hours; the third, being the Master, was Cashier'd without his Ticket. Two Dutch East-India Ships taken.In reward of so much Justice, suddenly came News that two East-India Ships, coming about by the North of Scotland, had stranded themselves upon a Bank near Orkney, and were secur'd. Duke of York makes for the Coast of Hol∣land.About this time, the Duke impatient of the Hollanders stay, resolv'd to give 'um a visit upon their own Coasts; and accordingly with 114 Sail made for the Texel, within five Leagues whereof he came to an Achor; some of the Fleet ventring within two Leagues of the shore; where the Duke took a full view of the Dutch Ships. Some few days after, they shew'd themselves just before the mouth of the Harbor, to the great amazement of the People ashore. Nor did the English forsake their Stations for a fair season, being now increased to 120 Sail; which made the Hollanders erect Beacons all along the Coast of Holland, from the Texel to the Maes, to give notice upon any attempt of landing.
The Duke staid longer than he intended, partly in expectation of draw∣ing the Dutch to an Engagement; partly, by reason of cross Winds, and ha∣zie Weather. Among many Foggs, there happen'd one in a happy hour for the Hollander; For the Duke having commanded Three Frigats out of his own Squadron, and Four out of the White and Blew, to try if they could meet with any Holland Merchant-men returning toward the Vly,Several Hol∣land Merchant-Men taken. the Fogge was so great, that only the three first could Sail. Had not this Fogg prevented, the whole Fleet had fallen into the Hands of the English. However, ten Sail were taken, laden with Wine and Brandy; only one West-India Ship of good Value, another from Lisbon, and the last an English Vessel taken by them before in the Soundings: there were afterwards at times fifteen or sixteen more taken, and Eight or Nine run aground: which was the fatal account the Hollanders had of their Burdeaux Fleet this Year. Nor was this all their loss at this time,Smyrna Ships sunk. for that before was followed by another, near the Coast of Lisbon, where five English Frigats encountering three Holland Men of War, and three rich Smyrna Ships, sunk two of the Mer∣chant-Men, and ran the third aground: The Dutch Men of War seeing themselves no longer able to maintain the Fight, blew themselves up. While Opdam is preparing to get out,Lord Bellasis Governour of Tangier. we may be at leisure to take a view of Tangier; at which place the Lord Bellasis, newly made Governour, safely Arriv'd toward the beginning of April: He was no sooner entred at one end of the Town, but the Moors shewed themselves at a distance upon the other,The Moors shew themselves without Effect. but without making any attempt; and indeed Gayland soon understanding the Courage and Bravery of the New Governour, though importun'd by the Dutch with Assurance of their Conduct, not only abstain'd from any further acts of Hostility, but by his own Letters signifi'd to the Governour his extraordinary desire of Peace. Toward the beginning of May,English Mer∣chants return safe home. the Prizes brought in under the Dukes Flag, were all safely lodg'd in Port; and not only so, but this no unwelcome News was accompanied with most happy tidings of the return of divers rich Fleets of our own; not only acceptable to their Owners, but seasonable for the Publique. About this time came News of De Ruyters design upon the Barbadoes;De Ruyter at∣tempts the Bar∣badoes. and that with such a force, that had it been equal to the report, it might have put that Island into some danger. But by the care and Prudence of Col. Henry Willoughby the Deputy-Governour in the absence of the Lord Willoughby, the Island was forthwith put into a posture to receive him: which when De Ruyter found, after an Attacque upon Nedham-Point, which lasted about four hours, he departed as he came, without doing any thing of hurt; having by this Alarm only waken'd the Courage of the Inhabitants. But the Attempt upon the Governour himself had like to have proved more fatal:Lord Wil∣loughby woun∣ded by Allen. for one Iohn Allen having taken a determinate Resolution to destroy the Governour, took his Opportunity as my Lord was at Evening-Prayer, and entring just as the Chaplain was reading, And Io smote Abner under the fifth Rib, unknown and unsuspected, he made a blow with a Cut∣lass provided for that purpose, at the Governours head's seconding that blow with another, which the Governour received on his hand, with the loss of two of his Fingers; and another wound on his Head some what dangerous. Up∣on the second blow, Allen was laid hold on, who then thrust the Weapon in∣to his own Body to have kill'd himself▪ but that failing,  at length Poyson'd himself. His dead Body was handled very ignominiously, and his Head and Quarters set up in the most Eminent parts of the Plantation. But now the Dutch,Duch at Sea. finding their Embassadours not able to effect any thing either in Sweden or Denmark, (where they met with a very cold, though Ceremonious Entertainment) began to shew their own strength; their Navy at length appearing upon the Ocean in all its splendor, divided into seven Squadrons:Their Numbers. Under Opda fourteen Men of War and two Fire∣ships;
under Iohn Evertse fourteen Men of War, and Two Fireships; under Cortenaer Fifteen Men of War and one Fireship; under Stillingwers, Fourteen Men of War, and one Fireship; under Tromp Sixteen, and one Fireship; un∣der Cornelius Evertse, Fourteen, and one Fireship; under Schram Sixteen, and two Fireships; besides Yachts and Galliots belonging to each Division: in all, One hundred and three Men of War, Eleven Fireships, and Seven Yachts. Captain Nixon Executed.The Duke all this while kept the Fleet in most excellent Order; and, which was more, under so strict a Discipline, that Captain Nixon, Commander of the Elizabeth, for letting two Capers escape which he had encountred in the Sound∣ings, and a Common Souldier for Seditious and Mutinous words, were both Executed; that as no encouragement should be wanting to them that behav'd themselves honourably, so no unhandsome Action should go unpunish'd. June 1664. Parl. Prorogud.In the mean time, the Parliament that was to have sate the Twenty first of Iune, was by his Majesty again Prorogued by Proclamation, for sundry weighty Reasons, till further time. A Curiosity.It will not be here amiss, for variety sake, to mention a Curiosity discovered at a place call'd Bald Bathford, three miles from Bath; where was found a Mo∣nument very admirable, both for its Antiquity, Form and Structure: from the top, three or four Foot deep, it was ourteen foot long, and sixteen foot broad, made of stones of several Colours, as Blew, Red, Murray and White, de∣licately cut, not above an Inch broad; curiously set, and strongly Cemented: the Floor was very delightful to behold: Round about it were plac'd di∣vers Figures; and in the midst, a Bird standing on a Sprig. It is thought to have been a convenience for water. A Work of great cost and labour, and which shew'd the excellency of much lost Art. A Loss.But we must now return to feats of War again, where we find our selves at first to have received some loss, as well as all honour and Victory: And this happen'd by reason of the miscarriage of the Hamborough-Fleet. True it is, that a Convoy was desired of the Duke, then lying before the Texel; and as true it was, that a Convoy was dispatch'd, but with Instructions to hasten the Ships away within ten days, and caution not to venture after that: yet they after the Ten days were over, venturing against Orders to Sea, fell into the Enemies hands, who upon our removal from the Dutch Coast, had upon Notice sent out to Attaque them; which was the more easily done, by reason that the Roe-Ketch, ordered to give them advice of the Dukes removal, mist of finding them; they being gone out of the Road before the Ketch could arrive there. Nor was this the first Disaster, for the Diamond had been thus lost before, upon the Coast of Italy, and carried into Villa Franca, and there made Prize. The Duke of York Ingaging the Dutch Fleet gain'd a very cal Victory.But for these Losses, that Noble and Signal Victory which ensu'd, made a most Ample Satisfaction: For upon the third of Iune both Fleets met, between which, there followed a most sharp and fierce Encounter; in which, with the loss only of one Ship, nam'd the Charity, a Vessel formerly taken from the Enemy, were taken Eighteen very considerable Ships, and good Men of War, as the Chancellour gave an account in his Speech at the following Sessions of Parliament; funk and fid Ten more of the biggest the Dutch had, carrying between them Five hundred and forty Guns, besides four Fireships to∣tally destroy'd. Opdam's Ship, carrying Eighty four Guns, was with himself, and all his Men, to the number of Five hundred, blown up▪ in the heat of the Fight. Captain Smith in the Mary Boarded a Zealander of Seventy six Guns, and Four hundred Men, which  Opdam's Ship was blown up, came to have grappled with the Duke: The Zealander was torn in pieces, and the Cap∣tain taken, but soon after dy'd of his Wounds. Two Thousand sixty three Prisoners were brought into Colehester, of which Thirteen Commanders. In sum, it was Computed, that they los ten for one; among the rest were aid to be
blown up in Opdam's ship certain of the French Nation of no small quality; though some of ours were persons of greater Note, as the Earl of Falmouth, Lord Muskerry, and Mr. Boyle, who fell all three by one Cannon-shot, so near the Person of the Duke, that he was besprinkled with their Blood: besides them, the Earls of Portland and Marleborough, Rear-Admiral Sanson, and Sir Iohn Lawson as good as kill'd, for he dy'd of his Wounds: as great a loss as any. Nor was it without Reason, that Fate fell so severe upon these per∣sons, seeing that the whole burthen of the encounter lay upon Thirty only of the Kings Ships. After this great Action, the chief business of the Fleet was, to prepare for more. But the ill success of this Fight, caus'd many disorders and complaints among the People in Holland; for appearing whereof, the States took a strange way, to Revenge themselves upon their own Officers; many of whom they tax'd either of Cowardice, or ill Management; and question'd for their Lives. Three of their Captains were Executed at the Hel∣der; Two more were ordered to have their Swords broken over their Heads; and the Master to Vice-Admiral Cortinaer, to stand upon a Scaffold with a Halter about his Neck. But this success in War was somewhat allay'd by the heat of the approach∣ing Sickness,July 1665. The Sickness. which now grew hot in London and the Suburbs. The Queen-Mother therefore returns for France,Queen Mother returns for France. being attended to the Kentish-Coast, in the Katharine Yacht, by the King, together with his Royal Highness, Prince Rupert, the Duke of Monmouth, and others: between whom, after all Solemnities of taking leave had pass'd, the King leaves his Mother to pursue her Journey into France. Afterwards he went aboard the Royal Charles, in the Boy of the Nore; where he bestow'd the Honour of Knighthood upon several Captains that had behav'd themselves valiantly in the late Fight, as Rear-Admiral Tiddeman, Captain Cuttins, Captain Iordan, and Captain Sprage; af∣ter which, he visited most of the Flag-ships, giving all necessary directions for the dispatch of the Fleet, and so return'd by water to Greenwich; and from thence by Coach to Hampton-Court, from whence in a short while he remov'd afterwards to Salisbury; but the Distemper there increasing, he retired to Ox∣ford,The King at Oxford. where he remain'd a considerable time. The Seat of the Muses, now the Palace of the British Monarch, proving so happy a Receptacle, that all the Concourse of People to a Kings Court, to a Parliament, and to a Term, prov'd no way prejudicial to the health and safety of the Place. However,Duke of Albe∣marle stays in London. for the security of his Chief City, the King, that he might not absolutely be said to withdraw his Beams from her Disconsolate Walls, left them to the Charge and particular care of the Duke of Albemarle; who in all the heat of the Distemper continu'd at White-Hall, with a Courage equal to his Dignity. And for the better preventing of Tumults,Disaffected Of¦ficers order'd to depart the City. a Proclamation was Published, Requiring all Disbanded Officers and Souldiers who had serv'd in the Armies of any of the late Vsurped Powers, to depart the Cities of London and Westmin∣ster, and not to return within Twenty Miles of the same, till November fol∣lowing. And now his Majesties Fleet,English Fleet Rendezvouse. the damages of those Ships which were dam∣nified in the late Fight being repair'd, and several of the Dutch Prizes being fitted for Service, began to Embody again; so that upon the fifth of this Month about 60 Sail weigh'd away from Southwold-Bay, to the Coast of Hol∣land: the Standard was born by the Earl of Sandwich; to him Sir George Ascue Vice-Admiral, Sir Thomas Tyddeman Rear-Admiral. Sr. William Pen was Admiral of the White; to him Sir William Barkley Vice-Admiral, Sir Ioseph Iordan Rear-Admiral. The Blew Flag was carried by Sir Thomas Allen; and his Flag-Officers were, Sir Christopher Mimms, and Captain Harman. The Alarm of the English being out,Bankert re∣turns. as was the common Opinion, brought back Bankers, sooner then he intended; who having been three weeks at Sea
with an inconsiderable Squadron, returned into Harbour. It was expected he should have brought De Ruyter along with him; but as yet there was no News, neither of him, nor of the East-India Fleet. Other Designe of his could not be imagin'd, seeing that it appear'd that he had no intention to go further than he did; or that he had any likelihood of doing good where he had his Station, unless the States might think it worth their while to put on a miserable Countenance of keeping the Sea, while the English were in Harbour: All the Exployt he did, was the taking of Four or five Ships belonging to Nor∣way, which the Dutch had the confidence to keep. De Ruyter Sails for New∣found-Land.De Ruyter, as his Voyage was longer, and his Force more considerable, so did he do more mischief, not without some marks of Dutch Inhumanity; for after he had been beaten from the Barbadoes, he arriv'd at St. Iohns in New∣found-land with 17 Dutch Men of War, where he took the Diamond of Pli∣mouth, and the Vnity of Dartmouth, stripping the People Naked as they were born, and leaving them without any sort of Provision. At Bay Bulls Har∣bour they took Two Ships more: In Pitts Harbour three other ships, using the Men with the same rigour they had done the former: and yet after all, they would have been dealing with the Seamen, whom they tempted with great promises of reward, if they would serve the States; but they bravely and unanimously refused. For which they might have pleaded the extravagant License of War, had they not treated the Women in a most Barbarous and Beastly manner, without favour or distinction. He took away all the Cattle from the Planters, and Eight Guns from off the Land: however, he restor'd three ships of the seven which he had taken, to bring home the Seamen, which were in all 120. The Stroaker.About this time, seeing that leisure from business will permit the Relation, the Fame of Greatrates the Stroaker fill'd the Mouthes of all People, both in City and Country. A Novelty not unfit to be mention'd, seeing that at that time many wise men were affected with it. They that knew him, reported him for a Civil, Frank, and well-Humour'd Man, Conformable to the Discipline of the Church; born in Munster, of En∣glish Extraction; and sometimes a Lieutenant in Colonel Farr's Regiment: he was Master of a Competent Estate, and perform'd strange Cures by Stroak∣ing, or Touching, for which he took neither Mony nor Presents. That which first created the Wonder, was, That he passed without Contradiction; and that such Multitudes followed him, as only they could believe who saw them. He was said to admire himself the Gift which he had: had he stay'd among the ignorant Irish, his Fame might have continued longer; but the Infidelity of the English made him often fail in his Divinitie; and his Reputation once blemish'd, his Healing Mystery soon vanish'd. Casualty in Norfolk.This Wonder having made its exit, behold another of another Nature, A Prodigie that made work for the Stroaker; he Cur'd, but this Kill'd and Wounded: for in the Parish of Erpingham in the County of Norfolk, there arose a very great Storm; in the midst of which, as the People were at Church, there Descended among them the appearance of a great Ball, which as it was suppos'd, beat down the South-East corner of the Steeple; for at that instant that it fell, it carried along with it the South-Porch: being come in∣to the Church, it turn'd upon the South-side where the Men sate; passing to the Chancel it brake, and then the whole Church seem'd to be of a light Fire: it left a great smoke and stench behind it: and in conclusion, there was one Man found stark dead, and many others were wounded, who for some time so continued. But upon this, and several other Mischiefs done in the same County by Lightning and Tempest, we leave it to others to make their descants. A General FastBut the Pestilence increasing, the King commanded a Proclamation for a General Fast throughout the Realm of England, to the end, That Prayers and Supplications might be every where made for the Removal of so heavy a Iudg∣ment:
And that the Day might be observ'd with order and decency requisite, the King, with advice of the Bishops, directed such a Form of Prayer as was thought most meet for the Service not only of that day, but of all the succeed∣ing Wednesdays in the Week, during the Contagion. Collections also were ordered to be made, for the relief of the sick and needy in so great a Ca∣lamity. Toward the latter end of Iuly, the King went to Portsmouth,King goes to Portsmouth, where with much satisfaction he view'd his Naval Stores and Preparations. He also or∣der'd Pesthouses to be Erected, that if the worst should happen, there might be seasonable relief and remedy for the sick. And to prevent Casualties by Fire, he Commanded several Thatch'd Houses to be otherwise cover'd. From thence he sail'd over in his Pleasure-boat to the Isle of Wight,to the Isle of Wight, and re∣turns for Salls∣bury. where he took a view of the Castles and Train'd Bands of the Island; and so returning, took Horse for Salisbury. The Parliament should have met about this time;Parl. Prorogu'd but by reason of the Sick∣ness, it was Prorogu'd till the Third of October following. In the mean while, long look'd-for De Ruyter Arrives in the Western Emms:De Ruyter re∣turns into Hol∣land, but the Purchase which he brought with him, was only Five English Prises, Three Laden with Sugar, the other Two Emptie. His own Ships were miserably torn and out of order; and therefore knowing the danger he was in, he passed by Fero, Shetland, and so over to Bergen, and then crept along the Coast of Norway and Denmark: however, upon his coming home he was made Admiral of the Dutch Fleet,and is made Admiral. so soon as it could be got ready to set Sail. This they were Eye-witnesses of; but of their ill success at farther distance, they had Intelligence by another hand; for by Letters to the General of the Iesuits in Rome, from certain of the same Order in China, news came, that upon their endeavours to retake the Island of Formosa on the backside of Chi∣na,Dutch loss in China. they had been put to the worst, with the loss of two Fleets, one of 17, the other of 18 Sail; together with Tydings of their being driven out of Macasser, Ternate, and Amboyna, by the Natives: which was the rather be∣liev'd, by reason of the exact Correspondence which the Roman Society of Iesu∣its holds with those parts. But though De Ruyter carry'd the Flag, he did not Command in Chief, but under the Triumvirate of De Witt, Huygens, and Boreel, who according to a new Model, had now the Superintendencie over the Naval Affairs. And now the Bishop of Munster's Drums sound in their Ears,Bishop of Mun∣ster threatens Holland. almost as terrible as the English Cannon; besides that his Army began to grow very nu∣merous. This made the States order a Flying-Army to the Frontiers, though with small satisfaction to the Inhabitants, who daily fled to the Fortifi'd Towns for their Security. In the mean while,August. the English Fleet lay in Three Squadrons from Brookness to Hitland, and so to Norway; which made the Dutch very earnest to put to Sea; but one while the Water, another time the Wind would not permit it. The Earl of Sandwich being thus abroad, upon Notice of 50 Hollanders be∣ing sheltred in Berghen, sent a Squadron of 22 Men of War, under the Com∣mand of Sir Thomas Tyddeman,Dutch Assayl'd by Tyddeman in Bergen. with Orders to Sail directly for Berghen, and there to Attacque and Fire the Hollanders; which Enterprize had prov'd ve∣ry fatal to the Dutch, had not the Wind and the Dane himself very much be∣friended the Dutch, and given them liberty to Plant their Guns ashore against the English. However, they receiv'd very great Loss, in the disabling many of the most considerable Ships then in the Harbour. But soon after, the Earl of Sandwich himself met with a Convoy of the Dutch, with several Merchants, and some East-India Men in his Company,East-Indie Ships taken Sept. 4. where though the storminess of the Weather did much favour the Dutch; yet he took above 8 good Men of War, two of their best East-India Ships; and 20 Sail of their Merchant-Men.
Some few daies after, some of his Majesties Fleet encountring with 18 sail of Hollanders, took the greatest part of them, whereof four Dutch Men of War, with above a thousand Prisoners. Parliament sits in the Schools at Oxford, Octob. 10.Upon the 10th of October the Parliament met at Christ-Church in Oxford, the Schools being fitted for their reception, where his Majesty delivered himself to this effect. His Majesty's Speech.That they might confidently believe, that had it not been absolutely necessary to consult with them, he would not have called them together, when the Contagion had spread it self over so many parts of the Kingdom. That he had entred upon the Dutch War by their advice and encouragement, and that therefore he desir'd they might receive information of the Conduct and Ef∣fects of it, to the end be might have the continuance of their chearful supply. That it prov'd more chargeable than he could imagine it would have been. That the addition which the Dutch made to their Fleets, made it unavoidably necessary for him to make a proportional preparation. That as the Dutch endeavour'd by false suggestions to make themselves friends, so he had not been wanting to encourage those Princes that had been wrong'd by the Dutch, to recover their own by force; to which end he had assisted the Bishop of Mun∣ster with a considerable sum of Money. That these were the Reasons that his Supply was upon the matter neer spent. How∣ever, That he made not War for Wars sake, but was ready to receive all fair Propositions; but that the Dutch were no less Insolent than ever, though they had no advantage that he knew of. Upon this the Lord-Chancellor Hide enlarged, observing from point to point the whole process of Affairs, from the time of his Majesties Restauration, to this instant. That notwithstanding the affronts upon the Royal Family in Holland during the Usurpation, His Majesty was pleased to Embark himself in one of their Ports, though prest by the two Neighbour-Kings to have taken his passage through their Territories. That being returned, the King was forc'd to support himself upon Credit, till the Armies were disbanded, and the Fleet paid off; which Debt was height∣ned by the supplies of his Majesties Stores, so exhausted at that time, that there was not Arms for 5000 men, not Provisions for the setting out ten new ships. That his Majesty replenish'd his Stores, reduc'd the expence of his Navy, pro∣viding only a necessary Guard for the Narrow Sas, and a Fleet against the Py∣rates, which had brought them to submission. Then he repeated the several Insolencies and unkindenesses committed by the Dutch. The King's application to the Parliament. The Parliaments humble desires of Redress. The States preparations for War: And the whole Series of the War, and its Success until that time. Then reflecting upon the greatness and necessity of the King's disbursments, he concluded. The Commons Answer.In answer whereof, the House of Commons returned their Thanks to his Majesty for his care and Conduct, for the preservation of his People, and Ho∣nour of the Nation; declaring withal, that they would assist him with their Lives and Fortunes. They returned him also Thanks for his care of his Brother the Duke of York. Then they gave the King an additional Supply of 1250000 l. by Monethly Assesment. They gave him also a Present of a Moneths Tax, to come in the Rear, after the expiration of the Monethly Aid; which they desired his Majesty would bestow upon his Royal Highness. They also passed a Bill of Attainder of certain English Fugitives who had joyned with the Dutch.
Also a Bill for suppression of Nonconformists; which with some other Bills being signed by his Majesty,Parliament Prorogu'd. they were Prorogu'd till the 20th of February fol∣lowing at Westminster. On the last of their Sessions, the House of Commons considering that they sate in the Convocation-House, and remembring the Fidelity and Loyalty of the University, Voted,Thanks of the House given to the University. that the Thanks of the House should be given to the Chancellor, Masters, and Scholars, for their eminent Loyalty to his Majesty, and his Father of blessed Memory, during the Rebellion; particularly, for refusing to be visited by the Usurped powers, and to subscribe the Solemn League and Covenant; and for these Excellent Reasons they publish'd to the World to justi∣fie his Majesties Cause. Mr. L. Hide, Sir Heneage Finch, Sir Iohn Birkenhead, and Colonel Strang∣ways, were ordered to present these their Thanks to the University; which was accordingly done in a full Convocation, within the same Walls where the Vote past. After this, Sir Heneage Finch and Colonel Strangways were made Doctors of Laws by Dr. Ienkins Principal of Iesus Colledge. Mr. Hide and Sir Iohn Berkenhead having received their respective Degrees before. Soon after, the Duke of Ormond,Duke of Or∣mond returns into Ireland. Lord-Lieutenant of Ireland was remanded back into that Kingdom, where in a short time he arrived at Dublin, and was received into the City with great splendor and Magnificence. This Moneth the several Courts of Justice sate in the Schools at Oxford,November, 1665. Term at Oxford. being Michaelmas-Term, where Sir Iohn Keeling was made Lord Chief-Jusice of the King's-Bench, and Sir William Morton one of the Judges of the same Court, in the place of Sir Wadham Windham deceased. The next Term (being Hillary) was from thence adjourn'd to Windsor, and from thence to Westmin∣ster, where they sate February the ninth. But among actions of lesser note at Sea, the courage of Captain Howard deserves remembrance,Captain How∣ard's Valour. who now commanding one of the King's ships, render'd himself as signally faithful to his Sovereign, as to his Owners: who having cer∣tain Victuallers and other Merchant-men under his Convoy, as he passed by the Bay of Cadiz, five Dutch Men of War,against the Dutch. then under sail before the Bay, ha∣ving notice thereof, being Vessels of 43, 40, and 36 Guns apiece, had immedi∣ately fetch'd up the Merchant-men; but the Captain so behav'd himself with his Merlin, a Frigat of 12 Guns only, that the whole English Fleet had time to escape into the Bay of Tangier; and by and by perceiving the headmost of the Dutch ships of 45 Guns, who had done him most mischief, to be making after the Fleet to their inevitable Ruine, he frankly ran himself aboard the Dutch-man, where he fought above an hour board and board, till being himself dangerously woun∣ded, and all his Men dead, or desperately wounded, save eight, he was at length compell'd to yield, and carried into Cadiz. But to return neerer home, to the Grand Affairs betwixt England and Hol∣land, we finde the Netherlanders in no small perplexity.Dutch Embas∣sador recall'd out of England. The King's Let∣ter to the Dutch. They had now recal∣led their Embassador Van Gotch out of England, who took his leave of the King at Oxford: by him the King sends a Letter to the States; wherein, though he could not but charge them as the Authors of the War, yet he signified to them his readiness to come to any fair terms of Accommodation: nor could this Letter be so stifled by the contrary Faction, but that the People got a view of it; by which when they saw the disposition of the King of England, they were not a little enrag'd at the Province of Holland, who had so much endea∣vour'd to keep them in ignorance, and made them more pliant to yield to those Alterations that not long after followed. Munster so bestirs himself all the Winter,Munster a∣ctive against the Dutch. that he allows no time for rest, but upon Thaws and milde Weather; so that he defeated several considerable par∣ties of the Dutch, and advanced not a little way into their Country of Friez∣land, burning and spoiling some, and taking other of their Towns; whilst Prince Maurice with 18000 men is forc'd to look on, without being able to at∣tempt
any thing of moment.King of France supplies the Dutch. Their chief Assistants were the King of France and Dukes of Lunenburg. As for the first▪ he sent them a Supply of men; but they brought along with them so much Rudeness, and such Diseases into the Country, that the Dutch were soon weary of their company; for they were forc'd to quarter 'am in the Brandenburgher's Country, which did them no good. The theats of Waldeck, and the conjunction of the Confederate-For∣ces, did them as little kindness, only it caus'd the Bishop to retire with his main Body out of Friezland, leaving a sufficient strength in Garrisons; for he had destroyed already 900 Horse in one place,Munster's Suc∣cess in Holland. 200 Foot in another▪ he had defeated two Troops of their Horse, and 500 Foot in another place, and 400 Foot that had repossessed themselves of Vriesveen, forcing them to render them∣selves; and had now Garrisoned his Foot in his new Conquests, and withdrawn his Horse into his own Country.Lunenburg excuses himself to the King of England. The Dukes of Lunenburg grew cold in their assistance, and sent to excuse themselves to the King of England, for what they had done, as being ignorant of the Grounds and Causes of the Bishop's taking Arms. The Brandenburgher offer'd a Mediation with the Bishop, but with much delay. Their main hopes was in the King of France, who believing the Ballance of Affairs not even enough yet, (and 'tis thought rather acting as he did out of an affectation of Sovereignty in the Mediterranean-Sea) not only conti∣nues their friend, but declares War against England,French King declares war against Eng∣land. acquainting the Queen-Mother of England, that though he could no longer keep off a Declaration of War against his Majesty of Great Britain, yet that he should always preserve the same esteem and value for his Majesty's Person, hoping his Majesty would continue the same kindness and affection for him. January 1665.Accordingly, upon the 27th of Ianuary the French King's Declaration of War was publickly proclaim'd, upon pretence of Succouring the States General in consequence of the Treaty 1662. But the Lord Hollis the King of England's. Embassador in France, having remonstrated the great injustice of that Declara∣tion which subjected all English-men in their Estates and Persons to the last acts of Hostility, contrary to the Treaties between the two Crowns, allowing each party three Moneths time for the withdrawing their Estates and Persons after a Rupture; The King of France thereupon issu'd out a second Proclamation, gi∣ving the English the said Liberty of three Moneths to Transport themselves and Goods. However, in return of the first Declaration, the King of England soon after, that is to say, in February,February, the King of Eng∣land declares War with France. publish'd also his Declaration of War against the French. Importing, that whereas the French King pretending an Alliance De∣fensive with the States General, had proclaim'd a War against his Subjects, That he was resolv'd to prosecute the War which the French King had so un∣justly undertaken against him, with his utmost Force by Sea and Land. It was then admirable to see with what a harmony and chearfulness the Ma∣ritime Counties offer'd their service to his Majesty, upon their receiving his first Orders to put themselves into a posture of defence: But he being tender of continuing them under the trouble of a needless Duty, was pleased to direct their dismission and return home till further occasion. In the mean time Sr. Christopher Mimms was Crusing about, with a Squa∣dron of stout Ships;Sir Christo∣pher Mimms Chases the Dutch. who hearing of a Squadron of the Dutch that were out at Sea near Ostend, he made away for Discovery, and at length had a view of them, out of fight of Land about Newport, being in all 16 Sail and 3 Flags. Fain he would have been dealing with them; but they not daring to abide the shock, made all the Sail they could away, and easily escap'd him, being neer their own Burrows. Pestilence abates; and the King returns to White-Hall.The Pestilence was now so well abated, that the King return'd again to White-Hall, where the Lord Mayor and Sheriffs of London attended Him, and hum∣bly welcom'd Him home to his Chief City, after so long and melancholy an absence. The Term also, which to prevent the too early resort of People to London
and Westminster, had been Adjourn'd to Windsor, was now again Adjourn'd from thence to Westminster. But the Parliament,Parl. Prorogu'd who should have met the 20th of this month, were again Prorogu'd till the 23 of April, by a special Commission directed to the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, and others of the Lords both Spiritual and Tempo∣ral. About this time, Sir Thomas Clifford, the Kings Extraordinary Envoy to Sweden and Denmark return'd into England.Earl of Sand∣wich sent Em∣bassadour into Spain. And the Earl of Sandwich was sent Ambassadour extraordinary into Spain, where what good Services he did, the following years will declare. And to shew how diffusive the Kings Royal care was, for the good of his Subjects, as well far distant, as neer home; Mr. Warren, employ'd for that pur∣pose, had now for the benefit of the English Trade in Africa,Peace made with the Moors in Africa. made a Peace with Sancta Cruze, Sophia and Morocco: In the last of which Places, when the Emperour heard that the English Agent was come to make a Peace with him, he ordered a Guard of 500 Horse to Conduct him to his Court, which attended the Agent above Fourscore Miles. And all this while the Mediterranean Sea were secured by a strong Squa∣dron of Ships under the Command of Sir Ieremy Smith. Sir Christopher Mimms missing of the Dutch at home,General Wran∣gle comes a∣board Sir Je∣remy Smith. sail'd away for the Coast of Sweden, where coming to an Anchor at the Mouth of the Elve, with a Charge of Merchants under his Convoy; General Wrangle made it his bu∣siness to travel 30 miles to give him a visit Aboard his Ship; whom the En∣glish Admiral entertain'd according to his Dignity. The Parliament in Scotland Issued out a Proclamation,Nonconformist Ministers sup∣press'd in Scot∣land. Commanding all Ministers, who had entred before the Year 49; and since the Restitution of the Church-Government by Archbishops and Bishops, had Relinquish'd their Ministery, or had been Deposed by their Ordinary, to remove themselves, within Forty days after their Relinquishment or Deposal, out of the Parishes where they were Incum∣bents, and not to Reside within Twenty miles of the same, nor within six Miles of Edenburgh, or any Cathedral, nor within Three Miles of any Burgh Royal; nor to Inhabit Two in one Parish, upon Penalty of Incurring the Laws made against movers of Sedition. This Proclamation was occasion'd, by the Insolent Carriage of one Alex∣ander Smith, a Depos'd Minister, who being taken at a Conventicle, was con∣ven'd before the High Commission-Court; but gave such reviling Language against the Archbishop of St. Andrews, who sate there as President, that the Lord Commissioner ordered him to be put in Irons Twenty four hours, in the Theives Hole. In Ireland,Parliament in Ireland. Irish Traytors there examin'd. the Parliament being likewise Sate, fell upon the Examination of certain of their Members, who were said to have been in the Plot in the Year 1663. Robert Shapcott, Alexander Staples, and five others, were call'd to the Bar, and for that Reason, were Expell'd the House, and made incapable of ever sitting in any Parliament of that Kingdom. Forein Affairs, 1665. The King of Poland having made a fruitless and very unsuccessful expedi∣tion against the Muscovites,King of Po∣land's ill suc∣cess. the event thereof was, That being deserted by his Tartars and Cossacks, for fear of being surrounded by the Muscovites, who having intelligence of his condition, had gathered their Forces together with the same intention; he was forc'd to make his retreat through a vast Desert of twenty Leagues over, wherein meeting with neither Forrage nor other conve∣niencies, his whole Cavalry was utterly ruin'd: and all his Nobility and Gentry
highly discontented to see themselves in that manner lost without a stroke, di∣spersed themselves and left him. Lubomirsky revolts.This Calamity, which they say broke his Heart, was follow'd by the revolt of Lubomirsky, a great Souldier, and of high repute in that Country, whose digni∣ties and Estate the King had Confiscated, as not conformable to his Government. Lubomirsky takes Arms, gathers together a very formidable Body; and though now grown considerable, both in his own Forces and the affections of the Po∣lish Nobility, tenders his service to the King, offers to make use of his power against the Common Enemy the Muscovite, on condition he might be restored to his Territories and Charges. But the King giving no heed to his Proposals, raises and Army, marches against him, and being come now within four miles of Lubomirskie with an intention to give him Battle, he assembled his Nobility and Gentry, and in a long Oration endeavour'd to encourage them to be∣have themselves resolutely against the Enemie of their Country, and Rebel to himself. But they gave him for answer, That they acknowledged it was their duty to hazard their Lives against any publick Enemy whatsoever; but to fight against their fellow-Subject and Citizen, whom they could not finde to have committed any crime worthy so high a punishment as was inflicted on him, they could not adventure at all. This Answer so disturb'd the King, that he withdrew himself, and posted directly for Warsaw, destitute of Counsel or Assistants, and was at length forc'd to the Restauration of Lubomirskie, to avoid the hazard of greater Inconveniencies. German Prin∣ces quarrel.This year a great Quarrel broke forth among the Princes of the Empire, as the Electors of Mentz, Triers, Collen, and others. But as those difference; were long a brewing, so it was not an easie work to compose them, though the Emperour was very diligent in his Mediation. He had no reason to desire War, who was in daily expectance of the arri∣val of his Contracted Empress the Infanta of Spain, of whose hastening into Germany he had received certain intelligence from her Father. In February, he sent his power into Spain to the Duke de Medina de las Torres for the Marrying of her; but she arrived not at Vienna this year. Beaufort en∣counters the Argier-Py∣rates in Ar∣gier.But returning to feats of War, we finde the Duke of Beaufort encountring in the Mediterranean-Sea with a Squadron of Argier Men of War, five in num∣ber; but two of them ran themselves aground; the other three he caus'd three of his Captains to set upon; who did so well acquit themselves, that the Ad∣miral of the Pyrates, carrying 600 Men, and 50 pieces of Cannon, lost in the dispute above half her men, the rest threw themselves into the Sea, and set fire on the ship: Nor did the other two, carrying 400 Men, and 30 Guns apiece, run a better fortune, being both sunk and burnt. Nor did it serve their turns, that they had withdrawn themselves within Carabine-shot of the very Forts be∣longing to Tunis. This was an honourable undertaking, and as successfully performed: How∣ever, the Victory which the Portugueses obtain'd against the Spaniard,Portugals de∣feat the Spa∣niards. made a greater noise in the World, which most not be forgotten, as obtain'd by the Valour of the English.English brave∣ry in Portugal. At first, the Spaniards Charg'd the Portuguez and French Horse so home, that they beat them into the Rear; but the English coming to charge, recovered all the ground which the other had lost, and kept it; which so encourage'd the rest, that they came on again afresh; and then the English charging again, with the same success as before, caus'd the Enemy to quit the Field. Major Trelawney charged the Prince of Parma at the head of his own Battalia, kill'd most of his men, and brought off his Standard. He had his Horse lain under him, but was remounted by his Lieutenant. The General of the Horse was taken, five thousand Prisoners, all their Baggage, and seven pieces of Cannon, together with 3000 Mules. The Emperour's Brother deceas∣ed.But in the Imperial Court there was no small distraction, by reason of the death of Duke Sigismun the Emperour's Brother, whom some supposed to have been taken away by Poison, though others affirm'd that he died by a heat
taken in Hunting; however, the Emperour was very diligent to take all conve∣nient orders for the prevention of any disquiet that might arise by reason of his death. The Cessation made the last year between the Emperour and the great Turk,Peace made be∣tween the Em∣po and the Turk. began now to look with a favourable aspect toward a general conclusion of Peace. The Emperour's Embassador, Count Lesley, having had a very honoura∣ble Reception from the Grand Visier at Constantinople: And the Turkish Chiaux having been no less sumptuously attended by the Emperour's Commissioners ap∣pointed to conduct him to Vienna, whither the Presents which he brought from the Grand Seignior were not a little sumptuous; among the rest a Tent, for Workmanship of Embroidery and Jewels,Turkish Embas∣sadr's present to the Emperor. valued at 200000 Rix-dollars. In September, the Peace betwixt the two Great Emperours was wholly conclu∣ded, with that satisfaction to the Turk, that Count Lesley the Emperour's Em∣bassador acknowledged himself to have been Treated with that Civility and Magnificence, that never any Imperial Embassador had received the like be∣fore. It was thought this year would have put an end to the differences between the Duke of Savoy and the Commonwealth of Genoua:Savoy and Genoua at odds. But instead of Com∣posure, the Breach grew wider; for the Duke of Savoy demanded the restitution of certain Villages, which he claim'd as belonging to his Ancestors, which the Genoueses in possession were loath to part with. He also claim'd the right of Passage to carry Salt through the State of Genoua into Piedmont, together with a priviledge of being nam'd first in all Articles of Treaty. Better success had the Quarrel between the Electors of Mentz and Collen,Mentz and Collen Ele∣ctors reconcil'd which with much difficulty this year was brought to a final conclusion, upon Conditions, That the City of Erford and the Villages thereto belonging should continue Hereditary to the Elector of Mentz, the Duke of Saxony renouncing all pretences to them: That Saxony should keep possession of seven Lordships which the Elector of Mentz laid claim to: That Religion should remain unmolested according to the Auspurgh Confession: And that the two Electors should enter into a League Offensive and Defensive. The Portugueses heightned with their late Victories,Portugueses make an inroad into Spain. and still back'd with the English Succours, Invade Galicia, where they Sack'd 24 Towns and Villa∣ges; at length coming before La Guarda, the English leading the Van, were commanded to enter the Town, which they gain'd with small loss; but in Storming the Fort they found a smarter resistance, though that also was in a short time compell'd to yield; but with the unhappy fall of Captain Charles Langley, Lieutenant Senhouse, and Ensigne Berry. In Germany, the Duke of Brandenburg makes new Levies of Horse and Foot,Brandenburg takes Arms, and expostu∣lates with the Dutch. and now with his Arms in his Hands he demands a Restitution of the Tolls at Genuep, and a regulation of Quarterings and Musters through his Country; (which though Beverning was sent to excuse, yet it could not be forgot.) The Dutch did not care to have too many Enemies; which made the Branden∣burgher think it seasonable to raise his Market, the price of his Alliance being nineteen Tun of Gold. At length, all the Conferences of his Ministers and the Dutch ended in this; That there should be a speedy meeting appointed, to consult for the common Peace and Safety of that Circle of the Empire; the Elector Declaring, that he could not conclude any thing in relation to the pre∣sent War, without the consent of the rest of his Allies. This year the Queen-Mother of France,Queen-Mother of France dies. Anne of Austria, Sister to Philip the 4th, departed this Life; before her expiration, making use of her last Breath to recommend to her Son, The easing of his People, to preserve Vnity between himself and his Brother, and in all things to imitate the Example of his Grand∣father Henry the 4th. In Italy there arose a Contest of no small consequence between the Venetian and the Pope.The Venetian and the Pope differ. For the Venetian claiming the Sovereignty of the Adriatick-Sea, finding a Vessel belonging to the Pope there, demanded the Custom due to that
Republick; which the Master denying, they carried the Vessel to Venice. The Pope demands Restitution; but they make such a tedious Demur, that it amounted to a denyal. Hereupon, the Pope makes an Embargo in Ancona, and all his other Ports, of the Venetian Ships. They send to their Embassa∣dor at Rome to complain; the Pope denies him Audience: but by the Me∣diation of the Cardinal Patron, the difference was Compos'd, in regard of their War with the Turks; against whom the Pope then reigning was a most Devout Enemy. A counterfeit Messiah ap∣pears among the Jews.About this time the Iews were strangely Alarm'd with the News of a New Messiah. The Impostor was a person bred and born in Smyrna, who in a short space grew to such a Head, that no one Jew durst open his Mouth against him: he drew after him great Multitudes, and was strangely ador'd by the chiefest of the Iews. That which contributed to the Imposture, was a Confedera∣cy of Thirty others, who pretending themselves to have the Gift of Prophesie, in all their Publique Ejaculations pointed out him for the Messiah. Another Jewish Prophet in Ara∣bia Foelix.Whether it were he, or another; but in Eden, a great City in the King∣dom of Elal in Arabia Felix, there was at the same time a Iew, by the Name of Giorobaon, who by his dextrous Oratory reduc'd all the Citizens, for the most part Iews, to his Obedience; killing the Bassa, and forcing the Garrison to submit to him. In a little time, his Numbers increas'd, he cal∣ling himself their Prophet; so that in a short time he drew after him all the Arabians of the Mountain Cabuburra; thence passing through Arabia Ptrea, he Possess'd himself of Medina and Mecca, writing from those parts to all the Iews of Idumea and Syria to prepare for his Reception. Nor were these two alone: for at the same time, one Sabadai, not so Warlike, but more Prophetical, did strangely entoxicate the brains of his Brethren, with an As∣surance of the Arrival of their Expected Messiah; and was so vain as to go to Constantinople, to demand the Land of Promise from the Grand Signior. One thing must not be omitted, since we are among the Iews, and the Turks, That the Secretary to the Turkish Embassador sent to Conclude the Peace at Vienna,Turkish Em∣bassadour's Se∣cretary turns Christian. after the business was over, took an occasion, whether out of Design, or Devotion is for others to conjecture, to absent himself with several Pa∣pers of Importance, from his Masters Service, and turn Christian. Yet notwithstanding the Turkish Peace, the Emperour was not a little di∣sturb'd by the Revolt of Palaffi Imbre,Palaffi Imbre, revolts from the Emperour. who with a great number of ill-disci∣plin'd Vagabonds did very much infest Hungaria, solliciting the Bassa of Ersa to his Assistance: but through the great diligence of the Palatine of Hunga∣ria, he prevail'd little or nothing this Year, more than in spoyling and Rob∣bing the Country. He was soon defeated and taken: his Person was Com∣mitted to Prison, where he remain'd till the Nuptials of the Empress; at which time he enjoy'd the benefit of a general Oblivion. King of Spain dy'd.Towards the beginning of Autumn, dy'd the King of Spain; and the Queen-Mother was Confirm'd Regent; much to the settlement of that King∣dom. Anno Dom. 1666. March.THE War continuing between the English and the Dutch, the beginning of this Year brought Intelligence from America, where the Governour of Iamaica resolves to Attaque their American Plantations;Governor of Ja∣maica assaults the Ducth Plantations in America. and according∣ly, by the Assistance of the Buccaneers or Hunters upon Hispaniola, made them∣selves Masters of Sancta Eastachia, Salia, St. Martins, and Bonaira; and took the Island Tabago by Storm. At which time a Party sent from the Barbadoes to have done the same, being thus prevented, fell upon the Dutch Plantations in the Continent, where they possess'd themselves of New Zealand, taking the Fort with seven Guns: upon the River Maccurah and Wina, they spoil'd Ten
Sugar-works, and took 500 Negroes, which they sent to Martinego. And thus, with a handful of Men, they Expell'd the Dutch out of all their Plantati∣ons in the West-Indies, excepting only Curressa, being a Fort built by the Dutch in an Island without any Plantation, and not worth Attempting. At home,Dutch conclude Peace with the Dane. the Dutch endeavour all they can to strengthen themselves with Alliances, and therefore make Peace with the Dane, on condition, That both Parties absolutely renounce all manner of Pretences: whereby Denmark be∣came a gainer of 60 Tun of Gold. All disorders in Norway were to be quite taken away; which doubled the King's Revenues at that time. Lastly, the Hollanders were to pay yearly to the Dane 15 Tun of Gold so long as the War with England lasted. In lieu whereof, the Dane was to maintain 30 Men of War in the Sound; to which the Hollander was to add Eight, or Ten, with some Land-forces. This the Swede took ill, Declaring to all Publick Ministers his Resolution to stand firm to the League with England;Swede stands firm to England in order whereunto, Wrangle understanding that some Dutch ships were come into the Elbe, where then a Fleet of English Merchants rode, commanded a Swedish man of War to Guard them, and rather to sink by their sides, than see them injur'd: the same care being likewise taken to secure the English in Schonen. They also sent an Embassadour into Denmark, to Expostulate the Reason of their Alliance, and to shew their dislike of the whole Transacti∣on: and when the Danish Resident, in a studied Speech, endeavour'd to give the Queen and Regents of Sweden an accompt of his Masters Inten∣tions in that League for the security of the Sound, and the Provocations pretended from England, which forc'd him to Revenge, and offer'd the Crown of Sweden to be included in the same Alliance: He was presently Answered, That the Procedure of his Master seem'd so fowl and Dishonourable, that they knew not how any Prince for the future could Treat with him. But the Swedes seeing what the Dane had done, resolv'd in no wise to suffer the Sound to be shut up at pleasure; reinforc'd their Garrisons in Schonen, and prepar'd a sufficient Navy for their Defence. However, to shew themselves not altogether averse from Peace, the Swedes did frame a Project for an Accommodation between the States and them, which contain'd so many points of Restitutinos, Reparations, and amends, to be made by the States, that they were nothing pleased with it. Besides, the Swede insisted to be ad∣mitted into the Trade of India; a point, above all the rest, which the Dutch were most jealous of. The King now taking into consideration the hazardous consequences by the extraordinary resort of People to the Parliament,April 6. Parliament Prorogu'd. by his Commission directed to the Lord Chancellour, Prorogu'd them to the 18 of September next. He also Issued out a Proclamation,A Proclamati∣on, requiring Desborough, and others, to return into En∣gland. whereby Iohn Desborough, Thomas Kel∣sey, and others, were requir'd to return into England, and render themselves; and in case of Disobedience, to stand Guilty, and be Attainted of High Trea∣son. A while after, Desborough was brought over from Ostend in the Lit∣tle Mary, and Committed to Dover Castle, by the Lord Middleton: but at length, released by the Kings Order. Another Proclamation was issued out, Giving all Persons that would, li∣berty till the 25th of December following, to export all Woollen Manufactures be∣yond Sea; in regard that the War and Contagion bad caus'd such a deadness of Trade in the Nation. But at the Old Baily were Try'd several Malefactors;Plotters Try'd at the Old-Baily. in all, Eight Persons, formerly Officers or Souldiers in the Rebellion; among whom, the most no∣ted was Iohn Rathborn an old Army-Colonel. Their Indictment was, For Conspiring the King's Death, and the overthrow of the Government; having in the Kings absence from the City laid their Plot and Contrivance for surprisal of the Tower, the killing General Monk, Sir Iohn Robinson the
Lieutenant of the Tower, and Sir Richard Brown Major-General of the City, and then to have declared for an equal division of Lands. The better to effect this Design, the City was to have been Fir'd, and the Portculces to have been let down, to keep out all Assistance; the Horse-Guard to have been Surpriz'd in the several Innes where they were quarter'd; several Ostlers hav∣ing been gain'd for that purpose. The Tower had been View'd, and its Sur∣prisal Order'd, by Boats over the Moat, and so to Scale the Wall. There was in the Conspiracy one Alexander, who made his Escape, who had distributed several Ss of Money to these Conspirators: and for the carrying on the Design more effectually, they were told of Great Ones, that sate constantly in London, who issued out all Orders; which Council received their Directi∣ons from a Council in Holland, who sate with the States. The Third of September was pitch'd upon for the Attempt, as being found by a Scheme Erected for that purpose, a Luckie Day; a Planet then Ruling, which Por∣tended the downfall of Monarchy.Condemned, and Executed. They were found Guilty of High Trea∣son, and Executed at Tyburn. The Month of May was without Action; only in the beginning thereof, the Fleet being ready to set Sail, His Majesty and the Duke of York went down to see the Condition thereof; and having staid there three days, return'd to White-Hall. Earl of Sand∣wich Arrives at Madrid. Lord Hollis re∣turns from France.Toward the latter end of May, the Earl of Sandwich His Majesties Ex∣traordinary Embassadour Arriv'd at Madrid; and the Lord Hollis return'd from his Embassie in France. The Fleet was now ready, under the Conduct of Prince Rupert, and the Duke of Albemarle: But while they are searching for the Enemy, it will not be amiss to relate a Combate of lesser Note,The Fleet ready. for the Honour of the En∣glish Courage abroad, as well as at home. The Guiny Frigate being in the Port of Lisbon, found there a French Man of War, the Captain whereof bragg'd what he would do, when the Guiny Frigat should dare to put to Sea. Which Captain Coite understanding,A French Drag came to nothing stood out to Sea, expecting when the French Champion would follow; but he consulting more his own security, than his honour, was content to let the Guiny Frigat tire her self with attendance: so that the Captain having stay'd hovering in sight of the Town, for three days together, return'd into Harbour; and bringing out the Ships under his Con∣voy, steer'd his own Course. Iune.But to return to the Fleet. It was at this time divided, and the White Squa∣dron under Prince Rupert was gone toward the Coast of France,The Fleet divi∣ded. upon an ap∣prehension of Beauforts coming to joyn with the Dutch; at which time the other two Squadrons under the Duke of Albemarle being Four Leagues off the North-Foreland, the Bristol plying about a League from the Fleet, discover'd several Sails, and thereupon fir'd Three Guns for better Information: Soon after,A Fight for two days toge∣ther, maintain'd by the Duke of Albemarie. from the top of the Admiral, they discover'd the Dutch Fleet. The Fight began, Friday the First of Iune, and was maintain'd for two days together with only 50 ships of the English, against double the number of the Dutch. The Duke had all his Tackle taken off with Chain-shot; and his Breeches to his skin were shot off. Captain Harman in the Henry, had the luck to have all the Dutch Fleet upon him, single; which he bravely supported, and forced his way quite through them: he had three Fireships upon him, of which one took fire, but it was soon quench'd; and at length, he was forc'd to leave the Fleet. The Rainbow being the second, as the Henry was the first that Engag'd. This was the first days Dispute, from one of the Clock, till nine at Night: wherein, the Dutch had two great ships Fir'd. The Fight re∣new'd.On Saturday, the Fight was renew'd with greater Violence than before, where∣in the Dutch lost Three Sail more, which were forc'd to retire out of the Dis∣pute; and it is thought, that this part of the Fleet would have given a very good accompt of the Enemy, had not the Dutch receiv'd a Reinforcement of 16 fresh ships. The General was Attacqu'd by a Vice-Admiral of the Ene∣my,
who came up so neer, as that the Yards arms touch'd; but the General re∣ceiv'd him with so full a Bread side, besides a Volley of small shot, that he fell a Stern, and appeared no more. However, on Sunday, the General finding the Fleet overpower'd in number, and tid with continual service, began to stand over to the English Coast. In this Retreat, which was manag'd with all care and prudence, the Saint Paul and two other ships were by the General's order set on fire, to prevent their falling into the Enemies hands; all the men disposed into other ships. Toward the Evening of that day appeared the Prince;Prince Rupert appears. upon whose approach, the Enemy leaving 50 Sail to make good against the General, sent out 30 more to intercept the Prince; but he avoiding them, made up to the General: when he drew neer the Fleet, he sent word to the General, that if he approv'd of it, he would keep the Wind & engage those thirty ships which bore up to him: but the General supposing that Squadron to be only a Decoy to draw the Prince upon the Galloper, sent a Caution to the Prince not to meddle with that Squadron. And now both Generals being joyn'd, on Munday by Morning-light the Dutch Fleet were got out of sight; but the English soon made them again, Sir Chri∣stopher Mimms leading the Van, the Prince in the Middle, and Sir Edward Sprague in the Rear of the fresh Squadron. Here the Encounter was very sharp, the English fighting some to the Windward, some to the Leeward of the Dutch. In this Engagement the English pass'd the whole Body of the Ene∣mies Fleet five times, with good advantage on their side: which the Dutch not enduring, began to run, and were pursu'd so long as the Powder lasted, there being not above 35 of the Enemy left in a Body; and doubtless they had recei∣ved more mischief, the Generals resolving to have born in among 'um a sixth time, but that the Prince having receiv'd in the last pass two shots in his Pow∣der-room, and finding his Masts disabled, was forc'd to let the Enemy make the best of their way, whereby they escaped much fairer than otherways they could have done. Of the English Fleet was only burnt the Prince, having by misfortune first run aground upon the Galloper,Sir George Ayscue Priso∣ner. by which means Sir George Ayscue the Commander be∣came a Prisoner. The Essex was also taken, having entangled her self by grapling with one of the Enemies ships which she had almost taken. The Swiftsure was also missing (taken by Rear-Admiral Swaert) her Commander Sir William Berk∣ley being slain. Beside these, not a ship, except the Slugs expresly burnt by Or∣der; all the rest arriving safe in the Gunfleet. Certainly many of the Enemy were Burnt and Sunk. The Enemy endeavouring to conceal their Losses as much as they could; but it was generally concluded that they lost above 15 Ships, and 21 Captains, among the rest Evertson one of their Admirals, and of common Seamen above 5000. Sir George Ayscue was sent to the Castle of Lovestein, and Captain Reeves im∣prison'd in Amsterdam, having, Wounded as he was, receiv'd most barbarous usage from the hands of those that took him. This bloudy Encounter being over,July. the King makes all the hast imaginable to take the Sea again; to which purpose the King proposes to the City the fur∣nishing him with a sum of Money to answer the great occasion of the War; whereupon, the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Common-Council agreed to fur∣nish him with 100000 l. the most of which was subscrib'd upon the place.The City fur∣nish the King with 100000l. The Dutch out again. However, the Dutch, by reason they had several ships already fitted, which were intended for the Sound to assist the Dane, got out some time before the English could possibly be ready, and were several times discover'd towards the Coast of France to meet with Beaufort, who was to have joyn'd with them, but never did. But it was not long before the English Fleet were at their heels in very good order:The English at their hels. The Flags being carried by the Generals Sir Ioseph Iordan, Sir Robert Holmes, Sir Thomas Allen, Sir Thomas Tyddiman, Captain Vtburt, Sir Ieremy Smith, Sir Edward Sprague, and Captain Kempthorn.
On Munday, the English Fleet set sail from the Gunfleet, the Enemy plying Eastward before them. That Night proving stormy, the Iersey disabled by Thunder, her Main-topmast being broken to pieces, and the Main-mast split from the Top to the Bottom, and another Fire-ship receiving some harm, were sent away to be refitted. At two of the clock next day, they weigh'd and discover'd the Dutch Fleet standing with them, having the Wind, but not the Courage to engage them. Next Morning by nine of the clock, both Fleets engaged,Another En∣gagement. the English not firing till they came up close with the Enemy, and then the Anne headmost of the White began the Fight, the Red and Blue Squadrons coming up within an hour after. Between ten and eleven, one of the English Fire-ships endeavouring to board their headmost Admiral, was put off, and burnt down without effect. At eleven, the Van of their Fleet began to give way; and about one, the whole Van bore away from the English before the Wind: neer half an hour after, the Royal Katherine, the Saint George, and another of the White lay by to repair, together with Sir Robert Holmes. After that, the Resolution was burnt by a Fire-ship sent on board him by Trmp, but the men were most of them sav'd, About three of the clock, the Royal Charles went out of the Line, and with much Gallantry fought ship to ship with De Ruyter within Musquet-shot, lea∣ving her place to the Sovereign, till having repair'd her self, she stood in again, and so warmly handled De Ruyter, that he was forc'd to give way; but so disa∣b'd her self, that she had not a Rope left, but was tow'd out of the Line by Boats: about which time two of the Enemies ships were observed to be blown up. About four of the clock De Ruyter made all the sail he could, and ran for't, but made frequent tacks to fetch off his maimed Vessels; once hazarding himself very much to rescue his Second, who was so disabled, that he could not be got off: in which condition he chopt to an Anchor, which brought the English to the Leeward of him; a Fire-ship attempting to get up to him, was assail'd by another from the Enemy, and both burnt together. The Van thus running, were pursu'd by the Red and White Squadron, which continu'd among them all Night: the Royal Iames taking Bankert's ship of 60 Guns, Vice-Admiral of Zealand, himself hardly escaping; and the Snake of Harlem of 66 Guns, which the English afterwards burnt, having Tromp in the Rear, engaged with the Blue Squadron. Next Morning the Dutch had all the Wind that was, so that the English could not get up with them; only the Fanfan, a little Sloop built for Prince Rupert, with her Oars made up to De Ruyter, and bringing her two little Guns to one side, continu'd for an hour plying De Ruyter Broadside and Broadside, to the great Laughter of the English, and Indignation of the Dutch to see their Admiral chac'd so stoutly. The English Fleet continu'd the Chace over many Flats and Banks, till they came so neer the Shore, that the great ships could not follow, but left the lesser Frigats to attend them till they got into the Darlow-Channel of Zealand. De Ruyter's ship was batte'd very much in this Chace; and if the Wind had serv'd for the great ships, he had inevitably been taken, and most of those that were with him had been destroy'd. Not long after, the Wind veering, the Generals discovered Tromp with the remainder of the Dutch Fleet in the Offen, chac'd by the Blue Squadron, having the Wind; so that toward Night, the Royal Charles tacking to keep between Tromp and home, stood in with the English Fleet, and came to an Anchor; but Sir Ieremy Smith in the Night-time lying by for fear of Shoale ground, the Dutch in the mean time stole away, getting to Windward, so that the Ge∣neral's Squadron could not reach 'um, though they chac'd 'um till they had but six Fathom Water; by which means they got into the Wielings to the rest of their Fleet. English Loss.On the English side were only three Captains slain, the Resolution burnt, and not much above 300 wounded men.
On the Dutch side,Dutch Loss. were above 4000 kill'd, and neer 3000 wounded of com∣mon Sea-men. Several of their Captains also were slain; among the rest, Evert∣son Admiral of Zealand, Tirrick Hiddes Admiral of Friezland; the Vice-Admiral of Friezland, and Rear-Admiral Van Saen. They were above a hundred sail, of which only eighty eight returned: which was the general computation of that time. It was impossible for the Dutch to deny this to be a Victory, their own ships being beaten home in such a miserable condition, that many of their best ships had much ado to float above Water: And the English keeping the Sea, and not only so, but presently after the Engagement shewing themselves upon their own Coast. Nor were their own Harbours secure;Sir Robert Holmes enters the Vly. for Sir Robert Holmes being order'd to go into the Vlie to burn that Island, with five Fire-ships, some Ketches, and one fifth-rate Frigat, went in: the Fire-ships went ahead, and soon destroy'd two Men of War, and other ships that lay there in defence of the Fleet; which being done, he sent the rest of the Boats to burn the rest of the Ships, which they did with so good success, that in a short time the most of that great Fleet, consisting of 170 sail,Burns 160 sail of ships. was in a flame, except a Guiny-man of 24 Guns, and three Privateers, who getting into the narrow of the Channel, protected five Sail more that were ahead of them, so that the Boats could not come at them. After that, he went ashore upon the Schelling,He lands on the Schelling, and burns a Town. where he burnt the chief Town upon the Island, which was accounted very rich; and had destroy'd all the other Villages, but that being high Water, he durst not lose the opportunity of retur∣ning. The number of Ships burnt, were judg'd to be 160 Sail; which was the more considerable, in regard it was perform'd with so little loss to the Eng∣lish, there being not above twelve men kill'd and wounded in the whole A∣ction. Yet neither this nor the last disaster were so fatal as to keep the Dutch from taking the Sea again, which they did toward the latter end of August, though not with so powerful a Fleet as before;The Dutch at Sea again. and therefore they pass'd by the back of the Goodwyn, making for the French Coast, to have joyn'd with Beaufort, who lay at Rochel with forty Sail: but the English Fleet follow'd 'um close,The English fol∣low them close, and fin∣ding the Dutch gone toward Calice, they stood a course after them; but upon the approach of the English, the Dutch got all under sail, and stood for Bul∣loigne-Road, haling close to the shore: And here they had in all probability been utterly Ruin'd, but that the Weather grew so extreamly stormy,but stormy Weather hinders any attempt. that the English could not attempt any thing upon them; nor durst the other adventure out to Sea; therefore the English thought it best to make away for St. Hellens-Bay, the place of Rendezvouze, and the most proper station to hinder the Ene∣mies conjunction with the Fleet. But the French were not a little tam'd by the taking of Monsieur La Roche, who scattered from the Body of the Fleet with five or six more French Men of War, was discover'd by Sir Thomas Allen lying between Fairlee and Dungeon∣ness, who having the Wind, came up by the side of the French-man Yard-arm and Yard-arm, and pour'd into him a Broad-side of great and small shot, receiving the like from the other; but before Sir Thomas could tack again, the French-man having spent his Fore-mast, and finding himself fallen between two other of the English Frigats, and Sir Thomas at his heels ready to give him another Broad-side, he immediately yielded. This ship was called the Ruby, of a thousand Tuns burthen,Monsiur de la Roche taken in the Ruby▪ carrying 412 men, and 54 Guns, whereof 50 Brass. And now De Ruyter falling sick, was forc'd to leave the Dutch Fleet under the care of Van Ness. But the States, finding the Weather unseasonable, and their Ships much shattered by Tempests, thought fit to call their Fleet home, and to put an end to any further occasion for this year. Saving only that five of the English Frigats meeting with five of the Dutch, of 38, and 36 Guns a piece, took the Admiral and two more, and chac'd the other two ashore.
Tromp and De Ruyter fall out.Being return'd, Tromp and De Ruyter fell out, laying the blame of all the Summers Losses and Miscarriages upon one another. The States in favour of De Ruyter took away Tromp's Commission, and confin'd him to Amster∣dam; and a second Examination and Execution was done upon many of their Officers for Cowardise, and others deeply Fin'd. But now to return homeward; in Guernsey the Governour of Chousey in France,A designe upon Guernsey di∣scovered. together with the Pilot or Master that brought him, were apprehended for bringing a Letter to Major-General Lambert there in Prison, and offering a contrivance by his escape to engage him against the publick Peace. At first, though the Dsigne was fully prov'd against him, he denied all; but the next day confessing the whole matter, and retracting what he had said the day before,Spies hanged. he and the Pilot were both Executed upon the common Gallows for Spies. Thus were the English scure enough from Forrein Enemies; but the City of London had now to grapple with an Adversary more powerful than all their Machinations: For upon the second of September, about one of the clock in the Morning,The dreadful Fire of Lon∣don. broke out a most sad and deplorable Fire in Pudding∣lane neer New Fish street; which falling out at that time of the Night, and in a quarter of the City so close, and built with Wooden Pitchd Houses, spread it self before Day so far, and with such distraction to the Inhabitants, that due care was not taken by them for the timely preventing the fur∣ther dffusion of it, by pulling down Houses, as ought to have been; so that in a short time the Fire began to be too big to be master'd by any Engines or working neer it. It fell out most unhappily also, that a violent Eatterly Wind somented it, and kept it burning all that Day and the Night following, spreading it self up to Grace-Church-Street, and downwards from Cannon-street to the Water-side as far as the Three Cranes in the Vintrey. The People in all parts were distracted by the vastness thereof, and their particular care to carry away their own Goods; yet many attempts were at length made to prevent the spreading of it, by pulling down Houses, and making great Intervals; but all in vain, the Fire seizing upon the Timber and Rubbish, and so continuing its progress through those spaces, and raging in a bright Flame all Mundy and Tuesday,The King and the Duke of York take great pains to prevent it. notwithstanding the King and Duke of York took most indefatigable pains night and day to apply all possible remedies to prevent it. At length, the Wind slackning on Tuesday-night, and the Flames meeting with Brick buildings in the Temple, by little and little it was observ'd to lose its force on that side. On Wednesday-morning, by the personal care and labour of the Duke of York a stop was put to it at the Temple-Church; as also neer Holborn-bridge, Pi-corner, Aldersgate, Cripplegate, at the lower end of Coleman-street, the hither end of Bishops-gate-street, at Leaden-hall and the Stand in Cornhil, at the Church in Fen-Church street, at Cloathworkers-ball in Mincing-lane, in the mid∣dle of Mark-lane, and at Tower-Dock. On Thursday it was wholly Extinguisht, but so, as that Evening it burst out again at the Temple by the falling of some sparkles upon a Pile of Wooden building. But the Duke of York, who all that night watch'd there in Per∣son, so encourag'd the People with his presence, that by blowing up the Hou∣ses about it, before day they most happily master'd it. Suspected per∣sons ImprisonedTwo strangers Dutch and French were during the Fire Apprehended and Imprison'd, and afterwards Examin'd by the Chief Justice of the King's-Bench, assisted by the Lords of the Council, Though notwithstanding that suspition, it was most generally concluded to have been the Effect of some unhappy Chance; or, to speak better, the heavy hand of Heaven. About the Tower, the seasonable Orders that were given for plucking down Houses, to secure the Magazines of Powder, were more successful; that part being up the Wind, though the Fire came almost to the very Gates: by which early provision, the several Stores of War lodg'd in the Tower were entirely sav'd.
It was observ'd,An Observation that this Fire first happen'd in such a part of the Town, where though the Commodities were not very rich, yet they were so bulkie, that they could not be well remov'd; so that the Inhabitants sustain'd no very great loss of Goods: but the other parts of the Town, where the Com∣modities were of greater value, took the Alarm so early, that they sav'd the greatest part of their richest Merchandizes; which did not a little diminish the loss. Through this sad Accident,The King takes care to relieve the distressed. it is easie to be imagin'd how many persons were necessitated to remove their Goods into the open Fields, where they were forc'd to continue some time; therefore the King was frequent in Consulting all ways to relieve these distressed persons, as well by his Proclamations, as Or∣ders to the Justices of the Peace, to send Provisions to the Markets; Com∣manding the Victualler of his Navy to send Bread into Moor-fields, which for the more speedy supply, was sent in Bisket out of the Sea-stores. The Fire being thus happily quench'd,A General Fast. the King Proclaim'd a General Fast through England and Wales; and order'd, that the distresses of those who had more particularly suffer'd in that Calamity, should be recommended to the Charity of all well-disposed persons, upon that day, to be afterwards di∣stributed by the hands of the Lord Mayor of the City of London. And to shew his Pious Care for the Cities Restoration,His Majesties Declaration concerning the Re-building of the City. he passed a Declara∣tion in Council, wherein he first prohibited the hastie Building any Edifices, till care could be taken for its Re-edification, so as might best secure it from the like Accidents. That no person should Erect any House or Building, but of Brick or Stone. That the most Eminent Streets should be of a breadth; and that no streets, especially toward the Water, should be so narrow, as to render the passages inconvenient. That a fair Wharf should be left, all along the River-side; no Houses be∣ing to be built, but at such a Distance; and none of those Houses to be In∣habited by Dyers, Brewers, or Sugar-Bakers. That an Exact Survey should be made of the Ruines, for the satisfaction of particular Interests; and that a Model should be fram'd of the whole Building. He also Recommended the Re-building of the Churches to the Charity and Magnanimity of well-affected Persons. And for encouragement of others, promis'd to Re-build his own Custom-House, and to enlarge it, for the benefit of Merchants: which he afterwards did accordingly, at his own Charge. He also engaged to part with all his right and benefit upon all his own Lands, for the Publick benefit; and▪ to remit the Duties arising from Hearth-money, for seven Years, to all that should Erect any New Buildings according to his Declaration. And therefore Valentine Knight,Val. Knight committed, for dangerous ad∣vice about it. for presuming to Print certain Propositions for Re-building the City, with considerable advantages to the Crown, was Committed to Custody, as being repugnant to the Gracious offers of the King. After this Distraction in the City,Parliament re∣assembles. the Parliament met at Westminster accor∣ding to the time limited at their last Prorogation, to whom the King expressed his satisfaction, to see them so happily met again; making known to them, the Progress and vast Expenses of the War, and the urgent occasion of supply. Whereupon the House resolv'd, that the humble and hearty thanks of the House should be return'd to the King,They thank the King for his care in the War. for his great Care in the Manage∣ment of the War; and that they would supply him proportionably to his Occasions: and afterwards in a Body attended the King in the Banqueting-House, to signifie the same to his Majesty; in order whereunto, they Voted a Supply of 1800000 l.Vote a Supply of 1800000 l. In relation to which, in Ianuary following they passed an Act for raising money by a Pole, and otherwise, toward the main∣tenance
of the present War: to which the King gave his Royal Assent in the House of Lords. But that not being thought sufficient, they so diligently ply'd their business, that in February they passed another Act, for granting the Sum of Twelve hundred and fifty thousand three hundred and forty se∣ven pounds thirteen shillings,Another Supply of 1250000 l. for the same reasons, and upon the same occa∣sion as the former. And to shew their readiness to forward the Re-building of the City, they passed another Act,A Court of Iudi∣cature Erected, for deciding dif∣ferences in the City. for Erecting a Court of Judicature to determine all differen∣ces touching Houses Burn'd or Demolish'd in the Fire; which, with an Act for the Relief of Prisoners, was the chief business of this Session: being upon the 8th of February Prorogu'd till the 10th of October following. That Fire which had lay'd the City of London in Ashes, now threatned the City of Westminster, and the Kings Palace it self; having by the misfortune of a Candle falling into the straw, violently seiz'd upon the Horse-Guard in the Tilt-yard over against White-Hall, burning down the North-West part of the Building;His Majesties Horse-Guard burn'd. but being so close under the King's own Eye, it was by the timely help which the King and the Duke of York caus'd to be apply'd, in a very short time stop'd, and wholly master'd. About this time, complaint was made by several Merchants, of the ill dea∣lings of the Inhabitants of the Canary-Islands, in enhansing the Prizes of their Wines; Banishing the English Consul and Factors out of the Island of Tenariff; publickly declaring against the Loading or Unloading of the English Ships; with other severe dealings with the Merchants of England Traing thither. Upon consideration whereof, the King put forth a Proclamation,Proclamation prohibiting Im∣portation of Ca∣nary. Prohibiting the Importing of any Wines of the growth of the Canary-Islands, and all Trade and Commerce with those Parts. And at the same time, another Proclamation came forth, Prohibiting the Importation of any Manufactures, Wines, Merchandizes, or Commodities what∣soever, of the Growth of France, or of any Lands, Territories, or Places be∣longing to the French King. No less care was taken for suppressing the Insolencies of the Papists, upon the humble Address of the Lords and Commons made to the King to that pur∣pose.The Parlia∣ments Address  suppressing  Insolen∣cies. And therefore all Popish Priests and Jesuits were by publick Proclama∣tion likewise Commanded by a prefix'd time to depart the Kingdom. And now the King, to justifie his Breaking with Denmark, Published a Deduction of all the Transactions of Affairs between Himself and the King of Denmark; with his Declaration of War against the said King, and the Motives that oblig'd him thereto: wherein the King alledges, that he had been unavoidably provok'd by the King of Denmark,Declaration of War against Denmark. by many Aspersions, Indignities, and breach of Faith, which that King had offered him; making the Assault made by His Majesties Ships in the Port of Berghen, the Ground of his late entring into a League Offensive and Defensive with the States of the Vnited Provinces; whereas in truth, his Majesty had the Freedom of that Port frankly offer'd him, by the King of Denmark himself, at a time when his Majesty thought nothing of it; and that in order to the doing those very Acts of Hostility wherewith he was then reproach'd. And for a good Omen of his Majesties Success, in the beginning of November came News, That the Vice-Admiral of Denmark was taken by some of His Majesties Frigats upon the Coast of Scotland. Too long had the City now lain in Ashes, when Sir George Moore, a Pro∣prietor in some Houses in Fleetstreet,City Building begins. upon promise of conforming to the Model, Form, and Scantling set by the Committee appointed by the King for that purpose, had liberty given him to begin that great Work; which was soon after followed with that Expedition and Beauty, that none could ima∣gine, but they who beheld it. Prodigious Storms in Lin∣coln-shire.It was a Year of Wonders, and this not the least which happen'd in the County of Lincoln; where at a place call'd Welborn, after a Prodigious Thun∣der,
with Hail-stones as big as Pigeons eggs,Prodigious Storm in Lincoln-shire. there follow'd a Storm and Tem∣pest with so great violence, that it threw down most of the Houses to the ground, broke down and tore up Trees by the Roots, dispersing the Corn and Hay: from thence going to the next Village call'd Willington, it threw down some Houses, which with the fall kill'd two Children; thence proceeding to Nanby, it fell so violently upon the Church, that it dash'd the Spire in pieces, tearing and rending the Church it self both in the Body and Timber-work, so that it left little of the Wall standing with the body of the Steeple. It was obser∣ved to run only in a Chael, which had it held any considerable breadth, could not but have Ruin'd a considerable part of the County. But that which after so many severe Calamities reviv'd the Hearts of the City,A day of Thanksgiving for the ceasing of the Plague. was the absolute ceasing of her devouring Enemy The Sickness; in ac∣knowledgment whereof, the King order'd a publick day of Thanksgiving. In Scotland, there happen'd a Riot of no small consequence at Dumfreeze,Ryot at Dum∣freeze in Scotland. where some persons having gathered the people of the Neighbouring Parishes, to the number of about two hundred, arm'd with Clubs and Sythes, took Sir Iames Turner out of his Bed, carried him naked into the Market-place, and had much ado to be restrain'd from cutting him in pieces, for his severity (as they pretended) in exacting Fines upon Nonconformists. Nor was this con∣temptible number long ere they increased to a considerable force, in all 1600 men, and were marching within four miles of Edenburgh, when hearing that the whole Country was up in Arms against them, they thought it more conve∣nient to return; but being set upon by Lieutenant-Colonel Dyel and Major-General Drummond, neer Glencarn-Kirk, they were totally defeated, 500 slain upon the place, and 100 taken Prisoners. Several of the Rebels were after∣wards Sentenced and Executed: among the rest, Corson that first began the Mutiny, and Malkel their Minister, a main Incendiary of the people; so that in a short time all things were reduc'd to their former quietness. In imitation of England, the Barbadoes, another England in the other part of the World, would not suffer the same Enemies of both to lie undisturb'd. To which purpose, the Lord Willoughby Governour of the Caribby Islands, having set forth from the Barbadoes a considerable Fleet, well Man'd and Victu∣all'd set sail from thence upon some particular designe,The Lord Wil∣loughby sets forth a Fleet from the Bar∣badoes. and in his way burnt two ships richly laden in the Harbour of Los Santos, and took two o∣ther Prizes: but as he was in pursuit of his further designe, there arose a Hur∣ricane so violent, that their Cables giving way, they were forc'd to abandon themselves to the rage of the Storm,A Hurricane. which continued with that extremity, that they were wholly separated and dispersed,His Lordship lost. and the Lord Willoughby him∣self absolutely lost. In Ianuary,Scotch Conven∣tion meets. the Convention of the Estates of Scotland met according to appointment, where the Oath of Allegeance being administred and taken by the several Members, they fell upon the publick concernments, as securing the Kingdom from publick and Domestick Dangers, and how to put the same in∣to a posture of defence; and for the raising so much Money as should be thought convenient to defray the charge, and thereupon 6000 l. per Moneth was agreed on, for the entertainment of such Forces as should be employ'd in his Majesties service. But in the parts neer Surinam,At Surinam better success. the English were more successful than at the Barbadoes, where they having destroy'd and ruin'd a considerable Co∣lony of the Dutch at Apecawaca, resolved to attempt something likewise upon the French, and particularly to attack the Fort of Sinamary, which they took together with fifty Prisoners, and the Governour, besides what were slain. The English dismantled the Fort, and carried away all the Guns and Am∣munition. Captain Reade also passing up the Canessa toward the Berbices, a very po∣pulous Creek inhabited by the Enemy, he landed at Carenteen, and marching twenty miles by Land, took the Fort of the Arawaces, taking Men, Wo∣men
and Children Captives, and much Booty, with little or no loss. But though it were how December, some English Vessels were still abroad. And among the rest, Captain Robinson, who lighting upon three Dutch Men of War neer the Texel, destroy'd them all: in requital of which curtesie, the Dutch not long after took the Saint Patrick off of Portsmouth, deserted by her own Fire-ship. At the conclusion of the Year, Captain Vtbert return'd from the Streights with the Squadron under his Command, and seven Dutch Prizes. Forein Affairs, 1666. The King of France having receiv'd a very high Affront from the Great Turk in the person of his Embassador,The French King affronted by the Turk. thought no way better than to send the same person again, to require satisfaction for the repair of his Masters Honour.An Embassador sent for repa∣ration. But the Turk retaining in his minde the attempt upon Gigery, and the Succours sent the Emperour, would hearken to no Proposition that might add to the Honour of his solemn Entry; so that he was forc'd at last to land as it were Incognito, and privately attended to walk from the Ship to his House. He went with much pomp to his Audience, and at his Entry made several stops, expecting the Visier would have risen to him; but finding no more respect, he sate down upon the Stool appointed for him, and in his Masters Name, whom he stil'd Emperour of France, demanded more Honour to be done him. But the Visier incens'd with the manner of his demanding it, broke out into a pas∣sion; which the French Embassador resenting,He is reviled, rose from his seat, and in going away, thrw the Capitulations with the Case over his Shoulder, which hit the Visier on the Brest; upon which, the Visier commanded his Officers to ap∣prehend and strike him; which was accordingly performed, and he hurried out of the Chamber, where he had received several boxes of the Ear, and blows upon the Brest;Beaten, and prisoned. and was carried Prisoner to the Bashaw's House, where he was kept Prisoner in a base low Room under the Stairs, and there detained four days, till by the Intercession of the English Embassador he was deliver'd. The King of France had sent a person of quality to be a Witness of the Great Turk' submission; but he became a fairer testimony of his Embassador's hard u∣sage. The Electors of Brandenburgh and Colen, the Dukes of Newburgh and Bruns∣wick laboured hard to finde out ways expedient for composing the Differences between the Bishop of Munster and the States of the Vnited Provinces, and with them the Emperour and the Princes of the Dyet at Ratisbone; so that at length the Bishop was over-perswaded to conclude a Peace; which was ac∣cordingly sign'd toward the beginning of the Year, though he had received 100000 Rix-dollars from the King of England for carrying on the War; but it lasted not long; for when the King of France became their Enemy, he broke it again, which was not long after. At Musco, great alterations had like to have fallen out in matters of Reli∣gion: For a certain Fya in his Sermons endeavouring to make the people wise than formerly they had been in that ignorant Country, among other Doctrines that were new here, instructed them, That Images signified no∣thing, and therefore were not to be worshipped: That the Saints know no∣thing of our Prayers to them, and consequently were not to be call'd upon. Which wrought so powerfully upon the people, that many hundreds of them began to reform their ancient practice, and openly refused the use of Pictures: But a great party of Souldiers being sent immediately to reduce them from their Heresie, frighted the generality into a Recantation: some 20 persisting in their new Faith were burnt, and 30 more hanged to terrifie the rest. This being the second attempt of this nature in that blinde pat of the World. In Poland, the difference between that King and Lubomirskie still continu'd.
But the generality of the Polish Nobility not only appeard to Mediate on his behalf, but seeing no effect of their Mediation, entred into a Confederacy with him, against the King. This brought the King to hearken to some terms of Agreement. But while both sides were at work busie to contrive it, the Royal Party endeavouring to put a more speedy end to those Affairs, attempted to have surpris'd the Confederates at unawares; but the Design was so timely discover'd, that Lubomirskie, by an Ambuscado of his best Troops, cut off above Five Thousand of the Kings Souldiers, in such a place, where the King was forc'd to look on and behold the Slaughter of his men, with∣out being able to Assist them. Whether upon this occasion or no, is uncer∣tain, but a Peace immediately ensued, between the King and the Confederates▪ upon Condition, of a General Act of Oblivion, an Evacuation of Garrisons, and the Confederates to be Dissolv'd. Soon after, Lubomirskie, with both his Sons, kiss'd the Kings Hands, and took the Oath of Fidelity. Last Year you heard how Sabaday the great upstart Prophet to the Iews, went to Constantinople, to dmand the Land of Promise for the Iews: but upon his Ar∣rival, the Great Turk consulting with his Mufti and one of his Judges what to do with him, concluded, That he was to be dealt with as a Traytor to the Ottoman Empire, and so to be Flea'd alive; after which, that People fell very severely upon the Iews, and slew a great Number of them. But the Sentence was respited, and he only sent to the Prison of the Seven Towers in the Dardanelli, from whence he wrote a Letter to the Hebrews in Smyrna, encouraging them to stand fast in their Opinion; after that, taking upon him the Title and Personage of a Great King and Prophet; insomuch, that ma∣ny Thousands of his Religion made their Visits to him in the Prison. But the Visier taking notice of the great Confluence of People to him, and fearing their Principles might lead them to some Action prejudicial to the Govern∣ment, gave Order to bring him from the Dardanels to Adrianople, where be∣ing by a Learned Iew of his own Country, after seven days Conference with him, found to be an Impostor, the Grand Visier so wrought upon him by Threats and Promises, that he was content to lay his Royal Titles aside, and to take a servile Employment upon him in the Grand Signiors Court; lea∣ving to his Country-men only Shame and Repentance. To visit Sweden in the Circuit of this Year, we find the Swedish Prince highly offended with the City of Bremen, for encroaching too much upon the Priviledges of that Crown, and assuming upon themselves to be a free Mem∣ber of the Empire. After tedious Parleys, they come to Blows: Wrn∣gle lays close Seige; but Brandenburgh, Lunenburgh, and the Dutch, Engage in their Defence, bringing their Forces together for their Relief: the noise where∣of (for the Enemy now drew near) so far wrought upon the Swede, that he was willing to come to Composition; and at length, Articles are agree'd up∣on, and the Siege rais'd, upon condition, That they should clayme no Vote or Session in the Meetings of the nether Circle: That they should pay their Contributions, as thereby directed: That the Works of the City built upon the Kings Ground should continue: That they should forbear to use the Ti∣tle of a Free Imperial City. For other things, to enjoy their Customs, Privi∣ledges, and Ecclesiastical and Civil Rights, as in the Treaty 1648. But the Venetians have their Hands full, the Great Turk bending all his Forces to the Conquest of Candia. The Grand Visier had already laid Siege to the Great Town, and rais'd a Battery near the Lazaret, to hinder the Passage of the Veneian Ships for its Relief, and was so offended with the Bassa of Canea and Candia Nova, that he took off their Heads, for being defective in their Duties, as he pretended, the Summer before. The Venetians on the other side were very sdulous in the Defence of their Territories; solliciting all their Neighbouring Princes, and having already receiv'd great Encourage∣ments from the Pope: and therefore the Event of the Siege was to be this Year Discovered.
Anno Dom. 1667. Swedes offer a Mediation.THE Swedes had offer'd a mediation last Year, between the King of En∣gland, and the States of Holland; the result whereof was, That the King of England did accept of Breda for the place of Treaty;Accepted. and would send for the Management thereof, the Lord Hollis, and Mr. Henry Coventry, so soon as the Passports necessary for their Transportation should be ready:Breda the Place of Treaty. which being communicated by the Swedish Embassadors, they embraced the Offer most willingly; however, their preparations for setting out their Fleet were car∣ried on with all imaginable diligence: which the King of England saw; but re∣solving that they should waste this Summer in a fruitless expence, stood on∣ly upon his own Guard. A Valiant Act of Capt. Dawes.Some Ships the English had abroad, but not to do any considerable Service, but what their own Courage, when they accidentally fell in with the Enemy, led them to: among the rest, Captain Dawes in the Elizabeth, meeting with 15 Sail of Rotterdam Men of War, Fought with their Rear-Admiral of 64 Guns, and Five others of 48 and 50 Guns; and presently after, with the Admiral of 70 Guns, and two of his Seconds; yet got clear of them all, forcing the Enemy to lye by the Lee. Not long after, the same Frigat engaged with Two Danish Men of War of 40 Guns apiece; where after four hours Fight, Captain Dawes was slain with a great Shot; yet had the heart to Cry, For God's sake, never yield the Frigat to those Fellows. Not long after, the Lieutenant being desperately wounded, the Master succeeding him slain, the Gunner took place, who so well ply'd the two Danes, that they Steer'd away to their own Shore; while the English Anchor'd within a Mile of them, to repair the Damages which they had receiv'd. The next morning, though but badly ready, yet they re∣solv'd to expect the Danes again; who, though they were to Windward of the English, and had the advantage of the Current, yet they would not at∣tempt any thing urther; although the English shot off a Gun in Defiance, but could by no means come nigh them, and therefore bore a way for En∣gland. The English Embassadors enter Breda.By this time, the English Embassadours are Arriv'd at Breda, and had made their Publick Entrie, which was very Solemn: they were met a Mile from the Town by 200 Horse, sent by the Governor; with whom went the Com∣mander of the Town, in the Governors Coach: the Horse led the Van, then sixteen Pages on Horseback; and after them, four Trumpets, in the King of England's Liverie; after them, the Gentlemen of the Horse to the Embassa∣dors, followed by the Mareschal of the Embassie; who preceded the Embassa∣dors Coach, which was very rich, drawn with six Horses; besides three others of their own, and the Governors. At the Gate of the Town they were met and Complimented by the Governor, who passed with them in their own Coach to their House: but while they were busie at the Trans∣actions of Peace, it will not be amiss to follow the Dutch Fleet in their Mi∣litary Progress. About the beginning of Iune, they appear'd abroad at Sea, with a con∣siderable Fleet▪ and finding no Enemy to resist 'um, they kept plying upon the English Coast, for many weeks together. The Dutch At∣tempts upon the Coast. Burnt-Island attemp∣ted.They had toward the latter end of April, made an Attempt, with a Squa∣dron of Ships, upon Burnt Island in Scotland; but were beaten off with loss. And SheernessTheir next attempt was upon the Platform at Sheer-Ness; which being a place of small strength, and consequently unable to resist the Force of their
Artillery, after a stout resistance made, was quitted by Sir Edward Sprague. Animated with this Success, with 22 Sail they made up toward the Chain, though with some difficulty, several Vessels being sunk about Muscle-Bank, which was the narrowest part: Here the Lord-General was in person with a considerable Force to oppose them; however, the Enemy taking the advantage of an Easterly Wind, and the Tide, press'd on; and though their first ship stuck upon the Chain, the second brake through; and notwithstanding the stout re∣sistance which was there made, they clapt their Fire-ships upon the Mathias and Vnity which lay as a Guard to the Chain, and then upon the Charles the Fifth, all three Dutch Vessels,They seize the Royal Charles. which had been formerly taken from the Enemy. The same day they possessed themselves of the Royal Charles, which was twice set on fire by the English, and as often quench'd by the Enemy. After this, with the same advantage of Wind and Tide, they advanc'd with six Men of War and five Fire-ships as far as Vpnore-Castle; but were so warmly receiv'd by Major Scot from the Castle, and by Sir Edward Sprague from the opposite shore, that they receiv'd no small damage in their Ships, but more in the loss of a great number of Men; yet before they retir'd, they burnt the Royal Oak (having spent three Fire-ships upon her) and much injur'd the Loyal London and Great Iames,Royal Oak burnt. which had been sunk before, and lay the grea∣test part under Water. In their return, two of their own Men of War ran aground;Two Dutch Men of War burnt. though others say, so disabled by Vpnore-Guns, that they could not carry them off; and were fired, to prevent falling into the hands of the Eng∣lish. Upon this, Commissioner Pett,Commissioner Pett committed the person who was intrusted with the Yard of Chatham, and all the Naval Provisions, was committed close Prisoner to the Tower. While he was there a Prisoner, he was twice Examin'd by the Lords of the Council, for several great neglects, in not executing the Orders sent him for the safety and preservation of the Ships in the River. Upon which a Commission was issu'd out under the Great Seal, for a further enquiry into the whole matter. The next attempt of the Dutch,The Dutch come up into the Ri∣ver of Thames. was upon the River of Thames, into the Mouth whereof they stood upon the 27th of Iune with 43 Sail great and small, but made not any attempt more considerable, than to send some few men ashore to steal Sheep in the Marshes. Sailing downwards, one of their Flag-ships ran aground upon Blithe-Sands, where she lay till they were forc'd to unrig her. From hence sailing toward Harwich,Dutch land neer Harwich. they landed 3000 men near Felstone-Cliff, with a Stand of Pikes: 2000 of them adventured to make two Assaults upon Languard-Fort: the first dispute lasted about three quarters of an hour, the second one quarter; but they were forc'd to retire in such haste, that they left all their Ladders behinde, being hardly able to carry off their Dead, which were judg'd to be an hundred and fifty. While these Assaults were making upon the Fort, about 1200 that were left behinde near the Cliff, to secure their Retreat,Encounter'd by the Train'd-Bands. were encounter'd by the Train'd Bands under the Command of the Earl of Suffolk; and a smart Skirmish pass'd between them, and continu'd till ten of the clock at night, and was again re∣new'd by the return of the beaten Companies from the Fort: but the Horse not being able to come up, that Execution was not done upon them which o∣therwise might have been. However, the Dutch would not stay for their coming, but as soon as their Boats were afloat, they Embarqued with all the haste they could, and returned to their Fleet. From hence they came up as far as Hull-Haven,They come up to Hull-Haven, are encounter'd by several ships that lay there. where the Success then lying, with about eighteen other Men of War of the English, there happen'd a sharp Engagement with a Squadron of the Enemy consisting of eight ships. While the Fight continu'd, one of our Fire-ships wrought up to one of theirs, and grapling together, both of them burnt down, but so close to another of the
Enemies, that she took fire likewise, and blew up. In a short while after, ano∣ther of their ships took fire, and burnt down: and after that, another of our Fire-ships and one of theirs were both burnt, being grappled together. All the time of this Fight, the English made good their place, insomuch that another of their Men of War ran aground, and fir'd her self; and another of their Fire-ships was burnt, with the loss of one of ours. As they were about to draw off, they sent one Man of War and four Fire-ships toward the English; but with such ill success, that the formost of the Enemies Fire-ships, seeing the English ready with their Ketches to cut off their Long-boats, forsook the Vessel, which was presently seized by the English: the other three Fire-ships out of fear burnt themselves; which the Dutch Man of War seeing, retir'd to the rest of the Fleet. But then the English Admiral with his own ship bore up to the whole Fleet of the Enemy, and sent out a Fire-ship, which had wrought her self very neer one of the Enemies greatest Men of War, being stoutly seconded by the Man of War; but being gall'd by the shot of the whole Fleet, they thought it convenient to come off. Upon this, the English fall down to Gravesend; the Dutch Anchor'd in the Hope, but durst attempt no∣thing further, though both the Wind and Tide served them. By this Engage∣ment, the Dutch were reduc'd from 24 or 25 Sail, to 14. the English from 19 to 15. This happened upon the third of Iune. The next day they were pursu'd by Sir Edward Sprague, who was now re∣turn'd to his Command, to whom Sir Ioseph Iordan was also joyn'd from Harwich with upwards of 20 Sail of small Frigats: but little or no action hap∣pened, by reason that the Dutch avoided any further Engagement, keeping still at a distance. Dutch attempt to land neer Wenbury in Devonshire.Their next attempt was in Devonshire, where they endeavour'd to land at Wenbury; but the Militia of the Country gave them so warm a return of their Vollies, that they immediately retir'd with all the speed they were able, to their Ships. When this would not do, they sent another Boat with a White Flag, desiring friendship, and leave to buy fresh Victuals: but being answered that nothing of that nature could be done without leave of their Officer in chief, they made another attempt with twelve Boats full of Men, to have lan∣ded neer Cawland in Cornwal;Neer Cawland in Cornwal. while their Fleet Anchoring within Musquet-shot of the Shore, spent their shot in vain for above an hour, but were beaten off by the Foot which were plac'd upon the Shore in expectation of their com∣ing. Then they sent out another Boat with a White Flag and two Officers, desi∣ring to speak with the Commander in Chief; who being brought before Sir Ionathan Trelawney, they first desir'd, from their General, to know what News there was of Peace: Next, they desir'd to buy Provisions, excusing the Hostilities past, as done without their Generals order, who had no Commission to molest or trouble any People on Land; offering the Faith of the Seven Pro∣vinces to any that should be sent aboard their Fleet for their safety in going and returning. Sir Iohn dismiss'd them with promise of a speedy answer:Sir Jonathan Trelawney, Major Sparks, and Mr. Windham, sent aboard the Dutch Admi∣ral. Their Enter∣tainment. and upon consultation with the Earl of Bath, it was agreed that Sir Ionathan Tre∣lawney, Major Sparks, and Mr. Windham should go aboard. At their approach, De Ruyter met them at the Boat-side, and inviting them aboard, saluted them with 13 Guns; excusing what had past, and promising for the future, that no other acts of that nature should be committed while he continu'd on the Coast. De Wit, Doleman, the Count de Horne, with above 20 Captains more, attended the English at the Great Cabin, where they offer'd a Present to De Ruyter for his own Table, but refus'd any greater supply till Peace should be Proclaim'd. Accordingly, upon their return the Earl of Bath sent the Admiral a Present of fresh Provisions,A Present sent De Ruyter. with a fat Buck and some Fruit; which De Ruyter receiv'd with seven Guns, as an acknowledgement. Notwithstanding De Ruyter's Complement, after he parted from Plymouth, two of the Dutch Fleet came before the Harbour of Hoy, and advancing near
the Shoar, ply'd with their Broad-sides certain Works that were newly rais'd at the entrie of the Harbour; but after an hour and an half, they were forc'd to retire,Foy Harbour Attempted. with several Shots receiv'd in their Hulls, and the loss of one of their Top-Masts, and several men, without any loss to the English. After this, they were only seen to hover about the Coasts, but without any farther Attempts; and Peace ensu'd. For about the beginning of Iune,Plenipotentia∣ries meet, and Teat at Breda- the Embassadours of England, France, and Sweden, the Plenipotentiaries of the States and Denmark, repair'd to the Castle belonging to the Prince of Orange, where there was great care taken, to avoid all contests about Precedency. A while after, Mr. Coventry, one of the Em∣bassadors, being sent over into England, and having receiv'd the King's An∣swer and Resolution touching the Articles discuss'd and agree'd to by the Plenipotentiaries, return'd for Breda: so that upon the Twenty first of Iune, the Articles were sign'd by the Plenipotentiaries.Peace Conclu∣ded. And upon the Fourteenth of August, the Ratifications of the Peace were enterchang'd: The Mediators first bringing in the Ratifications, and other Instruments of the Dutch, French, and Danes, into the English Embassadors Apartment, receiv'd from them theirs in Exchange: Which done, the English Embassadors went into the Apart∣ment of the Dutch and their Allies, where they made and receiv'd the Com∣pliments usual upon the Conclusion of so great an Affair. The Peace was immediately Proclaim'd before the Doors of the several Plenipotentiaries, in their respective Languages. Afterwards, upon the Twenty fourth of August, it was publickly Proclaim'd in the City of London. And as if this had not been enough, it was afterwards confirm'd by an Additional Treaty, made and concluded by Sir William Temple, in Ianuary following. Having thus pursu'd the Series of the Dutch War and Peace, other inter∣vening actions, must not be omitted. It was murmur'd,Commissioners to take an Ac∣count of Publick Money. that the Publick Treasure was wasted and miss-spent; the King therefore to satisfie the People, Issued out a Commission to several Mem∣bers of both Houses, to take an Accompt of such sums of Money as had been rais'd, and assign'd to him, during the present War, being in all 2477500 l. granted at several times, by several Acts; with full Power to call to Accompt all Treasurers, Pay-masters, Receivers, and all other Agents and Persons what∣soever. And what had not been lately practis'd before by the King, this Year the Feast of St. George was kept in his Palace of White-Hall. The Earl of Southampton, Lord High Treasurer of England,The Office of Lord High Treasurer in the Hand of Com∣missioners. being now lately Dead, the King did not think fit to give the Place to any particular Person for the present, but made the Duke of Albemarle, the Lord Ashley, Sir Thomas Clifford, Sir William Coventry, and Sir Iohn Duncomb, by a Com∣mission under the Great Seal, his Commissioners for executing that Office. The Parliament had met according to the Kings Proclamation, in Iuly; but were then Prorogu'd again,Parliament met. till the Tenth of October: at which time being again Assembled, the King gave for one reason of his last Prorogation, That it was to give himself time to do some things in the mean time, which he hop'd would not be unwelcome to them, which he had since done: leaving his other Reasons to be deliver'd by the Lord Keeper; who not only afterwards en∣larg'd upon the King's Reasons for the said Prorogation, but also recom∣mended to them the Obstructions of Trade, and the settlement of such a Ballance of Trade between England and Scotland, that neither we should be prejudic'd by the Import of their Commodities here, nor they put to seek new places of Vent abroad. As to the Money rais'd for the War, he told them what the King had done, in reference to calling all Persons to Account; and had committed the Examination thereof to themselves, to follow their own Method; adding withal, that if any grievances had happen'd, his Majesty would be as willing to have them Redress'd, as they to have them Represented; not doubting, but that they would endeavour to Imprint the known Truth
into his Subject hearts: that there was no distinct Interest between the King and his People. The Commons taking into Consideration the King's Speech, resolv'd to re∣turn him their humble Thanks; to which purpose, having obtain'd the Con∣currence of the Lords, the Two Houses in a Body attended the King in the Banqueting-House, where the Lord Keeper, in the Name of the Two Houses made known to the King, That they, His Majesties Loyal and Faithful Subjects, having taken into their serious Consideration the Speech, wherein he was pleas'd to let them know the reasons of their last Prorogation, which was to give himself time to do some things which would not be unwelcome to them but be a Foundation of a grea∣ter Confidence for the Future, between the King and them: They found themselves in duty bound to give him thanks; and particularly, for that he had Disbanded the New-rais'd Forces: that he had dismist the Papists from his Guards, and other Military Imployments: for his Care in quickning the Execution of the Act re∣straining the Importation of Canary: That He had seen the Canary Patent Va∣cated: And Lastly, for his displacing the Lord Chancellor. But the Parliament having Sate till the Middle of December, pass'd several Acts; among the rest, An Act for taking an account of the several Sums of Money therein mention'd. An Act, for Banishing and Disenabling the Earl of Clarenden; to which, when the King had given his Consent, by Commissi∣on, they Adjourn'd till February.Parl. Adjourn'd Commissioners appointed to hear the com∣plaints of Sea∣men.And because it was a general Complaint among the Seamen and Souldiers who had been in Service, that they were frequently constrain'd to give mo∣ney, or lose some part of their Wages to recover the rest, the King therefore for the more effectual Redress of such abuses, if any were, appointed the Duke of York, and several of the Lords of the Council, to receive and hear all such Complaints as any Sea-man or Souldier should make of any Exactions practis'd upon them by any of the Officers, Sub-Officers, or Clerks in the Navy-Office, or Treasury-Office: that if the same should appear to be true, Justice might be done upon the one, and Satisfaction given to the other. Mr. Cowley's death.About this time dy'd Mr. Abraham Cowley, one of the chiefest Ornaments of this Age, whose Immature Death, succeeding Ages will lament, when they finde what Treasures they have lost, by his untimely Fate. His temperate Life did not deserve so short a Period: But Heaven perhaps, thought he had done enough, that could not well do more, than make himself Immortal. His Body was convey'd from Wallingford-House to Westminster-Abbey, at∣tended by many Persons of very great Quality: over whose Grave, has been since Erected a stately Monument, to Eternize his Memory. In America, the French had a Design upon Mevis, having drawn out all their Forces from Martenico, Guadaloup, and St. Christophers; strengthen'd also with an additional force of their own, and two Dutch Men of War, being in all 32 Sail: but being encountred by 10 Sail of the English, who were sent by Lieutenant General Willoughby for the relief of the Island,Dutch beaten by Sir John Harmon in the West-Indies. the English so smartly Encountr'd them, that he Chased them home to St. Christophers. Upon the Return of the English to Mevis, they found Sir Iohn Harman new∣ly Arriv'd there, with seven Men of War, and two Fireships, who under∣standing what had happen'd, resolv'd to fall upon them in their own Ports, which he did so effectually, that he burn'd their Admiral, and six or seaven of their best Ships more; the rest, all but two, were sunk, partly by the industry of the Enemy, partly by the Shot of the English Ships: in which Service, the English lost not above 80 Men, with little damage to their Vessels. From the other Indies two ships about this time arriv'd under the Convoy of Sir Ieremy Smith, who having been cruising in the Streights the most part of the Summer, had met with no opportunity of considerable action, more than
to keep the Dominion of the Seas. However, at length he made a shift to meet with two Dch East-Indie-Prises outward bound, which he brought home; re∣turning into St. Helens-Road toward the end of September. Nor did the Dutch at any time Triumph where the number was not too un∣equal, as appeared by the success of six of our smaller Frigats, who falling in with three Holland Men of War of 42, 36, and 30 Guns, and two Merchant∣men to the Northward, took the three Men of War and one of the Merchant∣men,Three Dutch Men of War and a Prize taken. being forc'd to quit the other, upon view of a whole Squadron of the E∣nemy. At home, the King had notice of the great concourse of very many persons of the Romish Religion to the Chappels of St. Iames and Somerset-house; and therefore gave order in ouncil,Proclamation against Papists. That if any of his Subjects, not being of the Families of the Queen, or Queen-Mother, or of Forrein Embassadors, should repair to hear Mass or perform any Exercises of the Romish Religion, that they should be severely prosecuted, and such punishments inflicted upon them, as by Law were provided. And for the better discovery of such as were addicted to Popery, the Lord-Keeper was Authoriz'd to issue out Commissions of Dedimus Potestatem, for administring the Oaths of Allegeance and Supremacy in all places of England and Wales, where they had not been already granted by the Lord-Chancel∣lor. The abuses also of the Company of Woodmongers were look'd into,Woodmongers Charter deman∣ded. and upon frequent consultations thereupon had, it was thought fit, that for the con∣veniency of the Publick, their Charter should be surrender'd; which when they peremptorily refus'd to do, the Atturney-General was order'd to proceed against them by Quo Warranto, and by Information in the Crown-Office. The City began to rise with more splendor now than ever; which the King to forward as much as in him lay, as soon as the Foundation of the Royal Exchange was appointed to be laid,His Majesty lays the first Stone of the Royal Exchange. was pleased to be present and assisting at the Solemnity; His Majesty there placing the first Stone with the usual Cere∣monies. Not long after, the Duke of York, attended with several persons of Honour, went into the City, and being honourably receiv'd by the Lord Mayor and Al∣dermen, with the usual Ceremonies upon such occasions,The Duke of York the se∣cond. laid the first Stone for a second Pillar: which gave so great an encouragement to the Workmen, that never did so large a Structure go on with greater Vigour. The remaining part of the Year was more for Counsel than Action: And therefore the King▪ for the better regulating affairs for the future, among other Important parts thereof, taking into his consideration the ways and methods of managing matters at the Council-Board, establish'd several standing Committees for several businesses, with regular daies for their Assembling. And not content to have Peace at home, His Majesty, to shew himself a Me∣diator among his Neighbours,Earl of Sand∣wich sent to Portugal. Ja∣nuary 22. sent his Embassador the Earl of Sandwich on that Grand Errand of making Peace between Spain and Portugal, who soon af∣ter he had his dispatches, arriv'd at Lisbon. He no sooner had had his Audience, but upon the resignation of the former King, the Infanta his Brother took possession of the Scepter. However, so well he manag'd his employ, that in a short while after the Articles were fully agreed on between the two Crowns of Spain and Portugal, and the Ratification mutually exchang'd between the said Embassador of England and the Spanish and Portugueze Commissioners, and soon thereupon publish'd both at Madrid and Lisbon. The Insolencies of private Men of War were about this time very great,February. and therefore the King taking into consideration, as well the safeguard and pro∣tection of his own Subjects as of his Allies, the disturbances of Commerce, and the diminution of his own Revenues in his own Ports and Harbours, set forth a Proclamation, commanding an inviolable Tuce and Cessation in his own Ports, Havens and Roads.
Proclamation to hinder the roving of pri∣vate Men of War.That his Subjects by Sea and Land should do their utmost to hinder the roving and hovering of any Men of War neer the Entry of any of his Ports or Harbours. That if any Men of War of one side, came into any Port where were Merchant-men of another party, the Merchant-men should be suffer'd to depart two Tides before the Men of War. That no Privateer with forrein Commission should stay above 24 hours in any of his Majesties Ports or Harbours. That none of his Majesties Sub∣jects should contract or deal with any forrein Man of War. That no Mariner or Officer, being the King's Subject, should presume to put himself into the service of any forrein Prince or State. Toward the beginning of this Moneth, the Paament, according to their Adjournment,February. met. At which time, the King coming to the House of Lords, directed his Speech to both Houses, telling them, that he had made a League Defensive with the States of the Vnited Provinces, with a League also for an Efficacious Mediation of Peace betwixt the two Crowns, into which Sweden had offer'd to enter as a Principal. Then putting them in minde of his vast Expences pas, and necessarily to ensue, by the building of Ships, and setting out another Navy, he desir'd their speedy assistance with Money. Lastly, he recommended to their care to consider of a course how to beget a better Union of his Protestant Subjects. After this Peace with the Dutch, ensued the Peace with Spain; not only re∣newing the ancient Friendship, but enlarging the Trade and Commerce be∣tween both Kingdoms, concluded in May last, and this Moneth Proclaimed in England. Count de Dona the Swedish Embassador dies in Eng∣land.Toward the beginning of the Moneth, the Count De Dona, Embassador Ex∣traordinary from the Crown of Sweden, arriv'd at London; but before he had concluded his Negotiation, died in May following. Toward the latter end of the Moneth, Sir William Temple, Envoy Extraor∣dinary from his Majesty to the States of the Vnited Provinces,Maritime League conclu∣ded with the Dutch by Sir Wil. Temple. having exchang∣ed the Ratification of the late concluded League, concluded another League concerning Maritime Affairs; and having sent it into England for confirmation, departed from Holland for Brussels. Charles the second laun∣ched, March 3. 1666/7.The third of this Moneth was Launch'd that Famous Ship, still known by the Name of Charles the Second. This Moneth also, upon the Petition of the Commons in Parliament, a Pro∣clamation was issu'd forth, to enforce the Laws against Conventicles, and for preserving the Peace of the Nation against unlawful Assemblies.Proclamation against Papists. Forein Affairs, 1667. A Gentleman of Savoy, having his Head cut off at Geneva, for some Crime committed there; the Duke of Savoy did so exceedingly resent their Procee∣dings, (which he affirm'd to be both against the last Treaty between that City and him, and against the Law of Nations) that he was resolv'd to employ his Arms against them. The City of Geneva appeal'd to the Switzers, who in a Dyet at Baden, as well of the Roman-Catholicks as Protestants, where were also present the Embassadors of the Emperour and King of Spain, una∣nimously resolv'd to give their Assistance to Geneva. The Emperour's Embas∣sador declar'd the like in the Name of his Master, who was oblig'd to protect Geneva as an Imperial City, being unjustly assaulted by a Prince of the Empire. The Spanish Embassador deliver'd himself also in their favour. But the main Affair which alarm'd the Princes of Europe, was the pretension which the King of France made to the Spanish Netherlands, and his great prepa∣rations to get the possession of what he laid claim to, by force of Arms. Ca∣stle-Rodrigo represented to the King of France the scandal which would be given
to all the World, when they should see him engaged in a War against a Brother of only six years of age, and a Regency subordinate to the Laws of a Testator, without any form of Justice, or demand of satisfaction: That he doubted not but the Queen his Mistriss would willingly refer her self to the Princes of the Roman Empire, to the Crown of England, or the Vnited Provinces: And there∣ore left it to his consideration how unjust it would be to attempt any Invasion without those Formalities and Interpositions which the Christian Princes had always observed. Of this the King of France takes little notice: for he thought he had done e∣nough a little before, by his Letter to the Queen of Spain, wherein he wrote to her, that she could not but know the right which the Queen his Wife had to several Territories of the Netherlands▪ which she knowing to be solid, had desir'd her Majesty to take particular Cognizance of, and do her Justice therein. That she in her Answer had not only pretended that she could not upon any considera∣tion of that Affair enter into a discussion thereof, but had sent Orders to the Governour of Flanders to administer the Oath of Fidelity to be administred to all the States and People of that Country; which being an absolute refusal of doing him Justice, had put him upon a necessity of being wanting to his Ho∣nour, to himself, to his Queen, and the Dolphin his Son, should he not by force of Arms endeavour to obtain that reason which had been denied him. The Queen of Spain returns for Answer, that the King of France could not be ignorant of the just Rights of the King her Son: however, that she was willing to enter into an Amicable Treaty, wherein the Rights of her Son and Him might be seasonably examin'd, so that Justice might take place by the ways and means most proper. But the King of France, not liking these delays of Words, falls into the Spanish Territories in the Netherlands, and takes Tournay, Doway, Bergen St. Winox, Courtrich, Oudenard, and Lille; and almost wholly reduces those parts under his Jurisdiction: and besides all this, he defeats a great part of the Spa∣nish Army under Marcin, killing 2000 upon the place, and pursuing the rest to the very Walls of Damin. On the other side, he sends the Duke of Crequi with a Body of 8000 men, to secure Alsatia, and to prevent any Succours that the Emperour might send: And hearing that his Forces were upon their March, commanded the Prince of Conde, as Generalissimo of that place, to send a supply to Crequi to lie in their way. Toward the latter end of the Year, he fell into Franche Comte, where the Prince of Conde took Bessanson, Dole, Gray, Besterans, Rochefort, and so many other places, that by the latter end of February the Conquest of that place was wholly compleated. Though the Swedes stood firm to England during the War, yet now that the King of England had concluded a Peace with the Dutch, they also did the same. The chief Conditions of the Treaty were, That Swedeland should give up all their pretensions upon account of the Fort Cabo Corso in Guiny, and the Ship Christina. That the Swedes should give up all their Rights to the East-Indies, and neither directly nor indirectly sail into those Coasts upon the account of Trade; For which the King of Sweden should receive from the Dutch the sum of 140000 Crowns. This Year, toward the latter end of May, died Pope Alexander the 7th, in the sixty ninth year of his Age, and the twelfth of his Papacy. In his place, after several warm disputes, was at length chosen Iulio Rospigliosi of Pistoya, Secretary of State to the late Pope deceased. He entred upon the Chair in the 71 year of his age, by the Name of Clement the ninth. As for the Venetian, he had his hands full this year, the City of Candy being now closely Besieged; but though it were with greater numbers Assaulted, it was with greater courage all this year defended.
Nor was Poland free from the Irruptions of the Tartars, who had almost de∣feated the Polish General Sobieskie, but that he made a timely Peace with them upon condition of a general Oblivion, release of Prisoners on both sides▪ and a sum of Money to be paid them. Anno Dom. 1668. Prentices make a Tumult.TOward the end of March, several idle persons in and about the City being got together, and abusing the Liberty givn 'um by the Holy-days, it be∣ing then Easter-week, tumultuously took upon 'um to pull down Houses of ill fame about the Suburbs, according to former practises; though their chief de∣signe was to Steal and Plunder: Some mischief they did, and more intended, had they not been dispers'd by the Guards of Horse. The Scandal lay upon the Prentices, but afterwards it appear'd otherwise. Four of the number that were apprehended, were upon Tryal found Guilty, and Executed, two of their Heads being set upon London-Bridge. May 1668. His Majesty goes to the House, signes several Bills, and adjourns the Parliament. Lord Vaughan Chief-Iustice.The twelfth of this Moneth, the King went to the House of Lords, where he was presented by the House with several Bills; the chief whereof was one for the raising of 310000 l. by way of Imposition upon Wines and other Liquors; which being pass'd with the rest, the Parliament was adjourn'd till the 11th of August next ensuing. The place of Lord Chief-Justice of the Common-Pleas being vacant, Sir Iohn Vaughan was at the latter end of this Moneth solemnly Sworn Serjeant at Law, and being the next day advanc'd to the vacant Dignity aforesaid, took his place accordingly in Court. Iune 1668. Bridge-Town burnt.This Moneth arrived News, that came then too soon, of the burning of the Bridge-Town, being the chief place of Trade in the Barbadoes; the Fire not on∣ly consuming the greatest part of the Houses, but also blowing up the Magazine, to the great detriment of the publick, as well as private persons. But as it fares with most convenient Situations, all hands going to work, it quickly flourished again, being above half rebuilt before the latter end of the year. August 1668. Sir William Godolphin Knighted, and made Resident-Embassador in Spain.His Majesty had his Embassadors of Envoys in most other parts of Christen∣dom, only Spain; and therefore having first conferr'd the Honour of Knight∣hood upon Sir William Godolphin, hs made choice of him to reside as his Em∣bassador in the Court of the Catholick King, sending him away with all con∣venient speed. And to keep a Correspondence with the Grand Signior, for the good of the Merchants, Sir Daniel Harvey was sent much about the same time Embassador to Constantinople. These were no sooner gone, but Monsieur Colbert arriv'd at London, as Em∣bassador from the King of France. Sept. 1668.At the beginning of this Moneth, the Duke of York went for Dover, neer which place, in a Tent erected for that purpose, he took the usual Oath of War∣den of the Cinque Ports. And to shew that his Majesty was not unmindful of keeping a Watch up∣on the Proceedings of the Netherlands, it was not long after, that Sir William Temple, now the King's Embassador Extraordinary in Holland, made his pub∣lick Entry into the Hague, and had his Audience of the Deputies of the States. It was in August expected the Parliament should have met again; but the King by his Proclamation, for great and weighty considerations, adjourn'd them to the tenth of November ensuing. Duke of Mun∣moth made Captain of the Horse-Guards.In November, upon the Resignation of the Lord Gerrard, the Duke of Mon∣mouth receives the Command of the Life-guards of Horse, being openly con∣ferrd upon him by the King.
Some few days after Pietro Mocenigo,Venetian Em∣bassador has Audience. Embassador from the Republick of Ve∣nice, made his publick Entry, and had Audience of his Majesty. And now Mr. Secretary Maurice growing old, and ti'd with State-Affairs, craves leave of the King to make a resignation of his most important employ∣ment; which being consented to by his Majesty,Sir John Tre∣vor made Se∣cretary. Sir Iohn Trevor Knight▪ suc∣ceeded him, who at the same time taking the usual Oaths of a Privy-Councel∣lor, soon after was admitted to take his place at the Council-board. Nor was the King less careful of the Church than State; this Moneth be∣ing famous for the Consecration of that Learned Prelate Dr. Iohn Wilkins Bi∣shop of Chester,Dr. Wilkins Bishop of Che∣ster. in the Chappel of Ely-House. His Majesty's Navy, though considerable, had done little else but shew'd its Grandeur all this Summer; when on a suddain Sir Thomas Allen, being di∣spatch'd for the Mediterranean, appears before Argier; where though at first they stood upon their terms, yet when they saw him preparing to use force, their Stomacks began to come down,Sir Thomas Allen made Peace with Argier. so that they immediately offer'd a release of all the Captive English which had been taken by them belonging to Tangier. They also agreed to the former Peace made between the King of England and them, with some additions, which were signed by them and Sir Thomas Allen, to this effect. That all their Captains should be commanded to let all English Vessels pass with∣out damage or molestation, upon their shewing English Colours. If in any Vessel the English were equal to the Strangers, then they should be free; if the Strangers ex∣ceeded the English, then Lawful Prize; however, if they shew'd an English Pass, to be let go. That none of their little Frigats with Oars shall stop any Vessel laden with Pro∣visions or Ammunition for Tanger. That they shall not deliver any of their little Frigats with Oars to any of the Salley-men to make use of. That if any of their little Vessels intended for Tangier, they should take a Pass from the English Consul at Argier. From thence he sail'd for Tripoli, at whose appearance the King of the place sent out a Brigantine and a Favourite of his to bid him welcome, assuring him of his readiness to keep and maintain the ancient Friendship, and continue the Articles already agreed on. The Parliament, who had adjourn'd themselves to the first of March, were about the middle of this Moneth by the King's Proclamation Prorogu'd,Decem. 1668. Parliament Prorogu'd. for many; weighty and urgent reasons, till the tenth of October following. The Births of Princes and Princesses, oftentimes the subjects of Great Histo∣ries, are never to be omitted:Ian. 166. Dutchess of York brought to bed of a Daughter. Therefore was this Moneth not a little signalized, seeing the Dutchess of York was about the middle thereof deliver'd of a Daugh∣ter, which was Baptized by the Name of Henrietta by the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury; the Duke of Ormond assisting as Godfather, the Marchioness of Dorchester and the Countess of Devonshire being honour'd for Godmothers. The King in testimonie of his Amity with Spain,Sir Edward Sprague sent into Flanders. had sent Sir Edward Sprague as his Envoy to complement the Constable o Castile upon his Entry upon the Government of the Spanish Netherlands; who having perform'd what he had in charge, return'd at the latter end of this Moneth. That which compleated the double date of this Year,The Duke of Tuscany ar∣rives in Eng∣land. was the coming of the Prince of Tuscany to compleat his Travels by a view of England, where after he had been magnificently Treated by the King himself, both at London and Windsor, and in many other Cities and places, by several of the Nobility and persons of Quality of this Kingdom; he departed for Holland, and so to his own Country.
Forrein Affairs, 1668. The Differences at Avignon being compos'd, the Citizens sent two Em∣bassadors, one on the behalf of the Nobility, the other of the Commonalty, to Rome; who being admitted into the presence of the Pope, sware Falty to him, after the usual manner; and shew'd their great Satisfaction of the choise which the Pope had made of Cardinal Rospigliosi his Nephew to Reside there, as his Legate. France may be thought to have no kindness for the Jesuits; however, the most Christian King could not be said to do amiss, not to let 'um Triumph over their Superiors: for Complaint being made, that the Jesuits in the Di∣ocess of Fambers had refus'd to give Obedience to the Bishop of that Diocess, the King gave leave to the Bishop to proceed against them by Excommu∣nication, according to the Priviledges of the Gallicane Church: whereupon, the Bishop suspended them from all their Functions, forbidding them to Preach, Teach, or Confess any person, within the Territories of his Dio∣cess. The King of France being now Master of several Towns of Flanders, late under the Jurisdiction of the Spaniards, and having totally reduc'd the Coun∣ty of Burgundy under his Subjection; of which, in favour of the Prince of Conde, he immediately granted two Reversions, one to the Duke D' Enguien Son of the said Prince, and the other to the Duke of Bourbon his Grand-Child; thought it convenient to listen to the Mediation then proffer'd by se∣veral Princes of Europe; chiefly, by the King of England, and the States of the Vnited Netherlands: so that a Treaty was concluded upon, and Aix la Chapelle appointed the Place for the Commissioners to meet in. In the mean time, while the Spaniards lay upon their Demurs, a League was Concluded by the Mediation of the Earl of Sandwich, the King of En∣glands Embassador at Lisbon, between the two Crowns of Spain and Portugal; a League of sincere and perpetual Peace, containing a Release of Prisoners, Nullity of Confiscations, Freedom of Commerce; and such other Usual Articles: which were in Six Months after Publication, to be Confirm'd and Ratifi'd by the King of Great Britain. And now, as if the General Design of Europe were Peace, the Com∣missioners meet at Aix la Chapelle; for the King of England, Sir William Temple; for the Dutch, Mr. Beverning; for the French, Monsieur Colbert; for the King of Spain, the Baron of Bergeick; who having some time before Sign'd Provi∣sional Articles, in order to a final Conclusion, whereby a suspension of Arms was granted, and the March of the French Army Countermanded; at length, fell seriously to their Work, so that by the second of May, the Articles of General Peace were sign'd by the Plenipotentiaries of both Kings; and af∣terwards, Proclaim'd through all the Chief places of France, Spain, and Flan∣ders; to the general content of Europe, and satisfaction of the Mediators. But notwithstanding this fair Peace, the Spaniards did not like the Neigh∣bourhood of the French; and therefore would have made an Exchange of some other Territories of theirs lying farther off, for that o Frnche Come. On the otherside, the French not satisfi'd with what they had got, Claim'd several Towns, as dependencies upon their late Conquests; as the Towns of Conde, Newport, and other places. Hereupon, to end these differences, and to settle the bounds of the French Jurisdiction, Commissioners are appointed to meet at Lille: but they determine nothing: upon which, the French King makes a positive demand of all that he Challeng'd; and the Spaniards Or∣der the several Commanders to have a care of the Defence of their several Charges. In which posture, we leave 'um hatching new Discords for this Year.
Leaving these great Actors upon the Stage of the World, we are com∣ing to one who is making his Exit; for the King of Poland, at the begin∣ning of the Year, had signifi to the publick Dyet of that Kingdom his Re∣solution to make a Resignation: many applications were made to him, whe∣ther Real, or out of Ceremony, not here to be determin'd, that he would please to change his purpose; and some other delays happen'd, as in a mat∣ter of so great importance, so that the Ceremony was not perform'd till Sep∣tember; at which time, the King appearing in the publick Assembly, and in a pathetick Speech insisting on his misfortune to meet with such bad times, and desiring pardon for what had been done amiss during the time of his Raign, departed out of the Assembly, and in his own Coach, leaving the Ca∣stle, went to a private House he had in the City. The Nobility would have attended him, but he refus'd it. But there were enough that ardently coveted what he had so calmly for∣saken. The Duke of Muscovy was urgent for his own Son: The Emperour for the Prince of Lorrain: And the French King for the Duke of Newburg, a Creature of his own. But the Pole refus'd all, but more especially the French, whose Embassador, the Bishop of Bezieres, they would not endure should stay in the Kingdom, to have any finger in the Election: Nor was any thing this Year concluded. In Holland, Monsieur Cariius put a very hard Riddle to the States, When they would be pleas'd to pay his Majesty, the King of Denmark, several sums of Money, which he pretended to be due upon Promise; particularly, 400000 Rixdollars from the States of Holland, and 14000 from those of Amsterdam. This Question occasion'd many Debates and Conferences, and was at length put to the Arbitration of the King of France. Now for varieties sake, and to shew there was some Justice at Rome, I must not omit an Act of the Pope at this time raigning: A Complaint being Ex∣hibited to his Holiness, by a person of Tivoli, that whereas he had liv'd seve∣ral years with his Mother, with great content and satisfaction, upon an E∣state of 1500 Dollars per Annum; His Mother falling sick, was during her sickness so far prevail'd upon by a Jesuit, her Confessor, that she had by Will given away all the Estate to the Order, not reserving any thing for the sub∣sistance of him (her Son). The Pope extreamly dissatisfi'd with this Com∣plaint, sent for his own Confessor, and in very severe Language commanded him to finde out the General, and in his Name to require him to write to the Superior at Tivoli to restore the Petitioner his Land again. Nor must we omit, now we are at Rome, the Canonization of an American Virgin, named Rosa, a Nun in a Covent of St. Dominick: For every body in England does not understand, what a glorious thing it is to be made a Saint. The Church was hung with Tapistry, and Inscriptions, in honour of the New Saint; on the Altar stood her Image; and about it, the Arms of the Pope, the King of Spain, the Kingdom of Peru, and this Religious Dominican. During the Te Deum, one of the Cannons of St. Peters Church was fir'd, a great number of Drums and Trumpets sounding, and several Vollies of shot given by a Squadron of Germans, drawn up neer the Church. After which, a solemn Mass was sung, by six Quires of Musick. In the Afternoon, the Pope heard Vespers in the same Church, present several Cardinals, with the Embassadors and Ministers of Forrein Princes; and the Evening spent in Lights and Fire-works. The Venetians are busied for the defence of their Candia; and by the As∣sistance of the French, hold the Turk hard to it, this year; besides that their Admiral Morosini, with Twenty five Gallies, some few Galliasses, and several Fireships, engaging above One hundred of the Turks Gallies, with Sixty Saicks, burnt, sunk and took the greatest part of them; among the rest of his Prisoners, Two Bashaws, with six Months Provision and Ammunition for supply of the Besiegers.
The success of Gayland, an Enemy of the English, must not be omitted; who being at Argilla, and hearing of a great Defeat given by Taffalette to Ben Buker, wherein Ben Buker himself was taken Prisoner, and that there was little hopes of getting another Army into the Field to oppose the Conquerour; and finding how the ill news work'd upon his own people, who began to threaten to desert him unless their wants were supplied; he got out of Argilla with 300 men, and Transported himself for Argier. The Prince of Portugal made Rgnt.At this time, about the beginning of March, the King of Portugal, having caus'd his Brother the King to resigne, married the Queen, and was by the three Estates of that Kingdom confirm'd in his Regency, and in a solemn manner they swore Obedience to him accordingly. Now though all things went well at home on the French side, yet they had not the success which they promis'd themselves at Madagascar, where by en∣gaging themselves in other peoples Quarrels, they not onely lost many Men, but carrying themselves too high and imperious, and forcing the Inhabitants to carry their Arms for them, the Natives taking hold of the opportunity, fell so heartily upon their new Lords, that they destroy'd the greatest part of them. But Queen Christina, having disintrigu'd her self out of these Hurly-burlies, at the latter end of the Year arriv'd at Rome, where her entertainment was Pompous and Magnificent: Nor did the Pope himself the next day disdain to give her a visit in his own proper person, glad no question of so Eminent a Proselyte. Anno Dom. 1669. THe 25th of March being past, the Year 1669 begins. A Year wherein there could be nothing more calm and quiet than the surface of the Eng∣lish Affairs, had not the future effects of its silent contrivances made it ap∣pear, that though action fail'd, 'twas busie enough in Council. Therefore En∣voys and Embassadors were frequently employed, a most certain Prognostick of active designes. Earl of Car∣lisle sent into Sweden.About the beginning of the Year, the Earl of Carlisle was sent Embassador Extraordinary to Sweden. While he repos'd himself in Copenhagen, in which Court he was well known, he receiv'd a Letter sent after him by the King of England, in return of a very obliging Letter from the King of Denmark; with the receipt whereof, the King of Denmark was so well satisfied and pleased, that at the seasonable instance of his Lordship, he was pleas'd to cause his Or∣ders to be dispers'd to all his Ports, particularly to his Custom-places and Ha∣vens in Norway, for restoring the Engish Trading to any part of his Kingdom or Dominions, and the same priviledges which they formerly enjoy'd, according to the Treaty concluded in the Year 1660. Being arriv'd in Sweden, among other Transactions, he had a private Audi∣ence, in which he presented the King of Sweden with the little George, worn by the Knights of the Order of the Garter;King of Swe∣den presented with the Gar∣ter. which the King received with great expressions of joy; being after that, solemnly and publickly, by a parti∣cular Commission, presented and invested by the said Earl with all the peculiar Habits and Ornaments belonging to the said Order. Other Embassadors were sent to other parts; as Mr. Montague Extraordi∣nary for France; Sir Peter Wyche for Muscovy. Earl of Win∣chelsey re∣turns.In Iuly, the Earl of Winchelsey return'd from his Embassie at Constantinople. Nor can History be so ungrateful to Learning, as to bury in silence the Ho∣nour due to its most bountiful advancers. It was therefore this Year that the University of Oxford, being assembled in a full Body, went to take possession of
the New Theatre,Theater at Oxford fnished. the magnificent gift of Dr. Sheldon Arch-Bishop of Canter∣bury; where after the reading his Grace's Grant by the Register of the Univer∣sity, Dr. South the University-Orator made a Speech sutable to the occasion. After which, several Panegyricks were pronounc'd in Prose and Verse; concluding the Ceremony with several sorts  Musick both Vocal and Instrumental. But in the King's Ears the discords of Schism were more unpleasing:Meetings sup∣pressed. for now from several parts of the Kingdom came several Informations, that they who separated themselves from the established Worship, met in greater numbers than formerly, to such a degree, as to endanger the publick Peace, and greatly to the contempt of the Kings Indulgence to Tender Consciences; which forc'd the King to issue out his Proclamation for the suppressing of such Meetings, by putting the Laws in execution, and proceeding particularly against the Preachers. Learning always deserves an honourable Mecaenas; and therefore the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury having upon satisfactory reasons refus'd the Vice-Chancel∣lorship of Oxford,Dr. Fell Vice-Chancellor of Oxford. Dr. Fell, with the greatest part of the Body of the Con∣vocation meeting at Worcester-house, Install'd the Duke of Ormond Chancellor of that University. The King was now diverting himself, together with the Duke of York; in the New Forest in Hampshire, when they both receiv'd an express of the Death of their Mother the Queen Dowager of England, who died upon the last of August at Colmbe,Queen-Mother of England dies. after a long Indisposition and decay of Health: which made them both repair with all speed to Hampton-court. Her body was for some time expos'd with usual Ceremonies in the Gallery of St. Columbes; after which, her Heart was in a Silver-Vessel, inscrib'd with her Name and Title, carried to the Monastery of Chaliot. Her Body was carried to St. Denīs, and plac'd in a Chappel behinde the Quire. In November following, she was buried after the Form and Magnificence which was formerly used at the Funeral of the Queen-Mother. This Moneth brought us news, that the Enemy was more than ordinarily busie about Tangier, appearing often, and in great numbers, both of Horse and Foot.The Moors at∣tempt Tangier, but beaten off. They laid two considerable Ambushes to have surriz'd the Garrison; but one was discovered by the Sentinels, the other by the barking of Dogs, purposely kept there by the People and Souldiers; by which means they were beaten off with considerable loss. This not taking effect, they appeared next day on the other side of the Town, and gave the occasion of a smart dispute for an hour, but were thence also forc'd to retire, much to their disadvantage. This made them quiet for some time, when on a suddain they again shew'd themselves behinde a Hill, neer a Fort call'd Iames's Fort; here as the Onset was powerful, so they met with equal resistance, and a courage so much supe∣riour, as quickly forc'd 'um to leave the Enterprize and many of their men be∣hinde, with the loss only of one Corporal: which this Year ended all the trou∣ble of that Garrison. The Duke of Ormond had been some time since call'd out of Ireland, who thereupon left his Son the Lord Ossory to command in his room: But now to take the charge from-both, the Lord Roberts arrives at Dublin. Upon the news of this change,Lord Roberts Lord-Deputy of Ireland. the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, the Provost of the Colledge, the Dean of Christ-Church, and most of the Clergy attended the Lord Ossory, where the one acknowledged the many benefits which the City had received from the Government of his Father and himself; the other, the many bene∣fits which the Church had enjoy'd, as well by their good Examples, as by the plentiful provision made them by the Clergy. The reception of the new Lord-Deputy was intended to have been made with much State and Solemnity; but he waving those publick Honours, met the Lord-Deputy and the Council at the Council-Chamber the same Evening after his arrival, where after he had taken the usual Oath, the Lord-Deputy deliver'd him the Sword. He was no fooner enter'd upon his Government. but he issu'd out a Proclamation, com∣manding
all Governors and Officers to repair to their several Charges and Du∣ties, not admitting any dispnsation to the contrary. Royal Exchange fish'd.London had long layn in Ashes, and the Confluence of all the World had been as long confin'd within the narrow limits of a Colledge-Court; but now again the Merchants, to their great satisfaction, and the lasting Merits of Sir William Turner then Lord Mayor, whose indaigable pa and zeal was Eminent in advancing and forwarding so great a Work, met in the Royal Exchange; a Fabrick equal to the Honour of the Undertakers, and holding a true proportion with the rest of the Goodly Buildings of the Reviving City. P. AssemblesBut now men began to listen after things a higher Nature, seeing both Houses of Parliament again Assembled, upon the 19th of October. The King in a Speech acquainted them With his joy to see them at that time, and the hopes he had of a happy meeting, which he promis'd himself, from the great experience he had of their Affection and Loyalty, of which he did not doubt the Con∣tinuance; briefly minding them of his Debts, which though pressing, he was un∣willing to call for their Assistance till this time: acquaining them also, that what they last gave, was wholly apply'd to the Navy, and to the Extraordinary Fleet for which it was intended: desiring they would now take his Debts effectu∣ally into their Consideration. Afterwards, hinting to them a Proposal of great Importance, concerning the Vniting of England and Scotland; which because it requir'd some length, he left that, and some other things to the Lord Keeper, to open more fully, which was by him done: and then both Houses Adjourn'd. Parl. attended the King in the Banqueting-House.At the beginning of November, both Houses, in pursuance of a Vote which they had made, attended the King in the Banqueting House, where the Lord Chief Justice Vaughan supplying the Room of the Lord Keeper, in the name of both Houses return'd their Humble Thanks to the King, for his Care of the Publick, in Issuing out his Proclamation for the suppressing of Conventicles: Humbly desiring his Majesty to continue the same care for the future. In Re∣ply to which, his Majesty return'd an Answer, to the satisfaction of both Houses. But now Christmas drawing near, and having sate above a Month without effecting any thing of consequence, the Lords sent the Usher of the Black-Rod to the House of Commons,Parl. Prorogu'd till February. to tell them, That by Vertue of the King's Commission, they desird their Attendance: who Attending accordingly with their Speaker, the Commission was read, and the Parliament Prorogu'd till the 24th of February next ensuing. At the same time that the Parliament of England sate at Westminster, the Parliament of Scot∣land sate at Edenburgh;Parl. in Scotland. where the Earl of Lauderdale having taken the Chair of State, as Lord Commissioner of Scotland, the Earls Commission was first read, and then the doubtful Elections of Members re∣fer'd to Examination. That done, the Kings Letter to the Parliament was twice read, seconded by a shorter from the Lord Chancellor, perswading them to a concurrence with the King in his Design of Uniting the Two Kingdoms. Then they pro∣ceeded to Elect the Lords of the Articles; the Bishops choosing Eight Bi∣shops; and those Eight, Eight of the Nobility, and these Sixteen, making choice of Eight Knights, and as many Burgesses: by whom, all Affairs were to be prepar'd for the House. During this Session, they Publish'd an Act for the Naturalization of Stran∣gers within the Kingdom of Scotland; Declaring, that all Strangers of the Protestant Religion, that should think fit to bring their Estates into the said Kingdom, or should come to set up new Works and Manufactures therein, should be Naturaliz'd, as Native-Born Subjects of that Kingdom, to all in∣tents and purposes. The King farther Declaring, That upon application by such Strangers made to him, he would grant them the free and publick use of their
Religion in their own Language, and the Libertie of having Churches of their own: However, no persons were to have the benefit of the said Act, till first by Petition to the Lords of the Privy-Council, containing an exact de∣signation of their Names, and places of Birth, and former residences, and that tey be of the Protstant Religion. They also made another Act asserting his Majesty's Supremacy over all per∣sons, and in all Causes Ecclesiastical. By Sea, little was this Year done, only. Sir Thomas Allen being again sent with a Squadron of Ships about the begin∣ning of August, came before Argier;Sir Thomas Allen before Argier. and sending in his Boat, began to Treat: they in Argier seem'd willing to make restitution of such Money as they had taken from an English ship bound for the East-Indies; but not agreeing to some other demands, the Treaty prov'd ineffectual: thereupon he began actual Hostility, seizing a Bark laden with Corn which rode in the Bay, with eleven Moors, and a Brigantine, which he took in view of the Town. From hence, having done little or nothing else considerable, he set sail for Tripoly, the Ba∣shaw of which place sent him an assurance of his readyness to prserve Peace and a good Correspondence with the King of Great Britain. And after a short crusing up and down in those Seas, he return'd for Cadiz, where this Year leaves him. But being now so neer the English Territories at Tangier, the King of Eng∣land's Embassador Mr. Henry Howard must not be forgot, who being sent by the King his Embassador Extraordinary to the Emperour of Morocco (at that time Taffalette,Mr. Henry Howard sent Embassador to Taffalette. by vertue of his new Conquests) was now arriv'd at Tan∣gier; but understanding the danger of hazarding his person among those Bar∣barians, stay'd at that place, expecting a sufficient strength to convoy and con∣duct him to his place of Audience. In November, he receiv'd his Safe-Conduct, with an assurance from the Em∣perour that he should not fail of receiving all satisfaction in order to whatso∣ever he should desire for his security, and that he had already caus'd Justice to be done to such as were found guilty of giving any affronts to his people. And true it was, that he caus'd all the English which were taken by the men of Say since the Truce made with him, to be restor'd to their Liberty. But the further issue of this Embassie is to be expected in the following Year. And for this delay, the Emperour excus'd himself for not engaging so great a person in a Country where he had not power to protect him. Returning home,Duke of Albemarle dies. we meet with no small loss in the Decease of the Duke of Albemarle, after a long indisposition of Health, in the sixty second year of his Age. His Garter being brought to the King, was by his immediate com∣mand carried back to the Earl of Turrington, then by his Father's death Duke of Albemarle; with a further declaration that he should immediately also succeed in the place of Gentleman of his Bed-chamber, and Lord-Lieutenant of the County of Devon; and farther the King was pleas'd to send him word, that, as the last mark of Gratitude to the memory of the Deceased, he would him∣self take care for the Funeral: which, not long after, was perform'd with great Solemnity, at the King's particular charge. Nor did the Dutchess his Wife stay long behinde him,His Dutchess dies. dying toward the latter end of the Moneth; but was more privately buried in the Chappel of Henry the seventh. The Republick of Venice had ent a very honourable Embassie into England;Jan. 1669. in requital of which, the Lord Falconbridge, by the King's order, departed in the same employment to the Venetian State, being commanded in his way to visit some other Princes and States of Italy. Nor must we omit the kindness of the Grand Duke of Tuscany, who besides his civil entertainment of the Earl of Northumbrland, in acknowledgement of the courteous entertainment which he had received in England, built and gave to the King of England two very stout Gallies, for a guard of the Coast about Tangier, being of great importance to the service of his Majesty.
Parliament meet.The Parliament, according to the term appointed in their last Prorogation, was now assembled; to whom the King, as he was wont to do, made a short Speech, which was enlarged upon by another from the Lord-eeper. The King therein recommended three things more especially to them; the one was Unity among themselves, the Union of England and Scotland, and the Supply of his present and urgent Necessities. As to the differences among themselves, they were, as soon as sate, buried in oblivion, and all matter of prejudice threat∣ned thereby as suddenly vanish'd: For they were no sooner sate, but accor∣ding to his Majesty's Recommendation, both Houses came to a full agreement in the matter in debate between 'um, greatly to the encouragement of all that regarded the good of the Nation, as by the effect of their unanimous con∣sultations soon after appeared. Forein Affairs, 1669. The Treaty at Aix la Chapelle, one would have thought, should have brought a general repose to Europe; but jealousies of State had interrupted the quiet that should have attended upon it. The King of France's new demands of ap∣pendencies to his Conquests in Flanders startled the Spaniards; whereby Con∣tributions were exacted by the French from places under the Spanish Jurisdi∣ction, as they took it for granted: Nor did the States of Holland care at all for their Neighbourhood. This made the Constable of Castile, then Gover∣nour of the Spanish Netherlands in the place of Castel-Rodrigro, send his Com∣plaints to the French King, who appointed Commissioners to sit at Lille for the composure of all these differences. These Complaints the King of France eludes, by renouncing his pretensions in one place, and claiming in another; quitting Charleroy, and claiming Ipre▪ quitting Conde, and claiming Oudenard: in which contests the Commissioners at Lille having spent many Moneths in vain, were at length forc'd to break off without doing any thing. On the other side, Pompone the French Embassador endeavours all that might be to assure the States of Holland of the great incli∣nations of the King his Master to entertain all Friendship and good Correspon∣dency with them; telling them, that he doubted not but the cares which he had for the glory of Christendom, would in time sufficiently convince 'um of the vanity of those fears which some did endeavour to sow amongst 'um. Nevertheless, the States prepar'd for the security of their Frontiers, and gave particular order to fortifie several Towns of Overyssel, and upon the Borders of Westphalia. In this juncture of time came news that the King of France had laid double Impositions upon the Manufactures of Holland; in recompence of which kindness, the Dutch lay an Imposition upon French Wine and Bran∣dy; proceeding at length to do the same upon all French Wares, and forbid ab∣solutely the Importation of Brandy and all other Distill'd Waters into Holland: and upon this fuel, those silent Animosities fed, which afterwards brake out into greater Flames. But between the States and Portugal there began to be a better understanding, a new League being made betwixt them, with condition that Cochin and Cono∣mer in the East-Indies should remain to the Dutch, and that four Millions of Mo∣ney, due to the States, should be paid according to the Agreement made between them. The Venetians in Candy had held out a long while against the main force of the Turk, being assisted by many Princes of Europe, especially the French, first under the Command of Beaufort, but with ill success, he being slain in a Salley; after him, under the Conduct of the Duke of Navailles; who after many Sal∣leys and attempts, finding little good to be done, with what Souldiers he had left, deserts the Garrison, and returns for France, though not without some disgrace to his person: for the King of France hearing of his being landed,
commanded him to retire to his own possessions, forbidding him to see his Face. The Venetian seeing no hopes of keeping the Town any longer, surren∣der'd it upon Articles, and at length concluded a Peace inviolable for the ad∣vantage of Trade, and mutual quiet of both Subjects. King Casimire of Poland having resign'd, and being now retired into France; after many debates, and much contention, one Wisnowiskie, a Native, and one of the chief Nobility, was the Elected King, being Crown'd in September, and soon after Married to Eleanor Sister to the Emperour of Germany. This Year, Clement the ninth, of the House of Rospigliosi, died at Rome, ha∣ving promoted six new Cardinals a little before his death. A great Stickler against the Turks; his Gallies under the Command of his Kinsman Don Vin∣cenzo Rospigliosi, being very serviceable to the Venetian. After his Decease, Car∣dinal Rospigliosi, by vertue of a Brief, acted as Pope till the new Election. His death was followed by the death of the King of Denmark, to whom suc∣ceeded his Son Christian the fifth. The King of France at length signifies his willingness to refer the differen∣ces between himself and the Crown of Spain to the Arbitration of the Kings of England and Sweden. But all this hinder'd not the conclusion of the Triple Alliance, which was in the latter end of March in all points agreed upon by the Respective Ministers, meeting at the Spanish Embassador's-House at the Hague, where they sign'd and exchang'd all acts thereto belonging. Anno Dom. 1670. IN the beginning of April, the Parliament having prepar'd several Acts ready for the King to signe,The King signes several Acts, and adjourns the House. the King came to the House of Lords and gave his Royal Assent, signifying also his consent for an Adjournment till the 24 of Octo∣ber ensuing, having only granted the King an Imposition upon all Wines and Vinegar for such a certain time: And prepar'd a Bill, to Authorize such Com∣missioners as the King should nominate, for treating with the Scotch Com∣missioners in order to the Union desir'd. This Moneth also, the Lord Iohn Berkley arriv'd in Dublin, to succeed the Lord Roberts as Lord-Lieutenant of Ireland, who upon weighty considera∣tions was call'd back again into England. And now in this time of leisure,Dutchess of Or∣leans arrives in England. the Princess of Orleans comes to Dover to visit her two Brothers, his Majesty and the Duke of York; her stay in England was short, and her stay in this World not much longer; for in a short while after her return into France,Dies. she departed this life; the Court of England being not only grieved, but astonished at the suddenness of her death. Upon some apprehension of private designes, a Proclamation was issu'd out, commanding all Souldiers and Officers who had serv'd under the late Usurped Powers to depart the City, and not to come within twenty miles of the same for a prefix'd time, and in the mean while not to wear Arms, upon a severe penalty. The Parliament of Scotland now sitting,July 1670. Parliament in Scotland. Act for the Treaty of Union passed there. and understanding what the Par∣liament of England had done in that Affair, the Act for the Treaty of Union pass'd both Houses at Edenburgh, and was touch'd by the Commissioner with the Royal Scepter; of which, although the designe were of high concernment, yet because the Event was not correspondent, it will be enough to say, that the Commissioners on both sides had often Conferences, and great encourage∣ments from the King; but it met with so many delays and difficulties, that as a thing not to be compass'd, it was at length laid aside. The King was every year very intent upon the suppression of the Pyrates
of Argier, which was the only War he now had; wherein though his Commanders had prosper'd, by taking particular Prizes, and single Ships; yet never could they meet with a Body of those Rovers, to signalize their Courage, till now: neither was this a Body of above seaven men of War,Argier men of War destroy'd. too many for the Al∣gerines to run the Fate they did. There were the Hampshire, Portsmouth, Ier∣sey, and Centurion Frigats, under the Command of Captain Beach; these met the seven Argier Men of War, the least of which had 38 Guns, and full of Men, who after a short dispute, were forc'd to run all their Ships ashore, where they were all burn'd, two by themselves, and the rest by the English; besides the loss of most of their men, and the Redemption of 250 Christian Cap∣tives. Valour gets Renown, but Cowardise Disgrace: therefore Captain Iohn Peirce,Cap. Peirce shot to Death. and Andrew Legate, for the loss of the Saphire Fregat in the Streights, were both, about this time, which was in September, try'd for their Lives, at a Court Marshal held upon the River of Thames; where it plainly appear∣ing that the said Frigat was basely and shamefully lost, through the default and cowardise of the said Captain and Lieutenant, they were both Con∣demn'd to be Shot to Death, and soon after both Executed. Parl. meet.Both Houses of Parliament re-assembl'd, according to their Adjourn∣ment. Peace between Spain and En∣gland ratifi'd.This Month, the Ratification of the Peace between England and Spain be∣yond the Line was agree'd and Ratifi'd; and the Ratifications Exchang'd, and Notice given to the Governors in those Parts, for the punctual obser∣vation thereof, on both sides. Prince of O∣range comes in∣to England.In the mean while, the Prince of Orange Arrives, to give his Uncle a Visit: He came to London upon the 30th of October, but his stay here was not long; However, he visited both the Universities; and his entertainmen was in all places answerable to the Dignity of his Person. His coming, no question, had a Mysterie in it; but Mysteries of State are not to be div'd into: However, at the beginning of the Spring, he return'd well satisfi'd, both as to his Publick Reception, and private Concerns. Sir Thomas Allen returns from the Streights.In November, Sir Thomas Allen return'd home with his Squadron, having made many attempts upon the Pyrates of Argier, whose Cowardice still shun∣ing the English Force, made the Voyage seem the less successful;Sir Edward Sprague Com∣mands in his room. leaving Sir Ed∣ward Sprage in his Room. December seldom passes without some act of Villany: one more remarkable was at this time perform'd; for the Duke of Ormond going home in his Coach,D. of Ormond violently assaul∣ted in the Night was between St. Iames' and Clarendon-House, by six persons Arm'd and Mounted, forc'd out of his Coach, and set behind one of the Company, who was riding away with him; but he was at length Rescu'd, partly by his own strength, partly by others coming to his Assistance. A Fact which rendred the performers not so bold, as it render'd the Duke Memorable in his Forgiveness. Sir Edward Sprage was now the King's Admiral in the Mediterranean Sea; of whose Action, the next year must give a farther Accompt. The Parliament having at this time compleated several Acts, the King came to the House,The King passes some Acts. and gave his Royal Assent to them; being chiefly for Re∣gulation of the Law, and for an Additional Excise upon Beer and Ale. Popish Priests Banish'd.During this Session, the Lords and Commons by their Humble Petition Re∣presented to the King, Their fears and apprehensions of the growth and encrease of the Popish Religion: whereupon, the King in compliance with their desires, by His Proclamation, commanded all Iesuits, and English, Irish, and Scotch Priests, and all others that had taken Orders from the See of Rome, except such as were by Contract of Marriage to wait upon the Queen, or Forreign Embassa∣dors, to depart the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales, upon pain of having the Laws and Statutes of the Realm inflicted upon them.
Forrein Affairs, 1670. The first occurrence of Moment, is the Election of the new Pope, Cardinal Altieri, who at first refus'd the Honour; but the perswasion of the Cardinals prevailing, he told them, they had open'd upon Him the Gates of Hell; and so yielded to their importunity. He had no Nephews, and therefore Adopted Cardinal Paluzzi, whose Brother had Married his Neece. And now the Grandeur of the House of Orange began to revive again; The States Concluding in a full Assembly, his admission into the Council of State; and setling an honourable Pension upon him: Nor was he long without the Title of their Captain General by Sea and Land. In Flanders, some Alteration happen'd, by reason that the Constable of Castile growing sickly, could not abide the trouble of business any longer; he de∣parted privately to Ostend, and so by Sea for Spain: in his place the Count de Monterey was soon advanced. While Tangier makes us concern'd with the Moors, our nearest Neighbours, we must not omit the Actions of those people, whose Losses and Successes are to be narrowly observ'd by the English; either their Allyes, or Enemies. Taffa∣lette therefore having Intelligence that the people of Suz had united their For∣ces with those of Sancta Cruz, march'd toward the farther part of Suz, with an Army of 140000 Men, which at first so Terrified those people, that they presented him with their Leaders Head, and with great submission begg'd his Pardon. In confidence of this, Taffalette Marches toward Sancta Cruz; but the people Repenting of what they had done, underhand renew'd a League with the Governor of that Town; and unexpectedly setting upon the Army of Taffalette, quite routed it, and slew Taffalet's Brother who led the Van, himself only escaping with four Horse: but being soon recruited, he return'd to Sancta Cruz, and took it, and in a short while recover'd what he had so unadvisedly lost. But that which made the greatest noise in the World, was the suddain In∣vasion of Loraine, by the King of France. For the surprise of which Country Marshal Crequi being sent with a great Army, he over-ran the Country like a mighty Torrent: insomuch, that by the beginning of Winter there was scarce a Town in Lorraine that was not at the French Devotion. The designe of the King of France was to lay aside the old Duke, and confer the Dutchy on Prince Charles; on condition that he should raise the Fortifications of Chastel and Espinal, and give up to the King the Marquisate of Nomende. Certain it was, the King of France did send to the said Prince, then at Vienna, to offer him the Possession of Lorrain, on condition he would hold it of him, and to maintain no greater Number of Forces than he should think fit; telling him withal, that he were best have a care, that upon his refusal, the Duke of Guise did not accept of it upon the same terms. The old Duke thus outed of all, wandred up and down from place to place, begging Ayd of the Neighbouring Princes; who promis'd fair, but did little more, than come to a conditional Agreement for the raysing Forces for the common good and safety of the Empire. This Alarm'd not only the Dutch on the one side, but the Switzers on the other; the Effect of which was, that it made them both careful to put them∣selves into the best posture of Defence they might. While this part of Europe is thus preparing for Mischief, we find Russia over-whelm'd with an Inundation of Rebellion; where one Stephen Radskin a Tumultuous Ring-leader, having Poyson'd the Rabble with the fair pre∣tences of Liberty, the common motives to Insurrection, of a small Snow∣bal, grew to a mountainous Number; and having seiz'd the great Kingdoms of Astracan and Casan, and got into his Possession the Treasures of the Great
Duke in the chief City of Astracan; he grew Potent and Formidable, and made up for the City of Mosco it self, taking upon him the Title of Duke Radzin: But at length, after a short Reign, and having glutted himself with the Blood of as many Muscovitish Nobility as fell into his Power, he was overthrown by Dolkerouski General to the Emperor, and his whole Power totally dis∣perst. Anno Dom. 1671. The Dutchess of York dyes.IN the beginning of this Year, dyed Her Royal Highness Anne Dutchess of York, Wife to his Royal Highness the Duke of York, and Daughter to the Earl of Clarendon; being shortly after privately Interr'd in Henry the Se∣venth's Chappel at Westminster. The Parliament still sitting, had by this time prepar'd several other Acts rea∣dy for the Kings Royal Assent; which the King being present in the House of Lords, as readily pass'd. The chiefest, and most of Publick Concern was, The Addition which they made to the King's Revenue, by an Imposition upon Proceedings at Law; not being unmindful of setling such differences as might arise about Houses burn'd in the Fire of London: taking care also, to prevent the Disorders of Seamen,Parl. Prorogu'd. and the Imbezelment of the King's Stores. After which, they were again Prorogu'd to the 16th of April next ensuing. And an Address about English Manufactures.However, before they disperst, both Houses met in a Body in the Banqueting-House, where they made an , That the King would be pleased, by His own Example, to  the constant wearing the Manufactures of his own Kingdom, and discountenance the use of Manufactures made in Forrein Countries: who kindly receiving the Address, told them, That he had as little us'd in his own Person Forrein Manufacturs, as any; and would dis∣countenance them for the future in those that should. Earl of Man∣chester dies.Nor must we pass by the Death of the Earl of Manchester, Lord Chamberlain of His Majesties Houshold, a Knight of the Garter, and a Privy Councellor; though his loss was soon recompenc'd, by the succession of the Earl of St. Albans. Soon after dy'd the Lord Chief Justice Keeling; into whose Place, the Lord Chief Justice Hale was immediately Sworn: in his Place, Sir Edward Turnor was made Lord Chief Baron, and Sir Francis North Sollicitor-General. Nor was it fit the Offices of such Eminent Ministers of Justice should be vacant, when such Criminals were to be examin'd as were soon after discover∣ed: For upon the ninth of this Moneth, four men coming to the Keeper of the Jewel-House in the Morning,The Crown at∣tempted. and desiring to see the Regal Crown, were carried into the Room where it was kept; but they Stabbing and Gag∣ging the Keeper, an ancient man, and putting the Crown and Ball into two Bags, which they had brought for that purpose, fairly walk'd away, and had almost past all the Sentinels; but the Son-in-law of the Keeper casually passing by, and seeing the condition his Father lay in, run out hastily, crying out to the Guards to stop 'um: upon this they, mending their pace, made their own discovery. Being then commanded to stand, they fir'd a Pistol at the Sen∣tinel: but two of them were presently seized, carried to White-hall, and after Examination, sent back again to the Tower, to be kept close Prisoners where they had committed the Fact. To make an annual Record of St. George's Feast, is not necessary; but of this,King of Swe∣den, and Duke of Saxony by Proxies In∣stall'd Knights of the Garter. as being more singularly Signal, it may not be expedient to omit the re∣hearsal: For now it was that the Earl of Carlisle, introduc'd between his Roy∣al Highness and Prince Rupert, was Install'd as Proxie for the King of Swe∣den; and the Earl of Winchelsey, between the Duke of Ormond and the Duke of Buckingham, was Install'd as Proxie for the Duke of Saxony; both which
Princes were invested the year before: After them, the Duke of Albemarle, between the Earl of Sandwich and the Earl of Oxford, was Invested in his own Stall. Iune was Crown'd with the success of Sir Edward Sprague, who being now the King's Admiral in the Mediterranean-Sea, met with nine Men of War be∣longing to Argier,Sir Edward Sprague meets the Argerines, and destroys them. together with three Merchant-men, neer Bugia, who upon his appearance retir'd under the shelter of the Castle, and put themselves into the best posture of defence they could; but the English in the mean while at∣tacquing them with their Fire-ships, perform'd their business with so much va∣lour and success, that they et the most part of the Enemies ships on fire; those which escap'd the Flame, were seiz'd on by the English: the Men of War were the principal ships of Argier. And to compleat this Victory, Captain Beach brought in to the rest another ship of 40 Guns, and 350 men, which he had but newly taken. So that now Sir Edward Sprague, believing that by this loss the Algerines might be brought to an easie accomodation, made a speedy re∣turn to his station before that Port. This Moneth,The King takes a Progress. the King minding to look after the condition of his Western Sea-port-Towns, made a kinde of a Sea-progress. For arriving first at Ports∣mouth, he went in his Yacht to the Isle of Wight, where he took a view of the most considerable Ports of the Island; thence he return'd to Hurst-Castle; thence he went to view Corf-Castle; thence, returning for Portsmouth again, he sail'd away, attended by five Frigats, for Plymouth; thence back to Dart∣mouth, with an intention to return by Land to London. Observing this the great Proverb of The Masters Eye. The Moors and we were not yet so friendly, but that Taffalette, proceeding in his designe of attempting all the Christian Sea-port-Towns upon the Coast of Barbary, would needs visit Tangier,The Moors at∣tack Tangier, giving a warm attacque upon the Fort call'd Anne-Fort, though at a distance, firing upon our men in Rank and File, and falling back while others supplied their places; being the first time the Moors were observ'd to fight in such order:and are beaten off. but finding our men too hot, they soon retreated. And thus are the Moors become a part of the English History. Then was the Parliament again Prorogu'd from the 16th of April following till the 30th of October 1672.Parl. Prorogu'd The King, as it afterwards appeared, having now his hands full of forrein Consultations. Nor was it for nothing that so many Agents and Embassadors were sent a∣broad. Coventry Esq. for Sweden, the Lord Sunderland for Spain; it being the great care of Princes,Embassadors sent abroad. to draw what assistance they can from their E∣nemies: Sir George Downing for Holland; it being no less their care to offer all honourable terms of Peace if they may be obtain'd. At home, his Majesty, to reward Valour and Vertue, in consideration of that stout and memorable action perform'd by Capt. Boddison Captain of the Swallow, a Merchant-man of 150 Tuns, and 26 Men, who had fought against an Argerine of 36 Guns, and having Boarded him several times, forc'd him at last shamefully to leave him and six of his men-behinde, was pleased to order the Captain a Gold-Chain and a Medal. Nor was the City of London (having its publick Buildings recovered out of the late Ruines to a greater Splendor and Beauty than heretofore) less mindful to make an Invitation to his Majesty to honour their Lord-Mayor's Feast with his presence; which he did accordingly, to shew how much he was pleased to see the City so reviv'd from such a sad Calamity. The issue of Sir Edward Sprague's success against the Pyrates of Argier, was by this known in England▪ for he returning from the destruction of their ships to his former station before Argier it self, found a strange alteration among those people, for the Aga had taken off their General's Head, and soon after five of this General's Souldiers cut off the King Head; and brought it openly in to the Divan, crying out, they must have Peace with the English. Upon this they created a new King, who seeing the inclinations of the people, constrain'd
by their own necessities, thought it his best way to enter into a Treaty, which at length ended in a Peace as honourable and advantageous as ever was made between the English and those Rovers. Ian. 1671/2.It could no longer now be conceal'd what the secret Counsels of the Great ones had so long been aiming at: For now the King publickly intending War with the Dutch, openly Declared, That seeing all the Princes and States his Neighbours were making preparations for War both by Sea and Land, he look'd up∣on himself obliged, for the safety of his Government, and protection of his People, to make such preparations as should be answerable to the preservation of both: to which end he had given order for fitting and setting out a considerable Navy against the Spring; but Money was wanting, and his own Revenues all anticipated and deeply engaged. As therefore the necessity was inevitable, the Course taken was extraordinary: It being thought absolutely convenient to put a stop upon the paying of any Money then brought in,Stop upon the Exchequer. or to be brought in to the Exchequer, during the space of one whole year. To which, as to the last remedy, as the King himself de∣clared, nothing could have moved him, but such a conjuncture of affairs, when all the Neighbouring Princes and States were making such threatning preparations, that his Government could not be safe without appearing in the same posture. About this time died Dr. Cosens Bishop of Durham and Count Palatine there, in the 77th year of his Age, and was buried at Aukland neer Durham. Sir George Downing pres∣ses for answer to the King's demands. Sir George Downing being now in Holland, according to his particular Instructions, was very urgent with the States, in the affair of the Flag, and by several Instances and several Memorials press'd for an Answer to his Demands: but finding all their delays insufferable, and all his endeavours consequently fruitless, in a few Moneths return'd for England; but after a private Exami∣nation by some of the Lords of the Council, and report made thereof to the King,Sir George Downing committed. he was by his Majesty's Warrant committed to the Tower for not having obey'd the Orders sent him. It was not safe, while we are going to Wars abroad, to have dissention at home; and therefore the King put forth a seasonable Declaration of his will and pleasure freely to indulge all Nonconformists and dissenting persons in matters of Religion;Nonconformists indulg'd. asserting however his resolution to maintain the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England as it was establish'd. And now they, who would return no answer to Sir George Downing, are Summoned by Sir Robert Holmes to remember their Duty in another manner: For upon the 13th of this Moneth, five of the King's Frigats, crusing by the Isle of Wight,Sir Robert Holmes at∣tacks the Dutch Fleet neer the Isle of Wight. met with the Dutch Fleet of Smyrna-men, and others, to the number of 50 Sail, convoy'd by six Men of War: Above 20 of their Mer∣chant-men carried between twenty and forty Guns apiece. The English Fri∣gats coming neer, shot at them, to make them strike and lower their Sail; which when the Dutch refus'd to do, the Fight began in the Afternoon, and continued till Night; then three Frigats more coming in, the next Morning they fought again, and all that day. In the Evening, five of their richest Mer∣chant-men were taken; their Rear-Admiral was Boarded by Captain Iohn Holmes, but was so leaky that she sunk immediately. In this action Sir Ro∣bert Holmes was Admiral, the Earl of Ossery Vice-Admiral, and Sir Fresche∣vil Hollis Rear-Admiral. War declar'd against the Dutch.The first blow thus given, the King publishes his Declaration of War against the States General of the Vnited Provinces, to this effect: That the dissatisfaction his Majesty had in the carriage of the States General of the United Provinces towards him for some years past, being come to that pass, that be could no longer without the diminution of his own Glory dissemble the indignation rais'd in him,Mar. 1661/2. by a Treatment so unsuitable to the great Obligations which he and his Predeces∣sors had so liberally heap'd upon them; he was resolv'd to declare a War against them; forbidding all his Subjects to hold correspondence with them upon pain of death.War proclaim'd against Hol∣land This Declaration was with the solemnities openly Proclaimed at the usual
places both in London and Westminster; of which more in the succeeding years. And now to share in the Triumphs of this War,Sir Edward Sprague comes home. Sir Edward Sprague re∣turns, happy in the favours which his Prince did afterwards bestow upon him for his services in the Mediterranean Sea. It stock mightily in the Stomack of the Dutch, that the King of France should lay such Impositions upon their own Domestick Manufactures; and the King of France was glad it did; and therefore though they sent him word, That unless he took off those Impositions, he should not take it ill if they laid an Impost of 50 per Cent. upon Salt and all other Merchandises of France: And though they were at the charge of an Embassador to press for an Answer to this Affair, yet they found the King took no care to give 'um any satisfa∣ction at all in that particular. They therefore thus exasperated, lay the Im∣position. The King so exasperated,The French King continues, and increases Impositions on Dutch Goods, notwithstan∣ding their threats. French Warlike preparations breeds jealou∣sies. lays hold of the occasion, Taxes all Spi∣ces and Herring imported by the Dutch, and forbids his Subjects to lade any Brandy or other Commodities aboard any Holland-Vessels. Besides this, they saw the King of France's Forces drawing into a Body in Flanders, and that with such an unusual preparation, as the buying up of all the Flambeaux or Torches that could be got in the Country, as if the French intended to labour day and night, whereby all the adjacent parts began to be very inquisitive into their own strength. Cologne at odds with her Elector, comes with much ado to reasonable Terms, and in the mean time falls to Fortifying with all her might: and the Emperour took that City so far into his prote∣ction, that he sent the Marquiss of Grana to keep it in his Name,Cologne for∣tifies. to the great encouragement of the Inhabitants. Munster was so kinde as to offer this City his Forces for their assistance, provided they would admit of no other Gar∣rison; but they thought it not convenient to accept of his offer.The Dutch for∣tifie Mae∣stricht. The Dutch repair the Works of Maestricht, re-inforcing the Garrison with Men and Pro∣vision, fearing the violence of the Storm there.Newburg for∣tifies Dussel∣dorp, and Montery rai∣ses men in Flanders. The Duke of Newburgh for∣tifies Dusseldorp upon the Rhine, careful of the Imperal Territories. Monterey in Flanders makes it his utmost endeavour to raise Men and Money for the de∣fence of the remaining part of the Spanish Jurisdictions. In this interim of time, the two Dukes of Brunswick resolving to bring that City to that obedience which they affirm'd to be due,Brunswick Be∣sieged. and challeng'd from it, lay Siege to the Town with considerable Forces: the Townsmen within made a notable resistance for the time; but when the Duke's Army began to ap∣proach neer the Walls, and were ready to fling their Granadoes and other Combustible stuff in their very Houses; they were forc'd to surrender on Con∣ditions, that the Magistrates and Inhabitants should do Homage to the Duke of Wolfenbuttel,They surrender. as the rest of his Subjects, receive and pay his Garrison, and pay moreover a considerable sum of Money for their disobedience. Those Flames that could not have their will upon Brunswick, are now raging upon the beautiful Escurial, the most magnificent piece of work in all Spain, if not in Europe.The Escurial burnt. It was several days consuming; and among other things, was destroy'd the famous Library there; a loss the most considerable, as being most difficult, if not altogether impossible to be repair'd. But to return to other Combustions, in the midst whereof we finde the Dutch labouring all they could to get the Dane and Swede on their side. But the King of France had put the Dane and they far enough asunder;The Dutch en∣deavour to get Assistants. for the King of Denmark having referr'd the matter in difference concerning the re∣maining Subsidies due from the States to that Crown to the King of France, He makes an Award for the payment of five Millions of Crowns Principal▪ and one Million Interest; so that it was in vain for Amerongen to Sollicite there till the States had submitted to that advantageous determination. Besides that the continual Negotiations of the King of England's Embassadors and extraordinary Envoys had no small influence upon those Crowns; so that the Negotiation of Van Haren gave little satisfaction to his Masters. Their Consultations are therefore all employed for provision of Men
and Arms: and lest they should want a Head, the Prince of Orange is now by the general Consent of the States in a full Assembly,The Prince of Orange made their Captain-General. made their Captain-General, and Admiral, for that Campagne; engaging to renew it again, after Expiration, during Life: Commissioners were also appointed to Assist him; De Wit, Van Putten, and others. The Emperor of∣fers to Mediate.The Emperor seeing things at this height, offer'd his own Mediation be∣tween the King of France and the States; bu now prov'd too late. And as for the Queen-Regent of Spain, the King of France had sent to know Her po∣sitive Answer, how she would behave her self in this juncture of Affairs; but she being a Lady, took time to give in her Answer. Dutch Embassa∣dor slighted at Paris.Nor was it without some kinde of slight, that the Dutch Embassador was dismist from Paris; when desiring leave for his last Audience, and a Pass for the safe Transporting his Goods by Sea, Reply was made, That for his Au∣dience, he might have it so soon as he pleas'd; but for his Goods, they were to be view'd by the Officers of the Customs, before they could stir. Anno Dom. 1672. Convoys taken care of, for the Merchants.THE War with the Year being thus openly begun, the King of England in the first place takes care for the security of his own Subjects Tra∣ding by Sea, by allowing them sufficient Convoys, and giving them liberty to Sayl their Vessels with the assistance of what Forrein Marriners they could procure; taking particular Order also against the sculking, and absconding of such Officers and Sea-men who were his own Natural Subjects. And knowing that Actions of Importance depend in their success upon good Advice, he call'd to his Privy Council four persons of great Honour and Integrity: Henry Marquess of Worcester, President of the Council of Wales; Arthur Earl of Essex;Several Lords call'd to the Privy Council. Thomas Viscount Falconbridge; and George Viscount Hallifax; and soon after, Sir Thomas Osburn Baroner. While the King of England is preparing his Fleet by Sea, the King of France leaving the Management of Affairs at home in the Hands of the Queen, begins his March at the Head of his Main Army himself;King of France begins his March. and first he Arrives at Charleroy, the chief place of Rendezvous; whence he sends to Montery, to assure him, that though he were constrain'd to March through those Countries, yet he would take care, that not the least Act of Hostility should be com∣mitted. Turrenne blocks up Mae∣stricht.Toward the beginning of May, Turenne appear'd within a League of Mae∣stricht, which was soon after wholly Blockt up; in which condition the King leaving it, March'd directly with the gross of his Army toward Rhine∣bergh. Fight between the English and Dutch.In the mean while, at Sea, the English Fleet, being in all, English and French, 160 Sayl, had often sight of the Dutch; But upon the 28th of this Month, about five of the Clock in the Morning, a most brisk Fight began, near the Bay of Southwold. The Blew Squadron first Engag'd, and the Royal Iames was the first Ship that fir'd; next to which, his Royal Highness, who was becalm'd: but the Blew Squadron, and the French, having a Gale, came up with the Duke, and Fought briskly: In the Afternoon of the day, the Sove∣raign, St. Andrew, and about 20 more, getting the Weather-gage of the Dutch, were hotly Engag'd: about which time, the Iames being over-pres with Number of Men of War, and Fireships, a Flag-ship of the Dutch lay'd him∣self athwart his Hawser; but finding his Entertainment too hot, cry'd out for quarter; whereupon, the English entring, and leaving the Iames naked, the Fireships took their advantage, two of which were sunk, the third took place, and fir'd a stout ship, where the Earl of Sandwich perish'd for want of Relief;
but his Captain, Captain Haddock escap'd with a shot in his Thigh. The Henry, and Two other ships more, were likewise disabled. At Night the Dutch stood away; which the Duke perceiving, stood after them, keeping in sight of their Lights all Night: In the afternoon of the next day, the Duke hors'd up his Bloody Flag, and bore lasking upon the Dutch, intending a second Engagement: but on a suddain, there fell such a thick Mist, with much Wind, that they could not see a ships length: about an hour and a half after, it cleer'd up again, and the Bloody Flag was put out a second time; but the Fog com∣ing thick again, nothing could be done. Whereupon, the Duke finding him∣self near the Oyster-Bank, Tack'd about, stood away some Leagues, and came to an Anchor: there he staid all Night, and the next Morning till Ten a Clock, but could hear nothing of the Enemy; who were retir'd to the shal∣lows of their own Coast. In this Engagement were lost out-right, the Earl of Sandwich, Captain Digby in the Henry, Sir Iohn Cox in the Prince, Sir Fres∣chevile Hollis, Monsieur de la Rabinier the French Rear-Admiral, with several others: several others Wounded; about seven hundred Common Sea-men slain; and as many Wounded; and the Royal Iames only Burn'd. In the Henry, not an Officer was left alive, and above half the Men slain. The Katharine was taken, and the Captain put on Board a Dutch ship, and the Men clapt under Hatches, the Dutch going about to Fire the ship, at what time a French Sloop came in, and cut away the Fireships Boat; and then the English finding a way to break out upon the Dutch, redeem'd both themselves and the ship, and brought away Sixteen of the Dutch Prisoners, that were a little before their Masters. On the Dutch side were lost, Admiral Van Ghent, and Captain Brakhel: most of their great ships miserably torn; among the rest, two sunk, one by the Earl of Sandwich, another by Sir Edward Sprage▪ one taken, and one Burn'd; besides a very great loss of Common Sea-men: another great Vessel, suppos'd to be a Flag-ship, was seen to sink neer Alborough; and several others that were missing, suppos'd to be sunk or burn'd. As this was no small loss at Sea, con∣sidering some advantage they had, to be beaten into their own Ports; so was their loss as great by Land,Several Townes taken from the Hollanders. the French having at the same time taken Rhine∣berg, Wesel, Oysup, and Burick: Groll, Borkelo, taken by the Bishop of Munster: and after them, Rees, Sckenk-Sconce, and several others, underwent the same Fate, possessed by the French: Nor was this all, for the French without much resistance, had now forc'd their Passage over the Rhine, neer Tolbuys. This neer Approach of the French bred such a Confusion in the Netherlands,Hollanders confus'd at the success of the French. that many of the most wealthy Inhabitants forsook the Country, not willing to hazard their Persons and Estates in a Country falling into the hands of a Victorious Forreigner. The States also themselves remov'd from the Hague, to Amsterdam, for their better security; opening the Sluces, and putting the Country round under Water, to the dammage of above 18 Millions of Gil∣ders. The King of England being throughly informed of these Proceedings,The King of En∣glands Decla∣ration, inviting the Dutch Sub∣jects into En∣gland. puts forth a seasonable Declaration; signifying, That if any of the Low Coun∣try Subjects, either out of Affection to His Majesty or his Government, or because of the oppression they meet with at home from their Governours, should come into his Kingdoms, they should be Protected in their Persons and Estates, that they should have an Act for their Naturalization; and that all such Ships and Vessels as they should bring along with them, should be accompted as English built, and enjoy the same Priviledges and Immunities, as to Trade, Navigation, and Customs, as if they had been built in England, or belong'd to his own Subjects. And to restrain the Licentious Tongues of those that were apt to talk too busily and sawcily of State-Affairs, the King did farther by his Proclamation forbid all his loving Subjects, either by Writing or Speaking, to divulge or utter false News or Reports, or to intermeddle in matters of Government, or with
any of his Majesties Councellors or Ministers, in their common Discourses. Dutch more and more distressed.All this while, the Dutch at Land began to be more and more streightned: for on the one side, the King of France was Advanc'd within Three Leagues of Amsterdam; Arnhem, Vtrecht, and Zutphen, and Emmerick, surrendred up to him: on the other side, the Bishop of Munster press'd hard upon Frizeland, having taken Deventer, Groll, Borkelo, Doetechem, and several other Places of lesser Consequence; insomuch that the People began to Tumult in all places,The People Mu∣tiny. but more especially at Dort, whither they sent for the Prince of Orange, where as he was at Dinner with the Lords at the Paw, being the Principal House in the Town, the Burgers who were in Arms, surrounded the House, and sent up their Captains, to tell the Lords, That except they presently drew up a Paper and put their Hands to it, for declaring the Prince Stadt-holder, they would Cut all their Throats: whereupon, the Paper was immediately drawn up and sign'd; by which the said Prince was declar'd Stadt-holder, with all the Powers and Authorities, in as ample manner as any of his Ancestors had enjoy'd: they also renounc'd that perpetual Edict, by which they had ob∣lig'd themselves never to admit of a Stadtholder;Prince of O∣range declar'd Stadtholder. and discharg'd the Prince of the Oath he had taken, never to accept of that Dignity: which thing thus begun by a Tumult, was afterwards Confirm'd in a full Assembly of the States General. The Condition of the Dutch.There were at this time taken from them by the French, several Towns and Forts, some of them of great Importance: and by the Bishop of Munster six; and besides this, by the former Maestricht, by the latter Groninghen Besiedg'd: their Fleet in Port, patching up their bruises. Yet now the King of England com∣passionating their Condition, and believing those misfortunes might have ren∣dred 'um more humble▪ sent over the Duke of Buckingham,The Duke of Buckingham, and the Earl of Arlington sent into Hol∣land. and the Earl of Arlington, to try if now at length they would hearken to any Reasonable Terms of Accommodation. It was remarkable with what joy and satis∣faction they were receiv'd by the People; the Men, Women, and Children joyning in their Acclamations as they pass'd along the Streets, God bless the King of England: God bless the Prince of Orange: and the Devil take the States. They passed from Holland through the Prince of Orange's Camp to Vtrecht, where they found the King of France, who had now reduc'd the whole Pro∣vince; of whom they had their Publick Audience in the Camp: thither likewise came the Lord Hallifax, sent by the King of England as his En∣voy Extraordinary; and was, after his Audience, joyn'd with them in Com∣mission: being thus all together, they attended the Motion of the Camp, in expectation of Plenipotentraries from Holland, upon their last Proposition. While they are upon Extraordinary Affairs abroad, Henry Coventry Esq now return'd from Sweden, is made Secretary of State at home, in the room of Sir Iohn Trevor deceas'd; and the Duke of Richmond Arrives in Sweden Embassador Extraordinary from the Court of England, where he afterwards Dy'd. Duke of Buck∣ingham and Earl of Arling∣ton return.Toward the Latter end of this Month, the Duke of Buckingham, Earl of Arlington, and Lord Hallifax, Arriv'd at White-Hall; having expected four∣teen days in the French Camp, the return of the Dutch Deputies: so that all which they effected at that time, was a Promissory Act between the two Kings, not to treat or conclude without a Participation and Inclusion of each others In∣terests: which was afterwards form'd into Articles, and Ratifi'd and Exchang'd with the French Embassadour at London. The King of France had now drawn the Gross of his Army from the Neigh∣bourhood of Amsterdam, Marching for Boys-le-dc and Maestricht, both which he left block'd up; the first by Turenne, the second by Chamille; and being satisfi'd at present with the Victorious Progress he had made, return'd for Paris. Yet the taking of Nimmenghen by Storm, wherein were made Prisoners of War 4000 of the best Soldiers which the Dutch had, and the appearance
of the English Fleet upon the Coast of Holland, was occasion enough to con∣tinue the Tumults and Insurrections, which were now so general, that there was scarce a Town in Holland where the people were not Masterless. 'Tis true, the heat of Action began to cool for some time; nor did the Eng∣lish Fleet do any thing more considerable, but onely keep the Seas, besides that they mist the taking of the Dutch East-Indie-Fleet,English mis the Dutch East-Indie-Fleet. of which there was only this account, that the Cambridge and Bristol, being upon the Scout, had met with the East Indie-Fleet, with whom there happen'd a smart Encounter, insomuch that the Cambridge was forc'd to ly by to splice her Rigging; and that though they both followed 'um again, and gave 'um many Broad-sides, yet be∣cause they could no way separate 'um, nor the Bristol could carry out her lower tire, they were forc'd to quit the Fight: Only one ship too severely chac'd, was forc'd to destroy her self. This Moneth, the Earl of Essex arriv'd in Ireland,Earl of Essex Lord-Deputy of Ireland. and having taken the usual Oath, had the Sword delivered to him as Lord-Deputy of Ireland, in the room of the Lord Berkley. In Holland, the Prince of Orange, being now setled in the Supream Authori∣ty, did not a little win the favour of the people, by endeavouring to call to an account the chief of those who had been their former Leaders. Among the rest, he Imprisons Ruart Van Putten,The fall of De Wit and Van Putten. and his Brother De Wit. Van Putten was accus'd of an Intention to have destroyed the Prince of Orange by the assistance of a Barber, who was to have receiv'd from him a considerable sum of Money for doing it. The Court of Holland, upon examination of their Crimes, having Condem∣ned both the Brothers to lose all their dignities and employments, and order∣ed 'um to quit the Country as Banish'd men; Thereupon De Wit goes to the Prison to fetch away his Brother; but the people being incensed that they de∣served a greater punishment, as they were coming out again, forc'd 'um back again, broke open the Prison-door, hal'd 'um out; and thus the Rabble ha∣ving got 'um into their possession, never left till they had beat and trampled 'um to death. This not sufficing, they dragg'd their dead Bodies about the Streets, cut off their Fingers and Ears, and then hung 'um up naked by the Heels upon the Gallows: such was the miserable end of those two Brothers. The first good fortune that befel the Dutch, next to that of the escape of their East-Indie Fleet, was the defence of Groninghen, to which the Bishop of Munster had laid a most furious and close Siege; but notwithstanding all his fury, after several attacques, and the loss of many men, was at length forced to break up his Siege and depart, having battered and burnt down above two hundred Houses with his Guns and Granadoes. The Dutch had, no question, promised themselves great matters from the Emperour; but there was nothing appear'd to give them any hopes, till at length a general Treaty was concluded for the publick Security and general De∣fence of the Empire, at Ratisbone; which though it prov'd slow, as passing three Colledges, That of the Electors, That of the Princes, and That of the Free-Towns; yet after this Conclusion, the Imperial Forces being upon their march from one side, and the Brandenburgher on the other, to make a conjun∣ction upon the Frontiers of the Enemy,The Confede∣rates divert the French. made a very seasonable diversion to give the Netherlander some breathing time; so that Turenne was forc'd to draw off to attend their motion toward Leipstadt, and the Bishop of Munster thought it convenient to look toward his own Territories for fear of the Bran∣denburgher. So that now the Prince of Orange had some time to look after the Civil affairs, and to settle disorders at home; which he did by a change of the Ma∣gistrates in most of the Towns of the Low Countries;Magistrates chang'd in Holland. wherein he was not a lit∣tle encouraged, by the satisfaction which it gave the generality of the people, who now began to b by little and little better composed in their mindes. In England, the Parliament,Parl. adjourn'd which was to have met in October next, was
upon weighty considerations adjourned till the fourth of February follow∣ing. But in Scotland the Parliament had sate till this very time, and had made several Act for the publick good of the Nation; among the rest, one that gave toward the defraying the King's Expences 864000 l. Sterling. The Duke of York returns from the Fleet, and Action ceases.About this time also, the Duke returning to London from the Fleet, put an end to all further expectations of any considerable actions at Sea this year. But to return to the French Camp: Marshal Turenne, upon the approach of the Imperialists and Brandenburghers, sends to the Electors and Princes of the Empire,Turenne's De∣claration. to let them know in the King of France's Name, That it was not the King's intention to meddle with any thing that belonged to the Empire; and that if any of his Troops had entred into it, it was the inevitable consequences of the War against the United Provinces: and therefore understanding that several For∣ces were upon their march toward his Conquests, to disturb his Possession, and to give occasion of jealousie to his Allies, he was therefore obliged to pass his Army over the Rhine. And as for the Duke of Brandenburgh, that the King had frequently requested him not to meddle with a War in which he had no concern. And there∣fore, if things went further, they were desir'd to take notice, that it was once in their power to have preserved the peace of the Empire, and their own. The Elector of Cologne and Bishop of Munster openly declared at the Dyet against the March of the Imperialists; but the rest being for the most part Deputies, could make no Reply without larger Commissions. But the Duke of Hanover absolutely shew'd his dislike of their March, by denying them passage through his Territories. But now Sir Edw. Sprague gives us occasion to return to Sea again, who being left with a Squadron to keep the Seas, went to the Northwards,Sir Edward Sprague spoyles the Dutch Fishing. where he spoil'd the Dutch Fishing-trade, taking a Buss, several Doggers, and 350 Prisoners. By Land, Fortune might have been more kinde to a young General, such as was the Prince of Orange,Prince of O∣range succeeds ill. in his first attempts; but she favour'd him not at all. For whereas he thought to have done great things, he had still the worst in all his chiefest designes; first at Woerden, which he thought to have retaken from the French; but being encounter'd by the Duke of Luxemburgh, was forc'd to retreat with the loss of above 1500 of his men: the second time at Charle∣roy, which he had surrounded with the assistance of Count Marci, in order to lay a formal Siege to the place; but being assail'd from without by the Sieur Montal, and by the Garrison from within, he was forc'd to raise his Siege and march off, having lost neer 700 of his Souldiers: the last, in his attacque upon Swart-sluce, where his designe again failing, above 1600 of the Dutch came short home. As for any thing else this year, there was little considerable done, either by the Prince, Turenne, or Bournonvile, who was now General of the Imperialists in the place of Montecuculi. Onely a kinde of Chess-play among the great Com∣manders, and moving of the Armies from place to place as the Commanders saw most for their advantage: yet for all that, Turenne got ground, and advan∣ced as far as Hoxter. Returning home, we finde some changes of great Officers. The Lord-Kee∣per Bridgeman desirous through Age to resigne his place, the Earl of Shafts∣bury was in his room made Lord-Chancellor of England;Earl of Shafts∣bury Lord-Chancellor. and not long after, the Commissioners of the Treasury laid aside, and Thomas Lord Clifford Con∣trouler, made Lord High Treasurer.Lord Clifford Lord-Treasurer And now the time coming on for opening the Exchequer again, the King by another Declaration signified, that the same inevitable Necessities still conti∣nuing, which urg'd him to make the first stop,Stop upon the Exchequer con∣tinued. did now compel him to make a second till the first of May ensuing. In Holland, the Duke of Luxenburgh, General for the King of France, taking advantage of the Frost, with a great body of men advances almost as far as
Leyden, forces the Dutch from the strong Posts of Bodegrave, Newerbrug, and Swammerdam, and takes them; which put the Cities of Leyden and Amster∣dam into such a Consternation, that the Dutch to defend themselves were forc'd to cut their Dikes, and put the Country under Water; which caus'd such an Inundation, that all the course Goods in Cellars and Ware-houses were utterly spoil'd, being forcd to bring all their Cattle into New Town, and to kill great numbers of them, meerly for want of Fodder for them. But among all these disasters, the retaking of Coverden did not a little revive them, which they took with little loss; the Bishop of Munster having drawn out a considerable part of the Garrison a little before upon some other designe. Toward the beginning of December, the Duke of Richmond,Duke of Rich∣mond dies. Parl. meet. Extraordinary Embassador from the King of England to the Court of Denmark departed this life. He had been at Elsenore to dispatch the English Fleet there, in a sea∣son of much Snow, and very excessive Cold; whence going aboard the Yar∣mouth-Frigat, toward the Evening he return'd to shore in the ships Pinnace, but in his passage was so pierc'd with the extremity of the sharp Air, that before he came to the Shore he was insensible of what he did, and in that condition being carried to his Calesche, expired therein in his passage to Elsenore. Upon his death, the vacant honour of Knight of the Garter was supplied by the Earl of Southampton, who was immediately Elected by the Soveraign and Companions of the Order. It was no time to act, but to provide for War; and therefore the King, in order to his preparations for the next Spring, for the encouragement of his Seamen, puts forth a Proclamation, promising to every Seaman, that would voluntarily List themselves in a Second Rate, a free Largess to the value of six Weeks pay; and to every one that would voluntarily List themselves in a Third Rate, a free Largess to the value of one Moneths pay. And further, that their Pay should begin from the very first day of their Listing them∣selves. Toward the latter end of the Year, the Parliament, the time of Proroga∣tion being expired,Sir Job Charleton made Speaker. met again; and being summoned to attend the King in the House of Lords, the Chancellor by the King's Command acquainted them, that by the advancement of Sir Edward Turner to be Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer, the place of Speaker of the House was void; and being thereupon directed to choose a new one, they returned to the House, and elected Sir Iob Charleton. In the Afternoon of the same day, the King met them again in the Lords House, where, after he had approved their choice, he declared to them the success and charge of the War, and his resolutions to carry it on with their assistance for the honour of the Nation; which particulars were more largely insi∣sted upon by the Lord Chancellor. The next day, being resolv'd into a Grand Committee, upon their taking into consideration the King's and the Lord Chancellor's Speeches, they made an una∣nimous Vote,18 Moneths Assessment gi∣ven to the King. that a supply should be given the King of 18 Moneths Assessment, not exceeding 70000 l. a Moneth. While they were thus acting, Sir Iob Charleton falls sick, and his Indisposition continuing, the House by the King's permission chose a new Speaker, Edward Seymor Esq by Name, a person of great Loyalty and known ability. Soon after,The Parl. make an Address to to the King. they presented the King an humble Address for satisfying and composing the mindes of his Majesties Subjects. To which the King return'd for Answer, That he did readily and freely agree thereto. That on the other side, it was five Moneths since he had demanded a Supply▪ and that their Vnanimous Vote, did both give life to his Affairs, and disheart∣ned the Enemy; but their delay would make them take new courage. That the Enemy was preparing a greater Fleet than ever they had, and therefore desir'd them that the fears and jealousies of some, might not bring a Ruine upon all.
That if there were any Scruples remaining with them, concerning the suspention of Penal Laws, He promis'd, that what had been already done, should not be drawn into future Example. Lastly, That as he expected the Bill for his supply; so He should as willingly receive and pass any other, to give them satisfaction. The Effect of all which, appear'd at the beginning of the following Year. Forrein Affairs, 1672. The most important difference between the Lesser Princes and States of Christendom, was between the Duke of Savoy, and the State of Genoa, who taking advantage of a difference between the Officers and Souldiers of the Garrison, had surpris'd Oneglia, and the Territories thereto belonging. Thereupon, the Duke with a strong Army invades the Jurisdiction of the Genoeses; takes Guado the Key of the Genoese State towards Monferrat; after that Sissello, a most delicious place, and full of rich Booty; together with Iustinesi. Not thus content, he over-ran all the Riviera toward Nizza, and retakes the Principality of Oneglia: But then, by the Interposition of the King of France, first a Cessation, then a Peace was Concluded. Nor was Poland without a great share of Civil Dissention, by reason of great differences between one part of the Nobility, who were term'd Male-contents; and the other part of the Nobility, who sided with the King. The Army under Sobieskie, undertook the Defence of the Male-contents; and Mar∣ches for Warsaw, under pretence of protecting their Nobility, which were so severely prosecuted. The Archbishop of Gnesne, a potent Prelate, kept him∣self from Court, in Opposition to the Kings Interests; though all endeavours were used to reconcile him. In this posture, the Popes Nuntio arrives to Me∣diate, but it was too hard a task to be accomplisht this Year. From these troubles Casimire having withdrawn himself, by a timely Re∣signation, liv'd for some time privately in France, where he this Year dy'd of an Apoplexy at Nevers. But his Death was not so much taken notice of, as the Death of the Em∣press, to whom this Year was equally Fatal. Anno Dom. 1673. THE first remarkable passages of this year, were the Transactions in Parliament; who being press'd by the King for a Supply, fell with that seriousness and quickness to their Work, that by the latter end of March they had compleated several Bills; among the rest, an Act for raising the Sum of One hundred thirty eight thousand, seven hundred and fifty thousand pound, for sup∣ply of his Majesties Extraordinary occasions. And another Act of General and Free Pardon: To which, when the King had given his Assent, the Parliament was Adjourn'd till the 20th of October next ensuing.Parl. Adjourn'd James Piercy pretends to the Earldom of Northumber∣land.About this time, the Earl of Northumberland being Dead, and the Fami∣ly of the Peircies being Extinct, one Iames Percy, an ordinary Mechanick, coming out of Ireland, laid claim both to the Title and Estate; and went so far as to present a Petition to the House of Lords, to hear him, in Relation to his Claim, but when his Petition came to be read notwithstanding that he had two Months time given him before, and that he had caus'd above forty Witnesses to be sworn at the Bar, he made so little of any probability appear to∣ward his said Claim, that the Lords resolv'd that the Petition of the said Iames Percy should be dismiss'd, and that they would consider how to proceed against him as an Impostor.
Much about this time was the Island of Tabago taken from the Dutch,The Island Tabago taken by the English. by the English, under the Command of Sir Tobias Bridges▪ with a Booy of 400 prisoners, and as many Negroes; though a greater loss hapn'd to the English, by the taking of Sr. Hellens by the Dutch; and might have prov'd great Ob∣struction to the Trade of the East-Indies, had it not been soon after regain'd by the English, with a more fatal Loss to the Dutch, of Three very conside∣rable East-India ships; which, with the regaining of the Island, was such a sea∣sonable piece of Service, perform'd by Captain Monday, that the King himself thought it worthy the honour of a Knighthood, which was conferr'd upon him at his return in August, when he brought along with him both the good News and Prizes. But now the English and Dutch Fleets being abroad, Actions of higher Im∣portance call to be related; wherein, it will not be amiss to follow the whole Series of this Years Maritime Transactions, without any digression. The Belgians first got to Sea,Dutch at Sea▪ and shew'd themselves at the Rivers Mouth, with an intention to have stopt up the Mouth of the Thames, by sinking seve∣ral great Ships in the Narrow Passages of the Channel call'd the Middle-ground, but the broadness of the Channel, and the commodiousness of other Chan∣nels, rendred their Attempts altogether in vain. Prince Rupert, who Com∣mandd the English Fleet, that he might not seem to be shut in, sails toward the Enemy; wo unwilling to abide his coming, recover their own Shoar: The Prince therefore sails away for the Streights of Calis, with an intention to joyn with the Fleet from Portsmouth, and the French; and coming to Dun∣ganess, there casts Anchor, in expectation of their coming, who were not long absent: in this interim, no small danger threatned the Admiral, by which the Edgar and Lyon were forc'd from their Anchors, by the accidental firing of a Fireship. But now the French, consisting of 27 great Ships, and the Ports∣mouth Fleet, being joyn'd with the rest of the Navy, the Prince resolves to visit the Dutch Coast, and comes before Schonevelt, where the Fleet of the Ene∣my lay:May 26. the Prince's intention was, to have Engag'd; but the Sea growing rough, they came to an Anchor till the 28th.May 28. The morning proving fair, and a fresh Gale, the English prepare to Engage; to which end, the Prince Commands some 35 of the more nimble Frigats to provoke 'um out of the Sands, with which they lay surrounded: but they, contrary to expectation, boldly come orth, and in excellent order oppose Force to Force; by which means it happen'd, that while those lesser Frigats retreated to their own, they extreamly disordered the rest of the Fleet: yet the Battle was desperately Fought. The French that could come up, fought well, with whom the En∣glish intermixt, out of their eagerness entangled one another. Among the rest, most covetous to engage was the Earl of Ossory; but being pester'd among the French, falling foul upon an English Frigat, and entangled with one of our own Fireships, he had much ado to free himself: he was no sooner clear, but he was Attacqued by De Ruyter, and all the Squadron that followed him, whom with a vast Courage he stoutly resisted, and gave as good as they brought. The Prince in the Van, drave the Enemy before him; and pursu'd them as far as he could for the Shallows and Sands: whose Magnanimous and In∣vincible Example, was most strenuously follow'd by Captain Legge, Wetwang, and others: at length, Night put an end to the Combate. The Dutch re∣tir'd to their old station; the English lay by all Night, under Sayl. Of com∣mon Men of the English, were very few lost; and not one Ship: Captains there were slain, Fowles, Finch, Tempest, and Woorden. On the part of the Dutch were kill'd, Vice-Admiral Schrm, Rear-Admiral Vlugh, and six more Captains: their loss of Men was considerable; but only one Ship call'd the Deventer was taken. Both parties assumd to themselves the Honour of the Victory: the Dutch, because they had remov'd the Assaylors; The English, because they had bea∣ten the Dutch into their Lurking holes.
The next three days were spent in repairing the Ships damages; wherein the Dutch had the advantage, as having their supplies ready at hand from their own shore. In the beginning of Iune the Dutch changed their station, but lost a fair opportunity: For the Wind favour'd them, and the Weather was hazy, so that if they had then took their advantage to have fallen upon the English, who lay scatter'd for the advantage of Repairing, they might have exposed the English Fleet to some danger. But the English observing the mo∣tion of the Enemy, presently make ready; which the other perceiving, let fall their Anchors, as the English did likewise, having drawn their Fleet first into a Line, which reached at least three Leagues in length. June 4.The Dutch again make sail; and Sprague believing they did it onely to change their station as before, and not with an intention to fight▪ made the less haste to bear up; whereby it came to pass that he lost the Wind, which by ma∣king haste he might have gained. The French were in the middle: the Prince in the Rear eager to come to blows, press'd upon the French; the French upon Sprague; which made no small confusion. But what Sprague did amiss in de∣lay, he recompenced in fighting courageously; nor did he give out till his ship was so mam'd that he was forc'd to retire; into whose place the Earl of Ossory succeeding, maintained the Dispute with equal bravery. The Dutch now perceiving the English-standing North-West, fearing to lose the Wind which they had so favourable to them, did the like; which was the reason that the day began to close, before thir shot did any execution, having spent thousands of Bullets all the day in vain; at which time the Prince chang∣ing out of the Royal Charles into the Soveraign, continu'd the Fight the greatest part of the Night, having no other light than the fire of the Guns, and the Flame of several Boats, that, being 'd by one accident or another, floated up and down upon the Sea. By break of day the English saw the shore neer Laystaff, but no Enemy, but onely a small part of the Rear, the rest having withdrawn themselves in the dark. A Council of War was thereupon call'd: some were of opinion to pursue the Enemy, but the greatest part advised to return o the Thames; their Ammunition being spent, and many ships very much out of repair; which, by reason of the first retreat of the Enemy, they might do without any prejudice to their honour. There was no great loss of Common Seamen. Of Captains, onely Sadlington and White. The French lost some Fire-ships. And the Earl of Ossry sunk one by his side. Not a ship of the English was wanting: nor could the loss of the Dutch be very great, in regard they fought at a distance, and strove rather to keep the advantage they had got, than to offend their Enemies. July 17.The middle of Iuly was spent before the Fleet could be got ready again; which was no sooner done, but in the presence of the King himself the Fleet weighed, and the same night got into the Gunfleet, and thence to the Ness. The next day they made for the Dutch Coast, and the following day they perceiv'd the Dutch about eight Leagues off of Zealand;July 20. who seeing the English prepare to engage, return'd to their own shore, not daring to hazard themselves in the open Sea far from their Sanctuaries. At length, understanding De Ruyter to be about the Gorce, the English make thither: toward night they saw the Dutch Fleet;August 10. but it being late, they thought fit to stay till Morning. In the mean while, the Dutch by stealth in the night got the Weather-gage, and by break of day shew'd themselves above us. De Ruyter, aving thus got between the Eng∣lish and Camperdown, according to his own desire, bore directly upon the Eng∣lish; which the Prince perceiving, changing his course about seven a clock, in excellent order stood to the S. West. The French led the Van, the Prince in the middle, Sprague brought up the Rear. The Dutch came boldly on, Bankert attacques the French, De Ruyter the Prince, and Tromp engaged Sprague. Then was it incredible to think how equally, and with how much vigour the Fight was maintain'd: But by and by the French in the Van, thinking to get the Wind, sail'd away; which Bankert perceiving, leaving a few ships to observe
their motion, with the rest falls in with De Ruyter upon the Prince; nor did the French when they had got the Wind come up to his assistance, onely Martel with much courage stood by him. As for Tromp fiercely bearing up upon Sprague▪ he was as undauntedly receiv'd by Sprague, who slackned his Sails in expecta∣tion of him; which the rest of the Squadron observing, it fell out that be∣ing by this means separated, the Squadrons could not relieve one another as they should have done. The courage of both Captains was equal, and their desire of Glory the same. The Wind however favour'd the Dutch, and they refus'd to come neer, but fought at a distnce. About Noon, the Wind chang∣ing, Sprague, who before stood to the South, now bore Westward, follow'd by the Earl of Ossory. Tromp still engag'd with Sprague; Tromp's Second with the Earl of Ossory. In the Afternoon Sprague lay by to repair his Rigging; but his ship being at the same time disabled by two unhappy shot, he left the Vessel, and taking the Flag along with him, hasts to the St. George, and puts up the Flag; which when the Earl of Ossory saw, who had in the mean time brought new Foresails to his Yards, he sent Norborough to tell him, that if he would, he would set upon Tromp, and board him if he had assistance: Sprague praises his resolution, bids him go on, and he would immediately be with him. But his suddain death was the loss of a Noble Designe: For he had not been long aboard the St. George, when through the loss of her Main-mast he was forc'd to forsake her too; and as he was going aboard the Royal Charles, the Boat being shatter'd to pieces by an accidental shot, he was himself drown'd in the Ocean, over which he had so often Triumph'd. After Sprague's ship had lost her Masts, Tromp confident of carrying her, bore up briskly and gave her a Broad-side, and brought up two Fire-ships, but all in vain; for as he pass'd by, he was so severely gall'd by the Earl of Ossory, that he had hardly time to discharge six of his own Guns: Neither did the Earl of Ossory leave the Flag-ship till he saw her tow'd off by the Hampshire. Tromp sufficiently wearied, having got his Squadron together, at first retir'd; but when he saw De Ruyter coming toward him, he stay'd. By and by the Prince was to be discern'd a far off with his Squadron, who had born the brunt of the Zealand-Squadron and De Ruyter all the day; for the French, having gain'd the Wind in the beginning of the Fight, never came in; but at two of the clock the Prince and De Ruyter, as it were by consent, seem'd to leave off: for both being sollicitous for the rest of their Fleets, whom they saw afar off, sail'd peaceably, and directed their course toward their Friends, though all the while within Cannon-shot. But now De Ruyter being joyn'd with his own, falls upon the Blue, endeavouring to separate that Squadron from the Prince; but in vain, the Prince making all haste to come in, and the other seasonably joyning with him. Then began a most sharp dispute on both sides, at what time the Prince sending two Fire-ships, guarded by Captain Leg, upon the Enemy, put them into such a confusion, that had the French then come in, being, as they were, Masters of the Wind, the Dispute with the Dutch concerning the Do∣minion of the Sea had certainly been at an end. The Dutch lost two Flag-Officers, several Captains, and about 1000 Com∣mon Seamen. Among the English, Sprague was much lamented, Captain Neve was slain, Reeves and Heywood died of their Wounds. Of the French, but one Commander slain. The loss of Common English Seamen was not so great, being chiefly in the Earl of Ossory's and Sir Edward Sprague's ships. About the middle of Iune, the Lord Clifford of Chudleigh resign'd his Staff as Lord-Treasurer into the King's hands, and Sir Thomas Osborn, created Vis∣count Osborn of Dumblaine in Scotland, and afterwards Earl of Danby in England was made Lord-Treasurer in his room. Upon the 10th of October, the Parliament meeting according to their last Ad∣journment, were Prorogu'd by Commission till the 27th of the same Moneth: then meeting again, they were prorogu'd till the seventh of Ianuary follow∣ing.
After which, the King having taken the Great Seal from the Earl of Shafts∣bury, gave it to his Attorney-General Sir Heneage Finch, afterwards created Lord Daventry in the County of Northampton. Soon after, His Majesty was pleas'd to call before him in Council the two Lord Chief-Justices, and the Lord Chief-Baron, commanding them to con∣sider of the most effectual means for putting the Laws in Execution for pre∣venting the growth of Popery; and at the same time ordered, that no Roman-Catholick, or so reputed, should presume after the 18th of November to come into his presence, to his Palace, or where his Court should be: and the Lord-Ste∣ward, and Lord-Chamberlain of the Houshold, were ordered to see the same effectually put in execution. And by further Order a little after, forbid them to come neer St. Iames's House, or into the Park. Immediately after, in pursuance of his Gracious Assurance to both Houses of Parliament, His Majesty issued out his Royal Proclamation to the same ef∣fect, further requiring the Judges, and all Justices of the Peace, to take effectu∣al care for the prosecution of all Papists and Popish Recusants, according to the Laws and Statutes of the Realm. About the latter end of November the Dutchess of Modena arriving at Do∣ver, in order to her Intermarriage with his Royal Highness the Duke of York, was there met by the Duke; and some few days after, coming from Gravesend to London by Water, was by his Majesty and divers of the Nobility met in Barges upon the River, and so conducted to White-hall, where, after her Royal Highness had been received in the most obliging and kinde manner by her Majesty, she was conducted to St. Iames's. Within few days after, their Royal Highnesses gave Audience to the French, Portugal, Swedish, and Danish Embassadors, as likewise to the Residents of Venice and Newburgh, who all went to Comple∣ment them upon their late Marriage. About this time his Majesty (the great numbers of extraordinary Servants that had been sworn and admitted into his Service, who making use of the Protections they receiv'd thereby, did obstruct the due course of Law) issued forth an Order in Council, whereby all persons that did not by vertue of their Places receive Fee, Wages, Salary, Diet, or Board-wages, should be absolutely disabled from making use of any Protection whatsoever, for the future, to save them from the prosecution of their Creditors. From Tangier came Intelligence, that the Earl of Middleton Governour, un∣derstanding the defeat and death of Gayland, and the great success of Muly Ishmael in those parts; and having receiv'd a kinde Letter from the said Muly Ishmael, purporting his great desire to be in Amity with the Governour, and a proposition of sending Commissioners to treat with him; accordingly appoin∣ted Major White, Alderman Read, and Mr. Wollaston for that purpose, with full power and Instructions to conclude a Peace and Treaty of Commerce, and particularly for the Redemption of the Captives in Sally; wherein the Earl doubted not the same success as he had had with Gayland above a year before; with whom he had made so firm a Peace, that the Moors and Inhabitants of Tangier convers'd together as if they had been one Nation. Notwithstanding the vigour and fury of the War, yet neither in the height of this years Preparation nor Action, were the thoughts of Peace laid aside; but rather all endeavours tending thereto vigorously pursued. To this pur∣pose, a Treaty was concluded on between the King of England and the Dutch▪ whereat the Allies of both Parties were to be present. The place accepted of by the King of England was Cologne, whither by the middle of Summer, and some before, came all the Plenipotentiaries of the several Confederates. For the King of Great Britain, Sir Ioseph Williamson, and Sir Lyonel Ienkins. For the King of Spain, Count Areschot, and Don Emanuel de Lyra. For the Emperour, Count Conningsech, and the Baron D'Issola. Count Tott for the Crown of Sweden. For the Dutch, Van Beverning, Van Haren, and Odyke. For the French, the Duke de Chausnes.
But the Dutch having other Designes in their heads, than what were dri∣ven on in that place, would yield to nothing there; nor were they so fully in∣structed, but that upon the Propositions delivered by the English Plenipoten∣tiaries, they pleaded they could give no positive Answer, without consulting their Masters: and returning to Holland, had leisure enough to take their plea∣sure, while the States were contriving an Answer; which when they had de∣livered at Cologne, was nothing but a device finely spun for delay, which made Cologne a place of great Concourse, but little business. In the mean time, the Dutch send a Letter to the King of England; to which, the King of England return'd so full an Answer, that though they said, The King was very sharp and obstinate in his Letter: That nothing was to be done, but to continue the War: That no farther Instructions should be sent to their Deputies at Cologne, till they saw how the Parliament would order matters, to whom they were resolv'd to send a Copy of their Reasonable Proposals, hoping otherwise to bring the King to better Termes: Yet upon cooler thoughts, they not only listned to the Motions of Peace, but also came to terms of Accommodation: and thereupon, in February following, they dispatch'd a Trumpeter into England; by whom they receiv'd that satisfacti∣on, in Answer to their Letters, from the King of England, that soon after the Peace was concluded between His Majesty and the Spanish Embassador re∣siding in London, on the behalf of the Dutch. The News was receiv'd with incredible joy in the Low Countries. Sir Gabriel Sylvius was sent by His Ma∣jesty to the Prince of Orange, to Complement him upon the Conclusion of the Peace; with whom also the States did interchange the Ratification of the Articles. In the interim, His Majesty having caus'd a new sort of Brass Half-pence and Farthings to be made current throughout all England, and Coyn'd in the Tower, issued forth a Proclamation, for the suppression of the particular far∣things and halfe-pence of private Shopkeepers; and being inform'd that Shop∣keepers did notwithstanding continue to utter Halfe-pence and Farthings of their own stamping, he caus'd them to be proceeded against according to Law: which was so effectually done, that many were Convicted and fin'd but upon submission, by the King's mercy Pardon'd. Before we fully conclude the Dutch War, it will be necessary to relate a piece of Gallantry performed by Captain Harman in the Mediterranean Sea: where the Vice-Admiral of Evertson's Squadron, in a Man of War call'd the Sehaer∣laes, carrying 36 pieces of Cannon, and 140 Men, Commanded by Cap∣tain Pasqual De Witt, met with Captain Harman in the Tygre, returning from Tangier; and coming both into Cadiz-Bay, where Evertson lay to Careen, the people of the Town began to laugh at the Dutch, telling them, That they durst not Fight the English; that they had left their station for fear: Which Evertson hearing, told the Captain of the Dutch, that to save his Ho∣nor, he was oblig'd to Chalenge the English Captain. Which being resolv'd upon, De Witt fited himself the best he could for the Rencounter next Morn∣ing: Evertson thereupon furnish'd him with Two new Lieutenants, 70 Soul∣diers, and 60 Mariners more than he had; making in all 270 Men. The Tygre which had not above 184 Men in all, saw all these Preparations, and prepared himself the best he could, but without any more addition of Men. The next Morning, getting out a League to Sea, within view of the Town, and in sight of the greatest part of the Inhabitants; so soon as both Frigats came within Pistol-shot of each oher, the Fight began, with that success to the English, that with one Broad-side, the Tygre shot down the Main-yard of the Dutch Vessel, and kill'd and wounded above 80 Men, without receiving much Damage; so that after half an hours Dispute, the Dutch ship was Boarded and taken by the English; the Enemy having lost 140 Men, and 86 Wounded. The Dutch Man of War was so disabled, and shot through and through, that She was hardly fit for service, to the great wonder of the beholders. After
which, Captain Harman return'd into Port with great Honour, having lost only 9 Men Kill'd out-right, and 15 Wounded; one of which, was himself, being shot in at the left Eye with a Musquet-Bullet, that went out between the Ear and the Jaw-bone; of which he was happily afterwards recover'd. Peace with the Dutch.At home, the Dutch made great rejoycing for the Conclusion of the Peace; and being now quit from the fear of the English, minded onely the setting out of a small Fleet, consisting of 32 Men of War, under Tromp, Haen, and young De Ruyter. Proclamation against PapistsNor was His Majesty less mindful to proceed against the Papists, giving Or∣der to the Judges to put the Laws against them in Execution. Forein Affairs, 1673. Toward the beginning of the Year, the Elector of Brandenburgh concludes a Peace with the King of France; and in order thereto, draws his Troops out of the Territories of Cologne and Munster, Allies of France; and Monsieur Tu∣renue drew out his, out of the County of Mark. In Poland, things were now in an indifferent quiet posture; the Arch-bishop of Gnesna, a great Opposer of the Kings Designes, was Dead; and the Dyet concluding in a very great Calme. The Turk indeed threatned them, but they doubted not of their Ability to oppose him: But the King liv'd not long to see the fruits of his Accommodation, dying toward the beginning of Autumn ensuing. Great were the Fears of that Nation, what would fall out during this interregnum; and probably they might have suffered much, had they not been free'd from those fears at present, by a great overthrow gi∣ven the Turks by the Polish-General Sobieski, who Attacquing the Enemy in their Retrenchments, by the Assistance of the Hussar Horsemen, totally Defeat∣ed him; so that of 45000 men, not above 3000 remain'd alive after the Fight; Two Bassa's were slain, and a vast Plunder became a prey to the Victor; be∣sides the Castle of Cochim, which the Turks had some while before taken from the Christians. That which chiefly contributed to the obtaining this Victory, was the valour of the Hussars, and the Revolt of the Hospodars of Moldavia and Wallachia, who fell from the Turk at the beginning of the Fight, bring∣ing with them again those Two Provinces under the Subjection of the Po∣lish Crown, from whence they had fallen off above 50 Years since. But the chiefest Scene of War now, lay in the Low Countries, into which the King of France being fallen with a considerable Army toward the be∣ginning of Summer, had beleaguer'd Maestricht, a Frontier Garrison, and one of the strongest belonging to the States of Holland. Among all other Actions perform'd at this Siege, there was none more Signal than the Atchievment of the Duke of Monmouth; who Commanding one of the Posts, where the Ene∣my made a Vigorous Sally, and springing a Mine, which slew a Captain, an Ensign, and fifty Souldiers; and seeing the out-Guards give ground, sent a Party of the King of France's Musquettiers, design'd for the Guard of his own Person, to make good the Post; but seeing them retire, with only 12 Volun∣tiers, all English, through a storm of Shot, hasted to their Relief. The Enemy had now possess'd a Half-moon, which had been but lately taken from them before: but the presence and Encouragement of the Duke, and the small suc∣cour he brought with him, so animated the retiring Musqueteers, that they fell on anew; and the Duke, with some little help more, rallied out of the Trenches, recover'd the Halfe-Moon, and deliver'd it to Monsieur Fuillade, who came to relieve him at the ordinary hour. The regaining of which Post so soon, was no small reason of the Rendition of the Town, which soon after, in the beginning of Iuly followed, upon honourable Conditions to the Souldiers and Townsmen, both as to the Privileges of Religion and Trade. Of English Commanders slain at this Siege, were none of Note but Sir Henry Iones, who
Commanded the English Regiment of Light-Horse, and only accompanied the Duke of of Monmouth as a Voluntier to the regaining the Half-moon be∣fore-mentioned. But the Dutch were not a little comforted for the loss of this Town, by the recovery of Vtrecht and Woden▪ which were quitted by the French without any Damage done to the Fortifications or Inhabitants, upon a consideration of a certain sum of Money given to the Souldiers by the Towns∣men; and the retaking of Ban, which was at length surrendred into their hands, after it had been Besieged by the whole power of the Confederates, their own, and the Forces of the Imperialists and Spaniards, who had in the mid∣dle of October declar'd open War against the French; so that there was nothing more frequent than the Meetings and Conferences of Monterey and the Prince of Orange together, as to the ordering and governing their common Interests. But Naerden fell into the Hands of the French; for the loss of which, they were so much incens'd, that they Beheaded the Governour Monsieur Pa, for sur∣rendring it in so short a time, though it were afterwards retaken by the Prince of Orange to their great joy. In the mean while, the Pope, being at more leisure at Rome, thought it con∣venient to fill up the vacancies of the Conclave, to which end he disposed of four Hats this Year. One to Francisco Nerli, a Florentine of 38 years of Age▪ A second to Seignior Ieronimo Gustoldi, a Genese, 60 years old. A third to Ieronimo Casanalti, a Neapolitan, 58 years old, And the fourth to Pietro Bas∣saduana, a Venetian, Aged about 60 years. A fifth was intended, but not then disposed of. The King of France was fretted at the March of the Emperour's Forces; and therefore to try if he could stop their further March, he writes to the King of Sweden to do his utmost endeavour, who was at present a Mediator between them, and at the same time gives a Memorial to the Swedish Embassador in his Camp, wherein he pretended how tender he had been all along of the Peace of the Empire; but withal declares, that if the Emperour did persist to give assistance to the Dutch, and should march his Forces out of Bohemia, he was resolv'd to oppose him to the utmost of his power with all his Forces. Be∣sides this Threatning Letter, and his passing into Alsatia, and hovering from thence about Charleroy, the King of France did little else, returning soon af∣ter to Paris. The Dutch secur'd from the English, strive to strengthen themselves by o∣ther Alliances. And therefore having, by a publick Placaert, conferr'd the Commands of Stadtholder, Captain, and Admiral-General of the Provinces of Holland and West-Friezland to the Prince and his Heir-Males by Lawful Marriage, with all Rights and Priviledges thereto belonging; who thereupon took his Seat in the Assembly of the States of Holland and West-Friezland as Primier Noble: The next thing they did, was to conclude such a League as they thought most advantageous; and thereupon a League was entred into, and ratified by them and the Emperour; the King of Spain on the one part, and the Duke of Lorain on the other. The Conditions whereof were, That the Duke of Lorain should raise an Army of 18000 Horse and Foot by the times in the Treaty limited, to be paid by the Emperour, the King of Spain, and the States, after the rate of 9000 Crowns per Moneth; and to act by their orders and directions. The League to last 10 years. On the other side, the Swede joyns himself strictly to the French, upon con∣dition to receive 50000 Crowns a Moneth from the King of France for six years, to begin presently after the conclusion of the Peace. Being obliged to declare himself for the French, in case the States, the Emperour, and the King of Spain did not make a League with the French before the fifteenth of May next ensuing. But there was no likelyhood of that; for the King of France having de∣manded satisfaction at the Emperour's Court for the injury done to Count Furstenburgh Plenipotentiary for the Bishop of Cologne, but obtaining none, the
Emperour rather seeking to justifie the action, than to punish the actors, re∣called his Embassadors from Cologne, and brake off the Treaty. Nor would the Interposition of the King of England prevail, though he offered his Me∣diation to reconcile the differences between the two Crowns of France and Spain. The Swedes also proposed, That the Spaniards should give Aire, St. Omer, and Ipres into the Hands of the French, on Condition that the French should quit all they had got in those parts, and restore Maestricht to the Spaniards: But all in vain, the Spaniards affirming, that the French were to restore not only the places they had got in this War, but also all the places they had possessed themselves of since the Treaty with the Pyreneans. The business of Count Furstenburgh was this: He being at Cologne, and go∣ing in his Coach, accompanied only with his Secretary, and two Gentlemen more, attended by three Lacqueys, to visit the Elector of Cologne, whose Ple∣nipotentiary and chief Minister he was, was set upon in the Street by nine per∣sons, armed with Sword and Pistol, who being too strong for the Count's par∣ty, after some kill'd and hurt on both sides, the Count was forc'd out of the City, where stood another strong party to receive him, who carried him to Bonne, whence he was sent Prisoner to Vienna. The Emperour pretended him a Subject of the Empire, and that he had, contrary to his trust, taken part with his Enemies. Nor were the Swedes, as well as the King of France, less active in interposing for his Liberty, affirming, that he was the Elector's Ple∣nipotentiary; that though he had a French Regiment, it was only Nominal, and that he did not receive the profits of it. But the Emperour denied he knew of his being a Plenipotentiary, and that it was not for one of his Subjects to take up Interests contrary to the Interest of his Soveraign; and would not hear of his Release. During these Treaties, the King of France had possess'd himself of a great part of the Palatinate, and had put a Garrison into Germerstein of 300 Soul∣diers, yet proffered the Elector if he would stand Neuter, to satisfie him for all his Damages, and to withdraw his Souldiers out of Gemerstein, and put it into the Hands of any Neutral Prince of the Empire: which he refus'd, upon Capra∣ra's coming to his Succour. The Switzers, to hinder the King of France from coming into Burgundy, offered that Burgundy might stand Neutur, proffering themselves security that that Province should punctually observe the Neutrality, and that they would guard the Avenues into it against any Forces of the Empire. And thus stood Affairs at the end of this year. Anno Dom. 1674. PEace being now concluded between the English and the Dutch, this Year was not memorable for much at home. April.The first motion of the Court this Moneth, was to Windsor, where the Earl of Mulgrave was Install'd Knight of the Garter. The Lord Lock∣hart Mediates a Peace be∣tween France and Spain.This Moneth also, the King, by his Embassador the Lord Lockhart, offer'd his Mediation between the King of France and the Queen of Spain, to com∣pose the differences betwixt them. And to the end he might be no way concern'd in their differences, by pub∣lick Proclamation forbid any of his Subjects to enter into the Service of any forrain Prince. Proclamation against scan∣dalous News.He also set forth a Proclamation, forbidding the broaching and uttering false and scandalous News, as also against any that should talk impertinently of the Government or the Governours.
In May,Sir Lyonel Jenkins and Sir Joseph Williamson return to Lon∣don. Sir Lionel Ienkins and Sir Ioseph Williamson return'd to London from Cologne. Who were followed into England by the Baron de Reed, Van Benninghen, and Van Haren, Extraordinary Embassadors from the States of Holland. In Iune, came a strict Proclamation against the Jesuites and Friests, Com∣manding their discovery and apprehension, and promising five pounds for every one that should be discovered and taken. Toward the beginning of September, upon Resignation of the Duke of Buckingham,Duke of Mon∣mouth chose Chancellor of Cambridge. the Duke of Mnmouth was made Chancellor of the University of Cambridge. The Ceremony was performed with all its circumstances, at Wor∣cester-house in London. Not long after, the Right Honourable the Earl of St. Albans, having re∣sign'd into his Majesty's Hands the Staff of Office of Lord-Chamberlain of his Majesties Houshold, his Majesty was pleas'd to give it to the Right Honou∣rable the Earl of Arlington,Earl of Ar∣lington Lord-Chamberlain. in recompence of his long and faithful Services, and particularly for having performed to his Majesties satisfaction for the space of twelve years, the Offie of Principal Secretary of State, which his Majesty was pleas'd to coner at the same time upon the Right Honourable Sir Ioseph Williamson Knight,Sir Joseph Williamson Principal Se∣cretary. one of the Clerks then of his Majesties most Honourable Privy-Council, for his long and faithful service in the said Office under Sir Edward Nicholas, and the Earl of Arlington; and in his place Philip Lloyd Esq was sworn one of the Clerks of the Privy-Council. Upon the 22 of September, his Majesty was pleas'd to cause a Proclamation to be published for the further prorogation of the Parliament, from the 10th of November till the 13th of April ensuing. In the beginning of December,Earls of Osso∣ry and Arling∣ton ent into Holland. the Earls of Ossory and Arlington, together with the Heer Odike, not long before Extraordinary Embassador in England, arrived at the Hagne, where they went to pay their Respects to the Prince of Orange. About the same time was concluded, between his Majesties Commissioners and those of the States General of the Vnited Provinces,A Marine Treaty between the King and the Uited Provinces. a Treaty Marine for all parts of the World, in pursuance of the 8th and 9th Articles of the late Treaty of Peace made at Westminster the February before, and was after ratifi'd by the States in the beginning of February following. Presently after, His Majesty having been graciously pleased to Translate the Right Reverend Father in God Dr. Crew Bishop of Oxford,Dr. Crew made Bishop of Dur∣ham. and Clerk of the Closet to his Majesty, to the Sea of Durham, made choice of the Honourable Dr. Compton, Brother to the Right Honourable the Earl of Northampton, to succeed in his place.Dr. Compton Bishop of Ox∣ford. Toward the middle of December, His Majesty having been pleased at his entertainment at Guild-Hall, when Sir Robert Viner was newly Lord-Mayor of the City, graciously and freely to condescend to the acceptance of the Freedom of London, in the Chamberlains Office, from the Hands of Sir Thomas Player Chamberlain, beyond the Example of any of his Predecessors; The said Sir Robert Viner Lord-Mayor thereupon, having first obtained his Majesties leave, presented his Majesty, in the Name of the City, with the Co∣py of the Freedom, in a large square Box of Massie Gold, the Seal of the Freedom hanging at it enclosed in a Box of Gold set all over with large Dia∣monds. Toward the beginning of Ianuary, Her Royal Highness was brought to Bed of a Daughter,The Dutchess brought to bed of a Daughter. Christen'd at St. Iames's by the Bishop of Durham, by the Name of Catherina Laura; the Duke of Monmouth being God-father, and the Lady Mary and the Lady Anne God-mothers. The Term begining at the latter end of Ianuary,Sir Francis North Lord Chief-Iustice of the Common-Pleas. Sir Francis North the King's Attorney-General was sworn Lord Chief-Justice of the Common-Pleas, in the room of Sir Iohn Vaughan deceased. In the beginning of February, his Majesty caused several Orders and Reso∣lutions concerning Papists to be publish'd:
That the Conviction of Popish Recusants should be encouraged, quickned, and made Effectual. That no Person, of what Condition or Quality soever, should presume to say Mass in any part of this Kingdom. That all Persons born within His Majesties Dominions, being in Orders by Authority deriv'd from the Church of Rome, should depart the Kingdom by a short time prefix'd. That none of His Majesties Subjects should presume to send their Children to be Educated in any Popish Colledges or Seminaries, upon a strict Penalty. That none of his Majesties Subjects being Popists, or so reputed, should presume to come into His Majesties Presence, into White▪Hall, St. James's, or any place where His Majesties Court should be. And Lastly, That care should be taken for the suppression of Conventicles. Forrein Affairs, 1674. The first thing that presented it self of most Importance beyond Sea this Year, was, that the King of France gave order to quit all his Conquests in the Netherlands belonging to the States of Holland, except Maestricht. The States also, to be rid of so great a trouble as the Bishop of Munsteri, makes Peace with him; the Baron D' Issola signing the Articles on the behalf of the Emperor. The chief Articles whereof were, That the Bishop should re∣store all places taken during the War: That the Treaty of Cleves should be punctually observ'd: And that the King of Spain and the Emperor should be War∣ranters for the Observance. And now for the better support of the Prince of Oranges Dignity, the Dutch East-India Company unanimously resolv'd to give Him and his Heirs Male after him, Three in the Hundred of all that their gains, upon the di∣vision. And then having secur'd themselves from Munster, they made an agree∣ment with Lunenburgh, to keep 14000 Men in the Service of the States, they paying him such a certain Sum. About this time also, the difference between the King of France and the State of Genoa were wholly Reconcil'd, by the Mediation of the King of England. But on the other side, the King of France continues his German War; so that Besancon the chief City of Franche Compte falls into his hands, being rendred upon ordinary Articles, after a short Siege; Nor did the Ciradel hold out much longer. The next Town Besiegd was Dole, which not being able to withstand the Fortune of the French Arms, yielded it self. After which, Solines and Castle St. Anne being taken, made the Conquest of Franche Compte compleat. About the middle of Iune was fought the Battle of Sanzeime, between the Marshal Turenne and the Imperialists, wherein the Imperialists being far less in Number, had the worst; It was fought from Nine in the Morning till Night, when the Imperialists finding themselves over-powr'd, retir'd in very good order, leaving behind about 2000 Men. Nor was the loss of the French less considerable: for they lost a great many common Soldiers, but more Com∣manders. A little before this, the Dutch had taken the Island of Normantier from the French, where they destroy'd a great deal of Corn; but not long after quit∣ted, it upon Agreement made with the Inhabitants, and the Religios Order of Cistertians in that Island, to pay them 14000 Crowns in four Months; and for their security, taking with them the Abbot and some of the Principal Islan∣ders. After that, they approach'd Bell Isle, intending to have made a de∣scent there; but the Castle upon the Island was too well provided for their En∣tertainment.
In August was tought the Battle, or rather Notable Skirmish, call'd the Bat∣tle of Seneff, between the Prince of Conde and the Confederates, Imperialists, Dutch, and Spaniards; in shot thus: That the Confederates Army being up∣on their March toward a place call'd Binch, the French tell upon the Rear, and forcing them to Retreat through a narrow way, which they could only pass in Files, put them into great Confusion: upon this, the French soon became Masters of the Baggag and Cannon; when the Prince of Orange, and af∣ter that the Germans, came and engaged the Enemy, so that the Fight continu∣ed till Night, and then the French were forc'd to retreat to their Camp; and the Prince of Orange and the Imperialists remain'd Masters of the Field. The Prince of Orange was in great danger, having been long Engag'd with the Enemy. Several Officers of Quality were slain on both sides: among the rest, on the Prince of Orange's part, Sir Walter Vane Major-General to the Prince having bravely behav'd himself, was shot in the back and knee, of which he dyed soon after; and of 32 Colonels of the Dutch Army, 26 were either Kill'd or Wounded, the stress of the Fight lying upon them. Many Common Soul∣diers were slain on both sides, though the greatest Number was reported to be lost by the French, being said to be above 3000, and many more confide∣rable Officers than upon the Dutch side. The next Attempt of the Prince of Orange and the Confederates was up∣on Oudenard, to which they had laid a ormal Siege; but they were soon disturb'd by the Prince of Conde, upon whose Approach and Resolution to fall upon them, the Confederates drew off and marched toward Ghent. In November, Graves a strong Town Besieg'd by the Dutch, was after a rough Siege, and many Assaults, retaken from the French. The Garrison con∣sisting of 1600 Foot, ad 400 Horse, marching out upon Composition. And now the Army of the Confederates, and the French under Turenne, lying near one another, produc'd some considerable Action, though their wary Commanders would not put all to the push; nor was the Victory fully de∣termin'd by the grandest of their peformances In the first place, 4000 French Horse, most of them the Troops of the King's Houshold, Commanded by Monsieur Montauban, fell upon some Munster Troops, and a Regiment of Imperial Cuirassiers, who guarded a certain Passage; and with the suddainness of the Attack, put the Imperialists into disorder: but Caprara's Regiment, that of the Prince of Lorain, and some others, coming to their Assistance, they gave a stop to the Enemy, till such time as other Lorain-Regiments came in: the Fight was sharply maintain'd on both sides, but at last the French were forc'd to retire, the slaughter being great on both sides, but greatest on the French; and among the rest, Mountauban himself was taken Prisoner. The next was an Engagement between the Gross Bodies of both Armies: for Turenne Advancing toward Colmar, found the Confederates drawn up in Battalia, readily attending his coming. The Fight was bloody and tedious, and many of the French Commanders were slain, but more common Souldiers of the Imperialists side; but Night coming on, all Action ceased: However, the French continued in Arms all Night, expecting to have renew'd the Fight next Morning; but when the Imperialists perceiv'd that, they retreated in great Disorder to Schlestadt, and repassed the Rhine at Strasburgh. Turrenne made himself Master of Colmar, and sent Provisions to Brisa; which together with his keeping the Field, were the Reasons that the French concluded them∣selves the Victors, and sung Te Deum for their success at Paris. On the other side, the Imperialists took themselves to be Conquerours, because their loss was no greater. In Flanders there was nothing remarkable, only the change of the Go∣vernour. For Monterey being call'd home, the Duke de Villa Hermosa was sent to succeed him.
Anno Dom. 1675. Parl. meets.UPon the 13th of April both Houses of Parliament met, in pursuance of their last Prorogation. They sate till above a Week in Iune following: But the difference between the two Houses increasing about the business of Fag and Shirley, upon which four Lawyers were Committed by the Commons to the Tower, His Majesty was pleased upon the 9th of Iune to Prorogue them again till the 13th of October following, having only signed some private Bills. Prince of Newburgh ar∣rives in Eng∣land.In May, arriv'd in England the Prince of Newburgh; having made some stay in London, he went to Oxford, where he was nobly treated by the Univer∣sity. In the Barbadoes,Barbadoes Conspiracy. a Conspiracy was discover'd among the Blacks to have de∣stroy'd the English; which had been carried on with great secrecy till the very time of the Execution; and was begun by the Blacks belonging to Captain Swanley, who was kill'd by them: But the Plot being found out, several were made Exemplary. In New-England, the Natives, under King Philip Hegamore of those parts, fell upon the English,Indians Rebel in New-Eng∣land. and kill'd several, and plunder'd and burn'd their Houses and Plantations: But the Bostoners and they of Plymouth, arming a considerable Force, soon drove them to their Sculking-holes, so that they were soon restrain'd from doing any further damage: nor did the English leave hunting them, till they could not finde at length so much as an Indian left in all that Pro∣montory. In Iuly, his Majesty made a Sea-progress; he took shipping at Gravesend, being attended by several Frigats and Yachts, sail'd through the Downs, inten∣ding for Portsmouth; but meeting with bad Weather, he Anchor'd on the back of the Isle of Wight. He visited the Isle of Wight, where he was entertain'd by Sir Robert Holmes the Governour; from thence he arriv'd at Portsmouth in the Greyhound, where he saw the Royal Iames Launch'd; and upon the sixth of Iu∣ly toward Evening, returned again by Water to White-hall. In August came into England the Count S. Maurice from Savoy, to signifie to his Majesty the death of the late Duke. Northamp∣ton fred.In September happen'd a most lamentable Fire in Northampton, by which the whole Town was reduc'd to Ashes, leaving very little standing except some of the Out-skirts of the same. River by Salis∣bury began to be made Navi∣gable.About this time, the River Avon, running from Salisbury to Christ-church in the County of Southampton, was first begun to be open'd in order to the making the said River Navigable from Christ-Church to Salisbury, to the great improvement of the Trade of that City. Upon the 13th of October, both Houses met again, in pursuance of their Pro∣rogation in Iune;Parl. meets. but they had not sate long before some difference in rela∣tion to the Appeal of Shirley to the Lords House brake out again, so that upon the 22 of November they were again Prorog'd till the 15th of February 1676. having only pass'd a Bill for the Rebuilding of Northampton, and two other pri∣vate Bills. While the Parliament sate, Monsieur Luzaney being converted from the Ro∣mish Church to the Protestant Religion, and having preached a Sermon ex∣pressing the reasons of his Conversion, one St. Germane, a French Jesuite, com∣ing to the Lodging of Luzancy, with others, by Threats and Terrours of As∣sassinating the affrighted Luzancy, and of carrying him away by force, com∣pell'd him to write and subscribe a feigned recantation of what he had preach∣ed and published;Proclamation against St. Germain the Isuite. whereupon his Majesty issued out a Proclamation for dis∣covery
and apprehension of the said St. Germane and his accomplices. Nor was the Barbadoes threatned only by her Slaves, who were easily dealt with,Hurricane at Bardoes. but with an Enemy against whom there was no resistance: For upon the last of August happened so violent a Hurricane in that Island, that eight Ships and five Ketches in the Road were cast away, and most of the men drow∣ned, besides 300 Houses thrown to the ground, and above 200 Whites and Negro's kill'd. But as the Barbadoes suffers,Jamaica fou∣rishes. Iamaica encreases, by the removal of several Families with their Goods and Servants from Surrinam, who for their own, and the encouragement of others, had a double quantity of Land allotted them by the Lord Vaughan Governour. Forrein Affairs, 1675. The Confederates and French were now the most considerable Actors upon the Stage of Europe. But the Emperour dissatisfied with Bournonvile's Con∣duct the last Year, sends his old General Montecuculi to take the charge of the Army, granting him all that he desir'd in relation to the Campagne, and giving him full power to act as he should think good for the common Interest of the Allies: who thereupon, being furnish'd with large supplies of Men and Money, repairs to his Charge. In Holland, the Prince of Orange fell sick of the Small Pox; but very speedi∣ly and perfectly recovering his Health, he kept the Field all the Summer long. As for the French, they begun the Year with some success; for sitting down before Limburgh, after a smart, but short Siege, the springing of some Mines, and a general Assault given to the Town, the Prince of Nassau, seeing the Enemy entered, and not willing to expose the City and the Inhabitants to the fury of a Storm, beat a Parly, a surrender'd upon Articles. In the mean time the Hollander declares open War against Sweden. Upon which, the Swede resolves to make War upon the Dutch both by Sea and Land, and seized all Debts owing by the Subjects of that Crown to the Dutch. But in an ill time did the Swede appear, in the declination of the French Inte∣rest: the first Effects whereof he felt from the Brandenburgher, who falling up∣on him neer Fehr Berlin, defeated a very considerable Body of the Swedish In∣fantry, taking from them six peices of Cannon, and great part of their Baggage. On the Swedes side were killed above 4000 Men; nor did the Brandenburgher buy his Victory cheap, having lost neer 2000 of his own Souldiers. But a worse Fate befel the French; for the two great Armies of the Confe∣derates and Turenne, having layn long posted neer one another, at length came to Blows, which proved very unfortunate to the French: for, besides the loss of several great Commanders, as Du Plessy, Vaubrun, and others, there fell the Famous Turenne himself, being shot to death with a Cannon-bullet, being the second shot that was made from a Battery of six Cannons by Montecuculi to play upon the French Cavalry. About 3000 Men were slain upon the Spot, and more in the pursuit; and had not the Conde de L'Orge made a Souldier-like Retreat, (of which he had obliged the good-natur'd English to bear the brunt, though to their sad Havock, and loss of Colonel Lambert) they had suffer'd a greater Ruine. The death of Turenne was lamented by the King of France with Tears: He was buried at St. Dennis among the Kings of France, with his Epitaph: Turenne a son Tombeau parmy ceux de nos Roys Cést le fruit glorieus de ses fameux Exploits. L'on a par cet Honneur couronné sa vaillance, A fin qu' aux iecles a venir Il n'ait point de difference De Porter la Couronné, ou de la Soûtenir.
Turenne among our Kings entombed lies, The glorious fruit of his great Victories. Such fair rewards thus honour his Renown, That after-times may learn from hence, How little is the difference 'Twixt those that wear, and that support a Crown. onde succeeds, but with worse success: for he thinking to make all good, posts himself at a place call'd Ensheime; but Montecuculi, being resolved to force him thence, or make him fight, attacks him in his Intrenchments, and with twelve pieces of Cannon, which he had advantageously planted, he so battered the French Camp, that they were forc'd to make a disorderly Retreat in the Night, cutting down Trees with which they filled the ways, to hinder the Imperial Cannon; which was the reason they escaped a second Scowring. Montecuculi sent out two Major-Generals with 1000 Horse apiece; the one brought in 200 Prisoners, and 20 Waggons laden with Baggage; the other met with the French Commissaries, took their Convoy, and a vast quantity of Bread and Corn. After this followed the surrender of Treves to the Imperialists upon Arti∣cles, of which one was, That Crequy, who had escaped thither from his Rout, should be a Prisoner of War. In September, the Duke of Lorrain departed this life at Hermansteine neer Coblentz. Farther off the King of Poland removed a very great Storm that threat∣ned his Dominions, by a very great overthrow of the Tartars, wherein a great number of them were slain, with the loss of their chief Standard; which struck such a terrour into the Turks, that with their Captain Ishmael Bassa, they made a shameful Retreat out of the Polish Territories. But the Low Countries had a worse Enemy to deal with; for the Sea brea∣king into North-Holland, the Inundation continued with that violence, that many of the Cities of North-Holland had a great share of that Calamity: The Harlemeer-Dyke was broken, and all the Country round about lay under Water, so that many of the Boors Houses were drown'd, being covered with the Sea. The same Fate befel South-Holland; and it is said, that had the In∣undation continu'd 24 hours longer, the whole Country would have run a ha∣zard of being lost. And thus you have an account in brief of all the most memora∣ble Transactions since the greatest act of Providence that has been observed for many Ages, The happy Restauration of his Majesty. And we may aver, that here is nothing but Truth, if all the publick Intelligence of so many years have not fail'd. This is then a Story in dead Colours; it behoves them that will lay it in the lively Pain∣ting, to take more pains than may be thought has here been taken, and have greater helps than it was possible for us to have to make use of. And therefore if there be any that with the Knowledge of a Privy-Councellor, and the Eloquence of a Salust, will undertake to cull out the most important Actions which are here reduc'd into order ready to his hand (for some of these he must take, or be silent) and com∣pile them into a judicious History, we are ready to vail Bonnet: in the mean time, these few Sheets may pass for Common Satisfaction. FINIS.
AN ALPHABETICAL TABLE. A ABingdon-Garrison Page 70 Aberdeen and St. Andrews yielded 302 Abjuration of the King by the Rump 436 Account of the Dutch War; from 315, &c. to 323. Their Intrigues with forrein Princes and at home 323. of the Revenue and Charge of the Kingdom under the Vsurpa∣tion of Oliver 415 Act against proclaiming of the King 225. For Assessment 235. For sale of Cavaliers Estates. ibid. Executed 303. For Mar∣riages 351. For Irish Adventurers and Al∣lotments 352. Several confirmed 500. Against Bishops repealed 501. Pretended of annulling the Title of the King 383 Accidents 315 Addresses, how begun 67. To Cromwel up∣on the dissolution of the Parliament 343. To Richard 410. To the Rump from for∣rain Princes 423. To the Rump by the Army 422. to the King from the Nobility and Gentry of the whole Kingdom 452 Adjutators 127 forbid Adventurers for Ireland 352 Aix la Chappelle, Treaty there 570 Alarm in London 403 Albans Earl 455, made Lord-Chamber∣lain 580 Allen Sir Thomas Lord Mayor of London 428 Allen Captain sent for the Streights 528. Allen Sir Thomas makes peace with Al∣giers 569. Lies before Algier 575. Al∣gier Men of War destroyed by the Eng∣lish 578. Returns ibid. Albemarle's stay in London 539. General at Sea 550. One of the Commissioners of the Treasury 563. Dies 575. His Dut∣chess dies ibid Anabaptism the uppermost Religion 431 Andrews proclaims the Abolishing of Kingly Government, and made Lord Mayor 231 Andrews Colonel beheaded 270 Anniversary Act of the King's Nativity 456 Anthony Sir Ashley-Cooper 427 Approbation of Ministers 359 Arches Triumphal 475 to 479 Ards Lord 240 Arguments for Cromwel's accepting the Kingship 386 to 390 Argyle a Privy Councellor, sides with the As∣sembly 8. Policy and shifts 304. Mar∣quiss seized 470. Beheaded 497 Arlington Earl sent into Holland 586. made Lord Chamberlain 599. Sent into France ibid. Armagh Arch-bishop dies 380 Armstrong Sir Thomas joyns with the Mar∣quiss of Ormond 240 Army English very gallant and resolute 10. Parliament. Army raised 36. New mo∣duled 67. Quarrel with the Parliament about Irish Transportation, and publickly declare their power over them 132. Purging the House ib. Pretend civilities to the King 132 to 136. Designe upon the City, and claim the Militia 136. Declaration and insolence 140. Triumphantly through Lon∣don 141. Delude the King. Their Propo∣sals 145 to 147. Suppress a Rising in London 170. Quarter in London, White∣hal, and the Mews 192. And force the Parliament ibid. Shipt for Ireland, at Milford-Haven 237. English advance in∣to Scotland 268. Face the Scots 272. Re∣monstrance to Richard 416. Their ad∣dress to the Rump 422. Their representa∣tion to the Rump 428. New moulded by Lambert 429. Declaration upon outing the Rump ibid. Their Address, joyfully receiving the King's Declaration 466. Dis∣banded 456 Array Commission 27 Articles of Scotch Cessation 15 Arundel Earl made General of the English 9 Arundel Castle taken by Sir William Wal∣ler 56 Ascham slain in Spain 236 Ashley Sir Bernard at Naseby 79. Mor∣tally Wounded at Bristol 84 Ashley Sir Jacob defeated at Stow in the Wold 96. Deserts Newcastle 13
Ashby de la Zouch 97 Ashburnham Mr. John 99 Ashbnham Mr. William 148 Aske Iudge 254 Assembly General indicted, and meet by their own Authority, packt and made up o Lay-Elders, refuse the Bishops to sit; bu cite them to answer as Guilty; dissolved within 7 days, but continue nevertheless 8. Assembly of Divines 69. General in Scot∣land 325 Ashton Colonel Edward Quartered 404 Aston Sir Arthur Governour, slain at Droghe∣da 244 Aubigny Lord 41. His Lady 47 Aurange Prince the Kings great Friend 235 dies, and a new Prince born 276. Christned 282. Old Prince buried 284. His Interest in Holland 323 Avignon, Sedition there 533. Peace com∣posed 570 Axtel Guards the High Court of Iustice 205 Ayscue Sir George at Barbadoes 306. Re∣turns to Plymouth 322. At Dover ibid. In danger Engageth De Ruyter at Ply∣mouth, and discharged 323. Prisoner 551 B Badajox Marquiss killed 383 Balmerino Lord his Treason 4 Baggot Kath. Ballishanon 241, 242, 251 Banbury 108 Barnstable 99, 106 Barbadoes reduced 306. Wonder 526. At∣tempted by De Ruyter 537. Lord Wil∣loughby wounded there 537. Sails from thence with a Fleet 557. Lost in a Hur∣ricane ibid. The Bridge-town burnt there 568. Barbadoes Conspiracy 602. A Hur∣ricane there 602 Barbone denominates a Parliament 350. His Petition 437 Barons created 482 Baronets Catalogue 493 to 496 Bastwick, Burton, Pryn return from Banish∣ment in great state 16 Bastwick Dr. of Physick, Burton a Minister against Bishops, &c. 2 Basing-house Besieged by Waller in vain 62 Taken 91 BATTLES. Edge-hill 40. Newberry first 50.51. Newberry second 65.66. Mar∣ston-moor 59. Tepper-moor, Alderne, Kilsith, Philipshaugh, in Scotland 73. Naseby 78 to 80. Lamport 82. Routon-heath 89. Colonel Jones defeated near Dublin 164. Defeats Lord Preston with a huge slaughter soon after at Trim 164. Preston in Lancashire 178. Dunbar 273 Worcester 397 Beaufort encountered by Argier Pyrats 546 Slain 576 Bnnet Sir Humphrey 404 Benson Captain Executed 270 Beaumont a Minister, Murthered at Pont∣fraict 227 Berkenhead Sir John Knighted 512 Berkley Sir John 98. Berkley Sir John, and Col. Walter Slingsby 258 Bernard's Treachery rewarded 395 Betteley John Quartered 404 Bishops 12. Accused of high Treason, to the Tower ten of them 26. Their Charge ibid. Restored to their Honours 502 Biddle an Infamous seducer 369 Blake blocks up Prince Rupert at Lisbon 256 At Lisbon again 267. A wary Comman∣der 366. At Porto-Ferina defeats the Pyrates 372. Sails for the Coast of Spain 381. His desperate attempt upon the Spa∣niard in Sancta Cruz Fight 391. Fires the Spanish Fleet there ibid. Dies retur∣ning into England 402. His Character and Funeral ibid. Blackburn vide Moris Blackness yielded 288 Blechingdon-house 74 Blood attempts the Crown 580 Bourdeaux French Embassador owns Crom∣wel 359 Boys Sir John 62 Boyle Dean his management of affair with Cromwel about Articles for the English 252 Booth Sir George—riseth in Cheshire 424 Defeated and taken 425. Sent to the Tow∣er, and Examined by Vane and Haslerig 426. Obtains his liberty of the Rump up∣pon Bail 433 Bramhal Dr. dies 522 Bradshaw the bold President of the high Court of Iustice 106 to 217. Dies 430 Bradshaw Agent at Hamburg and Denmark 334 Brain sent General to Jamaica 381 Brandenburghers 547 Mortogh O Brian lays down last Armes in Ireland 356 Breda the place of Treaty 560. English Em∣bassadors there ibid. Plenipotentiaries meet, Peace concluded 563 Bristol intended to be surprized for the King 45, 46.
Taken by his Forces 47. By Fairfax 87 Bristol Earl honoured with the Garter 344 Bridgewater taken 82 Brickbat flung at the Protector's Coach 358 Broughton Col. 296 Broughil Lord lands in Munster with For∣ces from England 246. Defeats David Roch, and hangs the Bishop of Ross 252. Brown Major-General 57. Reconciled to the King at Holmby 128. In a new designe discovered 434 Brown Bushel beheaded 285 Brooks Lord killed 42 Brunt-Island taken 294 Brunswick besieged, and surrendred 583 Buchanan's Book burnt in Scotland 526 Buckingham Duke 177. sent into Holland 584 Buckhurst Lord, &c. 505 Burleigh Capt. 163 Butler Col. Richard taken 242 C Cahi Castle weakly yielded 521 Calamy Minister Committed 514 Canons made against the Church of Rome and justifying this 12 Capel Lord Tryed and Sentenced 228. and Beheaded, his noble deportment 229 Carlisle Earl sent into Sweden 572 Cavalcae and Procession, from 474 to 486 Campeach taken 520 Canary prohibited 556 Candia besieged 559. Surrendred 577 Carlisle yielded to the Scots 106 Carnarvan slain 50, 51 Casimire King of Poland dies in France 590 Carrick taken by Treachery 247. Attempted in vain to be recovered from Colonel Rey∣nolds 248 Carteret Sir George Governour of Jersey 255 Castlehaven Earl for the King in Ireland, and against the Nuntio's party 238 Casualties 315 Cavaliers to depart London 258. Conspire against Cromwel 366. Their Plot again discovered 401. They Plot against the Rump 423 Ceremonies in Religion one main cause of the War, opposed and murmured at 2, 3 Cessation granted by the Scots upon very dif∣ficult terms 15 Cessation agreed in Ireland 53 Chains of Gold and Medals given to the chief Sea-Officers 349 Chaloner Chute Speaker dies 416 Chancery regulated 368 Character of the Kings Iudges 196 to 203 Charles Prince in the Downs 175. At Goree in Holland 176 Charles the second, Proclaimed King by di∣spersed papers 225 Chester Charter taken away 427 Chichister City 42 Chepstow-Castle taken by Sir Nicholas Ke∣mish 171 St. Christophers and the Cariby Islands sub∣dued 307 Christmass day Celebrated 398 City Alarm'd with a pretended Plot 403 City invite Parliament and Army to dinner 429. Send Sword-bearer to Gen. Monke 435. Their Gates and Portcullices pulled down 437 City and Companies feasts the General 438 Their joy upon the King's return 453 Lend the King Money 575, 528, 551 City Building begins 556 Citadels built in Scotland 313 Claypool's Lady dies, buried 404 Dr. Clargis, also Mr. Caryl Minister, &c. sent to Gen. Monke in Scotland 432 Clanrickard Marq. his services 249. Substi∣tuted Lord-Governour of Ireland 251. Defeated by Col. Axtel 277. Lays down his Arms 324 Clubmen 83 Clement Gregory 255 Clifford Lord made Lord Treasurer 588. Re∣signes his Staff 591 Clogher Bishop defeated 267 Clonmel yielded after a stout resistance 252 Colchester Siege 175 Cock-matches, and Horse-races prohibited 359 Committee appointed for inspection of Char∣ters 381. Committee of Safety 429. Like not themselves, declare for another Parlia∣ment 433 Common-prayer abolished 69 Commonwealth altered by Cromwel 338 Composition 88 Compton Dr. made Bishop of Oxford 599 Commissioners in Scotland 166 Commission of the Great Seal altered 359 Commissioners for approbation of Ministers 359 Commissioners to treat with the King at the Isle of Wight 183 Commissioners to General Monke from the City 436 Commissioners to the King at Breda arrive at the Hague 447
Commissioners of the Treasury 563. To take account of publick Money ibid. To hear Seamens complaints 564 Cologne Treaty 594 Colmaer Battle 601 Colliers the Dutch designe 337 Confederate party of Irish Rebels 250 Confirmation of Acts 500 Constable Sir William dies, and buried in Hen. 7th's Chappel 373 Contents of the Kings Declaration from Bre∣da 445 Convocation in England grant 5th part of their Livings to Scotch War 12 Convention in Ireland 440 Conway Lord defeated 13 Coronation of the King 475 to 496 Cotterel Sir Charles sent to Brussels 532 Court erected for rebuilding the City 556 County-troops established 373 Councellors several Privy-Councillors made 584 Covenant first in Scotland what 7. Taken 45. Burnt by the Hangman 498 to 500 Council of State erected 226. New chosen 258 named by Cromwel 343. Supream power named by the Rump 421. A new one ap∣pointed 435 Courts of Iustice in Ireland 332 Courts it in the interval of the Rupture by Lambert 343 Coot Sir Charles defeats the Irish 250, 267, 305. His Stratagem on Galloway in Ire∣land for a free Parliament 438. Died 503 Cooper a Minister Executed 278 Corke vide Youghal Cowley Abr. dies 564 Craven Lord his Case 291, 365 offered again to the Parliament, but deferred by the Pro∣tector 392 Crew Dr. Bishop of Durham 599 Crosses demolished 45 Cromwel Lieutenant-General at Marston∣moor, at Islip 59, 74, 112, His Conspira∣cy in seizing the King at Holmby 129. Complements and Courts the King 144. And then abuseth him 147. Awes the Votes of Non-addresses 162. His Politicks on People, City, and King 163. Collogues the City and Parliament for fear of the Scots 165. Marcheth into Scotland 178. Makes the Scots disband 179. Treache∣rously surprizeth the Levellers; his subtile Clemency 234. Graduated at Oxford ibid. And presented and treated by the City of London 234. Made Lord-Governour of Ireland 237. Lands there ibid. Storms Tredagh, his cruelty and policy there; Winter-quarter at Youghal 254. Sent for by Letters, leaves Ireland, and Ireton in chief there 253, 266. His cruelty to the English Cavaliers ibid. Arrives in Eng∣land 267. Made Gen. for Scotch Expedi∣tion 268. His Sophistry with the Scots 271. Marcheth for Sterling, 275. his pro∣gress in Scotland 279. Alarms the Scots 283. At Glascow sick 289. His designe upon the Parliament 324. A Dictator 343. Made Protector, and Installed at West∣minster 354. The module of Government and his Oath ibid. Proclaimed and gra∣tulated 355. Names his Privy-council ibid. Invited to dinner by the City, and dines there 357. Supplies the Courts with able Iudges ibid. Concludes a Peace with the Dutch ibid. His designes to secure him∣self 358. Falls from the Coach-box in Hide∣park 363. Calls a Parliament Sept. 3d. his speech to them, and designes 363, 364. His designes in the West-Indies 365. His Mother dieth, buried in state in Hen. 7th's Chappel 366. His Cabal with the French Cardinal 369. His Conspiracy with the King of Sweden and the Prince of Tran∣silvania 373. Affronted by Coney a Mer∣chant 374. Gives preferments, and sends his son Henry to command in Ireland 358. His oppression of the Loyal party 378. His designe in setting up Major-Generals 378. To awe the Parliament new called 381. Treats with the Iews about a Toleration 379. Allows 200 l. towards Bishop Usher's Funeral 380. Excludes divers Mem∣bers ibid. Congratulated by his Conven∣tion on Syndercomb's Plot 385. His de∣signe is motioned to take the Title of a King 386. The danger makes him refuse it 390 Assists the French with 6000 men 391. Confirmed in his former Dignity of Pro∣tector 392. Signes several Acts 392. His speech to the Parliament containing Thanks for the Money-Acts 392. His In∣vestiture and Inauguration in the Prote∣ctorship 394. Frighted at a Book 395. Sends Embassadors to mediate betwixt the Dane and Swede 397. Advanceth and pre∣fers his Children 398. Swears his Privy-council ibid. Chooseth another House 399. The frame of his Government questioned by the Parliament 401. He dissolves them ibid His policy in discharging Sheriffs of their pences at Assizes 401. In fears and troubled condition 402. Falls sick, his Family and himself vainly presumptuous of his recovery,
Dies 408. His Character ibid. Sixty thou∣sand pound allotted for the expence of his Funerals, from 411, to 413 Cromwel, Bradshaw and Ireton digged up, and hanged at Tybourn 432 Cromwel Henry tamely surrenders Ireland 423 Crosby betrays Kingsale, Condemned 248 Cumberland Earl 44 Cyrencester 42 D Danemark, War declared against it 556 Daniel Col. John Articles 252 Davison, &c. kills a Souldier at St. James's 379 Daws Capt. his courage 560 Davis a Water-man betrays Lord Capel 220 Declaration of the King conecrning the Act of Vniformity 514 Declaration of Cromwel upon dissolution of Parliament 340 to 343. Of the Rump 420 Decimation of Cavaliers 378 Delinquents Capital and otherwise qualified 229 Democracy established in the City 231 Denbigh Earl killed 44 Dennington Castle Besieged, and stoutly de∣fended, and yielded 98 Denial Self order 67, 126 Denmark King 225. Dies 577 Deploration of the loss before Dublin, the causes thereof 242 Derby Earl corresponds with the King 234. Discovered ibid. Ioyns with the King in Lancashire 295. Defeated at Wigan, and flies to Worcester 296. Taken at Newport, Sentenced by a Court-Marshal, Beheaded at Bolton 302, 303. Derby-house Committee, formerly the Com∣mittee of Safety 166 De Ruyter sayls for New-found-land 540. Returned to Holland 541. Made Admi∣ral ibid. De Ruyter and Tromp fall out 554. Presented by the Cornish Gentlemen 562 Desborough Col. and others summoned 549 Dean General slain 344 Devizes 46 Digby Lord honoured with the Order of the Garter at Paris 344 Dignities conferred by the King 455 Dillon Lord at Baggot-rath 242 Directory 125, 126 Disorders and divisions the ruine of the Irish Army 251 Dives Sir Lewis escapes 220 Divisions among the Scots, fomented by Cromwel 271 Dorrington Sir Francis 63 Dorislaus slain at the Hague 236 Downing Sir George 448. Sent into Hol∣land 528, 529. Presses for answer to the King's demands 582. Returns ibid. He is Committed ibid. Drogheda besieged and taken by Cromwel, and a bloody Massacre there 244 Dublin besieged by the Marq. of Ormond 241. Siege raised, and Besiegers routed 242 Duckenfield Lieutenant-Colonel stops the Speakers Coach 429 Dunbarton yielded 308 Dunslo pacification 10 Dundalk taken 23. Retaken 25 Dundee stormed by Gen. Monke 301 Dunferling Earl to London 10 Dumfreize, Riot there 557 Dunkirk taken by the Spaniards 325. Siege 405. The Battle there ibid. A defeat given the Spaniard 406. Yielded, and put into the English possession 407. Restored to the French 512 Dunotter-Castle yielded 313 Dury's religious Cabal in Germany 377 Dutch Embassadors to Oxford 57. Commerce and Fishing molested at Sea 308. War to∣wards ibid. Send Embassadors to treat ibid. Embassadors extenuate and mediate the Rupture; their Papers, and our States answer thereunto 320, 321. Fleet gives the English a go-by in the North-Seas, and comes into the Down 344. Engage with the English ibid. Defeated 345. Send to England in order to Peace ibid. Trade at a stand 346. Their Embassadors have Audience of the Protector 355. Peace, and private Articles of it against the Prince of Orange 357. Magnificently treat the King 448. Surprised by the Turk 524. Complain by the English 525. House re∣solves therein ibid. King declares himself ibid. Bravado 528. Bourdeaux-fleet ta∣ken 529. A Dutch Libel 530. Dutch ar∣rive in Guernsey 530. Their Smyrna-fleet encountered by Captain Allen 536. Reprisals granted against them 531. Dutch War declared ibid. Dutch Libel ibid. Dutch Embassie, proves fruitless 531. Dutch Manufactures prohibited 532. Ca∣shire the English Officers 533. Dutch Im∣bargo in France 534. Dutch ibid. Dutch Libel 535. Ill treated in Russia 536.
Dutch lost in China 541. Make peace with the Dane 548. Dutch attempt Brunt-Island 560. Sheerness ibid. Come up the River 561. At Harwich ibid. At Wen∣bury in Devonshire 562. At Cowland in Cornwal ibid. Dutch lose several Towns 585. Dutch Mutinies 586. Dutch East-Indie-fleet escape the English 587. Dutch Magistrates changed. Dutch make peace with the Bishop of Munster 600. Dutch take the Island of Normantier from the French ibid. E Earles of Pembroke and Holland sent with a Declaration of the fears of the Parlia∣ment to the King 31. Answered ibid. Earls created 470 Earthquake in Cheshire 395 East-Indie ships Dutch taken 541 Edinburgh entred by Cromwel 275. Castle yielded 280 Elector Prince Palatine comes to London, departs, taken in France 10 Elections for a free Parliament 440 Elizabeth Princess dies 276 Emperor his Brother dies 146. Makes peace with the Turk 147. Offers to mediate 584. His Forces marched 597 Enfield-chace a Skirmish there 423 Engagement annulled 439 England and the Dominions made a free State by Act 235 English under Lord Marquiss Ormond and Inchiqueen disbanded and dismist by the Irish 252 Eniskillon delivered to Sir Charles Coot 250 Episcopacy re-established here 456. And in Scotland 503 Escapes of divers Cavaliers 227 Escurial burnt 583 Essex Earl Lieutenant-General of Foot against the Scots 9. General of the Parliament Forces departs London 38. Attends the King's motion 39. Fights at Edge-hill, retreats to Coventry 40, 41. Relieves Gloucester 49. At Newberry 50. At Theal, Redding, London 52. Marches reduce the West 58. Pounded at Lestithiel, and escapes with Lord Roberts by Boat to Plymouth 58. Resignes his Commission 72. Dies 124 Earl of Essex Lord-Deputy 587 Essex County joyns with Lord Goring, Sir Charles Lucas, and Sir George Lisle 174 Estate of the Kingdom in a sad condition after the death of the King 124, 125 Everts. taken 536. dismist ibid. Exchange Royal finished 574 Exchequer shut 582 Execution of the Kings Iudges 466 Exeter yielded, and Articles 98, 99. En∣gagement forced by the Independant-party for the Parliament to live and die with the Army—City refuse the Parliaments Or∣ders and Acts 231. Tumults about a free Parliament Excise 157 Exclusion of secluded Members 229. F Fairfax General in Commission 74. Marcheth 75. Is cajoled to manage the seizure of the King. Made Generallissimo and Constable of the Tower 141. Marcheth a∣gainst the Levellers 234. Complemented and graduated at Oxford with Cromwel and Lambert ibid. Magnificently treated and presented by the City ibid. Lays down his Commission 268. Arms against Lam∣bert 434 Faulkland Lord-Viscount slain 51 Fanshaw Sir Richard Embassador in Spain 525 Fatality among the Clergy 504 Farrel Lieutenant-General of Ulster-Army 245. Put into Waterford to defend it 247 Farewel to the Scotch-War Fast general 540 Faulkner perjured 291 Faulconbridge Lord Arms against Lambert sent to Venice 575 Fee-farm Rents 455 Feak Parson 540 Fiennes Lord Commissioner Fifth-Monarchists plot against Cromwel 366 FIGHTS, at Newborn with the Scots 13 Worcester in the Lanes 40. Brainford 41. Yarum 42. Wakefield 43. At Lis∣card ibid. Caversham-bridge ibid. Hop∣ton-heath 44. Bramham-moor ibid. Chalgrave-field 45. Stratton ibid. Mid∣dleton-Cheney— Lansdown 46. Round-way-down ibid. Adderton-heath and Bradford 47. Stow in the Wold 49. Auburn-chace 50. Newark at the relief of it by Prince Rupert 56. Brandia or Cherington 57. Cropredy 58. Lidbury 74. Sherburn 90. Torrington 93. Saint Fagons 171. Maidstone 174. At Dublin 241. Muscleborough 264. Warrington 295. Wigan 296
Fincher Mayor, vide Pye resigned Finch Sir Heneage his Reading 501. Made Lord-Keeper 594 Fire in London 554. In the Horse-Guards 556. In Fleet-street 368. Another at Aberfoyle in Scotland ibid. Another in Thred-needle-street 368. At Lambeth 373. At St. Johnstons in Scotland 381 Fleet sent under Hamilton to the Frith in Scotland 9 Fleet Spanish denied protection, and ruined by the Dutch in the Downs 11 Fleet returns to the Prince, Earl of Warwick imployed against them as Admiral 175, 176. Fleets Dutch and English at Shetland 322 Fleet under Pen from Jamaica, accidents of the return 376 Fleet declare their Royal acceptance, &c. 446 Fleet English 532. Beats the Hollander 538. English Hamburgh-fleet taken 538. Ren∣dezvouz ibid. Fleet ready 250. Divided ibid. Fleets Engage ibid. Engage again 552. Out again 553 Fleets Engaged 584. Fleets Engaged 591 Fleetwood made Deputy of Ireland 366. More of him Forrain Princes, how affected to our States 254 Forces from Ireland to assist the King 53. Surprized and defeated 54. Sent by Crom∣wel to assist the French 391. Vnder Earl Inchiqueen to Portugal 511 Fornication Act 225 Fray likely at Westminster At Tower-hill Fundamentals of the Army French prohibit English Cloath, and are pro∣hibited their Wines 255. Conclude a peace with Cromwel 377. Their Fleet taken by Blake 325. At Gigery 533. Embassa∣dors in England 535. King supplies the Dutch 544. Declares against England ibid. Embassadors beaten and Imprisoned in Turkey 558. Lays claim to the Low-Countries, breaks with Spain 579. In∣vades Lorrain 579. Breaks with the Dutch 583 Free Parliament noised 434 Frigats of Brest rove at sea 356 Furstenburgh Count seized 598 G Gates and Portcullices of London pulled down 437 Gayland 522, 523. Makes peace 532. Transports himself for Tangier 571 Gell Sir John Sentenced 270 A General required by Officers of the Army 439 Gentry secured over England 373 Gerrard Col. John and Sir Gilbert 538. Col. John beheaded 361 Gibbons Sentenced 290 Glencarn Earl submits to the English 362. Prisoner in Edenburgh 380. Chair-man to the Scotch Convention 432 Gloucester Duke born 13. With the King at Colen, from the Iesuits at Paris 365. Dies 456 Gloucester Siege and Summons, and Relief by Essex 49. Walls demolished 512. Ca∣thedral begged 381 Godolphin Sir Will. Knighted, and sent in∣to Spain 568 Goff Col. friend to Richard Cromwel 417 Goring Col. into France 39 Goring Lord Condemned, but saved 228 Goodman Bishop refuseth to subscribe Canons against the Church of Rome 12 Good Old Cause 417 Grace Colonel 324 Graigs Town 245 Grantham Col. killed 380 Grantham Town 44 Granger a Forger 256 Greenvile Sir John 445. Rewarded by the Parliament and City 446 Greenvile Sir Bevil 46 Great Cities and Towns in Ireland refuse to admit Garrisons, which proved their ru∣ine 244. Accept of them at last upon con∣dition the English be dismist, Cavaliers and others 251 Grey Lord Grooby 291 Groves Col. vide Penruddock Guiny Relation 535 Guernsey-castle stormed 284. A designe up∣pon it discovered 554 Gunning Dr. in Divinity his Congregation seized and plundred for celebrating Christ∣mass 398 Gurney Lord Mayor in the Tower 34 Guthury and Giffan Hanged 497 H Haberdashers-Hall 129 Hackney-coaches regulated 368 Haddington Earl blown up by Gunpowder in Scotland 14, 15 Hamilton Marquiss the Kings Commissioner
into Scotland, at London 7. Prisoner to Pendennis-castle 52. Defeated and taken Prisoner 178 Hamilton Duke tryed and sentenced 228. Beheaded 229 Hamond Col. secures the Kings person 151. His baseness 163. Shot in Ireland ibid. Hannam, the Infamous Thief, breaks Prison and escapes 376. Hanged 381 Harman Capt. his Exploit 595. Beats the Dutch 564 Harrisons impudence in bringing the King to London 193. A main man for the little Parliament, outed and dissatisfied 353. Apprehended 453 Harris a great Cheat 368 Harvey Sir Daniel sent to Constantinople 568 Hazelrig Sir Arthur seizes Portsmouth 433. returns to Westminster, and is thanked by the Rump 435. Dies 474 Healing Parliament 470 Henrietta Princess 469 Henchman Dr. Bishop of London 524 Hertford Marquiss 38 Heresies and Schismes 368 Hewit Dr. seized 404. Tried and Beheaded ibid. Hewson Col. made Master of Arts in Oxford 234 Marcheth into London 433 Hide Sir Henry beheaded 285 Highland-War in Scotland, its account 361, 362. Hinde the High-way man 303 Hispaniola expedition, from 369 to 372 Holland Earl Lieutenant-General of Horse against the Scots 9. Rising at Kingston and defeated 177. Tryed and Sentenced 228. Executed in Palace-yard Westmin∣ster 229 Hollis Lord Embassador into France 522. Returns for England 550 Holmes Major Committed 532. Discharged ibid. Enters the Vly 553. Attacques the Dutch Fleet 582. Holstein Duke 255 Honours and Dignities denied to some Male-Contents, another cause of the Scotch trou∣bles 4. Honours given by the King vaca∣ted 292 Hopton Lord 42. Disbanded honourably af∣ter many services and Victories, at Truro in Cornwal 96, 97 Horse-races and Cock-matches prohibited 359 Horton Adjutant to Maj. Gen. Brown at Dennington 63 Hotham refuseth to admit the King into Hull, but suffers the Duke of York and Prince Elector Palatine; is proclaimed Traitor 33, 34. Revolts from the Parlia∣ment, and his son and he sent Prisoners to the Tower 56. Executed 68 House of Lords voted useless 226. Protest against it ibid. Howard Lord adviseth Richard Cromwel 417 Howard Lady to the Tower 423 Howard Capt. his valour 543 Howard Master sent Embassador to Taffa∣lette 575 Hoyle Alderman Hangs himself 256 Hull Garrison 33. Hotham Governour of it ibid. The dispute of transferring that Ma∣gazine 32, 33 Humble Petition and Advice 393 Hume-castle yielded 283 Humphries-Col. to Jamaica 377 I Jamaica 370 Jamaicans assault the Dutch Plantations 548 James John Executed 502 Jealousies, Fears, and pretended Plots 26, 27, 30.31. Jenkins Iudge his writings 155, 156. De∣signed for slaughter 229. Dies 524 Jersey a new Mace 520. Surrendered to Col. Haynes 306 Jesuits in France proceeded against 570. Ex∣iled 373 Jews treat for admission with Cromwel 379 Jewish Prophet 548, 559 Imposition on Seal-coal 359 Independants rise 66. Quarrel with the Presbyterians, and cajolethem 67. un∣dermine and defeat them 112, 113, 139. Synod at Savoy 413 Inchiqueen Lord defeats Lord Taaff 164. Declares for the King ibid. Ioyns with the Confederate Catholicks for the King un∣der the Lord of Ormond, made Lieutenant General of the Army 238. His overfight, like to be surpried 245. Falsly suspected, and accused by the Marquess of Antrim 263. Leaves Ireland 277 Indians rebel in New-England 601 Ingoldsby Col. offers aid to Richard 417. Suppresseth a Mutiny and Lambert Instrument of Cromwel's Protectorian Go∣vernment, and his Oath 354 Joachims Embassador from the Dutch 267. Sent home 270
St. Johnstons yielded 294 Jones draws out of Dublin to oppose the ad∣vance of the Marquiss of Ormond, re∣treats 239. Raiseth the Siege before Dub∣lin 211. Comes before Drogheda, and retreats 243. Dies in the quality of Lieu∣tenant-General 247 Ireland and Ulster Forces submit 344 Ireland its state and condition 238 Ireton's appearance and notice at Naseby-fight; wounded 78. In the Cabal of the Army 84. Draws their Papers and Propo∣sals 84, 85. Parliament Votes 161. Intrigues between them 116, 118, 119. Dies of the Plague 305 Irish affairs, an account of the Cessation and the Marq. of Ormond's Treaty with Rebels and Parliament; the Articles thereof with the Rebels the Popes Nuntio there 122, 123, 124. Strength, what after Cromwel's departure 253. Abused by Cromwel's fair carriage at first, into horrible slavery at his departure 253. Defeated at Finagh 234. Their affairs 292, 309, 310. Seem to acquiess in Lambert's actions 431. Af∣fairs 515 Judges Commissioned by the new State 224. New ones again 254. New placed by the Rump 422. Of the King and others ex∣empted out of the Act of Oblivion 454. They that came in upon Proclamation re∣spited from Execution 469. Brought to the House of Lords, and remanded to Prison 502. Of the Law, their Names 492 Justice High Court 203 to 217. Again ere∣cted 258, 278. To try Col. Gerrard and Powel 360 K Kentish Insurrection 173. Suppressed ibid. Kent mastered and reduced by Rich and Berk∣stead 175 Keyling Sir John Lord Chief-Iustice 543 Ker Col. defeated 280 Killing no Murther, a Book 395 King dispenceth with the Common prayer and Book of Canons in Scotland, by a De∣claration, slighted and cavilled at as a de∣vice, and opposed by the Earls of Hume and Lindsey, with another Declaration 7, 8 Arms against the Scots 9. At York and Barwick agrees upon a Pacification 10. Goeth to his Scotch Parliament 20. De∣parts thence with mutual satisfaction ibid. Received Magnificently at his return to the City ibid. Demands five Members 25. To Hampton-court, to Dover, to Green∣wich, Theobalds 27. To Royston, New-market, York ibid. Asserts his right in the Militia 30, 31. His innocence of any designe of War, &c. ibid. Resolves for Ireland 32. Expostulates his affront at Hull from Beverley 34. Takes a guard of York-shire-Gentlemen ibid. His intentions of no War attested by the Lords ibid. An∣swers and refutes their Remonstrance 35. Forbids the Militia 36. Invites his Subjects to his assistance ibid. To Newark, back to York, to Nottingham sets up his Stan∣dard, to Stafford-shire, Leicester-shire, confines of Wales and Shrewsbury, and caresses the Gentry and Commonalty 37, 38 39. Melts down his Plate at Shrewsbury and Mints it 38. Faceth Coventry, to Southam 39. Stays and turns upon Essex: his Speech 39, 40. Takes Banbury, to Oxford, towards London, at Brainford, 41. Into the West after Essex — Over∣takes him at Lestithiel, defeats him 58. in the associated Counties 88. Into Wales ibid. At Newark 90. At Oxford ibid. Escapes thence 99. To the Scots 100. In∣formation of it, and his Majesties Messages and the Parliaments Answers, from 100 to 104. The King at Newcastle 114. disputes with Henderson 115. And be∣trayed by the Scots 121. His escape inten∣ded from the 122. Delivered to Com∣missioners 127. At Holmby 128. Car∣ried away by Cornet Joyce 129. At Chil∣dersley with freedom of Chaplains 130. The designe of it 131 to 133. Deluded by the Army Proposals 132. At Hampton-court after many traverses 145. Preten∣dedly at Liberty and Honour 147. His nearness to London suspected by Cromwel 148. Frighted thence by Whaley, and de∣parts ibid. His Letters and Declarations there 148 to 151. In the Isle of Wight ibid. High Treason to conceal his Person ibid. His Message from the Isle of Wight 151 to 155. A blasphemous Hue and Cry against him ibid. Answers the Message with the Bills of Parliament. His Decla∣ration upon the Votes of Non-addresses 166 to 169. Kings Message and Answer to the Votes of a personal Treaty 181, 182. Hath liberty of assistance and his Friends 183. Startled at the Remonstrance of the Army 187. Shews the unreasonableness of it ibid. His farewel to the Commissio∣ners, and Declaration concerning the Trea∣ty 188 to 190. And his Letter of the result
and advice to the Prince 190. Hurried from the Isle of Wight to Hurst-castle, to Winchester, to Windsor, to St. James's 193. To the High Court of Iustice: his defence and Reasons 203 to 215. Traite∣rously Sentenced ibid. Confers with his Children ibid. The Lady Elizabeth's re∣lation of it 216. His Speech upon the Scaffold 218 to 219. Murthered 220. His Corps exposed to view ibid. Buried by the Duke of Richmond, Marquiss of Hert¦ford, Durchester, and Earl of Lindsey, at Windsor 221. The Service-book denied at his Interment ibid. King Charles the second at Hague 235. Highly treated there and honoured 236. Departs for France by Rotterdam, Dort, Antwerp, and Brussels; treated by the Arch-Duke Leopold, attended thence by Duke Lorrain to Compeign, met there by the French King 237. At Jersey 257. At Breda ibid. Takes shipping at Terheyden for Scotland 268. Arrives there ibid. Withdrawing the Covenanting party 281. Crowned at Schoone ibid. Marched into England 294. Comes to Worcester 295. Summons the Country ibid. Flies by ad∣vice of the Earl of Derby to Whiteladies: the manner of his escape, and arrival at Paris 311. Continues there ibid. Interpo∣seth betwixt that King and Princes, honou∣red by the Duke of Lorrain ibid. From Paris to Liege, and from the Spaw 363. to Colen 365. At the Duke of Newburg ibid. Privately withdraws upon Penrud∣dock's rising 367. At Frankford 376. An interview with the Queen of Sweden, in company with the Princess of Aurange ibid. To Flanders, at Bruges 384. False reports spread of him here on designe 377. Honourably treated by the Elector of Mentz ibid. Entertains Forces in Flan∣ders 291. His Title to the Crown annull'd 383. King at Dunkirk 396. In readiness with Forces from Flanders 403. His de∣signe discovered by Manning 367. Pri∣vately at Sir George Booth's rising, about St. M's in Britany 426. At St. Jean de Luz ibid. And at Paris Complemented upon the Change by that Court 436. At Brussels, thence to Breda 445. Sends his Letters and Declarations ibid. At the Hague 447. Proclaimed ibid. Departs for England 449. Complemented with an Elegant Speech ibid. Embarques and Lands at Dover 450. To Canterbury, Rochester, Dertford 451. Manner of his entrance into, and passage through Lon∣don ibid. Proclaimed in Ireland by the Convention, Crowned 454. His answer to the Earl of Manchester's Speech 453. Pas∣seth many Acts 454. His passage through London to his Coronation 475. Married to the Infanta of Portugal at Portsmouth 506. His Declaration concerning the Act of Vniformity 514. Kings Progress 539. At Oxford ibid. Declares War against France 544. Lays the first Stone at the Exchange 565. Makes peace with Spain 578. Takes a Progress 581. Invites the Dutch into England 585. Makes peace with the Dutch 595. Mediates a peace between France and Spain, composeth the difference between the King of France and States of Genoua 600 Kingly power voted useless 226 Kirle a Lieutenant-Colonel betrayeth Mon∣mouth to Massey 64 Knights of the Bath 481 Kniveton Daniel the Kings Messenger-Exe∣cuted 256 L Lambert Major-General passeth into Fife, defeats Sir John Brown there 293 Lambert made General against Sir Geo. Booth; his success. 425. His reward of a Iewel 427. His policy and use of his Vi∣ctory ibid. His Cabal with the Officers of his Army against the Rump ibid. Offered Terms from the King by the Lord Hopton 431. Marcheth against General Monke ibid. Would Engage 434. Deserted by his men ibid. Turned off and discarded; escapes from the Tower, defeated, taken by Ingoldsby 441. Ordered to Trial 505. Sentenced. 510 Lambs, a brave white-coated Regiment of the Marquiss▪ of Newcastle, overthrown and destroyed 61 Langdale Lord joyns with Hamilton 17 Lane Lord-Keeper dieth at Jersey 270 Laud Lord Arch-Bishop of Canterbury a zealous Protestant, traduced, &c. 12. And intended to be murthered 12, 13. Im∣peached 17. And voted guilty of High Treason, committed to the Tower ibid. Con∣vened before the Lords, and after a brave defence Sentenced 69, 70. As bravely suf∣fered, Beheaded ibid. Col. Laughorn, Poyer, and Powel rise in Wales 171 Laughorn, vide Poyer, &c.
Laws poted to be maintained and preserved by the new States, turned into English 287 to be new moulded into another Body 351. Lawson Sir John sent to the Streights 526. Proclaims War with the Algiers ibid. Called home 528 De Lede Spanish Embassador hither 373. Governour of Dunkirk, slain there 406 Leeds taken by Fairfax 42 Leicester Earl made Deputy of Ireland 20 Leicester taken 6. Retaken 80, 81. Lenthal Mr. John 469 Lesly Scotch General 13. Defeated at Mar∣ston-moor 59. Baulked at Hereford 87. Taken and sent Prisoner to Chester 302 Letters sent from the King to the Rump 441 Levellers first 131 Levens Dr. Executed 269 Liberty of Conscience Enacted in England 275 Libberton Lord to the King at Jersey 233. Slain at Dunbar 273 Ligne Prince 455 Lilburn John whipt at Carts Tail for sedi∣tious Books 2 Lilburn and Levelling party secured 232. Their History and Actions at Burford 234 Their new Commotions 255. Defeated, and their Ring-leaders shot 234 Lilburn Col. Chief Commander in Scotland, he defeats the Royalists 355 Lilly's Prognostications 310 Lines and Bulwarks about-London, alarm'd by the King's march 39 Lindsey Earl General for the King 38. His Son 47 Limerick Siege 304. Surrendered 305 Lisle killed 534 Litchfield besieged and taken 42. Retaken by Prince Rupert 44 Litchfield Earl 424 Littleton Lord Keeper 45 Little, or foolish, Parliament sit down 349. Their Character and Names 350. Their strange Consultations and Actions 351. Dissolved 353 Lockyer shot to death 233 Lockhart the Rump Embassador at St. Jean de Luz 426 Loans and subscriptions against Scotch War by the Earl Strafford, &c. all the Nobili∣ty and Gentry 11 London proffers their ready service to secure the two Houses; their Levies forbidden by the Kings Letters 27. A Plot to surprize it for the King, Mr. Waller hardly escaped 47. Engage against the Army, and Petition the Parliament 137. Too rashly 138. Tu∣mult the Parliament ibid. Submit to the Army, their Lines and Works dismantled, Army through it in Triumph 141 Bishop of London attended the King at his death 220 London-Derry relieved by the joynt forces of O Neal and General Monke, the ill conse∣quences thereof 239 Longford house surrendred 92 Loudon Lord abuseth the King 120 Lorn Lord pardoned 509 Lords House comply with votes of Non-ad∣dresses awed by the Army 165 Lords of the Privy-Council 488 Loathbury sad fire 513 Loughborough Lord 81, 97. Escapes 227. Arrives at the Hague ibid. Love Minister Sentenced and Executed 240 Lucas Sir Charles and Sir George Lisle shot to death 179 Lucas Sir Charles and Sir George Lisle re∣interred at Colchester 500 Lunsford Lieutenant of the Tower 25 Luzancy assaulted by St. Germain 602 M Macquire and MacMahon seized in Dublin & sent Prisoners to the Tower 22. Executed 71 Mace a new one made 235 Maestricht blockt up 584. Surrendered 596 Major-Generals established 378. Their power and awe of Elections, &c. 382 Mallet Iudge resignes 522 Man Isle reduced 306 Manchester Earl at Marston 58. At Denning∣ton-castle 63. Disbanded 72. His Speech 452. Made Lord-Chamberlain 455. Dies 580 Mannings Treason 365. Shot 368 Mardike taken 396. Attempted by the Spa∣niard ibid. Marlborough 42. Burnt 343 Mary Princess Married to the Prince of Au∣range 18 Marriage Act 351 Marston the Leveller hanged 257 Marsin General 403 Marshals Court in Southwark abolished 291 Maynard Serjeant to the Tower, &c. 374 Massey Col. 42. Disbanded 112. Heads the Citizens against the Army 139. Impeached 132. Flies into Holland 143. Escapes from the Tower 303. Escapes from St. James's 227▪ Arrives at the Hague ibid. Worsted and wounded at Upton-bridge 296. Taken 303. Taken and Escaped 424.
Mazarine Cardinal joys the Queen-Mother with Cromwel's death 410 Maurice Prince drowned in the West-Indies 337 Members the five, the grand cavil of the Re∣bellion 25. Five Members charged 26 Eleven Members impeached by the Army 132. Fugitive Members sit in Council with the Army 140. Reseated by them 141. Void and null all that was done in their absence 142 Mentz and Collen at odds 547 Messiah counterfeit 548 Meetings supprest 573 Middleton now a Parliamentarian General 62. Taken 301. Seeking aid from the Dutch 344. Lands in Scotland 358 Militia Ordinance 29, 30. Petitioned by the Parliament 30 to 33. Messages about it ibid. On foot in Lincoln-shire 34 Mings Sir Christopher chaced the Dutch 544. Sails for the Coast of Sweden 545. General Wrangle comes aboard him ibid. Miracle ominous 390 Mohun Lord for the King. Lord Hopton, Sir John Berkley, and Col. Ashburnham Com∣missioners for the King in the West 43 Montross Marq. his Battles and activity 73, 74. His Declaration 254. Tragedy and death, from 255 to 266. His Interment 497 Monarchy the antient and only British Go∣vernment 223. Abolished in Scotland by English States 308 Monke a Colonel from Ireland to assist the King, taken prisoner at Namptwich, and thence to the Tower of London 53. To Ireland again 123. General, his acts in Ireland for the pretended States 237. He had the honour of Dunbar 274. In Scot∣land 358. In Sir George Booths, &c. 426. Secures the Scotch Nobility 427. Declares against the proceedings of Lam∣bert, &c. And secures Anabaptist Officers: maintains intelligence in England, and protracts time by offers of Composure 430, 431. Sends Commissioners to London, they agree to no purpose, obtains his desire of the Scotch Convention 432. Signifies his com∣ing to London 435. His passage, and Nar∣rative of his Cabal 436, 437. Thanked by the Parliament 442. The great instrument of the Restitution. Meets the King at Dover 450. Dignified with the Order of the Garter 451. With the title of Duke of Albemarle 455 Monmoth betrayed, and regained 64 Monmouth Duke made Capt. Kings Guard 568. His valour at Maestricht 596. Made Chancellor of Cambridge 599 Monro Sir George defeated 247. His enter∣prize in Ulster 250 Modiford Sir Thomas in Jamaica 530 Mordant Lord John seized 403. Tryed and quitted 404. Summoned 423 Morris Col. Executed 254 Moor Lord 240 Morpeth Earl affronted in Holland 532 Moreland Sir Samuel 448 Mother of Cromwel dies 366 Montague Gen. 416. Dignified with the Earldome of Sandwich 455. To Algier, and Lisbon 500. Brings home the Queen 507 Mulgrave Earl made Knight of the Garter 598 Munster success in Holland 544 Munson Lord, Sir Henry Mildmay, and Wallop Sentenced 501 Musco alteration in their Religion intended 558 Myn Colonel slain, and his party routed by Massey 64 N Naerden taken from the Dutch 597 Nailor James the Quaker personates our Saviour 384. Sentenced ibid. Released by the Rump 426 Newburg Prince arrives in England 602 Newberry disorders 525 Newark yielded 701 Newcastle Earl, afterwards Marquiss 42. Besieged in York 58. Disswades fighting after the defeat at Marston-moor, sets sail for Hamburgh with most of the Nobility and Officers of his party 61 Newcastle taken 67 New-park given the City by the Rump 235 News of the Change by Cromwel acceptable to the King at Paris 344 New-buildings 392 Nimmegen taken 586 No Address votes 162 Nobility of the Loyal and Presbyterian par∣ty 444 Noblemen English for the Scotch peace, a∣gainst Strafford's advice 15. Summoned to a general Council at York ibid. Con∣clude the Peace ibid. Secured by the Rump in the Tower 753 Nobles their Catalogue 488 Nonconformists increase in the Reigns of Qu. Elizabeth and King James 2 Indulged 582
Norfolk-Insurrection 278 Northampton burnt 602 North Sir Francis Lord Chief-Iustice of the Common-pleas 599 Northumberland Earl General of the Scots second expedition 22. His reasons to reject the Ordinance for the Trial of the King 194 Northampton Earl 42. Killed 44 Northern Counties oppressed by the Scots 120 Norton Colonel 66 Norwich Earl General in Kent, at Roche∣ster, and Black-heath, at Bow and Strat∣ford 174 Nuntio of the Popes in Ireland, his business 123. Party in Ireland 238 Nye one of the Commissioners for approbation with Lockier 359 O Oblivion Act by the Parliament 309 Oblivion Act by the King 456. Another 590 Obstructions in sales of Kings and Queens Lands, &c. removed 310 Okey Col. dismist from Command 366 Okey, Berkstead, and Corbet seized in Hol∣land, tried and Executed 505, 506 Omens and Prognostications of the Dutch War 315 O Neal Hugh put into Clonmel 248. De∣fends it very handsomly 252 O Neal joyns with the Independant-party 237 O Neal Sir Phelim hanged 333 Opdam made Lieutenant-Admiral in place of Van Tromp 349 Orange Prince arrives in England 578. Made Captain-General in Holland 579, 584. Declared Stadtholder 586 Order for the Murther and Execution of the King 217 Ordinances of Parliament obeyed as Acts 36. For tryal of the King disputed and thrown aside by the Lords, entituled by the Iuncto, and passed as an Act 194 to 196. Ordi∣nances published in Parliament 364 Orleans Dutchess comes into England 577. Dies ibid. Ormond Marquiss Lord-Lieutenant of Ire∣land 53. Capitulates with the Parlia∣ment Commissioners 164. Lord-Lieutenant of Ireland 238. He hath no power to pu∣nish any faults or Delinquents 243. Re∣cruits his Forces and Garrison-Towns ibid. Makes agreement with O Neal by means of Daniel O Neal his Nephew 244. Resolves to fight Cromwel before Duncannon 246. Before Carrick 247. But disappointed he leaves Ireland 277. Hardly escapes out of Sussex 401. Main Instrument of the Re∣stitutio — Made Earl of Brecknock 455. To Ireland Lord-Lieutenant 511. Duke of Ormond Chancellor of Oxford 571. Assaulted in the Night 578 Osborne Sir Thomas Lord-Treasurer 591 Other House meet, and fawn upon the Com∣mons 399. The Names of the Members ibid. Overton Maj. Gen. seized in Scotland 366 Overton Colonel 469 Owen Dr. preacheth before the Protector and Parliament 382 Owen Ro the great Rebel dies 248 Oxford the Kings chief Quarters and Court 47. Besieged by Fairfax 75. Yielded 106 P Pack Alderman 374, and 386 Palaffi Imbre revolts from the Emperour 548 Parliament in Ireland 4. Grant Subsidies to carry on the Scotch War 20 Parliament in England called, and dissolved, and why 12 Parliament in Scotland (and Assembly) and adjourned 17. Meet again, and order their Army to march into England 13 Parliament meets at Oxford 56 Long-Parliament 15. Enact a Triennial one 18. Deny his Majesties desire of going for Ireland, the reasons 32, 33. Forbid any resort to the King but his Servants. Arm the several Counties. Admit of no ways of accommodation 35. Arm and fight, &c. and having prevailed, agree not about disposing the King 113, 114, 121. Buy the King from the Scots after much tampering, and send Propositions to the King 118, 119, 121. Are refractory to all his condescen∣tions, offers, and messages, as appears 121. New Speakers 139. Fugitive Members sit with the Army in Council 140. Con∣strained to humour a Treaty in the Isle of Wight 158. Four Bills passed as Prelimi∣naries with Proposals ibid. Necessitated to vote a personal Treaty; the votes of Non-addresses cancell'd 180, 181. Agree to his Majesties condescention as a ground for Peace 192. Forced by the Army ibid. Turned into a Iuncto 193. Parliament-men twelve a penny 339. Dissolved, the manner of it 340. Dumb one meets 362. Another pretended Parliament 382. Mem∣berr excluded ibid. In a full House with the Other House 398, 399. Dissolved 401. One called by Richard, their Transacting with him, and the Other House, and the Army 413 to 418. The Long one dissolved 439. Most gladly and reverendly reecive the Kings Letters 445. Their resolves there∣upon 446. Their affairs before the King's return 453. They say hold on his Maje∣sties
Declaration from Breda 454. Dissolved 470. Another meet by the Kings Writ 496 Parliament 519.520. Prorogued 523, 527. Meet 530. Prorogued 532. Meet at Ox∣ford 542. Prorogued 543. Their Thanks to the Vniversity ibid. Prorogued 545, 549. Meet 555. Vote a supply ibid. Pro∣rogue and meet 563. Adjourn 564. Meet 566. Adjourn 568. Adjourn ibid. Pro∣rogued 569. Meet and Prorogued 574. Meet 576. Adjourned 577. Prorogued 580. They make an address about English Ma∣nufactures 580. Prorogued 581. Adjour∣ned 587. Meet 589. Adjourned 590. Meet and prorogued 591. Meet 602. Pro∣rogued ibid. Meet again ibid. Parliament of Scotlaud 524, 526. Proceed against Nonconformists 545. Meet at E∣dinburgh 574. Pass the Act for a Treaty of Vnion 577 Parliament in Ireland 545 Patrick Pursel Irish Maj. Gen. his treachery and cowardise 241 Pauw Embassador from Holland 227. Dies 324 Piercy James pretends to the Earldom of Northumberland 590 Piercy Capt. Executed 578 Pembroke Siege 172 Pen Sea-Capt. 293. Sea-General 369 376 Pennington and Pym 36. Pym dieth 56 Peneis-castle 111 Pendruddock's Insurrection, &c. 367. Tri∣ed and Beheaded 372 Perth in Scotland five Articles 3 Petitions from Essex, Surrey, &c. for peace 172 Petition and Advice 393 Phanatick Plots 500, 512 Phelim O Neal Irish General 21 Phenix lost 328. Regained 330 Philips, Young, Stubs, Baker, and two Gibs Executed 513 Piedmont story of a Massacre 373 ague in the Loyal-Irish Provinces 242 ships taken by Sir Richard Stainer 383 tentiaries of the Rumpin the Sound 462 tentiaries return from Cologne 599 Plot pretended against the Protector 358. A∣nother started 403. vide Cavalier Plot in Ireland 520. Plotters Executed 545 Plot in England 520. Plotters tryed 521. Executed ibid. More Plotters 549. Con∣demned and Executed 550 Pontefract-Castle 72. Dlivered 131 Poland King his ill success 545. Polanders re∣volt 546, 549. Make peace with the Tar∣tars 568. The King resignes 571. Seve∣ral pretend to the Crown ibid. New King Elected 577. New dissentions there 590. King dies 596. Defeats the Turks ibid. Popham Sea-General dies 303 Pope and King of France quarrel 524. A∣gree 525. Popes Iustice 571. Dies 577. A new one chosen 579, 596 Popish Priests Banished 578, 599. Orders against popish Priests ibid Porta Ferina Fight 374 Porto Longone fight between the Dutch and Capt. Badily 328 Portsmouth taken 39 Portugueze murthered 522 Portugal Embassador to the new English States 277. Concludes a peace 332. Con∣cludes a League ibid. His Brother Dn Pontaleon Sa Beheaded, for what 361. That King dies 383 Portugal Match declared by the King 497 Portugal routs the Spaniard 526. Victory 533, 546. Invade Spain 547. At peace with Spain 570. Prince of Portugal made Regent 572 Potter Condemned 290 Powel and Laughorn saved ibid. Power onely in the people 225 Poyntz Col. 89, 91, 139, 143. Poyer Col. shot to death 231 Prentices Tumult 568 Presbyterian Government established for three years 125. Ministers own not the Parliament 255. Seized by the Council of State 290 Presbytery tending to an establishment 439 Presbyterians endeavour a Toleration 511 Pride and Hewson, and Sir Hardress Waller force the Houses 192 Private Bills pass'd by the King 509 Prizes taken from the Dutch 322 Proclamation of the King's Privy Council slighted in Scotland 5, 7. Of the King for the Kings Iudges to render themselves 454 Of twenty miles to Rump Officers 511. A∣gainst Papists 565 Propositions to the King at Colbrook on his march to London 41. Made for tryal of the King by the Iuncto 194, 195. Protestants in Savoy 526 Pryn writes agaidst Bishops and Ceremonies, put in the Pillory for it 2. Meets the Rump 420 Publick Faith 37 Putten Van his fall 589 Q Qualifications made by the Rump of all such to bold Offices 421 Quarter free 156 Quarrel, the state of it between the Scots and Cromwel 271 Queen-Mother Mary de Medicis coming to England taken for Ominous, why 9
Queen with the Princess of Aurange for Hol∣land carries the Crown-Iewels 27. Lands in Burlington-Bay 42. Endangered by shot▪ proclaimed Traitor 44. Meets the King at Edg hill 43. Goes for security from Ox∣ford to Exeter 57. From thence to France 58 Queen-mother arris  England 469. De∣parts. Returns 4. Returns for France 539. Dies 573. Queen of Bohemia like∣wise dies▪ 504 Queen Catherine mbarkes from Lisbon 507. Arrives a mouth 508. At Hamp∣ton-court 509. To White-hall ibid. R Ragland-Castle 109, 110, 111. Duke of Richmond with the King 132, 147 Rainsborough tur of the Navy by the Sea-men  at Doncaster 193 Ramsey Col 42 Rea Lord defeat  otland 233 Reng besieged and rendred 43 in Ireland▪ 20, to 25. The Rebels proclaimed Traitors 26 Recognition-Act and expedient for it, the Army jar-with Richard 414 Red-house stormed 272 Remedies proper against late troubles 508 Remonstrance a second of the Parliament, worse than the former 35 Armies villa Remonstrance first against the King 185, 186. The Module of our ruine 136 Remonstrance of the Western Scots 280 Remonstrants their folly 304 Repeal of Act against Bishops 501 Resolution of Parliament in answer to the Kings Declaration 51 Restitution of King and Kingdom 444 Revocation and Impropriation-Act in Scot∣land, original of those troubles 4 Reynolds Commissary-General in reland, his actions 310 Reynolds Col. Knighted 373. Meets the Duke of York 397. Sent for by Cromwel there upon, and cast away ibid. Reynoldson Lord-mayor refuseth to proclaim the Act against Kingly Government, fined, Imprisoned, and degraded 231 Richard Protector 409. his advice and Coun∣cellors ibid. Proclaimed: a story of his guards 413. Calls a Parliament ibid. Offered terms by the King, his suspence 417. Con∣sents to a Commission and Proclamation to dissolve the Parliament 317. Layd aside by the Army, in danger of arrest, and hides himself 418. Gives a transcript of his debts; resolveth and promiseth to acquiesce under the Rump 422 Richlieu intermeddles with the Scotch War 9 Riches Regiment of Horse mutiny at Bury 438 Richmond Duke dis 589 Riot at Lambeth-house; Riers rescued 12, 13 Roberts Lord for the Parliament, Deputy of Ireland 573 De la Roche taken 5 Roch David defeated, vide Broughil Rochester Earl at Ratisbone Diet in Gerny 329 Rolf treacherously intends to murther  King 16 Rosa Canonized at Rome 57 Ross in Ireland yielded by Luke Taaff  Cromwel 2 Rothes Earl L. Commissioner in Scotland 5 Rous Francis Speaker to the little Parl. 349 Rudyard Sir Benjamin a Patriot 36 De Ruyter at mouth of Channel 326 Ruines of St. Pauls 4 Rump 419. Debar the secluded Me Derivation of the Rump  and Lambert fall out 428. Vote away Lambert's and eight more Field-commission Officers ib. Outed by Lambert 429. Reseated 43 ter company added to them 438. Arms de∣faced 446 Rupert Prince 40, 44. And throughout the War— Leaves Kingsale, and puts to Sea with a Fleet 254. Blockt up at Lisbon 256, 267. His Fleet dispersed, and some taken 275. From Taulon to Sea 289. Seizeth Spanish ships, why 293. In France 37. General at Sea 550. Divides yns again and fights 551 Russia Emperor 255. Embassadors. Rycaut Paul returns from Constantinople 520 S. Sad condition of the Irish 333 Safety a Committee 429 Sales of the King's, Queen's, Prince's▪ Dns and Chapters Lands and Houses 256. Of Kings Houses agreed on, but avoyded by Cromwel Salisbury River begun to be made Sanzeime Battle 600 Salmasius his Royl defence 236 Salters-Hall Commissioners for sale of priso∣ners Estates stopt 359 Sanderson Bishop dies 514 Saul Major Executed 278 Sandwich Earl keeps the Sea 528. Takes the Dutch East-Indie-fleet 541. He is sent Em∣bassador into Spain 545. Arrives at Ma∣drid 550. Sent to Portugal 569 Scalborough to the King by Brown Bushel 44. Yielded to the Parliament 193
Savoy and Genoa at odds 547, 566, 590. Saxony Duke installed Knight of the Garter by Proxey 580 Scilly Island rendred by Sir John Greenvile 288, 289 Scot & Robinson sent to meet Gen. Monk 435 Scotch troubles about English Liturgy and Book of Canons 3. Arm 1638. And desire the King of France's assistance 9. Cunning∣ly agree upon a Pacification; abuse the King, who is betrayed by his Servants 10. War resumed, proclaimed Rebels, treated with soon after 15. Peace ratified in Par∣liament ibid. Favour the Parliaments cause 35. Enter England with an Army for the Covenant 56. At Hereford 87. Iuggle with and sell the King 120. Parliament dispute about the disposal of the King 115 Commissioners sence of the Parliaments Bills and Proposals. Presbyters murther sveral Scotch Gentlemen 164. Prepare a War un∣der Hamilton 165, 166. Enter England under Duke Hamilton 177. Defeated 178. Hamilton prisoner ibid. Scotland detests the Murther of the King, and proclaims Charles the second at Edinburgh, and expostulates with the Regicides at Westminster 232 Scots defeat a Royal party in the North of Scotland 333. Send Commissioners to the King 233. Defeated in Ulster in Ireland by Sir Charles Coot 247. They send Com∣missioners to the King 257. Their Names. Except against Malignants: their other terms 257. They endeavour to unite 274 Cavaliers admitted into Trust 282. Pass an Act of Obli∣vion 290. Encamped in Torwood 292. Noble∣men taken at Elliot in Scotland, and sent Prisoners to the Tower: others of the No∣bility submit 302. The reasons 304. Kirk reject the English Vnion 307. Deputies ordered to be chosen by the Commissioners 310. The affairs of the Kingdom ibid. Several Scots, Earls and Noblemen, taken after Worcester 298 New Great Seal 56. Great Seal broken 128 Sea-fight the first between us and the Dutch in the Downs, an account of it 315 to 320 Second Sea-fight between Sir Geo: Ayscue and De Ruyter at Plymouth 325 Third Sea-fight between Blake and De Wit in the North-Foreland 326, 327. Fourth Sea-fight at Portland 335 Fifth Sea-fight at Leghorn, betwixt Captain Appleton and Van Gallen 337 Sixth Sea-fight betwixt Gen. Monke, Dean, and Blake, and Van Tromp, behinde the Goodwyn-Sands 345 Seventh Sea-fight betwixt Gen. Monke and Tromp 346 to 349 Sea-men encouraged 534 Secluded Members restored and reseated Sieges and Skirmishes in Ireland 274 Selden John dies 366 Seneffe Battle 601 Serini beats the Turk 52. Is killed 533 Sexby Col. dies 398 Shaftsbury Earl Lord Chancellor 588 Dr. Sheldon Arch-bishop of Canterbury 523 Sheriffs discharged of expenses at Assizes 401 Ship-money voted illegal 17. The nature of it 16, 17 Ships blown up neer London-bridge 361 Shrewsbury 38, 39, 71 Sickness in London 539. Abates 544 Skippon Major-General Articles for the In∣fantry at Lestithiel 58 Skirmishes, Brill, Ast-ferry 64 Slanning Sir Nicholas 46 Slingsby Sir Henry decoyed 304. Tryed and Beheaded 404 Smith Sir Jeremy keeps the Mediterranean Seas 544 Soissons Count Embassador hither 456 Sonds Freeman kills his Brother, and is hanged 380 Southampton Earl 163 Spalding-Abby fell, and killed 23 persons 380 Spaniard owns the English Commonwealth 278 Sprague Sir Edward sent into Flanders 569. Commands in the Streights 578. Destroys the Algerines 581. Returns 583. Spoyls the Dutch fishing 588 Stacy Edmond Executed 404 States of England pretended declare the main∣tenance of Laws 227. Are guilty of the I∣rish Rebellion, with which they taxed the King 237. Erect a new Council of State 283. Proclaim the King Traitor, and are in great fear and dispair at his entring England 294 Stamford Earl 42 Statues of the late King and King James pul∣led down, and the Inscription writ under that at Old Exchange 269 Steel Recorder of London refuseth to be Knighted by Oliver 357. Made Lord-Chan∣cellor of Ireland 366. Made Lord Chief-Baron of England 373 Stawel Sir John ordered for Tryal 229. At High Court of Iustice 279 Sterling-Castle taken 361 Sterry Oliver's Chaplain, his Blasphemy 409 Strafford Earl Commander in chief against the Scots 13. Accused to the Parliament 15. To the Black-rod and Tower 16. Tryal 18.
His willing resignation; his attainder ibid. And deth 19 St. Germain, a Proclamation against him 602 St. John and Strickland Embassadors to the Dutch, their business and departure 285, 286, 287. St. John 357. Stickles in the Council of State for terms with the King 440 Stratton Baron Lord Hopton dies 328 Straughan Col. 280 Stroker 540 Stuart Lord John killed 57. With Sir John Smith Col. Scot and Sandys, and Colonel Manning ibid. Stuart Lord Bernard slain 89 Submission of the Irish 324 Sunderland Earl slain 51 Summons for persons of Integrity to take upon them the Government by Council of state 345 Sums of Money raised by the Parliament Supplies to Jamaica 377 Surrenders several 91. As Basing, Tiverton, Exeter, Sheford 91, 92 Surrenders in Ireland 270 Surinam 557 Surrey Petitioners assaulted 172 Sweden Queen supplies Montross 255. Com∣plies with our States 358. Receives Whit∣lock ibid. Gives our Soveraign an inter∣view 376 Sweden King invades Poland 373 Swedes stand firm for England 549. Besiege Bremen 559. Mediations excepted 560. Embassador dies in London 566. Makes peace with the Dutch 567. King presented with the Garter 572. Installed by Proxie 580. Ioyn with the French 597 Sydenham Major slain at Linlithgow 288 Syndercomb's Plot and death 384, 385. T Tabaco taken by the English 591 Tables erected in Scotland 7 Tadcaster 42 Taffalette routed and slain 579. Moors beaten 581. Earl of Middleton Governour, and makes peace with the Moors 594 Taaff Lord sent against Cromwel 246 Taaff Luke Major-General 248 Tangier 504. Iews expelled 525. Lord Bella∣sis Governour there 537. Moors beaten there 573 Tartar taken in Germany 526 Taylor the Kings Resident with the Emperour 329 Taxes, a mark on them 331 Teviot Earl killed 527 Temple Sir William concludes  League of Maritime affairs with the Dutch 566. Ex∣traordinary Embassador in Holland 568 Thurlo Secretary to Oliver 357 Theatre at Oxford finished 573 Tickle Captain Executed for treasonable de∣signe of yielding Kilkenny 250 Tiddiman assails at Bergen 541 Timptallon-castle yielded 283 Tinmouth-castle by Lilburn for the King 179 Tomkins and Challoner Executed 47 Tower-street Powder-blow 25 Traquair Earl Kings Commissin Scotland 10 Treaty personal voted 180. Sir John Hippesly and Mr. Bulkly sent to the King a prisoner in Carrisbrook-castle 181. Begun and ma∣naged 183. So as ended 187. All that sub∣scribed it voted by the Iuncto remaining to be uncapable of bearing Offices 193 Treavor Sir John made Secretary 569 Treavors Col. sides with the Marq. of Or∣mond engaged at the Siege of London-Derry; intercepts Arms going from Monke to O Neal 240 Trial of the Kings Iudges 469 Trump Van defeats Blake in the Downs 330 in triumph to Guernsey & Rochel 331 returns 335. Is killed 347. Buried, and his Elegie 349 Tumults in Endinburg about the Common-prayer 5. The Bishop of that City in danger of life ib. Excused, but recommended in London and at White-hall-gates 25. Encrease, and drive away the Court 26. Against the Parli∣ament 138 to 140 Tumults in London against Army and Rump 433 Tunbridge and Red-hill designe 424 Turner tryed and hanged 521 Turk besieges New-hausel 525. Surrendred 526. Defeated 527. Makes peace with the Emperour 533. His Embassadors Secretary turns Christian 548 Tuscany Duke comes into England 569. Gives the King two Gallies 575 V Vane Sir Henry tried, beheaded 510, 511 Vavasor Sir William goes beyond Sea after Marston-fight 61 Varny Sir Edward slain at Drogheda 244 Vaughan Sir Will. slain at Baggot Rath 242 Vaughan Sir John Lord Chief-Iustice 568 Ven a Colonel at Windsor 39 Venables General 369 St. Venant taken 396 Venetian Embassador in England 569 Venner's Insurrection, and Trial, and Execu∣tion 505, 510, 511 Vernon Sir Ralph 367 Vicariat of the Empire 397 Vieuville a French Marquiss slain 50
These are ye cheife of them that came to David to Ziklag, and they were among ye mighty men helpers of the Warr. Cro 1.12.2
