H3381 12680604 65644
blazon of the City of London blazon of the City of London The Humble ADDRESS OF THE Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of London in Common Council Assembled. At a Common Council held the 13th day of March, 1682. Upon a Petition presented by the Inhabitants in and a∣bout Smithfield, taking notice that his Majesty (upon Application from the Court of Aldermen in behalf of this City) had been pleased to order a stop to an in∣tended Patent for a Market near Albemarle-House, which (if it had passed) would greatly have re∣dounded to the Cities prejudice; And upon Considerati∣on had of his Majesties Grace and Favour therein vouchsafed to this his City, a Committee was appointed immediately to withdraw and prepare an Address to be presented to his Majesty from that Court, who were Sir William Turner, Sir James Edwards, Sir John Moore, Aldermen; Sir Benjamin Newland, Deputy Ayleworth, Deputy Hawes, Deputy Langham, Mr. Charleton, Mr. Vernon, Commoners, with Mr. Common Serjeant, who withdrawing and having prepared an Address, accordingly brought in the same to the Com∣mon Council; which being there read was unanimously approved of, and ordered to be forthwith presented to his Majesty at Newmarket by the same Committee who had prepared it: The Tenor whereof is as followeth; To the Kings most Excellent Majesty. May it please your Sacred Majesty, WE the Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons of Your City of LONDON in Common Council Assembled, being highly sensible of the Happiness
We enjoy under Your MAJESTY's most Wise, Benign, and Merciful Government, and of the many Priviledges and Immunities by Your ROYAL Self and Progenitors granted to this Your Imperial Cham∣ber, Most humbly Prostrating Our selves at Your Feet, Return Our unfeigned Thanks and Acknowledg∣ments, Begging Your Sacred MAJESTY to believe, That as none of Our Fellow Subjects have received Larger Bounties from the Crown, so none shall be more ready to sacrifice their Lives and Fortunes in the Service thereof, in the Defence of Your Sacred Person (whom God long Preserve) Your Lawful Heirs and Successors, and the Government as now by Law Established in Church and State, than We Your Obe∣dient and Dutiful Subjects of Your Loyal City of London: And as We have lately Received an Expression of Your ROYAL Grace and Favour to Us, in Your MAJESTY's being pleased to Order a Stop to be put (until farther Hearing) to a Patent for the Grant of a Fair and Weekly-Market for Live Cattel in Conduit-Mead, which would be greatly Prejudicial to the In∣habitants in and about Smithfield, Your Hospital of St. Bartholomews, and Your City of LONDON in General; so we could do no less than humbly Re∣turning Our Thanks, Implore Your Continuance of Your ROYAL Grace and Favour. And Your Petitioners shall ever Pray, &c. LONDON, Printed by Samuel Roycroft, Printer to this Honourable City, 1682.
