h3577 11696725 48236
THE HUMBLE PETITION OF THE RIGHT HONOURABLE THE Lord Mayor, ALDERMEN, AND Commons of the City of London, IN Common-Council Assembled, ON THE Thirteenth of January, 1680. To the King's most Excellent Majesty, for the Sitting of this present Parliament Prorogu'd to the Twentieth Instant. TOGETHER With the RESOLUTIONS, ORDERS, and DEBATES of the said COURT. LONDON, Printed by Samuel Roycroft, Printer to the Honou∣rable City of London. 1680.
IT is Agreed and Ordered by this Court, That the Petition now Agreed on to be Presented to His Majesty, and such Orders and Proceedings of this Court had this Day, as the Right Honourable the Lord Mayor shall think fit, shall after the said Petition Presented, be printed by such Person as his Lordship shall Appoint. Pursuant to which Order, and to prevent false Copies, I do appoint Samuel Roycroft, Printer to this Ho∣nourable City, to print this Petition, with all the Orders and Debates thereupon; and that no other Person presume to print the same. P. Ward Mayor.
Commune Concil' tent' in Camera Guildhall Ci∣vitatis London Die Jovis decimo tertio die Januarij Anno Domini 1680. Annoque Regni Domini nostri Carol' Secundi nunc Regis Angl' &c. Tricesimo secundo, coram Pati∣ent' Ward Mil', Major' Civitatis London, Thoma Aleyn Mil' & Barr', Johanne Fre∣derick Mil', Johanne Lawrence Mil', Geor∣gio Waterman Mil', Josepho Sheldon Mil', Jacobo Edwards Mil', & Roberto Clayton Mil', Aldermannis, Georgio Treby Ar' Recordatore dicte Civit', Johanne Moore Mil', Willielmo Pritchard Mil', Henrico Tulse Mil', Jacobo Smith Mil', Roberto Jeffery Mil', Johanne Shorter Mil', Tho∣ma Gould Mil', Willielmo Rawsterne Mil', Thoma Beckford Mil', Johanne Chapman Mil', Simone Lewis Mil', Tho∣ma Pilkington Ar' Ald'ris, & Henrico Cornish Ar' Ald'ro ac unum Vicecom' dicte Civitatis necnon Major' parte Comminarior' dicte Civitatis in Communi Concil' tune & ibidem Assemblat'. THIS Day the Members that serve for this City in Parliament, having com∣municated unto this Court a Vote or Resolution of the Honourable House of Commons, whereby that House was pleased to give Thanks unto this City for their manifest Loy∣alty to the King, their Care, Charge, and Vigilance for the Preservation of his Majesties Person, and
of the Protestant Religion. This Court is greatly sensible of the Honour thereby given to this Ci∣ty, And do declare, That it is the fixt and uni∣form Resolution of this City to persevere in what they have done, and to contribute their utmost Assistance for the Defence of the Protestant Reli∣gion, His Majesties Person, and the Government Established. It was now unanimously Agreed and Ordered by this Court, That the Thanks of this Court be given to the Members that serve for this City in Parliament, for their good Service done this City, and their Faithfulness in discharging their Du∣ties in that Honourable and great Assem∣bly. Upon a Petition now Presented by divers Ci∣tizens and Inhabitants of this City, representing their Fears from the Designs of the Papists and their Adherents, and praying this Court to ac∣quaint his Majesty therewith, And to desire, That the Parliament may sit from the Day to which it stands Prorogued, until they have suffi∣ciently provided against Popery and Arbitrary Power. This Court, after some Debate and Consideration had thereupon, did return the Petitioners Thanks for their Care and good Intention herein; And did thereupon no∣minate and appoint Sir John Lawrence, Sir Robert Clayton, Knights and Aldermen, Mr. Recorder, Sir Thomas Player Kt. Mr. John Du Bois, John EllisEsq and Mr. Michael Godfrey Commoners, to withdraw, and immediately to prepare a Petition to his Majesty upon the Subject matter of the said Petition; who accordingly withdrawing, after some time returned again to this Court, and then presented the Draught of such a Petition
to his Majesty. The Tenor whereof followeth, Viz. To the Kings most Excellent Maje∣sty, &c. After reading whereof, It is Agreed and Order∣ed by this Court (Nemine Contradicente) That the said Petition shall be Presented to his Majesty this Evening, or as soon as conveniently may be. And the Right Honourable the Lord Mayor is desired to present the same, accompanied with Sir John Lawrence, Sir Joseph Sheldon, Sir James Edwards, Knights and Aldermen, Mr. Recorder, Deputy Hawes, Deputy Daniel, John Nichols, John Ellis, Es∣quires, Mr. Godfrey, and Capt. Griffith Common∣ers, who are now nominated and appointed to at∣tend upon his Lordship at the Presenting there∣of.
Ward Mayor. Commune Concil' tent' 13tio Januarij 1680. Annoque Regis Car. 2di 32do. IT is Agreed and Ordered by this Court, (Nemine Contradicente) That the Humble Petition to His Majesty from this Court, now read and agreed upon, shall be Presented to His Majesty this Evening, or as soon as conveniently may be. And the Right Honou∣rable the Lord Mayor is desired to Present the same, accompanied with Sir John Lawrence, Sir Joseph Sheldon, and Sir James Edwards Knights and Al∣dermen, Mr. Recorder, Deputy Hawes, Deputy Da∣niel, John Nicholls, John Ellis, Esquires, Mr. Godfrey, and Capt. Griffith, Commoners, who are now nominated and appointed to attend upon his Lordship at the Presenting thereof. Wagstaffe.
TO THE KINGS MOST Excellent MAJESTY. The Humble PETITION of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of LONDON, in Common Council Assembled. Most Humbly sheweth, THat Your Majesties great Coun∣cil in Parliament, having in their late Session, in pursuance of Your Majesties Direction, entred upon a strict and impartial Inquiry into the horrid and execrable Popish Plot,
which hath been for several years last past, and still is, carried on for destru∣ction of Your Majesties Sacred Person and Government, and extirpation of the Protestant Religion, and the utter Ruine of Your Majesties Protestant Subjects; and having so far proceeded therein, as justly to attaint upon full Evidence one of the Five Lords impeached for the same, and were in further Prosecution of the remaining Four Lords, and other Conspirators therein. And as well the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, as the Commons in Your said Parliament assembled having Declared, That they are fully satisfied, that there now is, and for divers years last past, hath been a horrid and Treasonable Plot and Conspiracy contrived and carried on by those of the Popish Religion in Ire∣land, for Massacring the English, and sub∣verting the Protestant Religion, and the Ancient established Government of that Kingdom. And Your said Commons having Im∣peached the Earl of Tyrone, in order to the bringing him to Justice for the
same; And having under Examination other Conspirators in the said Irish Plot. And Your said Commons having likewise impeached Sir William Scroggs, Chief Justice of Your Majesties Court of Kings Bench, for Treason and other great Crimes and Misdemeanors in en∣deavouring to subvert the Laws of this Kingdom by his Arbitrary and Illegal proceedings; And having voted Impeach∣ments against several other Judges for the like Misdemeanors. Your Petitioners considering the con∣tinual Hazards to which Your Sacred Life, and the Protestant Religion, and the Peace of this Kingdom are exposed, while the Hopes of a Popish Successor, gives Countenance and Encouragement to the Conspirators in their wicked De∣signs. And considering also the Dis∣quiet and Dreadful Apprehensions of Your good Subjects, by reason of the Miseries and Mischiefs which threaten them on all parts; as well from Foreign Powers, as from the Conspiracies within Your several Kingdoms, against which
no sufficient Remedy can be provided but by Your Majesty and Your Par∣liament, Were extreamly surprized at the late Prorogation, whereby the Prosecu∣tion of the Publick Justice of the King∣dom, and the making the Provisions necessary for the Preservation of Your Majesty, and Your Protestant Sub∣jects, hath received an Interruption. And they are the more affected herewith, by reason of the Experience they have had of the great Progress, which the em∣boldned Conspirators have formerly made in their Designs, during the late fre∣quent Recesses of Parliament; But that which supports them against Despair, is the Hopes they derive from Your Majesties Goodness, That Your In∣tention was, and does continue by this Prorogation, to make way for Your bet∣ter Concurrence with the Counsels of Your Parliament.
And Your Petitioners humbly hope, That Your Majesty will not take Offence, that Your Subjects are thus Zealous, and even impatient of the least Delay of the long hoped for Security, whilst they see your precious Life invaded, the true Religion undermined, their Fami∣lies and innocent Posterity likely to be subjected to Blood, Confusion, and Ruine; and all these Dangers encrea∣sed, by reason of the late Endeavours of Your Majesty, and Your Parliament, which have added Provocation to the Conspirators, but have had little or no Effect towards securing against them: And they trust Your Majesty will gra∣ciously accept this Discovery and Desire of their Loyal Hearts to preserve Your Majesty, and whatever else is dear to them, and to strengthen Your Majesty against all Popish and Pernicious Coun∣sels, which any ill-affected Persons may presume to offer.
They do therefore most humbly Pray, That Your Majesty will be gra∣ciously pleased (as the only means to quiet the Minds, and extin∣guish the Fears of Your Pro∣testant People, and prevent the eminent Dangers which threaten Your Majesties Kingdoms, and particularly this Your Great City, which hath already so deeply suf∣fered for the same) to permit Your said Parliament to Sit, from the Day to which they are Pro∣rogued, until by their Counsels and Endeavours those good Re∣medies shall be provided, and those just Ends attained, upon which the Safety of Your Ma∣jesties Person, the Preservation of the Protestant Religion, the Peace and Settlement of Your King∣doms, and the Welfare of this
Your Ancient City, do so abso∣lutely depend. For the pursu∣ing and obtaining of which good Effects, Your Petitioners una∣nimously do offer their Lives and Estates. And shall ever pray, &c. FINIS.
