i204 12360148 60201
THE POPES Threatning Letter TO THE FRENCH KING, OR The present Grand Controversie BETWEEN POPE INNOCENT the XIth. And the most Christian KING LEWIS the XIVth. ABOUT THE REGALIA, &c. H B printer's device of Henry Brome LONDON: Printed for Henry Brome, at the Gun at the West end of St. Pauls. 1681.
THE POPES Threatning LETTER TO THE FRENCH KING. Charissimo in Christo filio nostro Ludovico Francorum Regi Christi∣anissimo, Innocentius Papa XI. CHarissime in Christo fili noster, &c. Binis jam Literis fuse & luculen∣ter ostendimus Majesti tuae, etiam ex concordi omnium fere Galliae Scriptorum testimonio, & ex ipsi∣us Regii Tabularii Actis, quam esset libertati Ecclesisticae injuriosum, omni humano Divi∣no{que} J ntrarium, & alienum à perpetuo Regum majorum tuorum more & exemplo Edi∣ctum septem abhinc annis, à Te decretum, quo consuetudinem illam custodiendi fructus vacantium Ecclesiarum quam Regalia vocant, ad alias quo{que} Ecclesias, extendi jubes, quae ejusmodi oneri obnoxiae nunquam fuere. In quibus Literis vehementer à Te, pro Pastorali Officii nostri debito, & pro Paterna quam ge∣rimus aeternae salutis tuae cura efflagitamus, ut decretum, alia{que} deinceps Acta adversus Jura, libertates{que} Ecclesiarum abrogari, aboleri{que} mandares. Et sane, illud est causae ipsius me∣ritum, ea de Regia animi tui aequitate, & magnitudine opinio nostra, ut certa spe duce∣remur Majestatem tuam, omnibus in locum pristinum, quamprimum repositis, Cor nostrum ab ulteriore tantae rei solicitudine, tot aliis in Ecclesiae procuratione districtum, liberaturam. Verum, postquam plurium mensium spatium, quod longanimitati nostrae probandae, ab ulti∣mis literis effluxit, nullum adhuc, ne{que} ad eas literas responsum, ne{que} ex eis fructum vide∣mus, quinetiam ex plurimorum literis, & sermone ad nos, pro comperto affertur collationes, & canonicas institutiones impediri, Episcopo∣rum authoritatem pessundari, Ecclesiasticam Disciplinam, ordinem{que} turbari, novam{que} de∣ni{que} praxim veteri Ecclesiae praxi, & Divinae Institutioni contrariam invehi à saeculari pote∣state,
ne{que} ea clanculum aut timide fieri, sed alam, & manu Regia. Non repetimus hoc co, ne actum agamus, quot inde scandala, & querelae, quot in Clerum Gallicanum incom∣moda nascantur, quod Ecclesiae universae a tali exemplo periculum, quae tempestas immineat, quae honori & nomini tuo macula, quae conscien∣tiae labes inuratur; satis enim ea in superioribus Literis indicavimus, satis patent ipsa per se. Non patitur tamen, syncera plane, & Paterna erga Te Regnum{que} istud amplissimum charitas nostra in tanta Divini honoris injuria, in tam gravi tui ipsius periculo adhuc silere; sed cogi∣mur, iterum intimo Cordis affectu, in visce∣ribus Jesu Christi rogare, obsecrare{que} Maje∣statem Tuam, ut memor ejusdem Christi verbo∣rum ad Ecclesiae praepositos, Qui vos audit, me audit; nos potius qui tibi Parentis & quidem amantissimi leco sumus, audire velis, vera & salutaria suadentes, quam filios diffi∣dentiae qui terrena tantum sapiunt, qui{que} con∣siliis in speciem utilibus, sed revera perniciosis, inclita ipsius Regni fundamenta in rerum sacra∣rum reverentia, & in Ecclesiae Authoritate, juribus{que} tuendis posita, convellunt; qui qui∣dem si hi esse vellent quos ipsorum dignitas & officium, Tua{que} singularis in eos benignitas esse postulat, imitari potius deberent integritatem fidem{que} corum, quos olim pari loco positos, memoriae proditum est, & in Cleri Gallicani Acta nuper relatum, libera aliquando voce, in simili causa monuisse Reges predecessores Tuos; memi∣nissent quid & qua Jurejurandi Religione, uhi Regni gubernacula suscepturi, sacro Chrismate inungerentur, polliciti deo fuissent, se videli∣cet, Divinae ejus gloriae, omni ope & studio inservituros, & pro Ecclesiae suae sanctae juri∣hus & libertate asserenda paratos fore semper sanguinem suum vitam{que} profundere: Conside∣rarent fluxam & fugacem esse mortalium vi∣tam, Regum praesertim & principum, qui ubi
ad districtum Dei judicium vocarentur, illuc ac∣cederent sine custodibus sine comitatu, sine ullis Regiae vel Dignitatis cujuslibet insigniis, vel po∣tentiae praesidiis, nudi at{que} inermes reddituri om∣nis anteactae vitae rationem Judici scrutatori cor∣dium, quem nulla res latet, apud quem non est acceptio personarum, qui habet potestatem mit∣tere in Gehennam, ubi potentes potenter tor∣menta patientur. Nec superiori saeculo defuit in Gallia Episcopus qui in frequenti aliorum praesulum, aulae{que} procerum corona, ad Henri cum Regem hujus nominis tertium, cleri Gal∣licani causam in re non absimili orans, Regi dixerit observatum fuisse, nunqum in Gallia Regias slirpes defecisse, nifi ubi Reges indebitas ad beneficia nominationes arrogare fibi coepis∣sent, à quibus S. Ludovicus Rex Christianae humilitatis gloria, quam Regiae dignitatis cul∣mine sublimior, usque adeo abhorruisset, ut ultro, etiam pontificia authoritate sibi delatas rejecerit. Fuit haec quondam, fuit in Gallia, imo ad haec nostra tempora strenue retenta, & penes Episcopalem ordinem Apostolica loquendi libertas, nihil metuens, nihil sperans nisi à Deo. Neque id solum per Reges licuit, sed ita Episcoperum monita semper accepta sunt, ut Episcopi ipsi & sibi meritam landem, & causae optatum exitum sint consecuti, manseritque propterea inviolata tamdiu, atque inconcussa sanctio Occumenici Concilii Lugdunensis, adeo ut nonnulli Galliae Reges, impios & sacrilegos publico decreto eos apellaverint, quicunque Re∣galia ad Ecclesias eis non assuetas extendere aliqua ratione tentarent, sicuti in vestris Anna∣libus traditum reperitur. Haec autem temporis praesentis infirmitas, eo acerbior nobis accidit, quod scimus Majestatem tuam nihil ducere inter Regii animi ornamenta praeclarius Zelo Justitiae, & studio divini honoris, pro quo tam pia, tam salutaria decreta nuper edidisti, & tam multa tanta cum nominis tui laude, & bonorum om∣nium laetitia in praesens agis, destruendo Syna∣gogas & Asylos Haereticorum, ut tibi non minora in coelo statuere videaris conservatae propagatae{que} Religionis trophaa, quam in terris relicturum speramus devictarum Gentium bar∣bararum. Cavendum tamen diligenter est, ne quod dextera, hoc est, ingenita pietas tua
aedificat, destruat sinistra, hoc est, callida & iniqua consilia dicentium tenebras lucem, & lucem tenebras, cum Apostolico moneamur ora∣culo, qui in uno deliquit, esse omnium reum. Non defuere, hac etiam occasione in Gallia qui∣dam, neque plures deessent ex fratribus nostris Episcopis viri fortes, & divinae legis ac liber∣tatis Ecclesiastiae Zelatores, qui gravissimam hanc, toti Franciae Regno, immo Ecclesiae uni∣versae communem causam pari constantia & spi∣ritu apud Majestatem tuam agerent, sed metu quodam, ut ipsis quidem videtur justo ignoscen∣doque, ut nos autem judicamus, vano, & non solum Episcopali officio, sed etiam magnanimi∣tati, aequitatique tuae injurioso retenti silent, expectantes dum humilitas nostri à filiali tua in hanc sedem observantia impetret, quod à Regia Justitia Ecclesiis suis debitum poscere ipsi non audent. Itaque in his Literis nostris illorum omnium justum dolorem, & preces ag nosce, quini mo Dei ipsius voluntatem ore te nostro alloquen∣tis, ac serio monentis, ut praedictum decretum, & quicquid ipsius occasione adversus Ecclesiae libertatem & jura actum gestumque hactenus fuit, corrigi, emendarique omnino cures. Alio∣quin mag nopere veremur, ne subire aliquando debeas quod tibi in aliis literis, denunciavimus, & nunc iterum, ac tertio inviti quidem, quan∣tum pertinet ad sensum amoris in te nostri, sed Deo nos interius monente, aperte denunciamus coelestis irae animadversionem. Nos sanè ne{que} hoc negotium per literas amplius urgebimus, neque desides erimus in adhibendis remediis quae traditae nobis divinitus potestati competunt, quaeque in tam gravi & periculoso morbo omit∣tere, sine gravissima neglecti Apostolici muneris culpa non possumus. Nequc tamen ullum inde incommodum, aut periculum, nullam quantum∣vis saevam ac horribilem tempestatem pertimes∣cemus; ad hoc enim vocati sumus, neque faci∣mus animam nostram pretiosiorem quam nos, probé intelligentes, non forti solum, sed etiam laeto animo subeundas esse tribulationes propter Justitiam. In quibus & in Cruce Do∣mini nos unicè gloriari oportet. Causam Dei agimus, quaerentes non quae nostra sunt, sed quae Jesu Christi. Cum eo propterea, non no∣biscum
tibi erit negotium in posterum, cum eo scilicet, adversus quem non est Sapientia, non est Consilium, non est Potentia. Nos, postquam Ministerii nostri partes, plantando & rigando, sicut oportet, impleverimus, ex∣pectabimus dum operi det incrementum Deus, à quo accurata prece flagitare non desinemus, ut verbis & hortationibus hisce nostris vim & robur infundat Majestatis tuae animam ad sa∣lubriora consilia flectendo, unde mereri tu possis, & nos laetari, res tuas omnes secundiore, indies, cursu fluee, & subditas imperio tuo gentes per∣petua atque optima pace florere, tibiq, Aposto∣licam benedictionem amantissimè impertimur. Datum Romae, &c. die Decembris 29. 1679. Copia vera.
To our most dear Son in Christ, Lewis the most Christian King of the French, Innocent the XI, Pope. OUr dearest Son in Christ, &c. We have already in two for∣mer Letters at large, and clear∣ly shewed unto your Majesty from the unanimous Testimony even of almost all French Writers them∣selves, and the very Records of the Kings Exchequer, how injurious unto the Liberties of the Church, how contrary unto all right both Humane and Divine, and how diffe∣rent from the constant manner and example of all your Royal Ancestors was that Edict seven Years since by you set forth, wherein you command that, that custome of re∣ceiving the Revenues of Vacant Churches (which they call the Regalia) should be ex∣tended unto such other Churches as were never heretofore liable to any such Burden or Imposition. In which Letters as we are bound by our Pastoral Office, and for the Fatherly Care we have of your eternal Sal∣vation, we earnestly request of you that you would command that said Edict and other after Decrees against the Rights and Liber∣ties of those Churches to be abrogated and abolished. And truly, such is the merit of the Cause it self, such our opinion of the Royal justness and greatness of your Mind, that we certainly hoped your Majesty by speedily putting all things again into their ancient Channel, would have eas'd our Heart of any farther trouble about this so great Affair, that is otherwise busied about so many other matters in the Care and Go∣vernment of the Church▪ But after that we have waited several Months which since the sending of our last Letters for the proof
of our patience have passed away, we as yet see no answer to those Letters, nor any good effect of them. Nay farther, we are given to understand for certain, both by the Letters and Discourse of many, that Colla∣tions and Canonical Institutions are stopped, that the Authority of Bishops is trampled upon, the order and discipline of rhe Church disturbed and overthrown, and new Pra∣ctices contrary to those of the Ancient Church and the Divine Institution, are in∣troduc'd by the Secular Power, and that not timourously and by stealth, but openly by the Kings Authority. We do not here re∣peat, least we should loose our labour, how many Scandals and Complaints, how many Inconveniencies will from hence arise to the Gallican Clergy, what danger and peril such an Example may import to the Universal Church, what a blot it will be to your Name and Honour, what a sting to your Consci∣ence. These things we have sufficiently manifested in our former Letters: They are indeed sufficiently evident of themselves. Notwithwanding our sincere and Fatherly affection towards you and that noble King∣dom, will not permit us yet to be silent when God's Honour is so much injured, and you your self are in so great danger. But a most inward passion of Heart doth constrain us yet again to ask and beseech your Maje∣sty by the bowels of Jesus Christ, that being mindful of the same Christ's words unto such as had charge of the Church, He that heareth you, heareth me, you would rather hearken unto us who are to you as a Parent, and that a most loving one too, when we give you true and wholesome Advice, than to the Children of diffidence who only mind earthly things; who by Counsels in appea∣rance advantagious, but indeed pernitious, do remove the glorious foundations of the Kingdom it self, laid and consisting in a reverence of holy things, and the mainte∣nance and defence of the Church, its Rights and Authority: Who truly, if they would be such as their dignity and place, and your singular bounty towards them requi∣reth them to be, they should rather imitate the integrity & faithfulness of those who be∣ing heretofore in like place (as History tells us, and it is lately inserted into the Eccle∣siastical Records of France) have somtimes in the like case with great freedom of speech admonished the Kings your Predecessors, that they would remember what, and how re∣ligiously with an Oath they had promised unto God, when at their entrance upon the Government they were anointed with holy Oil, viz. That they would to the utmost of their power endeavour to promote his Glory, and always be ready with their lives and fortunes to assert and maintain the Rights and Liberties of his Holy Church: That they would consider that the life of mortals was very frail and uncertain, the life especially of Kings and Princes, who when called to the severe judgment of God,
must come thither without any Guards or Attendants, without the signs of any Majesty or helps of power, to give an ac∣count naked and unarmed of all their foregoing life, to that Judge who is the searcher of hearts, from whom nothing is hid, with whom there is no respect of persons; who hath power to cast into hell, where mighty men shall be mightily tormented. Nor was there wanting in the age last past in France a Bishop who in a great assembly of other Plelates and Nobles pleading the cause of the French Clergy in a business of like nature before Henry III. told the King that it had been observed that the Royal Line had never failed in France but when the Kings had begun to assume unto themselves undue Nominations unto Benefices: a thing which St. Lewis (a Prince more exalted in the glory of his Christian Humility, than the height of his Kingly Dignity) did so much abhor, that of his own ac∣cord he refused them when delegated to him by the Popes authority. Such, such an Apostle-like freedom of speech had the Episcopal Order heretofore in France. Such did it hold and maintain even down to these our own times, having no fears nor expectations but from God alone. Nor did Kings only allow it in them, but the admonitions of the Bishops were al∣ways in such manner received and acce∣pted of, that they themselves gained due applause, and the cause its desired issue. And for this cause did the Sanction of the Oecumenical Council at Lyons so long con∣tinue firm and inviolable, insomuch that some Kings of France (as you may find in your own Annals) have in their publick decrees stiled them impious and sacrile∣gious whoever they were that should any ways endeavour to extend the Regalia unto such Churches as were not ancient∣ly accustomed to them. But this weakness of the present age is therefore the more grievous to us, because we know your Majesty among all the Ornaments of a Princely Mind reckons none more glori∣ous than a Zeal for Justice, and an earnest affection for the honour of God, for which you have lately set forth such pious and good Edicts, and do at present act so much to the praise of your own name and the joy of all good men by destroying the Syna∣gogues and Sanctuaries of Hereticks, that you seem to erect in heaven no lesser Tro∣phies of your defence and propagation of Religion, then we hope you will leave on earth of your Victories over barbarous Nations. But however, you must diligently
take care lest what your right hand, (i. e.) your own innate piety doth build, your left hand, (i. e.) the crafty and unjust counsels of those who call darkness light, and light darkness, do destroy, forasmuch as we are told by the Apostolick Oracle that who-so offends in one point is guilty of all. There have not been wanting upon this occasion in France some, nor should more of our Brethren the Bishops, men of courage and zealous for the di∣vine Law of Ecclesiastick Liberty, now fail to plead this weighty cause (the com∣mon cause not only of the whole King∣dom of France, but of the whole Church too) with a like constancy and resolution before your Majesty. But they hold their tongue, being restrained as they think by such a fear as is just and pardonable, but is, as we judge, vain, and not only injurious to their Episcopal Function, but also to your Magnanimity and Justice, waiting and expecting till our Humility obtain that from your Filial respect unto this See which they dare not demand of your Royal Justice as a due unto their Churches. Wherefore from these our Letters take notice of these our just grie∣vances and petitions, nay more of the will of God who speaks unto you by our mouth, and seriously warns you to take care that the foresaid Decree, and what∣ever upon occasion of it hath been done and transacted to the prejudice of the Liberty and Rights of the Church, be throughly corrected and amended, other∣wise we very much fear that you must at length suffer what we have declared unto you in our other Letters and now again the third time, (unwillingly truly, as to the sense of our love toward you, but from the inward dictate of God) do openly denounce, the vengeance of his heavenly wrath. As for our selves we shall no more press this Affair by Letters, nor shall we be slack in applying those remedies which appertain unto the power that is given us from above, and which in so grievous and perillous a disease we cannot omit without becoming guilty of that most heinous crime, the neglect of our Apostolical Charge. Nor will we fear any inconvenience, or danger, any calamity however cruel and dreadful, that may from thence ensue. For unto this we are called, nor do we set a greater value upon our life than we do upon our selves, as well knowing that we must endure tribulations for righteousness sake, not only with a couragious but a joyful mind. In which and in the Cross of our Lord we ought only to glory. We act in Gods cause, not seeking
our own, but the things of Jesus Christ. With him therefore and not with us you will have to do hereafter, with him against whom there is no Wisdom, nor Counsel, nor Power. We, when we shall have ful∣filled the duty of our Ministry by plant∣ing and watering as we ought, will wait till God give increase unto the work. Of whom we shall not desist by special prayer to beg that he would infuse force and strength into these our words and exhor∣tations, by inclining your Majesties mind unto better counsels, from whence you may merir to have your affairs daily go on in a more prosperous course, the Na∣tions subject to your Empire flourish in a good and perpetual peace, and we re∣joice in their doing so. We give you most kindly our Apostolical Blessing. Given at Rome, Decemb. 29. 1679. For the better understanding of the above Letter from the Pope, and of the whole Difference, take the ensuing of a later Date from a Private Gentleman in France. SHall I write you some News? Or rather will it be News afore I have written it? For in likelihood these things are more common with you than us. The Pope and the King of France are at odds about the Kings Regalia, as they call it; which, they tell me, means Nomination to Bishopricks, and other Benefices, and I think receiving the Revenues in the Vacancy. The King enjoys this Right un∣contestedly in a great part of his Kingdom; but some Years since made a Declara∣tion to extend it to all the Kingdom; and proceeded in consequence of that Decla∣ration without opposition, till he happened to have to do with the old stubborn Jan∣senists, Alet and Pamiers, his Nominees coming to take Possession of their Benefices by provision from him in their Diocesses, were opposed by them, and upon contest Excom∣municated. This Excommunication was taken off by their Superiour Arch-Bishop, and so the Business carried to the Pope. Alet is dead during the Contest, to whom nothing was done; The King upon consultation what to do with him, being persua∣ded by the Chancellor Tellier, to let him alone, and die out of the way, since being esteemed a Saint, it would shew scurvily to persecute him: And besides, it was not easie to find a Course to take with him. Pamiers lives still and holds out, and the Pope takes his part. His Temporals were seized, and he lived a while upon Alms himself, only desiring of the King the Poor, to whom he distributed constantly a good part of his Revenues, might not suffer for his sake; in which request the King gratified him immediately, and has since, they say, restor'd him the rest. But the Pope insists to have the Declaration; and all done in consequence of it recalled. Two Briefs having had no Answer, he has lately sent the third; and, as he says, the last. It is a Letter becoming a Pope, grave and tender, but very positive, and which at last threatens in plain terms to write no more; but, in case satisfaction be not given, to make use of his Power. This being put to the Council, the hot men were for playing the Canons of France against the Canons of Rome. But Tellier's
more moderate counsels have prevailed again to refer it to Treaty. And so Cardinal D'Estrees has the Commission, and they say is gone about it, and we like to have no Sport. It being likely 'twill end so, and the great King of France submit: For he is reported to have said in Council, It became not the Son to fall out with the Father. The jest is, the Jansenists are now of the Pope's side, and the Jesuits ill with him. Maimburg has offended him so by his two last Books, I suppose for favouring the Regalia principally, that he has censured them, and or∣dered them to be put into the prima Classis; and besides, bid the General send for him, and deliver him up; the General replied, it was more than he could, Maim∣burg being too well supported; yes, says the Pope, there is another, meaning La Chaise, of greater credit than he. What followed I have forgot, but there is  talk as if La Chaise meant to go to Rome, which no body believes. But for Maimburg there is no talk of his stirring. Upon another occasion the General of the Jiesuits appealing to the Pope from a Decree of the Propaganda, the Pope not only confirmed the Decree, but added to it, and pulling out of his pocket the names of four or five Jesuits, ordered the General to suspend them. And, he going away, turned to the Cardinals about him saying, we shall now see whether the Jesuits be such obedient sons of the Holy See as they would pass for. Tellier has a Letter of thanks from the Pope. And the Archbishop of Paris, who is thought to have counselled th King to proceed as he hath done about his Regalia, is upon ill terms not only wi the Pope but King. He hardly does any thing in his Bishoprick, which makes some think him suspended: others say a Suspension or Interdict being upon the way, was taken from the Messenger before he reacht France. The Clergy in their late little Assembly signed a Letter to take the Kings part in the Quarrel agains the Pope. I have not seen it, though it be printed; but hear some look upon it as an unworthy piece of Flattery. And so I have written News, if it be so, for a whole Year. August 8. 1680. ERRATA. Pag. 1. lin. 3 In the Latin, read Majestati, lin. 7. in the English, read Acts recorded in the Royal Roll FINIS.
