J1070 12244512 56883
THE Triumphs of London: PERFORMED On TUESDAY, OCTOBER XXIX. 1678. FOR THE ENTERTAINMENT OF THE Right Honourable, and truly Noble Pattern of Prudence and Loyalty, Sir IAMES EDWARDS Knight, LORD MAYOR of the City of LONDON. CONTAINING A true Description of the several PAGEANTS, with the SPEECHES spoken on each Pageant. Together with the SONGS sung in this SOLEMNITY. All set forth at the proper Costs and Charges of the Worshipful Company of GROCERS. Designed and Composed by THO. IORDAN, Gent. Quando magis dignos licuit spectare Triumphos? London, Printed for Iohn Playford at the Temple-Church. 1678.
TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE Sir JAMES EDWARDS, Knight, LORD MAYOR of the City of LONDON. MY LORD, IN all flourishing Kingdoms throughout the Universe (especially Islands) honest Merchants and useful Merchandize have been ever had in a reverential Esteem. Their Profession in all former Ages highly magnified, and their Persons honourably valued: In that by their Cost, Adventures, Diligence, and Vigilance, incognite Countries have been discovered, Royal Amity introduced and confirmed with Transmarine Estates and Princes: As also (by reason of their generous Examples, and prevalent Perswasions) very brutish Nations, with barbarous Natures, have been reduced to Meekness, Order, and Civility. By Merchants, all Exotick Commodities from every Part of the World are made communicable in Traffick with us, whose numerous Varieties, pleasant Rarities, and substantial Necessaries, serve both for Delight and Profit to the Crown and Kingdom. They increase Shipping, multiply Navigators, and employ all Handicrafts. Many of them have not only been the Erectors of stately Structures, but the Founders of great and famous Cities. What may be said of Merchants and their Trafficks, their Antiquity, Dignity, Magnanimity, Generosity and Ur∣banity, is fitter to fill a Volume, than to be contracted in the narrow Bondage of a compendious Epistle. Therefore since Your Lordship hath so ample an Interest in this precedent Character, it is an especial Act of Almighty Providence, to indulge and dignifie this Honourable City with such an Ac∣complished Magistrate, whose Examples and Precepts are both prudent and pious, and may justly provoke all Persons under Your Government to be regular and obedient; which although but for One Year, yet is the Epitome of a Life-time: Thorow which, that you may have the daily Manuduction of that Great Governour of Heaven and Earth (the only Ruler of Princes) shall be the assidual Wishes and devout Desires of, My Lord, Your Heartily Humble Servant, THO. IORDAN.
TO THE WORTHY SOCIETY and WORSHIPFUL COMPANY OF GROCERS. GENTLEMEN, IN obedience to Your Commands, and punctual performance of my Promise, I crave permission to salute You with a perfect Copy of this Years Triumphs, wherein I have not express'd such sterility of Invention, as to reiterate or imitate any thing which I have formerly done my self, or any other Authors that heretofore have performed this Duty, either in designation of the Whole, or composition and order of the Parts, relating either to the Figures, Structures, or Orations, those things only excepted which are the Trophies of Antiquity, and especial Marks of Distinction, in the fre∣quent Representation of the Worshipful Companies Crest and Supporters, the Camel and Gryphons, with all their Ac∣complishments and Decoration. If in all, or any thing, I have made my Endeavours correspondent to Your Expectation, I shall humbly hope, I may deservedly acquire the Title of, GENTLEMEN, Your most humble and faithful Servant, THO. JORDAN.
The Agitations of the Morning. THE generous Citizens, selected for the order of this days Triumph, (according to the dictates of Ancient Form and Custom) assemble together at Seven of the Clock in the Morning, at Grocers-Hall. 1. Threescore poor Men accomodated with Gowns and Caps, each of them imployed in bearing a Standard or a Banner. 2. Fifty Gentlemen-Ushers in Velvet Coats, each of them a Chain of Gold about his shoulder, and in his hand a white Staff. 3. A certain Number of Budg-Batchelors, in Gowns and Scarlet Hoods. 4. The Batchelors, a part thereof in Gowns faced with Foins, and their Hoods. 5. The Livery in their Gowns faced with Budg, and their Hoods. 6. The Masters Wardens and Assistants, in Gowns faced with Foins and their Hoods. 7. Twelve other Gentlemen for bearing Banners and Colours, some in Plush Coats and some in Buff, they also wearing Scarfs, about their shoulders, of the Companies Colours. 8. Thirty six Trumpets; the Serjeant-Trumpet, with his Scarf of his Lordship's Colours, and of a Crimson about his shoulder, and a Leading Staff in his hand. 9. Fourteen Drums; the Drum-Major with a crimson Scarf about his waste, his Leading Staff in his hand, and three Fifes with Banners. 10. Divers Drums and Fifes, with red Scarfs, and the Colours of the Company. 11. The two City-Marshals, each of them riding on Horseback, with six Servitors to attend them, with Scarfs and Colours of the Company. 12. The Foot-Marshal, and six Attendants with the like Scarfs and Colours. 13. The Master of Defence, with the same Scarf and Colours, having persons of his own Science to attend him. 14. Divers other Pensioners in red Gowns, white Sleeves and flat Caps; each of them carrying a Javelin in one hand, and a Target in the other, where∣in is painted the Coat-Armour of their Benefactors.
These Persons are set a part for the Duty of the Day, who meeting at the Time and Place aforesaid, proceed as followeth. The Foot-Marshal ranks them out, two and two, beginning with the Pen∣sioners in Gowns, and in the Front of them, placeth the Companies Ensigns, Four Drums, and one Fife; in the Rere of them fall in the several Pensioners in Coats bearing several Banners and Standards; after them, six Trumpets; after them the Gryphons and Camel Ensigns, (the Supporters and Crest of the Worshipful Company of Grocers) and six Gentlemen Ushers; after them the Budg-Batchelors, who conclude this Division. In the Rere of those, fall six Trumpets; after them, two Gentlemen bear∣ing two Banners, the one of the Cities, the other of the Companies; after them follow two Gentlemen-Ushers, after them the Foins-Batchelors, con∣cluding this Division. In the Rere thereof first fall in the King's Drum-Major and four other of the King's Drums and Fifes; after them, two Gentlemen-Ushers bearing two Banners, the one the King's, the other the Cities; after them, ten Gentlemen-Ushers, habited as is set down before; and after them the Livery, which endeth that Division. In the Rere of them fall others of the City Trumpets, after them two Gentlemen bearing the Banners of the City and the Lord Mayor, twelve Gentlemen-Ushers appointed as aforesaid follow them, and after them the Court of Assistants put a period to that Division. In the Rere of them falls the Serjeant-Trumpet, after him sixteen other of the King's Trumpets and Kettle Drums; after them three other Gentlemen, bearing the King's, the Duke of York's, and St. George's Banner; after them fourteen Gentlemen-Ushers; to follow them are appointed four Pages; and after them, the Master and Wardens, which terminate the first and chief Division. Thus accomplish'd, they March from their Place of meeting to Gold-Smiths-Hall, beginning with the Pensioners, until the Marshal comes and makes a Halt at the Gate, till such time as his Lordship and the Aldermen are mounted. Which being done, the whole Body move toward Guild-Hall, where the Lord Mayor Elect joyneth with the Old Lord Mayor and his Retinue; so all of them march through King-street down to Three-Crane-Wharf, where the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and their Attendants take Barge; also the Grocers Company do likewise Embarge, whilst the Residue remain behind, viz. the Gentlemen-Ushers. The Budg-Batchelors repair to places of Refreshment. His Lordship, the Aldermen, the Company of Grocers, and other Companies, landing at Westminster, have a Lane made them through which they pass to Westminster-Hall, and there, having performed several Ceremonial and Customary Duties and Obligations, as an Oath to be True and Faithful to
His Majesty and Government established, Sealing of Writs in the Court there held; and having taken leave of the Lords and Barons of the Exchequer, &c. and doing some charitable offices to the Poor of that place, return to their Barges, a lane being made as before for their Passage to the Water-side, and there orderly Embarge. His Lordship, with those attending him (the Companies,) land at Black Fryar-stairs, in order to their Stands in Cheapside; where He and They are saluted with Three Volleys by (the Military Glory of this Nation) the Com∣pany of Artillery-Men, they being all in their Martial Ornaments of Gallantry, some in Buff with Head-pieces, many of them massy Silver. From Black-Fryar-stairs they march before my Lord Mayor and Aldermen through Cheap∣side to Guild-Hall. Those that went not to Westminster, viz. the Pensioners and Banners, being set in order, ready to March, the Foot-Marshal in the Rere of the Artillery-Company, leads the way along by the Channel up Ludgate-Hill, through Ludgate into St. Paul's Church-Yard, and so into Cheapside, where his Lordship is entertained by the first Scene or Pageant. A Description of the First Pageant. UPon a large Stage, in the Van, is exhibited the lively pourtraiture of a well-grown Camel, so curiously Carved and Exquisitely Gilded that it appeareth like a live Animal in a Hide of Massy Gold, and is the Crest upon the Arms of the Worshipful Company of Grocers. This Camel is back'd by a young Negro-Boy, sitting betwixt two Silver Hampers plentifully stored with all sorts of Fruits and fragrant Spices, and what ever else is per∣tinent to Grocery; which after the Subsequent Speech is delivered, the Negro with a Prodigal hand, scatereth abroad in the Tumult, where you might see an hundred persons confusedly scrambling in the dirt for the Frail Atchievement of a Bunch of Raisins, or a handful of Dates, Almonds, Nutmegs: This Negro-Boy is habited in an Indian Robe of divers Colours, a wreath of various colour'd Feathers on his black woolly head. Silver Buskins laced and surfled with Gold, a Bridle of white and red Ribon (the Companys Colours) at each hand of him sitteth a Virgin, one of them Representing Industry in a Robe of Russet colour'd Silk, a Green Sarsnet Mantle, a Peruke of dark brown hair, about which is a Wreath of Flowers and Fruits, watchet Silk Hose, gray Buskins laced with Crimson Ribon; in one hand she beareth a Silver Pruning-Hook, in the other a Banner of the Campanies. The other Person is a beautiful young Lady Representing Fortune, in a Yellow Robe, a Purple Mantle, a long curl'd bright brown Hair, a golden Coronet upon his Head, Carnation Silk Hose, and Yellow Buskins, laced with Silver Ribon; In her Left Hand she beareth a green Shield, Charged with a Ship under Sail; and in her Right Hand a Banner of my Lord Mayors.
And in the Rere of this Pageant is a Fortress, properly call'd, The Fortress of Government, Founded upon a Rock of Adamant, whose Walls are of Brass, in a Quadrangular form, Embattail'd, with several Turrets and Bulwarks, on which great brazen Guns, mounted upon Carriages, are planted; and (with∣in these Walls (Situate in the Centre) is erected the grand Golden Tower Royal, on which is displayed a very large Banner of the Grocers. 1. FIDELITY, standing in Front upon the Battlement, is thus Arrayed, in a Vest of Silver, on which is braced, a Golden Breast-plate, a Silver Corslet about his Neck, long-Brown curl'd Hair on his Head, and upon that a Golden Helmet, with a large Plume of White Feathers, tip'd with Red, Blew, Yellow, and Green; a Scarf of Scarlet-colour'd-silk-and-gold; a Sword hanging in it, with a Golden Hilt; Purple-Silk Hose; Gold Buskins, laced and surfled with Scarlet-and-Silver Ribon; In his Left Hand he raiseth a Lance of Silver; and in his Right hand (which is armed with a Golden Elbow Gantlet) he advanceth a Silver Truncheon: His Associates, Confede∣rates and Attendants, are Loyalty, Vigilancy, Iustice, Constancy, Wit, Con∣cord, Religion, Vnion, and Truth, in these significant distinct Habits. 1. LOYALTY, in a Purple Robe, semined with Stars of Gold, a Golden Scarf, cross from the right Shoulder to the left Side; Scarlet-colour'd Silk Hose, Silver Buskins, laced and surfled with Sky-colour and gold Ribon; a long curl'd bright brown Peruque, and on it a Silver Coronet of golden Hearts; She weareth in her left Hand, on a Shield Gules, the Rose and Crown OR, with this preceptive, Divine and Moral Motto about it, Deum Timete, Regem Honorate. Fear God, Honour the King. In the other Hand a Banner of the Cities. 2. VIGILANCY, in a Silver Robe, a French green Mantle, seeded with waking Eyes; a fair long bright Curling Hair, a Chaplet on her Head of Jesemine mingled with Mirtle, Caprifolium, and Eyebright; in one Hand she beareth a Shield Argent, Charged with a Peacock, his Tail displayed; in the other Hand a Banner of my Lords. 3 JUSTICE, in a long Crimson Robe, and on it a golden Mantle, fringed with Silver; on her Head a long dishevel'd Hair of a Flaxen colour, on which is a Coronet of Silver; In one hand she holdeth a Sword, in the other Hand a Ballance; her Buskins are Purple, sprinkled with gold Stars, laced and surfled with Gold and Scarlet Ribon; about her Coronet is written this Memento; Iniquitatem intermittite & Iustitiam facite. Ezech▪ 45. 9. Remove Violence and Execute Justice.
4. CONSTANCY, In a Watchet Robe, a Silver Mantle, Silk Hose, of Aurora-colour'd Silk, silver Buskins, laced and surfled with sky-colour and gold Ribon; a long brown curl'd Hair, and on her Head a golden Crown, having in front the Figure of a Seaman's Compass, to express the constant verticity of the Needle to the North-Pole; she beareth a Shield OR, charged with a Rock of Adamant, the four Winds blowing against it, and the Motto, Immota Triumphans. In her Right Hand a Banner of the Kings. 5. WIT, In an Indian Sarsnet Robe, of diverse Colours; a Lemon-colour'd Mantle, fringed with Gold; a bright brown Hair, curiously curl'd and tyed with sundry knots of small Ribon of all colours, and on it a Chap∣let of Bayes, intermingled with golden Berries in clusters; In her Right Hand an Escutcheon Vert, a Reynard OR, with a Goose Neck in his Mouth, and her Body circumflexed over his Back Argent; In her left Hand a Banner of the Cities. 6. CONCORD: A fair Virgin in a Scarlet-colour'd Robe, a sky-colour and gold Scarf; a fair bright Hair, and about her Head, a Garland of white and red Roses, intimating the Concord of York and Lancaster: white Buskins, laced with watchet and gold Ribon: in her left Hand a Shield, charged with a Bower of Mirtles; for such is the Nature of those Trees, that if they be Planted a good space one from another, they will meet, and with twining, one embrace the other. 7. RELIGION, In a Sable Robe, a Crimson Mantle; a fair Hair, on which is a Coronet of golden Stars, gold Buskins, laced with black Ri∣bon, bearing a Buckler in one Hand, where (on a Mount Vert, planted with Olives) is a Crucifix, Proper; in the other Hand a Banner on an Angelical staff, bearing a Cross Gules in a Field Argent. 8. UNION, In a Robe of Green Sarsnet, sprinkled with divers An∣nulets of Gold, a Chain of Gold thrice double about her Neck; her Legs and Feet beautified with Buskins of Gold, surfled with Watchet Silk and Silver Ribon, a Wreath of green Laurel (about a long curl'd Peruque of bright Hair) on her Head; bearing in one hand an Escutcheon Vert, char∣ged with a Triangle within a Circle OR; in the other Hand a Banner of the Grocers. 9. TRUTH, In a White Sarsnet Robe, a Cloth of Silver Mantle; a fair bright crispy curl'd Flaxen Hair; a Garland of white Lillies, white Silk Hose, white Buskins, laced with Silver Ribon; in one Hand, a large Fan of Stars, (with which she chaseth away Error) in the other Hand, a Banner of my Lord Mayors.
FIDELITY, arising up from her Seat with an obedient Bow, ad∣dresseth to his Lordship in this Congratulation following. The FIRST SPEECH Spoken by FIDELITY. MUch honour'd Lord, This Structure you behold, Whose outward Walls are Brass, and Tower Gold, Arm'd in such Martial manner, doth present The faithful Fortress of Just Government. The Adamantine Rock 'tis built upon, Merits the Name of True Religion. The Walls are made of Union, and well known To be Intire; Truth is the Corner-Stone. The Battlements are Concord, Bulworks be Built, Man'd, and Govern'd by Integritie. The Guns are Laws of wholsome Institution, The Gunner puts them all in Execution, When Justice gives Command; This golden Tower Is built by Policy, and held by Power. Which is in all, and every degree, The Seat of Government, and Soveraigntie: Loyalty, Vigilance, Fortitude, and Wit, With Constancy, and Concord, govern it. Who all (by turns) do take Orders from Me, That bear the Title of Fidelitie. And though this Fort, thus Arm'd and Top'd by Glory, Is but a Model built by Allegory: The Moral's pertinent and pregnant too, It intimates your Government and You: Without these Virtues, which are here set forth, A Magistrate will want much of his Worth. Rebellion, Fraud, Whoredom, and Felonie, In a short time, will grow greater than He. But you, my Lord, are furnish'd with all these Virtues, and of this Fort deserve the Keyes. Pointing to the Tower. 'Tis for your Company a Store-House made. This laden Camel, bears part of your Trade, [To the Camel.]
Which back'd by an Indian, Sallies from the Fort, T' express their Plenty, and to shew you Sport: All which, with every good that Traffick brings This Year, desires the Shelter of your Wings. Because you are with all the Graces plum'd; And 'tis by most Wise Vertuous Men presum'd, That with true Justice, Piety, and Power You'l shew your self, a faithful Governour. This Speech thus ended, and my Lord expressing some Signals of accep∣tation, his Honour advanceth with his Right Worshipful Fraternity (the sage Senators of the City) further forward into Cheapside; where he is again intercepted by two distinct Stages, on which are eminently planted two great Golden Gryphons the Supporters to the Coat Armour of the Grocers Company, on which are Vigorously mounted two Active Negro's, in rich East-Indian Vestments, with Coronets of many Colour'd Feathers; the one of them bears a large Banner of his Lordships Family-Coat; and the other as large a Banner of the Grocers Corporation-Coat, and at the Corner's of both these Stages, fit four Figures in the Habits and Ornaments as hereafter is de∣scribed. 1. Love, 2. Honoour, 3. Courage, 4. Courtezy. 1. LOVE, a handsom fair Boy, with a Curl'd Flaxen Peruke, a Coronet round beset with Bleeding Hearts; a Silver Robe, a Carnation Scarf▪ on which hangeth a Golden Quiver full of Gold and Silver Arrows, Golden wings upon his shoulders; a Silver Bow in one hand, and a Banner of the Cities in the other. 2. HONOUR, in a Purple Robe poudred with Stars of Gold, a Scarlet Mantle Fringed with Gold, Curl'd black hair, on it a Royal Diadem, watchet Silk Hose; white Buskins lace'd with Gold Ribon, bearing a Banner of the Kings. 3. COURAGE, a person of Heroick Visage, with short brown hair, on it a Golden Coronet, a flame-colour'd short Robe, a Sky-colour'd Scarf Fringed with Silver, Plush-colourd Hose, blew Buskins, with Carnation Ribon; in his hand a Banner of my Lord Mayors. 4. COURTEZY, in a Crimson Robe Fringed with Gold and Silver Scarf, bright brown hair; a Chaplet of red and white Roses, in one hand she bears a Shield Charged with the figures of a Salutation; in the other, a Banner of the Companies.
And in the Rere of these Gryphons, on another Stage is a Scene of great Splendour designed for. The Pageant Described. A Shrine, or Indian Structure erected according to the Dorick order of Architecture, adorned with lively pieces of Imagerie round about, and▪ on the high extremity, is exalted a Masculine lively person, richly Vested in a Silver Robe; a Sky-colour'd Mantle, a long bright hair, Crowned with a Coronet of Pensils, of all Colours, holding in his Right hand a Banner of the Kings, and representeth the Triumph of Tranquillity, called Ovatio This Temple-like Fabrick in frontstands so open, that with easiy perspicuity every Common eye may discharge it's sight up to the high Altar, on which an East-Indian Deity called OPVLENTA, a Representative of all the Intrinsic Treasure in the Oriental Indies, and is their Tutelary Goddess, before whose Shrine the Idolatrous Natives after the preparation of a long Feast) with Pagan Piety, and diabolical Devotion, prostrate themselves with all the adoration imaginable. Her Face and Hair are Black; her Ears are adorned with two rich Pen∣dants of great round Oriental Pearl, her Shoulders, Breast and Neck, are bare, on which is a Necklace of Diamonds; she is Crown'd with a Coronet of Sun-beams, her Robe is of all Colours, richly interwoven with Silk, Gold, Silver and Jewels; a Scarf of Gold, Silver Buskins, laced with Gold Ribon; in one hand she advanceth a Golden Scepter, in the other she beareth a Banner of the Kings. Beneath her sit three Black Indian Princes, viz. Animalia, Mineralia, Vegetabilia, who bear in their hands each of them a great Golden Key of 18 inches long, as principal Clavigers or Key-keepers to all the Treasuries of India, and generally to all Human Nature; Comprehending the diversities of Traffick and several Commodities, which our Noble English Merchants bring from India to England, by whom the Druggests are furnished from thence, with Barks, Woods, Roots, Fruits and Gums, Ambergreece with divers Aromats; which by the learned directions of the Physician, wisdom of the Chymist, and art of the Apothecary are extracted and compoun∣ded for Curation and Conservation. The Grocers are supply'd and plentifully stor'd with all sorts of Spices, as Pepper, Cinamon, Cloves, Mace Nutmegs, also with Rice, Mastich, Sanders of all sorts, with varietie of fruits, and other Commodities too numerous for Repetition.
In several Conspicuous and Convenient Vicinitys, about this Shrine fit the Representatives of six Eminent Indian Cities, in several rich Indian Habits; with the figures of Cities upon their heads, worn as Crowns or Coronets, and are distinguished by these well known Appellations, viz. FORTAM, SARABAIN, TVBAN, MATVRA, SVRAT, and BANTAM, the last of which is the City of most Traffique, frequented by Portugals, Dutch and English, in which every day are three several Markets. The Habits of these three Princes first mentioned, are thus pro∣perly distinguished. 1. ANIMALIA, in a Robe painted with Quadrupedes, Volatiles, and Reptiles, viz. Beasts, Birds, Flyes, and Crawling Creatures or Infects, (as she representeth all Animals that have Life, and Sense) an Indian Silk Scarf cross her shoulder interwoven with Silver; Black hair, a Coronet of various-colour'd Feathers, a Rope of Pearl about her Neck; and pendant Jewels in her Ears: bearing in one hand a Golden Key, in the other a Banner of the Cities. 2. VEGETABILIA, in a painted Robe of Trees, Flowers, Herbs, and sundry plants, that have Life and Growth, but neither Sense, nor Voluntary Motion; a Silver green and grey Scarf, a dark brown Peruke, a Chaplet of Flowers and Fruits upon her head; in her left hand, a Golden Key, of like form and length with the other, and in her Right hand a Banner of my Lord Mayor's. 3. MINERALIA, in a rich Robe all Imbroidered with Gold Silver, and precious Jewels; a purple and Silver Scarf, on her head a Black hair, Crown'd with a Diadem of precious Stones of divers Colours and excellent lustre, in one hand a Golden Key, set with Diamonds, Emralds, Saphirs, Amethists, and Smaragds, as the principal Conserver of all Mines, and Minerals; in her other hand she waveth a Banner of the Companies. My Lord Mayor being attentively prepared, The Goddess Opulenta, rising up from her Seat, with a Majestick behaviour doth oblige his Lord∣ship's regard, to the Delivery of a Speech. The SECOND SPEECH spoken by OPULENTA. This Clime, is England sure: it doth present [Look about her] So much of Honour, Union, Government:
And this must needs be London, who in Stute (As Fame tells me) this Day doth celebrate Th' Inauguration of their Magistrate. This must be Hee. I wish him good Event, Looks on the Lord Mayor. Bow's. His Presence doth presage good Government. Then I address my Self (much honour'd Lord) To you, that bear the Civil, City Sword. And I have brought Three Princes with me: These Are they that Keep my Oriental Keys, Pointeth to them. Vegetabilia, Animalia and Rich Mineralia, under whose Command Are all the Treasures of the Indian Land. Six Cities do attend me too, but none So bright and beautifull as is your own. Here's Fortam, Sarabaia, Tuban, (that Yeilds Spice) Matura, Bantam and Surat. To the Cities. Cities, great Sr. whose Traffique hath been free, T' your Lordship and the Grocers Company: Who do this Day, (mov'd by your high Deserts) In Triumphs pay the Tribute of their Hearts. Because their good Lord Mayor's Power doth Spring, From Honour's Fountain, in my Lord, the King. The Head of four great Kingdoms, yet would be (Such was his Candor and Urbanity) A Member of the Grocers Company. May you prove prosperous, and (when you please) You shall command my Cities and my Keys; My Deity it self: But I divine You do adore a Power greater than Mine, A God, that doth all other Gods excell, Imitate Him, and you will Govern well. His Lordship, well pleased with the Aptitude of this Composition, and the promptitude of the Emphatical Speaker; expresseth some Demonstrations of Approbation, and moveth through the Multitude, until a Scene of De∣light, doth invite him to a Stand, which is an Indian Plantation, with its Governour, the Speaker, with several Labourers, Planters and Drolls; both for Utility and Jucundity, Profit and Pleasure.
The Plantation Delineated. UNder the declivity of a Verdant Hill, which the Floriferous hand of Nature had Crown'd with a diverse colour'd Diadem of Flowers, in∣clining to that fertil point of the Compass, which is the Empire of Auster. On a rich Vale is situate a copious Plantation of Spices, as Woods of Cina∣mon, pleasant Groves of Nutmegs and Cloves, Orchards of Lemons and Oranges, surpassing those of Spain, representing a Plantation in that part of East-India called the Island of Zelon, not far distant from the Point of Indiā called Cape Comerin, which for fertility may be compared to any Coun∣try in the whole Universe. It abounds in Odoriferous Aromatical Spices, with whole Woods of the best Cinamon that ever the Sun saw; also there are found the best Smaragds, Rubies, and Ambergreece throughout all Asia. In this Island, the place of greatest note is Colmucki, the Seat-Royal of the chief King of that Island, situate on a Capacious Bay in the South-West of it, and of most Trade in all this Country; many great Ships laden with Cinamon, Gems, Elephants, and other Indian Commodities going yearly thence. But in this Representative Plantation in that Island, on an eminent conspi∣cuous Position sitteth Aromatario, the Governour of it, thus habited and accommodated: In a Robe of Scarlet-colour'd Silk and Gold; a Mantle of Purple and Silver; a black curl'd Peruke; a Coronet of Gold, pointed with several sorts of Indian Trees which stand erect, as if growing about his head; green Buskins starrified with Gold, and laced with Silver and Gold Ribon; in his hand a Banner of the Companies. Beneath him sit four Figures, repre∣senting Toyl, Traffick, Treasure, and Triumph, thus accoutred. 1. TOYL. In a gray silk Robe; an Orange-colour'd Mantle edg'd and fring'd with Silver; a brownish curl'd Hair; a wreath of Leaves; green Nutmegs, Cloves, and large Mace: gray Silk Hose; sky-colour'd Buskins laced with yellow Ribon: In one hand a Shield painted with Mattock, Spade, and Grassing-Knives; in the other hand a Banner of my Lords. 2. TRAFFICK. In a Sand-colour'd Robe of Silk; a Sea-green Man∣tle, fringed with Silver and Gold; a fair curl'd Peruke; a Coronet upon his head, bearing on the top the figure of a Ship under Sail: In one hand a shield Argent, charged with the four Winds, Perflant; in the other hand a Banner of the Cities. 3. TREASURE. In a Cloth of Gold Robe; a watchet Silk and Silver Mantle; a long brown curld Peruke; a Coronet of Gold, richly
adorn'd with Jewels; Crimson silk Stockings; Gold Buskins, with purple and silver Ribon; a Banner of the Companies. 4. TRIUMPH. In a Robe of Carnation and Silver; a Mantle of diverse-colour'd Feathers, tip'd with gold and silver; a black long curl'd Pe∣ruke; a Ducal Crown of gold, with a Plume of Feathers of several Ori∣ent Colours; Pearl-colour'd Hose; silver Buskins laced with Pink-colour'd Ribon: In one hand she beareth a Target Vert, charged with the similitude of a Triumphant Chariot OR; in the other hand a Banner of the Kings. The front part of the Stage is planted with variety of Trees, bearing all sorts of Spices and Fruits, as Oranges and Lemons, Citrons and Pomegranates; with several Planters and Labourers at work, some Digging, some Planting, others Pruning, Dressing, and Gathering; with divers Drolls, Piping, Dancing, Tumbling; and sundry kinds of Mimical Gestures, Antick Mo∣tions, Ingenious Confusion, and Studious Disorder: But a general cessa∣tion, and silence being proclaim'd, Aromatario their Governour standing up in the posture of an Address, delivereth this following Oration to his Lordship. The THIRD SPEECH spoken by AROMATARIO the Governour. ILlustrious Lord, under whose wise Commands The chiefest City in Great Britain stands, Aromatario the Governour Of this Plantation, doth present his Power, And Profits to Your Praetorship, whose Wit And well-known Worth can Govern Him and It: I do not to Your Honour's Hands prefer The Gifts of Gold, of Frankincense and Myrrh: Nor can I offer up the Golden Fleece, But Smaragds, Rubies, Pearl, and Ambergreece, Gums, Aromats, and Spices of the best, More Odoriferous than the Phoenix Nest, Or her own Flames, whose Ashes on that Hearth At once produce both Funeral and Birth. But You, My Lord, in Sweets excell that Flame, Who have the Precious Ointment of Good Name,
No Aromats like His, that is Indued With Justice, Prudence, Temperance▪ Fortitude▪ No brighter Jewels in both Indies be Comparative to Faith, Hope, Charity. Love, Loyalty, Sincerity and Truth, (The Honour of old Age, Glory of Youth) These are those Iewels, which when Iust men have They never dye, but bloom even in the Grave. You beeing thus Inrich'd, well may the Voyce Of your Elector's, Triumph in their Choyce, And so do I, who wish you the best Fate That ever bless'd a Happy Magistrate. My Planting People now shall Sing and Play. Fall to your Sports, This is My Lord Mayor's Day. To the Planters, they all Shout. The Speech thus ended, and the Acclamation over, a stout Planter, with a Voice like a Trumpet, distendeth his copious Chops, and holloweth out this Sonnet; and all the rest of the Workmen and Drollists sing the Chorus, whilst the Porters bear the Burden. A SONG. I. WIth Mattock, Spade, Pruning-Hook, Shovel, & Sieve, What a Life of Delight do we Labourers live? The bonny brisk Planter (for delving design'd) Hath Health in his Body, and Peace in his Mind. Though this as a Curse in the Scripture we read, In the Sweat of thy brows thou shalt purchase thy Bread. Chorus. Yet by Patience and Labour, in Digging and Dressing, Th' old Curse is Converted into a new Blessing. II. With Cinamon, Cloves, Mace, and all other Spice, We Planters have planted a New Paradise. We feel no Effects of the Faults that was Adam's, Here's Pepper for Gallants; and Nutmegs for Madams. We work, and we Sweat, yet are never the worse; At the most we have but a Spice of the Curse. Chorus. But by Patienoe and Labour our Treasure encreasing, Hath made a Conversion on't into a Blessing.
III. For London's great Grocers we Labour and Work, No Plots against Princes in our Heads do lurk: We Plant, Set, and Sow, likewise for the Physician, But Plant no Rebellion, and Sow no Sedition. The Grocers and Merchants are Men of Renown, They are just in their Trading, and true to the Crown. Chor. And we faithful Planters; since all this is so Sirs, Let's Pray for King Charles, and his Brethren, the Grocers. The Song being Sung, they all fall to their Drolleries, and the Foot-Marshal having placed the Assisants, Livery, and the Companies on both sides of King-Street, and their Pensioners with their Targets hung on the tops of the Javelins; in the Rere of them the Ensign-Bearers, Drums and Fifes in the Front, and hasten the Foyns and Budg-Batchelors; together with the Gentlemen-Ushers to Guild-Hall, where his Lordship is again Saluted by the Artillery-men, with three Vollies more, which conclude their Duty: His Land Attendants pass through the Gallery or Lane so made into Guild-Hall: After which, the Companies repair to their respective Halls to Dinner, and their Silk-works and Triumphs are likewise convey'd into Blackwell-hall, and the Officers aforesaid, and the Children that sit in the Pageants, there refresh themselves, until his Lordship hath Dined at Guild-Hall. His Lorship and the Guests being all seated, the City-Musick, after a little consideration and consultation one with another; conclude to habit themselves for the performance of a Song of three Parts in Stilo Recitativo; or a Musical Interlude Presented by three Persons; Crab, a West-Country-man; Swab, a Seaman; and Self, a Citizen. The SCENE, the ROYAL-EXCHANGE. Enter Crab, staring up and down. Crab. Thic New-made Zitty zeemeth ztrange, Zince last time thee did zee't; Cham vinding out the Royal-Change, To try if the con meet Zome honest plain West Country-mon, That we may go and Doin, And zit and chat and gulge a Can, Uor that is wellafoin.
II. Thic is th' Exchange that zhoins zo pure, Che ne're zaw Building neater: They burn'd it down on purpose zhowr To buildne up the better. Here all the zity Mezles meet In vest and velvet Rocket; And here a woundy crafty Cheat One day did pike my pocket. III. 'Tis very yarly day it zeems, Uor there are vew Men come, Within thic hour they'l vlow in streams, A Mon con get no rome. Enter Swab the Sea-man. But who comes here, that doth appear Rigg'd like a Mon a war: 'Tis a black-wall-ey'd Zea-mon, zhowr [The Tune changeth.] Swab. I A Sail, a Sail, a Sail, The Sea-man's come to sight; Whose Star-board And Lar-board Hath been bruis'd in fight. Crab. A flail, a flail, a flail, Iche tell the Mon of zeas Your Sailors Are failors, Without Pork and Peas. Swab. I have stood Bath'd in my Blood When a Brazen Broad-side roars; My Men dying, No flying. Crab. Zhips ha no back doors. Swab. Where so e're Enemies were, I would chase 'um like a flock:
And fly at 'em, Crab. From Chatham, Up to Wapping Dock: Swab. II. The dreadful; name of Drake, In thundering Eighty Eight; Whose Courage Did forage For the Spaniard's Plate. I have with Art and ease, And Valour on the Seas. Out-run him, Out-done him. Crab. What picklid lyes are these? [Aside.] Swab. I did once dive Down at Queen-hive. I did it all at one jirk, And under Water Two hours after, Crab. Rise agen at Dunkirk. Swab. Why thou Sheep-biter, how dar'st thou interrupt me? [Speak.] Crab. Why thou zhip-zhiter, I did but make up Rhime, vor in my conscience thou had'st almost zung thy reason out of breath. You zaid you were two hours un∣der water, and I thought I would zet you a zhore to dry your Daublet. Swab. What at Dunkirk? amongst Strangers? Crab. Yes, why not? zhour the purchasers of that place may allow an English-mon to dry his Daublet there, che believe they have bargain good enough on't. Swab. My Fame rings Abroad among Kings; Sing on a Repetition of the last Strain of the Tune. My Valour is Renown'd: In Salt River I was never Crab. Born to be drown'd. Swab. And what mean you by that Sir—Speak.
Crab. Iche mean youl have Rope enough about you to de∣vend you vrom drowning: Swab. Sirrah! you have saucie Interpretation: and I could find in my heart to chastize you with my Cane. Crab. I am a UUhipster Sir. I carry my weapon in my hand, cham not avraid of a whole Team of Tar∣paulins, vor I cham zvre you ha'nt a broadzide of Brass Guns in your Pocket. Swab. Go, thour't a Tarbox. Crab. How, Brother Pitch-barrel? [Enter Self the Citizen.] But, who coms heer? Swab. By his venerable pace, and posture, it should be one Mr. Self a Citizen. Crab. Zelf? Iche think that be a great Name in every Town and Country, especially amongst the Longeners. But I don't know'n. Swab. Thou art a pretty Comical Fellow: what's thy Name? Crab. Why zur cham not azham'd of my Name, my name is Crab. Swab. Gaffer Crab? a Land Crab? I have seen a great many of your Crawling Kindred in the Indies, Gaffar Crab. [Swab walks away.] Crab. Gaffer Crab? Crawling Kindred? doth the Meazle take me vor a Crablouse? Iche could vind in my heart. [Advanceth his whip.] Swab. How now, what's the matter? [and Swabs turns about] Crab. Faldera, Laidera, Taldara leero Crab sings a few notes of the Canarys and Danceth to it. Swab. You are very actively merry Mr. Crab. Crab. Yes, I can Crab it away I warrant ye, as well as any zea-Crab o ye all. Another Tune. Swab. O! the valiant strife Of a Seaman's Life, Whose Fame is never fading. Self. Though the Change be full, Yet the City's dull, And droops for want of Trading: It is to little purpose now our weighty Bills of Lading.
Shop keepers know not what to do. Crab. The Contry mon doth Plow and Zow, Harrow, Weed and Reap and Mow; But yet is like to starve on't. Swab. The greatest sort of Business now Is Mam your humble Servant. Self. II. What the reason is, That doth cause all this I gladly would be guided: Swab. Want of Amity Breeds Calamity, We are too much divided; By Atheistick persons too, Religion is derided. Self. With Arguments as light as Air, Swab. Opinion's got in Reason's Chair, And would controul the great affair Of Man's Eternal being. Crab. The new-vound slights have spoil'd our zights, And caus'd this disagreeing. Swab. III. Though the Citizens, With Tongues and pens Are new distresses faining; Crab. They do veast their Chopps With zhugard zopps And vamous Entertaining: Yet they cry out that by their zhopps, They have but little gaining. Swab. They Keep both Town and Country house. Crab. They veed on Capon Pig and Goose. Swab. In Sack and Claret they Carouse, And spread their plumes in Trayning: Crab, And yet as if not worth a lowse, They'r every hour Complaining.
Swab. IV. Through the Ocean curl'd, We surround the World For Merchandise to serve yee: Crab. And the Country Cheap Brings Bread and Meat, That Uamine may not ztarve yee. Swab. You live at home in Wealth and Peace, Whilst wee do rock and shelve it, You wallow in Delight and ease. Crab. Wee zend you Bacon Beef and Peas, Whilst we do ditch and delve it; And don zuch zimple Clodes as dese, When you weare zilk and velvet. Self. V. In your vain dispute of every thing, Y' are very much misguided; As it is the Chamber of the King It should be so provided; Therefore let no dissention spring, This Argument's decided. Swab. Your London Tables do excell. Crab. Y' have vorty dishes at a meal; Swab. And yet ye neither buy nor sell; But suffer diminution. Crab. You veed on Uesant, Cock and Teal Yet cry out Persecution. Swab. I. Though in Dust and Ashes it lately was hurl'd, The Tune changeth. This City may Vye with all parts of the World. For true Uniformity, Substance, and Show. These Fabricks all Buildings in Europe out-go. Self. But if that no Trading come into the Town, The City is up, but the Citizen's down. Swab. II. In Storms and in Tempests, through Waters and Fires, The Sea-man doth fetch what the City-desires;
From all points of the World we bring Treasure untold, Musk, Ambergreece, Silk, Silver, Jewels and Gold. 'Tis by the success of the Sea-man's Affairs, The City's supply'd with Shreves and Lord Mayors. III. Through Europe, to Asia and Africa we fly, In Russia we freeze, and in India we fry; Th' Antartick and Artick we visit by turn, In one we are frozen, in t'other we burn. We venture by dangerous Seas, Sands, and Shelves, To bring Wares to the City [Crab.] & wealth to your zelves Self. IV. Our City's the Market, to vend all our Wares, And Money's the Marrow of all our Affairs, Crab. UUe zarve ye with wheat and malt, wool, milk & honey▪ Self. It is much for our Love [Crab.] I but more vor your money Swab. You'l sacrifice all the fat Sheep in your fold, To the beautiful Idol of Silver and Gold. Self. V. Your Sheep and your Ships do replenish our stock, And therefore God prosper the Fleet and the Flock: The one in the Winter-time keepeth us warm, The t'other brings Treasure, and guards us from harm If we want your Traffick, and you want our Coyn, Like Members, let's all in one Body Conjoyn. CHORUS. Since Union and Concord bring Plenty and Peace, And Amity is the kind cause of Increase: Let Love from Division our fancy's release, And all our Dissentions ever cease.— Exeunt. Dinner being ended, and Night approaching, his Lordship being Attended by a private Retinue of his own Company, takes Coach, and is Conducted to Goldsmiths-Hall (where for this Year he doth intend to keep his Mayoralty) without the Night-Ceremony which hath been formerly, when Old St. Paul's was standing. When his Lordship is Housed, those that At∣tend on him depart with Order and Convenience; and the Triumphs and Silk-works are by the care of the Masters-Artificers lodged for that Night in Blackwell-Hall 'till the next day following, and then they are convey'd to Grocers-Hall. To close up all, the Artists and Artificers (each of them deserving ample Commendations) bid you all Good Night. FINIS.
