J376 23807957 109570
His Majesties REASONS For With-drawing Himself from ROCHESTER. Writ with his own Hand, and Ordered by Him to be Published. THE World cannot wonder at my With-drawing my Self now this Second time. I might have expected somewhat better Usage after what I writ to the P. of Orange by my Lord Feversham, and the Instructions I gave him; but instead of an Answer, such as I might have hoped for, What was I to expect after the Usage I received by the making the said Earl a Prisoner, against the Practice and Law of Nations; The sending his own Guards at Eleven at Night to take Possession of the Posts at Whitehall, without advertising me in the least manner of it; The sending to me at One a Clock, after Midnight, when I was in Bed, a kind of an Order by three Lords, to be gone out of mine own Palace, before Twelve that same Morning? After all this, How could I hope to be safe, so long as I was in the Power of one, who had not only done this to me, and Invaded my Kingdoms without any just occasion given him for it, but that did by his first Declaration lay the greatest Aspersion upon me that Malice could Invent, in that Clause of it which concerns my Son. I appeal to all that know me, nay, even to himself, that in their Consciences, neither he nor they can believe me in the least capa∣ble of so unnatural a Villany, nor of so little common sense, to be imposed on in a thing of such a nature as that. What had I then to expect from one who by all Arts hath ta∣ken such pains to make me appear as black as Hell to my own People, as well as to all the World besides? What effect that had at Home all mankind have seen, by so General a defection in my Army, as well as in the Nation, amongst all sorts of People. I was born Free, and desire to continue so; and tho I have ventured my Life very frankly, on several Occasions, for the Good and Honour of my Countrey, and am as free to do it again (and which I hope I shall yet do, as Old as I am, to redeem it from the Slavery it is like to fall under) yet I think it not convenient to ex∣pose my self to be Secured, as not to be at Liberty to Effect it; and for that, Reason do with-draw, but so as to be within call whensoever the Nations Eyes shall be open∣ed, so as to see how they have been abused and imposed upon by the specious Preten∣ces of Religion and Property. I hope it will please God to touch their Hearts, out of his infinite Mercy, and to make them sensible of the ill Condition they are in, and bring them to such a temper, that a Legal Parliament may be called; and that amongst o∣ther things which may be necessary to be done, they will agree to Liberty of Conscience for all Protestant Dissenters, and that those of of my own Perswasion may be so far Con∣sidered, and have such a share of it, as they may live peaceably and quietly, as English∣men and Christians ought to do, and not to be obliged to Transplant themselves, which would be very grievous, especially to such as love their own Countrey; and I appeal to all men, who are considering men, and have had experience, whether any thing can make this Nation so great and flourishing as Liberty of Conscience. Some of our Neighbours dread it. I could add much more to confirm all I have said, but now is not the proper time. Rochester, 22 December 1688.
