J608 99828737 33168
SEVERALL PAPERS Lately VVritten and Published by IUDGE IENKINS, Prisoner in the Tower: viz. 1. His Vindication. 2. The Armies indempnity: with a Declarati∣on, shewing, how every Subject ought to be tryed for Treasons, Felonies, and all other Capitall Crimes. 3. Lex Terrae. 4. A Cordiall for the good people of London. 5. A Discourse touching the inconveniences of a long continued Parliament. 6. An Apologie for the Army. ANNO 1647.
The Vindication of Iudge Jenkins, Pri∣soner in the Tower, the 29. of Apr. 1647. I Was convened upon Saturday the 10. of this moneth of Aprill before a Committee of the House of Commons, where∣in Master Corbet had the Chaire; and I was there to be exa∣mined upon some questions then to be propounded to me; to which questions I refused to give any other answer then that which was set down in a paper I then delivered to the said M. Corbet, which followeth in these words: Gentlemen, I stand committed by the House of Commons for High Treason, for not acknowledging, nor obeying the power of the Two Houses, by adhering to the King in this War. I deny this to be Treason, for the supreame and onely power, by the Lawes of this Land, is in the King. If I should submit to any exa∣mination derived from your Power, which by the Negative Oath stands in opposition to the Kings Power, I should confesse the Power to be in you, and so condemne my selfe for a Traitour, which I neither ought nor will doe. I am sworne to obey the King, and the Laws of this Land: you have not power to examine me by those Laws, by the Kings Writ, Patent, or Commission; if you can produce either thereof, I will answer the questions you shall propound; otherwise I cannot answer thereto, without the breach of my Oath, and the violati∣on of the Lawes, which I will not doe to save my life. You your selves, all of you this Parliament, have sworne that the King is our onely and supreame Governour: your Protesta∣tion, your Vow and Covenant, your solemne League and Cove∣nant, your Declarations, all of them publish to the Kingdome, that your scope is the maintenance of the Lawes; those Lawes are
and must be derived to us, and enlivened by the only supreame Governour, the Fountaine of justice, and the life of the Law, the King. The Parliaments are called by his writs; the Judges sit by his Pattents, so of all other Officers; the Cities and Towns cor∣porate, governe by the Kings Charters; and therefore since by the Law I cannot be examin'd by you, without a power derived by His Majesty, I neither can, nor will, nor ought you to examine me upon any question. But if as private Gentlemen, you shall be pleased to aske me any questions, I shall really and truly answer every such question, as you shall demand. Aprill 10. 1647. David Jenkins. This paper hath been mis-represented to the good people of this Citie by a Printed one, styling it my Recantation, which I owne not; and besides is in it selfe repugnant (just like these times) the Body falls out with the Head. To vindicate my selfe from that Recantation, and to publish to the world the realitie of the Paper then delivered to M. Corbet, and the matter therein contained, I have published this ensuing discourse. No person who hath committed Treason, Murder, or Felony, hath any assurance at all for so much as one houre of life, Lands or Goods without the Kings gracious pardon, 27. Hen. 8. Cap. 24. The King is not virtually in the two Houses at Westminster, whereby they may give any assurance at all to any person, in any thing, for any such offence. 1. The House of Commons hath declared to the Kingdome in their Declarations of the 28. of November last to the Scots Pa∣pers, pag. 8. That the King at this time is not in a condition to go∣verne. No person or thing can derive a vertue to other men, or things, which it selfe hath not: and therefore it is impossible that they should have a vertue from the King to governe, which they declare he hath not himselfe to give. 2.5. Elizab. Cap. 1. The Law of the Land is, That no person in any Parliament hath a voice in the House of Commons, but that he stands a person to all intents and purposes as if he had never beene elected or returned, if before he sit in the House, he take not his Oath upon the holy Evange∣lists,
that the Kings Majestie is the only and supream Governour over all persons in all Causes. All the Members of the said House have taken it, and at all times as they are returned doe take it; other∣wise they have no colour to intermeddle with the publicke Af∣faires. How doth this Solemne and Legall Oath agree with their said Declaration, That the King is in no condition to governe? By the one it is sworne, He is the only supreame Governour; by the other, that he is not in a condition to governe. 2. The Oath is not, that the K. was, or ought to be, or had been, before he was seduced by ill Councell, our onely and supreame Governour in all Causes, over all persons; but in the present tense, that he is our onely and supreame Governour, at this pre∣sent, in all Causes and over all persons. So they the same persons sweare one thing, and declare to the Kingdom the contrary of the same thing, at the same time, in that which concerneth the weale of all this Nation. 4. The Ministers in the Pulpits doe not say, what they sweare in the House of Commons. Whoever heard sthence this unnatu∣rall Warre, any of their Presbyters attribute that to His Majestie which they sweare? The reason is, their Oath is taken at Westmin∣ster amongst themselves: That which their Ministers pray and preach, goes amongst the people. To tell the people that the King is now their onely and supreame Governour in all Causes, is contrary to that the Houses doe now practice, and to all they act and maintaine. They, the two Houses forsooth, are the onely and supreame Governours in default of the King, for that he hath left his great Councell and will not come to them, and yet the King desires to come, but they will not suffer him, but keepe him prisoner at Holmby: so well doe their Actions and Oathes agree. 5. They sweare now King CHARLES is their onely and su∣preme Governour; but with a resolution at the time of the Oath taking, and before and after, that he shall not be onely or supreme Governour, or onely and supreme, but not any Governour at all: For there is no point of Government, but for some yeares past they have taken to themselves, and used his name onely, to abuse and deceive the people.
6. That this virtuall power is a meere fiction, their Propositi∣ons sent to Oxford, to Newcastle, to be signed by the King, doe prove it so. What needs this adoe, if they have the virtuall power with them at Westminster? 7. To affirme that the Kings power (which is the virtue they talk of) is separable from his Person, is High Treason by the Law of the Land; which is so declared by that learned man of the Law, Sir Edward Coke; so much magnified by this present Parlia∣ment; who in the 7. part of his Reports, in Calv. Case, fo. 11. saith thus: In the reigne of Edward the second, the Spencers, the Father and Son, to cover the Treason hatched in their hearts, invented this damnable and damned opinion, that Homage and Oath of Ligeance was more by reason of the Kings Crowne, (that is, of his politicke ca∣pacity) then by reason of the person of the King: upon which opinion they inferred 3. execrable and detestable consequences. 1. If the King doe not demeane himselfe by reason in the right of his Crowne, his lieges are bound by Oath to remove the King. 2. seeing that the King could not be reformed by suit of Law, that ought to be done per aspertee that is by force. 3. That his lieges be bound to governe in aid of him, and in default of him: All which were condemned by two Parliaments, one in the raigne of Edw, 2. called exilium Hugonis le Spencer; and the other in Anno 1. Edw. 3. cap. 2. And that the naturall body and politicke makes one indivisi∣ble body, and that these two bodies incorporate in one person make one body, and not divers, is resolved as the Law of England. 4. Eliz. Ploydon Com. fol. 213. by Sir Cobert Catlin, Lord Chiefe Justice of England, Sir James Dier, Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, the Lord Sanders, Lord Chiefe Baron of the Exchequer, and by the rest of the Judges, viz. Justice Rastall, Ju∣stice Browne, Justice Corbet, Justice Weston, Baron Frevyll, Conne and Pewdrell, Sergeant Gerrard Atturny Generall; Carre Attur∣ny of the Dutch: Plowdon the learnedst man of that age, in the knowledge of the Law, and Customes of the Realm. 8. The Law in all ages without any controversie is and hath beene: That no Act of Parliament bindes the Subjects of this Land without the assent of the King, either for person, Lands, Goods, or Fame. No man can shew any sillable, letter, or line to the contrary in
the bookes of the Law, or printed Acts of Parliament, in any age in this Land. If the vertuall Power be in the Houses, there needes no assent of the Kings. The stiles of the Acts printed from 9. Hen. 3. to 1. Hen. 7. were either, 9 Hen. 3. Magna Charta. So in every age till this day, and in every Kings time, as appears by the Acts in Print. 1 part of the Instit Sect. 234. in fine, where many of the Law-Bookes are cited. 7. H. 7.14.12. of Hen. 7.20. The King ordaines at his Parliament, &c. or the King ordaineth by the advice of his Prelats and Barons, and at the humble Petition of the Com∣mons, &c. In Hen. 7. his time the Stile altered, and hath sithence continued thus, It is ordained by the Kings Majesty, and the Lords spi∣rituall and temporall, and Commons in this present Parlia∣ment assembled. So that alwayes the Assent of the King giveth the life to all, as the soule to the body; and therefore our Law-Bookes call the King the Fountaine of Justice, and the life of the Law. 9.2. H. 4. c. 22. 4 pars instit. 42. M. Prin in his Trea∣tise of the great Seale Fol. 17.27. Hen. 8. Chap. 24. Mercy as well as Justice belongs by the law of the Land only to the King. This is confessed by Master Prynn, and it is so without any quection: The King can only pardon, and never more cause to have sufficient pardons then in such trou∣blesome times as these, and God send us pardons and peace. None can give any pardon, but the King by the Law of the Land: The whole and sole power of pardoning Treasons and Felo∣nies belongs to the King, are the words of the Law, and it is a de∣lusion to take it from any other and utterly invalid. 27 Hen. 8. Cap 24. 10. Queene Elizabeth summoned her first Parliament, to be held the 23. of January, in the first yeare of Her Majesties Raigne. The Lords and Commons assembled by force of the same writ the 23. day the Queen fell sick and could not appeare in her person in Parliament that day, and therefore proro∣gued it untill the 25. of the same Month of January. Resolved by all the Judges of England, 3 Of Eliz. Dier. 203. that the Parliament began not the day of the returne of the writ, viz. the 23. of January, when the Lords and Commons appeared, but the 25. of the said moneth when the Queen came in person: Which sheweth evidently that this virtu∣all presence is a meere deluding fiction that hath no ground in
Law, reason, or sense. They have the King now a prisoner at Holmby, with guards upon him, and yet they governe by the ver∣tuall Power of their Prisoner. These are some of the causes and reasons which moved me to deliver that paper to Master Corbet, which I am ready to justifie with my life, and should hold it a great honour to die for the honourable and holy Lawes of the Land. That which will save this Land from destruction, is an Act of Oblivion, and His Majesties gracious generall pardon, the Souldiers their Arears, and every man his owne, and Truth and Peace established in the Land, and a favourable re∣gard to the satisfaction of tender Consciences. Aprill 29. 1647. David Jenkins.
THE ARMIES INDEMNITY, With Addition; Together, With a Declaration, shewing how eve∣ry Subject of England ought to be tried for Treasons, Felonies, and all other Capitall Crimes, as it is set down in the Lawes of the LAND. By David Jenkins, now Prisoner in the Tower of LONDON. Printed in the Yeare, 1647.
The Armies Indemnity, &c. UPon the publishing of the Ordinance of the 22. of May last, for the Indemnity of the Army, certain Gen∣tlemen well affected to the peace of the Kingdome, and safety of the Army, desired me to set downe in writing, whether by the Law of the Land, the said Ordinance did secure them from danger, as to the matters therein menti∣oned. For whose satisfaction in a businesse wherein the lives and fortunes of so many men were concerned, and the Peace of the Kingdome involved, I conceived I was bound in duty and conscience, faithfully and truly to set downe what the Law of the Land therein is, which accordingly I have with all sin∣cerity expressed in this following discourse. The danger of the Army by the Law of the Land is appa∣rent to all men. 25. Ed. 3. c. 11. 2 Ri. 2. cap. 3. 1 Hen. 4. c. 10. 1 and 2. Phil. and Mary. c. 10 It is high Treason by the Law of the Land to leavy warre against the King, to compasse or imagine his death, or the death of his Queene, or of his eldest Sonne, to counter∣feit his Money, or his great Seale; They are the words of the Law. Other Treasons then are specified in that Act, are declared to be no Treasons untill the King and his Parliament shall de∣clare otherwise, they are the very words of the Law. 3. Pars instit. Pag. 22. & 2. pars instit. Pag. 47, 48. & 4. pars instit. P. 23.48.29. King and Commons, King and Lords, Commons and Lords, cannot declare any other thing to be Treason, then there is declared: as appeares by the Lord Cooke in the places cited in the Mar∣gin: A Law-booke published by order of the House of Com∣mons this Parliament, 3. Pars instit. cap. Treason Pa. 9, 10, & 12. Mr S. Iohn the Sollicitor in his Speech up∣on the araign∣ment of the Earle of Stra∣ford, Printed by order of the House of Com∣mons. p. 7. 13. as appeares in the last leafe of the second part of the Institutes, published likewise by their Order. The Resolutions of all the Judges of England, upon the said Statute of the 25. Ed. 3. (as appeares in the said third part of the Institutes, Chap. High-Treason) have been, that to impri∣son the King untill he agree to certaine demands is High-Treason;
to seize his Ports, Forts, Magazine for Warre, are High-Treason: to alter the Lawes is High-Treason. The word King in the Statute of 25. Ed. 3. cap. 2. must be un∣derstood of the Kings naturall person: for that person can only dye, have a wife, have a sonne, or be imprisoned. The Privilege of Parliament protects no man from treason or felony, 4. Pars instit. c. Parl. p. 25. howbeit he be a Member: much lesse can they pro∣tect others. Those who cannot protect themselves, have no co∣lour to make Ordinances to protect others who are no Mem∣bers. The Statute of 11. 11. M. 7. cap. 1. Hen. 7. cap. 1. doth by expresse words free all persons who adhere to the King. The Army by an Act of Indemnity free themselves from all those dangers, Stamford. l. 2. fol. 99. 18 Ed. 3. Sta∣tutes at large 144. 20 Ed. 3. c. 1. 11. Rie. 2. c. 10. 4 Pars instit. Pag. 23.48.29. which an Ordinance can no more doe then re∣peale all the Lawes of the Land, the whole and sole power by Law to pardon all Treasons, Felonies, &c. being solely and wholly in the King, as is cleared by the Statute of 27. H. 8. c. 24. and the Law of the Land in all times. Having shewed the danger of the Army by the Law of the Land, next consider the Ordinance of the Lords and Commons published the 22. of May last for their Indemnity. By the en∣suing discourse it doth appeare they have no Indemnity at all thereby. The Indemnity proposed by the Ordinance, is for any Act done by the authority of the Parl. or for the service or bene∣fit thereof: and that the Judges and all other Ministers of Ju∣stice shall allow thereof. This Ordinance cannot secure the Army for these reasons: I. Their Judges are sworne to doe justice according to the Law of the Land, 3. Pars instit. Pag. 22. 2 Pars instit. 47, 48. 1. Pars instit. 193. Princes case . perte. and therefore the Judges must be forsworne men, if they obey it: because an Ordinance of both Houses is no Law of the Land; and no man can beleeve they will perjure them∣selves so palpably and visibly in the eye of the world.
II. All trials for Treasons, Felonies, Robberies, Magna Charta cap. 29. 25. Ed. 3. cap 4. 28. Ed. 3. cap. 3. 37. Ed. 3. cap. 8. 42. Ed. 3 cap. 3. and such like Ca∣pitall offences, are by the Law of the Land to be by indictment of a Jury appointed out of the Neighbourhood where the of∣fence was done. There is no common Jury-man but under∣stands what the Law is in these cases as well as the best Law∣yers: and the Law makes the Jury Judges of the fact, whereby the souldier is left to their mercy whom he hath offended (as some of them have lately had wofull experience, Declaration of the Army pre∣sented at War∣den, and Prin∣ted by the ap∣pointment of the Officers subscribed. and thereupon doe rightly apprehend their danger) Now no man can thinke that the Jurors will perjure themselves to acquit the souldiers for robbing and plundring of the Countries, and thereby ut∣terly destroy their owne Rights and Properties. III. If the Judges conceive (as they may) that the taking of other mens horses or goods, is not by the Authority of Parliament, or for the service and benefit thereof, the souldier dyes for it: they may say to steale or rob any man of his goods is not for the Par∣liaments service but against it, which was alwayes the sence of the people, and doubtlesse the Jurors will not thinke otherwise. IV. This Ordinance is restrained to the authority, 4. Pars instit. pag. 1. 3. Pars instit. pag. 22. 1. Pars instit. pag. 1. 28. H. 8. sl 11. Dier 38. H. 8. sol. 60. 12. H. 7.20. 1. Pars instit. 159. Princes case 8. reports. service or be∣nefit of the Parliament. The Lords and Commons make no more a Parliament by the Law of the Land then a body with∣out a head makes a man: for a Parliament is a body composed of a King their head; the Lords and Commons the Members. All three together make one body, and that is the Parliament, and none other. And the Judges may, ought, and I beleeve will according to their Oathes proceed as not bound at all by this Ordinance. For it is restrained to the Authority of Parliament, vice or benefit thereof, whereas the two Houses are not the liament, but only parts thereof, and by the abuse and mis∣understanding
of this word Parliament, they have miserably deceived the people. V. This Ordinance is against their Ordinances which expresly prohibit plundring, 28 Aug. 1642. Col. of Ord. first part. 565.592.605. seve∣rall Ordinan∣ces. and so there is one Ordinance against ano∣ther, whereby their Judges have an out-let to proceed on the one or the other, and thereby the Army hath no manner of se∣curity. VI. The word Parliament is a French word (howbeit such Assem∣blies were before the Norman Conquest here) & signifies in that Language to consult & treat: 1. Pars iastit. 109. 1 Pars instit. 110. 4 Pars p. 49. that is the sense of the word Parler in the French Tongue. The Writ whereby the two Houses are assembled, which is called the Writ of Summons of Parliament, at all times, and at this Parliament used, and which is the war∣rant, ground and foundation of their meeting, is for the Lords of the House of Peeres, the Judges and Kings Councell to con∣sult and treate with the King (that is the Parler) of great con∣cernments, touching 1. the King, secondly, the defence of his Kingdome, thirdly, the defence of the Church of England. It cannot be a Parliament that will not Parle with their King, but keep him in prison, and not suffer him to come to them and parle; and therefore the Law, and sence, and reason, informing every man that is no manner of Parliament (the King with whom they should parle, being so restrained that they will not parle with him) The Army hath no manner of security by this Ordinance: For their indemnification referres to that which is not in being untill the King be at liberty. VII. It is more then probable that their Judges before the last circuite had instructions to the effect or this Ordinance: The Common Souldiers sc∣cond Apology. 6. Grievances of the Army published 15. May last. Three grie∣vances of Col. Riche's Regi∣ment.but they the Judges making conscience of their Oath, laid aside the said Instructions, and ought, and may, and it is beleeved will no more regard this Ordinance, then the said instructions: What was done in the last circuite, the Army well knowes, touching many of their fellow-souldiers.
VIII. The Houses in their first Proposition to his Majesty for a safe and well-grounded peace, sent to Neweastle to desire a pardon from his Majesty for themselves: they who desire a pardon, cannot grant a pardon (common reason dictates this to every man) and therefore that the Army should accept an Indemnity from them, who seeke it for themselves, or should conceive it of any manner of force, is a fancy: so that no man in the whole Army but may apprehend, that it is vaine and a meere delusion. IX. His Majesty by his gracious Message of the 12. of May fast, the 22 of the same, hath offered an Act of Oblivion, and a generall pardon to all his people, this done the Law doth in∣demnifie the Army (without all manner of scruple) for any thing that hath beene done: for it is an Act of Parliament when the King and two Houses concurre, and bindes all men. There is no safety by the Ordinance; There is safety by an act of Parliament: And will not reasonable men preferre that which is safe before that which is unsafe? X. His Majesty by his said Letter agrees to pay the Arreares of the Army; I am sure that it is a publique Debt, and the chiefest and the first that by the two Houses should be paid, and before any Divident or Gratuities bestowed among themselves; for their Bloud, Limbes, and Lives have put and kept the both Houses at rest in the power they have: So by this concurrence of his Majesty for your indemnity, and for your Arreares, The Army have not an Ordinance, or the Publique Faith, but the Law of the Land to make sure unto them their Indemnity for all Acts, and for their Arreares, and therewith also bring peace to the Land.
XI. The Kingdome and people generally desire these things. To such an Army, just and reasonable things must not be denyed; the things formerly proposed are most just and reasonable, you may have them if you will; if you will not, you render this Kingdome miserable; Mr Pyms Speech against the Earle of Strafford. p. 16 Sixt considera∣tion Printed by the com∣mand of the House of Com∣mons. wherein you will have your shares of miseries: The head and the body are such an incorporation as cannot be dissolved without the destruction of both. The Additional Ordinance of both houses passed the fifth of June instant for the fuller indemnity of the Army, makes no∣thing at all to the matter. 1. For that it extends not to Felony, Homicide, Burglary, Robbery, or any other capitall crime, which is the maine businesse insisted upon, and most concerneth the Souldiers security. II. The both Houses in the said Additionall Ordinance, say, that it is expedient that all offences be pardoned and put in obli∣vion. Pardon and Oblivion cannot bee understood to bee for a time, but for ever: and they themselves confesse, that an Ordi∣nance is not binding but pro tempore which with the most ad∣vantagious Interpretation can be but a reprieve or delay of the execution of the Law, and therefore that cannot pardon or put in oblivion by their owne shewing. But the Law of the Land is, 27. H. 8. c. 24. (and so it hath constantly been practised in all times) that no persons of what estate soever, have any power to pardon Treason, Felony, or any other offen∣ces but the King onely, who hath the sole and whole power to pardon all such crimes whatsoever. And in the same manner an Ordinance is of no Authority at all to take away the right of private mens actions, by any evidence it can give: In truth all the evidence that this Ordinance will give is, that it records to posterity nothing but a lawlesse and distempered time. For remedy therefore I say againe, it is a certaine truth, This Kingdome without an act of Oblivion, and a generall Pardon,
and the payment of Souldiers arreares, and a meet regard had to tender Consciences, will unavoidably be ruined. June 10. 1647. David Jenkins, Prisoner in the Tower of London. Sundry Acts of Parliament mentioned and cited in the Armies Indemnities: set forth in words at large for the better satis∣faction of such as desire to be rightly informed. 25. Edw. 3. Chap. 2. A Declaration what offences shall be adjudged Treason. VVHereas divers opinions have been before this time, in what case Treason shall be said, & in what not: The K. at the request of the Lords and of the Commons hath made a Declaration in the manner as hereafter followeth: That is to say, When a man doth compasse, or imagine the death of our Lord the King, or of our Lady the Queen, or of their eldest Son and Heire: or if a man do violate the Kings companion, or the Kings eldest daughter unmarried, or the wife of the Kings el∣dest sonne and heire: or if a man do levie war against the Lord our King in his Realme, or bee adherent to the Kings enemies
in his Realm, giving to them aid and comfort in the Realme, or else-where, and thereof be probably attainted of open deed by people of their condition; And if a man counterfeit the Kings great or privie Scale, or his Money: and if a man bring false money into this Realm, counterfeit to the money of Eng∣land, and the money called Lusburgh, or other like to the said money of England, &c. 11. Hen. 7. Cap. 1. None that shall attend upon the King, and doe him true service, shall bee attainted or forfeit any thing. THe King our Soveraign Lord calling to his remembrance the duty of allegiance of his Subjects of this his Realm, and that they by reason of the same are bound to serve their Prince and Soveraign Lord for the time being in his wars, for the defence of Him and the Land, against every rebellion pow∣er and might raised, reared against him, and with him to enter and abide in service in battell, if case so require, and that for the same service what fortune ever fall by chance in the same bat∣tell against the minde and will of the Prince (as in this Land sometime passed hath been seen) that it is not reasonable, but against all lawes, reason and good conscience, that the said Subjects going with their Soveraigne Lord in wars, attending upon him in his person, or being in other places by his com∣mandement within this Land or without any thing should lose or forfeit, for doing their duty or service of Allegiance. It be therefore ordained, enacted, and established by the King our Soveraigne Lord, by the advice and assent of the Lords spiritual and temporall, and the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by authority of the same, that from henceforth no manner of person or persons whatsoever he or they be, that attend upo the King and Soveraigne Lord of this Land for the time being, in his person, and doe him true and faithfull service of allegiance in the same, or be in other places by his comman∣dement in his wars, within this Land or without, that for the said deed and true duty of allegiance he or they be in no wise
convict or attaint of high treason, nor of other offences for that cause, by act of Parliament, or otherwise by any processe of Law, whereby hee or any of them shall lose or forfeit life, lands, tenements, rents, possessions, hereditaments, goods, chattels, or any other things, but to be for that deed and service utterly discharged of any vexation, trouble, or losse. And if any act or acts, or other processe of the Law hereafter thereupon for the same, happen to be made contrary to this Ordinance, that then that act or acts, or other processe of the Law, what∣soever they shall be, stand and be utterly void. Provided al∣waies, that no person or persons shall take any benefit or ad∣vantage by this Act, which shall hereafter decline from his or their said allegiance. Cap. 24. In the Statute of 27. H. 8. It is enacted, that no per∣son or persons of what estate or degree soever they be of, shall have any power or authority to pardon or remit any treason, murders, man-slaughters, or any kinde of Fellonies, &c. but that the King shall have the sole and whole power and authority thereof united and knit to the Imperiall Crowne, as of right it appertaineth, &c. And in the same it is enacted further, that none shall have power, of what estate, degree, or condition soever they be, to make Justices of Eyre, Justices of Assize, Justices of the Peace, &c. but all such officers and Ministers shall be made by Letters Patents under the Kings great Seale in the name and by the authority of the King and his Heires and Successors Kings of this Realme. In the first yeare of Queen Mary, and the first Chapter, It is enacted by the Queen, with the consent of the Lords and Commons, That no deed, or offence, by Act of Parliament made treason, shall be taken, deemed, or adjudged to be high treason, but only such as be declared and expressed to be treason by the Act of Parliament, made 25. Ed. 3. cap. 2. before mentioned.
A Declaration of M. David Ienkins, now Prisoner in the Tower of London, one of His Majesties Iudges in Wales, for tryalls of Treasons, Murthers, Felonies, and all other capitall crimes, that they ought only to be by Iuries and not otherwise, unlesse it be by Act of Parliament. THe common Law of this Land is, That every free∣man is subject to a tryall by bill of Attainder in Parli∣ament, wherein His Majesty and both Houses must necessarily concurre, for that tryall and attainder is an Act of Parliament to which all men are subject to. Mag. Chart. cap. 29. 2 part. instit. fol. 28 29.46.48, 49, 50. composed by Sir Ed. Cooke and published by the Order of the House of Commons in May 1641. No man shall otherwise be destroyed, &c but by the lawfull judgement of his Peers, or by the common Law of the Land. Peers to Noblemen are Noblemen, Peers to the Commons are Knights, Gentlemen, &c. Judgement of Peers refers to Peers, those words, The Law of the Land, refers to the Commons, the Law of the Land is for the tryall of the life of a free Commo∣ner, by Indictment, Presentment of good and lawfull men where the deed is done, or by Writ originall of the common Law, all this is declared in Magna Charta c. 29. and by 25. Ed. 3. c. 4. 28. Ed. 3. c. 3. 37. Ed. 3. c. 8. 42. Ed. 3. c. 3. If the Lords will try any man by an Ordinance, they destroy that excellent Act of Magna Charta, and all those other good Lawes. Sir Simon de Bereford a free Commoner of England was condemned by the Lords to death by an Ordinance, which af∣ter the Lords better considering the matter, that they might be acquitted of that sentence; became suters to the King, that
what they had so done in future time might not be drawn into president, because that which they had so done was against the Law, Rot. Par. 1. roule 4. E. 3. Num. 2. part inst page 50. with this . grees Sir Jon Lees case, Rot. Par. 42. E. 3. Num. 22.23. 2. inst. fol. 50. with this agrees the practice and usage of all times in this Land, all the free Commoners of this Kingdome have al∣wayes been tryed and acquitted or condemned in capitall cau∣ses by Jurers of their equalls. An Ordinance bindeth not in Law at all, See 4. part. inst. fol. 23.48.292. 2. part. inst. f. 47, 48. and but pro tem∣pore, as the two Houses now affirme, a mans life cannot be try∣ed by that which is not binding, and to continue for all times, for a life lost cannot be restored. By an Act of Parliament of the 1. and 2. of Philip and Mary, chap. 10. It is enacted that a tryalls for Treason hereafter to be had, shall be according to the course of the common-law. If the crime charged upon any be treason against the two Houses (against the Parliament it cannot be, for there is no Parliament without the King) that is no Treason in Law, as appeares by 25. Ed. 3. chap. 2. 11. R. 2. chap. 3. 1 Hen. 4. cha. 10. 1. and 2. Philip and Mary, chap. 10. 3 part. of the institutes Page 23. An Act of Parliament to make any a Judge where he is par∣ty, is a void act, Dr oams case 8. part of Cooks reports. for none can be a Judge and party in the same cause, and therefore the House of Peers being a party touching the crime charged upon any man, whom they would try by an Ordinance for Treason against both Houses, cannot be a Judge. By the Petition of Right, Petition of Right. 3. Car. Regis. if any man deserve death he ought to suffer the same according to the Lawes of the Land established, and not otherwise; but an Ordinance of the Lords is no established law. The Protestation, the Vow and Covenant, the solemne League and Covenant, the Declarations of both Houses, had, made and published sithence this unnaturall Warre, are a∣mongst other things sworne and set downe to be for the main∣tenance of the Lawes, the people of this land ought to enjoy the benefit of their Birth-right the Law of the Land, and the making good of the said Protestation, Vow and Covenant, League and Covenant, and Declarations, otherwise truth must
be said and will be said, that there is brought in a new arbitrary and tyrannicall government. If the Lords have taken one mans life by an Ordinance, they are not bound to take any more, and the case differs in case any appeale be made from a tryall by Ordinance to a tryall at common law, which was not done by that man whose life was taken away by an Ordinance. The Lords ought to remember, that his Majesty and his Progenitors have made them a house of Peeres, they are trusted to counsell him in peace, Nevels case 8. part Cooks reports. and defend him in war, his Maje∣sty in Parliament is to consult and treat with the Peers, and with his Counsell at Law, Judges, his Sergeants, Atturney, and Solicitor, and Masters of the Chancery, the Lords and that counsell by the respective Writs of Summons to Parliament are to give Counsell, 4 Pars instit. fol. 4.9. the House of Commons by their Writ to performe and consent. In the House of Lords, the Court of Parliament only is, for they only examine upon oath, 1 H. 7. fol. 20. with them, the King in person sits, and by them there erroneous judgements 14. Ed. 3. c. 5. (upon a Peti∣tion to his Majesty for obtaining of a Writ of Errour) by the ad∣vice of the Judges are reversed, or affirmed, &c. the Lords are to remember that their eminency and grandeur, is preserved by the Laws, if they leave all to will, and dishonour their King, and make nothing of the Lawes, they will make nothing of themselves in the end. And therefore, it is well worth your observation what was said by Mr Iohn Pym a Member of the House of Commons in his speech against the Earle of Strafford, in the beginning of the Parliament, which speech is published by the expresse order of the House of Commons, the words are these. The Law is that which puts a difference betwixt good and evill, be∣twixt just and unjust, if you take away the Law, all things will fall into a confusion, every man will become a Law unto himselfe, which in the depraved condition of humane nature must needs produce many great enormities: Lust will become a Law, and En∣vy will become a Law, Covetousnesse and Ambition will become Lawes, and what ditates, what decisions such Lawes will pro∣duce, may easily be discerned, i See part. book deel. pag. 140.163. &c. They that love this Com∣mon-wealth
as things now stand, will use all meanes to pro∣cure an Act of Oblivion, a generall pardon from his Majesty, the Souldiers their Arrears, and tender consciences a just and reasonable satisfaction, else we all must perish, first or last. God preserve His Majesty, and the Lawes wherein their Lord∣ships and the whole Kingdome are concerned. Mai. 17. 1647. David Ienkins Prisoner in the Tower of London. FINIS.
TO THE HONORABLE Societies of Grayes-Jnne, and of the rest of the Innes of Court, and to all the Professors of the LAW. I Have now spent Forty five yeares in the Study of the Lawes of this Land being my profession, under and by the conduct of which Lawes this common-wealth hath flourished for some ages past in great splendor and happinesse (jam seges est ubi Troja fuit) The great & full body of this Kingdome hath of late yeares fallen into an extreame sicknesse it is truly said that the cause of the disease being knowne, the disease is easily cured. There is none of you I hope, but doth heartily wish the recovery of our com∣mon parent, our native country (Moribus antiquis stat res Britannica) I call God to witnes that this discourse of mine hath no other end then my wishes of the commongod: how farr I have been from Ambition, my life past, and your owne knowledge of me, can abundantly informe you, and many of you well know, that I ever dtested the ship  and monopolies, & that in the beginning of this Parliament, for opposing the excesses of one of the Bishopes, I lay under three Excommunications and the Ex∣amination of seeventy seven Articles in the high Commission Court. His sacred Majesty: (God is my witnes) made mee a judge in the parts of Wales against my will, and all the meanes I was able to make; and a patent for my place was sent mee
for the which I have not paid one farthing, and the place is of so in∣considerable a benefit that it is worth but 80. l. per Annum when paid, and it cost me every yeare I served twice as much out of mine owne estate in the way of an ordinary and frugall expence. That which gave me comfort was that I knew well that his Ma∣jestie was a just and a prudent Prince. In the time of the Attournyships of Master Noy and the Lord Banks, they Were pleased to make often use of me, and many refer∣rences concerning suits at Court upon that occasion came to my knowledge, and as I shall answer to God upon my last account this is truth, that all or most of the referrences which I have seen in that Kind (and I have seen many) were to this effect, That his Majesty would be informed by his Counsell if the suits preferred were agreeable to the Lawes, and not inconvenient to his people, before he would pass them. [What could a just and pious Prince do more?] Gentlemen you shall find the Cause and the Curse of the present great distemper in this discourse, and God Prosper it in your hands, thoughts, and words, as the Case deserves. Hold to the Lawes, this great body recovers: for sake them, it will certainly perish. I have resolved to tender my selfe a Sacrifice for them as cheerefully, and I hope (by Gods assistance) as constantly as old Eleazer did for the holy Lawes of his Nati∣on. Your well-wisher DAVID JENKINS. Now Prisoner in the Tower.
LEX TERRAE. THE Law of this Land hath three grounds. First Custom. Secondly Iudiciall Records. Thirdly Acts of Parlia∣ment. The two latter are but declarations of the Com∣mon-Law and Custome of the Realme, touching Royall Government. And this Law of Royall-Government, is a Law-Fundamentall. The Government of this Kingdome by a Royall Soveraign, hath beene as ancient as history is, or the memoriall of any time; The kings prerogative is a princi∣pall part of the com∣mon Law. Com: Litt 344: what power this Soveraignty alwayes had and used in warre and peace in this land, is the scope of this discourse; That Vsage so practised makes therein a Fundamentall Law, and the Common. Law of the Land is common Vsage, Plwdens Commentaries. 195. For the first of our Kings ithence the Norman conquest, the first William, second William, Henry the first, Stephen, Henry the second and Richard the first, the Customs of the Realme touching Royall Government, were never questioned: The said Kings injoyed them in a full measunt. In King Iohns time the Nobles and Commons of the Realme conceiving that the ar∣cient customes and Rights were violated, and thereupon press∣ing the said King to allow them in the seventeenth of King Iohn the said Liberties were by King Iohn allowed, and by his son Hen. the third, after in the ninth yeere of his Reigne confirmed, and are called Magna Charta, and Charta de Foresta declared foure hundred twenty two yeeres sithhence by the said Charters. Now rests to be considered, after the Subjects had obtained their Rights and Liberties, which wn no other then their anci∣ent Customes (and the fundamentall Rights of the King as So∣veraigne are no other.) How the Rights of Soveraignty conti∣nued in practise from Henry the thirds time untill this present Parament of the third of November 1640. for before Henry the thirds time, the Soveraignty had a very full Power. Rex habet Potestatem & jurisdictionem super omnes qui in Regnosuo sunt, ea quae sunt jurisdictionis & Pacis ad nullum
pertinent nisi ad Regiam dignitatem, reacton temps. H. 3. lib. 4. cap. 24. Sect 1 habet etiam coeroionem, ut Delinquentes puniat & coerceat; This proves where the supreame Power is. A Delinquent is hee who adheres to the Kings Enemies Com Sur. Littl. 261. This shewes who are Delinquents. Omnis sub Rege, & ipse sub nullo nisi tuntum Deo, non est inferior sibi Subjectis, Sect 5 Bractabid. non parem habet in Regnosuo. This shewes where the supreame power is. Rex non habet superiorem nisi Deum, satis habet ad poenam quod Deum expectat ultorem. Bracton lib. 5. tract 3. de de saltis Cap. 3. Bracton. Lib 3. Cap. 7. This shewes where the suprerme power i. Treasons, Fellonies, and other Pleas of the Crowne, are propri causa Regis. This shewes the same power. By these passages it doth appeare what the Custome was for the power of Soveraignty before that time; the power of the Mili∣tia, of coyning of Money, of making Leagues with forreigne Prin∣ces, the power of Pardoning, of making of Officers, &c. All Kings had them, the said Powers have no beginning. Sexto Ed: 1. Comsur. Littl. 85. Liege Homage, every Subject owes to the King (viz) Faith de Membre, Ewd. 1. de vita, de terren Ho∣nore, the forme of the Oath inter vetera statuta is set down; We read of no such, or any Homage made to the two Houses but fre∣quently of such made by them. It is declared by the Prelates, Earles, Barrons, and Commonal∣ty of the Realm, that it belongeth to the King and his Royall Segniory, 7. Ed. 1. statuts at largel. 42. straitly to defend force of Armour, and all other force against the Kings peace, at all times when it shall please him, and to punish them that shall doe contrary according to the Law and Usage of the Realme, and hereunto they are bound to ayde their Soveraigne Lord, at all seasons when need shall be. Here the su∣preame power in the time of Parliament, by both Houses is decla∣red to belong to the King. At the beginning of every Parliament, all Armes are, or ought to be forbidden to be born in London, 7. Ed. 2.4. pars instit. 14. 1 Ed. 2. de Mili∣tibus. Westminster, or the Sub∣burbs. This condemnes the multitudes comming to Westminster, and the Guards of armed men. All who held by Knights-service, and had twenty pounds per , were distraynable ad Arma militaria suscipienda. This
agrees with the Records of ancient time, continued cerntly in all Kings times, but at this Parliament 3. November 1640. The King, out of his grace, discharged this duty, which proves that the power of warre and preparation thereto, belongs not to the two houses, but only to the King. The two Spencers in Ed. 2. Ed 3. Calvins Case Cook l. 7. fol. 1 time hatched (to cover their Trea∣son) this damnable and damned opinion (viz.) That Ligeance was more by reason of the Kings politique capacity then of his person, upon which they inferred these execrable and detestable consequences. First, if the King demeaned not himselfe by reason in the right of his Crown, his Lieges are bound by Oath to re∣move him. Secondly, seeing the King could not be removed by suit of Law it was to be done by force. Thirdly, that his Lieges be bound to govern in default of him. All which tenets were condemned by two Parliaments, the one called exilium Hugonis in Ed. 2. time; the other by 1. Ed. 3. cap. 2. All which Articles against the Spencers are confirmed by this last Statute, the Articles are extant in the booke called vetera Statuta. The separation of the Kings person from his power, is the principall Article condemned, and yet all these three damna∣ble, detestable, and execrable consequents, are the grounds where∣upon this present time relies, and the principles whereupon the two Houses found their Cause, The Villeine of a Lord, in the presence of the King; Plowdon com. 322, 27. ass. pl. 49. 33 Ed. 3 ayde dery 103 Fitz. 10 H. 7 16. cannot be seized for the presence of the King is a protection for that time to him: This shewes what reverence the Law gives to the person of a King. Reges, sacro oleo uncti sunt capaces spirituallis jurisdictionis But the two Houses were never held capable of that power. Rex est persona mixta cum sacerdote, habet Ecclesiasticam & spititualem jurisdictionem. This shewes the Kings power in Ec∣clesiasticall Canses. The lands of the King is caled in Law Patromonium sacrum. Com. Sur Littl Sect 4. 3. Ed. 3. 19 The houses should not have meddled with that sacred Patry. The King hath no Peere in his land, and cannot be judged? Er∣go the two Houses are not above him. The Parliament 15. Ed. 3 was repealed, for that it was against the Kings Lawes and prerogative. 4 pars. instit fol. 52. this shewes
cleerely the propositions sent to Newcastle, ought not to have been presented to his Majesty, for that they are contrary to the Lawes and his Prerogative. The Lords and Commons cannot assent in Parliament to any thing that ends to the disinherision of the King and his Crowne, 4 pars Cookes in∣stit. fol. 14 42. E. 3. Parlia¦ment Rol. num. 7. Lex & consuetudo Parlia∣menti. to which they are sworn. This condemnes the said Propositions likewise. To depose the King, to imprison him untill he assent to cer∣taine demands, A war to alter the Religion established by Law, or any other Law, or to remove Councellors, to hold a Castle or Fort against the King; are offences against that Law declared to be treason by the resolutions herein after mentioned, by that Law men are bound to ayd the King when war is levied against him in his Realme. 25. Ed. 3. cap. 2. King, in this Statute must be intended in his naturall body and person that only can die; for to compass his death, and declare it by overt Act is declared thereby treason, to incounter in fight such as come to ayd the King in his wars, is treason. Compassing of the Queenes death, of the Kings eldest son, to coyne his money, to counterfeit his Great-Seale, to levie Warre against him, to adhere to such as shall so do, are declared by that Act to be high Treason. This Statute cannot refer to the King in his politique capacity, but to his naturall, which is inseperable from the politique, for a body politique can have neither. Wife nor Child, 21. Ed. 4.14. not, levie Warre, nor do any Act but by the operation of the naturall body: A Corporation or body politique hath no soule or life, but is a fiction of the Law, and the Statute meant not fictitious persons, but the body naturall, conjoyned with the publique, which are inseperable. The clause in that Act, that no man should sue for grace or pardon for any offence condemned, R. 2.11.  cap. 13. 4. pars in∣stit. fol. 42. or forfeiture given by that Act, was repealed by a subsequent Act in  R holden unrea∣sonable, without example and against the Law and custom of the Parliament. This condemnes the Proposition for disabling the King to Pardon. 4. pars instit, fol. 42. The Act of 11. R. 2. so much urged by the other side, was an Act to the which the King con∣sented, and so a perfect Act: yet Note the Army then about the Town: Note that that Law is against private persons, and by the 3. cap. thereof, the Treasons there declared, are declared to be new
Treasons made by that Act, and not to be drawne to example, it was abrogated 21. R. 2. and revived by an usurper 1. H. 4. to please the people, and by the tenth chap. thereof enacts that nothing shall be treason but what is declared by 25. Ed. 3. 16. R. cap. 5. The Regality of the Crown of England is immediatly subject to God and to none other. Plaine words, H. 4. shewing where the su∣preame power is. The Commission of Array is in force and no other Commission Ret. Parim. . H. 4. numb. 24. an Act not printed, this Act was re∣pealed by 4. and 5. P. & M. cap. 2. this repealed by the Act of 1. Iacobi and so it is of force at this day, for the repealing Statute is repealed 4. pars institu. fol. 51. & 125. published sithence this Parliament, by the desire of the house of Commons, their Order is printed in the last leafe of the commentaries upon Magna Charta. Sir Edward Cooke, A booke alowed by Sir Nat. Brent, cal∣led the rea∣son of the War: fol. 65. by their party is holden for the Oracle of the Law, who wrote the said fourth part, in a calme and quiet time, and I may say, when there was no need to defend the autho∣rity of the Commission of Array. For that objection, that that Commission leaves power to the Commissioners to tax men secundum facultates, and so make all mens estates Arbitrary: the Answer is, that in levying of publick ayds upon mens goods & estates, which are variable, and probably cannot be certainly knowne by any but the owners, it is impossible to avoid discretion in the assessements, for so it ever was, and e∣ver will be. By this appeares that the Votes of the two houses a∣gainst the commission of Array, were against the Law. The death of the King dissolves the Parliament, H. 5. if Kings should refer to the politique capacity it would continue after his death 4. pars Inst. 46. which proves that the King cannot be said to be there when he is absent, as now he is: 2. H. 5. 4 pars in∣stit 46. there is no interregnum in the Kingdome the dissolution of the Parliament by his death, shewes that the beginning and end thereof refers to the naturall person of the King, and therefore he may lawfully refuse the Propositions. 2. H. 5. Chap. 6. to the King only it belongs to make Leagues with Forraigne Princes this shewes where the supreame power is.
8. H. 6. numb. 57. Rtt. Parl-Cookes 4. pns instit. 25, N peiviledge of Parliament is grantable for treason, H. 6. Felony, or Breach of the Peace; if not to any one member, not to two, not to ten, not to the Major part, 19. H. 6.62. The Law is the inheri∣tance of the King and his people by which they are ruled, King and people; And the people are by the law bound to ayde the King, and the King hath an inheritance to hould Parliaments and in the ayds granted by the Commonalty. If the major part of a Parliament commit treason they must not be Judges of it, for no man or body, can be Judge in his owne cause, and aswell as ten or any number may commit treason, the greater number may aswell. The King by his letters pattents may constitute a County pala∣tine and grant Regall rights, 32. H. 6 13. Plowd. 334. this shewes where the supreame power is. 17. Ed. 4. rot parl. numb. 39. Ed 4. No priviledge of Parliament is grantable for Treason, Fellony, or Breach of the peace, if not for one, not for two or more, or a Major part. The same persons must not be Judge and party. A corporate body can committ no treason, Calvins Case 7 pars fol. 11 12 nor can treason be committed a∣gainst a corporate body, 21. E. 4, 13. ond 14. but the persons of the men who make that body may committ treason, and com∣mit it against the naturall person of him who to some purposes is a body corporate, but quatenus corporate no treason can be com∣mitted by or against such a body; that body hath no soul, no life, and subsists only by the fiction of the Law, and for that reason the Law doth conclude as aforesaid; Plow. com. 213. therefore the statute of 25. E. 3. must be intended of the Kings naturall person conjoyned with the politique which are inseparable and the Kings naturall person be∣ing at Holmby, his politique is there also, and not at Westmin∣ster; 19. Ed. 4.46. for the politique and naturall make one body indivisible. If all the people of England should breake the league made with a forreigne Prince, 22. Ed. 4. Fitz: ju∣visdiction. last pla∣cite. without the Kings consent, the league holds and is not broken; and therefore the representative body is inferior to his Majesties. The King may erect a Court of Common-pleas in what part of the kingdome be pleaseth by his letters patents; can the two hou∣ses do the like?.
1. Ed. 5. fol. 2. It cannot be said that the King doth wrong, Ed. 5. 4 Ed. 4.25. 5 Ed. 4.29. declared by all the Judges and Serjeants at law then there. The reason is, nothing can be done in this Common wealth by the Kings grant or any other act of his, as to the subjects per∣sons, goods, lands or liberties, but must be according to esta∣blished lawes, which the Judges are sworn to observe and de∣liver betwene the King and his people impartially to rich and poor, high and low; and therefore the Justices and the Ministers of Justice are to be questioned and punished if the Lawes be violated: And no reflection to be made on the King. All Coun∣sellors and Judges for a yeare and three months untill the tu∣mults began this Parliament were all left to the ordinary course of Justice, what hath beene done sithence is notorious. For great Causes and considerations an act of Parliament was made for the surety of the said Kings person; R. 3 1 R. 3. cap. 15. if a Parlia∣ment were so tender of King Rich. the 3. the houses have grea∣ter reason to care for the preservation of his Majestie. The Subjects are bound by their allegiance to serve the King for the time being against every Rebellion, power and might, H. 7. 11 H. 7. cap. 1. reared against him within this land, that it is against all lawes, reason and good canscience, if the King should happen to be vanquished, that for the said deede and true duty and alligeance they should suffer in any thing, it is ordeined they should not: and all acts of processe of law hereafter to be made to the con∣teary are to be void. This law is to be understood of the naturall person of the King, for his politique capacity cannot be van∣quished; nor war reared against it. Relapsers are to have no benefit of this act. It is no statute, if the King assent not to it, 12 H. 7.20. H. 8. and he may dis∣assent, this proves the negative voice. The King hath full power in all causes to doe justice to all men this is affirmed of the King, 24 H. 8. cap. 1 25 H. 8. cap. 2 and not of the two Houses. The commons in Parliament acknowledg no superior to the King under God, the houses of Commons confesse the king to be above the representative body of the Realme. Of good right and equity the whol & sole power of pardning treasons, fellonies &c. belong to the King, 27 H. 8. cap. 24 Note. as also to make all
Justices of Oyer & Terminor, Judges, Justices of the peace, &c. This law condemns the practise of both houses at this time. The kings royall assent to any Act of Parliament signed with his hand expressed in his Letters-patents under the great Seale, and declared to the Lords and Commons shall bee as effectuall, 33 H. 8. cap. 21 as if he assented in his owne person; a vaine act if the King be virtually in the Houses. The King is the head of the Parliament, the Lords the princi∣pll members of the body, Dier 38. H. 8 fo 59.60. the Commons the inferior members, and so the body is composed, therefore there is no more Parlia∣ment without a king, then there is a body without a head. There is a corporation by the Common-law, as the King. Lords, 14 H. 8 fol. 3. and Commons, are a corporation in Parliament, & ther∣fore they are no body without the King. The death of the King dischargeth all mainprise to appeare in any Court, 24 Ed. 3.48. 1 Ed. 4.2. 2 H. 4.8. 1 H. 7.10. 1 Ed 5.1. or to keepe the Peace. The death of the King discontinues all pleas by the Com∣mon-law, which agreeth not with the virtuall power insisted upon now. Writs are discontinued by the death of the King; Ed. 6. 1 Ed. 6. cap. 7. Patents of Judges, Commission for Justices of the Peace, Sheriffs, Eschea∣tors, determined by his death; Where is the virtuall power. All authority and jurisdictions spirituall and temporall is de∣rived from the King, 1 Ed. 6. cap. 2. therefore none from the Houses. His Majesties subjects, 2. 3 Ed 6. ca. 2 11 H. 7. cap. 1. Calvins Case. Sa. pars Cooke according to their bounden duties, ought to serve the king in his warres, of this side or beyond the Seas; beyond the seas is to be understood for wages: This proves the power of warres, and preparation for war to be in the king. It is most necessary both for common policy and duty of the subject, 5. 6 Ed. cap. 11 to restrain all manner of shamefull standers against their king, which when they be heard, cannot but be odible to his true and loving subjects, upon whom dependeth the whole unity & universal weale of the realm. This condemns their continuing of the weekely pamphlets, who have been so foule mouthed a∣gainst his Majesty. The punishment of all offenders against the lawes, belongs to the king, Q. Mary. 1 Mar. Pl. 2. c. 2 and all jurisdictions doe, and of right ought to belong to the King. This leaves all to his Majesty.
All Commissions to levy men for the warre, 4 5 P & M. c. 3 Q. Eliz. 10 Eliz pl 315 are a warded by the king. The power of warre only belongs to the king. It belongs to the king to defend his people, and to provide Armes and Force. No speech of the two Houses. Roy ad sole government deses subjects. Plow. 234.242 213. Calvins case 7. pars fol 12. Plow. com. 213 Corps naturall le Roy & politique sunt un corps. that is, The king hath the sole govern∣ment of his Subjects, the body politique and the naturall body of the king make one body and not divers, and are inseparable and indivisible. The body naturall and politique make one body, and are not to be severed: Ligeance is due to the naturall body, Plow. 934 243.213. Calvins case 7. pars fol. 12. and is due by nature; Gods Law, and Mans law, cannot be forfeited nor renounced by any meanes, it is inseparable from the person. Every Member of the House of Commons, at every Parlia∣ment, takes a corporall Oath. 1 Eliz. cap. 1. Cawdries case. 5. pars fol. 1. That the King is the Supreme and only Governour in all Causes, in all his Dominions, otherwise he is no Member of that House; the words of the Law are, In all Causes, over all persons. The said Act of 1 Eliz. is but declarative of the ancient Law, Cawdries Case ibid. The Earle of Essex, and others, assembled multitudes of men to remove Councellors, 43 Eliz. 3 pars instit. fo, 6.2. adjudged Treason by all the Judges of England. To depose the king, or take him by force, to imprison him un∣till he hath yeelded to certain demands, adjudged Treason, 39. Eliz. Hil. 1 Jacobi ibid. and adjudged accordingly in the Lord Cobhams Case. Arising to alter Religion established, or any Lawe, is Treason; 39 Ed. Badf. case f 9. & 16. By all the Judges of Eng∣land ibid. 10 Eliz Plow, 316. so for taking of the Kings Castles, Forts, Ports or Shipping Brooke treason 24. 3 & 4. Philip and Mary, Dier, Staffords Case concerning Scarborough. The Lawe makes not the servant greater then the Master, nor the subject greater then the King, for that were to subvert Or∣der and Measure. The Law is not knowne but by Usage, 10 Eliz. Plow, 319. and Usage proves the Law, and how Usage hath been is notoriously knowne. The King is our only Rightfull and lawfull Liege Lord and Soveraigne, K. James. 1 Jac. cap. 1. 9 Ed. 4. fol. 8. We doe upon the knees of our hearts agze con∣stant Faith, Loyalty and Obedience to the King and his Royall
progeny, in this high Court of Parliament, where all the body of the Realme is eyther in person or by representation: We doe acknowledge that the true and sincere Religion of the Church, is continued and established by the King. And doe recognize, as we are bound by the Law of God and Man, the Realme of England and the Imperiall Crowne thereof doth belong to him by inherent byrth-right, and lawfull and undoubted succession, and submit our selves and our posterities for ever, untill the last drop of our blood be spent, to his rule; and beseech the king to accept the same as the first fruits of our Loyalty and Faith to his Majesty and his posteritie for ever, and for that this Act is not compleat nor perfect without his Majesties assent, the same is humbly desired. This proves that the Houses are not above the King; that Kings have not their Titles to the Crowne by the two Houses, but by inherent byrth-right, and that there can bee no Statute without his expresse assent, and destroyes the chyme∣ra of the Kings virtuall being in the Houses. To promise obedience to the Pope, or any other State, Prince or Potentate, 3 Jac. cap. 4, other then the King his Heires and Successors, is Treason; and therefore those persons who call the Houses the Estates offend this Lawe. Such Bills as his Majesty is bound in Conscience and Justice to passe, K. Charles. Collection of Ordinances fo. 727. 1 pars ib. fol. 728. are no Law without his assent. To designe the ruine of the Kings person, or of Monarchy is a monstrous and injurious charge. Ʋbi Lex non distinguit, ibid; fol. 865. non est distinguendum, all the afore∣said Acts and Lawes doe evidently prove the Militia to belong to the king: that the king is not virtnally in the two Houses: that the king is not considerable separately in relation to his po∣litique capacity: that the king is not a person trusted with a power, but that it is his inherent byrth-right, from God, Nature and Lawe, and that hee hath not his power from the people: These Lawes have none of those distinctions of naturall and po∣litique, abstractum & concretum, power and person, in Caesars time this Island had kings, and ever since, which is almost 17 hundred yeeres agoe. No King can be named, in any time, made in this kingdom by the people: A parliament never made king, for they were kings
before, the Parliaments are summoned by the kings Writs, which for Knights Citizens and Burgesses begins thus, viz. Rex vic. Wilis. Saltem. Quia Nos de avisamento & assensu consilij nri. pro quibus. arduis & urgentib. negetiis nos statum & defensionem Regninri. Aug. & Eccles. Anglic. concernentibus quoddam Parliamentum urum, apud B. teneri ordinavimus & ibid cum Prelatis Magnatib. & proceribus dicti Regni uri. Colloqui, habere & tractatum, ipsi Vicecomiti precipimus firmiter injun∣gendo qd. facta Proclamatione in prox. Comitatu tuo post recep∣tionem ejusd. Brevis, dues Milites gladiis cinctos, &c. eligi facias ad faciendum & consentiendum hiis quae tunc ibidem de Communi Concilio nro. Angl faventi De contigerit ordinari super Nego∣tiis antedictis, ita quod pro defectis potestatis hujusmodi seu propter improvidam electionem Milium, Civium, & Burgensium pred. dicta negotia ura. infecta non remanerent. The King is Principium, caput & finis Parliamenti, the body makes not the head, 4 pars Instit: fol. 3 & 4. nor that which is posterior that which is prior: concilium non est Preceptum, conciliarij non sunt Praecepto∣res, for Counsell to compell a consent, hath not beene heard of to this time in any age, and the house of Commons, by the writt, are not called ad concilium; the Writts to the twelve Judges, Kings Councell, twelve Masters of the Chancery are concilium impensuri, and so of the Peeres. The writts for the Cominalty, Ad faciendum & consentiendum. Which shewes what power the representative body hath, they have not power to give an oath; neither do they claime it. The Oath of the Justices 18 of E. 3. among Statutes of that yeere. The King at all times, when there is no parliament, & in Par∣liament is assisted with the advice of the Judges of the Lawe, 12 in number, for England at least hath 2 Sergeants when few∣est: an Attorny and Solicitor, twelve Masters of the Chancery, his Councell of State, consisting of some great Prelates and o∣ther great Personages, versed in State affaires, when they are fewest to the number of twelve. All these persons are alwaies of great substance, which is not preserved but by the keeping of the Lawe, The Prelates versed in divine Lawe, the other Grandees in affaires of State & managery of Government. The Judges, Kings Sergeants, Attorny, Sollicitor, and Masters of the Chancery versed in the Lawe and Customes of the Realme: All
sworn to serve the King and his people justly & truly, the King is also sworn to observe the Laws, and the Judges have in their Oath a clause, That they shall do common right to the Kings people, according to the established Laws, not withstanding any command of the King to the contrary, under the Great Seale or otherwise, The people are safe by the Lawes in force without any new: The Law finding the Kings of this Realme assisted with so many great men of Conscience, Honour and skill in the rule of Common-wealth, knowledge of the Lawes, and bound by the high and holy bond of an Oath upon the Evange∣lists, settles among other powers upon the King, a power to refuse any Bill agreed upon by both Houses, and power to par∣don all offences, to passe any Graunts in his Minority, (there are many great persons living hold many a thousand pound a yeare by Patents from Edward the sixt, passed when he was but ten yeares of age) not to be bound to any Law to his pre∣judice, whereby he doth not binde himselfe; power of warre and peace, coyning of Money, making all Officers, &c. The Lawe, for the reasons aforesaid, hath approved these powers to be unquestionable in the King, and all Kings have enjoyed them till 3. Nov. 1640. It will bee said notwithstanding all this fence about the Lawes, the Lawes have beene violated, and therefore the said powers must not hold, the two Houses will remedy this. The answere to this is evident: There is no time past, nor time present, nor will there bee time to come, so long as men mannage the Lawe, but the Lawes will be broken more or lesse, as appeares by the story of every age. All the pretended violations of this time were remedied by Acts to which the King consented before his departure 10. Jan. 1641. being then driven away by Tumults. And the Houses for a yeere and al∣most three Moneths: From 3. Nov. 1640 to 10 Jan. 1641. as aforesaid, being a yeare and almost three moneths, had time and liberty to question all those persons who were eyther causes or instruments of the violation of any of the Lawes. Examine how both Houses remedied them in former times. First, touching Religion, What hath beens done this way? Both houses in Henry the eights time tendred to him a Bill to
bee passed called commonly the Bill of the six Articles, this was conceivd by them to be a just and a necessary Bill: Had not Henry the eighth done well to have refused the passing of this bill? both houses tendred a bill to him to take the reading of the Scriptures from most of the laity: had not King Henry the eight deserved much prayse to reject this bill? In Queene Maryes time both houses exhibited a bill to her to introduce the Popes pow∣er and the Roman Religion; had not Queen Mary done well to have refused this bill? Many such instances may be given. The two Houses now at Westminster I am sure will not deny but the refusall of such Bills had beene just, the King being assisted as aforesaid, and why not so in these times? For the Civill Government what a bill did both houses present to Richard the third, to make good his title to the Crowne; had it not beene great honour to him to have rejected it? what bills were exhibited to Henry the eight by both houses for bastardizing of his daughter Elizabeth, a Queene of renowned memory, to settle the Crowne of this Relme, for default of Issue of his body, upon such persons as he should declare by his letters Patents or his last will, and many more of the like? had not this refu∣sall of passing such bills magnified his vertue and rendred him to posterity in a different Character from what he now hath? And by the experience of all times and the considera∣tion of human frailty this conclusion is manifestly dedu∣ced, that it is not possible to keepe men at all times (be they the houses, or the King and his councell) but there will be sometimes some deviation from the Lawes, and there∣fore the constant and certain powers fixed by the ancient Law must not be made void, and the Kings Ministers; the Laws do punish where the Law is transgressed, and they only ought to suffer for the same.
In this Parliament the houses exhibited a bill to take away the suffrages of Bishops in the upper house of Par∣liament, and have sithence agreed there shall be no more Bishops at all, might not the King if he had so pleased have answered this bill with Le Roy s'avisera, or no voult. it was against Magna Charta; Articuli Cleri and many other acts of Parliament. And might have farther given these reasons if it had so pleased him for the same: first that this Bill destroyes the writt whereby they are made two houses of Parliament the King in the writt to the Lords being Cum praelatis colloquium habere; secondly they have beene in all Parliaments since we had any, and voted, but in such wherein they themselves were concer∣ned: And there have beene Bishops here sithence we were Christians, and the fundamentall Law of the King∣dome approves of them: if any of them were conceived offensive; they were left to justice, and his Majestie would put in inoffensive men in their places: but sithence his Majestie hath passed the Bill for taking away their votes in Parliament, it is a Law that binds us so farr. Upon the whole matter the Law hath notably deter∣mined that Bills agreed by both houses, pretended to be for the publique good, are to be judged by the King, for in all Kings reigns Bills have been preferred by both houses, which all wayes are pretended to be for the publique good, and many times are not, and were rejected with Roy s'a∣visera or Roy ne veult. This Parliament beganne the third of November 1640 before that time in all the Kings reigne no armed power did force any of the people to do any thing against the law: what was done, was by his Judges, officers Referees and Ministers from that time untill the tenth of January 1641 (when the King went from London to avoyde the danger of frequent tumults, being a yeare and three months▪ Privy Councellors and all his Justices and
ministers were left to the Justice of the law, there wanted  time to punishable men. The Sphaere of the house of Comment is to represent the grie∣vances of the Countrey, to grant aydes for the King upon all fit occasions extraordinary, to assent to the making or abrogating of lawes▪ The Orb of the house of Lords to Reforme eroneous judgements given in the Kings Bench, to redresse the delayes of Courts of Justice, to receive all Petitions, to advise his Majestie with their Councell, to have their votes in making or abroga∣ting of Lawes, and to propose for the common good, what they conceive meete. Lx non cogit ad impossibilia, Subjects are not to expect from Kings impossible things, so many Judges, Councellours Sheriffes, Justices of the peace, Commissioners, Ministers of State, that the King should over-looke them all cannot be, it is impossible. The King is virtually in his ordinary Courts of Justice; so long as they continue has Courts: their charge is to administer the lawes in being, and not to delay, defarre or sell-justice for any commandement of the King. We have Lawes enough stu∣ta bi saculi sunt boni  good ministers, as Judges and officers are many times wanting, the houses propose now Lawes, or abrogation of the old; both induce novelty; the law for the reasons aforesaid, makes the King the only Judge, who is assi∣sted therein by a great number of grave learned, and prudent men, as aforesaid. For the considerations aforesaid the Kings party adhered to him, the law of the Land is their birth-right, their guide, no of∣fence is committed where that is not violated: they found the commission of Array warranted by the law; they found the King in this Parliament to have quitted the Ship-money, Knight∣hood-money, seven Courts of Justice, consented to a trienniall Parliament, setled the Forest bounds, tooke away the Clerke of the Market of the houshold, trusted the house with the Navie, passed an Act not to dissolve this Parliament without the Houses assent; no people in the world so free if they could have been
content with Lawes, oathes and reason, and nothing more could or can be devised to secure us, neither hath been in any time. Notwithstanding all this we found the King driven from Lon∣don by frequent tumults, that two thirds and more of the Lords had disserted that house, for the same cause, and the greater part of the house of Commons left that house also for the same reason: new men chosen in their places, against Law, by the pretended Warrant of a counter set Seale; and in the Kings name against his consent, levying warre against him, and seizing his Ports, Forts, Magazines and Revenue, and converting them to his de∣struction, and the subversion of the Law and Land, laying taxes on the people, never heard of before in this Land; devised new oathes to oppose forces ray fed by the King, not to adhaere to him, but to them in this Warre which they call the Negative Oath, and the Vow and Covenant. By severall wayes never used in this Kingdome they have rai∣sed monies to foment this warre, and especially to inrich some among them; namely first Excise, secondly Contributions, third∣ly Sequestrations, fourthly Fift parts, fiftly Twentieth Parts, fixtly Meale-money seventhly Sale of Plundered goods, ightly Loanes, ninthly Benevolences, tenthly, Collections upon their Fast-dayes, eleventhly new Inpositions upon Merchandizes, twelvethly Guards maintained upon the charge of private men, thirteenthly Fifty Subsidies at one time, fourteenthly Composi∣tions with such as they call Delinquents, fifteenthly Sale of Bi∣shops lands, &c. From the Kings party meanes of subsistance are taken; 1 R. 3. cap. 3. ract. li. 3. c. 8. Stanford. 192. Sir Ger. Fleet∣woods Case. 8. pars Cook 7. H. 4 last lease. before any indictment, their Lands seized, their goods taken, the Law allows a Traytor or Fellon attainted, Necessaria sibi & familie sua in vict & vstitu, where is the Covenant? where is the Peti∣tion of light? where is the liberty of the subject? First, We have ayded the King in this warre contrary to the negative oath and other votes, Our warrant is the twenty fifth of Edward the third, the second Chapter, and the said resolutions of all the Judges.
Secondly, Wee have maintained the Commission of Array by the Kings Command, contrary to their votes: We are war∣ranted by the statute of the fifth of Henry the fourth, and the judgement of Sir Edward Cooke, the Oracle of the Law as they call him. Thirdly, We maintained Arch-Bishops and Bishops, whom they would suppresse. Our warrant is Magna Charta, and ma∣ny statutes more. Fourthly, we have maintained the booke of Common prayer, they suppresse it, Our warrant is five acts of Parliament in Ed∣ward the sixt and Queene Elizabeths time, 5. Pesch. 35. Eliza∣beth inter placita Coronae in Banco Regis, New booke of Entries, sol. 252. Penry, for publishing two scandalous Libels against the Church government, was indicted, arraigned, attainted, and executed at Tyburne. Fifthly, We maintained the Militia of the Kingdome to be∣long to the King, they the contrary, Our warrant is the statute of the seventh of Edward the first, and many statures sithence, the practise of all times, and the custome of the Realm. Sixthly, We maintained the counterfeiting of the great Seale to be high Treason, and so of the usurpation of the Kings Forts, Ports, Shipping, Castles and his Revenue, and the Coyning of money, against them; We have our warrant by the said statute of the twenty fifth of Edward the third, Chapter the second, and divers others since, and the practise of all times. Seventhly, We maintaine that the King is the only supreme go∣vermour in all causes. They, that his Majesly is to be governed by them, Our warrant is the statures of the first of Q. Eliza. Chap∣ter the first, and the fifth of Q. Elizabeth the first. Eighthly, 9. Ed. 4. sol. 4. Wee maintaine that the King is King by an inhae∣rent birth-right; by nature, by Gods law, and by the lay of the Land, They say his Kingly right is an , Our warrant is the statute of the first of King Ja. Chapter the first. And the resolution of all the Judges of England in Calvins case.
Ninthly We maintain that the politick capacity i not to be se∣vered from the naturall. They hold the contrary: Our war∣rant is two flatures (viz.) xilium Hugonis in Edward the se∣conds time, and the first of Edward the third Chapter the second, and their Oracle who hath published it to posterity, that it is damnable, detestable and execrable Treason, Calvins case pars 7. fol. 11. Tenthly we maintain that who aids the King at home or a∣broad ought not to be molested or questioned for the same, they hold and practise the contrary, our warrant is the statute of the eleventh of. Henry the seventh. Chapter the first. Eleventhly We maintain that the King hath power to disassent to any Bill agreed by the two Houses; which they deny. Our warrant is the Statute of the second of Henry the fift and the pra∣ctise of all times, the first of King Charles, Chapter the seventh the first of King James Chapter the first. Twelfthly We maintain that Parliaments ought to be holden in a grave and peaceable manner, without ults, They allow∣ed multitudes of the meanest sort of people to come to Westmin∣ster to cry for, Coll. of Ord. fol. 31. Justice when they could not have their will, and keep guards of armed men to wait upon them. Our warrant is the Statute of the seventh of Edward the second and their Oracle. Thirteenthly We maintain that there is no state within this Kingdome but the Kings Majesty, and that to adhere to any o∣ther State within this Kingdome is high treason, our warrant is the Statute of the third of King James Chapter the fourth, and the enty third of Queen Elizabeth Chapter the first. Fourteenthly, We maintain that to levy a warre to remove Councellours, to alter religion, or any Law established is high Treason, They hold the contrary. One warrant is the resolutions of all the judges of England in Queen Elisabeths time, and their oracle agrees with the same. Fifteenthly We maintain that no man should be imprisoned, put out of his Lands, but by due course of Law, and that no man ought to be adjudged to death but by the Law established,
the customer of the Realm, or by act of Parliament; They pra∣ctise the contrary in London, Bristol, Kent, &c. Our warrant is Magna Charta, Chapter the twenty ninth, the Petition of right the third of King Charles, and divers Lawes there mentioned. We of the Kings party, did and do detest Monopolies, and ship money, and all the grievances of the people as much as a∣ny men living, we do well know that our estates, lives and for∣tunes are preserved by the Lawes, and that the King is bound by his lawes, we love Parliaments, if the Kings, Judges, Counsell or Ministers have done amisse, they had from the third of No∣vember 1640 to the tenth of Ianuary 1641 time to punish them, being all left to Justice where is the Kings fault? The law faith the King can do no wrong, 11 pars Cooks Reports Mag∣dalen Colledge Cale. that he is medicus Regni, pater patriae sponsus regni qui per annlum is espoused to his Realm at his Coronation; The King is Gods Lieutenant, and is not able to do an unjust thing, these are the words of the Law. One great matter is pretended that the people are not sure to enjoy the acts passed this Parliament, A succeeding Parliament may repeal them; The objection is very weak, a Parliament succeeding to that may repeal that repealing Parliament. That feare is endlesse and remedilesse, for it is the essence of Parlia∣ments being compleat and as they ought to be, of head, and all the Members, to have power over Parliaments before; Parlia∣ments are as the time are; if a turbulent faction prevails the Parliaments are wicked as appears by the examples recited be∣fore of extreme wicked Parliaments: if the times be sober and modest, prudent and not biassed, the Parliaments are right good, and honourable, and they are good medicines and salves, but in this Parliament excessit mediia medum. In this cause and warre between the Kings Majesty, and the two Houses at Westminster, what guide had the Subjects of the Land to direct them but the lawes? What means could they use to discern what to follow, what to avoid but the Lawes? The King declaresi treason to adhere to the Houses in this
warre: The Houses declare it Treason to adhere to the King in this Warre. The Subjects for a great and considerable part of them (treason being such a crime as forfets life and estate, also renders a mans posterity base beggerly and infamous) looke up∣on the Lawes, and find the letter of the law requires them to as∣sist the King, as before is manifested, was ever subject criminal∣ly punisht in any age or nation for his pursuit of what the letter of the Law commands? The Subjects of the kingdome find the distinction and inter∣pretation now put upon the Lawes of Abstractum & Concre∣tam, Power and Person, body politique, and naturall, Personall presence and virtuall, to have beene condemned by the law: And so the Kings party hath both the letter of the law and the inter∣pretation of the letter cleared to their judgements, whereby they might evidently perceive what side to adhaere to, what satisfa∣ction could modest peaceable and loyall men more desire? A verbo legis in criminibus & poenis non est recedendum, hath been an approved maxime of law in all ages and times. If the King be King and remain in his Kingly office (as they call it) then all the said lawes are against them without colour: Coll of Ordi∣nances 777. they say the said lawes relate to him in his Office, they cannot say o∣therwise, Commissions and pardon in the Kings name, and the person of the King and his body politique cannot▪ nor ought to be severed as hath beene before declared: 5 Eliz. cap. 1.1 Eliz. cap. 1. And the members of both houses have sworn constantly in this Parliament that the King is the only supreme Governour in all causes over all per∣sons at this present time. For that of verball or personall commands of the King which is objected, We affirme few things to be subject thereto by the law: But his Majesties Command under his great Seale, which in this warre hath beene used by the Kings command for his Commission to leavy and array men, that is no personall com∣mand (which the law in some cases disallowes) but that is such a command, so made, as all men hold their lands by, who hold by Patents; All corporations have their Charters which hold
by Charters, and all Judges and officers their places and cal∣lings. It is objected the King cannot suppresse his Courts of Justice, Ob. Sol. 7 pars The Earle of West∣merlands Case. 1 Eliz. Dier. 165.7. pars Cooke. and that this warre tended to their suppression. The answer is the King cannot nor ought to suppresse Justice or his Courts of Justice, nor ever did: But Courts of Justice by abuser or non user cease to be courts of Justice; when Judges are made and proceedings in those courts holden by others then Jud∣ges made by the King, and against his command under the great Seale, and his Majestie is not obeyed, but the votes of the hou∣ses, The case of discontinuance of Processe. they cease to be the Kings Courts and are become the Courts of the houses, and his Judges breaking that condition in law, of trust and loyalty, implied in their Patents, are no longer his Judges; they obey and exercise their places by vertue of writts and processes under a counterfet Seale. The King only can make Judges, the twenty seventh of Henry the eighth, Chapter the twenty fourth, Iustices of the peace, &c. twenty eighth of Henry the eighth Dier the eleventh, the Kings Patent makes Judges: The cheese Justice of the Kings Bench is made by the Kings writ only of all the judges. The great Seale is the key of the kingdome, Articuli super chartas cap. 5. and meet it is that the King should have the key of his kingdome about him; 2. pars instit 552. which confutes their saying that the King got the Seale away surreptitiously. The King, and he only, Britton sol. 23. may remove his Courts from West∣minster into some other place, at Yorke the Termes were kept for seaven yeares, in Edward the first's time: but for the Court of Common pleas, the place must be certaine; for the Kings Bench and Chancery, the King by the law may command them to attend his person alwayes if it seeme so meete unto him: but the removing of the Common pleas must be to a place certaine and so notified to the people. All the bookes of law in all times agree, 34. Assis. pl. 24.22. Ed. 4. Fitz. jurisdiction last placit. that the King may grant conusance of all Pleas at his pleasure within any County or precinct to be holden there only, and remove the Courts from
Westminster to some other place (for the Common Pleas, 6 H. 7.9.6 Eliz. Dier. 226. the place must be certaine, and so notified to the people) and ad∣journe the termes as he sees cause. All which the two houses have violated. Plebs sine lege ruis. Some seeming objections of Master Prin's, scattered in di∣vers books answered, and the truth thereby more fully clea∣red. The first of Henry the fourth reviveth the statute of the eleventh of Richard second, 1 Ob. and repeales to the twelfth of Richard the second, whereby certaine persons were declared traytors to the King and Kingdome, being of the Kings party. True, Sol. but note, the eleventh of Richard the second, A Parlia∣ment beset with 40000 men, and the King assents to it so an Act, and besides the first of Henry the fourth declares, that the trea∣sons mentioned in the act of the eleventh of Richard the second, being but against a few private men shall not be drawn into ex∣ample, and that no Treason should be but such as the twenty fift of Edward the third declares. 9 Ed. 4. sol. 80. All these are Acts passed by the King and the three estates, not to be drawne into example, in a tumultuous time, by a besieged Parliament, with an army, and the confirmer of Henry the fourth being an usurper makes that Act of the first of Henry the fourth to secure himselfe. Also what is this in the votes of the two houses only at this time. The Court of Parliament is above the King, 2 Ob. for it may avoid his Charters Commissions, &c. granted against the law. And the Law is above the King. Sol. By the same reason you may say that the Courts of Chan∣cery, or any of the Courts of Law at Westminster are above the King, for they make of no effect the Kings Charters, which are passed against the Law: and the King is Subject to Law, and sworne to maintaine it. Again, it is no Parliament without the King, and the King is the head thereof, he is principium Caput & finis of a Parliament, as Medas tenends Parliament. hath it, and two houses only, want principium Caput & fixis of a Parliament
and it is a sorry Parliament that wants all these. And therefore to say that Parliaments are above the King, is to say that the King is above himselfe. The Parliament can enlarge the Kings prerogative, 3 Ob. there∣fore it is above him. If the King assent, otherwise not; Sol. and then it is an Act of Parliament, and otherwise no Act. Bracton saith, God, the Law, and the Kings Court, 4 Ob (viz.) his Earles and Barons are above the King, (viz.) in Parliament, as Master Prynne expounds it. Where is then the House of Commons? Indeed, take God, Sol. the Law, and Earles and Barons together it is true; but to af∣firme that the Earles and Barons in Parliament are above the King (the King being the head of the Parliament, and they one of the members) how an inferior member is above the head, is hard to conceive: besides, that position destroyes all M. Pryes discourse, who attributes so much to the House of Commons. The King is but one of the three estates of Parliament, 5 Ob. and two are greater then one; therefore above. The Legs, Armes, Sol. and Trunke of the Body are greater then the Head, and yet not above; nor with life, without it: the ar∣gument holds for quantitie, but not for qualitie; and in truth, the King is none of the three estates, but above them all; the three estates are, the Lords Spirituall, the Lords Temporall, and the Commons; Coke, their Oracle, in his Chapter of Par∣liaments, fol. 1. In Corporations, 6 Ob. the greater number of voyces make all the Acts of the Corporation valid; therefore so in Parliament. By this reason the Kings assent is needlesse, and to no end, Sol. and all the Acts of Parliament formerly mentioned, and Law-Bookes have quite mistaken the matter, which with unani∣mous voyce requires the Kings assent as necessarie: besides, the Corporations are so constituted by the Kings Charters, that the greater number of Votes shall make their Acts valid. The King, as King, 7 Ob. is present in his Parliament as well as in all other his Courts of Justice, how be it he is not ther. In his other Courts of Justice he hath no voye, Sol. he is none
of the Judges, in the Parliament he hath; if his presence be not necessarie, his voyce is not, nor his assent. Ob. Soverain power of Parlia∣ments, 6, 47. The originall prime legislative power of making Lawes to bind the subjects and their posteritie, rests not in the King, but in the Kingdome and Parliament, which represents it. Master Prynne in the same leafe affirmes, and truly, that the Kings assent is generally requisite to passe Lawes and ratifie them; Sol. the King is the head of the Kingdome and Parliament, how then can a Body act without a Head? A major part of a Corporation binds, 9 Ob. therefore the major part in Parliament, and so of by-Lawes. The Corporation is so bound, either by the Kings Charters, Sol. or by prescription, which sometimes had the Kings concession; but prescription, and Law, and practise, alwayes left the King a negative voyce. The King cannot alter the Bills presented to him by both Houses, 10 Ob. go. True; Sol. but the King may refuse them. Acts of Parliament and Lawes ministred in the Reignes of Usurpers, 11 Ob. bind rightfull Kings, go. What is this to prove the two Houses power only, Sol. which is the question? A King de facto must be obeyed by them who submitted to him, and they are his Subjects by their submissi∣on, and not Subjects de facto to the true King, and such being Traytors and Rebels to the Regent King (having renounced the true King) when the lawfull King is restored, 9. Id. 4.12 may be pu∣nished by him for their Treason against the Usurper. But here is a King still in both cases, and the proceedings at Law holds; the Judges having their Patents from the being Kings, in the reignes of Kings, de facto or de ur, for all Kings are bound and sworne to observe the Lawes. A King dies without Heire▪ 12 Ob. is an infant, non compes mentis, &c. the two Houses may establish Lawes. go. There is no Inter-regnum in England, Sol. as appeares by all ou Bookes of Law; and therefore the dying without Heie is a vaine supposition, and by their principle  is considerable in his politique capacitie, which cannot die at also The Protector,
assisted by the Councell of the King at Law, his twelve Jud∣ges, the Countell of State, his Attorney, Solicitor, and two Sergeants at Law, his twelve Masters of the Chancerie, hath in the Kings behalfe, and ever had, a negative Voyce: but what is thi no the present question? Wee have a King of fall age, of great wisdome and judgement; the power of the two Hou∣ses in such a case to be over the King, cannot be showne. The King cannot dis-assent to publique and necessarie Bills for the common good, go. 13 . Nor ever did good King: but who shall be judge, Sol. whether they be publique and necessarie? The major part in either of the Houses, for passing of Bills so pretended, may be but one or two voyces, or very few, and perhaps of no judicious men: is it not then fitter or more agreeable to reason, that his Ma∣jestie and Councell of State, his twelve Judges, his Sergeants, Attorney and Solicitor, twelve Masters of the Chancerie, should judge of the conveniencie and benefit of such Bills for the publique good, rather then a minor, (of which sort there may be in the Houses) or a weake man, or a few, who often∣times carry it by making the major part, which involves the consent of all? let reason determine. The Kings of England have beene elective; 14 Ob. and the King by his Coronation-Oath is bound to maintaine justas leges & consitudines quas vulgas elegerit, go. perie hath beene in the kingdome, So. and therefore to con∣tinue it still, will not be taken for a good argument; when things are setled for many ages, to look back to times of con∣fusion is to destroy all repose: The Act of Parliament, of the first of K. James, Chapter the first, and all our extant Laws say, that the Kings Office is an heritage inherent in the bloud of our Kings, and their birth-right. And Usurpers that come in by the consent of the people are Kings de facto, but not de jure, Ed. 4. c. . but not de jure, as appeares by the Acts of Par∣liament declaring them so: And by all our Law-Bookes and the fundamentall constitution of the Land, Regall power is hereditarie and not elective. For the words (vulgus-elegerit) if vulgus be applyed to the
House of Commons, 1 H. 7. they of themselves can make no Lawes. The Peeres were never yet tearmed vulgus; but allowing they be so called, the Lawes to be made must be just; and who is fit to judge thereof, is before made evident. Customes cannot referre to future time, 5 Ob. and both are con∣pled, Lawes and Customes. Princes have beene deposed, and may be by the two Hou∣fes, go. The deposers were Traytors, Sol. as appeares by the resolution of all the Judges of England; Coke, Chap. Treason, in the se∣cond part of the Institutes. And never was King deposed but in tumultuous and mad times, and by the power of Armies, and they who were to be the succeeding Kings in the head of them, as Edward the third and Henry the fourth. The appeale to the Parliament for errors in judgements in all Courts, 16 Ob. is frequent, go. This is onely to the House of Lords, Sol. and that is not the Par∣liament; the House of Commons have nothing to doe there∣with: and in the House of Peeres, if a Writ of Error be brought to reverse any judgement, there is first a petition to the King for the allowance thereof; and the reason of the Law in this case is, for that the Judges of the Land all of them, the Kings Councell and twelve Masters of the Chancerie assist there, by whose advice erroneous judgements are redressed. The Parliaments have determined of the rights of Kings, 17 Ob. as in Henry the sixts time, and others; and Parliaments have bound the succession of Kings, as appeares by the Statute of the thirteenth of Q. Elizab. Chapter the first: and the discent of the Crowne is guided rather by a Parliamentarie Title then by Common Law, go. If this Objection be true, Sol. that the Title to the Crowne is by Parliament, then we had no Usurpers, for they all had Parlia∣ments to back them, yea, Richard the third, that Monster. All cur Bookes of Law say they have the Crowne by discent, and the Statutes of the Land declare, that they have the same by inherent birth-right. And the Statute of the thirteenth of E∣lizabeth, the first Chapter, was made to secure Q, Elizabeth
against the Qu. of Sca, then in the kingdome, clayming the Grown of England, and having many adherent. And that Statute to that end a firmes no such power in the two Hom∣for (which is the Question) but in Q Elizabeth, and the two Houses, which makes against the pretence of this time. Master Prynne, fol. 104. of his booke, intituled, The Parli∣aments supreme power, &c. Objecting the Statute of the first of Queen Elizabeth, and his own Oath, that the king is the onely supreme Governour of this Realme; Answers, The Parliament is the supreme power, and the king supreme Go∣vernour: And yet there he allowes him a Negative Voyce; and fol. 107. confesseth that Acts of Parliament translated the Crowne from the right Heires at Common-law, to others who had no good Title; then the Parliamentary▪ Title makes not the king, so powerfull in truth, that it escapes from a man unawares: To make a distinction betweene Supreme Governour, and Supreme power, is very strange, for who can Governe without power? The king assembles the Parliament by His Writ, adjourns, Vide Speed 645.4 par. Instit. 27. & 1. prorogues, and dissolves the Parliament, by the law at his pleasure, as is evident by constant practise, the House of Commons never sate after an adjournment of the Parlia∣ment by the kings command. Where is the supreme Power. The king by his Oath; 1. Ob. is bound to deny no man right much lesse the Parliament, to agree to all just and necessary lawes proposed by them to the king. This is the substance of the discourse against the kings Negative Voyce. The king is so bound as is set downe in the Objection, but who shall judge whether the Bill proposed be just and neces∣sary: Sol. For all that they doe propose are so pretended and car∣ried in either House, sometimes by one or two Voyces; or some few as aforesaid, and certainly as hath been shewn, the king, his Councell of State, his Judges, Sargeants, Attorney, Sollicitor, and twelve Masters of the Chatcery can better judge of them, then two or three, or few more. Mr. Pryn fol. 45. In his book of the Parliaments interest to nominate Privie-Councellors, calleth the opinion of the
Spencers, to divide the Person of the King from his Crowne, a strange opinion, Calvins case, 7. pars, fol. 11. and cites Calvins Case, but leaves out the conclusions there in mentioned, fol. 15. Master Prynne saith there, But let this opinion bee what it will: without the Kings Grace and Pardon it will goe very far, and two Acts of Parliament there mentioned are beyond an opinion. And in his Book of the opening of the Great Scale, fol. 17. The Par∣liament hath no jurisdiction to use the Great Seale for Par∣dons Generall or Particular. Where is the Supreme power? Mr. 9. Ob. Prynnes (opening of the Seale) pag. 19. saith, The No∣blemen and State, the day after the Funerall of King Henry the third (King Edward the first his sonne being in the Holy Land) made a new Great Seale, and Keepers of the same: And in Henry the sixts time, in the first yeere of his Reigne, the like was done in Parliament. A facto, Sol. ad jus, is no good Argument, for that in Edward the firsts time, it was no Parliament, for King Henry the 3. was dead, which dissolved the Parliament, if called in his time, and it could be no Parliament of Edward the firsts time, for no Writ issued to summon a Parliament in his Name, nor could issue but under that New Seale, it was so sodainly done after Henry the thirds death, King Edward the first be∣ing then in the Holy Land, it was the first yeere of his Reign, and no Parliament was held that yeere, nor the second yeere of his Reigne: The first Parliament that was in his Reigne, was in the third yeere of his Reigne, as appeares by the Prin∣ted Acts. Also the making of that Seale was by some Lords then present, What hand had the Commons in it? Concer∣ning the Seale made in Henry the sixths time, the Protector was Vice-Roy according to the course of Law, and so the making of that Seal was by the Protector in the Kings name; and that Protector, Humphrey Duke of Gloucester, as Prote∣ctor, in the kings Name summoned that Parliament, and was Protector made by the Lords, and not in Parliament, as appeareth plainely, for that Parliament was in the first of Henry the sixth, and the first holden in his time, and power given by Commission to the said Duke, then Pro∣tector,
to summon that Parliament, Prynne, ibid. fol. 19. t the new count cfe it Seale was made when the King was at Gxford, in his own kingdome, and not in the holy Land. M. Prynne in his Book of the two Houses power to im∣pose Taxes, restraines Malignants against any Habeas Corpus, 20. Ob. &c. saith, that the Parliament is above Magna Charta, and fol. 15. ibid. The Parliament hath power over Magna Charta to repeale the same when there is Cause. This Argument supposeth that they have the kings power, Sol. which hath appeared formerly they have not. But suppose they had, Magna Charta containes many morall Lawes, which by the Law of the Land a Parliament cannot alter, 21 H. 7.2. D. & Student, 2. Dialogue. For example it saith cap 18 Justice shall not be sold, delayed, no denyed to any man: but by this Argument the Parliament may make law to delay, deny, and to sell Justice, which surely is a very ill position to main∣taine. What they would have doth now by the Propositions sent to N castl to his Majesty appeare, whereby they would have him divest himselfe, and settle in them all his kingly power by Sea and land, and of themselves o have power, without him, today upon the people of this land what taxes they think meet, to abolish the Common, prayer booke, to abolish Episcopacie, and to introduce a Church Govern∣ment not yet agreed, but such as they shall agree on. His Majesy finding  prevailing prty in both Houses to , and being chased away with Tumults from London, leaves the Houses for these Reasons, (.) First, because to  the Government for Religion, in against the king . , against their Oathes▪ For every of them hath sworne in this Parliament, That His Mjsty is the  supreme Governour in all Causes Ecclesiasticall and over all persons. Thirdly, This course is against Magna Charta, the 1. chap. and the last. Salvae suis Episcopis omnes libertates suae, Confir∣med by thirty two Acts of Parliament; and in the two and
fortieth of Edward the third, in the first Chapter enacts; If any Statute be made to the contrary, it shall be holden for none, and so it is for Judgements at Law, in the 25. of Ed∣ward the 1. chap. 1, 2. The Great Charter is declared to bee the Common Law of the Land. Fourthly, they endeavour to take away by their Propo∣sitions, the Government of Bishops, which is as ancient as Christianity in this Land, and the Book of Common-Prayer setled by five Acts of Parliament, and compiled by the Reformers and Martyrs, and practised in the time of foure Princes. Fifthly, these Propositions taking away from His Majesty all his power by land and Sea, rob him of that which all his Ancestours, kings of this Realme, have enjoyed. That En∣joyment and Usage makes the Law, and a Right, by the same to His Majesty. They are against their owne Protesta∣tion made this Parliament, (viz.) to maintaine His Royall person, Honour, and Estate; They are against their Cove∣nant, which doth say, that they will not diminish His Just Power and Greatnesse. For these Reasons His Majesty hath left them, and as i beleeved, will refuse to agree to the said Propositions, as by the Fundamentall Law of the land hee may (having a Nega∣tive Voyce) to any Bills proposed. The result of all is, upon the whole matter: That the king thus leaving of the Houses, and his Denyall to passe the said Propositions, are so farre from making him a Tyrant, or not in a condition to Governe, at the present; That thereby hee is rendred a Just, Magnanimous, and pious Prince: so that by this it appeares clearly to whom the Miseries of these Times are to be imputed. The remedy for all, is, an Act of Oblivion, and a Generall pardon. God save the KING. DAVID, JENKINS, now Prisoner in the Tower. 28, Aprilis, 1647.
THE CORDIALL OF JVDGE JENKINS, For the good People of LONDON; In Reply to a thing, called, AN Answer to the Poysonous Seditious Paper of Mr David Jenkins; By H.P. Bar∣rester of Lincolns-Inne. Printed in the Yeare, 1647.
The Cordial of Judge Jenkings for the good People of London, &c. After the said Mr H.P. hath made a recitall of the Heads of my Vindication, hee deduceth his Answer unto these eight Particulars, which follow verbatum. 1. It cannot be denyed, but the Parliament sits by the Kings Writ, ay if Statute Law be greater then the Kings Writ, it cannot be denyed but the Parliament sits or ought to sit by something greater then the Kings Writ; And, if it be confessed that the Parliament sits by the Kings Writ, but does not Act by the Kings Writ, then it must follow that the Parliament is a void vaine Court, and sits to no purpose; nay it must also follow, that the Parliament is of lesse authority, and of lesse use then any other inferiour Court; forasmuch as it is not in the Kings power to controule other Courts, or to prevent them from sitting or Acting. 2. This is a grosse non sequitur, the Kings power is in himself; Ergo, it is not derived to, nor does reside virtually in the Par∣liament. For the light of the Sun remaines imbodied, and unex∣hausted in the Globe of the Sun, at the same time as it is diffused and displayed through all the body of the yre; and who sees not that the King without emptying himselfe, gives commissions daily of Oyer and Terminer to others, which yet he himselfe can nei∣ther frustrate nor clude? but for my part I conceive it is a great errour to inferre that the Parliament has onely the Kings power, because it has the Kings power in it: for it seemes to me, that the
Parliament does both sit and act by concurrent power, devolved both from the King and Kingdom; And this in some things is more obvi∣ous and apparent then in others. For by what power does the Par∣liament grant Subsidies to the King? if only by the power which the King gives, then the King may take Subsidies without any grant from the Parliament: and if it be so by a power which the people give to the Parliament; Then it will follow the Parliament has a power given both by King and Kingdome. 3. The sending Propositions to the King, and desiring his concur∣rence, is scarce worth an Answer; for Subjects may humbly petition for that which is their strict right and property. Nay, it may some∣times beseeme a superiour to preferre suite to an inferiour for matters in themselves du. God himselfe has not utterly disdained to beseech his own miserable impious unworthy creatures: besides, tis not our Tenet, that the King has no power, because he has not all power, nor that the King cannot at all promote our happinesse, because hee has no just claime to procure our ruine. 4. We affirm not, that the Kings power is separated from his Person, so as the two Spencers affirmed, neither doe we frame conclusions out of that separation, as the two Spencers did, either that the King may be removed for misdemeanours, or reformed per aspertè or that the Subject is bound to govern in ayde of him; we only say, that his power is distinguishable from his person, and when he himself makes a distinction betwixt them, commanding one thing by his Legall Writs, Courts, and Officers, and commanding another thing extrajudically by word of mouth, Letters, or Ministers, we are to obey his power rather then his person. 5. We take not from the King all power of pardoning Delinquents, we only say it is not proper to him quarto modo: For if the King pardon him which hath murthered my sonne, his pardon shall not cut me off from my appeale; and 'tis more unreasonable, that the Kings pardon should make a whole State, which hath suffered, re∣medilesse, then any private man. So if the King should deny in∣demnity to these which in the furie of Warre have done thing un∣justifiable by the Lawes of Peace, and thereby keep the wounds of the State from being bound up, 'tis equitable that an Act of In∣demnity
should be made forcible another may. And if this will not hold, yet this is no good consequence, the King is absolute in point of pardons, therefore he is absole in all things else; and the Par∣liament hath no power to discharge Delinquencies, therefore it hath no power in other matters. 6. The Parliament hath declared the King to be in no condition to govern: but this must not be interpreted rigidly, and without distincti∣on; for if the King with his sword drawn in his hand, and pursuing the Parliament and their adherents as Rebels, be not fit for all Acts of Government, yet 'tis not hereby insinuated that he is di∣vested of the habit or right of governing: If he be unqualified now, he is not unqualified for the future; if he may not doe things destructive to the Parliament, he is not barred from returning to the Parliament, or doing justice to the Parliament. This is a fri∣volous cavil, and subturfuge. 7. We sweare, that the King is our supreme Governour over all per∣sons, and in all Causes; but we doe not sweare that he is above all Law, nor above the safety of his people, which is the end of the Law, and indeed Paramount to the Law it selfe. If he be above all Law, or liable to no restraint of our Law, then we are no freer then the French or the Turks; and if he be above the prime and of Law, common fafety, then we are not so free as the French or Turks: For if the totall subversion of the French or the Turk were attempted, they might by Gods Law, imprinted in the Book of Nature, justifie a self-defence; but we must remedilesty perish, when the King pleases to command our threats. Besides, how atchieved the King of England such a Supremacie above all Law and the com∣munity it selfe, for whose behoofe Law was made? If Gods dona∣tion be pleaded, which is not speciall to him, or different from what other Kings may pretend to, then to what purpose serve our Laws, nay, to what purpose serve the Laws of other Countries? for by this generall donation, all Nations are condemned to all servitude as well as we. If the Law of this Land be appealed to, what Books hath Mr Ienkins read, where hath he found ont that Lex Regia, whereby the people of England have given away from themselves all right in themselves? Some of our Books tell us, that we are more free then the French; that the King cannot oppresse us in our
our persons, or estates, by imprisonment, denying justice, or laying Taxes without our consents: other Books tell us, that the safety of the people is the supreme Law, and that the King hath both God and the Law for his Superiour: But all this is nothing to learned Mr Ienkins. 8. We admit, that no Acts of Parliament are compleat, or formal∣ly binding, without the Kings assent: yet this is still to be denyed, that therefore without this assent particularly exprest, the two Houses can doe nothing, nor have any virtuall power at all, no, not to examine Mr Ienkins, nor to doe any other thing of like nature, though in order to publick justice and safety. I have done, and wish Mr Ienkins would call in and lick up againe his black infa∣mous execrable reproaches, so filthily vomited out against the Par∣liament. To the first. I Was examined by a Committee appointed by the House of Commons: I say and said that the House of Commons have no power to examine me, for that it is no Court; every Court hath power to examine upon Oath; this power the House of Commons never claimed; The Court of Pie-powders, Court-Baron, Hun∣dred Court, 5 H. 4. c. 3. 3 H. 6.46. 1, H 6.43. 35 H. 6.5. County Court, and every other Court of Record, or not of Record, hath power to examine upon oath; and an exami∣nation without Oath is a communication only; examination in Law is upon Oath. There is no Court without a power of tryall; the House of Commons have no power to try any offence, Sir Anthony Maynes case, Cook 5. pars, Reports, Lit. 2. lib. Sect. 194.6. H. 4.1. nor ever practised it by Bill, Inditement, Information, Plaint or Originall, to de∣duce it to tryal, nor to try it by Verdict, Demurrer or Examinati∣on of Witnesses upon Oath, without which there can be no con∣demnation or judgement; and that which can attaine to no rea∣sonable end, the Law rejects as a thing inutile and uselesse; Sa∣piens incipit a fine. The Writ Whereby they are called gives them power A faciendum & consentiendum; to what? to such things Que ibidem de communi Consilie ordinari contigerint, 4 pars, instit. fol. 4. & 9. (viz.) in the Parlia∣ment: This makes nothing at all for a Court for the House of
Commons; that consilium which that Writ intends, is cleared partly by the Writ for chusing Knights, &c. For the King by that Writ is said to resolve to consult and treat with the Pre∣lates and Peeres of the Kingdome, for and touching the great concernments of the Common-wealth (for the King never sits in the House of Commons;) and this also is made evident by the Writs to the Prelates, Peeres, Iudges, and to his Councell at Law; the words in their Writ are, To appear and attend the Parliament, consilium impensuri, the one doth consulere, the other facere & consentire. The House of Lords, where the King sits in person, 7. H. 6.28. 1 H. 7.20. 13. E. 3. ca. 5. 4 pars, instit. pag. 21. assisted by his Lords, Judges, Serjeants, Atturney, Sollicitor, Masters of the Cnancery, is a Court of Record to many purposes, set down in the Books of Law and the Statutes of the Land, and that Court is only in the House of Lords, where the Kings sits. A Court must either be by the Kings Patent, Statute Law, or by the Common Law, which is common and constant usage; the House of Commons hath no Patent to be a Court, Plowd. Com. 319. nor Statute Law to be a Court, nor common usage; they have no Iournall Book but since E. 6. time: was there ever Fine by the House of Commons estreated into the Exchequer? For murder or Fe∣lony they can imprison no man, much lesse for Treason; that House which cannot doe the lesse, cannot doe the greater. It is ordained, 25. E. 3. c. 4.3. Car. Peti∣tion of Right. that no man shall be imprisoned or put out of his Franchise by the King or his Councell, but upon Indictment or presentment of his good and lawfull Neighbours, where the deed is done, or by originall Writ at the Common Law, and so is Lex terrae the Law of the land mentioned in Magna Charta, cap. 29. expounded, and the said Magna Charta, and Charta de Foresta, are declared by the Stat. of 25. E. 1. c. 1. to be the Common Law of the Land. All Iudges and Commissioners are to proceed, Secundum legem & consuetudinem Regni Anglia, as appeares by all proceedings in all Courts, and by all Commissi∣ons: and therefore the House of Commons by themselves, pro∣ceeding not by Indictment, Presentment, or Originall Writ, have no power to imprison men, or put them out of their Franchise. This no way trenches upon the Parliament; for it is in Law no Parliament without King and both Houses; 4 pars. Instit. pag. 1. 3 Pars, Instit. p. 23. I have only in my Paper delivered to Mr Corbet, applyed my selfe to that Commit∣tee,
that they had no power to examine me, 12. . 7.20. Princes case, 8 Pars, Cook. 1 Pars, Instit. p. 159. 14. H. 8.3. Dier, 38. H. 8.60. 1 Pars, Instit. p. 19. b. but I never thought, said, or wrote, that the Parliament had no power to examine me: the Law and custome of this Land is, that a Parliament hath power over my life, liberty, lands and goods, and over every o∣ther subject, but the House of Commons of it selfe hath no such power. For the Lord Cooks relation, that the House of Commons have imposed Fines, and imprisoned men in Queen Elizabeth time, and since; Few facts of late time never questioned, make no le∣gall power nor Court; 4 Pa. Instit. ca. Parl. à facto ad jus is no good argument; for the words of the Statute of 6. H. 8. c. 16. that a licence to depart from the House of Commons for any Member thereof is to be entred of Record in the Book of the Clark of the Parliament, appointed, or to be appointed for that House, doth not conclude that the House of Commons is a Court of Record. For first, that Law of 6. H. 8. c. 26. handles no such question, as that, whether the House of Commons be a Court; it is a maxime in all Lawes, Lex aliud tranctans nil probat, the word (Record) there mentioned, is only a memoriall of what was done and en∣tred in a Book: A Plaint removed out of the County-Court to the Court of the Common-Pleas, hath these words in the Writ of remove, Fitzh. Nat. Br. 70. Fitzh. Nat. Br. 13. 12. H 4.23. 34. H. 6.49. Recordari facias loquelam, &c. and yet the County-Court is no Court of Record; and so for ancient Demesne, in a Writ of false judgement, the words are Recordari facias loque∣lam, &c. and yet the Court of ancient Demesne is no Court of Recod; and so of a Court Baron, the Law and custome of Eng∣land must be preserved, or England will be destroyed, and have neither Law nor custome. Let any man shew me, that the Court of Lords or the House of Commons in any age hath made any man a Delinquent (Rege dissentiente) the King contradicting it under his Great Seale. Sir Giles Mmpessau, Michell, and others of late were condem∣ned by the prosecution of the House of Commons in King James his time; did King James ever contradict it? And so of ancient times, 4 Pars, Inslit. Tit. Parliam. pag. 23. where the House of Peeres condemned the Lord Latimer in 50. E. 3. the Kings pardon freed him: which shewes cleerly, that the Kings expresse or implyed assent must of necessity be had to make a Delinquent. The Geatleman saith, That the Parliament sit, or ought
to sit by something greater thn the Kings Writ, &c. No Parliament did ever sit without the Kings Writ, nor could ever Parliament begin without the Kings presence in per∣son, 4 Pars, Instit. pag. 4. & 6. or by a Guardian of England by pacent under the Kings Great Seale, the King being in reti, or by Commission under the Great Seale to certaine Lords representing the Kings person, and it hath been thus in all Ages unto this Session of Parliament, wherein his Majesty hath been pressed, and hath passed two Acts of Parliament, one for a Triennall Parliament, and ano∣ther for a perpeuall, if the Houses please, to satisfie their de∣sires; ow these two Acts agree one with another, and with the Statute in E. the thirds time, where Parliaments are ordained to be holden every yeare, 4 E. 3. c. 14. 36. E. 3. c. 10.21. Iac. the Act of Limitation of Actions, cap. 26. and what mischiefes to the people of this Land such length of Parliaments will produce by protections and priviledges to free them and their meniall servants from all debts during their lives, if they please to continue it so long, and how destructive to mens actions against them, by reason of the Statute of Limitations, which confines their actions to cer∣tain years, and many other inconveniences of greater impor∣tance, is easie to understand. How can any man affirm, that the two Houses doe act now by the Kings Wrie, which relates to Counsell and Treaty with the King, concerning the King, the defence of his Kingdome, and of the Church of England, 4 Pars, Instit. p. 14. these are the three points which it tends to, as appeares by the Writ. They keep their King priso∣soner at Holnby, and will not suffer him to consult and treat with them. Vow and Co∣venant, p. 11. They have made a Vow and Covenant to assist the For∣ces raised and continued by both Houses against the Forces raised by the King without their consent, and to the same effect have devised the Oath which they call the Negative Oath: Is this to to defend the Kings Kingdome or their Kingdome? When by their Solemn League and Covonant they extirpate Bishops, Deanes and Chapters root and branch, is this to defend the Church of England? (that Church must necessarily be meant, that was the Church of England when the said Writ bore test) they were not summoned to defend a Church that was not in being; 3 Pars, Cook Deane and Chapter of Norwich. to destroy and defend the Church are very contrary things; the Church is not desended, when they take away and sell the Lands of the Church.
The Gentleman saith, The King cannot contrle other Courts of Justice, or prevent them from sitting or acting, and therefore not the two Houses, &c. It is true, the King cannot controle or pre∣vent his other Courts, for that they are his ordinary Courts of common Iustice, to administer common right unto all men, ac∣cording to the fixed Lawes. 14 H. 8.3. 36 H. 8. Dier. 60. The Houses make no Court without the King, they are no body corporate without the King, nor Par∣liament without the King, they all make one corporate body, one Court called the Parliament, 4 Pars, Instit. pa. 1. whereof the King is the head, and the Court is in the Lords House, where the King is present: and as a man is no man without a head, so the Houses severed from the King, as now they are, have no power at all, and they themselves by levying wa against the King, and imprisoning of him, have made the Statute for not dissolving, adjourning, or proroging this Parliament of no effect, by the said Acts of their own; they sit to no purpose without his assent to their Bills, they will not suf∣fer him to consult with them, and treat, and reason with them; whereby he may discern what Bills are fit to passe, and what not, which in all Ages the Kings of this Land have enjoyed as their undoubted Rights, and therefore they sit to no purpose by their own disobedience and fault. For the ordinary Courts at Westminster, 27 H. 8. c. 24. 28 H. 8.11. Dier. the Iudges in all those Courts are Iudges by the Kings Patent or Writ, otherwise they are no Iudge: the Houses can make no Iudges, they are no Iudges at all who are made by them; the whole & sole power of making Iudges, belongs to the King: the King cannot controule or pre∣vent his own Iudges from sitting or acting, but the Houses hee may, for they are not the Kings Iudges, but the Iudges of the two Houses. 2 R. 3.11. In his other Courts, the King commits his power to his Iudges by his Patent, and they are sworn to doe common right to all men, and the King is sworn not to let them from so doing: the King cannot judge in those Courts, nor controule; but the King is both Iudge and Controller in the Court of Parliament: Quoad Acts, for his assent or dissent doth give life or death to all Bills. Many Lawyers have much to answer to God, this King∣dome, and to psterity, for puzling the poore of this Land with such Fancies, as the Gentleman who wrote the Answer to my Paper, and others have published in these Troubles, which hath been none of the least causes of the raysing and continuing of
them: And so I have with the first part of his Answer. AD. 2. For the Non sequitur, in the second Section of the Gent. An∣swer, the Antecedent and the Censequent are his own. Quem recitas meus est (ô Fidentine!) libellus: Sed malè dum recitas incipit esse tuus. My words are, that the King is not virtually in the two Houses at Westminster, to enable them to grant pardons, for that whole and sole power by the Law belongs to the King. My Paper hath no such thing, 27 H. 8. c. 24. as that the Kings power cannot be derived to o∣thers, or the vertue of his power: For his power, and the vertue of his power, is in all Patents to his Iudges, in Charters to Cor∣porations, in Commissions of all sorts, and in the Parliament assembled by force of his Writ of Summons, so long as they obey him; but when they renounce that power, and claime it not from the King, and declare to the Kingdome that he is not in condition to govern, and imprison him, and usurp to them∣selves all Royall Authority, as the two Houses now doe, no reasonable man can affirm that they act by the power of their prisoner, who hath no power to give them, that by force of Armes take all the power to themselves. The Gent. saith, the King grants Commissions daily of Oyer and Terminer, which he cannot frustrate nor lude. 4 E. 4.39. 5 F. 4.4. 1 Eliz, Dyer 165. 1 Mar. Brooks case, 447. The King may revoke and discharge the Commission by his Writ, as he may re∣move all Iudges, and place other men in their roome; and any Kings death determines all the Iudges Patents of Westminster Hall, Commissions of Oyer and Terminer, &c. and so he might dissolve both Houses in all times, by his Writ under the Great Seale, untill that by this Parliament, by his own concession, the King of his goodnesse hath secluded himself; which goodnesse hath been full ill requited. The Gent, affirms, That the power the Parliament hath, is concurrent from the King and Kingdome; which, he conceives, is proved by the Grant of Subsidies to the King by the Parlia∣ment. The mistaking of this word (Parliament) hath been mischievous in these times to this Land, 4 Pars, Instit. pag 1. and it is affectedly mistaken, which makes the sinne the greater, for the two Houses are not the Parliament, as before is declared; and at this time so to inculcate it, when all men know, that of the 120 Peeres of the
Kingdome, who were Temporal Peeres before the Troubles; there are not now above 30 in the Lords House, and in the House of Commons about 200 of the principall Gent. of the Kingdome left the House, and adhered to his Majesty, who is imprisoned by them, shewes no such candor as is to be desired. It is true, that no Tallage can be layd upon the people of this Land, 25. E. 1. con∣firmatio char∣tarum, cap. 6. 34. E. 1. cap. 1. de Tallagio non conce∣dendo. but by their consent in Parliament, as appeareth by the Lawes mentioned in the Margent; but you shall finde in Mr Sl∣dns learned Book, called Mare Clausum, a number of Presidents in Henry the Thirds time for Ship-money, justly condemned this Parliament, to the which his Majesty assented; and in truth, that Ship-money was condemned before, by the said two Sta∣tutes of 25. E. 1. & 34. E. 1. de Tallagio non concedendo. Dane∣gelt, Englitery, and many grievous burthens were laid upon the people, and born, untill that memorable Princes time. But I am of opinion, that the Common Law of the Land did alwayes re∣straine Kings form all Subsidies and Tallages, but by consent in Parliament; which doth appear by Magna Charta the last chap∣ter, where the Prelates, Lords, and Communalty gave the King the fifteenth part of their moveables. In truth it is no manner of consequence, because the King cannot take what he pleaseth of the subects goods, that therefore they have a concurrent power in Parliament: there have been many Parliaments, and no Subsi∣dies granted; Parliaments may be without Subsidies, but Subsi∣dies cannot be without Parliaments: of ancient time Parliaments rarely granted any, unlesse it were in the time of forraine Warres; and in my time, Q. Elizabeth refused a Subsidy granted in Par∣liament, and in the Parliament of  Jac. none were granted. The Gent. should make a conscience of blinding the people with such untrue colours, to the ruine of King and people. AD. 3. The Gent. affirms, That the sonding Propositions to the King, and desiring his concurrence, is carce worth an answer, for Sub, ects may humbly petition for that which is their strict right and proper∣ty, &c. The Propositions sent to Newcastle, are in print; where∣in the two Houses are so farre from humbly petitioning, that they stile not themselves his Majesties Subjects, as appeares by the Propositions. That they have a strict right or property to any one of these
Propositions, is a strange assertion, every one of them being against the Lawes now in force: Have the two Houses a strict right and property, to lay upon the people what Taxes they shall judge meet? To pardon all Treasons, &c. that is one of their Propo∣sitions. Have they a strict right and proporty to pardon them∣selves? and so for all the rest of their Propositions. These Propositions have been Voted by both Houses, 12 H. 7.20. 1 Iac. cap. 1. 1 Car. cap. 7. the Kings assent (the being drawn into Bills) makes them Acts of Parli∣ment: Hath the King no right to assent or dis-assent? Was the sending but a Complement? All our Law-Books and Statutes speak otherwise. This Gent. and others, must give an account one time or other for such delusions put upon the people. AD. 4. The Gent. saith, They affirm not, that the Kings power is sepa∣rated from his person, so as the two Spencers affirmed, &c. His Majesties person is now at Holnby under their Guards; have they not severed his power from him, when by no power they have left him, he can have two of his Chaplaines, who have not taken their Covenant, to attend him for the exercise of his Con∣science? For the three Conclusions of the Spencers, 15. Ed. 2. Ex∣ilium Hugonis 1 E. 3. c. 2. Calvins case. 7 Pars, Re∣ports, 11. doe not the two Houses act every of them? They sa, his Majesty hath broken his Trust, touching the Government of his people: They have raised Armies to take him, they have taken him, and imprisoned him; they govern themselves; they make Lawes, impose Taxes, make Iudges, Sheriffes, and take upon them omnia insigna summae p∣tstatis: Is not this to remove the King for misdemeanours, to reform per aspertè, to govern in aide of him; the three Conclu∣sions of the Pencers? Doe they think the good people of Eng∣land are become stupid, and will not t length see these things? The Gentleman saith, They doe not separate his power from his Person, but distinguish it, &c. His power is in his legall Writs, Plowd. 4. Eliz. 213. the Kings power and his Person are in∣divisible. Courts, and Officers: when they counterfeit the Great Seale, and seale Writs with the same, make Iudges themselves, Courts and Officers, by their own Ordinances against his consent, declared under his true Great Seale of England (not by word of mouth, letters, or ministers only) their Seale is obeyed, their own Writs, their own Iudges, their own Courts, their own Officers, and not
the Kings: The time will come when such strange actions and discourses will be lamented. AD. 5. The Gentleman goes on, We take not from the King all power of pardoning Delinquents, we only say it is not proper to him quarto modo, &c. What doe you meane by quarto modo? I am sure, Omnis Rex Angliae, solus Rex & semper Rex can doe it, and none else; read the Books of the Law to this purpose collected by that reverend and learned Iudge Stanford, Stanfor. Plcas 99. 27 H 8. c. 24. Dier, 163. from all Antiquity to his time, who dyed in the last year of King Philip and Queen Maries Reign, you shall finde this a truth undeniable; and this power was never questioned in any Age in any Book by any untill this time, that every thing is put to the question: You Gentle∣men who professe the Law, and maintaine the party against the King, return at length, and bring not so much scandall upon the Law, (which preserves all) by publishing such incredible things. We hold only what the Law holds, the Kings Prerogative and the Subjects Liberty are determined, and bounded, and admea∣sured by the written Law what they are; 1 Pars, Instt. pag. 344. Plowd. 3. Eliz. 236, 237. we doe not hold the King to have any more power, neither doth His Majesty claime any other but what the Law gives him; the two Houses by the Law of this Land have no colour of power, either to make De∣linquents, or pardon Delinquents, the King contradicting: (and the Army under Sir Thomas Fairfax (howbeit but Souldiers) doe now understand that to be Law, and doe now evidently see and assuredly know, that it is not an Ordinance of the two Houses, but an act of Parliament, made by the King, Lords and Commons that will secure them, and let this Army remember their executed fellow Souldiers,) And the Law was alwayes so taken by all men untill these troubles, that have begot Monsters of opinions. AD. 6. This Gentleman sayes, The Parliament hath declared the King to be in no condition to govern, &c. There is no end of your distinctions, I and you professe the Law; shew me Law for your distinctions, or letter, syllable, or line, in any Age in the Books of the Law, that the King may in one time be in no condition to govern, and yet have the ha∣bit
of governing, and another time he may (viz.) when the two Houses will suffer him: The Law saith thus, Ʋbi lex non di∣stinguit, non est distinguendum. He sayes, The King is not barred from returning to His Par∣liament, (as he calls the two Houses) he knowes the contrary, the whole City knowes the contrary, Nos juris consulti sumus sacerdotes, (as Institian the Emperour hath it, in the first Book of his Institutions) and therefore knowledge and truth should come from our lips: Worth) and ingenious men will remember, and reflect upon that passage of that good and wise man Seneca, Non qua itur, sed qua eundum; follow not the rayes of the Lawyers of the House of Commons: God forgive them, I am sure the King will, if they be wise and seek it in time. AD. 7. The Gent. sayes, We sweare that the King is our supreme Go∣vernour over all persons and in all causes, &c. Why hath he lest out the word (only)? for the oath the Members now take, is, that King Charles is now the only and supreme Governour in all causes, over all persons, 5 Elz. cap. 1. Cawdreys case 5 pars, fol. 1. and yet they keep their only Supreme Governour now in prison, and act now in Parliament by vertue of their Prisoners Writ, and by a concurrent power in this Par∣liament, and by their own strict right and property, (as the Gent. This Oath is allowed by the Common Lw of the Land affirms in his Answer) These things agree well with their Oath, that the King is the only Supreme Governour in all causes, over all persons; this Oath is taken now in the Parliament time, by all the Members of the House of Commons, and is re∣quired by the Law to be taken in all Parliaments, otherwise they have no power, nor colour to meddle with the publike Affaires. This Oath being taken in Parliament, that the King is the only and Supreme Governour in all Causes, then it followes in Parliament causes; over all persons, then over the two Houses; let them keep this Oath; and we shall be sure of peace in the Land: and good Lawyers ought to desire peace, both for the pub∣like good and heir private, and not dishonour that Noble pro∣fession, as many doe in this miserable time. The Gent. sayes, We doe not sweare that the King i above all Law nor above the safety of his people; neither doe we so sweare, but His Majesty and we will sweare to the contrary, and have
swom, and have made good, and will by Gods grace make good our Oath to the world, that the King is not above the Law, nor above the safety of his people; the Law and the safery of his people are his safety, his Honour and his Strength. AD. 8. The Gent. concludes, That Acts of Parliament are not formally binding, nor compleat without the Kings assent, yet the Houses have a virtuall power without the Kings particular assent, to doe things in order to publike Iustice and Safety, (viz▪) In setting up the Ex∣cise, in raising and maintaining of Armies, in taxing the peo∣people at pleasure with Fifth and Twentieth part, Fifty Subsidies, Sequestrations, Loanes, Compositions, imprisoning the King, abolishing the Common-prayer-Book, selling the Churches Lands &c. all these are in order to the publike Justice and Safety. Mr H.P. you are of my profession, I beseech you, for the good of your Countrey, for the Honour of our Science perswade your selfe and others, as much as in you lies, to believe and fol∣low the monition and Councell of that memorable, reverend, and profoundly learned in the Lawes and Customes of the Land, the Lord Coke, who writes as becomes a great and a learned Judge of the Law (a person much magnified by the two Houses) in these words? Peruse over all Books, Records and Histories, and you shall finds a Principle in Law, 3 Pars, Instit. p. 36. a Rule in Reason, and a Tryall in Experience, that Treason doth over produc futall and finall destruction to the offender, and never attaines to the desired and (two incidents inseparable thereunto) and therefore lt all men abandon it, as the poysonous hait of the Devill, and follow the Precept in holy Scripture, SERVE GOD, HONOƲR THE KING, AND HAVE NO COMPANY WITH THE SEDITIOƲS. CONCLUSION. I Say againe, that without an Act of Obliviow, a gracious generall Pardon from His Majesty, the Arreares of the Soulaiers paid, a favorable regard had to tender Conscien∣ces, there will be neither Truth nor Peace in this Land, nor any man secure of any thing be hath: By me David Jenkins Prisoner in the Tower. The End.
A DISCOURSE Touching the Inconveniencies of a Long continued Parliament. AND THE IVDGEMENT OF THE LAW OF THE LAND In that Behalfe. By DAVID JENKINS now Prisoner in the Tower of LONDON. Printed in the Yeare, 1647.
A DISCOURSE Touching the Inconveniencies of a Long continued Parliament. 1. Aerpetuall Parliament is repugnant to the Act made this Parliament for a Trienniall Parlia∣ment; for how can every three years a Parliament begin, if this be perpetuall, which may be so if the two Houses please? 2. An adjournment of the Parliament makes no Session, 4 Pars, Institut. fol. 27. Howbeit, before the Adjourn∣ment, the King gives His Royall assent to some Bills. Cooke, ibid. 3. There is no Session till a prorogation or dissolution of the Parliament. 4. This Parliament, as appeares by the Act for not dissol∣ving thereof, set downe in the Printed Statutes of this Parliament, fol. 138. cannot be prorogued but by Act of Parliament. There hath beene as yet no Act of Parlia∣ment present, and therefore all the Acts of this Parlia∣ment, are Acts of one Session.
5. All the A of one Session relate to the first day of the Parliament, Plow  com. 79 35 H. 8. Bro. relation 35. Bro. Parl. 86. Dier. 1 Mariae 45. and all the Acts of such a Paliament are Acts of one day; so the Act for the Trienniall, and the Act for this Perpetuall, are two Acts of one day by the Law. 6. 4 Ed. 3. cap. and 36 Ed. 3. cap. 10. A Parliament is to bee holden once every yeere, and more often if need▪ shall bee▪ those Acts are confirmed by the Act for the Trienniall Parliament. How doth a perpetuall Parlia∣ment agree with a Parliament once every yeere, or with the intention of those Lawes? How doth a Parliament every three yeers agree with a Parliament for ever, which may be, if the two Houses please? 7. The result is this; at one day in Law this Parliament two Acts have passed (for howbeit the one was in 16 Carol. and the other in 17. Carol. yet both in Law are Acts of one day) the one saith there shall be a Trienniall Parliament after the end of the sitting of this Parlia∣ment: The other, this Parliament shall sit for ever, if they please. The one will have a Parliament with an end, the other, a Parliament without an end. When an Act of Parliament is against common right or Reason, 8 Pars, Doct. Bonhams case fol. 118. 8 Ed. 3.30. 33 E. 3. cessa∣vit, 32. 27. H. G. An∣nuity 11. 14 Eliz. Dier, 313. or repugnant, or impossible to bee perfor∣med, the Common Law shall controle it, and adjudge this Act to bee void; they are the words of the Law. An Act of Parliament, that a man shall bee Judge in his owne cause, is a void Act. Begin with Common Right. It is against Common Right, that indebted men should not pay their debts: That if any Member of the House of Comons doe any Subject wrong by diffeising him of his land, or dispossessing him of his goods, or blasting of his fame, or doing violence to
his person, that such persons during their lives should not bee questioned by a priviledge of Parliament, and that extended also to many others besides themselves. Com∣mon Right doth abhorre these enormities, which a per∣petuall Paliament doth beget, besides the utter destru∣ction of all mens actions, reall, personall, or mixt, who have to doe with Parliament men, 21 Jac. by the Statute of Li∣mitation, which confines suits to certain yeares. For Common Reason. Parliaments were ordained for remedies to redresse publike grievances; It is against Reason they should make publike and insufferable grie∣vances. The Law of the Land allowes no protection for any man imployed in the service of the Kingdome but for a yeare, to be free from suits, and in many suits none at all, howbeit hee be in such service; 39 H. 6.39. but a Parlia∣ment perpetuall may prove a protection, not for a yeare, but for ever, which is against all manner of Reason. For Impossibility. The death of His Majesty (whose life God prolong) dissolves it necessarily; For the Writ of summons is, Carolus Rex in hoc individuo, and Carolus Rex is in this particular, Habiturus colloquium & tracta∣tum cum Prelatis & proceribus, &c. 2 H. 5. Cooke Title Parliam 3. pars. King Charles being to have Conference and Treaty with his Prelates and Peeres; Carolus Rex cannot have Colloquium & tracta∣tum, Conference and Treaty, when he is deceased; and therefore it is impossible for any Parliament to continue as long as they please, as for a Parliament to make a dead man alive. For Repugnancie. That which is but for a time, can∣not be affirmed to have continuance for ever, it is repug∣nant. The end of the Act of 17. Caroli Regis, which is to continue at pleasure, is in the said Act expressed to be to raise credit for money for these three purposes. First, for reliefe of his Majesties Army and people in the North.
Secondly, for preventing the iminent danger of the Kingdome. Thirdly, for supply of other His Majesties present and urgent occasions. These ends are ended, the reliefe of that Army, the iminent danger supposed was sixe yeares agoe, the supply of His Majestie hath beene a supply against him, take away the end, the meanes thereto are to no purpose, take away the cause, the effect ceaseth; and therefore the three ends of this Act being determined, it agreeth with Law and Reason, the Act should end, Sir Anthony Mayns case. 5. pars, 1. H. 4.6. Littl. cap. Villen. the Law rejects things unprofitable and uselesse. A perpetuall Parliament (besides that it incites men to selfe-ends, destructive of the publique of which the whole Kingdome hath had sufficient experience) wilbe a constant charge to the Kingdome; for that every County and Borough, who send Members to the Par∣liament, are by the Law to pay wages to their Parlia∣ment men, which to many Counties will amount above some Subsidies Yearely: There are many poore Bo∣rough-Townes in each County of this Kingdome, who being to maintaine two Burgesses in Parliament, will be quickly begger'd, if the Parliament have no end; for all which reasons it is cleare, that such long continuance of Parliaments, will instead of a remedy (which is and ought to be the proper and true end of Parliaments) become an insufferable grievance and oppression to all the People of the Land. The Writ of Summons this Parliament is the basis and foundation of the Parliament. If the Foundation be destroyed the Parliament falls. The Assembly of Parliament if for three purposes. Rex est habiturus collo∣quium et tractatum cum praelatis, magnatibus et proceribus super arduis negotijs, concernentibus, 1. Nos. 2 Defensionem regni nostri 3. Defensionem Ecclesiae Anglicanae. This Par∣liament hath overthrowne this Foundation in all 3 parts, 1. Nos. the King, they have chased him away, and im∣prisoned
him; they have voted no prelats, and a num∣ber of other Lords, about 40. in the City must not come to the House, and about 40, more are out of Towne, the colloquium et tractatus are made void therby. For the King cannot consult and treat there with men removed from thence. 2. Defensionem regni nostri, that is gone; they have made it their Kingdome, not His, for they have usurped all His Soveraigntie. 3. Defensio∣nem Ecclesiae Anglicanae, that is gone, that Ecclesia An∣glicana trust be understood necessarily that Church, that at the test of the Writ was Ecclesia Anglicana, they have destroyed that too. So now these men would be called a Parliament, having abated, quashed, and made nothing of the Writ whereby they were Summoned and Assembled. If the Writ be made void, all the pro∣cesse is void also: that House must needs fall, where the Foundation is overthrowne, Sublato fundamento opus ca∣dit, the Foundation being taken away, the worke falls, is both a maxime in Law and Reason. For some yeares past, there is no crime from Treason to Trespasse, but they are guilty of: all Treason, Felo∣nies, Robberies, trespasses are contra pacem, coronam, et dignitatem Regis, against the Peace, Crowne and Digni∣tie of the King; as appeares by all Indictments in all Ages. Pax Regis the Kings Peace, Corona Regis, the Kings Crowne, Dignitas Regis, the Kings Dignitie, are all trod under foot, and made nothing; Pax Regis, the Peace of the King is become a Warre against the King, His Dignitie put into prison, and the Crowne put upon their owne heads. All the Judges of England have resolved, Nevills ease 7. part, 34. 2. Jacobi. that Noble∣men committing Treason have forfeited their Office and Dignitie, their Officeis to councell the King in time of Peace, to defend him in time of Warre, and therefore those men against the duty and end of their Dignitie taking not onely Councell, but Armes also to destroy
Him, and being thereof attaint by due course of Law by a racite condition annexed to the estate of their Dignitie, have forfeited the same; they are the words of the Law, and therefore they have made themselves inca∣pable to be Members of the upper House. The Oppressions of the People. Briberies, Extortions, Monopolies, ought to be in∣quired after by the House of Commons, and complained of to the King and Lords, what have they done? The House of Commons cannot by the Law commit any man to prison, who is not of the said House, for Treason, Murder, or Felony, or any thing but for the disturbance of the publique Peace, by the priviledge of the whole body. They have no power by the Writ, which the King issueth to elect and returne Members of that House, so to doe. For the Writ for them is onely ad faciendum et consentiendum to those things, whereof His Majestie shall consult and treat with his Prelates and Nobles, et de communi consilio Regni shall be there ordained, as ap∣peares by the Writ. Here is no separate power given over the Kings people to them, but onely ad faciendum et consentiendum, 4 Pars. insti∣tut. 23.24.25. and in all times this hath beene expoun∣ded and restrained to that which concerned their owne Members in Relation to the publique Service, as he is a Member of the corporate body of the Parliament, wher∣of the King is the Head. But that the House of Commons have committed any man for Treason, Murder or Felony, or for any offence that had no relation to a Member of the House of Com∣mons, as it is against Law and Reason, so no instance can be given till this Parliament. 19 H. 6.43. 22. E. 4.22. 5 H. 4. cap. 8. 3 H. 6.46. All Questions and trials where witnesse are examined, the examination is upon oath by the Law, by all our
Bookes, Statutes, every dayes practice. Examination without an Oath, is but a loose discourse; therefore the House of Commons not claiming power to give an Oath, have no power to examine any man. No man shall bee imprisoned by the King or His Councell, unlesse it be by Inditement, 25 E. 3. c. 1. Petition of Right. 3 Car. presentment of his good and lawfull Neighbours where such deeds bee done, in due manner, or by processe made by Writ ori∣ginall at the Common Law: This Statute rehearses Magna Charta, pag. 29. and expounds Lex terrae, the Law of the Land there mentioned: This Law binds all men, and the House of Commons (for they say they are of the Kings Councell) in all points, but onely against the disturbers of the service of the Parliament; and therefore the imprisonment of severall persons who are not their Members, and for no disturbance to their Mem∣bers, is utterly against the Law of the Land, and the fran∣chise of the Free-men of this Realme. Cui non licet quod minus, non eet quod majus; he who may not doe what is lesse, may not doe what is greater; they cannot commit a man for murder or Felony, much lesse for Treason. No Court can fine and imprison, but a Court of Re∣cord, the House of Commons is no Court of Record, 8 Pars, Cook 120. 27 H. 6.8. the House of the Lords where the King is in his Person, his Nobles and his Judges, and Councell at Law, the Ma∣sters of the Chancery assisting, is a Court of Record, and that is the Court of Parliament, where the colloquium & tractatus is. The House of Commons may present grievances, grant or not grant aydes, consent or not consent to new lawes, but for fining and imprisoning any but as aforesaid, is but of a late date, and no ancient u∣sage: They have no Journall Booke, but sithence Edw. 6. time. 6 Hen. 8. cap. 15. doth not prove the House of Commons to be a Court of Record, it mentions onely to be entered on Record in the Booke of the Clerke of the Parliament, if any Member depart into the Country.
There is no Journall there but sithence Ed. 6. time, or it is a remembrance or memoriall, as 12 H. 4.23. The whole Parliament is one corporate body, 14 H. 8.3. 36 H. 8. Dier 60. 4 Pars Instit. cap. 1. con∣sisting of the Head and three Estates: The Court is on∣ly there where the Consilium & tractatus is, where the consult and treaty is with the King, which is in the House of Lords onely. The House of Commons claime not to examine upon oath any man; no Court can bee without a power to give an oath, Courts Baron, Court of Pipowders, Coun∣ty-Court, may and doe give oath: No Court can bee without a power to try, no tryall can be without Oath; and therefore the House of Commons not claiming po∣wer to give an Oath, can bring no matter to tryall, and consequently can be no Court. The behaviour of the Commons at a Conference with the Lords, the Commons are alwayes uncovered, and standing when the Lords sit with their hats on, which shewes they are not Colleagues in judgement, for fel∣low Judges owe no such Reverence to their Compa∣nions. When was ever Fine imposed by the House of Com∣mons estreated in the Exchequer? 11 H. 4. c. . The ejecting of a Member, who hath sitten, is against the Law; for they cannot remove a man out of the House unduly returned, much lesse a man returned duely. By these Lawes it appeares, H. 4. cap. 1. 1 H. 5. cap. 1. 8 H. 6. cap. 7. 23 H. 6. cap. 15 that if any undue returne be made, the person returned is to continue a Member, the Sheriffes punishment is 200. pound, one to the King, another to the party that is duly elected, imprisonment for a yeare without Baile or Mainprise; and that person who is unduly returned, shall serve at his owne charge, and have no benefit at the end of the Parliament by the Writ De solutione foendorum Militum, Civium & Burgen∣sium Parliament. and the tryall of the falsity of the re∣turne, is to be before the Justices of Assises in the proper
County, or by action of debt in any Court of Record. This condemnes the Committee for undue elections, which hath been practised but of late times; 3 Ed. . 20. 5 Ed. . 41. for besides these Lawes, it is against a maxime of the Common law; an averment is not receivable against the returne of the Sheriffe, for his returne is upon Oath, which Oath is to be credited in that suit wherein the returne is made. The said Statutes condemne and make those members no members, which were not resiant in the County or Boroughs, for which they were elected, at the time  the rest of the Writ of the Summons of the Parliament, and any abusive practice of late times to the contrary is against the Law, and ought not to be allowed. Assault upon Parliament Men. If a Parliament man or his Meniall Servant be assaul∣ted, beaten, or wounded, in the Parliament time, 5 H. 4. cap 6. 11 H. 6, cap 11. procla∣mation shall bee made where the deed is done, that the offender shall render himselfe to the Kings Bench, with∣in a quarter of a yeare after proclamation made, and the offence there to be tryed, for default of appearance the offender is declared, attainted of the misdeed, and it is accorded that thereafter it bee done likewise in the like Case. Serving of processe upon a Lord of the Parliament pu∣nished in the Lords House. Bogo de Clare 18 E. 3. 4 pas, Instit. fol. 24. Iohn Thorns∣byes case, Clerk of the Parliam. ibid. 10. E. . Serving of processe upon Thornsby inquired of in the Chancery, and there the offenders were convicted. The premisses prove, that breaches of priviledge of Parliament may bee punished elsewhere then in Par∣liament. Upon all this Discourse, it is easie to discerne what fruits may be expected from this Parliament, continuing as long as the two Houses please; and that there is no safety for this Common-wealth, but by the Observati∣ons of their ancient Franchises, Customes and Lawes.
CONCLUSION. I Say againe, that without an Act of Oblivion, a gracious generall Pardon from His Majesty, the Ar∣reares of the Souldiers paid, a favo∣rable regard had to tender Conscien∣ces, there will bee neither Truth nor Peace in this Land, nor any man se∣cure of any thing he hath. The End.
AN APOLOGY FOR THE ARMY, Touching the eight Quaeres upon the late Declarations and Letters from the Army, touching sedition falsly charged upon them. Wherein those Quaeres are resolved, and thereby the present proceedings of the Army are proved to be Legall, Just & Honorable. By DAVID JENKINS, Prisoner in the Tower of LONDON. Quis tulerit Gracchos de seditione querentes. Printed in the Yeare, 1647.
AN APOLOGIE FOR THE ARMY. THese Treasonable and insolent Qurie make the Army the Houses Subjects, Bracton fol. 118, Stanford. f. 2 and not the Kings. None by the Lawes of this and can in this King∣dome have any Army but His Majesty. It appeares, the Army doth now evidently perceive, that they were mis-led by the specious pretencees of Sulus Papuli, the maintenance of the Kings Honour, and of the maintenance of the Lawes of the Land, and liberties of the Subject, to take up Armes against their naturall Liege Lord and Soveraigne, the King. The People is the Body, Mag. Char. c. 1. & ultim. All the act concerning the King, Church, and Churchmen. 25. E. 1. c. 1. the King is their Head; was the Body sufe when the Head was distressed and imprisoned? For Lawes and Liberties have not the prevailing patie in the two Houses destroyed a∣bove 100 Acte of Parliament, and in , Magun Charta, & Chorta de Forest, which are the common Lawes of the Land▪ Doth Excize, Fifth and Twentieth Parts, Meale∣money,
and many more burdens which this Land never heard of before maintaine the Liberties of the peo∣ple: You, and that partie of the two Houses, made the Army by severall. Declartions before ingagement, believe that you would preserve the Kings Honour and Greatnesse, the Lawes and Liberties of the people: The Army and the whole Kingdome ow , see your actions, and have no reason longer to beleve your Oaths, Vowes, and Declarations; and fince that partie in the two Houses re∣fuse to performe any thing according to their said Oathes, Vowes, and Declarations. The Army and the Kingdome may and ought, both by your own principles and the Lawes of the Land, pursue the end for which they were raysed. And so your first Quaere is resolved, whereby it is manifest, that specious pretences to carry on ambitious and pernicious designes, fix not upon the Army, but upon you, and the pre∣vailing partie in both Houses. The Solution of the second Quaere. The Army, 3. par. Instit. f. 12.39. Eli. 1. Iacob. ibi. 2. & 3. E. 6. cap. 2. 11. H. 7. c. 1. to their eternall honour, have freed the King from imprisonment a Holmby. It was High Treason to imprison His Maestie  Tof His Majestie from that im∣prisonment was to delive Him out of Traiteros mands, which was the Armies bounden dutie by the Law of God and the Land. That partie refused to suffer His Majestie to have two of His Chaplaines for the exercise of His Con∣science who had not taken the Covenant, free aceesse wa not permitted, doth the Army use His Majestie so all men see that accesse to Him is free, and such Chaplaines as His Majestie desired are now attending on His Grace: Who are the guiltie persons, the Army, who in this action of de∣livering the King act according to Law, or the said partie who acted Treasonably against the Law? Who doth ob∣serve the Protestation better, they who imprison their King, or they who free Him from prison?
That this Army was raysed by the Parliament is  false: The Army was raysed by the two Houses upon the specious pretences of the Kings Honour, common sae∣tie, and the preservation of Lawes and Liberties, which how made good hath beene shewed before, and all the peo∣ple of the Kingdome doe find by wofull experience. The two Houses are no more a Parliament then a Body without a Head a man. 14. H. . 36. H. 8. Dier. 60. 4. par. Instit. p. 1.3.12.14. 16. R. 2. c. 1. 5. Eliz. c. 2. 17. Carol. The act for the continu∣ance of this Parliament. The two Houses can make no Court without the King, they are no Body Corporate with∣out the King, they all, Head and Members, make one Corpo∣rate Body; and this is so cleare a truth, that in this Parlia∣ment, by the Act of 17 Caroli, it is declared, That the Par∣liament shall not be dissolved or prorogued but by act of Parliament; but the two Houses may respectively adjourne themselves; two Houses & a Parliament are severall things. Cunct a fidem vero faciunt, all circumstances agree to prove this truth. Before the Norman Conquest, and sithence to this day, the King is holden Principall, Caput, & finis, that is, the beginning, Head and chief end of the Parliament, as appear∣eth by the Treatise of the manner of holding of Parliaments made before the Norman Conquest; 4. par. Instit. pag. 12. by the Writ of Sumons of Parliament whereby the Treaty and Parler in Parliament is to be had with the King onely, by the Common Lau by the Statute-Law, by the Oath of Supremacy, 4. par. Instit. pag. 4.9. 5. Eli. c. 1.2. taken at this and every Parliament, it doth manifestly appeare, that without the King there can be no colour of a Parliament. How many Votes have they revoked in one Session, yea, and Bills? Was there ever the like done? Nay, is not the constant course of Parliaments violated and made nothing thereby? They are guarded by Armed-men, divide the publique money among themselves, and that partie indea∣vours to bring in a Forreigne to invade this Land againe: If they be no Parliament, as clearely they are none with∣out His Majestie, they have no privileges, but doe exercise an Arbitrary, Tyrannicall, and Treasonable power over the people.
By the Law of the Land, 7. E. 4.20. 8. E. 4.3. 9. E. 4.27. 4. H. 7.18. 27. H. 8.23. when Treason or Felony is committed, it is lawfull for every Subject, who suspects the Offender, to apprehend him, and to secure him so, that Ju∣stice may be done upon him according to the Law. You say, The disobedience of the Army is a sad publique president, like to conjure up a spirit of universall disobedi∣ence, I pray object not that conjuring up to the Army, whereof you, & the prevailing partie in the Houses are guil∣tie; who conjured up the spirit of universall disobedience against His Majestie, your and our onely Supreme Govern∣our, But you, and that partie in the two Houses, and even then, when the house of Commons were taking, and did take the said Oath of Supremacy? For the Covenant you mention, it is an Oath against the Lawes of the Land, a∣gainst the Petition of Right, devised in Scotland, wherein the first Article is to maintaine the Reformed Religion in the Church of Scotland: 2. pars. Coll. of Ord. pag. 803. Petition of right 3. Car. 2. pars. instit. 719. And certainly there is no Subject of the English Nation doth know what the Scottish Reli∣gion is. I believe the Army tooke not the Covenant: No man by the Law can give an Oath in a new case without an Act of Parliament; and therefore the imposers thereof are very blamable and guiltie of the highest Crime. The Writer of these Quaeries seemes to professe the Lwes, let him declare what Act of Parliament doth justi∣fie the tendring, giving, or taking of the said Oath: he knoweth there is none, he knoweth that all the parts of it are destructive of the Lawes and Government to maintaine which the Law of nature & the Law of the Land had obliged them: Mag. Chart. cap. 1. & Ul∣timo Arti∣culi cleri, and many o∣ther statutes. 16. Ed. 4.10. The Oath of the Covenant makes the Houses Su∣preme Governours in causes Ecclesiasticall, the Oath of Supremacy makes the King so, and yet both taken by the same persons, at the same time. What credit is to be given to persons who make nothing of Oathes, and contradict themselves? How de the Covenant and the Oath of Su∣premacy agree? How doth their Protestation and the Co∣venant
agree? How doe their Declarations and Oathes a∣gree? The Lord be mercifull to this Land for these Oaths. It is a sad thing to consider that so many gentlemen who professe the lawes, and so many worthy men in both Hou∣ses should be so transported as they are, knowing that the Lawes of the Land from time to time, and in all times, are contrary to all their actions, and that yet they should amuse themselves and the people with the word of Parliament, without the King, and with the Covenant; whereas they know they are no Parliament without His Majestie, and that English men throughout the Kingdome should sweare a Covenant, to preserve the reformed Religion of Scotland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government, which they no more know than the Doctrine, Worship, Disci∣pline and Government of Prester Iohn in Ethiopia: if they consider it, they cannot but discerne that this is a high de∣sperate and impious madnesse. Be wise in time, without the King and the Lawes you will never have one houre of safety for your Persons, Wives, Children or Estates: Be good to your selves, and to your Posterities; apply your selves to be capable of an Act of Ob∣livion, and of a generall Pardon, and to be able and willing to pay the Souldiery, and to allow a reasonable liberty for m consciences, and God will blesse your endeavours, and the people (to whom you are now very hatefull) will have you in better estimation. The third Quarie is thus answered. You resemble the Army to Iacke Cade and his Compli∣ans, and you cite the Act of Parliament of 31. Hen. 6. cap. 1. and that it may appeare who acts the Part of Iacke Cade, you and that Party in the two Houses, or the Army, I thinke it necessary to set downe the said Act in words at large as followeth. First, Whereas the most abominable Tyrant, horrible, odi∣ous
and arrant false Traytor Iohn Cade, calling and naming himself sometime Mortimer, sometime Cap. of Kent, which name, fame, acts, and feats are to be removed out of the speech and mind of every faithfull Christian man perpetu∣ally, falsely and traiterously purposing, and imagining the per∣petuall destruction of the Kings said Person, and finall subver∣sion of this Realme, taking upon him Royall power, and gathe∣ring to him the, Kings people in great numbers, by false, subtle imagined Language, and seditiously making a stirring Rebel∣lion, and Insurrection, under colour of justice, for reformation of the Lawes of the said King, robbing, stealing, and spoiling great part of his faithfull people, Our said Soveraigne Lord the King considering the premises, with many other which were more odious to remember, by advise and consent of the Lords aforesaid, and at the request of the said Commons, and by authority aforesaid, hath ordained and established that the said Iohn Cade shall be reputed; had, named, and de∣clared a false, Traytour to our Soveraigne Lord the King; and that all his tyranny, acts, feats; and false opinions shall be voyded, abated, annulled, destroyed; & put out of remem∣brance for ever: and that all enditements and all things de∣pending thereof, had and made under the power of tyran∣ny shall be like wise void, annulled, anated, repealed, and hol∣den for none: and that the bloud of  them be there∣of defiled nor corrupted, but by the authority of the said Parliament cleerely declared for even: and that all endite∣ments in times comming in like case under power of tyran∣ny, rebellion and stirring had, shall be of no Record nor ef∣fect, but void in Law; and all the Petitions delivered to the said King in his last Parliament, holden at VVestminster, Noveb. 6. in the 29. of his Raigne, against his mind by him not agreed, shall be taken and put in oblivion out of remem∣brance, undone, voyded, annulled and destroyed for ever, as a thing purposed against God and conscience, and against His Royall Estate and preeminence, and also dishonourable and unreasonable.
Now wee are to examine who hath trod in the step of Jack Cade, you and the present prevailing party of the two Houses tooke upon them, and doe take all the Royall Power in all things; so did Jack Cade, as appeares by the said Act; the Army doe not so: They who imprison the King pur∣pose to destroy His Person (our imprisoned Kings alwayes Edward . Henry 6. Richard 2. fared so) Jack Cade did likewise so purpose, but the Army doe not so: The said party in the two Houses made a stirring under colour of Justice for Reformation of the Lawes; so did Jack Cade: The Army doe not so, but desire that the Lawes should be observed: Jack Cade le∣vied Warre against the King, the Army preserves Him: Jack Cade dyed a Declared Traytor to his Soveraigne Lord the King; this Army lives to have the glorious true Ho∣nour of being restorers of their King. Simon Sudbury Archbishop of Canterbury was murthe∣ted by Jack Cade i William Laud Archbishop of Canter∣bury was likewise murthered by that party of the two Hou∣ses, 25 Ed. 3.4. 28 Ed. 3.3. Petition of Right. 3 Car. for that an Ordinance by Law cannot take away any mans life, & his life was taken away by an Ordinance of the two Houses, the Army had no hand in it. Many misled by Jack Cade, perceiving his Trayterous purposes, fell from him; and as that was lawfull, just, and Honourable, so it is for this Army to adhere to their naturall King, and to indeavour to settle the Kingdome againe in the just Lawes and Liberties thereof: London did then right wor∣thily adhere to the King and the Lawes, and not to Iack Cade and his specious pretences, and it is hoped they will now so doe: By this it appeares, that the Gentlemans Discourse touching Iack Cade, fastens altogether on his party, and cleareth the Army. To the IV. which is solved thus. The Arreares of the Army (howbeit it is the least thing they looke after) yet being not paid them, it is by the Law of the Land a sufficient cause to leave and desert that party
in the Houses: A person who serves in any kinde, and is not paid his wages, the desertion of that service is warran∣table by the Lawes of the Land: Pitz. N. B. 25. 9 Ed. .20. 38 H. 6.27. 23 Eliz. Dier 369. You say, the Houses will reforme all things when the Army doth disband; who will beleeve it? Will any beleeve that the setling of the Presbytery will doe it? Will any beleeve that his Maje∣sty will passe the Propositions sent to Him to Newcastle? Will any man beleeve that this Kingdome will ever bee quiet, without His Majesty and the ancient and just Lawes? Can the Members of the Army conceive any of them to be safe in any thing, without a Pardon from His Majesty? Have they not seene some of their Fellows hanged before their eyes, for actions done as Souldiers? Shall the King∣dome have no account of the many Millions received of the Publike Money? Will the Members of the Houses accuse themselves? Shall private and publike Debts bee never paid? Shall the Kingdome lye ever under burthens of Oppression and Tyranny? There is no visible way to remedy all these enormities, but the power of the Army. To the V. which is solved thus. The Kingdome hath better assurance of Reformation from the Army, then from the Houses, for that in their Military way they have bin just, faithfull & honorable, they have kept their words: That party of the Houses have bin constant to nothing but in dividing the publike Treasure among themselves, and in laying burdens upon the peo∣ple, and in breaking all the Oathes, Vowes, and Promises they ever made: 2 & 3 Ed. 6. cap. 2. 11 H 7. cap. 1. Calvins case, 7. pars, Cook fol. 11. As the Army hath power, so now ad∣hering to the King, all the Lawes of God, Nature, and Man, are for them, their Armes are just, and blessed; and the King is bound in Justice to reward his Deliverers with Honour, Profit, and meet Liberty of Conscience.
To the VI. Quare. All the sixth Quaere containes Calumnies cast upon the Armie; the new elections are against all the Lawes men∣tioned in the Margin, 11 H. 4. c. 1. 1 H. 5. c. 1. 8 H. 6. c. 7. 23 H. 6. c. 15. and are against the ejection of the old Members: and by this it may be judged, what a House of Commons we have. By the said Lawes it ap∣peares, that if any undue returne be made, the person re∣turned is to continue a Member; the Sherifes punishment is two hundred pounds, one to the King, and the other to the partie that is duly elected; imprisonment for a yeare, without Bayle or Mainprise: and that person who is un∣duly returned, shall serve at his owne charge, and have no benefit at the end of the Parliament, by the Writ de solu∣tione feodorum Militum, Civium & Burgensium Parliament. And the tryall of the falsitie of the returne, is to be before the Justices of Assises in the proper Countie, or by Action of Debt in any Court of Record. This condemnes the Committee for undue elections, which hath been practised but of late times: for besides these Lawes, it is a Maxime of the Common Law, 3 Ed. 4.20. 5 Ed. 4.42. an Averment is not receivable a∣gainst the returne of the Sherife, for his returne is upon Oath which Oath is to be credited in that suit wherein the returne is made. The said Statutes condemne elections of such men which were not resiant and dwelt in the Countie or Bo∣roughs for which they were returned; and any abusive practise of late times to the contrary, is against the Law, and ought not to be allowed. To the VII. Quaere. The Quaerist saith, That the Votes of the Independents in the Houses were arbitrarie, exorbitant, and irregular, and that they disposed and fingred more of the common Trea∣sure then others: That whole Quaere, I believe, is false and
slanderous; 37 E. 5. c. 17. and the Author ought to make it good, or else to undergoe the Law of Talton; which is, to suffer such punishment, failing of his proofe, as the accured should, in case of proofe made. To the VIII. Quaere. This Quaere is all minatorie and threatning, and the con∣trarie o every part is true: by the deliverance of the King and Kingdome from the bondage of that partie in the two Houses by the Army, their renowne will be ever∣lasting; they secure themselves, they content and please the Kingdome, Citie, and Countrey, as appeares by their con∣fluence to see his Majestie and the Armie, and their accla∣mations for his Majesties safetie and restitution: all which doth evidence to every one of the Armie, how acceptable the intentions of the Armie are to the people of this Land, who have been so long inthralled. Sir Thomas Fairfax, let your Worthinesse remember your extraction and your Ladies, by the grace and favour of the Prince, to be in the ranke of Nobilitie; remember what honour and glory the present Age and all posteritie will justly give to the restorer of the King to his Throne, of the Lawes to their strength, and of the afflicted people of this Land to peace: let the Colonels and Commanders under you, and likewise your Souldierie, rest assured, that they shall not only share in the renowne of this action, but also shall have such remuneration as their hautie courage and so high a vertue doth deserve: This his Majestie can and will doe, the Houses neither will nor can; and God blesse you all, and prosper you. I conclude all, as I have alwayes done: Without an Act of Oblivion, a generall Pardon, the Arreares of the Souldierie payd, and a regard to Libertie of Conscience, this Kingdome will certainly be ruined. FINIS.
