J866 R216579 99828305 32732
A Brief HISTORY OF THE Memorable Passages and Transactions, That have attended the Life, and Untimely Death, Of the Unfortunate Sr. Iohn Iohnston Who was Executed at Tyburn on the 23th of December, 1690. for Stealing Mrs. Mary Wharton. Together with his Behaviour in Prison, and what he Wrote there touching the Matter for which he Dyed: With his Pious Ex∣hortations, and Dying Expressions, &c. With a Short ELEGY, written by an Im∣partial hand, upon this Melancholly occasion. Licensed according to Order. Printed for J. Millet, at the Sign of the Angel in Little-Brittain. 1690.
A Brief HISTORY OF THE Memorable Passages and Trans∣actions, that have attended the Life and Untimely Death, of the Unfortunate Sir JOHN JOHNSTON; Who was Executed at Tyburn on the 23th. of December, for Stealing Mrs. Mary Wharton. IF we seriously consider the various Circum∣stances that attend Humane Affairs, they cannot but make us conclude, with the Philosopher, That no Man, however prosperous his condition may be in the beginning, or the greatest part of his Life, can be accounted Happy, before we see his Latter-end: For no Man can be accounted truly so, how great or promising soever his Affairs may be, till the Conclusion Crowns the Felicity. It happen∣ed once, (as we find it in a Credible Author) that a great and powerful Person, admiring in the progress of his many Successes, he was
never Crossed, Disappointed, or met with the least Misfortune: which made him seriously ponder with himself, (as we may say) to tempt his Destiny; and concluded to cast a precious King, which he esteemed above all his Riches, from a Rock into the Sea, to try how For∣tune would deal with him on that account; and so it happened, beyond his expectation, that se∣veral Fishes being taken for his use, the King was found in the Belly of one of them; which seized him with a Melancholly and Conceit, That his Misfortunes when they came, would sit heavy upon him, and so indeed it happened; for he soon after fell by a violent death. Many Stories, undoubtedly real, we might mention of this kind, but not being very pertinent to this affair, what has been said may reasonably suffice; though to make a little further pro∣gress of a somewhat different nature: many Persons, before any grand Misfortune has be∣fallen them, have, by an impulse in the Soul, in one manner or other, foreseen it, and per∣haps, laboured to shun it one way, when it has unexpectedly fallen out the contrary: But to come nearer. This unhappy Person, the subject of our Discourse, whose untimely fall has given an occasion of much Talk, was, as far as we can learn, and as indeed appeared in his Conver∣sation, one of a Liberal Education, the Son of considerable Parents; who in his tender
years, took care to bring him up in those ways that might make him appear an accomplished Gentleman, and carry some figure in the world, distinguishing him from the Inferiour Rank of Men; not leaving any thing undone that might make him fit for Conversation, or apt to do things worthy of his Birth and Edu∣cation. He was by Birth, a Native of Scotland; where indeed Learning (and especially the La∣tin Tongue) is very much promoted, and en∣couragement given on that occasion, it being a Language intestigable to most Nations, e∣specially to Travellers, or Men of any parts, rendring Conversation familiar in distant Coun∣tries, and amongst people otherwise of various Speech: And although divers Advantages offered in his younger years, yet nothing was so pleasing to him, as a desire to make himself known in the Field of Honour, the thirst of Millitary Glory filled his breast: and finding no considerable Service offer for the advantage of his own Country, he resolved to make him∣self known abroad: and having a sufficient Fortune to defray the Charges of such an un∣dertaking, (as being, according to report, no less than a Baronet of the Kingdom of Scot∣land, and the Second of that Rank, viz. Sir John Johnston of Cascaban:) Nor did his ex∣pectations fail him, for he found good Enter∣tainment in Flanders, and other places, beha∣ving
himself so like a Gentleman, that he soon was taken notice of, and preferred, doing many things that redounded to the gaining him Re∣spect and Credit: So that being looked upon as a fit Person for Service of this kind, he was not long without a Command, and did many signal Exploits, to the advancement of his own Reputation, and the encouragement of others: And when he had leasure-times, he Travelled to take a Survey of the Country, and to inform him in the Manners and Cu∣stoms of the People; and so he spent a consi∣derable part of his days, and Fortunate had it been for him, if he had always Courted Glory in the Camp of Mars, and not in an unlucky hour, medled with the soft Intrigues of Venus, which proved his Ruin: For having now lea∣sure to be in England with his Company, where he be haved himself very Civilly; and we hear not of any thing that offered as a blot upon him, till a Woman of Chester accused him with a Rape, which afterwards he avers, ap∣peared to be Maliciously suggested, the Woman being intited to it, as she said, when it came to a true understanding, by her Brother, who threatned her with death if she would not Swear it; and to avoid his Fury, fled to Ireland; the Circumstance of which, appears more at large in his Dying Words, though not much perti∣nent to what we here undertake, than that he absolutely denyed it with his almost last breath.
Likewise another Trick of the same nature, he said was put upon him at Utrecht in Holland, where he Quartered. But to return: He having an opportunity to be in London, and frequenting places where a resort of Gentlemen usually are, amongst o∣thers, he had a familiar Acquaintance with one Mr. Montgomery, a Gentleman of considerable Fortune; as also Captain James Campbel, both his Country-men, though that acquaintance proved very unlucky: However, a strict Friend∣ship being knit between them, he was found to be one in the party that Enterprized the carry∣ing away of Mrs. Mary Wharton, Daughter to Phillip Wharton, Esq Deceased, a Ʋirgin under fourteen years of Age, and an Heiress of 1500 pounds a Year, and above a Thousand pounds in Monies, and other Effects; for which he was Tryed, Cast, and received Sentence at the Old-Baily: But since, having met with a Paper sufficiently testified to be his own Hand∣writing, and left as the last Protestacions of a Dying-man, we may, as we hope, without gi∣ving any offence, incert the Account he gives of the whole matter, as it happened in the many Circumstances that attend this Affair. Sir, (says he, meaning the Minister to whom he gave or sent the Letter) I think it not amiss, as a Dying-Man, to give you a short Account of all my Innocency, and all the reason they have for bringing me to this untimely End.
On Fryday Morning, being the day she was taken away, about Ten of the Clock, Captain Campbel and Mr. Montgomery, came to my Lod∣ging with a Haunch of Venison: I asked them, what they were going to do? Mr. Montgomery told me, it was to Treat Madam Biarly, and the rest of the young Ladies; and that he would have Captain Campbell Marryed to one of them this Night; and asked me, if I would go and be a Witness to it. I told him, it must be by con∣sent, or I would have nothing to do with it. He told him, that if he did not procure her Con∣sent, he would not meddle with it; and so we parted, he desiring me to come and meet him at Six of the Clock, at a Coffee-house near his Lod∣ging, which I did, and met Captain Campbel there; and some time afterwards Mr. Montgo∣mery came and called us to the door, and told us, The Business was done. About 8 of the Clock, Madam Biarly's Coach came by, and they went all away; Captain Campbel called a Coach and Six Horses, and bid us go in, and ordered the Coach-man to drive after her Coach, and stop in Great Queens-Street. When she was put into the Coach, (as I'm a Dying-Man, and now receive the Sacrament) I could perceive no discomposure in her at all: For after some time spent by Mr. Campbel in his A∣mours, she began to talk of my Lord Argyle, and told us, that she had seen some of his Chil∣dren at Ham, and that he was Marryed to the
Dutchess of Landerdale's Daughter; and asked him if he were the Second Brother. Upon some Discourse, which I do not well remember, she gave him her Hand, that she would Marry him. This good Humour continued still with her; so that when the Parson desired her to say the words after him, she spake with so Audible a Voice, that the People in the Room heard her louder than the Minister. After the Ceremony was over, it was obser∣ved, that her Wedding-Ring was too Big: Her Husband told her he would change it to mor∣row: She said, No, it is not Lucky to Change a Wedding-Ring. At Supper there was nothing to be observed but an equal Satisfaction between both: When it was asked her, whether she inclined to Bed? She freely consented. The next Morning when we came and asked them how they Rested? She in particuler, answered Very well. About 10 of the Clock, Mr: Montgo∣mery asked her, if she would go to Mr. Pontac's to Dinner? She said, With all her heart: Where we went, and stayed till 4 in the Afternoon, and the House full of People. Then we went to our Lodgings, and played at Cards till half an hour after 9; then she went to Bed with all the seem∣ing pleasantness imaginable. This is the Truth, and no more, as I am a Dying-Man; neither truly, was it ever my intention or design, to be a Witness of any thing that would look like a Force; neither indeed, was there any occasion
for it, she being so very frank and free of her self to the Marriage. I forgot to tell you, I desired her in the Coach, not to be afraid of any thing, for I told her, there should be no∣thing of Force imposed upon her, she told me, she was not at all afraid of that, she wrote like∣wise to her Aunt freely a Letter, Desiring she might not be troubled for her, for she was very well with her Husband Captain Campbel, &c. And in this he persevered upon his frequent taking the Sacrament; and at the time of Execution, he likewise wrote a Letter, to shew a Christian Temper, wherein he expres∣sed himself heartily, willing freely to for∣give those that had injured him, intreating and requesting his Friends to rest satisfied, &c. During his continuance in Prison after Con∣demnation, he sent for several Eminent Di∣vines to assist him with Consolation and Com∣fort, and to prepare him for another World; appearing wholly to set himself about the great Work he had to do, in making sure his Peace for an Eternal Consolation; he was oft in Me∣ditations and Prayers, expressing his own vile∣ness and unworthiness, for the Sins he had committed against God through the frailty of Youth, and the corruption of Nature; earnest∣ly begging that he might be thoroughly wash∣ed and cleansed in the Blood of Iesus Christ, that so his pollutions being done away, he might
at the end of his Life, enter into one more Glorious; and so he continued to wean him∣self from worldly things, and six his thoughts upon everlasting Ioys, and have his Eyes up to the place whither he hoped he was hastening; he shewed a very even Temper and Disposition, and received the Counsel and Cordial Advice that was given him, with much heed and at∣tention, and made all manner of visible Im∣provement of it, receiving the Notice, that he must prepare for Execution, with great mild∣ness and less concern, than was expected upon the approach of such melancholy News. On Tuesday morning about eleven of the Clock, he was put into a Mourning Coach, and followed by a Herse, to bring back the Body; he was attended by two worthy Divines, and was so far from fear of Death, that be∣fore he came out of the Prison, he blessed God that his mind was so well satisfied, and by the Grace of God, he was so prepared to dye, that if a Reprieve should come, it would do him an injury rather than a kindness; and when he came to the place of Execution, one of his Friends by the Coach side, told him, That he then came from the King, and no Re∣prieve could be obtained for him, at which, he did not in the least seem mov'd: being come out of the Coach, and standing in a Cart, he made a very long Speech to the People, mostly re∣lating to the circumstances that attend the un∣happy
Accident that had occasioned his coming thither; in all the material Points, agreeing with what is mentioned in his Letter: And then came to his Exhortation in these, or as near as could be taken, like words. Gentlemen, I Must now exhort you to be careful for the Salvation of your own precious Souls: Gentlemen, He that has been bred a Souldier, has not perhaps, Lived so strict to the Rules of Christianity as some other Men. I con∣fess, I have left undone those things which I ought to have done, and have done those things which I ought not to have done; but however, Let me intreat you, that you would remember your latter end: I pray God that none of you all may come to an untimely end, yet remember, that you must come to an end, your time must have a period. I bless God, my Life and Conversation has not been so odious and obnoxious to the World, nor I hope, in the sight of God, but that I have confidence in his Mercy; and I hope, that those Di∣vines have been with me, can Justify that there is nothing that hath come from me, but what hath proceeded from a True and Pe∣nitent Heart: And I beg, that you would offer up your Prayers to the Throne of Grace for me, because no man can say, he does not want the Prayers of the Righteous, for God
A short ELEGY, by an impar∣tial Hand, on the untimely Fall of Sir John Johnston. WHat melancholy thoughts should now arise? Here sighs suffice not, this requires wet eyes: Tears are the east of Tribute we can pay, When in the prime of Life, Life's snatcht away. Ah! Johnston, thou art gone, mifortunes hand, Has broke the Glass & scatter'd thy frail Sand; Grim Death, an envy'd Triumph has obtain'd, A too too early Conquest he has gain'd. o have I seen a blushing Rose look gay, And scatter'd sweets in Focus's fragrant way: Then suddenly a blasting Wind bereaves er of her Glory, withering her Leaves. hat made thee hast to an untimely date? was friendship that deserv'd a better fate: t here's the Comfort, Heaven perhaps decreed, at you from Earth should this hard way be freed.
Rather than by Disase or lingring Paein, And in full vigour Storm, the Starry plain; Break thro' the Aure Battlements by Pra The violent by force, Are seated there. Your Pious End did you a Souldier show, To fight for Heaven, as well as Earth below Go then unenvy'd to the Realms above, Ne'er more to fall a Sacrifice to Love. Love there Refin'd, remains, no better Seed Do's mix its Corn to rear a bainful weed; That like wild Gourds do's in the Pot crow Death. To make what shou'd give Life expel o breat Epitaph. REader, consider e'er you censure pass, Tho' Death untimely break this brit Gla Pity at least must make you drop a tear, VVhen such Misfortune on Earth's-Stage appe Say Humane Frailty brought him to his end, And in condoling, shew your self a Friend. FINIS.
