L1787 R20611 12610209 64340
LETTERS To the Council of State, From the Commissioners of the Mili∣tia of several Counties, &c. Informing them of the several Marches of Colonel Lamberts Forces. And shewing their readiness to suppress them. AND A Letter from the Lord Montagu, expressing the Fleets obedience to the Council and Parliament. ALSO A Letter from Col. Ingoldsby, who with his own hands took Col. Lambert Prisoner. WITH Some further Information given by the Mes∣senger that came first with the News, and was in per∣son at the Randezvouz on Edge-hill, when Col. Okey and Major Creed appeared there. LONDON, Printed by Abel Roper and Thomas Collins, Printers to the Council of State, 1660.
A LETTER To the COUNCIL, From the Commissioners of the Mi∣litia of Glocester-shire. Right Honorable, WE have received Information by the Letters of several Persons of Quali∣ty, that there hah been for this week last past, many dangerous Meetings of sundry dis-affected persons, at the House of Captain John Croft of Neather-Swell, in this County; We have therefore thought fit to send out some honest and discreet persons, to make what further Discovery thereof might be, from whom we are ad∣vertised, as well by their Letter, as by the Oaths of
several Persons, that it is probable that certain of the Reduced and Discontented Officers of the greatest Quality have, and daylie do repair thither; as also, of a Randezvouz appointed by them to morrow at Edge-hill. We have therefore thought it requisite first to send out to apprehend and secure the person of the said Captain John Croft, and divers others, justly suspected by us, of which we thought it our duty to give you timely notice; and remain Your Honours humble Servants, Glocester, April 29. 1660. We are since the Writing of this, advertised by Letters from other places, that several of the Army Troops are marched, and ready to march from Worcester, Eve∣sham, Bristol, Tewksbury, and other Places, to meet Colonel John Lambert at a Rendezvouz, as they themselves af∣firm.
A Letter from the Commissioners of the Militia of Nottinghamshire. My Lord, WE had late notice of fuent Meet∣ings and Preparations of W by the Discontented Party in this Cou and that many of the Private Soul∣diers that Quartered in Town had their Horses all day yesterday ready saddled without Order of their Officers, and in the night time a small Party of them left their Colours; And this morning, about eight a Clock a Party of Horse consisting of a∣bout thirty (in which Party was Captain Lockyer, and M. Everard, who were lately sent Prisoners to London, and Captain Waine) marched through this Town, some with drawn Swords, one of them presenting a Pistoll at a Townsman, whereupon Captain Sherman drew out his Troop, and Captain Craddock's to pursue them, and all Captain Craddock's Troop excepting ten or twelve Souldiers Revolted, and marched with the said Party towards Melton in Leicestershire, designing (as 'tis said) to Rendezvouz under Colonel Lambert at Naseby in Northamptonshire, but Captain Sherman kept his Troop entire, and hath manifested himself very ready to our assistance, and in the Service of the Country, and his Souldiers have likewise declared themselves to
be obedient and faithful to his Excellencies my Lord General Monck's Commands, therefore we pray that his Troop may be continued amongst us, and another faithful Troop added to him. Upon the entrance of Captain Lockyer's Party into the Town we received an Alarm, and the Townsmen did rise in Armes, for their own and our defence, and there was immediately about four hundred men drawn out into the Meadows by Colonel White and two Guards appointed out of their own for he Bridges, and another for the Castle (which Cptain Galand, who dwells in it, hath made so late Fortifications about) for our present safe∣guard, and prevention of Insurrections amongst us; For which purpose we have desired the Sheriffs assist∣ance in raising the well affected of the County by his Posse Comitatus, and have intimated the danger to our Neighbouring Counties, with whom we desire to hold correspondence for the Preservation of our Peace, a∣gainst the Enemies thereof, Presuming the Council will be pleased to make a favourable construction of our Actions in this Exigency, and speedily fortifie us with Instructions and Power to serve your Honours in the defence of our Country. And we have thought fit to acquaint the Council, that Colonel Whalley and Colonel Goffe are now at Southwell in this County, and that Colonel Disbrow was at Cotgrave the last Wednes∣day. We remain (My Lord) Your most humble Servants. Nott. 21 April, 1660.
Major Beakes Letter from Coventry. Right Honorable, IN obedience to your Lordships Order, I hasted to this City, which I found under a competent guard, the Citizens having put themselves in armes upon an apprehension of some design up∣on it; it is now much more secure, the Com∣panies being up according to your Lordships Order. Its very evident, that this place would have been at the dispose of your enemies, had not some of your Ser∣vants upon the place been very active. Since Thurs∣day night we have been surrounded with parties of Horse, consisting of 40 and 50 in a Company, and but one party has hitherto appeared with Colours. Ye∣sterday there appeared a Troop about Dunchurch, who greatly alarm'd the Country; they stopt for some time a Company of Foot of Colonel Streaters Regiment disposed for this place; he that had been formerly Ma∣jor of the Regiment, produced order from the Lord Lambert to march back; but after some pause they made a shift to break through the temptation and come forward. Part of this Troop (to the number of 30) ap∣proached within a mile of us, and meeting several Members of Parliament, gave a check to their journey, and so they were forced to return hither again: but sen∣ding some Scouts to discover their motion and number, I understand that part of them went towards Edgehill,
and th'other to Daintry; where its said a Troop o Horse stayed for them; they give out that the Army is wholly theirs. The last night late appeared a Troop of 60 within a mile on th'other side of the City, and they crossed the Country the way leading to Edgehill, where several parties of them appeared this 3 dayes. From all parts we have advertisement of their seizure of horses, and their actual declaring for Lambert, whom many judge to be in these parts. Any command your Lord∣ship shall think good to lay upon me shall faithfully be performed by Your Lordships most humble servant, ROBERT BEAKE. Coventry, April 22. 1660. The High Sheriff is raising the Countrey.
