M1103 R1888 12776478 93774
ELEƲTHERIA: OR, An Idea of the REFORMATION IN ENGLAND: AND A History of NON-CONFORMITY in and since that Reformation. With PREDICTIONS of a more glorious REFORMATION and REVOLUTION at hand. Written in the year 1696. Mostly compiled and maintain'd from unex∣ceptionable Writings of Conformable Di∣vines in the Church of England. To which is added, The Conformists Reasons for joining with the Nonconformists in Divine Worship. By another Hand. LONDON, Printed for J. R. and sold by Sam. Philips Bookseller at Boston in New-England, 1698.
THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER. THIS Treatise I received by a Trader from New-England from an unknown hand (a Learned Nonconformist there, as I guess him to be.) I had not time to have the Judg∣ment of some judicious Divine here (for a number of them was desired to be sent this Season into those parts) therefore I have adventured to print it on my own Judg∣ment; and tho I will not presume to be a competent judg, yet I may say this, that it is a brief, smart, and (I hope) a true History of the darkness of Popery, the first Rise of the Reformation, and the great struggles for further Reformation ever since; and all this made good by
the Writings of many Divines of the Church of England. The Printer having left room at the latter end, I thought good to add a Sheet which I received from a Reverend Di∣vine of the Church of England, which I hope will not offend the Author of this Treatise, in as much as it may be use∣ful to the Reader to convince him that there are some conformable Divines, even at this time, that heartily desire and la∣bor after Union and Communion with all the faithful in the Land, whether Conformists or Nonconformists; the Church of England having in her Articles given this definition of a Church, viz. The visible Church of Christ is a Con∣gregation of faithful Men, in which the pure Word of God is preached, and the Sa∣craments be duly administred according to Christ's Ordinance, in all those things that of necessity are requisite to the same. I leave the Reader to make the Inference. Aug. 18. 1698. Vade, Liber, quanquam sis parvus mole, sed amplum Lectori Fructum det Deus Omnipotens.
TO THE BOOKSELLER. SIR, THIS is not the first time, that you have been address'd from an un∣known Hand, with matters which were worthy to be made known, and which by your charitable care have been made known to the whole English Nation. The Character which you deservedly have, even in America, as well as Europe, is that of a good Man; and agreeably to that Character, you will by the Publication of the Manuscript here sent you, come to the Na∣tion with good Tidings. The Author of this Manuscript lies con∣cealed from you, and from all its Readers, only that he may, till a fitter Opportunity, preserve his Teeth from some few kicking Unreasonables: But the Matter of it is a Discourse, wherein with Truth closely followed, there is expressed such a Spirit of union with all good Men, whether Confor∣mists
or Dissenters, that none of them can be offended at. It cannot but be a Satisfaction unto the lovers of Truth, to be entertained with an History, thus unexceptionable: and a Per∣son of such a disposition as yours, to serve your Country and the Church of God in all its Interests, cannot but rejoice in an oppor∣tunity to communicate unto the Publick a little Book, accommodated so much as this, unto those Interests. You will find the Composure brief; but you will find a variety of acceptable things, crowd∣ed into this grateful brevity: the Stile also I hope you will find not unacceptable: and tho 'twas written in the year 1696, I sup∣pose 'tis grown but the more seasonable, by being till now reserved. But all this I leave to your better Judg∣ment, and subscribe, SIR, Your hearty (tho unknown) Friend and Servant. Boston in NEW-ENGLAND, May 10. 1698.
ELEƲTHERIA. §. 1. WE have seen a great RE∣VOLUTION, and we are e're long to see a greater. There are very considerable Questions, which do, and will, and cannot but exercise the minds of good Men in the English Nation. To assist agreeable Answers unto those considerable Questi∣ons, there can scarce any more significant thing be offered, than an incontestible Idea and History of the REFORMATION. And one is here brief∣ly exhibited, which the consenting Pens of con∣formable Writers in the Church of England, all along here quoted, have rendred incontestible. You have here a relation and a description of a marvellous Matter, whereof I may say, as Austin once did of another Matter, Quisquis non videt, caecus: Quisquis videt, nec laudat, ingratus: Quis∣quis laudanti reluctatur, insanus: Those Men are blind and mad who do not acknowledg it. But the Reader is thereupon surprised with a further Advice of this importance: Believest thou? Thou shalt see yet greater things than these. And when his courteous patience hath carried him to the end of this little Treatise, he will see upon what Authority this Expectation is with so much freedom uttered; he will see that it is no Fa∣naticism.
§. 2. And now, Reader, be willing to travel so far into Antiquity, as to take a view of the Con∣dition, whereinto the Christian Church was fallen by the Apostacy, which, as the Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ long before expresly foretold, was to come upon it. When the Imperial and Heathenish Power once flourishing at Rome, which hindred the Revelation of that wicked one, was taken out of the way; and in the fourth and fifth Century, the fierce Nations of the Northern Barbarians made their violent Assaults upon the Roman Empire, and carried all before 'em, with an ir∣resistible Inundation of Desolation; Then a little Priest had opportunity to establish himself with a mixt Religion among those barbarous Nations, and then there appeared openly in the Temple of God that ANTICHRIST, who calls himself (what indeed the very name ANTICHRIST most properly signifies) The Vicar of CHRIST. This Antichrist, or the Satanical Spirit, working in the Bishop of Rome, was conceived as early as twenty five years after the Ascension of our Lord, in affectations of Ecclesiastical Prehemi∣nency, when the Apostles accordingly gave no∣tice of him; and he was compleated about six hundred and sixty six years after this, when Image-Worship was effectually pressed by the Ne∣buchadnezzar of the Western Babylon, with the ruin of the Iconoclastick Emperors that refused it. But between those Terms, even about the year 450, there were no less than ten Soveraign Kingdoms, which, taking advantage from the Confusions whereinto the Empire was fallen,
set up for themselves; and according to the Sa∣cred Oracles, when those ten Kingdoms received their Power, then, even in that ONE HOUR, there got into the Throne the Antichristian Beast, unto whom it may be the Spirit of Prophecy had some respect in the most antient Writings of the Old Testament, which mention the Leviathan. From the Shipwreck of the Empire there were quickly gathered Planks to patch up that Fa∣brick, which they since call St. Peter's Bark: a crafty Clergy under one spiritual Monarch, be∣came the Conquerors of the Pagans, from whom they had been conquered; obtruding upon them a Christianity disguised with Paganism, and a Doc∣trine of Daemons, with a mighty Lerry of Mira∣cles, and Austerities of forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from Meats, to render the Cup of their Abomination the more inebriating. Thus the deadly Wound giv'n to the Fourth Mo∣narchy was healed; the Dragon that inspired it under its Heathen form, did now no less inspire it under its Christian; and the faithful People of God were not mistaken in those days, in their Conjectures upon the Signs of times, when Rome's falling into the Gothic hands, caused them to expect and exclaim with Jerom. He that hindred is now taken out of the way; ANTICHRIST is at hand! Gregory the Bishop of Rome had no sooner proclaimed it, in these memorable words of his twenty eighth Epistle, Because ANTI∣CHRIST, that Enemy of the Almighty, IS NOW AT HAND — I speak it boldly; whoever calls himself, or desires to be call'd by others, The UNIVERSAL BISHOP, is the FORE-RUN∣NER
OF ANTICHRIST. But Boniface the Bishop of Rome coming a few Months after him, obtained from the Traitor Phocas (Obtinuit mag∣nâ tamen contentione, saith Platina) The Title of THE SOVERAIGN AND UNIVERSAL BI∣SHOP. To the Reign of the ANTICHRIST, and so of Idolatry, Persecution, and all mysteri∣ous Iniquity, thus come into play, the great Lord of all Time hath allow'd a space, wearing the Denomination of TIME, TIMES, and HALF A TIME; or in plainer Expressions, twelve hundred and sixty Years; and so long all the effects of an horrible Apostacy make a very Gehinnom of that which was called CHRISTEN∣DOM. §. 3. While the doleful time of three hundred and sixty Years, and the yet more doleful two times of seven hundred and twenty years were slowly wheeling about, no Tongue is able to ex∣press, or Heart conceive, the lamentable Cir∣cumstances whereto the Holy God abandoned the World, for its indisposition to the blessed Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ: tho Wri∣tings were then commonly dated Regnante Chri∣sto, yet it may be truly said, that Satan then reigned, so as never more uncontrolably. It was then the Hour and Power of Darkness; the Devil (in his Vicar and Vice-Roy) was by the Wrath of God the King of Europe, and the De∣stroyer of the Faith; and it was but with too much of significancy, tho a Prosopopeia bold enough, there were then amed Letters of Thanks from Lucifer the Prince of Darkness, and
Emperor of the High Mysteries of Acheron, un∣to his dear Allies, the Clergy of the Church of this latter Age, which his Adversary Jesus Christ calls the Congregation of the Wicked, for the help which they had given him to bring the whole World under his Dominion; and saying this, a∣mong other things too justly said, Thou hast cleaved unto us, O our blessed Babylon; the Sove∣reignty of our Empire is by you propt up, and our intolerable loss restored! None but men intoxi∣cated unto the degree of Campanella's Phrensy, can dream (tho he did, and wrote it) that this Reign of the Pope was the promised Reign of our Lord: It is this papal Confusion upon the World which is by the All-wise Permission of Heaven, that which lies in the way of what according to the Promise of God we look for: And so it must, and so it will, until the wicked One be destroyed by the brightness of the second coming of him, whom we expect from Heaven as our Saviour. In those dismal days, [Reader, wilt thou not give thanks to God that thou wast not born in those days?] Clouds of thick Barbarity envelop∣ed and overwhelmed all Schools of Literature. The famous Maxim of old John Dullard past for no less than a Maxim, Quanto eris melior Grammaticus, tanto pejor Theologus. Espencaeus, one of themselves, acknowledges that among their best Authors, Graece nosse suspectum fuerit, Hebraice proprie Haereticum. Zuinglius and Colli∣nus had like to have lost their lives for medling with those dangerous Languages, Greek and Hebrew. To give the Etymology of the word Alleluja, rack'd the most extended Wits of
whole Ʋniversities. The best Latin they wrote was little better than the stuff in the Epistolae obscurorum virorum; the reading whereof cast the witty Erasmus into such a fit of laughter as broke an Abscess in his face, whereinto the Chirurgeons were going to make an Incision. What jejune and wretched Fooleries were the highest Learning of Colleges, the more learned Bullinger alone is a sufficient Relator: A little of Aristotle, confounded rather than expounded by the Commentaries of the Schoolmen, with an heap of pitiful Cobweb-Notions, was the Flinty Diet then gnaw'd upon; and Ludovicus Vives roundly swears for them, that when they some∣times brag'd of such abilities in Disputation as would have been too hard for Aristotle himself, Ego id pro vobis dejerabo, nam quas artes vos modo exomniastis, quas nugas, & quidem ex illius, ut pu∣tatis, Dogmatibus, ipse si revivisceret, non intelli∣gerit, ac ne suos quidem Libros, ut vos explicatis. Their Divinity was by a Renowned Writer, who lived three hundred years ago, too truly compared unto the Apples of Sodom, that under a fair skin had nothing but Ashes and Poison. Doctors of Divinity were created, and pronounced most sufficient, who never had read the Bible, (nor indeed had they any other Bible, than that vulgar Latin, wherein one of themselves, Isi∣dorus Clarius, declares that he found fourscore thousand Errors:) and, as Erasmus reports of them, at fourscore years of Age they had stu∣died nothing but a few silly Sophisms; and if any thing were quoted out of St. Paul, it asto∣nished them. Stephens and Gerhard are compe∣tent
Witnesses, that the Preachers of no less than half an hundred years standing, had never seen the New Testament: Musculus affirms, that multitudes of them never saw the Scriptures in their Lives; or if they ever did, it was like the Arch-Bishop of Mentz, of whom Amama tells us, that opening the Bible, he said, In truth I don't know what Book this is, but I perceive ev'ry thing in it is against us. Their Sermons were accordingly but ridiculous Harangues upon the Reliques or Merits of the Saints; or else the more exquisite Postillers made Peter Lombard, or Tho∣mas Aquinas, or Duns Scotus, the Oracles upon which they discoursed: Plures extiterunt (says Thanner) Thomistae quam Biblici. And as Me∣lancthon affirms, Aristotles Ethicks was in the pub∣lick Churches usually treated on; but all were generally of Hosius's Perswasion, Longè meliori talo res Ecclesiae staturas fuisse, si nullum Evange∣lium scriptum fuisset. In those days the Face of the Earth was almost covered with Religious Hou∣ses, as they called them; from whence continu∣ally issued out the swarms of those Locusts, the several Orders of the Religious, who in the great smoke of the bottomless Pit, which they brought with them, tormented Mankind exceedingly. Alsted above one hundred years ago, reckons two hundred twenty five thousand, forty and four Mo∣nasteries in Christendom; in which, if we reckon only twenty persons belonging at the same time to each of these Monasteries one with another, the Sum total amounts to four Millions five hun∣dred thousand eighty and eight Souls. If after so many Nations had utterly suppress'd these Aca∣demies
of the Devil, they were yet so nume∣rous, what horrid Shoals of Poisoners was the World before such a suppression plagued with∣al? Their Cells were not the seats of the Muses and the Graces, as Mutius tells us that Charles the Great intended them, when he founded so many of them; no, they were, as Hospinian tells us, rather squalid Prisons, and such Nurse∣ries of ignorance, that, More ignorant than a Monk, was a Proverb for the most ignorant; and it was no abuse to stile the Wretches who dwelt in them, Stoicas simias, cucullata Monstra, inscitiae & Cacologiae Doctores: yea they were the very Habitations of Devils, the Holds of every foul Spirit, the Cages of every hateful and un∣clean Bird; and such Antichambers of Hell it self, that if after Bernard's Invectives against them, we peruse the incontestible Accounts of them who then went under the name of the Reli∣gious, reported by Petrus Cluniacensis, by Cerbo Augustinianus, by Gualo, and Nigellus, and Honorius and Polydore Virgil, and others, but especially by old Nicolaus de Clemangis, we shall wonder at the Divine Patience that the Fate of Sodom (still impending over the abominable City of Rome) did not overtake them. The King over those Children of Pride, whose Title was His Holiness, ordinarily was a very Devil for wickedness, an Heretick, a Conjurer, a Per∣jurer, a Murderer, a Sodomite; such a filthy pack there was of them, that heathen Rome, with all her Nero's, or Domitian's, or Commodus's, or He∣liogabalus's, could never match them: And it may be guessed, what Saints the Common
Soldiers were, when they had such Hell-brands to be their Leaders. In those days the Wor∣ship of our Lord Jesus Christ was ev'ry where lost in a depraved mixture of Jewish and Pagan Rites (not without additions from the Alcho∣ran:) cursed Charms, and thousands of magical Tricks, were every where introduced, instead of our Lord's Institutions; insomuch that the Author of the Fasciculus Temporum says, A Monster of a Dog's Head on a Man's Body, ex∣hibited unto Lewis, benè potuit monstrosum statum significare hujus Temporis: Exorcisms and Amu∣lets, and very diabolical Fopperies were of universal use. The Faithful were sacrilegiously cheated of the Cup in the Eucharist (tho our Lord foreseeing this, expresly bad them ALL drink of it;) and the monstrous Figment of Transubstantiation was thrust down their throats with burning Firebrands. The variegated Idola∣try of Artolatry, and Mariolatry, and Hagiola∣try, and Angelolatry, and Leipsanolatry, and Iko∣nolatry, fill'd the Devotions of Mankind. A vile Man sitting in his Pontifical Chair, was with infinite Blasphemy adored as the Lord God, and that Stile of Dominus Deus noster Papa most blasphemously usurped. And such Devilism ruled in all places, that the Histori∣ans of these Periods cannot forbear crying out with Vitoduranus, O quam lamentabilis, & exe∣crabilis deformitas Ecclesiae, illis in temporibus facta est! In those days a pretended Successor to Simon Peter, advanced by the Arts of Simon Magus (and inferior Ecclesiasticks usually fol∣lowed the Example) exercis'd a prodigious
Tyranny over the Children of Men in all their Interests: The People could not approach the Word of Life; the Bread of Life was detain'd in inaccessible Concealments, and the blind led the blind; the Colliers Creed no man might presume to go beyond: Oaths of absolute Obedience to the Holy See fetter'd the Consciences of Men: Laws above and beyond, and contrary to those of our Lord were imposed upon Men, so many as make huge Volumes of Canons in Folio; De∣crees, Decretals and Extravagants made a huge body of Laws for all men to observe, which wise men would even disdain to study, but say with the Prophet, Non possumus, Domine, vesci stercore humano: Laws whereof Agrippa, who was a Doctor thereof, says, Non sunt à Deo nec ad Deum, sed a corrupto hominum ingenio profecta, & ad avaritiam excogitata. Filthy Lucre was all that was pursued by the greedy Dogs, who had now taken the charge of the Flocks; and the forlorn Flocks, that saw (as Mantuan de∣plores it) there were Venalia Romae Templa, Sacerdotes, Altaria sacra, Coronae, Ignis, Thura, Preces, Coelum venale, Deus{que} were under all possible Temptations to fall into downright Atheism. The Marriage of Priests was made a Crime unpardonable by those that were the most profligate of Whoremasters, Qui conjugia damnando prefitentur se nasci non de∣buisse: And one grand Brothel-House was made of that which was called the House of God. That Sham, the Fire of Purgatory, was an En∣gin
that made a lewd and a vast Crew of kna∣vish Churchmen, under a vow of Poverty, live merrily upon Rostmeat all their days. An Historian of their own asserts it with some re∣sentment concerning the one Kingdom of Eng∣land in particular, That there was not remaining so much Treasure in the Kingdom as these Wretches had in one three years extorted, and exported out of it, the Vessels of the Church only excepted: Infa∣mous Indulgences, denominated very properly The Treasury of the Church, were, as Rivet calls them, Emulgences, whereby besotted Sinners were milk'd of all the money they had: These did, as Matthew Paris expresses it, Romanorum locu∣los impraegnare, cram the Coffers of the Roma∣nists: But so ingenuous is the Taxa Camerae Apo∣stolicae, as to confess, Nota diligenter, quod hu∣jusmodi gratiae non conceduntur pauperibus; quià non habent, ergò non possunt consolari. A proud Prelate would set his foot upon the neck of Prin∣ces: Emperors must hold the stirrup for mount∣ed Beggars: Crowned Heads were treated with wonderful Indignities by a Tyrant of Souls; and if any one began to dispute his Tyranny, they dreadfully thunderstruck him, embaras∣sed him, and ruin'd him with their Anathemas; two Emperors alone were under a necessity to fight at least threescore bloody Battles against Enemies, which the Pope had raised against them. The Immunity from the secular Power claim'd by Ecclesiasticks, and the command which by means of Auricular Confession they got over the Souls of Men, put the world un∣der an intolerable Slavery to the Powers of
darkness. —But hold my Pen! 'Tis here no place for thee to transcribe the Letters of Petrarch to his friends about Rome's being the Mother of Harlots, or the Complaints which Clemangis made several hundreds of years ago, De corrupto Ecclesiae statu, or to abridg the whole Cartloads of Books, which a whole Army of Protestants (besides Monsieur Claude) have since written in defence of the Reformation. It is enough to bring in Baronius himself, lamenting the Tempora Ecclesiae infelicissima, & luctuosissima, The lamentable times, when into the Chair of Peter [Sir, Your Eminence might have call'd it, The Chair of Pestilence!] there got horribly dissolute, villanous, and infamous Monsters; when Strumpets ruled the Roast, and all holy Canons and Customs were extinguished; when our Lord Jesus Christ slept in the Ship with a profound sleep, and the violent Winds overwhelmed it, and he raised up no man to correct these things; yea, which was worst of all, there were no Disciples to awaken our Lord with their cries, but a dead sleep was upon them all. §. 4. Were there no Attempts of good Men in this doleful Time, and in these woful Times, to recover the Church out of this deplorable A∣postacy? Yes, but unsuccessful enough, because the last Half-time of the Antichrist was not yet arrived. Many particular Witnesses of the Truth, illuminated by the Grace of Heaven, saw through the thick mists of Error in these Ages of darkness; and in the very darkest places of
the Earth, which was then filled with Habita∣tions of Cruelty, so many were these Witnesses, that the World knows, the Catalogue of them hath made a Folio: And as those eminent men whose Heart-strings were made of a little finer Clay than the grosser part of Mankind, could not without much Abomination, behold the abo∣minable Principles and Practices then commonly prevailing; so there were not a few of them, who particularly discerned the evident Cha∣racters of ANTICHRIST. It is five hun∣dred years ago, that Abbot Joachim told the two Kings of England and France, That An∣tichrist was he who was then set on high on the Apo∣stolick Seat in the City of Rome; and that in the time of this Antichrist many Christians shall preserve the true Faith in Dens and Caves of the Earth, and in desart places, even until the consummation of Antichrist; and as long ago it is, that Peter of Blois exhorted his Friends in time to depart from the midst of that Babylon. It is impossi∣ble without admiration to read the most exqui∣site Oration made by the Bishop of Saltsburgh to the States of the Empire, in the year 1240, in which he calls the Popes the Priests of Baby∣lon; and finds at Rome the Antichrist which had the ten Horns, or Kings of Europe under him. Yea, as early as the year 991, a whole Council of Gallick Bishops cried out upon the Pope, He is the Antichrist who sits in the Temple of God! But the Admonitions of these great Men were generally Songs unto the deaf; I say generally, because I cannot say universally: I do particularly know, that in the twelfth Centu∣ry,
there was a Treatise emitted in the name of some faithful Servants of Christ, concerning the Antichrist, which they said was then manifest in the Papacy; whereupon some did then sepa∣rate. But the time for favor, the set time was not yet come! Indeed all this while our Lord Jesus Christ had his chaster Church, visibly existing among that chosen and holy Generation of Peo∣ple who, as Leger hath proved, were called Val∣denses, long before the time of Peter Valdo, which name (as they are now called Vandois from the word Vaux, that signifies a Vally) be∣long'd unto them, as inhabiting the Vallies of the Alps. From the sworn Enemies of that renowned People, we will briefly take their (therefore credible) Character and History. Claudius Sesselius the Archbishop of Turin, in a Book which he writ against the Waldenses, tells us, That the Sect of the Waldenses took its rise from a most religions Person, called Leo, that lived in the time of Constantine the Great, and who detesting the Covetousness of Pope Sylvester, and the immoderate Bounty of Constantine, chose rather to embrace Poverty with the simplicity of the Christian Faith, than with Sylvester to be defied with fat and rich Benefices; and that all they who were seriously Religious, joined themselves unto him. Reynerus Sacco the celebrated Inquisi∣tor, quoted by the Jesuit Cretzer in his Biliothe∣que of the Fathers, has a like Passage; he says, Among all the Sects there is none that hath been so pernicious to the Church of Rome as that of the Leonists, because it is the most antient, and hath continued longest; for some affirm that it began in
the time of Sylvester, and others in the time of the Apostles; and because they who are of it, have a great shew of Piety, live vertuously before Men, believe rightly of the Deity, and observe all the Ar∣ticles of the Creed. The Friar Belvedoras, ex∣cusing the Missionaries for their not converting so much as one of the Waldenses, when they were sent among them, assigns this Reason for it; The Heresy is too firmly rooted there, for any to be able to do good among them; they of the Val∣leys have been always, and through all times ac∣counted Hereticks. That sort of People call'd Waldenses, whose Errors, as Cascini the Fran∣ciscan Friar declares, consisted in this, That they denied the Church of Rome to be the Holy Mother-Church, and would not obey her Tradi∣tions: These, for the condition they submitted unto, were call'd the Poor Men of Lions: In Dauphine, they were nicknamed Chaignards: From the Country of Albie, where their opinions much obtained, they were called Albigenses: Tramontani were those called that passed the Alps: In England they were called Lollards, from one Lollard, a chief Instructer of them there; and strict Laws were there made against the Conventicles of those that had this name applied unto them; [Quaere, Whether ever yet repeal'd?] In Italy they were called Fratricelli, or Men of the Brotherhood, from their brotherly way of living with one another: In Germany they were call'd Gazares, a word that carries the highest Cursedness and Wicked∣ness in the signification of it: In Flanders they
had the name of Turpelins, that is to say, Men dwelling with Wolves, because the heat of Persecution sometimes drove them to seek for quarters among the wild Beasts in the Wil∣derness. This People were still disposed in sundry parts of Europe, with Circumstances no better than those which we have newly seen; Abbot Joachim, as their Quarter-Master, providing for them. They were always de∣spised, always distressed, always under hatches: When they made any Figure, the bloody Church of Rome, which cannot any more cease bloodily to persecute the Church of Christ, than the Leopard can change his Spots, quickly thundred out barbarous Croisados against them; in one of which Crosaidos alone, Bellarmine himself with triumph relates, there were killed no less than an hundred thousand; and Perionius avers, that in France alone by one Persecution upon this People, there were no less than ten hun∣dred thousand murdered. When such terrible Dissipations were overwhelming the Churches of our Lord abroad, it pleased him in the fourteenth Century to bless our English Nation at home, with our memorable Wickliff, who sounded the alarm of Reformation louder than any that had been before him; he being in∣structed especially by the Works of the godly and learned Robert Grosthead, set himself to decry the Pope as the very Antichrist; and that men might be rescued from the Snares of Popery, he not only preach'd and wrote a∣gainst the villanies of the Popish Clergy, but
also translated the whole Bible into the Eng∣lish Language; whereby those Impressions were made on the minds of Men that never could be totally effaced. His very Adversaries pro∣fessed themselves astonished at his Exercises and Abilities; none of the Bulls that roared from Rome against him, nor all the tricks of Papal Malice, at home, could prevent his dying peaceably in a good old Age at Lutterworth: the very name of which Town (signifying the Pure Word) hath in it a pleasant intimati∣on of what this Town and the World was by Wickliff irradiated withal. But some of his followers, especially one Peter Payn, carried his Doctrines into Germany, where John Huss was thereby enlightened, and the Hussites began to grow considerable. Happy WICKLIFF! of whom, tho the mad Papists long after burnt his Bones, we will assign for an Epitaph, part of the Encomium which the Son of Sirach bestow∣ed on Simon the Son of Onias: He was as the Morning-Star in the midst of a Cloud, and as a Rainbow diverting the fears of a Deluge. §. 5. If Idolatry, if Heresy, if Cruelty could make a Babylon, the Church of Rome was now such a Babylon, that all who had any concern for their own everlasting Welfare, must think themselves concern'd now to come out of her; and it is well done of you, ye foolish Roma∣nists, to confess, that by Babylon the Oracles of Heaven intend Rome, when you go to prove Peter's being at Rome from the Text
where you find him at Babylon; Sirs, Who hath bewitched you? Christianity was now so lost among the generality of them who wore the name of Christians, that their description may be given in the language of Bernard, one too far himself plunged in the general Apostacy, Religionis Antiquae non selum virtutem amiserunt, sed nec speciem retinent. Let us behold an Idea of the Apostacy! I. Until the time of the Restitution of all things, 'tis the Gospel purely and plainly preached that must represent the Lord JESUS CHRIST unto the faith, and love, and joy of his People. But the Apostate Church, disliking such a spiri∣tual Representation of our Lord, forbids Peo∣ple to read the Scripture, and instead thereof ascends into Heaven to bring from thence Ima∣ges of his heavenly Glory; descends into the Deep, to bring up Crucifixes and Images of his resurrection from the Dead; and they must have graven Images of Christ, that he may be nigh unto them; as the fond People of old had their Calf in the Wilderness. II. The real Beauty of Divine Worship lies in our devout homage to one God in three Persons, and our distinct respect unto each of those Per∣sons: But the Apostate Church, not beholding this Beauty, instead thereof set off their own Worship with an external Pomp, agreeable to carnal minds; meretricious Allurements, under the pretence of Decency, and all the Pageantry of
Ceremonies, Vestments, Gestures, Musick, Painting, and beggarly Elements, Rites never instituted. III. Believers are admitted unto a very pecu∣liar and most intimate Communion with our Lord Redeemer, in the Sacrament of the holy Supper; A CHRIST suffering for us, is in that Sacrament, by the Symbols of Bread and Wine, so tendred unto the faithful, that in their obedience to his appointment of it, they do with ineffable advantage partake of him therein. But the Apostate Church, not having the in∣ternal experience of this matter, have in the room thereof, invented the sottish and horrid Monster of Transubstantiation, with the Sacrifice of the Mass. They that could not bow down to this Image, have been cast into the fiery Furnace! IV. There is a Catholick Church which is a Mystical Society, purchased and purified by the blood of the Lord Christ, and married unto him, and possessed by his Holy Spirit; part of this Family of God is, in conjunction with the holy Angels, arrived unto perfect Holiness in Heaven; part is on Earth, in the sure way unto it. But the Apostate Church confines to it self the Notion of the Catholick Church; it is a Society whereto not one inward and sincere Grace of Christianity is requisite; a visible profession of subjection to Romish Canons, is all that is required unto the Constitution of that Society; 'tis a wicked thing, by cursed Liga∣ments compounded for a secular Domination,
that anathematizes all that conform not unto the Superstitions of it; and a Moloch which horribly devours the Children cast by the Ghostly Fathers into its devouring Flames. V. The Churches true Glory lies in its Ʋnion to its Lord; his Presence with it, and Spirit in it; and its conformity and fidelity to his Laws alone: all the Gaities of this World are not com∣parable to this Glory. But the Apostate Church cannot see any comliness in the Spouse of Christ as adorned only with his Graces: in the place thereof they have brought in worldly Grandeurs, Dignities, Promotions; and the Glories of this World, which our Saviour would not accept at the Devil's hands, and on the Devil's Terms, in his Temptations, the Devil has proffer'd unto this Man of Sin, and he has accepted of them. VI. The Church is a Body which must have an Head, both for Influence and for Govern∣ment, always present with it: And it is a wonder how Men could think of any other Head for this Body, besides the Lord Jesus Christ, without casting away their Bibles. But the Apostate Church have set up another supream Head of the Church, even the Pope, the worst Idol that ever was heard of: One Pope re∣scinds the Decrees of another, and it may be throws the Carcase of his Predecessor into the River; yea, Wretches which even their own Vo∣taries in their most allowed Histories call Mon∣sters, and such as for their Diabolical Practices,
yea, their explicit Covenants with Devils, and their being very Devils in Flesh, were confessed Ecclesiae opprobria, have been set up as the Vicars of Christ, the Centers of Unity, and the Husbands of the Church. VII. The Discipline which our Lord has com∣manded his Church to observe, must be such as to serve the Designs of Holiness, and shew unto Mankind the Love, Care and Faithful∣ness of the Lord himself towards the Church, and give a Testimony and Praeludium of his future Judgment; all of an Efficacy purely spi∣ritual. But the Apostate Church in the lieu thereof, has erected a Discipline, consisting in a meer Tyranny over the Estates, the Liberties, the Lives of Men; a Tyranny managed with Weapons, which are mighty through the Devil, to destroy all that it falls upon; a Tyranny which by Courts, Fines, Mulcts, Imprison∣ments and Capital Executions, hath made the Earth a Shambles, and been drunk with the Blood of Martyrs. VIII. The Disciples of our Lord own them∣selves obliged by him as far as they can, to disciple all Nations; They that have obtained precious Faith, must as they are able, propagate the Faith; Nevertheless, 'tis only the diligent and patient, and uncorrupt preaching of the Gospel, by which the Gospel would run and be glorified. But the Apostate Church dislikes this primitive way of proselyting Mankind unto the obedi∣ence
of the Gospel: A Congregatio de propagan∣dâ side, with a vast crue of Missionaries from the overstockt Fraternities, is continually employed for the gaining of Proselytes; but by what Methods? truly by Fire and Sword, and bloody Murders and Massacres, like those which the Spaniards committed upon the poor Indians, when the Children of Cain butcher'd more In∣nocents in America, than some think there are People alive at any one time in Europe: or by the Inquisition, a thing that can't be painted, with∣out first besmearing, as the exact Painter for that purpose once did it, the Table with Blood; a meer Cacus's Den, the horriblest Ar∣senal of Cruelty that ever was upon the face of the Earth; or finally, by Seditions, Rebellions, Conspiracies, the embroiling of Nations, and subverting their fundamental Constitutions, en∣snaring wretched Persons, first into Debauche∣ry, so into Atheism, then into Indigency, that they may an last be taken in the Snares of Popery. IX. 'Tis a principle of our blessed Religion, that God the Sovereign Lord of all things, is to be obeyed absolutely and universally: His Will is to be the highest Reason of our Obe∣dience. But the Apostate Church has superceed∣ed this, by imposing upon Men a Vow of blind Obedience to their Superiors, urging for that Vow the Example of Abraham's Obedience: And thus all the Interests of Men lie at the Mercies of a spurious Offspring, the most un∣natural
Dregs of Mankind, who are nourished up to be the Janisaries of the Papal Empire. X. The Nature of Man is polluted by Sin, and the pollution must be taken away before Men can enter into the Kingdom of God; nor can any thing but the Blood of the Lord Jesus Christ the Son of God, cleansing us from all our Sins, take it away. But the Apostate Church dis∣cerns not the sweetness of this Mystery, the Blood of the Son of God applied unto the Con∣science, to purge it from dead works: the pal∣try Fopperies of Holy Water, of Pilgrima∣ges, of Disciplines, of Masses, and various Com∣mutations, were employed as Purgations of Sin; and when they found that these things would neither purify nor pacify the Conscience, they feigned a certain subterraneous Purgatory, where the Souls of Men were by exquisite Afflictions made meet for Heaven; and their Venial Sins, which they make the most, are capable of an Expiation after this life, tho there were no Repentance in it; and this Fiction they placed behind the Curtain of Mortality, that so no man living might find out the Cheat: and thus adding an imaginary Store-house of Ecclesiastical Merits, the Keys whereof are committed unto that great Adulterer at Rome, they have cheated Nations of Riches far be∣yond the Revenues of Emperors. XI. All our help against the Flesh, the World, and the Devil, and our Deliverance
from all evil, is in our Lord Jesus Christ alone; who by his Death on the Cross, pur∣chased all this Good for us; and it is by Faith in him, that we bespeak and enjoy the actual Communication of it. But the Apostate Church only makes the sign of the Cross, instead of an Application to him who died on it: and in∣numerable Virtues do they ascribe unto this cursed Idol. XII. They that approach unto God, should be in all holiness free from offensive Defilements. But the Apostate Church hath to this end bor∣rowed from the old Pagans, the ludicrous Trifles of sprinkling all with holy Water, that they may be holy. XIII. That our Souls may live, the death of our Sins is necessary; and it is in the Destruc∣tion and Extinction of our vitious Habits, by the Spirit of Christ crucified, in the daily Duties of laborious Devotion, that we have our necessary Mortification. But the Apostate Church has prescribed Monastical Retirements, Penances, and Self-Macerations, not pleasing unto God, but highly pleasing to the Daemons in Chains, whose delight it is to see Men also in Chains of Darkness. XIV. Good Works, tho utterly excluded from any share in the Justification of Sinners, are yet indispensably needful to the present and future Comfort of Believers. But the Apostate
Church, pretending to perform good Works from their own Free-will, do advance the pre∣tence unto the vain pride of Merit in them; yea they carry on the Merit, even to a Su∣pererrogation. Such Protestant Pens as our in∣comparable Owen's, have abundantly stated these points of the grand Apostacy. I think I have now recited no less than twice seven Ar∣ticles, of that woful Apostacy, whereinto the Church in the Western part of the Roman Em∣pire was precipitated, while at the same time the Church in the Eastern part of the Empire fell under the Mahometan Oppressions and Con∣fusions. And now Qui Satanam non odit, amet tua Dogmata, Papa! But is not here enough to anticipate the Ap∣prehensions of my Reader, that the truest and furthest Recovery out of the Romish Apostacy hitherto seen, is that which they that go by the Name of Non-Conformists in the English Nation, have endeavoured? And that it is not possible for the Church to recover effectually out of this Apostacy, without acting upon such Principles as have at last produced in the Ame∣rican Desarts, a whole Nation of Non-Con∣formists? §. 6. Till the TIME, and the TIMES of Antichrist had rolled away, the call to come out of Babylon could not become effectual unto the Nations that were under the Babylonish In∣toxications;
but when the last HALF TIME of an hundred and eighty years, left for the Reign of this Antichrist, was entring, it was high time for our Lord JESUS CHRIST, then to make some reprisal of that Kingdom. Which at the time of the end, shall under the whole Heaven be given to the People of the Saints of the Most High. Then it was, that the re∣markable Prophecies uttered by the two Bo∣hemian Martyrs an hundred years before, must receive their accomplishment; and the People who had been too long fleec'd, yea, flay'd by the Tyrannies of Rome, grew willing to pare the Talons of the Ecclesiastical Harpies. Behold how great a Matter a little Fire kindles! In the year 1617, Pope Leo X. under a pretence of War against the Turk, sent abroad his Indul∣gences, promising the Pardons of Sins to all that would give Mony for them; and among the Hacksters of these Pardons, was one Tece∣lius, a Dominican Friar, of whom Lonicerus writes, Pontificis dignitatem & potentiam, Indul∣gentiarumque virtutem & efficaciam impudenter praedicabat; yea, he adds, The Man kept bawling, that there could be no wickedness committed, so great, but it might be forgiven by these Indulgences; and that the Souls tor∣mented in Purgatory, as soon as the Mony [ten Shillings] was flung into the Bason, skipt for Joy, and being released from their Pains, flew up to Heaven. MARTIN LƲTHER, one born at Isleben in Saxony, and now a Monk in the Order of St. Augustin, and a Professor of Divi∣nity
at Wittemberg, but a Person illuminated in the Article of Justification, by the private Conferences and Expositions of an honest old Monk on Paul's Epistles, began to oppose the impudent Cheats and Shams which these Col∣lectors of the Pope imposed on the People. He first wrote Letters to the Archbishop of Mentz, and the Bishop of Brandenburgh, for the re∣straint of these Abuses; the neglect of which Letters egg'd him on to publish Propositions, which exasperated the business, till he had been made a Sacrifice unto the Papal Fury, if the Duke of Saxony, then upon the Death of the Emperor, the Vicar of the Empire, had not been so moved by his powerful Preaching, as to abet him, and assist him in his Under∣takings. This was that famous Luther, of whom they that will acknowledg the least, must yet come to as much acknowledgment as Dr. More makes of him: I cannot think so very highly of Luther as some do (saith he) and yet I think him to have been a very happy Instrument in the hand of God, for the good of Christendom, against the hor∣rid Enormities of the Papal Hierarchy. And tho he might not be allowed to be the Elias, the Conducter and Chariot of Israel, (as some have stiled him,) yet I think at least he might be accounted a faithful Po∣stilion in that Chariot, who was well accou∣tred with his Wax Boots, oiled Coat and Hood, and who turned the Horses Noses in∣to a direct way from Babylon toward the
City of God, and held on in a good round trot thro thick and thin not eating to be∣spatter others in this High Fog, as he him∣self was finely bespattered by others. A∣bout the very same time, or about a year be∣fore, did Zuinglius appear at Zurich in Switzer∣land, against the like Abominations of Popery; nor could all the Compliments and Enchantments, with offers of Preferments from the Pontifical Chair, bribe him into silence; but he went on, till the Evangelical Truth was far and near embraced. Long would be our work, to tran∣scribe Seidan, and relate the Actions of Me∣lancthon that accompanied Luther, and of Oeco∣lampadius that accompanied Zuinglius in the Reformation; or so much as to recite the Names of the more than thirty Worthies, who were by the marvellous Providence of Hea∣ven, raised up to act great parts in this migh∣ty Revolution; and who had no secular En∣couragements, but bravely denied and renoun∣ced rich Livings, and encountred with the Cross in all its mortifications, for the sake of the Gospel, and were not unwilling to die, as well as to live, under the Circumstances particu∣larly related concerning some of them intes∣tate, Quià undè conderet, pauper Christi servus, non habebat: Only because the Name of CALVIN, a Person to be reckon'd one of the first three, is unaccountably, since the Tares of Arminius have been so cherished, become an Object of scorn and hate, among a Generation of mas∣queraded Enemies to the Reformation, who
arrogate unto themselves the stile of The Church of England, I may not leave that ve∣nerable name unmention'd, but I must men∣tion it with an Account of the Veneration, which the old Church of England paid unto it, when Dr. Carlton the Bishop of Chichester, in a Book dedicated unto K. Charles I. Anno 1626. thus wrote; As for Calvin, his Name and Doctrines are made odious; but why, I know not. Some take it for a sign of looking towards Popery, when the Members of our own Church offer such a service to the Papists, as to speak evil of them that have been the greatest Enemies to Popery, the greatest Propugnators of the Truth: And when Dr. Hakewel, Chaplain to Prince Charles, in a Book dedicated unto K. James I. Anno 1616, wrote thus: One of the main points you drive at, is to put us off from all fellowship and Com∣munion with those Churches, who acknow∣ledg Calvin to have been an excellent Instru∣ment of God, in abolishing and suppressing of Popery, and the clearing and spreading of his Truth; and so through Calvin's sides you strike at the Throat and Heart of our Religi∣on: And when Dr. Hoyl, a judicious Divine of the Church of England, in a Book dedicated unto Archbishop Ʋsher, as being written by his direction, wrote after this manner; That great Instrument of God's Glory, John Cal∣vin, was a Man of whom I had almost said, as once it was of Moses, That there arose not a Prophet since like him in Israel, nor
since the Apostles days was before him. His works shall praise him for Wit, Eloquence, Fulness and Soundness of Divinity, va∣riety and multitude, advanc'd among the highest, that the World may justly admire, how they could be so many, being so good; and so good, being so many. And much more to this purpose, too much to be in this place repeated, concerning this incomparable Man; the first line of whose Epitaph, at last gave him his true commendation: Romae ruentis Terror ille maxi∣mus. As for the common Cavil of our Episco∣palians, that Calvin was he who rebelliously ex∣pell'd the Bishop of Geneva, the Chief Magi∣strate of the City, 'tis as true as Heylins Geo∣graphy of that City. Let not me, but a con∣formable Author, Dr. Henry More, assure the Reader that the Bishop fled away eight months before Calvin's coming, being hated by the Citi∣zens for the Rape of a Virgin, and many Adul∣teries with their Wives, and in fear of his life for his Conspiracy with the Duke of Savoy, to oppress the Liberties of the City, for which his Secretary was hanged; and they who changed the Government were strong Papists, and afterwards main Opposers of the Refor∣mation. But I hasten to observe, that when Angels thus flew thro the midst of Heaven, preaching the everlasting Gospel, so quick was the Progress of the Gospel, and so wonderful its Conquest, and its Triumph, as to fill half of Europe in less than forty years, with Church∣es, which from a Protestation made by several
States, that were zealous for the Reforma∣tion, against the Decrees of a Popish Diet, in the year 1526, have been ever since called PROTESTANTS: A Progress of Pro∣testantism, which at length caused Bellarmine, to confess and complain, That Heresy now possessed almost all Germany, Denmark, Nor∣way, Sweedland, Gothia, Hungary, France, Eng∣land, Scotland, the Low Countries, Polonia, Bo∣hemia, Helvetia, and it was got over the Alps into Italy. The time was now come that the ten Kings must begin to hate the Whore that had bewitched them; which Hatred was very par∣ticularly exemplified by K. James V. of Scot∣land, when the Popish Prelates were advising him to destroy his Nobles and Barons that were Friends unto the Reformation: Wherefore (said he, as 'tis related by that rare Gentle∣man, Sir James Melvil) did my Predecessors give so many Lands and Rents to the Kirk? Was it to maintain Hawks, Dogs and Whores to a num∣ber of idle Priests? The King of England hangs you; the King Denmark beheads you; and I will stick you with this Whingar! Whereupon he drew out his Dagger, and they fled out of his Presence. 'Tis observ'd that, in the first Song that any Writings have recorded or mentioned, even that of Moses, many words are put in the future Tense, and the very first words are, Then SHALL sing Moses. I am not igno∣rant, that from this very Remark the Jewish
Rabbins hence inferr'd the Doctrine of the Resurrection; and there are Christian Writers, who hence infer that the Song looks not on∣ly backward, on the deliverance of the Church from Egypt, but also forward, on the deliverance of the Church from that worse than Egyptian, even the Antichristian Yoke in the latter days. Truly, the Church now was beginning to get out from the Sea, where tho they had been tortured with Fire, yet they had hitherto been detained with impassable Flakes of Ice over their Heads: The Church now therefore began to sing the Song of Mo∣ses the Servant of God, and Heaven eccho'd unto the Melody: And now —Non ultra tolerare potest Ecclesia porcos, Duntaxat ventri, veneri, somnoque vacantes. §. 7. When the antient Babylon was to be de∣stroyed, way was to be made for it, as the Sacred Oracles foretold, By the drying up of her Waters; and Xenophon, as well as others, reports to us, how wonderfully Cyrus fulfilled what was foretold, when he made his Passage to Babylon, by turning the Euphrataan Wa∣ters into another Channel. Then it was not long before her broad Walls [fifty Cubits broad, saith Herodotus] were broken down, and her high Gates [two hundred Cubits high, saith Strabo] were burnt with Fire. Truly, the Reformation thus begun, did wonderfully
turn the Waters of our Mystical Babylon into another Channel; whole Nations of People were turned another way: And this prepares that Babylon for the approaching day; when Babylon shall become a Desolation among the Nations, and she shall become a burn∣ing Mountain, overthrown as God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah. But the Antichrist had yet an half-time to reign; and therefore no wonder if but half-work were done in the separation then made from him. Neverthe∣less, the Reformation which was no where ful∣ly perfect, had in several Nations, various degrees of its perfection; some went much further than others in restoring of Primitive Christianity, and reforming of all things, ac∣cording to the word of Christ. In this mat∣ter, very particular and remarkable was the Condition of England, where the best part of the Reformers who began the Work in the days of King Henry VIII. on Mo∣tives and in Manners well known to the World, and carried it on in the days of K. Edward VI. did really desire to pursue it as far as they should see light for it in the Sacred Scripture, the only Rule of Reforma∣tion; but there was always a corrupt, and cun∣ning Party, who being jealous of too far a Secession from Rome, did resolve still to re∣tain at least so much of the Romish Disci∣pline, as might gratify their Aims at a worldly Domination in the Church of God. All the World hath long since been informed,
that in the year 1554. a number of conside∣rable Protestants, flying from the bloody storm of Persecution, with which the miserable Queen Mary for a while retarded and confounded the Reformation, that the Reign of her ever glorious Brother had so far advanced, were kindly entertain'd at Frankford; and when those Holy Men pursued that Reformation so far, as to leave out of their Worship those unhappy Ceremonies, which they perceived likely to prove scandalous unto the purer Church∣es of God, several Men that were furiously zealous for the Ceremonies, did with all pos∣sible fury disturb them in their Proceedings. This renowned Congregation of Non-Confor∣mists, then wrote unto Zurick in their own Vindication, such memorable words as these: As touching the substance of the Book [of Common Prayer] we desire the observation of it so far as God's Word commands. But for the unprofitable Ceremonies, they are not to be used. Surely it were better they should never be practised, than that they should prove the subversion of our Church, which would be much hazarded by the use of them. If any think that the not using the Book in all points, will tend to the dishonor of the Laws of our late Sovereign of famous Memory King Edward VI. he seems little to weigh the matter; or else, hindred by Ig∣norances, knoweth not, that even they them∣selves upon consideration of Circumstances, have altered many things, and if God had not in
these wicked days prevented, would have altered more: and we doubt not but in our case they would have done the like. Those great Men, Mr. Knox, Mr. Fox, Mr. Cole and Mr. Whittingham, composed a Directory for the Congregation, like that of Geneva; and Knox preached, That by the word of God we must seek our warrant for the establishing of Re∣ligion, without which warrant nothing is to be obtruded upon Christians; and that in the English Service-Book there were supersti∣tious and impure, and imperfect things; and that the slackness in Reforming Religion when there was an Opportunity, was one of the many things whereby God's Anger against England had been provoked; and that whereas there were some not ashamed to say, that Reformation was perfected in Eng∣land, the contrary was proved in the want of a good Discipline, which appeared by the Troubles that good Master Hooper had sustained in the time of King Edward. But by the infamous Bigotry of Dr. Cox and his Associates, conformity to the scrupled Ce∣remonies was pressed at such a rate, that the oppressed Congregation was driven away unto Basil and Geneva; and the Prelatical party con∣tented not themselves, without seeking the very Blood of Mr. Knox by an accusation pre∣ferr'd against him; an Accusation so barba∣rous and inhumane, that the Magistrates of the City to whom it was brought, expressed their abhorrence of it; howbeit, his remo∣val
was thereby occasioned. If now there were inscribed on the Graves of these Per∣sons [In their Coffins here now lie shut up, they that first open'd the true PANDORA'S Box in the English Nation] it would be a stroke less liable to contestation, than that Popish one, which afterwards in Dr. Coxes Epitaph, gave such scandal as to be demo∣lished. Reader, In these troubles at Frank∣ford, there was the Epitome, and in some sort the Original of the struggles about Reforma∣tion, both pro and con, which have ever since distressed the Church of God in the English Nation: until at length a new England was found out, as a refuge from the storm of un∣scriptural Impositions urged with unnatural Per∣secutions. From the very beginning of the Reformation, there hath always been a Gene∣ration of Godly Men, desirous to pursue the Reformation of Religion, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government, according to the word of God, and the example of the best Reformed Churches: and there hath been another Gene∣ration of Men who have employed the Pow∣er which they have still generally had in their hands, not only to stop the progress of the desired Reformation, but also with innumerable vexations to persecute those that were the most hearty friends unto it. All Mankind knows that among those who jointly forsook the Papacy, there were different apprehensions about the Worship and Order to be maintain'd in the Church; and we have no Record of
any attempt for the healing of these differen∣ces, before there was by Law established one certain Form of Worship and Order; which thro the pertinacious adherency not only of most People unto their old ways, but even of the Bishops and Clergy, the greatest part of whom disliked the whole Reformation; and through the extreme scarcity of able Minis∣ters, underwent as little alteration from the former Usages as was possible. This Consti∣tution of things was very dissatisfactory to very many of the best Men in the Land; who yet considering the necessity of the Times, did more or less acquiesce in it, hoping and plead∣ing that the Reformation might proceed in due time unto more of Purity: but they that found their own secular Interests accommo∣dated in this Constitution, set themselves after a while to fine, silence, deprive, censure, and imprison those that were dissatisfied, and smite their Fellow-Servants, who remained in privacy under their Sufferings, waiting still for more of Reformation. Thus Edom refused to give Israel passage through his Border, wherefore Israel turned away from him! After some years of a fruitless expectation, the severities which were multiplied upon them drove mul∣titudes unto a more open separation from the things that were by Law established: a sepa∣ration, which yet was opposed by others that also passionately longed and even groaned for a National Reformation. Tho not being wholly agreed among themselves about the measure
of Separation or of Reformation to be attend∣ed unto, there insued several Inconveniencies thereupon which had no little Temptation in them. Then 'twas, that, as our great Owen has expressed it, Multitudes of pious, peaceable Protestants were driven by their Severities to leave their Native Country, and seek a Refuge for their Lives and Liberties, with freedom for the worship of God in a Wilderness, in the ends of the Earth. There are none that more heartily bless God for the first Reformers, and for the service they did in the Reformation, or that more firmly cleave to their Doctrine which was the Life and Soul of Reformation, than these Non-conformists have ever done, or that more try to follow them in their noble design. But, as those first Reformers never in∣tended that what they did should be the ab∣solute boundary of Reformation, from whence it were a sin to dissent or depart, which would have been to have only changed one Popery for another, and quite contrary to their own going beyond Wickliff, and changing and grow∣ing in their own models also, and the inge∣nuous Confessions of the great Cranmer par∣ticularly, who fatchatur multa detracta oportere superflua, & ardentibus votis cupiebat ea in me∣lius correcta; And the Orders of King Edward unto Bucer, to write for further Amendments, whom accordingly we find in his Learned Scripta Anglicana doing so; thus the Non-conformists have been willing to imitate them in exercising that Liberty wherewith Christ hath
made them free. This is very sure, that those very Principles upon which the first Reformers built the Reformation, are those that have pro∣duced and justified the hundreds of thousands of Non-conformists which have so long asked for further steps to be taken in it; namely those Principles, that the Word of our Lord Jesus Christ is a perfect Rule of all that we are to believe or practise in Religion: and, that Christian People not being tied up to the blind obedience of their Ecclesiastical Guides, are to judg for themselves what they are to believe or to practise in Religion. 'Tis very sure also, that the Non-conformists, in imita∣tion of a Challenge made by Dr. Jewel, one of our first Reformers, unto the Romish Cler∣gy, upon their unjust imputation of Novelty unto the Reformation, have published a Chal∣lenge in such Terms as these. If any Learned Man of our Adversaries, be able to bring any one sufficient Sen∣tence out of the Holy Scripture, or any one Example of any Bishop, Minister, or (afterwards) Martyr in the time of King Edward the 6th, or in the times of Queen Elizabeth, any passage out of Bishop Jew∣el, which do directly and, ex professo, plead for, and commend the present Liturgy in the frame of it, or assert that Episcopacy is Jure-Divino, or argue for Adoration to∣wards the Altar, bowing at the name of Jesus, signing with the sign of the Cross, wearing of the Surplice, kneeling at the
Sacrament, or for the exercise of Church-power by Lay Chancellors, we will then sub∣mit and subscribe. And none hath answer∣ed it. §. 8. If the Reader will accept the Report and Judgment of a Non-conformist, concerning the condition of the Church in the English Na∣tion at the time of the Reformation, it must be thus. The God of Heaven having sent the light of the Gospel into the Minds of the King and some that were his chief Counsel∣lors, disposing them to the Reformation, they found it a business incredibly difficult for them to incounter the inveterate and incu∣rable prejudices with which Mankind were ge∣nerally possessed, against the work by them desired and intended. The greatest part of the greater Men, the Nobles and the Gentry, were averse to the proceedings of the Refor∣mers; the most of the Clergy were so true unto their own carnal Interests, that with might and main they opposed those Proceed∣ings; and the body of the People horribly blinded with Superstition and Prophanity, were easily Priest-ridden, to join with their blind Leaders in their troublesom oppositions: Nor were the Nations in the Neighbourhood left uninstigated by the Pope, to foment the discontents of the People on this occasion. The body of the People were those which in these difficulties the King most of all re∣garded, knowing, that they were his Wealth
and Strength, and that without their concur∣rence the Dissatisfactions of all others would hurt none but themselves. Now the People in those days being miserably unacquainted with the Doctrine of the Scripture, were ve∣ry little or nothing at all concerned, what perswasions Men held in matters of pure be∣lief, provided they might retain those Rites and Modes in their Worship, whereto they had been accustomed. Accordingly we know, that the Prelates who carried on the Papal Persecution against the Reformers, rarely, if ever, unless compelled by Disputations, men∣tioned the Opinions about the Credenda of Doctrine, as the grounds of the Quarrel, tho these were the main grounds of all; because the common People would not have been easily prevailed withal, to bring in Faggots for the burning of their Brethren on those more ab∣struse accounts: but it was in the agenda of Worship, that they wisely stated the cause of all their Cruelty, because they saw that the common People would violently interpose on the behalf of the Mass, wherein their share of Religion chiefly lay. Our considerate Reformers, considering the disposition of the People, first of all, with a brave Resolution, asserted the true Doctrine of the Gospel, and renounced the Errors and Follies with which the Antichristian Apostacy had envenom'd it: but then they attempered the way of public Worship as far as ever the Articles of their Faith would permit them
(if no further) unto that which the Populace had been us'd unto. It was a thing very sen∣sible unto them, that so long as ths People were accommodated with as much conformi∣ty as might be unto their former customs in Divine Service, the main Reformation in Do∣ctrine, which ('twas hop'd) would at length introduce a Reformation in Worship also, might go on with less Observation, and consequent∣ly with less Contestation. And the Priests find∣ing a provision thus made for their continu∣ance in the possession of their Places, with∣out any thing further prescribed, but what was as easy to be performed as any thing that had been practised in former days, would quietly let their betters go on with what they had undertaken. On these considerati∣ons the English Liturgy was formed, and the Book of Common-Prayer thus composed, be∣came from the very beginning a bone of Con∣tention in the Church of God. Many that were inlightned with such rays of Truth, as had irradiated the chief Instruments of the Reforma∣tion, utterly decried this compliance with the ignorance and vanity of the People, and cried out earnestly for purer Administrations of Evange∣lical Ordinances, agreeable to the word of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the examples of Pri∣mitive Christianity; whilst others would not hear of going any farther than that first Essay of Reformation. Only, a long experience hath made it evident, that the more the know∣ledg of the Gospel hath increased in the Na∣tion,
the more hath increased the dislike of the Liturgy and its Appurtenances: nor can the Liturgy with its unscriptural and unpro∣fitable Discipline, be secured, without an ex∣tirpation of hundreds of thousands of as good Christians as any in the Land, yea, and of the very Bibles that have made them so; which, if any are so wicked as to imagine, let them know, Aliter statutum est in coelo! But, Reader! because it is a lubricous and a difficult Theme which we are now upon, thou shalt not have my Sense of these mat∣ters imposed upon thee; I will carry thee with me to more significant and sufficient in∣formers, even those Historians who were no Non-conformists, but liv'd and dy'd in the fullest Conformity to the Rites of the Church of England as by Law established; and thou shalt have thy choice to take thy informa∣tion either from an Historian, that was an enemy to any further progress of the Refor∣mation, or from an Historian to whom such a progress in the Reformation as the first mover thereof design'd, would not have been so dis∣tasteful; that is to say, either from an HEY∣LIN, or from a FƲLLER. Let a bitter HEYLIN, in his History of the Reformation of the Church of England, be consulted, and he will tell us;
That, he cannot reckon the Death of King Edward the 6th, for an infelicity to the Church of England. That, not to press too much at once upon the People, it was thought fit to smooth the way to the Reformation, by setting out some preparatory Injunctions; all which was done to this intent, that the People in all pla∣ces being prepared by little and little, might with more Ease and less Opposition, admit the total Alteration, which was in∣tended in due time to be introduced. That, some godly Bishops and other Learned and Religious Men (the same that made the Liturgy) were imployed in the Castle of Windsor by the King's Command, to consult about one uniform Order, for the administring of the Holy Communion; and they agreed on such a Form and Order, as might comply with the intention of the King and Parliament, without giving any just offence to the Romish Party. That, the Liturgy being finished, accept∣ed and enacted, gave great offence to the Romish Party, not that they could except against it, in regard either of the matter or the manner of it, but because it was communicated to the People in the vulgar Tongue.
That, then Calvin and his followers ex∣cited the King and Council to a further Re∣formation. That, when Queen Elizabeth came to the Crown, she retained such as had been of Privy-Council unto Queen Mary (her Sister) to be of her Council. And in the Parli∣ament, which altered, and again imposed the Book of Common-Prayer, great care was taken for expunging all such Passages in it as might give any Scandal or Offence to the Popish party. And tho by Calvin's means, some Reformation had been made in the second Liturgy, in King Edward's time, now it is returned back into the first Form, and by compliances, the Book was made so passable among the Papists, that they re∣paired unto our Parish-Churches without scruple. That, what was done in the form of our Devotions, did so far satisfy the Pope then being, that he shewed himself willing to confirm all by his Papal Power; and that Parpalio was instructed to offer in the name of his Holiness, That the English Liturgy should be confirmed. That, things abolished by King Edward the 6th, and revived by Queen Mary, were by Queen Elizabeth retain'd as formerly in her Father's time; for which she receiv'd
both thanks and honor from her very E∣nemies; that is to say, the Papists. That, in the beginning of Queen Eliza∣beths Reign, many that were disaffected un∣to Episcopacy and Ceremonies, were raised unto great Preferment; and even the Queens-Professor at Oxford, and the Margaret-Pro∣fessor in Cambridg, were Non-conformists. These and many more such things as these are affirmed, by that Heylin, who, tho for his Divinity, the most Reverend Archbishop Ʋsher says, He had need be put to learn his Catechism again; and for his Geography, the same Arch∣bishop says, He deserves little credit, when he brings us news from the remote parts of the World, that tells us so many untruths of things publickly acted in his neighbour Nation: Yet in these Paragraphs of his History, is incontes∣table. But how let us consult a better, FƲL∣LER; and he, in his Church-History of Britain, will tell us: That, as careful Mothers and Nurses, on condition they can get their Children to part with Knives, are contented to let them play with Rattles; thus the Reformers permitted ignorant People still to retain some of their fond and foolish Customs, that they might remove from them the most dangerous and destructive Superstitions.
That, the Non-conformity was conceived in the Days of King Edward, which was born in the days of Queen Mary, nur∣sed in the days of Queen Elizabeth, a tall stripling in the days of King James, and towards the end of King Charles grown up to the full stature of a Man. That, the Reverend Hooper, scrupling certain points of Conformity, the King under his Royal Signet in the fourth year of his Reign, countenanced the let∣ting pass certain Rites and Ceremonies offen∣sive to his Conscience. That, in the year one thousand five hundred sixty four, began the name of Puritans, for such as dissented from the unscriptural Discipline of the Church: and by the year one thousand five hun∣dred seventy two, Presbyteries begun to be erected; first at Wandsworth, and af∣terwards at London. That, in the year one thousand five hundred and eighty, threescore Ministers of the Presbyterian party, met at Cockfield in Suffolk, for a Conference about the Common-Prayer Book; and by the year one thousand five hundred eighty two, their platform of Church-Discipline ap∣peared.
That they petitioned the Lords of the Privy-Council, confessing their zeal for the necessary Reformation of many things in the Church, according to the word of God: who thereupon solicited the Archbishop for favor to them. That in the year one thousand five hundred eighty five, the Parliament be∣gan to correct Ecclesiastical Abuses; but the Queen being semper eadem, would let nothing of moment be alter'd in the Church-Discipline. That in the year one thousand five hundred eighty seven, the House of Com∣mons presented unto the House of Lords a Petition, That (among other Grievan∣ces) Ministers might not be troubled for the Omission of some Rites prescribed in the Book of Common-Prayer. And the Lord Grey wondered, that her Majesty would in this matter make choice to confer with those who were all enemies to Reformation, because it touched their Freeholds. That in the year one thousand five hundred eighty eight, a Synod at Coventry, decreed against private Baptism, against the sign of the Cross in Baptism, against the calling of Bishops, and the lawfulness of
their Courts, and for teaching the Resto∣storation of Discipline, as occasion shall serve. That in the year one thousand five hundred eighty nine, famous Mr. Cart∣wright had thirty one Articles (of Non-Conformity) before her Majesties Commis∣sioners, objected against him; and he, with his Brethren were sent unto the Fleet, where he secretly and silently took up his Lodging. That King James wrote from Scotland unto the Queen, to stay the hard usage of the Ministers of the Evangel for their diversity from the Bishops. That after this, one Mr. Stone, who yet continued a stiff Nonconformist, made un∣to the Persecutors a discovery of the Meet∣ings held by the Presbyterian Ministers at London, at Cambridge, at Northampton, and at Kettering. That Mr. Perkins, whom all Men held for a Prophet, was concurring to this Cause. That Mr. Ʋdal, who, as Musculus first brought in the manner of preaching with Doctrines and Ʋses, was the first that ad∣ded
Reasons thereunto; a learned Man, blameless for his Life, powerful in his praying, and no less profitable than pain∣ful in his preaching, was condemned to die, for being the Author of a Book, Intituled, A Demonstration of the Disci∣pline which Christ hath prescribed in his Word. And the Sword of Justice be∣ing then drawn, was not put up again into the Sheath, before others were exe∣cuted. That there was a Petition, signed by seven hundred and fifty Preachers, col∣lected out of only twenty five Countries, afoot in the year one thousand six hun∣dred and three, desiring a Reformation of certain Ceremonies and Abuses of the Church. That then followed the Conference at Hampton-Court, by which time the Bi∣shops had so made the King their Pro∣priety, that (after abundance of ri∣diculous Passages) "the King was pleas∣ed to say, If this be all your Party hath to say, I will make 'em con∣form themselves, or else I will har∣rie them out of the Land, or else do worse.
And so truly he did! The King, who had once professed unto a National Assem∣bly of the Kirk in Scotland, He praised God, he was King in so sincere a Church, a Church sincerer than the Church of England, whose Service was an ill-said Mass in English, did now set himself to harrie out of the Land, the People who could not conform to that Service in England. The Persecutions used upon the Nonconfor∣mists, under his and the Successors influ∣ence, proceeded so far, that Multitudes of them at length sought quiet Recesses in an American Wilderness. But that in the Mouth of at least three Witnesses, our account about the degree of Reformation, designed by some, and obstruct∣ed by others, may be established, we will to these Quotations, add the Testimony of Dr. Gilbert Burnet, who in his printed Letters, affirms, That in his Travels he had opportunity at Zurich to read a vo∣lume of the Letters that passed between Bullinger, and several of our great Refor∣mers, the Originals whereof were laid up a∣mong the Archives there: By which Letters it appears, that the Bishops pre∣served the things then contested, rather in compliance with the Queen's Incli∣nations than out of any liking they had themselves unto them. Juel in a Let∣ter,
February the 8th, 1566. wishes that all the Remnants of Popery might be thrown both out of the Churches, and out of the minds of the People; and laments the Queen's Fixedness unto them, so that she would suffer no change to be made. Sands writes, Contenditur de vestibus pa∣pisticis utendis, vel non utendis; dabit Deus his quoque finem. Horn writes, that he hoped, the Act concerning Habits would be repealed at the next Session of Parliament, if the Popish Party did not hinder it. Grindal writes, That the Queen was so prepossessed in the mat∣ter, that she continued inflexible; and Coz the Bishop of Ely laments the aver∣sion that they found in the Parliament, unto all the Propositions that were made for the Reformation of Abuses. And if the Reader will further consult the History of the Reformation, written by that learned Man, he will find, That Queen Elizabeth received some Impressions in her Father's Reign, in favour of such old Rites as he had still retained, in her own nature loving State, and some Mag∣nificence in Religion (as well as in every thing else;) she thought that in her Bro∣ther's Reign they had stript it too much of external Ornaments. Yea he will find, That the Visiters made report to the Queen of the obedience given to
the Laws and her Injunctions; and it was found that of nine thousand four hun∣dred beneficed Men in England, there were no more but fourteen Bishops, six Abbots, twelve Deans, twelve Arch-Deacons, fifteen Heads of Colleges, fifty Prebendaries, and eighty Rectors of Pa∣nishes that had left their Benefices on the account of Religion. So compliant were the Papists generally! And indeed the Bishops after this time had the same ap∣prehension of the danger into which Re∣ligion was brought, by the Juglings of the greatest part of the Clergy, who retain'd their affections to the old Super∣stitions, that those in King Edward's time had: so that if Queen Elizabeth had not lived so long as she did, till all that Generation was dead, and a new set of Men better educated and principled, were grown up and put in their rooms; and if a Prince of another Religion had succeeded before that time, they had probably turned about to the old Su∣perstitions, as nimbly as they had done before in Queen Mary's Days. But if the Confessions which the most conforma∣ble Sons of the Church have thus made con∣cerning the various disposition of men and things in the Reformation, be not satisfacto∣ry; Reader, take the pains to peruse the
Story, which Cambden, another of them, has given us concerning the Steps which Queen Elizabeth took in the Reformation; how many of the Popish Rites were by slow degrees rejected, and how many were still retained through her fondness for them: a Story too long to be in this place repeated. And add thereunto the Testi∣mony of one, who was friend enough un∣to Prelacy, in his Letter to Hooker about writing his Ecclesiastical Policy; It may be remembred that at the first, the great∣est part of the Learned in the Land, were either eagerly affected, or favou∣rably inclined to that way [of Noncon∣formity]; the Books then written, sa∣voured for the most part of the Disci∣plinary Stile, it sounded every where in the Pulpits, and in the common Phrase of Men's Speech; and the contrary Party began to fear they had taken a wrong course. Unto such incontestible Authors do I still confine my self, being terrified by the words of Mr. Baxter, who says, To give the true History of the original Causes and Progress of our Corruptions, will not be endured by them that still justify their own and their Predecessors Sin, and can see no fault in any, but those that they first make, and then call, their Adversaries. I have found that the most notorious matters of Fact will be
denied furiously by such Men, even what hath been said and done in their presence and mine, before a multitude of Witnesses, Bishops, Doctors and divers others; yea, things said and done in Parliaments, and Armies, and publickly notified, are by such Men contradicted with rage. §. 9 From this time, Reader, Behold the Church of England miserably beschism'd into Guelph and Gibelline! After this, What will ye see in the Church of England? As it were the company of two Armies. On the one side [Alas, thou wretched word, SIDE, wilt croud into all our Hi∣story, and be a word essential to all the History of the whole World, until the third Chapter of Genesis be superseded by the three last Chapters of the Revelation!] I say on the one side, there hath been a great Body of Men, desirous to enjoy for themselves, and allow and assert for others, the Liberty of Men; and at the same time, to have the Liberty wherewith Christ hath made us free, preserved inviolable: They desire, That the Reformation of Religion should be carried on in the Steps, and by the Rules which the Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ, speaking from the Oracle of the Sacred Scripture, hath directed; and they believe
there is a PLUS ULTRA, which the great Work begun, and but begun in the last Age, is not yet arrived unto: They desire that the Qualifications for the Pastoral Office, and for Communion in all the special Ordinances of the Church, be no other than what the Lord Jesus Christ hath in his Word requir∣ed: They desire, That the Civil Magi∣strate should be entrusted with a Power to regulate, according to the word of God, any disorder in the Church, that shall have a direct influence on the State; and they confess thus far, a National Church Govern∣ment; only they would have it recognized as no more than an Human and a Civil Policy circa Sacra. If there must be Bi∣shops, they cannot acknowledg them to have any Title unto their Dignities, but what is Humane and Civil, conferred by the King upon them, whose alone Officers they are, circa Sacra, (nor indeed was the Jure Di∣vino-ship hereof ever until the Days of King James the First pretended unto; but we are sure, that even a Convocation in the days of King Henry the Eighth declared, That there are but two Or∣ders only, viz. that of Priests, and that of Deacons, instituted by Jesus Christ: That the Superiorities or Preheminences of one Bishop or Priest above another are, only by an human Ordinance:) They desire that Parochial or Congre∣gational
Assemblies, may be acknowledg∣ed as particular Churches, and permitted the Rights of Churches, who may from the Pastors of their own choosing, have all the Ordinances of the Gospel, with the Pri∣mitive Discipline administred, and have it left unto their own choice, whether they will herein have a Liturgy or no among them: They desire, That conscientious Dis∣senters from established Rites, may not be compelled, and harassed, and ruined with Civil Penalties, for the scruples of their ten∣der Consciences; but, that Evangelical Me∣thods of Conviction be the only ones im∣ploy'd upon them: and finally, they de∣sire, That no illegal, despotick, and arbi∣trary Government may be imposed upon the brave English Nation: LIBERTY and PROPERTY is their cognizance. To avoid Circumlocutions, I will take the li∣berty to put upon the Side thus describ∣ed, a name that shall carry their desired Liberty in the signification of it; I will call them ELEUTHERIANS: And if the Story of our King Lucius, the first Christian King they say in the World, were certain, we would respect the name the more, for that famous old Eleutherius, who thought that the Faith of Christ, and the Old and New Testament, without any Additions from Rome, was Law enough to govern the Church of England. Now a∣mong
these our ELEƲTHERIANS, or Freemen, are to be reckon'd, not only the hundreds of thousands that have actu∣ally shaken off the Shackles of Conformity to the Popish Remainders yet vexing of England, but those also that have lived in conformity, yet groaning, or at least wil∣ling to have the heavy Yoke taken off; yea, I am not sure that the biggest part of the Conformable themselves, will not be found of this number. Such an one (Rea∣der, I will not quote one, but what, if I mistake not, was a conformable Son of the Church) I say, such a one was Doctor Jewell, when he wrote, That Perse∣cution for Conscience sake is a very Unchristian or Antichristian Symptom. Such was Mr. Deering, when he wrote, The Similitude which the Common-Prayer-Book hath with the form of Prayer which the Papists used, I think declineth from the equity of the Laws in the seventh and twelfth Chapters of Deuteronomy; which thing our Fathers so much regarded in the Primitive Church, that their Books are full of great Complaints, against all Similitude to be had with Gentiles; and great Incon∣veniency hath followed this Book, while it hath maintained an unlearned Mi∣nistry. Such was Dr. Pilkington, when he wrote, That he misliked our being
so like the Papists in our Liturgy; and that it is our fault generally that we differ not from them in all our Ministry. Such was Dr. Bilson, when he wrote, That the Reformed Churches are so far from admitting the full dose of the Heresies of the Papists, that by no means they can digest a dram of their Ceremonies. Such was Dr. Humphry, when he wrote, That we ought to re∣fuse to conform our selves unto the Enemies of God in any of their Cere∣monies; and that he wish'd and hop'd for the utter abolishing of all the Mo∣numents of Popish Superstition, which yet remain in our Church. Such was Dr. Fulk, when he wrote, That if a Man mislike our Form of Divine Service, as not sufficiently differing from the Pa∣pists, he shows his greatest zeal in de∣testation of their Idolatry and Blasphe∣my: We abhor whatsoever hath but a shew of Popery. Such was Dr. More, when he wrote, It is an Antichri∣stian Use of Church-Government, to direct it to the upholding of scanda∣lous Ceremonies, and ensnaring Inven∣tions of Men; and what is it but Inju∣stice and barbarous Cruelty, to afflict Men for what they cannot help, and in what they do not sin? And what but plain Rebellion against God, to wrest
his Scepter out of his hand, by which he ruleth in the Consciences of Men, and to usurp this Empire to them∣selves! A mutual agreement in bearing with one another's Dissents in the Non-fundamentals of Religion, is really a greater Ornament, than the most exact Uniformity imaginable; it being an eminent exercise of Charity, the Flower of all Christian Graces, and the best way I think at the long-run, to make the Church as uniform as can justly be desired. To have done: Such was Mr. Chillingworth, whose emphatical Words are these; Require of Christians only to believe Christ, and to call no Man Master but him only; let those leave claiming of Infallibility, who have no right unto it, and let them that in their words disclaim it, disclaim it like∣wise in their Actions: In a word, take away Tyranny, which is the Devil's In∣strument to support Errors, and Su∣perstitions, and Impieties in the seve∣ral parts of the World, which could not otherwise long withstand the Power of Truth; I say, take away Tyranny, and restore Christians to their just and full liberty of captivating their Understand∣ings to the Scripture only; that universal Liberty thus moderated, may quickly reduce Christendom to Truth and Unity.
And what but such were those Episcopal Divines, who with Dr. Ʋsher presented unto the Parliament above thirty Excep∣tions against the Liturgy? I will descend no lower, I will produce no more; here is enough to explain one side of the Eng∣lish Controversies. On the other side; there hath been a prevailing Party, whose Grief it hath been, that ever the Reformation proceeded so far, and whose Wrath hath been on all occasions vented against the Memory of those that were chief in the Reformation. Reader, call them not that Church of Eng∣land, which is the Spouse of Christ; but let the name of LOT's WIFE be assign'd unto them, and let them upon good ad∣vice remember her. These IDUMAEANS would monopolize unto themselves the name of the Church of England; but they have by Canons boldly invading of, and contrary to the Parliamentary Power, form∣ed a new Church of England, which for more than half an hundred years after the Reformation, t'would have been little short of Treason to have talk'd of. They have made their Church-Government, by Arch-Bishops, Bishops, Deans, Arch-Deacons, and the rest that bear Office in the Church, a thing of Divine Right; but then they durst not show their Head: for, from the
King they now derive not their Episcopal Authority, as they did at the beginning: Their Eye is upon a foreign Jurisdiction! They have made no more than twenty six particular Churches, namely the Diocesan, in the whole Kingdom; and with a prodigi∣ous Impudence they dare to publish it, Inauditus erat parochorum pastoratus ante hu∣jus seculi, & antecedentis Delirium; and blotting out the name of Pastor, where their Books formerly so called the Parish-Presbyter, they have left unto none, but the twenty six Bishops, either Obligation to teach, or Authority to rule in the Church. They have been meer Bigots for trifling Ceremo∣nies; and if they could but cozen Men in∣to a Belief, that it was a brave piece of devotion, to have a Church set off (like that of Durham, described by Dr. Fuller) with an Altar and Cherubims, which cost two thousand Pounds, and an Image of the Trinity, and Anthems of the three Kings of Collen, to be sung instead of Psalms, before and after Sermon, and a conse∣crated Knife to cut the Bread at the Com∣munion, and abundance more of such Trinkets, they have seemed as if they car∣ed not, tho the Substantials of the Chris∣tian Religion were utterly lost in the Nation. All the Doctrines of Grace, as∣serted by the true Church of England,
these men do first Subscribe them, and then Preach and Print against them, and with these, if a man would be preferred, he must be a Pe∣lagian. Lest Christianity should be consistent with Conformity, these men also are they that once invented a Proclamation for Sports on the Lord's Day, as an Engine to vex the best Chri∣stians among the Conformists, and fill the Land with Paganism and Atheism: And this in spite of the Homilies of the Church of England, which damn'd them for doing so. They have exacted from the Clergy, an Assent and Consent unto every thing in the Book of Common-Prayer, the Book of Consecrating Bishops, and Order∣ing Priests and Deacons, and the Book of Ar∣ticles and Homilies; and the Clergy are to de∣clare, That they will never endeavour any Al∣teration of the Ecclesiastical Constitution; yea, to Vow and Swear that they will observe all the Canons. By these Canons, Whosoever shall affirm, That the Church of England, by Law Established, is not a Church formed according to Divine Institution; or whosoever affirms, That its Worship contained in the Book of Common-Prayer, and Administration of the Sacraments, is Corrupt; or that any of the Thirty Nine Articles, are in any part Superstitious or Erroneous, or such as he may not with a good Conscience Subscribe unto; or that the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England, are such as being Com∣manded by Lawful Authority, men who are zealously and godlily affected, may not with a good Conscience approve them; or that
the Government of the Church of England, by Archbishops, Bishops, &c. is Repugnant un∣to the Word of God; are to be Excommu∣nicated, Ipso facto, and not to be restored until they repent, and publickly revoke such their wicked Errors. By these Canons, 'All such are Accursed, who combine themselves in a New Brotherhood, or affirm that such Ministers as refuse to Subscribe unto the Com∣munion-Book, and their Adherents, may truly take unto themselves the Names of another Church, not Established by Law, and dare presume to publish it; that this pretended Church hath of long time groaned under the burthen of some certain Grievances imposed upon the Members thereof: Or, whosoever shall maintain, That there are within the Realm other Meetings, Assemblies, or Con∣gregations, of the Kings Born Subjects, than such as by the Laws of the Land are allowed, which may rightly challenge to themselves the name of True and Lawful Churches. By these Canons, none may have their Children Baptized, who dare not sub∣mit unto the Cross and Godfathers; and all those that refuse to Kneel at the Reception of the Sacrament, and to be present at publick Prayers; or who refuse Reverently to Kneel, when the General Confession, Litany, and other Prayers are Read, and will not stand up, at the Saying of the Belief, and Bow at the Name of Jesus, nor say in their due place, and audibly, with the Minister the Confession, the Lord's Prayer, and the Creed,
nor make such other Answers to the Publick Prayers as are appointed, all such are to be denied the Communion; and what Minister soever shall wittingly admit them, he is lia∣ble to a Suspension. With these men (to quote still none but Conformable Authors for every thing, Reader, now 'tis one Hickringale, and no Nonconformist, that is my Voucher) A pretended hatred against Popery, is nothing but a Colour wherewith Hypocrisy hath still painted the ugly face of hatred and malice against the Consci∣entious. While these men can assert the Salva∣tion of Heathens, they cannot allow an Indul∣gence to Christians: And though they Blaspheme it as a Tyranny for the Almighty to Punish men for what they can't help, they themselves very Tyrannically practise it. These Men, being by Divine Providence made capable for the most part very much to influence the Legislative Power, have procured those Laws to be Enact∣ed against Conscientious Dissenters, a mere Ab∣stract whereof, were enough to fill many Pa∣ges, well deserving the Title of Draconica; Laws, which gave the Earl of Castlemain, a Papist, cause to say in Print, It was never known that Rome Persecuted (as the Bishops do) those who adhere to the same Faith with themselves, and Established an Inquisition against the Professors of the strictest Piety among themselves: And however the Pre∣lates complain of the Bloody Persecution un∣der Queen Mary, it is manifest their Perse∣cution exceeds it; for under her there were not more than Two or Three hundred put to
Death; whereas under their Persecution, there hath above treble that Number been stifled, destroyed, and ruined in their Estates, Lives, and Liberties, being (as is most re∣markable) men for the most part of the same Spirit and Principle with those Protestants who suffered under the Prelates in Queen Mary's time. In the Execution of those Laws, wherein Dat veniam Corvis, vexat censura Columbas. What three Volumes of Martyrology in Folio could enumerate the unaccountable Oppressions used upon the best Christians in the Nation? While at the same time the most Ungodly Wretches of all sorts, and the scoffers and haters of all Godliness, have been encouraged as the truest Sons of the Church: Persons of Caesar Borgia's Qualifications can live in the Communion of the Church, with these men, un∣der all manner of encouragement; while the most serious Piety, exemplified in all manner of Conversation, could not secure those that scrupled any of their pitiful Ceremonies, from as cruel Censures as ever the Wolf and the Fox, which in the ancient Apologue, Absolved one another from the guilt of their confessed Villanies, pass'd upon the poor Ass for touch∣ing the Pilgrims pad of Straw. Nor could Conformity neither, secure the seriously Religious from the rage of that Spirit whereby these men have been acted; but as it is expressed and complained by Dr. Wallis, a Conformable
Divine, (for indeed, Reader, in these mat∣ters I durst not quote a Nonconformist) with such as these, if any man press for Regeneration, Sanctification, and an holy life, he was to pass heretofore for a Puritan, then for a Round-head, now for a damn'd Fanatick; nor shall he escape this censure, though he be never so great a Church∣man, and do exactly conform to the Church, as now by Law Established; for 'tis Holiness they hate more than Noncoformity. Yea, no less Per∣sons than the Lords of the Council have been put upon, signifying with grief under their hands, unto an Archbishop, That a great num∣ber of Ministers (conformable enough) zealous and learned Preachers; have been Deprived and Suspended, and their Places left without any Mini∣stry or Preaching, Prayers and Sacraments; or certain Persons appointed unto those void Rooms, who were Persons neither of Learning nor of good Names; yea, a great number notoriously unfit, chargeable with Ignorance, and with great enor∣mous Faults, as Drunkenness, Filthiness of life, Gaming at Cards, haunting of Ale-houses, and such like; against whom we hear not of any Pro∣ceeding, but that they are quietly suffered, to the slander of the Church, to the offence of good Peo∣ple; yea, to the Famishing of them for want of good Teaching. This is that Faction who pub∣lish unto Mankind their Spirit in such Lan∣guage as this, That they abhor being a Papist as much as being a Presbyterian, and that they will as soon be Turks as be either of them. What shall I say more? In the Church they have broken down the Form of Churches which our
Lord Jesus Christ Instituted; they have de∣posed his Officers; they have destroyed his Offi∣ces; they have laid aside his Rules of Govern∣ment; they have set up New things of their own quite opposite unto His: Yet they lay claim to all the Priviledges of His; and all this they do in his name; which is an Iniquity ex∣traordinarily aggravated, extraordinarily com∣plicated! In the State what they have done shall not be reported in any words of mine; but, Ex ore tuo, Serve Nequam. They have taught, with Manwayring, That the King, with∣out common Consent in Parliament, could by his Command so far bind the Subject to say Taxes, that they cannot refuse the Payment of them without Peril of eternal Damnation; and that the Authority of Parliament was not necessary to the raising of Subsidies. They have Taught, with Heylin, Princes are God's Deputies; Of whom should they be limited? If you say by the Laws of the Land; those themselves have made, Principi Lex non est posita; They are above the Law and have an Absolute Authority. They have Taught with Lesley, That Princes being God's Legislators, are above their Laws, and Dispense with them as they think expedient. They have Taught with Wemius, In Monarchiâ, Regis sola voluntas, de substantiâ Legis est; praevia populi Consultatio, non est Necessaria. They have Taught, as a later Meteor in the English Heavens hath Illuminated us; That as well Inferior Magistrates, as others, employed by a Popish or Tyrannical Prince, in the most illegal and outragious acts of Violence, such as Cutting of Throats, and the like, are Irresistible,
and must be submitted to under pain of eternal Damnation. Yea, that the Note may be carried high enough unto all their fulsome Idolatry of their Charles the First, they have added the Blasphemy of calling him CHRIST the Second: And one Parker in a Treatise of Reli∣gion and Loyalty, published 1684, thus expres∣sed himself; It is but a Crude expression, not to call it Profane (because it is so common by custo∣mary mistake) to affirm that Kings are Supream Governors under Christ: They are and ever were so, under God, but so as to be Superior to Christ, as Christ is Head of the Church within their Domini∣ons. I am already weary of Transcribing their Tantivee stuff, and will conclude it with the words of one that is a Conformable Son of the Church, [for still I durst not quote a Noncon∣formist] who says, Non-Resistence and Passive Obedience, were the only Orthodox and Catholick Doctrines, so long as they imagined it would never come unto their own turn to practise them. When the men of this stamp had once gained the Prince on their side, and to espouse their Interest, they have endeavoured to requite him by ascribing to him an Absolute Power, and Illimited Authority over the Subject; though none winc'd sooner, nor kick'd higher at it, when they themselves began to feel the dint of it. I shall proceed no farther in Anato∣mizing this Carcase of a Church: Pope Boni∣face VIII. threatned a Thunderbolt of Excom∣munication against every Physician that should venture to do the part of an Anatomist; and I have already employed my Knife so far in my Dissections, that certain Canons made by as
good Authority as Boniface's, have ipso facto Ex∣communicated me. I called them IDUMAEANS; be∣cause whether we consider their contempt of what every Right Christian, and every Right Englishman values as his Birth-right; or consider the Bloody Rage with which they came out against their Brethren, who in some sort have been Twins with them, they will appear to us the true Sons of Edom; and because they may read more than they are aware of their own Fate, if they will please to consult the Pro∣phecies in the ancient Oracles of Heaven about the Edomites; to the sense of which Prophecies, I remember there is a notable Key given us by the Jewish Rabbies, על רגמי אמרו, Of ROME have they spoken it. But they like not their Scripture Name, let them still keep their old Right English Name of UNRE∣FORMABLES. §. 10. No less a man than Sir Francis Wal∣singham, in his account of the Severities used by Queen Elizabeth against the Puritans, (a Nick-name devised first by Sanders the Jesuite, for the best men in the Kingdom, and by the worst ever after put upon them) confesses, That when they resolved (at last) to carry on their designs, without waiting for the consent of the Magistrate, upon that the Queen found it neces∣sary to restrain them. And Cambden [one far from a Nonconformist] is our Author for it, That Queen Elizabeth advancing Whitgift unto the See of Canterbury, above all commanded him
to re-establish the Discipline of the Church of Eng∣land, that as then lay dismembred by the conni∣vency of Prelates, the obstinacy of Innovators, and the power of some great ones; whilst some Mini∣sters utterly condemned the Liturgy, and the ap∣pointed manner of Administring the Sacraments, as being in many things contrary to the Scripture. Nor is it unknown that the proceedings of Whitgift hereupon, were such as to procure him from the Lord Treasurer Burleigh a Letter dated, July 5. 1584. wherein he tells him, I think the Inquisitors of Spain use not so many Que∣stions to trap their Preys: This kind of Proceeding is too much savouring the Romish Inquisition. The terrible Persecution which afterwards followed upon the Nonconformists, would be too long and sad a Story to be in this place largely re∣lated: Afflicti Suppliciis Puritani, Genus Homi∣num, [Forsooth!] Superstitionis Novae & Ma∣leficae! Mr. Cotton, in a Book Printed Anno 1647. Writes, That there was then in New-England a Fourth Volume of the Books of Martyrs in Manuscript beginning, where Mr. Fox left off, and containing the Sufferings of Godly men (and Mr. Fox himself, perhaps one of them) from the Enemies of the Reformation, for their expressing their desires to have it further car∣ried on. But Mr. Cotton being a Nonconformist, I must fly presently to a more Conformable Au∣thor; it shall be old Bishop Morton, who ear∣nestly urged the Puritans to be as Conformable as himself, with such wonderful words as these; I ought not to esteem any thing a just cause of Silencing my self from Preaching, for which I
ought not as willingly to venture my life. The Nonconformist have suffered what is next to Death, and too many have suffered even unto Death in Prisons, where several caught their Death, and others Died; Of whom shall their Deaths be requi∣red? And I suppose the Puritans then knew how to retort upon this Reverend Bishop, his own words; Not of our own selves, Doctor! (might they have said) but of you, that would venture to Silence good men, and even to take away their lives, for things for which you thought they should not venture their lives. All Mankind then saw no less than Three hundred Ministers (whom the most Learned Parker compares to the Three hundred Soldiers of Gideon) all of them in one particular storm Deprived of their Ministry and their Maintenance, because they could not Subscribe to some unlawful Impositions. No less a man than Sir Edward Dearing, in the most August Assembly under Heaven, could then complain, With the Papists there is a severe Inqui∣sition, and with us a bitter High Commission. Yea, the Book Entituled, The Register of me∣morable Matters touching the Reformation, records a Story about a Congregation of an Hundred Persons who refused the Liturgy, and had the purer Ordinances of the Gospel among them∣selves, in the Year 1567. for which they Suf∣fered not a little. And after what fashion some of these Confessors were handled in those days, the Reader shall understand, Cri∣mine ab uno, which I find (reported by a Con∣formist) thus; Mr. John Heyden, a Devonshire Minister, in a Sermon preach'd at Norwich,
let fall some passages against setting up of Images, and Bowing at the Name of Jesus; he was hereon Apprehended like a Traytor, with the Constables Bills and Halberts, and brought before Dr. Harsnett, then Bishop, and Manacled like a Felon, and Committed by him close Prisoner to the Common Goal, above Thirteen Weeks, where he was like to Starve (the Bishop having taken from him his Horse, Papers, &c.) from whence he was by a Pursevant convey'd to London, and kept Two full Terms; at last, by the High Commission, he was Deprived of his Orders; thereafter the High Commissioners Imprisoned him in the Gate-house common Dungeon, and Canterbury sent him to be Whipt in the Com∣mon Bridewell, and then kept him all the long extreme Cold Winter in a dark cold Dungeon, without Fire or Candle, Chain'd to a Post in the midst of the Room, with heavy Irons on his Hands and Feet, allow∣ing him only Bread and Water, with a Pad of Straw to lie upon; and on his Release, caused him to take an Oath and give Bond to Preach no more, and to depart the Kingdom in Three Weeks without returning. Reader, 'tis a kind of Inhumanity to relate such horri∣ble things; what hath been related is enough to make way for the passage that must now follow thereupon. To undergo much Pover∣ty and Misery, with daily fears of Massacre from Indian Salvages, in a bleak Region, a Thousand Leagues from ones own Country, is a sad condition; but if the Liberties of the
Gospel may be had with it, the condition was by some Thousands of Good men judged not so sad and so hard, as that of being in the Griping Talons of Archbishop LAUD. Cer∣tainly Mankind will not now wonder at it, That a Number of Nonconformists chose to fly into a Wilderness, where they might Peaceably erect Evangelical Churches, and pursue the De∣signs of a Scriptural Reformation, and enjoy the Spiritual Blessings of a Reformed State, rather than both feel and give the Disturbance where∣to the Differences here at home exposed them. An American Wilderness, now known by the Name of NEW-ENGLAND, was on this occasion, between the Years 1620 and 1640, Peopled with Evangelical Churches, by such as were driven out of the Realm of England through the Persecutions of Ceremony-Mongers, that ever were, and ever will be Enemies to all the true Interests of the Nation. §. 11. 'Tis true, That the Party in the Church of England, which hates to be Reformed, hath, for the most part, through I know not what Advantages, hitherto been Uppermost. And hence not only the Reformation of Disci∣pline, which was only commenced in the for∣mer Age, hath ever since been stopt, but also the Reformation of Doctrine, in the very Essen∣tial Points of the Grace of God, then compleat∣ed, has been in danger to be utterly lost. When the Church first Rose from the Grave of the Antichristian Apostacy, wherein she had so long been Buried, she had, like Lazarus,
her Grave Cloaths hanging about her; but this Party have with a success equal to their fervour, and a fervour equal to their folly, endeavoured still to keep upon her those Monuments of her former Misery. For Discipline, they have still been in the humour of those Islanders, who held it an Impiety to sweep a Room after it had contracted the Dust of Three Generations; and when the Word of Christ hath been urged with never so much of Irresistible, and In∣contestable Evidence by them who thirsted after a better Order; there hath still been little better Answer given, than what the Prolocu∣tor of the Convocation Silenced Philpot withal, You have the Word, and we have the Sword. But an old Observation, in the Homilies of the Church of England, hath been too much veri∣fied in the Practies of them that would be cal∣led so, That such hath been the corrupt Inclination of man, Superstitiously given to make new Honour∣ing of God of his own Head, and then to have more Affection and Devotion to keep that, than to search out God's Holy Commandments and to do them. For Doctrine, 'tis well known that Hundreds of thousands of Romanists at this day, distinguished by the Name of Jansenists, are Sounder in many Essential and Funda∣mental Points of the Christian Faith, than many that have Subscribed our most Ortho∣dox Articles of the Church of England, and then pretend them to be Articles not of Faith, but of Peace: Or else the famous Letter to the Rector of Brussels had never bragg'd, Now we have planted that Sovereign Drug, Ar∣minianism,
which we hope will purge the Prote∣stants from their Heresy; and it flourisheth and bears fruit in due Season. The Learned Bulli∣aldus, I remember, speaks of a Florentine Phy∣sician, whom all the Friends he had could not persuade so much as once to view the Heavens through a Telescope, and the unreasonable man gave this reason for his refusal, Because he was afraid that then his Eyes would from Ocular Demonstrations, make him stagger concerning the truth of Aristotle's Principles, which he was resolved he would never call in Question. Our Unreformable Churchmen seem to have been as much afraid of bringing Ecclesiastical Matters under a fair Examination by the Scri∣ptures of Truth, lest they should plainly see with their Eyes, a necessity of Proceeding to fur∣ther measures of Reformation. When an Eng∣lish Parliament was but bringing in a Bill against Pluralities, that eternal Scandal of Christianity, the Archbishop Whitgift, writes to the Queen with as much distress as if they were all go∣ing to be Martyr'd at the Stake; The woful and distressed Estate (saith he) whereinto we are likely to fall, forceth us, with grief of Heart, in most humble manner, to crave Your Majesty's most Sovereign Protection: We beseech Your Highness's favourable beholding of our present State, and what it will be in time, if the Bill against Pluralities should take place. And when the Parliament was bringing in a Bill against another of the Abuses then Oppressing of Mankind, he com∣plains to the Queen with hideous Lamentati∣ons, That it would tend to the Dishonour of the
Church, as having hitherto maintained an Error. Then 'twas that the great Zanchy (in the Year 1571.) Addressed Queen Elizabeth for an Abatement of the unhappy Ceremonies, concluding, It is to be feared that the Fire is so kindled, and casteth its flames so far and wide, that all the Churches of Your most mighty King∣dom, to the most perpetual Disgrace of Your most Renowned Majesty, will be set on flaming fire. But the sense of the Reformed Churches beyond Sea, thus expressed by the great Light of Hei∣delberg, would not be regarded until indeed all came to be set on a flame of Fire. Then 'twas that the Reverend John Fox entred into his Martyrology, his complaints about those Baits of Popery, and his wishes, God take them away, or ease us from them, for God knows they be the cause of much Blindness and Strife amongst men. But the unhappy causes of Blindness and Strife have still continued, until they have produced matter enough to fill another Marty∣rology. After what fashion the Church hath since those times jogg'd on with the old Mumpsimus's, I had rather the Pen of a Con∣formist than mine should relate; and let such a Pen ['tis the Witty Marvel's] now observe it unto us; There are a particular Bran of Persons, who, in spite of Fate, will be ac∣counted, The Church of England, and to shew they are Pluralists, never do write in a modester Style, than We, We; nay, even these, several of them, are men of Parts, sufficient to deserve a Rank among the Teachers and Governors of the Church.
Only what Bishop Bramhall saith of Grotius his defect in School Divinity, Unum hoc Ma∣ceror, & doleo tibi deesse; I may apply to this excess and rigour in matter of Discipline; they want all consideration, all Moderation in those things; and I never heard of any of them at any time, who if they got into Power or Office, did ever make the least Experiment or Overture towards the Peace of the Church and Nation they lived in. They are men of a Fiery Nature, that must always be uppermost, and so they increase their own Splendor, care not though they set all on a flame about them. You would think the same day that they took up Divinity, they divested themselves of Humanity; and so they may procure and execute a Law against the Nonconformists, that they had forgot the Gospel. They cannot endure that Humility, that Meekness, that Strictness of Manners and Conversation, which is the true way of gaining Reputation and Authority to the Clergy; much less can they content themselves with the ordinary and comfortable Provision that is made for the Ministry, but having wholly calculated themselves for Preferment and Gran∣deur, they know and practise no other means to make themselves venerable, but by Ceremony and Severity. Upon the Restoration of King Charles the Second, there was a sin∣gular opportunity for the Reformation to have gain'd, at least, as much Establishment as was promised in that King's Declaration about Ec∣clesiastical Affairs; a Declaration whereof a
Divine of the Church of England could say, If ever a Divine Sentence was in the mouth of a King, it was with His Majesty, in that admira∣ble Declaration; and the united Judgment of the whole Nation, cannot frame a more unexceptiona∣ble expedient for a firm Concord of these distracted Churches. But this Declaration was immediate∣ly of as little regard, as the Solemn League and Covenant. Though there were then a Conference about those Affairs, between the Episcopal and the Nonconformist Divines, by the King's Commis∣sion, such was the event, that I still choose to give the Story in the very words of a Confor∣mist; I admire (says my Author) that up∣on such an Occasion they could not in any one thing be gratified; not so much as in for∣bearing the Lessons of the Apocrypha; inso∣much, that, as many remember well, after a long tug at the Convocation-House about that matter, a good Doctor came out at last with great Exultation, That they had carried it for Bell and the Dragon. And that the Story may be yet a little more perfect, the words of ano∣ther Conformist shall be adjoined; Many to this day think (says my Author) that the Leaves of that Plant might have conduced much to the Healing of the Nation; but in∣stead thereof a Corrosive was provided, which Invenom'd, but never Healed the Hurt of the Daughter of our People. His Majesty soon after this Interim (which was but like Light∣ning before a Thunderbolt) Enacted a Law, which Deprived above Twenty hundred of the Dissenting Clergy, leaving them to the
Charity of their Friends to provide Bread for themselves, and Ruined Families. By this Act was required a Subscription to the Book of Common-Prayer, and to give an un∣feigned Assent and Consent unto all and every thing contained in it, (which was Revised and Reprinted with divers Alterations) and to be done by such a day upon pain of De∣privation; which time was so limited, that the New Copies could not be distributed, nor what was to be Subscribed, consulted: Which hath often caused some to think, that the Per∣sons then Ejected by that Law, were not Legally Ejected; for the Ignorance in that case was invincible, the Copies not being to be procu∣red in time. How can a man be disseized of his Free-hold for not doing a thing which is Impossible and Impracticable? Then it was that the Parliament, since known by the Name of Pensioner, were so Priest-ridden as to Enact those horrid Laws for Ceremonies, by which the Magna Charta of the Nation was torn to pieces; Millions of Perjuries fill'd the Land; the most bruitish of men were hired to do the most bruitish of things; Convictions were made, and Penalties were laid, not only without Juries, but also without any hearing of the Accused; Estates were Seized and Em∣bezzel'd; Houses were broke up and disturbed; Families were scattered and ruined; the Pri∣sons were fill'd with the most serious Christians; and Reverend Ministers of the Gospel sent un∣to the Stocks and the Houses of Correction all over the Kingdom, for nothing but because
their Consciences could not Conform to sinful Ce∣remonies, which in the Judgment of the Impo∣sers were but Indifferent. Thus Edom did pursue his Brother with the Sword, and cast off all pity; his Anger did tear perpetually, and he kept his wrath for ever; till God sent a Fire upon them. I have read concerning Zoroaster's Book, En∣titled The Similitude, That it required no less than Twelve hundred and sixty Ox Hides for the co∣vering of it. I know not how far the full Story of the Sufferings of the Nonconformists under the Caroline Persecution would go to fill a Book of such enormous Dimensions; this I know, 'twas a Persecution too terrible to ad∣mit of a Similitude; and there is a worthy Writer who does not scruple to say, That if the Sufferings of Good men in this Persecution were distinctly written, our largest Books of Martyrs would be but an Enchiridion in com∣parison of this History. At length to be re∣veng'd upon them for their Joining, as they always did, with the Sober part of the Nation against the Popish Plot, there fell upon them the Storm, which not only cost many of them their Lives, but also utterly dissipated their Congregations. Their Adversaries then kept a Day of Thanksgiving through the Kingdom; and in this doleful state they lay Three Years and an half; even till the Laws, which some think were made by no Authority, received ei∣ther from God or Man, came strangely (and at last fairly) to be removed. Since the most happy Accession of Their Majesties, King William and (the late) Queen Mary, to the
Throne of the Three Kingdoms, the oppor∣tunity to Prosecute the Reformation hath been wonderfully renewed and increased, not only in the readiness which those excellent Princes have shewn in many instances to Relieve the Oppressed Consciences of the Protestant Dissenters, but also in their earnest calling upon the Cler∣gy of the English Nation to prepare and offer Things for the good Order, Edification, and Unity of the Church of England, and the Reconciling as much as is possible, all Differences among the good Subjects, and to take away all occasions of the like for the future. Nevertheless we cannot learn that any great matter hath hitherto been done by them, to answer the expectation of the Best of Princes; but excepting the Indulgence granted unto the Nonconformists by an Act of Parliament, all things remain so much in the old posture, as to produce this Complaint of a worthy Person, one Mr. Snowden, who is yet a Conformable Son of the Church — Ever since the Reformation (saith he) the Church hath suffered many a bitter pang for the sake of these Offensive Rites and Ceremonies: They once fretted out her Bowels, and have been, ever since their Restoration with Charles the Second, as Moths fretting her Garments: They have been the constant Troublers of our Israel; and I am afraid, if, with Jonas they be not cast overboard, they will at one time or another sink our Ship. After these mul∣tiplied and emphatical Overtures, there comes forth unto the World, a Vox Cleri, which in∣stead of consenting unto the Abatement of any one Apocryphal Ingredient in Divine Wor∣ship,
does propose the Addition of more, and the Appointment of Reading sometimes in the Church for the further Enlightening of our Un∣derstanding, certain Portions out of ΕΙΚΩΝ ΒΑΣΙΛΙΚΗ; [about the true Author of which Book, the Earl of Anglesey, and (a Conform∣able Divine) the Reverend Dr. Anthony Walker, and not I, must be an Informer unto as many as would be truly informed]; and unto this Proposal of our Vox Cleri, not I, but one who called himself, A sober Lay-man of the Church of England, hereupon Publishing a Vox Populi, hath answered, And why not the Arcadian Prayer in the same Book, for the furthering of our Devotions? What shall we say more? If nei∣ther the Commands of Christ, nor the Judgments of God, nor the Arguments of the strongest Reason, with the long Experience of above an Hundred and fifty Years Nonsense in Imposi∣tions and Persecutions, have not persuaded us to make a more thorough Reformation; one would think that the Derision, which for the want of it, we have had from the Papist, them∣selves, whom it has been our pretence therein to accommodate, might have carried some lit∣tle persuasion in it. Reader, unto them that are most concerned, let us leave the Transla∣tion of a very pungent Passage, which Ed∣ward Weston hath, in his Theatrum Vitae Civilis & Sacrae, Printed at Antwerp. Alii Protestantes, ne prorsus Impii videantur, nostris Missali, ac Breviario, cum suo delectu utuntur. Et quò Religionis apud eos Forma cele∣brior appareat, adhbent Canonicos, etiam, si diis
placet, & Archidiachonos. Adcoque de More Ecclesiae Romanae Eorum Cappas, pluvialia & ejusdem Supellectiiem, quam dicunt invenisse in Synagoga Antichristi. Quo ipso liquet, Religio∣nem Protestantium imprimis Furto noxiam — vel si Fus haberi rcuant, maneant Simiae nostrae, & Antichristi. Ridentur hi, cum omni suâ Scenâ, non à nostris modò, verùm & à suis: And then he adds the saying of one, Videntur Angli Pa∣pam à suo Regno fugâsse adeò festinè, ut eum Coe∣gerint vestes à Tergo relinquere; quibus isti, Ovantium Ritu Choros ducentes, induuntur perso∣nati. But none of all these considerations hath hitherto moved the Predominant Party; nor have these true Sons of Austin the Monk, taken any other methods to recommend them∣selves unto the Nonconformists, than that old Formal and Foolish Monk took to push the Papal Ceremonies upon those ancient Churches of Nonconformists, our British Ancestors. The Church of England, in the beginning of the Commination against Sinners, does confess, That her Discipline is not so good as that of the Pri∣mitive Churches was for several Ages. And no Commination of our Lord Jesus Christ against the Unreformable, has caused them to lay aside their sinful Resolution, That it never shall be so. The Reformation when carried but half through, immediately stuck like an Inchanted Cart, and if by any driving that hath made the tackling all fly, it hath been strain'd beyond the Line, where the Spell was first laid upon it, it hath soon resil'd within that Line again with a Ven∣geance. Mow to use (which on this Theme (still choose) the words of a Conformable
Writer, Is it not strange [saith the Conform∣able Author of a Plea for Abatement] to ob∣serve that in the Reformation of Religion, there should be so great a sally out of Darkness into mar∣vellous Light upon the first dawning of that Day, and that notwithstanding all the Prayers and Tears of Oppressed Consciences, and the utmost endea∣vours of our Learned Fathers, it could not for more than this Hundred Years, be carried on one step fur∣ther towards perfection? §. 12. Thus it must be, because an Half time of the Twelve hundred and sixty years, de∣termined for the continuance of the Apostacy, was yet behind. But now, lift up your heads ye Reforming Churches of God, because Re∣demption draweth nigh. The Hundred and four∣score years are almost out; and then an irresisti∣ble Spirit of REFORMATION showred from the Lord Jesus Christ on the Hearts of men, shall bring mighty and happy Changes upon the World. He doth great things by Spirit, and, Lord, I know that thou canst do every thing. The Sacred Oracles of Heaven assign Two steps to be taken for the abolishing of Antichrist: First an Harvest, and then a Vintage: Our Lord had a notable Har∣vest of Churches gathered out of the Papal Empire at the Reformation in the former Cen∣tury; but the Harvest leaves no little work for the Vintage, which always comes about a Se∣venth part of the Year after it. Now the Se∣venth part of the Twelve hundred and sixty years, which constitute the grand year of Antichrist, is just an Hundred and fourscore Years; and about so many Years from the
Reformation, we shall see Popery cast into the great wine-press of the wrath of God. But be∣cause in this Thorny Argument I have still cho∣sen to say all in words whereto the Conformable Sons of the Church of England have helped me, I will here choose to sum up my expecta∣tions in the words of such an one; for such an one I find in the Year 1690, publickly thus expressing himself; It is the hope of many Good and Learned men, that the time is at hand when God will deliver his Church for ever from the darkness of the Kingdom of Antichrist; and that the Nations will cast away all things that have been Instruments of advancing his Tyranny and Superstition; surely that glorious Day will open mens Eyes; I have the faith to believe, that England will not be blind when other Nations do see. And long before him, I find another of them, namely, Dr. More saying, What harm is it to presage so well of the Reformation, as that after the Decursion of the years of their Child∣hood, God will ripen them into a more manly sense of the great and indispensable Duties of the Gospel; That he will not tolerate nor connive any longer at their childish squabling about Nutshels, Counters, and Cherry-stones; but menace them even with Destruction, if they leave not off their Animosities and Asperities of mind about Trifles, and hold not fast unto the Royal Law of Love? I would re∣proach my Hand, if I did not find it even to tremble in Transcribing the terrible words of the Famous Mr. Baxter, who hath Published this Prognostication: I think it exceeding proba∣ble, that either England will have Popery settled
in Power by a French Conquest, in the French Fashion, by the Compliance of those of the Eng∣lish Clergy, who are for a Foreign Church-Ju∣risdiction, or else God will constrain the present Governors, by the sense of their own Interest, if not of the Interest of Religion and the common Good, to open the publick Church-doors unto that Concord, against which they have been lock'd by the Act of Uniformity, and such like, above Thirty Years; and the unplacable Enemies of Peace will cast down themselves. The former part of this terrible Prognostication, how probable so∣ever the Sins of men have rendred it, we may hope shall by the Sovereign Mercy of Heaven be prevented; but the latter part of it, shall by the Almighty Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ, working on the Hearts of men, how∣ever not without an amazing shake once more not only of the Earth, but of the Heavens al∣so, be speedily and gloriously accomplished. It would indeed make a Volume to re∣cite all the hopeful passages of a true ELEU∣THERIAN strain, which we find oc∣curring in the Books of late Years, written by many Conformable Sons of the Church of England. Now because I am going to pre∣dict the Language, which will be heard through the Nation, when a wonderful Revo∣lution shall irresistibly bring on the heretofore maligned, and hitherto opposed Reformation; and Good men will write in all their Books, what was the Motto written by Selueccerus in all of his, ΠΕΡΙ ΠΑΝΤΟΣ ΤΗΝ ΕΛΕΓΘΕΡΙΑΝ. Above all things for LIBERTY. I am
willing first of all to repeat a little of that Language, which I find in the Writings of the Conformable. Reader, Shall we go so high as the very Reverend old Robert Abbot the Bishop of Salisbury, whose Two Younger Brothers, one became Archbishop of Canterbury, the other became Lord-Mayor of London? This great man, when Doctor of the Chair in the University of Oxford [1615.] thus expressed himself; There are some, that are partly Romish, partly English, as occasion serves: So that a man may say unto them, Noster es, an Adversariorum? Who under pretence of Truth, and preaching against the Puritans, strike at the Heart and Root of the Faith and Religion now Established among us. This Preaching against the Puritans, was but the practice of Parsons and Campion's Counsel [Two notorious Jesuites] when they came in∣to England to seduce young Students: For when many of them were afraid they should lose their places if they should professedly be thus, the Counsel they then gave them was, That they should speak freely against the Puritans, and that should suffice. Now for this speech, That the Presbyterians are as bad as the Papists; there is a sting in it, which I wish had been left out; for there are many Churches beyond the Seas which contend for the Religion established amongst us, which yet have Approved and Admitted the Presbytery; and this is to make them as bad as the Papists. Besides, there have lived among us many Reverend and Worthy men, which have
not rejected the Presbytery, taking it even for Lay Elders; and amongst the rest, Dr. Nowel, late Dean of Pauls, in his larger Catechism, p. 29. and 71. affirms, That in every well Go∣vern'd Church there was a Presbytery; and yet this Catechism, by the late Reverend Arch∣bishop of Canterbury, was commanded to be had in every Grammar-School; which surely he would not have done, if the Presbyterians were as dangerous or bad as the Papists. But I spoke of coming to the late Years, and I will do it as fast as I can. 'Tis Bishop Dave∣nant, who says, If you be free from the Rites that God himself once Prescribed, then are you free from the Traditions of men. It is a most wicked thing, that they should im∣pose this Yoke upon you, and you are most foolish to submit your Necks unto it; for God would not have abolished the Ceremonial Law Instituted by himself, that a New One may be invented by men. 'Tis Bishop Taylor who says, a symbolical Rite of Human Invention, to signify what it does not effect, and then introduced in the Solemn Service of God, is so like those vain Imaginations and Representations forbidden in the Second Commandment, that the very suspicion is more against Edification, than their use can pretend unto. Ecclesiastical Laws are to be fitted for the advantage of the Churches, Ministring to Edification, and complying with Charity; whatever Ecclesiastical Law hath not these Conditions, the Churches ought not to re∣ceive.
'Tis Mr. Hales (one as worthy to have been a Bishop as Archbishop Laud) who says, That when either False or Uncertain Conclu∣sions are obtruded for Truth, or Acts either Unlawful or Ministring just Scruple, are re∣quired of us to be performed; in these ca∣ses, Consent were Conspiracy, and open Con∣testation is not Faction or Schism, but due Christian Animosity. That it hath been the common Disease of Christians from the be∣ginning not to content themselves with that measure of Faith, which God and the Scri∣ptures have expresly afforded. — But upon pretence of Church Authority (which is none) or Tradition (which for the most part is but feign'd) they have peremptorily concluded, and confidently imposed upon others, a ne∣cessity of entertaining Conclusions of that nature. That to load our publick Forms with the private Fancies upon which we differ, is the most Sovereign way to perpetuate Schism unto the worlds end. That they do but abuse themselves and others, that would per∣suade us, that Bishops by Christ's Institution have any Superiority over other men, further than that of Reverence. 'Tis Dr. Fuller (one as worthy of a Bishoprick too as any other) who says, Mul∣tiformity in things merely indifferent, with mutual Charity, doth more promote God's Glory than Uniformity it self. 'Tis Bishop Stillingfleet, who says (though he were not a Bishop when he said it) Let men turn and wind themselves which way
they will, by the very same Arguments that any will prove Separation from the Church of Rome Lawful, because she required Un∣lawful things as conditions of her Communion, it will be proved Lawful, Not to conform to any suspected or unlawful Practice, required by any Church-Governors upon the same Terms, if the thing so required be after serious and sober enquiry, judged Unwarrantable by a man's own Conscience. Again, What possible reason can be given, why such things should not be sufficient for Communion with a Church, which are sufficient for Salvation? And certainly those things are sufficient for That, which are laid down as the necessary Duties of Christianity by our Lord and Saviour in his Word. — Without all Controversy, the main inlet of all the Distractions, Con∣fusions, and Divisions in the Christian World, hath been by Adding other Conditions of Church Communion than Christ hath made. Further, By allowing a Liberty for matters of Indif∣ferency, and bearing with the weak, who can∣not bear things which others count Lawful, we might indeed be restored unto a Primi∣tive Lustre far sooner, than by furbishing up some Antiquated Ceremonies, which can de∣rive their Pedigree no higher, than from some ancient Custom and Tradition. Once more, There is nothing the Primitive Church deserves greater Imitation by us in, than that admirable Temper, Moderation, and Condescention, which was used in it towards all the Members of it. It was ne∣ver
thought worth the while to make any standing Laws for Rites and Customs, that had no other Original but Tradition, much less to suspend men her Communion for not observing them. 'Tis the Bishop of Hereford, who says, As long as men hold fast the Body of Christ, be not Rigorous with them for Shadows. This Forceable urging Uniformity in Worship, hath caused great division in Faith as well as Cha∣rity. I beseech you in the fear of God, set before your Eyes the dreadful Day of Judg∣ment, when Christ on his Tribunal of Justice shall thus question you, Are your Ceremonies more dear unto you, than the Souls for which I Died? If David dispensed with a Ceremony Commanded by God to satisfy the Hunger of his People, Will not you dispense with your own Ceremonies to satisfy the Souls of my People? Shall they perish for transgressing your Human Laws, which they ignorantly conclude Erroneous, and shall not you perish for transgressing my Di∣vine Laws, which you know to be Good and Holy? 'Tis the Protestant Reconciler (a faithful Son of the Church of England, as one calls him) who says, It is certain that our Church hath altered her Liturgy at several Times, and in several Parts. Hence it appears, how sense∣lesly 'tis alledged, That we cannot abate these Ceremonies, because they have been once received by the Church. One skill'd in An∣tiquity will be convinced of the great insin∣cerity of these two pretences; That we, lay∣ing
aside of the rest, have kept our present Ceremonies out of due Reverence to Anti∣quity. 'Tis the Reverend Mr. Samuel Bolde, who says, I dare affirm, That if the Rites and Ceremonies now in use in the Church of England, should be Altered by the same Au∣thority which did at first Enjoin them, the Church of England would still be as impreg∣nable a Bulwark against Popery as now she is; and I am fully satisfied there is no man will deny this, unless he be either a Real Papist, or an Ignorant and a Superstitious Fool. Why should I quote the Four Books, En∣titled, The Conformists Plea for the Nonconfor∣mists, which were Composed by a Beneficed Minister, and Regular Son of the Church of Eng∣land, and exposed in the Years 1681, 1682, 1683? Unto these, if I should add all that occurs in the several Arguments humbly Proposed for Concessions and Alterations in the Common-Prayer, and in the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England (with numberless Quo∣tations from Conformable Authors therein made) published by a Minister of the Church of England, as by Law Established, in the Year 1689. Some fierce IDUMAEAN would say, I am raising an Army of Moderate Con∣formists against his Violent Party. And yet I must presume to Cite a few Lines out of the Author last mentioned: Says he, The Cere∣monies are Inutilia Caelo, of little or no use for the winning of Souls. And I see not but that Prelate's Speech was truly Christian,
who said, We had rather lose a Ceremony than a Soul. As is said of some Meats, Neither if we Eat them are we the better, nor if we Eat not are we the worse; so we are nothing bet∣tered by these Ceremonies. And the Reason for the use of the Ceremonies ceaseth much; they were kept partly out of Compliance with the Papists to gain upon them, but now the Papists are harden'd by it, upbraiding us (as Bishop Usher said of them) If our Flesh be not good, Why do you drink of our Broth? And the Conformists (many of them) would think it hard to be Silenc'd for not Assenting to the Perseverance of the Saints, or any other the Five Points, according to the common Sense of our Dissenting Brethren. — I shall conclude with the common Assertion of the Reformed Churches, That all Churches should labour as much as possibly may be, after Apo∣stolical Simplicity, and fewness of Ceremonies, which they judge the safest, the purest, and the best; as Peter Martyr, Bucer, Calvin, Be∣za, Zanchy, and indeed almost all Good men affirm. Lest my Reader should grow weary [and yet who can be weary!] of being enter∣tain'd with too long a Repetition of the true ELEUTHERIAN Language, to be found in the Books of many Conformable Writers, I will only Extract a few Lines from Two more of those Writers, who yet have not prefixed their Names unto their Works; and it is a shame to the Nation, that men who write so well, should find it necessary,
for the avoiding of Envy, to write Anony∣mously. It was in the Year 1690, that one Con∣formable Divine [whose Name, I hear, is Mr. Graves] Published a Discourse on the Vanity, Mischief, and Danger of continuing Cere∣monies in the Worship of God: And now see what he says; If we by continuing the pre∣sent Terms of Communion, drive People from us, the Schism will lodge at our doors, and we shall be the Schismaticks. They that for Rites labour to keep up our Animosities, make themselves Guilty of all the Persecutions of former Times; and God may charge upon them all the Righteous Blood that has been shed, from the Blood of Abel to the Blood of Russel; Verily I say unto you, it shall be re∣quired of this generation. — There is no keeping up the Honour of the Ceremonies, except we blind the People, which is now im∣possible. — Many of our own Clergy submit not unto them out of Choice, but as a Burthen from which they would gladly be delivered. — As Knowledge increaseth, Zeal for Ceremonies will grow more and more Ridiculous. — The Lords, the Knights of the Shires, and the Burgesses, know who are fit in their several Countries to be Coun∣sellors of Peace, and Healers of our Breaches; and if we are unwilling to be Peace-makers, they may (if they please) make a Law, That the Members of both Houses, shall in their several Countries, chuse Three or Four Divines to sit in Convocation to offer unto
them, what may settle the Peace of our Church. — The Church would lose no∣thing though all its Ceremonies were laid aside. They are no more an Ornament unto the Church, than the Chains of a Galley or a Prison, are Ornaments to the poor man that is laden with them. — A Soul swallowed up in the Contemplations of the Infinite Majesty of the Glorious God, may reckon these imposed Fooleries, no better than the Fools-Caps and Coats which Persecutors did put on the Saints of God; they may be valued by formal Dead Christians, but the Spiritually Minded will look on them, as Toys fit only to Adorn Hypocrites. No man can shew any good they have done, except it be good to maintain a Corrupt Party in Church and State, to the excluding a Pious, Sober, Peace∣able, Diligent, Powerful Interest. Uniformity is Deformity, and Confusion, when men ap∣point other Terms of Ministerial Service and Church-Communion, than are prescribed in God's Word. — The good Temper, Wis∣dom, Diligence, Faithfulness, and Courage of God's Servants, hath been useful to Man∣kind; but a Carnal Faction of Christians, be∣ing hurried by a mad Zeal for little things, have oppressed these Benefactors, stained the Glory of the Nation, beaten down the Rents of Lands, discouraged Industry, de∣stroyed Trade, and brought the most Illu∣strious Island in the World, unto a low state. — The making unnecessary Terms of Mi∣nisterial Service, which Christ never enjoin∣ed,
is an Invasion of his Kingly Office. — Instead of keeping out Burning and Shining Lights, we had need Trim some of our own, which give but a faint Light, if any at all. — The most Learned Divines, and the Wisest Statesmen in the World, are but Bunglers when they take upon them to add unto God's Worship what he hath not appoint∣ed. — With these Inventions Heathens and Atheists are habited like Christians for the ser∣vice of the Devil, to corrupt and destroy true Christianity. — Mankind hath for ma∣ny Ages been possessed and tormented with a furious Spirit, the Devil of Impositions; it will never be well till this Spirit is cast out. — Piety hath been hid in Corners, re∣move Stumbling-Blocks, and it will come forth and appear in publick with all its Beau∣ty and Glory. — The use of Ceremonies tends to the oppression of the Life and Power of Christianity. They are like Painted Win∣dows, which make a gaudy shew, but they much lessen the Light. — The Carnal part of the world is easily engaged for them, against Holiness; and to such a degree that serious Piety hath been scoffed at, not only by the Mobile, but even the Tribe of the Long Robe when engaged to be Advocates for Impo∣sitions. — Our furious Bigots, when they had quite trampled under foot the Dissenters, they began a wild Carier against Piety and Sobriety in their own Body. The Removal of Ceremonies will take away the Vizor with which Formalists, Hypocrites, Wicked and
Profane men, do cover themselves. The continuance of them in the Worship of God, will be a Gratification of the Worst of Christians, and a Grief to the Best. — It cannot be proved, that Ceremonies in Wor∣ship ever did any good. — In the Refor∣mation in the last Century, the Pope was dri∣ven hence in such haste, that he left some of his Toys behind him; these have continued too long among us, to the great disturbance of the Church. In the first Reformation we were cleansed from Idolatry; in the next, I hope, we shall go a step further. — Let us not Fight against God; all dividing Terms of Communion, or of the Exercise of the Mi∣nistry, are the things to be removed in order to a more perfect Reformation of the Church, and to make way for a more holy and bles∣sed State; which may be at hand, if by our perverseness we do not put away this happi∣ness from us: God is doing this Work in the World; it shall go on, though we perish by our foolish Obstinacy. — All the Pious, Sober, and Moderate Clergymen are for an Union; the rest are, some of them, Dignifi∣ed Drones; these fear Contempt if more diligent Labourers are admitted into the Church. Some are Learned, but are infla∣med with a Pharisaical Zeal for the Form of Godliness, denying the Power thereof: Some are Debauch'd, and fear the severe Correction that is due unto them: Some are departed from our Doctrine, and fear (here the Shoe pincheth) that their Errors will be exposed by
the Accession of such an Orthodox Interest, as the Body of the Presbyterians, who are firm to the Doctrine of the Church of England: Some are so Sottish, that they act their part very ill, and would be undone if their Tools were taken away: All our Sticklers are Tan∣tivees for their own Humours, and care not what becomes of our Religion, Laws, and Li∣berties. — Though by the Act of Indul∣gence, the Instruments of Persecution are struck out of the hands of Persecutors, yet we may be still guilty of Persecution, if we continue those things that armed Evil men against the People of God. — He requires you to Pray unto the Lord of the harvest, that he would send forth more labourers into his harvest; and you keep away many worthy Labourers from his Work, because they cannot comply with Terms that he never appointed. — Thus he. It was in the Year 1693. That another Conformable Divine [whose Name as I am in∣formed is Mr. Snowden] Published a Discourse for Abatement in Matters of Conformity to several Injunctions and Orders of the Church of England. See what he says: Compulsion is a Quiver which affords many a sharp Arrow, but such as seldom hit the Mark. — Yet we can∣not go to the House of God in Company: How happy were it if the Partition Wall were broken down, or so wide a Door made in it that we might go in and out; that every thing were cut off which troubles the Church,
and which are as Goads in the Side, and Thorns in the Eye, of Conscience. The Convocation held in the Year 1640. speaking of the Custom of Bowing in token of Reverence to God when we come in the Place of Publick Worship, says thus; In the Practice or Admission of this Rite, we desire that the Rule of Charity pre∣scribed by the Apostle may be observed, which is, That they who use this Rite, despise not those who use it not; and they who use it not, condemn not them who use it. (The like Liberty is left as to Bowing at the Name of Jesus). And I cannot understand, why the same Latitude or Charity might not be granted in the other scrupled parts of Conformity. The Church (I am of Opinion) may thank her Preferments for the extreme Zeal of many of her Votaries in the case of Conformity. The Whore of Babylon never wanted Pledgers, whenever she drank to them out of her Golden Cup, what∣ever Abominations 'twas filled with. — Sup∣pose some of our Tackling should be rent, and Sprucery sullied, yet it were a Misfor∣tune no way comparable to that of dashing the Ship against the Rock. And what Ship∣wrack the Storms which some Zealots a∣mong us are ever upon the least Alteration of that Rigging (though upon the justest Reasons) raising, may occasion, God only knows, if he that stills the Raging of the Sea, does not quiet the Madness of the People. — Why might not things be so tempered, that the Church of England, by hearkening to some Terms of accommodation, and making a
Rebatement of Disputable Things, and (all along) offensive Rites and Ceremonies, be∣come more enlarged, and settled upon a firmer Basis and more tried Foundation? Al∣though I have some good reason to know, and believe (and therefore do I speak) that many of our Dissenting Brethren be of Mephibosheth's mind, That if the Protestant Religion may be secured, the King and King∣dom setled in Peace, they are contented the Ziba's should take all; they grudge not at their Preferments and Dignities. — But why should we envy our Brethrens sitting at the same Table, when we have all the same Faith, the same Father, the same Baptism, and the same hope of our Calling? Or, Is there no re∣gard to be had unto the tender Consciences of Conformists, who rather than violate the Peace, or break the Unity of the Church, have a long time laboured under an heavy bur∣then? I wish there may not be the same rea∣son to believe now, what a Reverend Doctor and Dignitary of the Church hath some Years since declared unto the World, That they seem resolved to break all in pieces, and ha∣zard our Religion, and let these sad effects, our Divisions, still continue, than to abate their Ri∣gour in Imposing, what they may Lawfully Alter and Abolish. The Old Leven could not be purged out all at once; and therefore several of the greatest Prelates in Queen Elizabeth's Days endeavoured to proceed in that work; but Satan hindred them; and, he that hath let, still lets; yea, that Mystery of Iniquity will
work, till it be taken out of the way. — While our Discipline hath been very quick∣sighted in matters of Conformity as to the smallest Ceremonies, it hath been comparative∣ly dull in hearing, and slow in spying the greatest Immoralities. — We should all sit under our Vines and Fig-trees, leading a peaceable and quiet life, when once these Apples of Strife (which, they say, grow upon a Tree that is neither Good nor Evil) became Forbidden Fruit. Haec ille — Thus, Reader, I am so far from able to brag, with old Epicurus, of not having in all my Writings Quoted any one single Authority out of any Book whatsoever, that (although I have not, as Pineda did in his Monarchia Ec∣clesiastica, Cited One thousand and forty Au∣thors) I doubt I have brought some Quotations, enough offensive to some that have more of Epicurus than of Jesus Christ in their Divinity; and that stick at nothing to maintain their Ec∣clesiastical Monarchy. But as Mr. Samuel Bolde (a Conformist) hath reported, That a Church-Warden having Presented a Person unto the Ecclesiastical Court, one in the Court immediately applied himself unto the Register, saying, What do you mean? You'll spoil all; for this Gentleman is ONE OF US; he will swear and be Drunk as well as the BEST OF US: Say you so, quoth the Register, Then the Case is altered; and immediately cal∣ling the Church-Warden, he told him, he was a most impudent and villanous Rakehel to Present so
worthy a Gentleman, and chid him sharply for it. Even so, when we Nonconformists meet with any man who desires the Reformation of the Church, to be carried on by the Rules of the Lord Jesus Christ, as the Blessed men that first attempted it, intended it; or, who carries the heart of a true Englishman in him, for the Constitution of the State, with the Principles which alone can maintain the late happy Re∣volution; or who is for Government without Slavery, in Spirituals or Temporals; we must be excused if we presently cry out, This is ONE OF US; and though he may be a Conformist, yet make bold freely to Quote him as OUR OWN. For I do again say, the difference between us will, by a wonderful Work of Heaven upon the Nation, be quickly taken away; Ridley and Hooper will quickly shake Hands; and our Brethren [for we are Brethren] among the Conformable in the Church of England, will now quickly come to speak the Language exemplified in the Citations thus made from some of them: They will speak as the Learned Crakenthorp did for the Puritans in the former Age, In Doctrinâ & Fidei Ortho∣doxae professione Discordia inter nos nulla; Hâc integrâ, in Ritibus & Discipliná, Discrimen fe∣rendum, utrique Scimus. We are one in Faith, and it's no matter whether we be one in Rite or no. Yea, they will speak it in so general and so prevailing a Note, That the wicked who will be grieved at it, shall gnash their teeth and melt away: Nor shall the Sons of Pro∣crustes be able to hinder this Restoration of
Mankind unto its Liberty. That part of the English Nation which values its true English Li∣berty (for which, if the Heavens were Parch∣ment, and the Seas were Ink, as the Rabbi says, they would not suffice to write the just Praises of God), I say, that part of the English Na∣tion, will not much longer permit the truest Friends of English Liberty to be suppressed, Abused, and Incapacitated, merely to please the Humours of a Faction, who have always done all they can to betray that English Liber∣ty. A glorious King will set himself to put an effectual stop unto the Profanity and Immorality which have depraved the Kingdoms; and he will unite the Best People in the Nation, to assist that Best of Undertakings. A Senator invited Augustus Caesar unto a Feast; whereto as the Emperor was coming, he heard an horrid cry of a wretched man, whom he saw a Com∣pany dragging after them: The Emperor de∣manding the cause of that Violence, it was answered, Their Master had Condemned him to the Fish-ponds for Breaking a Glass which he set a high Value upon; whereupon he Commanded a stay of the Execution, until he arrived at the House of the Senator; where the Senator shewed him a Room well furnished with Glas∣ses, whereof he Valued some at the Price of a Province: The Emperor saw they were pretty things, but he saw that they were likely to be the cause of abundance of Mischief, and therefore uttering that Expression Better all these perish than one man, he presently broke them all to Pieces.
Our Caesar, and the most powerful Friends of our Caesar, will shortly pass the like righte∣ous Doom upon those wretched things, which by being made the Terms of Communion, have really proved the Grounds of Separation between the Best People in the Nation. Such they have really proved, and such they will still, and ever prove, until Men are so Wise and Just, as to take them away: For 'tis truly observed by a Person of no mean consideration, and of some Conformity too, That should the Nation be at once emptied of one whole Generation of Nonconformists, so long as the reading of the Bible is suffered, ano∣ther will unavoidably and immediately spring up. But when this Day of Coalition shall come, it will bring on the most glorious Times that ever arose upon the English Horizon; and as the Curse of our JESUS will fall, as it hath already fallen, upon the Persons and Houses of them who have assay'd the rebuilding of the Old Romish Jericho, which hath been so far there demolished; so in the room thereof there shall be introduced a New Jerusalem. THEN, the Dukes of Edom shall be amazed. And that in this Expectation also, I may not seem carried away with mere Fanaticism and Enthusiasm, I will take the leave to make one Quotation more from a Conformable Divine: 'Tis Dr. Drue Cressener, who in the Year 1687. upon the Occasion of the late King's Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, wrote the following words: The present Revolutions, I look upon to be the beginning of the Preparations for the Uni∣versal Kingdom of Christ upon the Earth. What∣soever
others may intend or design by the Liberty of Conscience, I cannot believe that it will ever be recall'd in England as long as the World stands. The next Year seems in all probability to be a Year of Wonders, for the Recovery of the Church. — And I send you the News of a continual Increase of the flourishing State of the Church very shortly to begin, and to continue unto the End of the World. In fine, As the first pretended Statute that ever was in England, for the vexing of Christians on the account of Religion, by the colour whereof the Bishops committed great Oppressions and Cruelties, was one that never pass'd the House of Commons, but the House of Commons in the next Parliament, with the concurrence of the King, vehemently protested against it, albeit the then Bishop of London, with the help of the other Prelates, found a way unjustly to suppress and conceal the Revocation of that pretended Statute; so it may be hoped our Lord Jesus Christ will bless the Nation with Parliaments that shall restrain a Corrupt Clergy, not only from vexing of Christians on the account of Religion, but also from stopping any more the progress of Religion in the Nation. THEN, Thus saith the Lord God, concerning EDOM; The pride of thine heart hath deceived thee; thou whose habitation is high, that saith in his heart, Who shall bring me down to the ground? Tho thou exalt thy self as the eagle, and tho thou set thy nest among the stars, thence will I bring thee down, saith the Lord. — Saviours shall come upon mount Zion, to judge the mount of Esau, and the king∣doms shall be the Lords. What shall I say? The
Spirit of Christ sent forth at the Reformation, an Hundred and fourscore Years ago, carried back some Advice, That the Deluge of Popish Ignorance, and Wickedness, and Wretched∣ness, was abated from off the earth. But that Spirit is going to be again sent forth, and it will remain here, without leaving this woful World, as it hath heretofore done; for behold, The face of the earth will quickly be dry before it. Then the Spirit of Christ shall no longer be re∣markably distinguish'd from the Spirit of the Church; and Luther's Complaint shall no more be made, Sunt nunc homines, magis vindictae cu∣pidi, magis avari, magis ab omni misericordiâ re∣moti, magis immodesti, & indisciplinati, multoque deteriores, quam fuerunt sub Papatu. §. 13. Indeed those Dispensations of Hea∣ven that shall bring on the Reformation and the Resurrection of the European Churches, can be no other than Constellations of Miracles. But fear not, O ye Disciples, whose Faith is almost sunk in the Storms which threaten to overwhelm that Bark which hath the Interests of One infinitely greater than Caesar in the bottom of it: An Age of Miracles is now dawning upon the World; and Fluctuat, at nunquam mergitur illa ratis. Proper Miracles were continued in the Church of God, for Two or Three Hundred Years together, even until the Antichristian Apostacy was come on to some extremity. And whether
there may not be a Return of those powers of the world to come, when the Apostacy shall be over, is known unto the Lord of that world. Such Miracles have been lately wrought, more than two or three of them, in the City of London, as well as elsewhere: Persons who have had their Limbs miserably disjointed, Persons that have had inveterate Palsies, incu∣rable Fistulaes, desperate Leprosies; these Per∣sons, as they have been reading the Ancient Miracles of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Spirit of Christ hath wonderfully given them the Faith of his doing the like for them; and be∣hold! they have to the astonishment of Man∣kind, been by the like Miracles perfectly and presently recover'd out of all their Maladies. If the Relations and Evidences that we have of these Great Things had not been incontesta∣ble, I would not have mention'd them: Now say I, That the Lord's Name (that is, his Christ) is near, his wondrous works declare. I make no doubt that these may be Symbolical Represen∣tations and Exhibitions of the Great Things which the Miraculous Providence of our Lord Jesus Christ is going to do for his People in the World. After a very deliberate Meditation and Inquisition upon the Divine Oracles, and after utmost Application to those Methods by which one may arrive to any understanding in the Times, I do humbly affirm, That we may understand by Books the Number of Years allotted for the Church's lying under its Desolations, to be very near unto its Accomplishment. And this Book of mine does now appear among
you, ye faithful People of God, with Good Tidings of great Joy, even the Tidings of a REVOLUTION and a REFOR∣MATION at the very Door, which will be vastly more wonderful than any of the De∣liverances yet seen by the Church of God from the beginning of the World. Yea, if this Book were capable of carrying the Advice as far as the Voice of the Seventh Apocalyptical Trumpet (which we may be sure must sound quickly) shall be extended, it should carry this Advice, The Kingdom of God is at hand. The precise Year for the great Revolution, I do not pretend so much as to conjecture; but that the Time is at hand, I venture to utter as a thing beyond Conjecture. We all know, Glorious things are spoken of thee, O thou city of God! I say not that these things will come on without such horrible Commotions, and Concussions, and Confusions, that mens hearts every where shall fail them for fear, and for looking after those things which are coming on the earth. The mighty Angels of the Lord Jesus Christ will make their descent, and set the World a trembling at the Approaches of their Almighty Lord: They will shake Churches, and shake Nations, and shake Empires, and shake mighty King∣doms, and shake once more not Earth only, but Heaven also. And the Great SWORD fore∣told by Lactantius, to fall from Heaven to Earth, when the Lord of the Celestial Armies is at hand, will fill both Pages of all Gazettes with Armies, and Campaigns, and Sieges, and horrendous De∣solations. But this is to be expected, That
the Day is at hand, when the kingdoms of this world shall become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ: Even the Day when Rome, with all its Unreformable Adherents and Supporters, will not only see fulfill'd the Prophecy of her own Irish Malachi, Civitas Septi-collis diruetur, & judex tremendus judicabit populum suum; but shall also suffer all the Plagues threatned her in a more sure word of prophecy. And shall not an early and an happy Share in the Holy Changes that are coming upon the World, be enjoy'd by Great Britain, the Island which was irra∣diated with the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, several Years before the chiefest Pre∣tenders of St. Peter's being at Rome, durst pro∣pose his Arrival there, even according to the Assertion of the Ancient Gildas, Tempore ut scimus summo Tiberii Caesaris, Radios suos primum indulget, id est, praecepta, Christus: We know Christ granted his Rays to this Land first, in the latter end of Tiberius Caesar, whose last Year was the Thirty seventh of our Lord? There is no little reason to be given for such an hope. The Omnipotent Lord Jesus Christ, who manages the Isles as a very little thing, even as a Man does the Spittle in his Mouth [for so the Seventy render that Passage] giving it whatever Turn, and whatever Cast he pleaseth, hath marvellous Things to do in Great Britain; yea, upon those Islands his people shall renew their strength; and the unreasonable and Schis∣matical TESTS that have enfeebled them, will be taken off. Now as Judas Maccabaeus, after the Prophanation of the Mosaical San∣ctuary
by Antiochus [who some say was the first that ever invaded Liberty of Conscience, and I add, a Type of the Last;] for Twelve hun∣dred and sixty Natural Days, then spent Thirty Days in the Purification of the Temple, and spent Forty five Days more to prepare all things for the Dedication of it; so 'tis not improba∣ble, that when the Twelve hundred and sixty Years of Antichrist are out, there may go some Years to sweep and cleanse the Church of ma∣ny wrong things that are crept into it; and then comes the End, which blessed is he that waits and comes unto. But the Days of Purifica∣tion are hastning upon the Church, wherein the Temple will be swept and cleansed from the things that have hitherto defiled it; and tho' there should then be found in England particu∣larly, any considerable Persons guilty of Je∣rom's fault, who undertook the Patronage of the Abuses in the beginning of the Fifth Cen∣tury, against which Vigilantius appeared, and who bestow'd the name of Dormitantius, with other base and bad Language upon that Man of God; yet such vigilant Servants of God, as become vigorous Reformers of the Abuses now prevailing, shall be gloriously prospered. Sirs! You are not now to be discourag'd with an Abi in cellam, & dic, miserere mei Deus: 'Tis Time for you to be at work, even at the Work of publishing to the Church of God, those Prin∣ciples of Evangelical Truth, whereto it should be more conformed. Let the Witnesses of our Lord, who have hitherto been Preaching un∣der the Cross, now set themselves to extraordi∣nary
Prayer, with Fasting, like the Devotions of Daniel before the Lord; and in the solemn∣est way often resigning themselves up to the Holy Spirit of God, that being possessed by him, they may be fitted for, and used in the most eminent Services: Let them then study what Services they would have the Lord Jesus Christ at his coming, find them engaged in. You are going to drop off your Sackcloth, ye Elijahs; the Old Cloaths of the Wilderness will be taken from you sooner than you are aware; and you shall have the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness. If Luther, with the other Heroes of his Time, had been apprehensive that the Time ap∣pointed for making better and hotter Batteries than those which Huss and others had an Hun∣dred Years before made upon the Romish Ba∣bylon, was come on, what Security would have been added unto their Magnanimity? Est ventura Dies, Romae quae subruat Arces; Jam quassae nutant Turres, Lapsumque minantur.
The Conformists Reasons for hearing and joining with the Nonconformists. 1. THE same Reasons which oblige Persons to hear and join with us, oblige us also to take all Op∣portunities of hearing and join∣ing with the Nonconformists, they being Mi∣nisters of Christ, having due Call and Autho∣rity from him to preach the Gospel. The Church hath real need of their Labours, their Ministry is hated by Satan and his Instru∣ments; they are duly subject to the higher Powers, and are protected by the Law of the Land in the course of their Ministry, and are a considerable part of that same Church of England, which His present Majesty under God is Supreme Governor of, according to the old Oath of Supremacy, and the 37th Article of the Church of England. 2. Those Words of our Saviour's take place here; He that is not against us, is on our part, Mark 9.40. The Nonconformists really are not against us, therefore they are on our part. The Scope and Drift of their Ministry is to
win Souls, not to this or that Sect, but to Christ; to teach them their Duty to God, and to His present Majesty, as sole Supreme under God, and the common Center of Ca∣tholick Unity in these Nations. They are truly tender of our Ministry, rejoice in our Labours, and in the Gifts and Graces of able and faithful Conformists, rebuke Backbiters and Vilifyers of our Ministry; and as they have opportunity, some of them hear and join with us and our Churches. 3. In the time of the late King James the Church of England did confess its Error in being severe to the Nonconformists. This is plain from a certain Pamphlet published in the late King's Reign, entituled, A Letter to a Dissenter, upon occasion of his Majesty's late graci∣ous Declaration of Indulgence. The Words there∣of, page 8. are these following; The Church of England convinced of its Error in being severe to you; the Parliament, whenever it meeteth, will sure be gentle to you: the next Heir bred in the Countrey which you have so often quoted for a Pa∣tern of Indulgence: A general Agreement of all thinking Men, that we must no more cut our selves off from the Protestants abroad, but rather enlarge the Foundations upon which we are to build our Defences against the common Enemy; so that in truth all things seem to conspire to give you Ease and Satisfaction, &c. This is to be looked up∣on as the general Sense of the Conforming Nobility, Gentry, Commonalty, and Clergy, in the time of the late King's Reign: for so really it was, as is well known. Now here
the Church of England doth confess its Error towards the Dissenters, and to have erred not in some slight and trivial Matters, but in Mat∣ters touching the Foundation; and sees a ne∣cessity of enlarging its Foundations, and con∣sequently of taking in the Nonconformists, and making them constituent Parts of the Church with her self. Either then the Non∣conformists are upon one and the same Foun∣dation with our selves, or they deserve to be; and it is through no fault of theirs that they are not: Being upon the same Foundation, we cannot be against their Ministry and Meet∣ings, but we must needs be against our own, and overthrow the Common Protestant Cause, Religion, and Interest in this Nation, and consequently in all other Nations and Countries, what in us lies; and in being for their Ministry, we are for our own. 4. These Scriptures set together, prove it a Duty, viz. Hear, and your soul shall live, Isa. 55.3. Where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them, Mat. 18.20. I charge thee before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, preach the word, be instant in season, out of season, 2 Tim. 4.1, 2. Though I be free from all men, yet have I made my self servant unto all, that I might gain the more: And unto the Jews I be∣came as a Jew, that I might gain the Jews; to them that are under the law, as under the law, that I might gain them that are under the law; to them that are without law, as without law, (be∣ing not without law to God, but under the law to Christ) that I might gain them that are without
law: To the weak became I as weak, that I might gain the weak. I am made all things to all men, that I might by all means save some: And this I do for the gospel's sake, 1 Cor. 9.19, 20, 21, 22, 23. 5. The Communion of Saints is a principal Part of the Catechism, and of the common Creed of Christendom; it is a Fundamental in true Religion, most frequently repeated in all Conforming Congregations. Now we do not duly believe and practise this Fundamen∣tal, unless we hear and join with the Non∣conforming Brethren in the Word, and Prayer, d Sacraments, as we have Call and Oppor∣tunity, they being visible Saints, and there being nothing in their way of Worship, but what is either laudable or tolerable: God doth own and approve their Ministry and Meetings, and is graciously present with them. Objections Answered. Obj. 1. The Dissenters refuse Subjection to the Governors of the Church of England, and therefore it cannot be safe for us to hear and join with them. Answ. This is plainly not true; for under God His present Majesty is sole Supreme Governor of the Church of Eng∣land, ruling all Estates according to Laws enacted by common Consent in Parliament; witness the old Oath of Supremacy, and the 37th Article of the Church of England, in these words, The King's Majesty hath the chief Power in this Realm of England, and other his
Dominions. Unto whom, the chief Government of all Estates of this Realm, whether they be Ec∣clesiastical or Civil, in all Causes doth appertain, and is not, nor ought to be subject to any Foreign Jurisdiction. The Dissenting Ministers gene∣rally subscribe this Article; and it is notorious that they are duly subject to His present Ma∣jesty, pray heartily for him, pay Taxes, bear all legal Charges, and are more upright and cordial to the present Government, than many of the Conformists are. If you deny His present Majesty to be chief Governor of the Church of England, you then bring in the Pa∣pacy, and unhinge the Government. Obj. 2. Though the King be Supreme Go∣vernor by the Sword, yet Bishops are Supreme Governors of the Church of England by the Word. Answ. Bishops have no Authority but what is ministerial and subordinate, and there∣fore they cannot be Supreme Governors: They are under Law to God, and they are under Law to the King as God's Vicegerent. If you suppose them Supreme Governors of the Church of England, you suppose them Popes, that is, Antichristian Prelates, exalting them∣selves above God, and above the King his Vicegerent. Abiathar the High-Priest was not Superior to, nor Co-ordinate with King Solo∣mon, but his Subject, and therefore for his Crime was justly deposed by him, and Zadock put in his room.
Obj. 3. The Dissenting Ministers have not just and valid Ordination, as being Ordained by meer Presbyters without a Bishop. Answ. God hath no where declared that there cannot be just and valid Ordination without a Bishop, and therefore the contrary Doctrine must needs be Erroneous. Accordingly all true Protestants own and approve Ordination by Presbyters without a Bishop, (as is used in the Dutch, Helvetian, French, and New-Eng∣land Churches) to be just and valid, and not defective in any thing absolutely necessary. The Church of England doth not allow the Ordination of Presbyters by a Bishop only, without the presence and concurrence of co∣assistant Presbyters, who do equally Impose Hands with the Bishop: And the Presbyteri∣ans do not allow Ordination by all Presbyters promiscuously, but only by Senior Presbyters, such as for their Age, Experience, Gravity, Wisdom, Ministerial Ability and Fidelity, and exemplary Vertues, are Heads and Chief Men among them, and a kind of Fathers to the Younger Sort, The principal thing in a Minister of Christ, is not External Ordinati∣on, but Ministerial Ability and Fidelity; Ex∣ternal Ordination is not principal but subser∣vient: And where is Ministerial Ability and Fidelity, with the consent and liking of the People, and the protection and countenance or permission of the Magistrate, with Imposi∣tion of Hands, and Fasting and Prayer by Senior Ministers of known Wisdom, Gravi∣ty,
Piety, and exemplary Vertue and Ability; either this is just and valid Ordination, or there is no such thing as Ordination, neither can it be declared what it is. Now this is the Ordination in use among the Dissenters. And indeed able and faithful Presbyters are, ac∣cording to Scripture-phrase, Bishops; Acts 20.17, 28. Phil. 1.1. 1 Pet. 5.1. Obj. 4. We who are Conforming Ministers cannot hear and join with the Nonconfor∣mists without breach of our Oath of Cano∣nical Obedience to the Ordinary. Answ. That Oath binds us but to obey the Ordinary in things lawful and honest: And to hear and join with the Nonconformists as we have op∣portunity, is neither against Law nor Honesty, but rather laudable, pleasing to God, profita∣ble to the Soul, and the true way of Peace. The Ordinary is not Supreme, but an Officer appointed by the King and State touching Church-matters, he is under Law to God, and to the King and State: If he enjoin or forbid us any thing contrary to Law, we owe him no Obedience. Our Oath to him binds us to no new Duty, but only binds us more strictly to do what we had been bound by the Law to do, in case we had not taken that Oath. The same Supreme Authority which makes the Ordinary, and gives him limited Power over us, doth declare in the Preamble of the late Act for Toleration, that the Liber∣ty now enjoyed by the Nonconformists, may be an effectual means to unite His Majesty's Pro∣testant
Subjects in Interest and Affection. Now our hearing and joining with the Nonconfor∣mists, is a countenancing of them, and of their present Liberty, and consequently it tendeth to the Union of Protestants in In∣terest and Affection, in the Judgment of the King, and of both Houses of Parliament, and consequently of the Ordinary himself; for by the Ordinary is meant the Bishop of the Diocess, who is one of the House of Lords, and so hath a hand in making the Law. How can we disobey the Bishop by hearing and joining with those Men, unto whom the Bishop himself, as a Member of the House of Lords, doth by his consent to the Act of Parliament, give free Liberty, as an effectual means of uniting Protestants in Interest and Affection, and exempteth them from all Penalties, and from being prosecuted in any Ecclesiastical Court, for or by reason of Nonconforming to the Church of Eng∣land? Obj. 5. The Nonconformists are against all Church-Government by Bishops; and there can be no Church without a Bishop. Answ. The Nonconformists are not against all Church-Government by Bishops, for they have long desired that famous Archbishop Usher's Model of Church-Government by Bishops and Presbyters might be established among us. But hitherto they could not ob∣tain it, for there are a Party of Men in the Nation, some Clergy and some Laity, by
Profession Protestants, whom the Piety and Moderation of such Bishops as Bishop Usher and Bishop Hall, doth greatly offend, and can by no means please. A limited Episcopacy the Nonconformists generally are not against; try and see if they will not accept and wil∣lingly Conform to Archbishop Usher's Model. That there may be a Church without a Bi∣shop, is plain from the Dutch, Helvetian, Pro∣testant French Churches, and those in New-England. There is also the universal Church on Earth, and yet no one universal Pastor and Bishop on Earth. The Pope indeed claims to be so, but for that he is by Protestants justly charged with Antichristian Pride and Ambi∣tion. There is also the Church of England, as comprising all the Christian People in Eng∣land; but no one Man is universal Bishop to all the Christian People in England, nor are all the Bishops put together Governors of the Church of England, but they are subject to the King, and Governed by Laws made by the King and Parliament, as hath been de∣clared; and therefore it is not true that there can be no Church without a Bishop. The Church consisteth by Christian Faith, Hope, and Love, not as exclusive of Pastors and Mi∣nisters, but as supposing and including them as God's Instruments for begetting and finish∣ing these heavenly Graces: And nothing hin∣ders but that able and faithful Presbyters may be instrumental in God's Hands for begetting and finishing these heavenly Graces in thou∣sands of Souls, yea and much better than
some Bishops, such as either cannot, or will not Labour in the Word and Doctrine; Po∣pish Bishops, who are Idolaters, and such other as seek themselves and not the things of God. Obj. 6. The Nonconformists have no Ce∣remonies in their way of Worship. Answ. Yes, but they have two Ceremonies of God's own Ordaining, Baptism and the Institution of Bread and Wine; and if God had not thought these two enough, he could easily have Ordained more; but he thought good to Ordain no more, and it must needs be a wise and safe way to keep to God's Ordinance. Obj. 7. The Nonconformists have no pub∣lick Liturgy, that is, no stinted Form of Pub∣lick Prayer and Administration of Sacraments. Answ. You will give the Minister leave to chuse his Text, and compose and methodise his Sermon; Why can you not also leave him to perform the other part of Ministerial Of∣fice, respecting Prayer, Thanksgiving, and the Sacraments, by a stinted Form or not, as he himself is best able and thinks most meet? If his Words be grave, sound, scriptural, pi∣ous, suited to common Edification, though not to each ones Fancy, your Duty is to mind your Heart, to purify that from Pride and carnal Prejudice, and evil Thoughts, and af∣fectionately to concur and join in all the Ser∣vice, and be thankful. It is very desirable that all Ministers were of such Abilities, and
at all times so prompt and full, as to need no stinted Form in publick; let those who are so able, not be abridged of their Liberty beyond their own Choice and Christian Prudence. The Nonconformists keep to Christ's own Words in the Act of Baptism, and they re∣cite the Words of Christ touching the Lord's Supper, and they keep to a stinted Form in Singing Psalms, and they read God's own Word in their Assemblies; and if they be able to Preach, they are able to Pray, and to suit their Prayer to the Edification of that People over whom they are set, and to whom they Minister. And therefore this can be no just Exception; they think they have much more reason to except against our way, as be∣ing too much in stinted Forms. Obj. 8. We who are Conformists, cannot hear and join with the Nonconformists with∣out condemning our own way. Answ. It doth not follow, that because our Way is good, therefore their Way is not good; for as to external Modes, and Forms, and Things circumstantial, Sister-Churches, and Neigh∣bour-Congregations may differ, and yet both be good and lawful. Twenty Ministers at the same time in distant Congregations may hit upon the same Text, and deliver the same substantial Doctrine, and yet their Words and Method and Composure may wonderfully vary, and all may be good and useful, and God more glorified by such Variety, than otherwise. Most conforming Congregations
have no Organs; some have; must therefore one of the two necessarily be bad and damna∣ble? The Churches in Holland, the Churches in Helvetia and Geneva, the Churches in Den∣mark, and in New-England, the Protestant French Churches, have different Ways, and Modes, and Forms, as to external Worship. If one be good, must we therefore condemn all the rest as sinful? What is sinful and for∣bidden by God, we may in no wise conform to; but what is neither precisely commanded, nor precisely forbidden by God, may be done or not done, according as Christian Prudence shall dictate to be most convenient: In such Cases and Matters we are after the Example of St. Paul to be all things to all Men; and if we come to an Episcopal Church, do as they do; if we come to a Presbyterian Church, do as they do; according as Ambrose advised Augustine, Ad quancunque ecclesiam veneris, ejus morem serva, si, &c. To what Church soever thou shalt come, observe its way and manner, if thou wouldst neither offend others, nor have others to offend thee. Obj. 9. If the Nonconformists will preach in the Church, I will readily hear them; but to hear them in Barns and private Houses, and the like places, I will not, I am against it. Answ. We cannot follow a better Pattern than Christ: Now he preached not only in the Temple and Synagogue, but in private Hou∣ses, and sometimes upon a Mountain, and by the Sea-side out of a Ship, the People standing
upon the Shore; and he never declined Preach∣ing to more or fewer in any convenient place suitable to the Occasion. The places in which the Nonconformists preach, some of them are goodly Edifices, some of them are publick Chappels, the meanest of them are not natu∣rally indecent, they best suit with their Cir∣cumstances; and God being graciously present with them, the places where they assemble must needs be the House of God, and the Gate of Heaven, Gen. 28.10, to 18. Get them free leave to exercise their Ministry in the Chur∣ches, and they will willingly quit their Barns and other places; but if you exclude them from the Churches, you necessitate them to preach in other places; and by valuing the Word for the sake of the Place, rather than the Place for the sake of the Word, you de∣clare that indeed you do not truly value God's Word. As it was no Shame to Christ to be born in a Stable, nor to his Virgin-Mother, be∣cause it was not their Sin but their Calamity, but all the Shame was to those that thrust them into the Stable: so it is no Shame for God's Ministers and People to worship him in a Barn, when they have no fitter Place to wor∣ship God in; but the Shame is to those that might allow them better Places to worship God in, and will not, but thrust them into a Barn, and then make that a Cloak for their not hearing and joining with them.
Obj. 10. There is no need of the Noncon∣formists Preaching, it doth more hurt than good, it may better be spared, the Conformist Ministers are full enow for the People of this Land. Answ. I confess that if all Places throughout the Nation were supplied by able and faithful Conforming Ministers, as some are, there would not be such need of the Non∣conformists Preaching as now there is; but it is manifest to all discerning and impartial Chri∣stians, that though there is no want of Mini∣sters, yet there is great need of able, holy, pow∣erful, painful and exemplary Ministers in all the Diocesses of England; and pious Confor∣mists and Nonconformists Ministers have need of each others Labours, and the more humble and faithful they are, the more sensible of it. Never to this day did the Church over-abound with able and faithful Preachers, nor will to the end of the World, while the Followers of Cain and Abel remain in the World, and many are called, but few chosen. Good Bishop Hall would use to say, You may as well complain of too many Stars in the Firmament, as of too many good Preachers in a County. Obj. 11. The late Act of Toleration doth only tolerate the Nonconformist Meetings, it doth not approve them. Answ. It is plain from the Preamble of the Act, that it permits them as an effectual means to unite their Majesties Prote∣stant Subjects in Interest and Affection; and there∣fore
it must needs approve them. For nothing that is not good and laudable, and worthy to be approved, can be an effectual means of uni∣ting Protestants in Interest and Affection; so that the Nonconformists have as true Right to their places by the Law of the Land, as the Conformists have to theirs, they are both alike under His Majesties Protection, and do alike stand or fall with Him and His Govern∣ment; their Religion is one, they have the same common Enemy, and are like to be hap∣py or miserable, strong or weak, according as they unite in God and His present Majesty, or do not unite. Obj. 12. The Dissenting Meetings are not true visible Churches of Christ. Answ. The 19th Article of the Church of England declares the visible Church of Christ to be a Congregation of faithful Men, in which the pure Word of God is preached, and the Sacraments be duly ministred ac∣cording to Christ's Ordinance, in all those things that of necessity are requisite to the same. Now the Dissenting Meetings are visibly such Con∣gregations, and therefore it is impossible that they should be heretical, schismatical, and lack∣ing in any thing necessary to the being of true visible Churches of Christ. If we deny them to be true visible Churches of Christ, we shall not be able to prove the Conformist Churches true visible Churches of Christ; for my part I am not able, and I despair to see it solidly and scripturally proved by any other.
Obj. 13. Conforming and Nonconforming Churches are contradictorily opposite, as Light and Darkness, Christ and Belial, Heaven and Hell, and therefore both cannot be true Churches. Answ. Such as conform to God's Word, and such as do not conform to God's Word in the Substance and Foundation of Re∣ligion, are contradictorily opposite, as Heaven and Hell, the Church of God and the Syna∣gogue of Satan; but they who equally con∣form to God s Law in the Substance and Foun∣dation of Religion, and differ but about cir∣cumstantial things enjoined by Man's Law, though really and for the main they be both Conformists, yet verbally and secundum quid they differ as Conformists and Nonconformists; therefore the grand difference is not between Conforming and Nonconforming Protestants, but between godly and ungodly Protestants, whether Conformists or Nonconformists. As for godly Men Conformists and Nonconfor∣mists, they can bear with one another, and re∣joice in each others Labours, and sincerely though not perfectly deny themselves, and mind and seek the things of Christ, and advance his Kingdom; but it is unregenerate, ungodly, Self-seeking, Saint-hating, sensual and worldly Men, whether Conformists or Nonconformists, that are the Plague of the Church, and Satan's chief Agents. Obj. 14. It is fitter that the Nonconformists come over to us than we to them; we by yield∣ing
to them shall harden them in their sinful Nonconformity, and shall displease our own Side, and not gain our Enemy. Answ. Be it supposed that Nonconformity is a Sin, will it therefore follow that we are not to do our Duty to God and them, and all that in us lies seek the Peace of the Church and the Publick Good? Rigid Conformists confess the Points scrupled by Nonconformists, to be in their own nature indifferent, neither commanded nor forbidden by God, and that the Church may well be without them: Moderate Confor∣mists confess the Church might better be with∣out them, if all both Rulers and People could be so content: but Nonconformists judge some of the things to be flatly sinful. Now on whom doth it lie to yield? They retaining their own Principles, cannot yield and come over to us; we retaining our own Principles, may come over to them, and join with them in the Word, and Prayer, and Sacraments, as we have Call and Opportunity; and in so doing, we gain them so far as it lies in us to gain them; we please God, which is Motive sufficient, and cannot but have a good end and effect. If they make an ill use of our Condescension, that is their Sin, for which they must answer to God, who will not fail to accept and re∣ward our good Deed: and if Conformists be displeased with us for doing our duty, shall we therefore desist from it? The question is not, whether they sin in not conforming? but al∣lowing to each other their different Thoughts and Opinions about Conformity, what is the
duty of both sides as to mutual Peace and Con∣cord? They are so prudent as in the course of their Ministry to insist upon those Points in which both sides agree, as being sufficient for Edification; and therefore we may safely join with them in publick Church-duties as we have occasion, without receding from our own Principles, without breaking any Law divine or humane; and therefore it will lie at our door if we do not; we sin against one Arti∣cle of Faith, The Communion of Saints. Obj. 15. The Nonconformists preaching is generally Mystical, Enthusiastical, and Calvi∣nistical, therefore I care not to hear them. Answ. You mean (I suppose) they preach up the Doctrines of Original Sin, Regeneration, and Mystical Union with Christ, &c. I wish we did preach more on such Subjects, which are so necessary in order to Salvation, and which come more home to the Conscience; whereas that which we call Rational and Inge∣nious, does only affect the Fancy; the truth is, too many of us preach up Seneca more than we do St. Paul. Obj. 16. Can you give an instance, an example of what you press and exhort to? Answ. Yes, a famous one recorded in the Har∣mony of Confessions of three Parties of Pro∣testants in Poland, some following the Augustan Confession, some following the Helvetian Con∣fession, and some following the Bohemian Confession; and being sensible of the evil and
sad effects of their Divisions, the leading Men of each Party came to an Agreement as to Doctrine and Points of Faith, and permitted to one another diversity in Rites and external Modes, and so became one, and did preach, and pray, and communicate with one ano∣ther, and did greatly flourish in the midst of Popish Adversaries and Arian Hereticks, and Enemies of all sorts. See for this Corpus Con∣fess. par. 1. pag. 163. par. 2. pag. 215. Paraei Ire∣nic. cap. 17. Obj. 17. A downright and thorow Con∣formist I love, a downright Nonconformist I can fence my self against, and do not much fear nor care for: but a doubting Conformist, neither Fish nor Flesh, halting between God and Baal, and true to no side, I cannot en∣dure; the Church is in most danger from such, from such good Lord deliver us. Answ. You do well to be against Double-mindedness and Hypocrisy, and halting between God and Baal; I pray stick to this Principle, and be for no Side, for no Sect and Party against im∣partial Truth and Godliness, and permit me and others to serve you, and both Confor∣mists and Nonconformists in Love; and all that lies in us to live peaceably with all Men, and to be one with God, and all good Men against the World, the Flesh, and the Devil. Remember the Communion of Saints is an Article of Faith twice repeated in Conforming Churches each Lord's Day, and at other times.
Let us all agree to practise this one Article of Faith impartially, and it will heal all our Breaches and Divisions: I press no one to go against his own Principles and the Dictate of his Conscience, but only in times of great Di∣vision, and of many Sects and Parties, and contrary Ways and Interests, to be an impar∣tial Christian, and to abound in holy Love and Self-denial, and true Zeal for the Peace of God's Church in this Nation, and for the publick Good. Certainly St. Paul did well in circumcising Timothy, Acts 16.3. and yet else∣where he counts Circumcision a weak and beg∣garly Element, Gal. 4.9. and tells the Galatians, If ye be circumcised. Christ shall profit you nothing, Gal. 5.2. Was therefore St. Paul neither Fish nor Flesh, but a double-minded Hypocrite? Judge not according to Appearance, but according to Truth: have love to your Country, value Persons by their insides. Let us remember the Day of Judgment, lo∣vingly converse with our Protestant Brethren, not be strange to them, serve them in Love; rejoice that Christ is preached, Souls saved and edified, and Satan confounded by the Ministry of Protestant Conformists and Nonconformists. Long for the good Day when all Sect-names shall be abolished, and till that can be, let us really and indeed be one in Love; embrace the Nonconformists as dear Brethren in Christ, make them freely welcome to preach in our Pulpits, encourage our People to hear them,
and hear and join with them our selves as we have Opportunity, and thank them for their Labours, and wish them all good Success, and extend our Charity to such of them as need, and in all things conform our selves to the Example of Christ. To him be Glory for ever. Amen. FINIS.
