N57 12353957 60067
A Short Account OF THE Present STATE OF New-England. Anno Domini 1690. SIR, THAT large tract of Land, which lies between the Degrees of Forty and Forty-five, is known by the general Name of New-England, but divided into many Provinces and Colonies; must of which had, in times past, distinct Governments, and made such Laws as seem'd best and most agreeable to their particular Frames and Constitutions; which interfering with the Interests of their Neighbours; and indeed, being framed for some private Interest, more than for the Publick Good, they lived not in that Peace and Quiet, which was necessary for the Preservation and good Establishment of those Young Settlements, but had con∣tinual petts & differences among themselves, till in the Year 1686 they were all united and cast into one Government, which was committed to the care of Sir Edmond Andross. The Names of the several Colonies and Provinces, are these that follow, Road, Island, Plymouth, Narraganset Country, Connecticot, New-Hampshire, Province of Maine, & the Massachusett's-Colony. Road-Island is of a considerable bigness, and justly called the Garden of New-England, for its Fertility and Pleasantness. It abounds with all things necessary for the life of Man, is excel∣lent
for Sheep, Kine and Horses; and being environed by the Sea, it is free'd from the dangers of Bears, Wolves and Foxes, which much molest and damnisse those that live on the Con∣tinent. The People for some tract of time had a Charter to them∣selves, lived under a Governour of their own choosing, and Laws of their own making: But in Year 1686, upon serving the Quo Warranto, they freely resigned up their Charter to His Majesty, and continue so well satissied with the surrender, that they do not so much as petition for their Charter again. Here is a medley of most Perswasions, but neither Church nor Meeting-house, except one built for the use of the Quakers, who are here very numerous, and have annually a General Meeting from all Quarters. Many of the others regard neither Time, nor Place, nor Worship; and even some very sober men have lived so long without it, that they think all instituted Religion useless. The People live in great plenty, send Horses and Provisi∣ons to Barbadoes, and the Leeward-Islands, and sell great num∣bers of fat Oxen and Sheep to the Butchers of Boston. The settlement of this Colony, was in this manner; The People of Boston, who always had a perfect hatred against all those who differed in Opinion from them, had some Quakers in the Land; and how to rid themselves fairly of these, they had many Consultations, which at last ended in this result; They would banish them to some place or other, from whence they might be sure to be never troubled with them again; So they banish'd the Quakers to this Island, where in all pro∣bability they must have perish'd with hunger, or else been destroyed by the Heathens: hither these poor people being come, dig themselves Caves in the earth, and by the kindness of the Indians, outlive the severity of a long and sharp Win∣ter. The Spring coming on, they obtain'd leave from the Sachem to manure the ground, and in a little time wrought themselves into good Estates, which some even of the first setlers enjoy to this day. Being thus happily settled, they Petitioned King Charles II. that they might have a Charter to themselves, fearing least they should fell under the lash of the Bostoners again, who had been so Inhumane and Barbarous to them in their banishment. Plymouth compared with the former is but a mean and
poor Country, yet the ground well compensates the Husband∣man's labour with good crops of Corn; and being wash'd by the Sea, they make great benefit by Fishery; as also their Bay, of late years, is much inrich'd by great numbers of Whales which come into it; and even the Rocky Mountains yield them considerable prosit, for on them grow plenty of Pine∣trees, out of which they make abundance of Tar for their Ships. The Religion of the Country is exactly after the model of Boston and the Massachusetts, from whom they receive Di∣rections and Ministers. This People being without Law, and without Government from England, chose Governours and made Laws for themselves; of all which Hinckleys is the most Famous, whereby they stript the poor Quakers of all that many of them had, for not coming to their Meetings. In this Estate they continued without any Charter, till King James ordered them to be under the Governmene of Sir Edmond Andross. The late Address they made to Their Majesties, acknowledges as much, in which they petition for Their Majesties Grant to be a distinct Government. The Narragansett Countrey is a large tract of Ground, lit∣tle inhabited, but the greatest part of the Country is taken up by several Persons. Some of the Bostoners claim a propriety for several miles together, but never take care to make the least Improvement. Churches here are none, and but a few Houses: I cannot say there is one English Town in the whole Province. What is most considerable in the Narragansett Country, is the settlement of the French Protestants; who, on the vio∣lence of the Persecution, left their Country, came over to New-England, and took up their habitation in this Wilderness; where they have made good improvement, live comfortably, and have planted great numbers of Vines, which they say thrive well, and it is hoped will be very beneficial to them. This Wilderness leads to a very fertile and pleasant Coun∣try called Connecticott, which may be truly styled the glory of the Maine, for richness of Soil, and product of the Ground; there being great plenty of Wheat, Barley and Grain, with a∣bundance of Sheep, Kine and Horses. It may well be called, as many will have it, the Aegypt of America from its wonderful
fertility, and that from the overflowing of the great Riven Connecticott, which, like Nilus, annually overfloweth the banks, and thereby inricheth the Soil. This Country hath many inhabitants who live in great plenty, and communicate largely towards the support of Boston, whether they send annually great quantity of Wheat and other grain, with many Head of fed Cattle. As New-England, in General, is Healthy, so this Countrey shares in that great Blessing. However, after great Glutts of Rain, the Feavey and Ague make some unwelcome Visits among them. Here are many Towns and Villages, the greatest of all is called Hartford, where they have their general Meetings, and keep Courts of Judicature, and transact publick Affairs. In this Town are two Meeting-Houses for publick Worship, which shews it is large and well Peopled. In Religion, they generally follow the Model of the Massa∣chusetts Independents, by whom they are managed and governed in all things. This People lived for some time under a Charter-Govern∣met; but in the Year 1687, resigning their Charter, they de∣sired to be put under Sir Edmond Andross's Government; and at his Arrival among them, they received him with great joy, and lived very quiet under him, till the grand rising at Boston, whose Example they followed, and set up their Char∣ter again. New-Hampshire is another Province, very healthy, and well settled, hath an excellent Harbour for Ships, where they may ride very secure in all weather. Their Soil is none of the best, nor the Countrey the most pleasant in the World; but yet, as it is, they raise abundance of Corn and Provision; and the meanness of the Soil, is fully compensated another way. For in this, and in the neighbouring Province of Maine, grow those stately Trees, which make as good Masts, as any in the World, and in such abundance, that scarce any part of the World can shew the like. They send many to En∣gland, and have wherewith to supply, not only Their Ma∣jesties Navy, but if well Husbanded, the whole Nation. It is pity there should be such havock made of those stately Trees, which without number they Yearly cut down and saw into Boards.
The People live friendly together, freer in Conversation than most of their Countrey-men, and given to Hospitality. What Religion they have, comes from Boston, but at pre∣sent, their chief Town is destitute of all publick Worship; for their Teacher, with whom they entred into mutual Church-Covenant, has forsaken them, having got himself a richer Church in Boston. This people for many Years have lived under the imme∣diate Government of the Crown of England; and being in the late rising, stirred up by some of their neighbours, to as∣sume a Government to themselves, answered, that they were well, and easy, and desired so to continue. The Province of Maine, is an excellent Tract of Land, but I am afraid at this time, without Inhabitants; the People be∣ing either killed, or carried away captives, by the Indians, or else fled to Boston for preservation of their Lives. As in New-Hampshire, so here grow the Trees for Masts, with all other sorts of Timber for Shipping; upon which Account, it is preferable to any part of New-England. The Soil is very rich, well requiting the Husbandmans labour and pains: So bountiful hath Nature been to the Land, and no less kind to the Sea-coast: For on these shoars is the best Fish∣ing ground in all the English Dominions, where are annually caught Ship-loads of Cod, and other great Fishes. For Har∣bour, it may compare with most Countries of the World; having those that are spacious and secure against all Storms, as if God Almighty had designed it for a great and mighty People. I lament the present desolations of this Coun∣trey; for it had Towns, Villages, and Forts, till very late∣ly; but now the Towns are burnt, and the Forts demolished, for which devastations, in great measure, they are bound to thank their New Lords of Boston. The Governour, Sir Edmond Andross, had so covered the Coun∣trey against the Incursions of the Indians, that all the time the Go∣vernment rested in his hands, the People were in the greatest safety, and not the least mischief happened unto them. But upon the Rising of the People of Boston, the Patriots there, re-called the Forces from thence, and left the whole Countrey a Prey to their savage Enemies. So that April last, when the Bostoners took the Reins of Government into their hands, to the 30th. of July, there were above an hundred of the
poor Countrey People killed, or carried away captives, Houses burnt, Forts razed, and all their Goods pillaged by the Enemy. It remains to give a Description of the Massachusetts, which is the least of all the Coloines, but would be accounted the greatest; nay, they are very desirous to appropriate the name of New-England to themselves, and endeavour what they can to extend their Com∣mon-wealth over the greatest part of that Continent. For they claim a right to a great part of the Narraganset-Coun∣trey, alledging that the Lands belong to them, because they bought it of the Natives. In the like manner, they say, that the Province of Maine is theirs; for Mr. Ʋsher bought the Government, as well as the Soil of the Proprietor, and they bought it of Mr. Ʋsher. They may also lay a Title to Connecticott, and Plymouth; because there, the generallty of the People are of the same perswasion with them of Boston, and those Colonies have all along been Governed and Ma∣naged by the Massachusetts. But yet by their Charter, they are bounded within Merimack River, and Charles River; which bounds it is to be hoped Their Majesties will not suffer them to exceed. The Countrey in some part is very stony and mountainous, so that for many miles together, little else is to be seen but Shrubs, a few scattering Trees, and the grisly head of Rocks. In other places, it is very dry and sandy, little profitable to the Husband∣man, without great plenty of Rain and Showers. The Soil is but poor of it self; and yet at first settlement, the Countrey-mans la∣bour was well rewarded with good crops of Wheat, excellent Pease, and other Grain; but for many Years, the Wheat hath been con∣tinually blasted, and the Pease breed a Worm in themselves, which eats out the heart, and leaves only the husk for the Planter. For the generality of the people, they are very censorious, and ready, on all occasions, to judge one another; and some there are among themselves that attribute this plague to the immediate hand of God for the cruelty of the people against the Quakers. The cause is secret, but it is a general obser∣vation, that much about that time when the Quakers suffered, came the blasting on the Wheat, and the Worm into the Pease. Indian Corn is the staff of the Land, and that on which they have the greatest dependance; for if that fails, all is gone. The sins committed in Husking of it are very great and no∣torious,
it is much to be feared God will enter into judge∣ment with them for it, and smite the Indian Corn with a Curse. The Commodities of the Colony are quickly reckoned up; for thô in Print they boast of the Trade they can drive with their Fish and Lumber-Goods, yet they have in truth, but lit∣tle Lumber, and less Fish, except what they receive from the Fishermen and Inhabitants of the Province of Maine and New Hampshire, and not one Tree in the Land that will make a Mast for a Ship. 'Tis true, the Massachusetts build many Ships, and other Vessels, but they bring most of their Materials from other Countreys; as also they send abroad many Vessels laden with Boards, Pipe, Staves, and Provisions, all which are but as borrowed Goods which they fetch out of the neighbouring Colonies. This Colony hath many Towns and Villages, of which the greatest is Boston, large and well peopled, where are kept the Courts of Judicature, and the publick Records of the Countrey. The people are naturally courteous, affable and obliging, but for the Government of them, who are all of the gather∣ed Churches, their Separate way makes them very high and un∣sociable, looking on others as mean abject creatures, who de∣serve their Pity rather than their Company. In their Dealings they are very crasty and subtle, out-doing even Jews themselves, who (as I heard a New-England-man boastingly say) could not live amongst them. They are watch∣ful of all advantages over them they deal with, and when they have a Man within their Clutches, gripe him unmerci∣fully. In their Treats they are very lavish and expensive; where they cohceive a prejudice they are revengeful, and very Religiously pray for destruction on their Enemies. Hence some that knew them very well, have given this caution to their Children, Above all Persons, take heed of a Professor. This I say for the generality of them, not but that there are many worthy, charitable, and Religious people among them, (who as I am fully perswaded) serve God with a perfect heart, and love their Neighbour with love unfeigned. But as in all other places, so among the Massachusetts, Vice greatly abounds, and there is no sin in Old England, but what is practiced in the New. However some Sins speed worse among them than others. Swearing, Cursing; and Blaspheming
are justly discountenanc'd: but they who scruple an Oath will make no conscience to Lye or Cheat for advantage. The Capital Vices are Sloth and Idleness, Cheating and Censoriousness; prone they are also to a Sin of Frailty (as they term it) and Lasciviousness, which appears too much in their Common Conversation. The Trade of the Countrey is well known, and for the most part unlawful. Of all the Colonies this has been most prejudicial to the Kings Customes, and the Trade of England, which hath been sufficiently proved against them. Of themselves they bring no considerable Ravenue to the Crown, of which more in the Re∣marks, as also of their famous Colledge, and great works of Evan∣gelizing Indians. The Laws of England are of no Credit among them, and when pleaded in their Courts are little regarded; but they have Composed a body of Laws for themselves, which are Printed together in a thin Folio. The Book is scarce to be had here in England, and therefore not at all taken notice of; otherwise it would move the Publick Indignation to see how the Fortunes and Lives of their Majesties Subjects are disposed of by a Combination of Men, that think themselves Wiser than the Parliament of this Kingdom. The Government was first by way of Charter, which was chiefly Managed by the Teachers. These by their power with the people, made all the Magistrates, and kept them so en∣tirely under Obedience, that they durst not act without them. So that whenever any thing strange or unusual, was brought before them, they would not determine the matter without consulting the Teacher. For should any be so sturdy as to presume to act of himself without taking their advice and di∣rection, he might be sure of it, his Magistracy ended with the Year. The World, justly condemns the Usurped Power of the Popish Clergy over the Laity, yet the Priests even in Italy, have not a greater Ascendant over the People than the Teachers in New-England. And that they might perpetuate the Government to them∣selves, they so brought things about (as indeed they might do what they listed) that it was past into a Law, that none should have any thing to do with the Government, that was not a Freeman of the Country; and none should be made a
Freeman, who was not in full Communion with their Churches, that is, who should not in all points be of the Preachers Opi∣nion. The way of making Freeman was after this manner. He that desired the Freedom of the Country came, and made known his request to the Court; whom thô never so sober in Life and Conversation, if he favoured not the Independent per∣suasion, he was certainly rejected, either as an Enemy to the Church or State; But whoever came with such powerful Cre∣dentials as these, The Bearer is a godly Man, and in Communi∣on with such a Church, Given under my hand N. N. or under the hands of his Deacons. Such a Man needed not to seek for other Arguments to gain the favour of the Magistrates, for without any other formality he might be sure to have the grant of his Freedom. For this reason many formal Hypo∣crites, who were ambitious of Honour and Preferment, would work themselves into the favour of the Teachers. To this end, besides many costly Treats and Presents, they would in the Meeting-Houses frame Stories of their Conversion, and enter in∣to Church-Covenant (as the Phrase is) and make a long Cant how the Work of Grace was wrought on their hearts, by the Sermon or Pains of one of the Leading Teachers. Whereupon such were admitted into the Fraternity, and made Church-Mem∣bers, and there they were in a fair way to the highest Pre∣ferment. It was pleasant to behold poor Coblers and pitiful Mecha∣nicks, which had neither House nor Land, struting and making no mean Figure at their Elections; and some of the richest Merchants and wealthiest People stand by as insignificant Cy∣phers; or in the words of one of their own, who thought he cha∣ractariz'd them ingeniously, as so many Asses to bear the Loads that should be laid upon them. In the late Rising there were many Divisions among the People, what Government to erect. Many of the Council (as they term'd themselves) were for declaring themselves a Free-State. But Mr. Stoughton well knowing their weakness, would not Subscribe the Summons sent to the Governour, unless depen∣dance on the Crown of England should be inserted into the De∣claration. Some were for a Court-Martial and Military-Go∣vernment, because what they got by the Sword, they ought to keep by the Sword. Others were for Election of Governour
and Magistrates by all the People. But the Teachers, who all along were the Chief in the Councils, and carried the Ballance in their hands, dislik'd such Proposals, for then they should lose their Power; and therefore they moved, that the old Goyer∣nour and Magistrates formerly of their own making might be restored, with the Addition of some confiding Men, whom they had proved and found Faithful, to supply the Vacancies of those Magistrates which were dead; to whom all bowed and paid Obedience: So that now the Government is safely lodged in the hands of the Teachers again. 'Tis hard to give an acccount of the Religion of the Colo∣ny where so many know not what Religion they are of, and when demanded a reason of their Faith, can say little more than that they are Hearers of Mr. Mather, or Members of the Old Church, or under the watch of the South Meeting-House. But having promised an account of the Country, it is neces∣sary that I should give some account of their Religion, because it is a large Topick of their discourse, makes the great noise among the People. The first Setlers were a good serious sort of People who had the fear of God before their eyes, and firm assurance of his providence, otherwise they never had undertaken that ha∣zardous design. I cannot say what persuasion they were of, but this I know they stil'd themselves Children of the Church of England, and counted it their glory to be called after her Name; and at their departure from hence, in all humble duty they desired the Prayers of the Bishop of London and his Clergy, for them, who came out of their own bosoms, and who should continually offer up their Prayers to the Throne of Grace for the Prosperity of the Church. All which with a great deal more to the same effect was written in a Letter sent to the Bishop of London from on board the Arabella, and sub∣scribed by Governour, Magistrates and Ministers. But they had not been long in the New World, before all forts of People flock'd over unto them, of as different Princi∣ples as places; which caused no small trouble to the Inhabl∣tants, for one was for this Model, another for that Plat∣form; so that they were like to be scattered and destroyed by Religion, which should have united and preserved them. It was therefore thought necessary something should be Esta; blished, that they might not be always a confused Babel:
Whereupon after much Strife and Contention they setled on Independency, which hath indeed a shew of much Purity and Ho∣liness, but hath in truth that which is highly Superstitious, as Mr. Willard, one of their own, declared in a Publick Convoca∣tion; and as another Non-Conformist Minister term'd it Paga∣nizing Independency. For three fourths of the Country never participate of the Lords Supper, and if any should beg it, as for the Salvation of his Soul, yet he could not obtain his re∣quest without coming up to their Terms, and telling Stories of the time of this Conversion, and when the Work of Grace was wrought upon his heart. Even in the space of little more than one Generation, near one half of the People are Ʋn-baptized, and let Parents do what they can for their Children, let them give never so good account of their Faith, and live never so uprightly towards God and Man, yet their Children shall not be admitted to Baptism, unless one of the Parents be of their Communion, and promises to walk after the Church Covenant; so that in a few Ages by their Independent Practice, Paganism will a second time overcome the Land, and there will be as much need of Evan∣gelizing the English, as there is now of the Indians. This overtoping Persuasion would have none to grow under it, if continual droping could prevent it; yet its natural Issue Anabaptism sprouts out amain. However the Independants have treated the Anabaptists very unkindly, fined them for not com∣ing to the Independent Assemblies, nailed up the Doors of their Meeting-Houses, and turned them into the Streets. Besides these, there is another Sect arrived to great Perfection, who were for none but King Jesus. Also there are Quakers, notwithstanding the Severities that they have suffered among them, all these having suffered Banishment formerly, and some of them having been put to Death for their Religion. For these and many other Usurpations and Stretches of Go∣vernment, a Scire facias was issued out of the High Court of Chancery, and timely notice given them for their ap∣pearance. (But they well knowing their own Guiltiness) never took care that any should appear and defend the Suit, but sent their Agents with a Power to lavish out four or five thousand pounds to corrupt Justice. Whereupon after these delays had continued for some years, at last Judgement was entred against them; and the then King Charles II. resumed
their Charter-Grant, that their hands might be tyed up from persecuting their Brethren and doing more Mischief. Afterward in the Year 1686. Sir. Edmond Andross came o∣ver with a Commission to Govern the Countrey, and during the time that he was in the Government (as it will certainly appear when the matter comes to be examined by indifferent Judges) he carried himself courteously and obligingly to all, gave an excellent Patern of Sobriety and Temperance, and in all things perform'd the Duty of a good Governour. But because he would not let the Teachers have their Wills in all things, and follow their directions in every matter; there∣fore they raised false Accusations against him, lessened his good Actions, and misrepresented his Government to the People as Illegal and Arbitrary: and not contented herewith, the Heads of the Party came over hither into England, and charged him with Injustice, Oppression and Violence, made Addresses to King James, promising to do whatsoever he would have them, and to be instrumental with their Party in England to pull down the Fence against Popery, and Repeal the Penal Laws. Parti∣cularly they Courted William Pen, and made their Humble Applications to Father Petre, to have the Governour recall'd and their Old Charter restored. But when all these accused Methods proved ineffectual, what the Quaker could not do, and what the Popish Priest would not, impatient of any delays, they attempted themselves on the 18th of April, in a Tumultuous manner, they wrested the Government out of Sir Edmond's hand, made him Prisoner, and so they did all others of the Church of England as by Law Established, who were in any Office Civil or Military, com∣mitting him and some other Gentlemen to the Fort, others to the Castle, and more to the Common Goal. The particulars of this Transaction may in convenient time be made publick. In the mean while, I beg of you, and of all other Gentlemen, to whom you shall think fit to communi∣cate this Paper, that you would be pleased to suspend your Judgements concerning the Case of the Complainants, till the Matter, in Question, comes to be heard before its proper Judges. I am, Yours, N. N. FINIS.
