N585 99829110 33546
A New BOOK OF Knowledge; Treating of Things, Whereof some are Profitable, some Precious, and some Plea∣sant and Delightful. I. How to Write Secretly. II. To Write your Name on a Knife. III. To make Bone or Wood Red for ever. IV. To make Ink. V. To Catch Fowls. VI. To keep Cloaths from Moths. VII. To make the Q. of Hungary's Water. VIII. To Fatten Fowl. IX. To make Cock-Ale. 10. To make Lucatellus Balsam. XI. To Cure Corns. XII. To Pickle French Beans, &c. XIII. To take Fish. XIV. To take Moles. XV. To take Spots out of Linnen, XVI. To make the Balsam sold by Mountebanks. XVII. To make Pouder-Ink in an instant. XVIII. To make Pomatum and Wash-Balls. XIX. To make Aqua Mirabilis. XX. To make Dr. Stephen's Water. With divers other Notable Things. London, Printed for G. Conyers at the Golden Ring in Little-Britain, 1697.
A New Book, &c. To Write Secretly. TAke Alum, and beat it into Pouder; then put some into a Sawcer of clean Water, till it dis∣solve: write with this, and dry it by the fire; so you may dispose of it how you please: but when you would read it, wet the Paper in clean Water, and it will appear of a Blewish Colour. There are divers ways of Writing privately, as with the Juice of Li∣mons or Onions; but this exceeds all in my opinion, by reason the others may be seen before the Light, when dry; but this may not, if throughly dry. To Write your Name on a Knife. Warm your Knife over the Fire, then take Bees-Wax, and rub all over one side thereof, about the thickness of Paper, in every place: when it is cool, write your Name, or what else you please, on the Knife with a Needle put into a small Stick; but you must Write so deep in the Wax, as to touch the Me∣tal: having so done, take Aqua Fortis with a Stick or Feather, and lay it all over that side of the Knife and Writing; so let it stand for one hour: scrape off the Wax, and it will be as it were Engraven, and will never wear out. This is called Etching. To make Bone or Wood red for ever. Take pounded Brazil, and put it in some Milk, so that you put not too much to the Brazil, then lay in your Bone or Wood, letting it lye in for eight days; then boil it a little over the Fire, and it will be Red for ever.
To make Yellow INK. Take Saffron, and grind it very fine with weak Gum∣water; you may put a little Gambogia with it, if you please. This is a good Yellow. To Draw out Splinters or Thorns. Take common Turpentine, and spread it upon Leather, and apply a Plaster of this to the place; it also Draweth, and cleanseth Sores and Ulcers. To Catch CROWS. Take white Pease, steep them eight or nine days in the Gall of an Ox, and lay them in some place where they use to come. To make COCK-ALE. Take nine Gallons of Ale, and let it Work; and when done Working, have in readiness four pound of Raisins of the Sun, stoned and bruised in a Mortar, two Nutmegs, and as much Mace bruised; then take two Cocks, flea them, and take out the Guts, then hold them in a pot of boiling Water, just to Plump them; then break their Bones, and bruise them in a Mortar, so put them in a Vessel to your Ale, (besure you put in all the Blade Fruit and Spice,) so stop them close: let it stand a Fortnight; and when you Bottle it, put in every Bottle two or three bits of Limon-Peel, and as much candied Ginger-Root, with a Lump of Sugar; stop it close: let it stand a Fortnight or three Weeks, then drink it; it is very pleasant, and good against Consumption. To Cure Corns in the Feet. Tender them with Plasters or warm Water, then pick them out with a Point of a Pen-knife, and apply Vinegar and new Lime. Another. Cut them well and close; take out as much of the Coar as you can: then take burnt Alum, and the Pith of an Oyster that sticks to the Shell, dried and pouder∣ed, incorporate these with a little Venice Turpentine, put into the Hollowness (if there be any) a little Tent
of Lint dipped in Oil of Cloves, and lay on the other as a Plaster, and in a Weeks time, with thrice renew∣ing, takes away the Corn, making Flesh arise, to f the Hollowness. Lady Boswells LUCATELLUS BALSAM or OINTMENT, admirable for Wounds. Take Venice Turpentine one pound, a quart of Salle Oil, a dram of red Sanders in fine Pouder, six spoon∣fuls of Sack, one pound of yellow Bees Wax, natural Balsam, and Oil of St. Johns wort, of each an ounce first cut the Wax, and melt it on the Fire in a well∣headed Pipkin, and then (lest it catch fire) take  off, and put in the Turpentine to it, having first wash∣ed the Turpentine thrice in Damask Rose-water, an put in the Oil and Sack, stirring them on a slow fire and when it is cold, pour off the Sack, and melt it a∣gain, and put in the natural Balsam, Red Sanders and Oil of St. Johns-wort, stirring it again on the fire till it almost boil, and strain it off, if you will, and stir it till it is a little thickish, and put it in Pots for use. Note, That if the Flame happen to catch any Oint∣ment (in making,) clap a Cloth or Paper over it, to damp the Flame. The Virtues. First, It is good to heal any Wound inward or out∣ward, being squirted warm into the inward Wound to an outward Wound, being applyed with fine Lin or Linnen, anointing the Parts also thereabouts; i not only taketh away the Pain, but also keepeth i from Inflammation, and draweth forth Splinters o broken Bones, or any thing else that may putrify  so as the Brain, Guts or Liver, be not Wounded, it commonly heals the Wound in four or five times Dres∣sing, so that no other thing be applyed thereto. Secondly, It heals Burns or Scalds without a Scar.
Thirdly, It helpeth the Head-ach, by anointing the Nostrils and Temples. Fourthly, It cureth the Biting of a Mad Dog, used ot. Fifthly, It is good in the time of Plague, Pox, &c. by anointing the Nostrils and Lips every Morning. Sixthly, In the beginning of the Plague, Small-Pox or Measles, swallow about a quarter of an ounce, and Sweat upon it three or four Mornings together. Seventhly, It is good against the Colick, Stitches, &c. Bathing it well in, and apply Flannel. Eighthly, It healeth Fistulas, or other Ulcers and Cankers, used hot, taking the longer time. Ninthly, It helps Digestion, the Naval and Stomach being anointed going to Bed. Tenthly, For Ulcers in the Bladder or Kidneys, and Bruises by Falls inward; Take the quantity of a Field-Bean in Sack, or ills made thereof, rolled in Sugar Morning and Night, and drink Ale-berry after it; but for the Stone, take them at going to Bed in White-wine. Eleventhly, Mix with Conserve of Roses, and Gum-Olibanum, cures old Coughs, &c. if followed. Of FLAX. Flax will yield Thirty or fourty pound an Acre: Barren, Sandy and Heathy Ground is best for it; and after Flax, Turnips; one Acre of good Flax is ac∣counted worth three or four Acres of the best Wheat, and the Liquor hath much advanced the Goodness thereof. The best time for Sowing, is about the be∣ginning of April, presently after a Shower of Rain; which may abundantly be supplyed by the Engine, and much Water following. Some do usually sow Flax until the end of May, and some after. Cabages pull'd up by the Roots, and set in Sand, in a Cellar, or some other Room, may be kept all the Winter; or you may hang them up with Strings:
and so may you keep Artichokes, and other Plants a Roots, for constant use, as Caros, Parsnips and Tur∣nips. In dry Weather, in October and November, ma a Layer of Sand, and a Layer of Carots, cutting aw the Tops close to the Roots, with some of the sm ends of the Carots: and about the last of December when there is no Frost, uncover them; and you m keep them longer, if you pare off the Shootings  the upper end of the Roots, and lay them in Sand and so Parsnips and Turnips. To help a Chimney that is dangerously on Fire. Let two or three Persons take a Blanket or Cover∣let, and hold it close to the Mouth of the Chimney that no Air may enter, and with a close Board, cov the Top of the Chimney; and the Fire, for want  Air, will soon be Extinguished. Chaff will Heat, and Ripen unripe Apples. The Dross, or that which is left after the pressing out of Lint-seeds, is exceeding profitable for the Fee∣ing of Cattel, as the other Rape-seeds with Turnips. Hemp seeds given to Hens, in Winter, will make them Lay oftner than ordinary Seeds or Corn. Boil Butchers Blood, which is easily to be had, wit a good quantity of Bran mingled therewith; o Grains, which is not so good until it come to th manner of a Blood Pdding, which will feed you Fowl as fat as you will desire them to be. Some d use to feed Fowl with Carots. Turnips, Parsnips an Pumpions sodden, and mingled with Bran, or coar Pollard. Turkies will become very Fat in a short time, an prosper exceedingly, with bruised Acorns. You may soak Chippings, and other Crusts of Bread in broken Beer or Fletten Milk, and feed your Hen and Capons fat presently. Graft Apples upon Cherry-Stocks, and the Frui will be exceeding Red.
To make five sorts of Roses grow upon one Stock, without Inoculation. When they begin to Knot, bore with an Awl under he Knot, and with a Feather put Green in one, and Yellow in another, Red in a third, and Blew in he fourth, and close up all the Holes handsomly. To make Lillies become Red. You must very neatly open the Clifts of the Roots, and fill the same with any Red Colour, then set them n fat Dunged Earth. Graft Roses in the Bud, upon Sweet-Briar, and they will Smell most deliciously. The Roots of Roses, with their Slips and Knots, removed and set amongst Broom, will bring forth Yellow Roses. Elm-Tree Chips set in Ditches, will in a short time become Young Trees, and make a very good Fence: and the Slips that grow from the Roots of Elms be∣ing taken off, will grow to great Perfection in few Years. To keep Cloaths from Moths. Seeth the Dregs, or Mother, or Foam of Oil, to the half, and therewith Anoint the Bottom, Corners and Feet of any Chest or Press, and the Cloaths that you lay therein will be free from any Hurt with Moths; but before you put the Cloaths in the Chest or Press, it must be dry. Provide store of Walnut leaves, and hang them up∣on Thread, one distant from another; when they are throughly Dry, strip them in the Chest, or amongst the Cloaths and Beds, and within the Folds of every Garment: lay Wormwood or Lavender amongst the Cloaths, and they will be safe from Moths. The Branches of Bay-Trees wrapt up, and laid amongst Cloaths and Books, will keep them safe from Moths and other Corruption. To keep Apparel, Hangings, &c. from Moths. Brush them several times in the Year, with a Brush
made of Wormwood Tops, and you may rub the with Wormwood, especially when you discern t Moths to haunt amongst the Hangings. To destroy Caterpillars. Besmear all the bottom of the Tree with Tar, the get great store of Ants; put them in a Bag, and dra the same with a Cord unto the Tree, and let it han there, so that it touch the Body of the Tree; and th Ants being prevented to go from the Tree by reason of the Tar, will for want of Food, eat and destroy th Caterpillars, without hurting any of the Fruit o Leaves. To take FISH. Set a Candle in a piece of Cork, as even as may b with the Water, which will stupify and attract th Fishes to it, so that with a little Hoop Net, upon the end of a Cane or Staff, you may take them with much facility; or with a Shovel-Net, &c. which must be in the Night. Where Mudd and Water is taken out of the Ponds if the Rain-water do after come into them, there will become multitude of Eels in a short time; and by this Course, you may abundantly increase Carps. In May, dig up two Turffs of new grown Grass when the Dew is on them: then tye the grassy side together, and place them in Water on the side of a Pond; then let them remain there unmoved, about Ten days; and taking up the Turffs, untying or loo∣sing them, you shall find great store of Young Eel within the Turffs, although there were not an Eel in the Pond before; and by tying the Turffs together again, and placing them in the same manner, a greater increase will come thereof. To bring all the Fish in the Pond together. Take Plattavia or Dioscorides, lay either of them in Honey, a Day and a Night; then let them dry in the Sun: bind them to a String, and cast them into the Pond, and all the Fish will come to it.
To take Moles. Get a Pot or Glass that is narrow at the top, and ide at the bottom, and place one of these deep in the ound in the Fields, where the Moles are; the top  the Pot being even with the ground, and in the Pot  Glass, put a stinking Crab, which they will eager∣ smell after, and so fall into the Pot, and being im∣isoned, they will call for Aids of their Fellows. nd to bring them all to a place in this manner, fire imstone in the like Pot so placed: but first, put a ve Mole therein, and she will call all the Moles that re near, to come to her release; and so being ta∣en, you may use only a live Mole in the Pot, with∣out the Crab or Brimstone. To make good Ʋsquebaugh. Take two Gallons of Aqua Vitae, four ounces of best liquorice bruised, four ounces of Anniseeds bruised, ut them into a Glass, or Stone Vessel, and cover hem close, and so let them stand a Week; and then raw off the clearest with Molosses, and keep it in an∣other Vessel, and put in some Dates, Raisins stoned; eep it close from the Air. To make pleasant Mead. Put a Quart of Honey to a Gallon of Water, with about Ten Sprigs of sweet Marjoram, and half so ma∣ny Tops of Bays; boil all these well together, and when it is cold, Bottle it up, and in Ten days it will be ready to drink. To get Ink-Spots out of Linnen. Lay it in Urine immediately after the Ink has drop∣ped on it, and there let it lye all night, and the next day wash it out again; and in so doing two or three times, you will find the Spots and Stains quite out. To  Parsly spring up in few hours. Steep the ee in sweet Milk, and strew your Bed you mean to Sow with unquench'd Lime three times, then sow your Seed, and strew once more of your Lime upon it, and upon that Earth well prepared,
then Water it well, and you may according to disc∣tion enjoy your expectation. To make a Pouder, that will make Ink in an instant. Take Galls and Copperas, of each a like quant beat it to Pouder, and put it in Water, and on a ∣den it will be good Ink. Likewise, if you strew the same Pouder on white Paper, and write the with Water, the Letters will presently appear bl. To make that Famous Balsam, sold by the Mountebanks  most parts of England; exactly set down, for the  of the Country, as followeth: Take Linseed Oil 5 Quarts, 2 pound of Oil of Tur∣pentine, 1 pound of Sallet-Oil, 5 pound of Ro 2 pound of common Turpentine, 2 pound of Be Wax, 1 ounce Ship-Pitch, 4 ounces Storax Liqu 1 ounce Galbanum, 1 ounce Amoniacum, Bdellium, Sa∣penum, of each half an ounce, 4 ounces Oil of Sp half an ounce Natural Balsam, Burgundy Pitch a Frankincense, of each two ounces: dissolve yo Gums in Vinegar, then melt them gently together and it is done. The true and genuine Receipt, for making the Queen of Hungarys Water. Take four pound of Rosemary Flowers, gather  in a fair Morning, two or three hours after Sun-risin and picked from all the green part: put them into Cucurbite, and pour upon them three Quarts of Spi∣rit of Wine well Rectified; press down the Flowe into the said Spirit, and then cover the Cucurbite with its Head and Alembick: lute well all the Ju∣ctue with Paste and Paper: then place it in a Sa bath, and lute a Receiver to it, then leave it so  the next morning: Then Distill it with o modera a , that whilst the Spirit Distille  Head m no be so much as warm. Or,  the Distillati∣on, you may cover the Head with a Linnen Clo doubled several times, and dipped in cold Water  and dip again, and cool the Head several times. Con∣tinue
the Distillation, until you have drawn about three Quarts of Spirit, which will be very pure, and charged with the best and volatil Substance of the Flower: then take out all the fire, and let the Bath cool: unlute the Vessels, and put the Spirit into a Bottle well stopped: then strain, and press out the Li∣quor that remains in the Cucurbite, and clarify it. Then put into the Cucurbit again, and Distill it, un∣til it remaineth in the bottom, of the consistence near as thick as Honey, or a thick Syrup, which put into a Pipkin well glaz'd, and boil it over a gentle fire, to the thickness of an ordinary Extract; put the last Spirit into a Bottle by it self. Elixir Salutis, rightly prepared, as followeth. Take of Anniseeds, Coriander-seeds, Parsly-seeds, sweet Fennel-seeds, of each 2 ounces, 2 ounces of Spa∣nish Liquorice, 2 ounces Senna, 2 ounces Rhubarb, Elecampane 2 ounces, Guaiacum 2 ounces, Saffron 6 penny worth, Raisins of the Sun stoned, 1 pound: mix all these together, put them into 3 Quarts of the smal∣lest Aqua Vitae, in a Stone or Glass Bottle. Let it stand, and insuse 14 days at least (but the longer the better) near the Fire, that it may receive some warmth, for it will infuse the better, and sooner. Then pour off your Liquor into a Vessel, and take your Druggs and press them as dry as you can, and put the Liquor you squeeze out to the other; and so Bottle it up for use. To make Wash-Balls. Take Storax of both kinds, Benjamin, Calamus A∣romaticus, Labdanum, of each alike: bray them to Pouder with Cloves and Orrice, beat them all with a sufficient quantity of Soap, till it be stiff, then work it like Paste, and make round Balls thereof. To Pickle French-Beans. String your Beans, boil them tender: take them off, let them stand till they are cold; put them into Pickle of Beer, Vinegar, Salt, Cloves and Mace, with a little Ginger.
To make Aqua Mirabilis. Take Cloves, Cubebs, Cardamums, Galanga, Nut∣megs, Mace, Ginger, of each a dram, half a pound o Juice of Celandine, a pint of Spirit of Wine, 3 pints o White-wine, infuse them 24 hours, and draw off  Quart with an Alembick. Dr. Stephen's Water. Take of Cinamon, Ginger, Galanga, Cloves, Nut∣megs, Grains of Paradise, Seeds of Amse, Fennel Caraways, of each a dram: Herb of Time, Mother of Time, Mint, Sage, Penny-royal, Pellitory of the Wall, Rosemary, Flowers of Red-Roses, Camomil Origanum, Lavender, of each a handful: infuse the 12 pints of Gascoign Wine, then with an Alembi draw away 3 pints of the Strong. To make Pomatum. Take fresh Hogs-Suet cleansed from the Films, and washt in White-wine, one pound: and as much Sheeps Suet washt in White-wine: then take about 16 Pom∣water Apples, cleansed and boiled in Rose-water add to these Rose-wood, Sasaffras, Roots of Orrice Florentine, of each six Drams, of Benzoin, Storax, Calamita, half an ounce of each, and so make it into an Ointment. To take FISH. Take Assa Fatida, Milk, Honey, Wheat-flower, and make an Ointment, and anoint the Bait and Hook. An Ointment to kill the ITCH. Take a pennyworth of Black Soap, and a penny∣worth of Boars-grease, beat them together in Water, and anoint therewith when it itcheth. For a Scald-Head. Take Primrose-leaves, stamp them, and lay to it. For a Ring-worm. Take Mustard and Honey, and anoint the place three days. FINIS.
