P336A R31751 12252407 57167
A PARALELL BETWEEN THE LATE TROVBLES IN SCOTLAND, AND THE PRESENT TROVBLES IN ENGLAND. Written by a private Gentleman. LONDON, Printed for W. C. 1642.
A PARALELL BETWEENE THE LATE TROVBLES IN SCOTLAND, AND the present troubles in England, written by a private Gentleman. IT hath beene alwayes held a rule, or maxime, among all Nations, and Countries, to make the defence of Religion the chiefe ground or cause of their warres, sometimes for meere politique ends and by respect▪ sometimes to plant religion where it is not, and sometimes to regulate it where it is; Amongst these three, the last seemes most dangerous, because it seldome happens but vnder the ter∣ritories of one and the same Prince, and so produceth the miserable effects of Civill Warres. But to come to my present purpose, wherein I intend briefly and com∣paratively to discourse of the late troubles that have happened both in Scotland, and England. And because my Needle hath not beene touch'd (being the first that hath written upon this subject) if I vary in the Compasse, or meete with a Rocke, I shall expect some favour, although I will not sue for any speciall pardon, as not worthy of it, for he that followes himselfe, followeth the worst Master that is. The cause of those great troubles in Scotland, was the Innovation of Religion, and violation of the ancient Lawes and Statutes of the King∣dome
as sufficiently appeared by their severall petitions and declarati∣ons. The chiefe Actors, plotters, and contrivers of those distractions and distempers were the Prelates, Bishops, Popish affected Clergie, and Papists joyning themselves with a malignant party, ill affected to the true Protestant Religion, which had a wicked and malitious intent and purpose to inthrall and bring into bondage and slavish subjection, both the Soules, Persons, and Estates of three Kingdomes at once. And by making vse of the great favour, power, and authoritie of the Archbishop of Canter∣bury, the Clergie began to sayle after a Cynosure, which was elivated to the thirty six degree, and followed the example of Thomas Becket Archbishop of Canterbury, in the time of Hen. 2. who forswore himselfe (by denying the power of the King) to inlarge the power of the Pope, and to bring the Cannon Law into this Land. In the passage whereof Hen. 2. playd Adreftus part, and stabbed himselfe. In England, as in Scotland our grievances chiefly consist of two kinds, either such as concerne the Innovation of our Religion, or such as con∣cerne our Lawes and Liberties, as hath likewise often beene declared, and set forth by many petitions and declarations. The fountaine from whence these evils have sprung, and so conse∣quently, our present distractions hath by too much experience beene found to arise from those Incendiaries of mischiefe, the Prelats, Popish Bishops, and Papists. To stirre up those distempers in Scotland, the Prelats joyne with Papists (who are neuer wanting to use there best skill and utmost power to stirre up warres and division betweene kingdomes,) and finding the Archbishop of Canterurie the onely Instrument to act the plot, he being the Darling of times (as its said of Mounford in the time of Hen. 3.) first they labour to advance his greatnesse comperable to that of Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury, tempore. Ed. 1. which tooke on him to be equall with the King, saying in one of his Epistles that the Plough of the holy Church was drawne by two Oxen of equall strength and beauty, the King and himselfe. The Archbishop being gotten to this hight, the rest of the Prelats and Clergie, want not Ambition to climbe after him, their Canons and de∣crees must be of that force and authority, that none dare to dispute on the Lawfulnesse of them like, the Cannons of that learned Synod in the Raigne of Richard 2. when Thomas Arundell was Archbishop of Canter∣bury where they decreed that none should dispute upon the Articles de∣termined in the Church, nor should doubt the authority of those decrees, the offendors to the contrary should be pronounced Heretickes. Such
were the miseries that began to overtake us, by the potent greatnes of these aspiring spirits, that they will not onely be content with that power which Anselme was so puft up with that he boasted of it; to be of equall authority, with the King, in the Church▪ government, but they will be above him, the King must commit the whole sway of all Ecclesiasticall government into their hands; nay that will not serve their turnes (which was to much) but they incroach into temporall jurisdiction also▪ But as Swydas saith, for Priests to be temperall Iudges is to knit that which will never be twisted, and for a divine to medle in seculer affaires, is as if a bird in the Ayre should with the Mould∣warpworke in the earth. To season this lumpe of matter, every Kingdome hath many distinct and particuler Lawes and Customes, after a settled gouernment, not before, as a batch of bread consists of many distinct loafes, after the distinction which before is conteined vndistinguished under one Lump. A man consists of many distinct members, which at the first conception was not distinct. In Scotland, and likewise in England before the settling of a Civill government, their Lawes were not distinct, both participating of that generall Law of humaine pollicy, or rather barberous customes were onely gained by the dime light or knowledge of heathenish understan∣ding; since the dividing of these two Isles into Kingdomes, their Lawes have beene distinct which were not so before. But least by treating of the Lawes of these two Kingdomes, I should wade too deepe, and drowne my selfe in a streame I never came at, I will returne againe to my present purpose, and give a short view of the mi∣serable effects that have ensued by the Counsels and endeavours of these croaking frogs, or rather Spiders of the Common wealth, that by con∣tinuall issuing forth their deadly poison, have crackt the Venus glasse of peace and tranquillity. When Scotland first perceived their Religion betrayed, their Lawes violated, and their Liberties inthralled, and that these Incendiaries (like those favorites to Hen. 3. which were afterwards banished for it) had in∣sinuated so farre with his Majesty, that their Soveraignes eare was stop∣ped from hearing their just complaints, they openly declared their grie∣vances to the world, and desired Iustice against the infringers of their Peace. Now their enemies malice against them is more enraged, they per∣ceive their wicked ends were not onely like to bee frustrate, but their lives and fortunes indangered, they begin to strengthen their party, and
turne their Invective Counsells to advise his Majesty, that their petitions are scandalous, their Declarations and behaviour rebellious; and so labour to force by the terror of an Army, that which pollicy and threats could not accomplish. And so like Guido, Godfrey, and their followers, be∣ginTemp. H. 3. to act the part of their lawlesse rage, by seeking utterly to destroy all those that withstood their wicked enterprises, and by Projects and many heavy taxes oppressing, and in a tyranicall manner keeping this Kingdome in slavish subjection, intending hereby to cut, off and over∣throw two flourishing Kingdomes at once. And although at this instant there were no present Levies of Armes by the malignant party, openly intended against England, yet it plain∣ly appeared that by endeavouring to ingage the two nations in blood, the designe against England was as great (if not greater) then that a∣gainst Scotland. I shall not crush ou my notes in this behalfe, in any new divisio, and the portion I shall allowe, will not be large, therefore in the next place I shall onely give a touch, that when things were brought to this head, the Iesuits and Papists (which are alwayes thirsty after bloud) now plot and contrive the forwarding of those warres, as the onely meanes to promote and advance the Catholike cause. And per∣ceiving that the want of money, was likely to prove a great hinderance to that designe, they begin to make great proffers, hereby they onely will be deemed his Majesties best subjects, and as if the taxes under which the Protestants groaned were to light a burthen for them, they will lay great taxes upon themselves, a servant that hath not above 40. shilings Per annum, must give five towards the promotion of this cause. And that the neere vnion and correspondency betweene the Prelats, and them, might be duly observed, the Clergie goe hand in hand with them, in this large contribution: and last of all, to shew they wanted not affection to the Catholike cause they grant large subsidies in their Synod under the name and Collour of an Ayde. And no doubt such was their zeale (or rather their malice) that to have effected this worke they would have Imitated their predecessors in the time of Hen. 2. which sould their Challices to advance their owne ends. These persons being now in the hight of their glory, might justly have most cause to question their strength. Christall that fairely glistereth doth quickly breake. And as the assent of vsurped royalty is slippery; so the top is shaking and the fall great. All the strength and pollicy of this malignant party, not being able to defend them from suddaine and most eminent danger, two Parlia∣ments
are forthwith summoned, one in England, and another in Scot∣land, his Majestie being graciously pleased to make sweetnesse and Clemency the enterance to settle these distempered states. Now the cur∣rant began to run smooth and cleere, all rough waves seeme to be past, the Sunne shines bright and cleere, the Clowds are a little disperced, and the strength of our hopes gave us almost full assurance of a happy Successe, but when these mischievous Spirits, perceived that the wise∣dome and faithfull advise of the Parliament in England, carryed great Antipathy with their Counsels and endeavours, they prevaile with his Majestie to goe into Scotland, and grant their demands (thinking it easier to contend with one Parliament, then with two) and his Majesty complying with the Parliament in Scotland, gave great assurance to our thirsty hopes, that his Majestie would not be lesse▪ gracious to his, Subjcts in England. At his returne, he is received with great acclamations of joy, many profes∣sons of a true desire, & promises really to performe the like work in Eng∣land, are made unto us and the Parliament, begins to move in its proper Orbe. But heere me thinks my discourse wants one of the three Demensions. It is wide, and broad enough, but it wants depth, to shew the suddaine re∣volution & change of these things. And indeed it might seem very strange, and a thing beyond example, if we should not consider the reason, and occa∣sion of summoning these Parliaments, and the rather, if we consider with what wisdome, mildnesse, temper, and Iudgement they have proceeded. But experience teacheth us, that great actions are seldome effected without much paines, and great dificulty; especially, when they meet with strong and apparent opposition, and as these Parliaments were not called out of any love or affection thereunto, but meerely by compul∣sion, and constrant, to avoyd a present danger, which there was no o∣ther meanes to escape; so now the malignant party perceiving that in case this Parliament, should be suffered to goe on prosperously, their former plots would not only be made frustrate, but the knot so broken, and their wings so clipt, that they should never be able to put in practise any notorious acts sutable to their desires. Now they begin to muster up their forces a new, and endeavour not onely to destroy some members of either house, but the very essence and being, not onely of this Parliament, but of all Parliaments hereafter. Here me thinkes, this skeyne in my hand is so twisted with the disparity betweene the effects of these two Parliaments of England, and Scotland, that I cannot without intangling winde it upon a proper bottome. The Parliament in England, hath beene ever held the Soveraigne
cure to heale all distempers of the Kingdome, and the surest and safest Counsell for the Kings of this Land to follow, being Magna Concilium Regis, especialy in case of Warre, which was the reason that Edw. 3. being much incouraged to goe with the King of France to the holyRot. Parlia∣ment▪ 6. E. 3 warres, and being advised thereunto by his Councell, refused to goe without taking aduise of his Parliament, and caused a Parliament to be summoned for that very purpose? By which Councels of Parliament many great breaches & ruptures, have bin made up, and great distempers & distractions settled in a very short time, but such hath bin the un-heard of opposition, that hath beene made against this Parliament, thorough the continuall multiplicity of new businesses, occasoned by the new plots and devises framed against them, by the Malignant party, that without eminent danger to the whole state and kingdome, they have not had time to punish offenders; nor meanes (his Majestie being seduced by their wicked Counsels,) to redresse greevances, having sufficient Worke to under prop and uphold the tottering fabricke of this distempered king∣dome, so that herein stands the disparity betweene the affaires in Scot∣land and England, that the Parliament there by reason of his Majesties grace and goodnes, in complying with them, did effect that in three moneths, which the Parliament in England hath not beene so happy to accomplish in 20▪ Moneths. Me thinks, my notes in this place, have the vertue of a Looking-glasse to shew and represent that which is before, as well as that which is behind, In that behalfe this short discourse being fully look't upon, as in a Glasse, may shew the apparity of the causers, Agents, and effects of the troubles, both of England and Scotland to be the same, onely some few particuler persons may be changed, or removed. I shall trouble you but with one example, we may remember that the principall actor (of the Clergie) in the plotting and contriving of these troubles in their birth; was the Archbishop of Canterbury, but (according to the Propheticall speech of King Iames, he brought up a bird to picke out his owne Eyes) the Archbishop of Yorke, hath now gotten the staffe out of his hands, and acts his part more to the life: then ever he had beene able to have done himselfe. Now also great proffers are made by these Clergie, and the Papists towards the advancing of a Civill warre in England, And although this that I have spoken be sufficient for my present purpose, yet Me thinks I heare Tilbury speake. It cannot fall within the compasse of mans know∣ledge to utter the malicious intents of these persons, but as Pliny sheweth, that all Homers Iliades were written in a Nut-shell, the whole matter of my discourse being perused, it may be you shall Iudge all shll▪ and no Kernell, therefore I will not further inlarge my selfe for my mettall is molten, and my bellowes by often blowing, have let out all their breath. FINIS.
