P929 09981141 44431
SOME OBSERVATIONS Made upon the Bengala Bean, Imported from the INDIES: SHEWING Its Admirable VIRTUES In CURING All sorts of Hemorrages, and particularly Spitting of Blood. Written by a Doctor of Physick in the Countrey to one of his Patients in London. Printed in the Year 1694.
SOME OBSERVATIONS Made upon the Bengala Bean, IMPORTED FROM The INDIES: In a LETTER, &c. SIR, IEceived yours, wherein you give me an Account of your dangerous Disaster, which greatly threatens your Life, viz. your frequent Spitting of Blood, proceeding from the Acrimony of that Vital Liquor.
Long and frequent Evacuations of that Kind must of necessity spend the Spirits, weaken Nature, and shorten Life: I therefore re∣commend to you a most Excellent Specifick in your Distemper, viz. the Bengala Bean; which is of a healing Balsamick Nature, mo∣derately Stiptick, of a very temperate Qua∣lity, and affords an excellent Soder to the Veins and Arteries, where any breach is made on them by the Defluxions of a sharp cor∣roding Humour: It mitigates the Acidity of all salt Rhumes which invade the Lungs, and threaten a Consumption. It checks the Violence of Coughing, and easeth pains in the Breast, it rarely Thickens and incrassates the Blood, and gives it a good Consistence, where∣by it prevents all sorts of Hemorrages of Blood. Dr. Smith, the Author of the Book called Solomon's Pourtraicture of Old Age, tells of a young Virgin, a Patient of his, who Dyed in twenty four hours Space, of a Violent Flux of Blood, from all parts of her Body; as Nose, Ears, Eyes, Mouth, &c. Had he been so
happy as to have known this Remedy, I don't know but he might have saved her, with God Almighty's blessing. We cannot now Apply our selves in our Issues of blood, to so Happy a remedy as the Hem of our Saviours Garment, and there∣fore must make use of the Best means we can, and be thankful if we find Relief by any. I could tell you a strange Story of a young Gentleman who was troubled with a Hemop∣tosie, or spitting of Blood for many Weeks, so that he Despair'd of Life. He had open'd a Vein Twice, had used all the Common Forms of Medicines, as Frictions, Liga∣tures, Fomentations, Gentle Purgatives, and what else could be thought on by the ablest Physicians; but nothing could cure the Rup∣ture of the Vessels about the Lungs, untill he applyed himself unto the Drops drawn out of this Balsamick Bean, and drinking them sometimes in Cows Milk, and some∣times in Asses and Goats Milk, was wonder∣derfully Cured.
I knew a Learned Divine, who straining his Voice in Preaching, had broke a Vein in his Lungs; and after the use of many Pre∣scriptions, which proved insignificant, he at length used these vulnerary Drops in Wine and Water, and he experienced a mighty ad∣vantage thereby, to the Immortal Praise of the Great Physician above. A Labouring Man about Forty years of Age, who fell from the Top of a House, and bruised his Breast, which occasioned Spitting of Blood: I gave him these Drops in Mead seven days, and all his pains aba∣ted, and he Spit no more Blood, nor felt any more pain. A Child about Twelve Years of Age, be∣ing troubled with a violent Cough, which caused him to Spit and Vomit Blood, a great Quantity, after he had taken many Fantasti∣cal Medicines, as Fryed Mice, John and Jones Bread, sate with his Naked Buttocks upon a Bears Back, and been Toss'd seven or
nine times over a Bramble-Bush, &c. at last he took these Drops in Claret-Wine and Water, and was cured of his Chin-cough, his Whooping ceased, and his Spitting went off. An elderly Person, who was continually bleeding at the Nose, and other parts, was wonderfully rescued from the Jaws of Death, by the use of these Drops in Milk and Water. FINIS.
