S3951 9398798 42973
A SALVE FOR EVERY SORE OR, A Collection of PROMISES out of the whole Book of God, and is The Christian Centurions Infallible ground of Confidence or, His poore Soules most assured comfortable companion at all times, and in all things. PSALME 94.19. In the multitude of my thoughts within me, thy comforts delight my Soule. PSALME, 119.50. This is my comfort in my affliction; for thy word hath quickned me. And is for more breuity, and better portage a very brief extract out of a much larger written Copy. By PHILLIP SKIPPON. Serjent Majr Generall, &c. MAT 8.6. Lord I am not worthy that thou shouldest  under my roofe. VERS. 7. Wherefore neither thought I my selfe worthy to come unto thee. COLOS. 3.11. Christ al in all. LONDON, Printed by E.G. for Samul Enderby living in Popes∣head-Ally, at the signe of the Starre, 1643.
In extremitate maxima, Me juvit & juvabit Jehovah. Lord by the help of thy most gratious spirit Which I crave, resn, wait for through Christ merits With heart, hand, tongue, in life to death I am, Spirituall for truth, to which I set my Name. Phillip Skippon. Reader at adventure. HAst thou a misconceit of this or me, Suspend thy censure till that heard I be; 'Tis Conscience, Justice, Reason, Charity, Tis all I crave, you may it not deny. Wherein I faile, i'le not my selfe excuse, Guilty, to cry where needs not, I refuse. Where need requires, amend what is amisse, Where it is well let it be as it is.
Behold, I will shew thee that which is noted in the Scripture of truth Daniel 10, 21. Lo this, we have searched it, so it is, heare it, and know thou it for thy good, Iob 5.27. Therefore search the Scriptures whether these things be so Ioh. 5.3. Acts 17.11. CAn he be poore whose portion is Gods  and faithfull Promises? Much I have lost, and still may lose, Far well to all; These these I choose. Beyond Sea service me undid, Because to shark conscience forbid. I am not like (as't is) to gaine Except my labour for my paine. I then did trust, and still will make, Gods promises my surest stake: His promis'd help I then did finde: More of the same is still behinde. Can I be poore whose portion is Gods free and faithfull promises?
To all Souldiers of reall honour and honesty of what degree soever P. S. Wisheth all grace and good now and alwayes. FEllow Souldiers; take it not ill I give you no other Titles, I conceive customary complements, in such a case as this, to be uncomly: out of my reall respect unto you I present you with this small Treatise, which cost me no small labour, let the wise and honest judge,
well as it is, if you have a share among those that mourne in Zion, Isa. 61.3. You will relish it; howsoever knowing there are many among you that un∣derstand the Language of Canaan, Jsa 19.18. I desire all may be judiciously perused be∣fore any part bee rashly censu∣red, be not too curious or cap∣tious; I am no Schollar, I desire to be a Christian, looke to the matter more then the hand∣ling, be wise for your selves, my Soule wisheth you all well: I aime neither at thankes, com∣mendations nor benefit, I sleight envy scorne and censure: I shall avoyde needlesse circum∣stances
and apply my selfe to brevity, truth and plainnesse: I desire to honour God, not to humour men; if our poore soules get any good hereby, I have enough; your good is intended, neglect it not, despise nothing because of my insufficiency; if in judgement and sincerity any will informe mee, I promise thankfulnesse, and (by Gods grace) amendment: for good received blesse God and pray for me, (unworthy). The Lord of hosts, the great Jehovah who is a man of War, our Chief Cap∣taine, be intreated to governe, strengthen preserve and prosper you all as mine own selfe, Amen.
To my wife and Children. MY most dearly beloved, for your and mine owne pri∣vate use, this Treatise was at first especially intended, and this is the best provision J can make for you: though outward comforts should fayle you, these will al∣wayes be most usefull to you, for Piety hath the promise, 1 Tim. 4.8. And Promises in your hearts are better then pearles in your Chests: but J counsell, beseech, and charge upon evry one of you
most earnestly (as it most nearely concernes you, and the neglect whereof will the more condemne you) that as you love God, and your owne Soules, as you tender my affection, and will answer be∣fore the Judgement Seate of Christ, 1 Tim. 6.13. To remember ap∣ply and practise, to reade, study and observe what J by Gods grace, with so much care and paines have thus collected for you, endeavour to get and keep the Testimony of a good conscience in all things, Acts 24.16. Sinne not against the light thereof willfully for any respect, 1 Sam. 15.22, 23. Away with knowne sins whatsoever you doe, for those are most haynous, uncomfor∣table,
dangerous, and (without repen∣tance shewed by amendement) dam∣nable, Num. 15.30, 31. Deut 19.19.20.21. In well doing commend all to the Lord, Ps. 37.3.5.7. And be content with his good pleasure, Heb. 13.5, 6. Yea trust him most in greatest extremity, Isa. 50.20. As he is God he will send help in every need, Ps. 50.15. & 9.9. & 46.1 & 142.4, 5. & 72.12. And goe all how it will, all shall (through the Lords free mercy in Christ goe well with you, Hos. 14.4. Col. 3.11. Ro. 8.28. Eccl. 8.12. Isa. 3.10. Ps. 37.37. For so run all the Promises through him unto you, 2 Cor. 1.20. 1 Cor. 1.30. 1 Tim. 4.8. Peruse them J pray you.
Now I most humbly and unfain∣edly beseech the Lord God our hea∣venly Father, with his most holy spirit, throughly to sanctify every one of you, that you may walk with, call upon, and trust in him aright, and by his infinitly wise, Almighty, most mercifull, faithfully promised, never fayling helpe to make every one of you every manner of way truly happy here and for evermore through our alone all-sufficient Sa∣viour and perpetuall intercessor, the Lord Jesus Christ, Amen.
A few helpfull Meditations concerning the use of the following Promises. ETernall Lord God, by vertue of thine owne most free and In∣fallible covenant onely, in Jesus Christ my reconciled God, my Hea∣venly Father, my alone Al sufficient helper, my hearts desire is, that as thoa hast pleased most graciously in some measure to reveale unto me thy p omised favours for this and a better life, thou wilt also make me fit to receive them, by working, re∣storing, continuing increasing in me every one of those Infallible markes and every circumstance of each, whereby I may be fully assured that
all thy Promises are my portion in the beloved. O cause me througly to understand and rightly to use every one of those well warranted rules for the right applying of every one of them, O Lord my God, I (by thy Grace, know and believe because thou hast sayd it, let me in each particular seasonably and ef∣fectually feele and finde it, that all thy Promises are freely made, and undoubtedly belong unto me, are all as one easily to be performed by hee, that as thou never hast, thou never wilt faile in performing any one of them unto me, I have thine owne hand to shew for them, thine owne oath confirmes them, thy Mi∣nisters (at thy command) Preach that thou wilt fulfill them, thy Christ himselfe imployed his own Ministery for more assurance of them, the death of him the Testator yet the noe ratifies them, the earnest of thy
spirit assures my right to them, the Law cannot disanull them, thou hast in thy counsell, Sonne, Sacraments and by thy spirit sealed them, expe∣rience in all Ages further Testisies thy keeping of them, thine in grea∣test extremity have made and ever make them their stay chiefly, Thou who promisest art goodnesse it selfe, most willing, able, and true to per∣forme them, thou who promisest art Omnipresent, omniscient, most wise, holy, just, abhorrest, destroyest the unjust, lovest, blessest the just, decree∣est, willest, workest all for the glori∣fying of thy selfe according to thy word, and by thine owne especiall providence ordaynest and orderest all things in most remarkable man∣ner, to manifest unto thine owne that thou ever hast beene, art, and ever wilt be theyrs for good, according to each part of thy immutable truth whatsoever opposeth, thou who pro∣misest
misest art unchangeable in thy nature, attributes, promises, and wert not God if thou shouldst not exactly and fully keepe thy word: it being thus, yea as it is thus, I can say no more, I must humbly and earnestly beseech and urge thee, let me in all places up∣on all occasions, in every present and future pressing inward and outward necessity, finde favour in thy sight and help at thy hands, according to every one of thy most precious pro∣mises (although I be most unwor∣thy and merit the worst of evills in all extremity,) yea then, even when I am most hopelesse, and seeme all ne∣ver so impossible, most especially my Lord, my God, my Father, my Hel∣per be pleased for thine own sake in thy Christ my Jesus as thou hast here plainly, expresly, and plentifully promised, cause me to know, remem∣ber be ashamed of, loath my selfe for, be confounded in my selfe for
my sins, &c. Thus turning the words into a prayer, will no doubt be found a most warrantable, comfortable, acceptable and prevayling way of praying: and so I conceive (without a thought of giving offence, or any way limiting Christian liberty) one may take one chiefe head or more at a time, or such places as most especi∣ally concerne his especiall occasions some one time and some another and turne them into prayers, so speak∣ing to God in his owne Language, in reverend, affectionate, distinct and earnest manner with a judicious be∣lieving heart, will wonderfully direct, cherish, settle and further us; onely let us in well doing wait upon God in the lawfull use of all good means for the obtaining of whatsoever grace or blessing we want or desire, and it cannot be but we shall have helpe one way or other in every ne∣cessity, for the mouth of the Lord
hath spoken it, all his attributes lie at the stake to doe it, what can hinder it? Isa. 46.11. Let me humbly affirme it, I my selfe have alwayes found it, all glory to my God for it. And leek what promise he doth make his household to defend, For just and true they shall it take all times without an end, Psalme 39. ult. Gods Promise J doe mind and prayse O Lord J stick to thee: I doe not care at all assayes what flesh can doe to me. I glory in the VVord of God to prayse it I accord, VVith joy I will declare abroad the promise of the Lord. Psalone 56.5.10. Though Heaven and Earth and all should vanish quite, Rely Isa. 50.10 upon my mercy Ps. 5.8. truth Ps. 119.0 and might, sa. 18.2 & 59 9. Not the least lttle of my word shall fayle thee, But be flfiled Mat. 5.18 whatsoever may ayle thee, Jer. 30 7. Yea I have said it and will doe it too, Stight all in Earth or bell that dares say no, Isa. 46.10.11. Well Lord I trusst thee on thy word Act. 27.25 and it, Make good unto me as thou see'st most fit, A. 21.24 Thy promisd grace and glory I implore, Ps 84.11, It is enough, tis all, I'le have no more. Ps. 73.24.25, 6.
Onely the maine parts of this Collection, and chiefest divisions of each, most briefly set downe, and how readily to finde them at large. EIrst, twenty eight undeniable Proofes of the Infallibility of the Promises, Page 1. to p. 20 Secondly, Divers Infallible markes to whom the Promises doe belong, p. 21. to p. 41. Thirdly, To whom they belong not. p. 44. to p 47. Fourthly, Divers well warranted and ne∣cessary Rules for the right applying of the Promises, p. 47. to p. 55. Fifthly, The Promises themselves divided into six maine parts, as First, The general Promises, p. 55 to p. 58
Secondly, Such Promises as assure us freedome from 1. The guilt, p. 58. to 66. of Sin. 2. The punishment, p. 66. to p. 71. of Sin. 3. The power, p. 71. to p. 76. of Sin. Thirdly, Such Promises as assure us. 1. Many Saving graces, p. 76 to p. 87. 2. Ability to worship GOD aright, p. 87 to p. 90. 3. Abilities for our particular calling, p. 90. to p. 91. 4. Increase and perseverance in good, and of acceptation, p. 91. to p. 102. Fourthly, Such Promises as assure us. 1. Many Comforts concerning affliction in generall, p. 102. to p 112. 2. Concerning particular Afflictions. p. 112. to p. 140. 3. Concerning perills in generall and par∣ticular, p. 140 to p. 158. 4. Concerning Death, p. 158 to p. 164.
First, such Promises as assure us ma∣many outward blessings, as the Lord sees best for us. 1. Such as concerne our selves. p. 164 to p. 183. 2. Such as concerne . p. 183. to p. 187. 3. Such as concerne Gods Church, p. 187 to p. 192. Sixt, Such promises as assure us plenty of mercifull rewards of severall Graces and Vertues. 1. To many saving Graces. p. 192. to 230. 2. To works of Charity, p. 230. to p. 250. 3. To our conscionable worshipping of God, p. 250 to p. 287. 4. To avoyding divers Sinnes. p. 287, to p. 297. 5. To imbracing severall Duties. p. 297. to p. 313 Where readily to finde out such Po∣mises as I conceive concerne Souldiers more especially. 1. That we shall have direction sufficiency, and valour, p. 90, 91, 92, 93.
2. Jf wee bee wounded or Captives, p. 128, 129. 3. Against Perils in generall, in par∣ticular, of Fire, Water, stormes at Sea, or in and against any perilous imploy∣ment of War. p. 140 to. p. 147. 4. The Lord will give us advancement and blesse our warrantable proceedings and journies, p. 170.174, 175. 5. If we pray in any feare, or danger, or beeing prisoners, or hungry or thirsty, or if we pray for direction in our courses p. 259.260, 261, 262, 263. 6. To governing our Affaires wisely, to courage, diligence, and faithfulnesse. p. 320. to 317. 7. To avoyding evill company Adultery, and all other uncleannesse, injuring o∣thers, wrath, contention, lying, evill speaking, swearing, being among many other the common crying sinnes of our calling, p. 289, 291, 295, 296. Ʋnder the generall heads, and every
one of their maine parts, which are here, but very briefly expressed, are many other particular branches of much concernment, and more then some at first will imagine, Let them be lookt after, The generalls will lead you to particulars. Doubt not, but search & try, observe, and do, Believe, God sayes it, we shall finde it so. Errata. PAge 27 l 6. r. 1 Cor. 10.24. l. 17. r 2 Cor. p. 29. l. 10. r. Deut 10 p 30. l. 15. r. Ex. 23. p. 31. l. 21. r Num 9. p. 34. l. 4. r. v. 10. l. 25 insers Ps. 57. l. p 35 l. 3 r. Eph. 2.5.7, 8, 9. p 38. l. 6. r. Ps 68. 20. p 43. l. 11. irecet  Tes. 5. 7 p 44 l. 4. r insers Isai. p 49. l. 3. r. 2 Chron 20. p 50. l. 22. r. 13 v. p 51. l. 6. r. 25 v 6.8. p 53 l. 19. r. 1 Chro. p 54. l. 4. r. Prayer p. 55. l. 2 insers Mica. 2.7. p. 56. l. 5. R. hiding place p 70. l. 19. r. Heb. 2. p. 89 l. 24. r. then p 92, r. v. 22. p 93. l. the last r. Isa. 55. p 97. l. 9. r. Iohn 15. p 98. l. r Jer. 31 3. p 99. l. 24. r. 2 Thess. p 102 l 17. r. v. 12 p. 107. l. 23. r. Correct p. 109 l. 2. r. Ps. 42 p. 110. l 5. r Nchū. p 120. l. 17. r. provide p. 128. l. 23 r. v, 39. p 131. l. 12 shalt. l. 14. 1 68. 6. p 147. l. 12 r Ps. 71. p 154. l. 14. insert Ps p 155. l. 26. r Jer. 20.11. p 156. l. 26. r v. 47. p 159. l. 19. r v. 27. p 170. l. 13. r Deut. 8. p 179. l. 18. r stort p 186. l. 18. r. Isa. 30. p 187. l. 3. r Deut. 28. p 196. l. 21. r Iob 5. p 198. l. 1. relay. p 205. l. 5. r Levit. 26. 11, 41. p 297. l. . but to p. 208, l. 7. r. v. 2, 3. p 209. l. the last r. everlasting life p. 210 l. 26. r Ioh. 7. p 230. l 1 r. v, 16. p 241. l 11. r happy  he p. 244. l. 7. r, v. 21. p. 255. l. 15 r. v. 9 p 289. l. the last r. 2 Cor. 6. p. 295 l. 11. r. v, 29. p. 300. l 13. r v. 25 p 315. l. the last r. v. 24. p. 316 l. 4. r, Pre. 13. p. 317. l. 6. r. v, 25 p 318. l. 26. r Isa. 56 p 321. l. 21. r. v. 20. p 379 l. 12 r. lived the world, l. 26. r. 1 Ich. p 326. l. 6. r Isai, 60 p 329. l. 10. r. be with me where.
XXVIII. VNDENIABLE Proofes of the Infalli∣bility of the Promises. FIrst, all the promises are freely made unto us by the Lord not∣withstanding our unmeasurable great unworthinesse. Thus saith the Lord God, I doe not this for your sakes O house of Israel, but for mine holy names sake which yee have prophaned Ezek. 36.22. The Scripture hath concluded all under sinne, that the Promise by faith of Je Christ might be given to them that believe. Gal. 3.22. I will love them freely, Hos. 14.4. Secondly, the promises, belong to us as well as to our forefathers.
For the promise is unto you and to your children, and to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call, Act. 2.39. That the Gentiles should bee fellow heires and of the same body, and partakers of his Promises in Christ by the Gospel, Eph. 3.6. Therefore it is of faith that it might be by grace, to the end the promise might be sure to all the seed: not to that onely which is of the Law, but to that also which is of the fayth of Abraham the father of us all, Rom. 4.16. That promise made to Joshua, 1.5. I will not fayle thee nor forsake thee, applied by Paul, Heb. 13.5.6. Thirdly, all the promises are called one, and as if they were but one, most easy to be performed by the Lord. Wherein God willing more abundantly to shew unto the heires of promises, Heb. 6.17. That the Promise of Jesus Christ might be given, Gal. 3.22. Fourthly, the promises were made before the world was, yet hitherto God never fayled any one word  s goodnesse.
In hope of eternall life which God that cannot lie promised before the world be gan, Tit. 1.2. Yee know in all your hearts and in all your soules, that not one thing hath fay∣led of all the good things which the Lord your God spake concerning you  are come to passe unto you, and not one thing hath fayled thereof, Iosh. 23 14. & 21.45. Fifthly, we have the writings of God for them, they are upon record in Scripture, and shall we mistrust when we have Gods own hand to sh∣for it? I the Lord speake righteousnesse, I d∣clare things that are, Isa. 45.19. Thy word is true from the beginning and every one of thy righteous judgements endureth for ever right, Ps. 119.160. For the word of the Lord is right and all his workes are done in truth, Ps. 33.4. Sixthly, the Lord hath bound himselfe by his oath to performe his promises unto us. The Lord of hosts hath sworn sayn surely as I have thought, so shall it come to passe, and as I have purposed, so shall it stand, Jsa. 14.17. I have sworne by my selfe: the word
is gone out of my mouth in righteousnesse, and shall not returne, Isa. 45.23. God willing more abundanly to shew unto the heires of Promise the immutability of his counsell, confirmed it by oath, Heb. 6.17. Seaventh: we have the word preached unto us by ds ambassadors sent of purpose at the Comman∣ment of God, who hath inioyned them to make it manifest, that he will be as good as his word unto us. But hath in due time manifested his word through preaching, which is committed un∣to me according to the Commandement of God our Saviour, Tit. 1.3. Eight; Christ Himselfe did imploy his Ministery to confirme the promises. Jesus Christ was a Minister of the cir∣cumcision for the truth of God, to co firme the promises Rom. 15.8. Ninth: we have the death of the Testator to con∣firm this new Testament and all the promises con∣tained therein (a) so as in Christ they are all, yea and amen unto us (b) there can be no nay nor deniall of them, they may now be well pleaded in my Christ of the lustice of God. (c) (a) For this cause hee is the Mediator
of the new Testament, that by meanes of death for the redemption of the transgres∣sions, they which are called might receive the promise of eternal inheritance, He. 9.15 (b) For all the promises of God in him are yea, and in him aen, unto the glory of God by us, ve. 6.2 Cor. 1.20. (c) He is faithfull and just to forgive t our sinnes, and to cleanse us from all u righteousnesse. 1. Ioh. 1 9. Tenth: the graces of Gods Sirit powred out up us are our assurance that he will not hold from us our regall priviledges, viz. his promises. Now he which stablisheth us with you, in Christ, and hath anoynted us, is God, who hath also sealed us, and given the earnest of the spirit in our hearts, 2 Cor. 1.21.22. In whom also after that yee believed, yee were sealed with that holy spirit of promise, Eph. 1.13. Eleventh: the Law cannot disanull the pro∣mises. For if they which are of the Law be heires, faith is made voyd, and the promise made of none effect, Rom. 4.14. And this I say that the Covenant that
was confirmed before of God in Christ, the Law which was foure hundred and thirty yeares after, cannot disanuld that it should make the promise of none effect: for it the inheritance be of the Law, it is no more of promise, but God gave it to Abraham by promise. Gal. 3.17.18. Twelfth: the Lord hath sealed his promises un∣to us. 1. In his counsell, which booke the Lyon and the Lambe now hath opened. The Lion of the tribe of Iudah, the roote of David hath prevailed to open the booke, and to lose the seven seales thereof: thou art worthy to take the booke, and to open the seales thereof, Rev. 5.5.9. 2. In his sonne, God made all sure when he sent out Christ, he sealed his comissin in all things that concerned the happinesss. of his people. Him hath God the father sealed. Ioh. 6.27. 3. By his spirit, this is Gods privy Seale, and thus are all believers sayd to be sealed with the spirit of promise. In whom also after that yee believed, yee were sealed with that holy spirit of pro∣mise, Eph. 1.13.
4. In the Sacraments, which are given us as Gods broad seale, and outward to∣kens and pledges to confirme our fayth  the promises. And hee received the signe of circum∣cision a seale of the righteousnesse of th fayth which hee had, yet being uncircum∣cised. Rom. 4.11. Thirteenth: we have the experiences of all  that whatsoever God promised, the same he  also most certainly performed. I have declared the former things from  beginning; and they went forth out of  mouth, and I shewed them, I did them sud∣denly, and they came to passe, Isa. 48.3. Examples. Promises made (d) And I will put en∣mity between thee and the Woman, and betweene thy seede and her seed: it shall bruise thy head, and thou shal bruise his heele, Gen. 3.15.
(e) Unto thee and un∣to thy seede, I will give all these Coun∣tries, and I will per∣forme the Oath which I swore unto Abraham thy Fa∣ther, Gen. 26.3. & 17.8. & 12.7. (f) And hee sayd I will certainly re∣turne unto thee ac∣cording to the time of life, and so Sarah thy wife shall have a sonne Gen. 18, 10. (g) Thy seede shall be a stranger in a
land that is not theirs, and shall serve them, and they shall afflict them 400 yeares and also that Nation whom they shall serve wil I judge, and after∣wards shall they come out with great sub∣stance, Gen. 4.14. (h) Yee shall spoyle the Egiptians, Exodus 3.22. (i) I am with thee, and will keepe thee in all places whither thou goest, and will bring thee againe into this Land, for I will not leave thee, until I have done that which I have spoken to thee of, Ge. 28.15.
(k) Hee shall build an House for my Name, and I will stablish the throne of his Kingdome for ever. 2 Samuel 7.13. (l) For thus sayth the Lord that after seventy yeares be accomplished at Ba∣biln, I will visite you, and performe my good VVord to∣wards you in cau∣sig you to returne to this place Ieremy 29.10.
(m) And it shall come to passe afterward that I will power out my Spirit upon all flesh, &c. Ioel 2.28.29. (n) And behold I send the Promise of my Father upon you: but tarry yee in the City of Ie∣risalem untill yee bee indued with power from on high Luke 24.49.
Performed. (d) But when the ful∣nesse of time was come, God sent forth his Sonne made of a Woman, made under the Law; to redeeme them that were un∣der the Law, Gal. 44.
(e) Goe over this jor∣dan, thou and all this people, unto the Land which I doe give to them, even the children of Israel, Iosh. 1.2. And these are the Countries which the children of Israel inherited in the Land of Cannan, Io. 14.1. &c. (f) And the Lord vi∣sited Sarah as hee had sayd, and the Lord did unto Sarah as he had spoken: for Sarah conceived and bare Abraham a Sonne in his old age, at the set time of which God had spoken to him, Gen. 21.1.2. (g) And it came to passe the selfe same
day that the Lord did bring the chil∣dren of Israel out of the Land of Egipt, by their Ar∣mies, Exodus 12.51. The Lord over∣threw the Egiptians in the middest of the Sea, ch. 14.27. See cha. 12.36.41. (h) And they spoy∣led the Egiptians, Ex. 12.36. (i) And the man in∣creased mightily, Gen. 30.43. The God of my Fa∣thers hath been with me, Ge. 31.5. God suffered him not to hurt me, ver. 7. see ver. 24.42. God hath dealt gra∣ciously with mee, I have enough, Gen. 33.11.
And Iacob came un∣to Isaac his Father, Ge. 35.27. (k) And the Lord hath performed his word that he spake, and I am risen up in the roome of David my Father, and sit on the throne of Israel as the Lord promised, and have built an house for the Name of the Lord God of Israel, 1 Ki. 8 20. (l) Now in the first yeare of Cyrus King of Persia (that the VVord of the Lord by the mouth of Ie∣remiah might bee fulfilled) the Lord stirted up the spirit of Cyrus King o Persia, &c. Ezra. 1.1. see all that Book.
(m) But this is that which was spoken by the Prophet Ioel. and it shall come to passe in the last dayes (saith God) I will power out of my Spirit upon all flesh, &c. Acts 2 16, 17, 18. (n) And when the day of Pentecost was fully come, they were all with one accord in one place, and suddenly there came a sound from Heaven, as of a rush∣ing mighty winde &c. Acts 2.1, 2, 3. According to all that hee promised there hath not fayled one VVord, of all his Pro∣mises which he promised, 1 Ki. 8.56.
Fourteenth: the patriarkes imbraced the promises as the chief stay of their lives in their pilgrimage on Earth. And were perswaded of them and imbrac∣ed them, & confessed that they were strangers and pilgrims on the Earth, Heb. 11.13. Fifteenth: the LORD who promiseth is the foun∣taine of all goodnesse, therefore all good promised may, must and ought to be expected from him. Every good gift and every perfect gift is from above and commeth downe from the father of lights, Iam. 1.17. There is none good but one that is God. Mat. 19.17. Thou art good and dost good, Ps. 119.68. Sixteenth: the LORD is most willing to give us the good things that he hath promised. Come yee, buy and eate, yea come, buy Wine and Milke without money and with∣out price, Isa. 55.1. The Lord is not slacke concerning his promise, but is long suffering to us ward not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance, 2. Pet. 3.9. I will give to him that is a thirst of the fountaine of the water of life freely Re. 21.6.
Seaventeenth: the Lord is almighty, therfore most able to performe all that he hath promised, whatso∣ever opposeth. I am the Almighty God, Gen. 17.1. Great and marvellous are thy workes, Lord God Almighty, Re. 15.3. I wil work and who shall let it? Isa. 43.13. Being fully perswaded, that what he had promised, hee was also able to performe, Rom. 4.21. Eighteenth: the LORD is most true and faithfull to performe his word. He is the Rock, his Worke is perfect: for all his wayes are judgement, a God of truth and without iniquity, just and righte∣ous is he, Deut. 32.4. The Lord thy God, he is God, the faith∣ful God, which keepeth covenant, Deut. 7.9. Faithfull is he that calleth you who also will doe it, 1 Thess. 5.24. Let us hold fast the profession of our faith without wavering, for he is faithfull that promised, Heb. 10.23. Ninteenth: the LORD who promiseth is omni∣present. Therefore no place excludes our assurance of his performing his word unto us, but whereso∣ever we are, we may, ought and must rely upon his promises.
Am I a God at hnd sayth the Lord and not a God a farre off? Can any hide him∣selfe in secret places, that I shall not see him sayth the Lord? Doe not I fill Hea∣ven and Earth sayth the Lord? Ier. 23.23, 24. The eyes of the Lord runne to and fro through the whole earth, to shew himselfe strong in the behalfe of them whose heart is perfect towards him, 2 Cro. 16.9. Twentieth: the LORD who promiseth is most wise, therefore throughly considereth when, where, by what meanes and in what manner, or how far to let us experimentally find the truth of his word, so that we may rest assured thereof, as shall be best for us, goe all how it will with us. Now unto the King eternall immortall, invisible, the onely wise God, be honour and glory for ever and ever: Amen, 1 Tim. 1.17. O the depth of the riches both of the wisdome and knowledgeof God! Rom. 11 33. The Lord knoweth how to deliver the godly out of temptations. 2 Pet. 2.9. Twenty one: the Lord who promiseth, is omnis∣cient. Knowing perfectly, in which how many and
how far we stand in need of his help, to vouchsaf he same according to his word. Great in counsell, and mighty in worke, for thine eyes are open upon all the wayes of the sonnes of men, to give every one ac∣cording to his wayes, and according to the fruit of his doings, Ieremy, 32.19. The wayes of man are before the eyes of the Lord, and he pondereth al his goings, Pro. 5.21. Twenty two. The Lord who promiseth is most ho∣ly, therefore cannot de a thing so contrary to his most holy nature as to breake his promise. Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of hosts. Jsa. 6.3. Rev. 3.7. The Lord is righteous in all his wayes and holy in all his works, Psa. 145.17. There is none holy as the Lord, 1 Sam. 2.2. Thou art of purer eyes then to be∣hold evill, and canst not look on iniquity, Hab. 1.13. Twenty three, the Lord who promiseth is most just and it is one especiall property of a just man to keep his promise. Wilt thou condemne him that is most just? Iob. 34.17.
To shew that the Lord is upright: he is my Rock, and there is no unrighteousnesse in him, Psa. 92.15. A just God and a Saviour, there is none beside me, Jsa. 45.21. The just Lord is in the middest thereof he will not doe iniquity, Zeph. 3.5. Twenty foure. The Lord abhorreth and destroyeth the unjust, but Loveth and blesseth the just, how should he then be unjust himselfe in not keeping his word. Thou shall destroy them that speake lea∣sing, the Lord abhors the bloudy and de∣ceitfull man, Psal. 5.6. Thou Lord wilt blesse the righteous, with favour wilt thou compasse him as with a shield, Psa. 5.12. The righteous Lord loveth righteousnesse, his countenance doth behold the upright, Psalme, 11.7. Twenty five. The LORD decreed, willeth, worketh all things for his own glory, unto the setting forth, whereof the faithfull performing of every one of his promises doth exceedingly extend, and from which the not performing any one of them would so far derogate, that all that is, or can be conceived, revealed or expressed concerning him were no∣thing
if he were not every wayes as good as his VVord. For of him, and through him, and to him are all things: to whom be glory for ever, Romans, 11.36. The Lord hath made all things for him∣selfe, Pro. 16.4. Who worketh all things after the coun∣sell of his own will. Eph. 1.11. Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory and honour, and power: for thou hast created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created, Rev. 4.11. Twenty six. The LORD by his especiall and only providence ordaineth and ordereth all things in most especiall remarkeable manner to manifest to his own that he is, and ever will be their God for good according to his VVord. Now therefore be not grieved nor angry with your selves, that yee sold me hither: for God did send mee before you to pre∣serue life: God sent me before you, to pre∣serve you a posterity in the Earth, and to save your lives by a great deliverance; so now it was not you that sent mee hither, but God, Gen. 45.5.7.8. t as for you yee thought evil against me,
but God meant it unto good, to bring to passe as it is this day, to save much people alive, Gen. 50.20. And we know that all things worke to∣gether for good, to them that love God, Rom. 8.28. Twenty seaven. The LORD who promiseth is un∣changeable in his Nature, Attribute, and Pro∣mises, yea whatsoever he hath revealed Himselfe to have bin, the same he is, and ever will be to his own for good, which fully answereth all supposi∣tions, objections, feares, and doubtings whatsoever, against the infallibility of the promises. I am the Lord, I change not, Mal. 3.6. With whom is no variablenesse, neither shadow of turning, Iam. 1.17. Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever, Hebr. 13.8. The gifts and calling of God are with∣out Repentance, Rom 11.29. Even from everlasting to everlasting thou art GOD, Psal 90.2. I the Lord the first, and with the last, I am he, Isa. 41.4. Twenty eight: and lstly, the Lord were not God, if he kept not his VVord. The strength of Jsrael will not lie nor
repent: for hee is not a man that he should repent, 1 Sam. 15.29. God is not a man that hee should lie, neither the Sonne of man that he should re∣pent: hath he sayd and shall hee not doe it, or hath he spoken and shall he not make it good? Num. 23.19. He abideth faithful, he cannot deny him∣selfe, 2 Tim. 2.13. I hope of eternall life which God that cannot lie promised before the word be∣gan, Tit. 1.2. Yee know it that no lie is of the truth, 1 Ioh. 2.21. Thus far of the undeniable proofe of the infallibi∣lity of the promises. Which being rightly under∣stood, seriously considered, and soundly applied, will throughly settle a true Christians heart, in and against the greatest calamities that can be∣fall him. Alas, for that day is great, so that none is like it, it is even the time of Iacobs trouble, but he shall be saved out of it. Ier. 30.7. Well, he that walketh in darknesse and hath no light, let him trust in the name of the Lord, and stay upon his God, Isa. 50.10.
And David was greatly distressed, but he incouraged himselfe in the Lord his God, 1 Sam. 30.6. Therefore I will looke unto the Lord, I will wait for the God of my salvation, my God will heare me. When I fall I shall rise, when I sit in darknesse, the Lord shall be a light unto me, Mich. 7.7, 8. Hee hath sayd hee will never leave thee, nor forsake thee: so that we may boldly say, the Lord is my helper, and I will not feare what man shall doe unto mee, Heb. 13.5, 6. Lord, with my soule have I desired thee, yea with my spirit within mee will I seeke thee early, Isa. 26.9. Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none upon Earth, that I desire be∣side thee, Ps. 73, 25. As thou hast promised (my God) be with me so will I be with thee. Iosh. 1.5.
To whom the Promises in Christ doe assuredly belong. OMitting all other, here are set down Divers choyse and infallible markes of upright∣nesse of heart, out of a true lively, justifying, sa∣ving faith in Christ, in whom and for whose sake alone all the promises are our portion: The which whosoever can finde in himselfe, may safely conclude he is in the savour of God, and shall be truly happy here and ever according to all his promises contained in his most holy VVord. Godlinesse is profitable unto all things having promise of the time that now is, and of that which is to come, 1 Tim. 4.8. The Scripture hath concluded all under sinne, that the promise by the Faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe. As many as walke according to this rule, peace be on them, and mercy, Gal. 6.16. The Lord God is a Sunne and shield the Lord will give grace and glory, and no good thing will he withhold to them that walke uprightly, Ps. 84.11.
And to him that ordereth his convers∣tion aright, wil I shew the salvation of God Ps. 50.23. First, to examine our selves so seriously and im∣partially (p) by the perfect rule o Gods Law (q) thereby to co to the knowledge of our most sinful (r) and write edstte (.s) (o) I commune with mine owne heart and my spirit made diligent search, Ps. 77.6. (p) Let us search, and try our wayes, Lam. 3.40. (q) The law of the Lord is perfect, Ps. 19.7. (r) By the Law is the knowledge of sinne, Rom. 3.20. (s) It is written, cursed is every one that continueth not in all things which are written in the Booke of the Law to doe them, Gal. 3.10. Second. To desire the Lord unfainedly (t) to ingage our hearts, and to reveale unto us our misdeeds, especially those most displeasing unto him (u) that herein we shall deale directly (w) as in the sight of God (x) who searcheth the heart and reines (y) not leaving back for any one respect. (z) (t) With mine whole heart have I sought thee, Ps. 119.10. (t) Examine me Lord and prove me, try
my reines and my heart, Psalme 26.2. (u) I acknowledge my sinne unto thee, and mine iniquity have I not hid: I said I will confesse my transgressions unto the Lord, Ps. 32.5. (w) Let my heart be sound in thy statutes, Psal. 119.80. (x) I have set the Lord alwayes before me. Psal. 16.8. (y) I the Lord search the heart, I try the reines, Ier. 17.10. (z) Though wickednesse be sweete in his mouth, though hee hide it under his tongue, though he spare it and forsake it not, but keepe it still within his mouth Iob. 20.12, 13. If I covered my transgression as Adam: by hiding my iniquity in my bosome, Iol. 31.33 (a) Third: to endeavor to confesse our sinnes with their circumstances (b) with godly sorrow (c) grieving that we can be no more grieved for them. (d) (a) Who confesseth and forsaketh them shal have mercy, Pro. 21.13. (b) We have sinned, and have committed ini∣quity, and have done wickedly, and have rebelled, even by departing from thy pre∣cepts,
and from thy judgements. Dan. 9.5 (c) Therefore now sayth the Lord turne ye unto me with all your heart, and with fast∣ing and with weeping, and with mour∣ning, Ioel. 2.12. (d) be afflicted and mourne and weepe: let your laughter be tureed into mourning, and your joy into heavinesse. Jam. 4.9. Oh that my head were water and mine eyes a fountaine of teares, &c. Ier. 9.1. See for all these, Ps. 51. Fourth. To resolve most seriously to sinne no more hereafter, as we have done heretofore (e) even as wee would God should forgive us our sinnes past, and not punish us for them. (e) I sayd I will take heede to my wayes, Psal. 39.1. I will set no wicked thing before mine eyes, Psal. 101.3. I have sworn and I will performe it, that I will keepe thy righteous judgements Psal. 119, 106. Sinne no more, lest a worse thing come un∣to thee, Ioh. 5.14. We will not ride upon horses, neither will we say any more to the worke of our hands, ye are our gods. Hos. 14.3.
Ephraim shal say, what have I to doe with Idole? Hos. 14.8. First, to study (f) purpose (g) pray (h) watch (i) endeavour (k) and practise (l) that all our wayes be ordered (m) as in Gods presence (n) according to his word (o) aiming at his glory (p) the edifying of others (q) in all good conscience (r) abhorring all by respects (s) labouring to ap∣prove our selves to him (t) and this in respect of his worship (v) of our particular calling (w) fa∣mily, carriage (x) and common conversation (y) by all meanes to draw nearer and to cleave faster to him (a) therefore for our furtherance in knowledge and practise in our whole duty to ex∣ercise our selves in Gods Word carefully and con∣stantly. (b) (f) I thought on my wayes and turned my feet unto thy Testimonies. Ps. 119.59. (g) And exhorted them all that with pur∣pose of heart, they would cleave unto the Lord, Acts, 11.23. (h) Teach me O Lord the way of thy sta∣tutes, and I will keepe it unto the end; give me understanding and I shall keepe thy Law; yea I shall obserue it with my whole heart, Ps. 119.33.34. (i) Take heed to thy selfe and keepe thy
soule diligently, lest thou forget, Deut. 4.9.23. Watch and pray, Mat. 26.41. And what I say unto you, I say unto all, watch Mar. 13.37. (k) Herein doe I exercise my selfe to have alwayes a good conscience voyd of of∣fence toward God and toward men, Act. 24.16. (l) You shall observe to doe therefore as the Lord your God hath commanded you: you shal not turne aside to the right hand or to the left, Deut. 5.32. (m) Order my steps in thy word: and let not any iniquity have dominion over me Ps. 119.133. Therefore shall ye observe all my statutes and all my judgements, and doe them, I am the Lord, Levit. 19.7. (n) But as of sincerity, but as of God, in the sight of God, 2 Cor. 2.17. I have walked before thee in truth, and have done that which is good in thy sight, Isa. 38.3. (o) Thy word is a lamp unto my feete and a light unto my path, Ps. 119.105. We have also a more sure word of pro∣phecy,
whereunto yee doe well that yee take heed, 2 Pet. 1.19. (p) Whatsoever yee doe, doe all to the glory of God, 1 Cor. 10.31. (q) Let no man seeke his own, but every man anothers wealth, 1 Cor. 20.24. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glo∣rifie your Father which is in Heaven, Mat. 5.16. (r) I have lived in all good conscience be∣fore God untill this day, Act. 23.1. (s) I love thy commandements above gold, yea above fine gold, Ps. 119.127. (t) Not he that commendeth himselfe is approved, but whom the Lord commen∣deth, 1 Co. 10.18. (v) In vaine doe they worship me, teaching for Doctrines the Commandements of men, Mat. 15.9. God is a Spirit and they that worship him, must worship him in spirit and truth Ioh. 4.24. This I confesse that after the was that they call heresie, so worship I the God of my Fathers, Act. 24.14. (w) Yet know that with all my power I
have served your Father: Thus I was in the day the drought consumed me, and the frost by night, and my sleep departed from me; thus I have been twenty yeares in thy house, Gen. 31.6.40.41. Then the presidents and princes sought to finde occasion against Daniel concer∣ning the kingdome, but they could finde no occasion nor fault, forasmuch as he was faithfull, neither was there any error or fault found in him, Dan. 6.4. (x) I will behave my selfe wisely in a per∣rect way, O when wilt thou come unto me? I will walke within my house with a perfect heart, Ps. 101.2. And I know him, that he will command his children and his houshould after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord, Gen. 18.19. (y) for our rejoycing is in this the testimony of our conscience that in simplicity, and godly sincerity not with fleshly wisdow, but by the grace of God, we have had our conversation in the World, 2 Co. 1.12. Having your conversation honest among the Gentiles that whereas they speake a∣gainst you as evill doers, they may by
your good workes which they shall be∣hold, glorifie God in the day of visitati∣on, 1 Pet. 2.12. Ever follow that which is good both a∣mong your selves & all men, 1 Thes. 5.15. (a) It is good for me to draw neere to God, Ps. 73.28. Thou thalt feare the Lord thy God, him shalt thou serve, and to him shalt thou cleave, Deut. 18.20. (b) This Booke of the law shall not depart out of thy mouth, but thou shalt medi∣tate therein day and night, that thou mayest observe to doe according to all that is written therein. Josh. 1.8. But his delight is in the law of the Lord, and in his Law doth hee meditate day and night. Ps. 1.2. I will meditate in thy precepts, and have respect unto my wayes, Ps. 119.15. Sixth, to have respect unto all Gods commande∣ments (c) and to turne from every evill way (d) avoyding the practise of every grosse sin (e) and the occasions thereof (f) and all appearance of evill (g) not willfully allowing our selves in the least evill against conscience (h) nor to take settled likeing in any evill motion (i) or to dally
with contemplative wickednesse (k) or dispensing with our selves in the omitting of any warrant∣able duty (l) at least in every one of these with full purpose of heart to feare, serve, and cleave unto the Lord (m). (c) Then shall I not be ashamed when I have respect to all thy Comandements, Ps 11.6. What doth the Lord thy God require of thee but to seare the Lord thy God to walke in all his wayes, Deut. 10.12. All that the Lord hath sayd, will we doe, and be obedient, Ex. 24.7. And in all things that I have sayd unto you, be circumspect, Ex. 22.13. (d) I have refrayned my feet from every evill way, Ps. 119.101. I will e  wicked thing before mine eyes, Ps. 101.3. () Keepe back thy servant also from pre∣sumptuous sinnes, let them not have do∣minion over me, Ps. 19.13. (f) And it came to passe as she spake to Joseph day by day, that he hearkened not unto her, to he by her, or to be with her, Gen 39.10. (g) Abstaine from all appearance of evill, 1 Thess. 5.22.
(h) I was also upright before him: and I kept my selfe from mine iniquity, Psal. 18.23. Whosoever therefore shall breake one of these least Commandements, and shal teach men so, he shall be called the least in the kingdome of Heaven, but whoso ever shall doe and teach them, the same shall be called great in the Kingdome of heaven, Mat. 5.19. (i) If I regard iniquity in my heart the Lord will not heare me, Psal. 66.18. Yee that love the Lord hate evil, Psalme 97.10. (k) Wash thy heart from wickednesse, how long shall vaine thoughts lodge in thee? Ier. 4.4. (l) But the man that is cleane, and is not in a journey, and forbeareth to keepe the passover, even the same soule shall be cut off from his people, Num, 19.3. And it came to psse by the way in the Inne, that the Lord met him and sought to kill him &c. Ex. 4.24. (m) Yee shall walke after the Lord your God and feare him, and keepe his Com∣mandements, and obey his voyce, and
you shall serve him, and cleave unto him, Deut. 13.4. Seaventh: That we finde nothing to trouble us more then to have sinned (n) and can have no rest till peace be renewed by renowed presence (o) be∣ing more watchfull afterwards not to offend so againe. (p) (n) Have mercy upon me Lord, for I am weake? O Lord heale me for my bones are vexed, Ps. 6.2. I acknowledge my transgressions, and my sin is ever before me: against thee only have I sinned and done evill in thy sight, Psa. 51.3.4. (o) There is no soundnesse in my flesh be∣cause of thine anger, neither is there any rest in my bones because of my sin, mine iniquities are gon over my head, as an heavy burthen they are, too heavy for me Psal 38.3.4. Returne O Lord, deliver my soule, O save me for thy mercies sake, psal, 6.4. When I kept silence my bones waxed old, for day and night thy hand was hea¦vy upon me; I acknowledged my sin un∣to thee and mine iniquity have I not hid, I sayd I will confesse my transgressions
unto the Lord and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin, Ps. 32.3, 4, 5. Come unto me all yee that labour, and are heavy laden and I will give you rest, Mat. 11.28. (p) And all Israel shall heare and feare, and shall doe no more any such wick∣ednesse as this, Deut. 13.11. And all the people shall heare, and feare, and do no more presumptuously, Deut. 17 13. Ponder the path of thy feet, and let all thy wayes be established, Pro. 4.26. Eight: In all wholly to deny our own wisedome (q) and strength (r) desiring and relying upon the direction (s) and power of the Lord alone (t) for the discharge of our duty. (u) (q) Leane not unto thine own understand∣ing: be not wise in thine own eyes, Pr. 3.5.7. Neither make thy selfe overwise, Eccles 7.16. (r) Not that we are sufficient of our selves  think any thing as of our selves, 2 Cor. 3. Without me ye can doe nothing, Ioh, 15.. (s) Cause me to know the way, wherein should walke, for I lift up my soule  thee Ps. 143 8.
In all thy wayes acknowledge him and he shall direct thy paths, Pro. 3.6. (t) Be strong in the Lord and in the power of his might, Eph. 6.16. I can doe all things through Christ which strengtheneth me, Phil. 4.13. Our sufficiency is of God, 2 Cor. 3.5. The Lord is my strength and shield, my heart trusted in him, and I am helped, psal 28.7. (u) I will cry unto God most high: unto God that performeth all things for me, psal. 57.2. Ninth: Lastly, and above all, in all our faylings, by prayer to desire (w) and by faith apply (x) the free grace the rich mercy (y) infinite love (a) un∣deserved favour (b) unchangeable goodnesse (c) tender compassions (d) of our God (e) in Iesus Christ (f) for remission (g) Sanctification (h) acceptation and a blessing (i) yea for all good things revealed and assured to us in his most ho∣ly word, so giving the Lord all the glory according to the same (b). (w) Be mercifull unto me O God be merci¦full unto me for my soule trusteth in thee. () In whom we have boldnesse and ac∣ the faith of him ph. 3.52.
He staggered not at the promise of God through unbeliefe; but was strong in faith, giving glory to God, Ro. 4.20. (y) Therefore it is of Faith that it might be by grace, Rom. 4.16. Where sin abounded grace did much more abound, Rom. 5.20. There is a remnant according to the election of grace, and if by grace, their it is no more of workes; otherwise grace is no more grace, but if it be of workes then it is no more of grace, Ro, 115.6. But by the grace of God I am that I am 1 Cor. 15.10. Not I, but the grace of God which was with me, Idem, my grace is sufficient for thee, 2 Cor. 129. To the prayse of the glory of his grace wherein he hath made us accepted in the Beloved: in whom we have redem∣tion through his blood, the forgivenesse of sinnes, according to the riches of his grace, Eph. 1, 6 7. By grace yee are saved; That in the ages to come hee might shew the exceeding riches of his grace in his kindnesse to∣wards us through Cist Jesus, for by
grace yee are saved through Faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God; not of workes lest any man should boast. (z) But God who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith he loved us, Eph. 2.4. The same Lord over all is rich unto all, Rom. 10.12. (a) Can a Woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the son of her wombe? Yea, they may forget, yet will I not forget thee, Isa. 49.15. But God commendeth his love towards us, in that while we were yet sinners Christ died for us, Rom. 5.8. Behold what manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us, that we should be called the sonnes of God, 1 Iohn 3.1. (b) I will love them freely, Hos. 14.4. Thus sayth the Lord God I doe not this for your sakes O house of Israel, but for mine holy Namessake, which yee have prophaned, Ezek. 36.22.
The Lord did not set his love upon you, nor choose you because yee were more in number then any people, but be∣cause the Lord loved you. Denetronomy, 7, 7, 8. (c) I have loved thee with an everlasting love, Ier. 31.3. Having loved his own, which were in the World, he loved them unto the end, Ioh. 13.1. O how great is thy goodnesse which thou hast layd up for them that feare thee? Ps. 31.19. The goodnesse of God endureth conti∣nually, psal. 52.1. (d) He being full of compassion forgave their iniquity and destroyed them not, psal. 78.38. But thou O Lord art a God full of com∣passion and gracious, long suffering and plenteous in mercy and truth, psal. 86.15. & 145.8. Let thy tender mercies speedily prevent us, ps. l. 79.8. Remember, O Lord, thy tender mercies, and thy loving kindnesses, psal. 25.6.
According to the multitude of thy ten∣der mercies, psal. 51.1. Who crowneth thee with loving kind∣nesse and tender mercies, psal. 103.4. The Lord is good to all, and his tender mercies are over all his workes, psal. 145.9. (e) He that is our God is the God of salvati∣on, psal. 86.20. Lo this is our God, we have wayted for him, and he will save us, Isa. 25.9. For this God is our God for ever and ever, psal. 48.14. (f) But to us, there is but one God the Fa∣ther, of whom are all things, and we in him, and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things and we by him, 1 Cor. 8.6. Christ is all, and in all, Col. 3.11. But of him are yee in Christ Jesus who of God is made unto us, wisedome, and righteousnesse, and sanctification, and redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30. (g) Whosoever believeth in him, shall re∣ceive remission of sins, Acts 10.43. Him hath God exalted with his right hand to be a Prince and a Saviour, for to
give repentance to Israel, and forgive∣nesse of sins, Acts 5.31. In whom we have redemption through his blood, the forgivenesse of sins, Eph. 1.7. Col. 1.14. (h) See 1 Cor. 1.30. as to letter (f.) (i) To the prayse of the glory of his grace, wherein he hath made us accepted in the beloved, Eph. 1.6. Acceptable to God by Jesus Christ, 1 pet. 2.5. (k) God having raysed up his Sonne Jesus sent him to blesse you, Acts 3.26. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who hath blessed us with all spirituall blessings in heavenly places in Christ, Eph. 1.3. (l) In God I will prayse his word, in the Lord will I praise his word, psalme. 56.10.4. Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but un∣to thy Name give glory, for thy mercy, and for thy truths sake psal. 115.1. This is that faith that purisieth the heart (l) that worketh by love (m) that is full of good workes (n) that procures us peace (o) and that entitles us to the promises (p) and our case standing thus
we may, we must confidently and comfortably con∣clude, the Lord is our God (q) himselfe and his word is our portion (r) and that we shall finde him every way good unto us according to the same, and every part thereof (s) in due time (t) notwithstand∣ing all our unworthinesse (u) and all other im∣possibilities (w) as shall be most for his glory (x) and our salvation (y) for though Heaven and Earth should faile, not one jot or tittle of his word shall fayle till all be fulfilled (z) therefore O my soule doe not feare, faint or doubt (a) but hope be∣yond hope (b) believe beyond sence (c) and with an holy carelesnesse cast thy care on God who ca∣reth for thee (d) who hath never fayled thee (e) who (f) never will forget or forsake thee, so shalt thou live by most comfortable experience (g) in the Lord to praise his word (h) and for his word to praise the Lord (i) and goe all how it will, all shall go well. (k) (l) Purifying their hearts by Faith, Acts 15.9. (m) Faith which worketh by love, Gal. 5.6. (n) That yee might walke worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing, fruitfull in every good work, Col. 1.10. (o) Therefore being justifyed by Faith we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ, Rom. 5.1.
(p) That the promise by faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that be∣lieve, Gal. 3.22. All the promises of God in him are yea, and in him are amen, 2 Co. 1.20. (q) In God is my salvation and my glory, the rock of my strength and my resuge is in God, psal. 61.7. My God shall be my strength, Isa. 49.5. My Lord and my God, Ioh. 20.28. O my Soule, thou hast sayd unto the Lord thou art my Lord, psal. 16.2. O Lord I sayd thou art my God, psal. 31.14. (r) God is the strength of my heart and my portion for ever, psal. 73.26. Thou art my portion O Lord, psalme 119.57. This is my comfort in my assliction, for thy word hath quickned me, psal. 119.50. () There sayled not ought of any good thing which the Lord had spoken, all came to passe, Josh. 21.45. () The Vsion is yet for an appointed time, but at the end it shall speak, and not lie; though it tarry, wait for it, because it will surely come, it will not tarry, Hab. 2.3.
In due season we shall reape if we faint not. Gal. 6.9. (u) For mine own sake, even for mine own sake I will doe it, Isa. 48.11. I had pity for my holy Name, which the house of Israel had prophaned, Ezek. 36.21. (w) I will worke, and who shall let it? Isa. 43.13. (x) For of him, and through him, and to him are all things, to whom be glory for ever, Rom. 12.36. () I know that this shall turne to my sal∣vation, phil. 1.19. We know that al thig worke together for good to them that love God, Rom. 8 28. () Verily I say to you, till heaven and Earth passe, one jotor one tittle shall in no wise passe from the Law, till all be fullfilled. Mat. 5 18. () Have not I commanded thee? be strong and of a good courage be not affrayd, neither be thou dismayed, for the Lord thy Gd is with thee whither soever thou goest, Ish. .9. Why art thou cast down O my soule,
and why art thou disquieted within me? hope thou in God, for I shall yet prayse him, who is the health of my counte∣nance and my God, psal. 43.5. (b) Who against hope believed in hope, Rom. 4, 18. (c) Being fully perswaded that what he had promised, he was able also to performe, Ro. 4.21. (d) Casting all your care upon him, for hee careth for you. () According to all that he promised there hath not failed one good word of all his good promise, which hee promised 1 Kings. 8.56 () He hath said, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee, Heb. 13.5. (g) I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my countenance and my God, psal. 4.11. Hee will bring me forth to the light, and I shall behold his righteousnesse, Micha. 7 9 (h) In God will spraise his word, in the Lord will I prayse his word, psa. 56.10. () Blssed be the Lord God, which spake with his mouth and hath with his hand fulfilled it 1 King 8.15.
(k) Surely I know it shall be well with them that seare God, Eccl. 8.12. Say yee to the righteous that it shall be well with him. 3.10. Thus far to whom the promises doe (in Christ assuredly belong. To whom the promises belong not. THese most pretious pearles are not for filthy Swine, neither is this childrens bread for dogs () ll unregenerate men that live in their sins without repentance are strangers from the Cove∣nant of promise, and have no part in the Testa∣ment, they have no hope, but are without God in the World (m) Therefore I besch and warn you (as I doe mine own soule, to lay this seriously to heart, (n) lest we miserably deceive our selves (o) and lose our labour (p) for this is certaine, if we dare to live in any one sin with∣out Repentance in stead of the promised blessings we may look for threatned vengeance: and whoso∣ever cannot (as none such can) rightly lay hol on the promised comforts, may justly expect the plagues according to the contrary threatring
(q) this is a maine point, and worthy our best con∣sideration (r). (l) Give not that which is holy unto dogs, neither cast ye your pearls before Swine, Math. 7.6. It is not meete to take the childrens bread, and to cast it to dogs, Mat. 15.26. (m) Yee were without Christ, being aliens from the Common Wealth of Israel, and strangers from the covenants of promise, having no hope, and without God in the World, Eph. 2.12. () Meditate upon these things, give thy selfe wholly to them, 1 Tim. 4.15. () Benot deceived, God is not mocked; for whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reape Gal. 6.7. () Turne yee not aside, for then should yee goe after vaine things which cannot profit nor deliver, for they are vaine, 1 Sam. 12.21. I will declare thy righteousnesse, and thy workes: for they shall not profit thee, Isa. 57.12. The wages of sin is death, Ro. 6.23. (q) For it is written, Deut. 27.26. Cursed is every one that continueth not in all
things, which are written in the Booke of the law to doe them, Gal 3.10. Whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point is guilty of all, Iam. 2.10. Compare, Deut. 28. ve. 1. ver. 25. With v. 15. To the end. See especially ver. 8. & 61. (r) Who so is wise and will observe those things, even they shall understand the loving kindnesse of the Lord, Psalme 107.43. Who is wise and hee shall understand these things? prudent and he shall know them? for the wayes of the Lord are right, and they shall walke in them, Hos. 14.9. Now consider this, yee that forget God, lest I teare you in pieces and there be none to help, psal. 50.22. That they may see, and know, and con∣sider, and understand together, &c. Isa. 41.20.
Divers necessary Rules for the right applying of the Promises. FIrst, in generall, seeing it hath pleased God () in his word to make promise of good things (t) more then we could aske or thinke (u) we shall want nothing that is good (w) and whatsoever commeth shall be for our good. (x) (s) Having made known unto us the myste∣ry of his wil, according to his good plea∣sure which he had purposed in himselfe, Eph. 1.9. I thanke thee O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, because thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent and hast revealed them unto babes even so Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight Mat. 11.25, 26. (t) The Lord thy God blesseth thee, as he premised thee, Deut. 15.6. VVhereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious promises, 2 pet. 1.4. (u) Unto him that is able to doe exceeding abundantly, above all that we can aske or think, Epl. 3.20.
(w) Lord is my Sheapheard I shall not want, Psal. 23.1. They that seeke the Lord shall not want any good thing, Psal. 34.10. No good thing will he withold from them that walke uprightly, Psal. 84.11. (x) And surely I know that it shall be well with them that feare God, Ecle. 8.12. Say yee to the righteous that it shall be wel with him, Isa. 3.10. We know that all things work together for good to them that love God, Ro. 8.22. In spirituall things:  if any fall into sin so as he had no hope of pardon or amende∣ment, yet to believe so as to rest upon Gods promises, for both. (y) Who is among you, &c. That walketh in darkenesse and hath no light? Let him trust in the Name of the Lord and stay upon his God, Isa. 50.10. Therefore I will looke upon the Lord: I will wait for the God of my salvation, Micab. 7.7. (z) In temporall things, in greatest out∣ward calamities, when we see no way of helpe, yet to believe that God will surely helpe one way or other, y.
(z) O our God we have no might, &c. Nei∣ther know wee what to doe, but our eyes are upon thee, 1 Chro. 20.12. He shall deliver the needy when he cri∣eth, the poore also and him that hath no helper, Psal. 72.12. I looked on my right hand and beheld: but there was no man that would know me, refuge fayled me, no man careth for my soule, I cried unto thee O Lord, I sayd thou art my refuge, Psalme 142.4.5. If thou altogether holdest thy peace all this time, then shall there inlargement and deliverance arise from some other place, Hest 4.14. Alas for that day is great, so that none is like it, it is even the time of Iacobs trouble, but he shall be saved out of it, Iere. 30.7. Briefly, if we will profite by the promises thus collected to our hands, let us wisely and carefully use these few briete and well warranted rules following. We must labour to understand the premises right∣ly (a) remember them seasonably (b) believe them faithfully, (c) weigh our own condition seriously,
(d) what good Word of God is made thereto dis∣creetly, (e) applying that to the same power∣fully (f) praying over them often and earnestly. (g) resting thereon steadfastly (h) submitting to Gods will wholly, (i) awayting the performance patiently (k) in the use of all good meanes conscio∣nably (l) when God maketh good any promise to give him the glory of his truth only (m) for every one of these to pray fervently, frequently, and constantly (n) for wisedome (o) disposition (p) and strength (q) to conceive (r) believe (s) and doe accordingly. (t) (a) That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ the Father of glory, may give unto you the spirit of wisdome, and revelation in the knowledge of him, Eph. 1.17. Wisdome is the principall thing, there∣fore get wisdom, and with all thy get∣ting, get understanding pro. 4.7.5. (b) Remember the word which Moses the servant of the Lord commanded you, &c. Iosh. 1.14. Remember the word that I sayd unto you, Ioh. 15.20. These things have I told you, that when the time shall come, yee my remember that I told you of them, Joh. 16.4.
(c) Believe in the Lord your God so shall you be established, believe his Prophes so shall yee prosper, 2 Chron. 20.20. Wherefore sirs, be of good courage, for I believe God, that it shall be even as it was told me, Acts 27.45. (d) Commune with your owne heart. Psal. 4.4. I communed with mine owne heart, and my spirit made diligent search: is his mercy cleane gone for ever, doth his promise faile for evermore? Psalme. 77.58. (e) In the multitude of my thoughts with∣in me, thy comforts delight my soule, Psal. 94.19. (f) I know that my redeemer liveth, &c. Iob. 19.25.26, 27. Jesus Christ came into the World to save sinners, of whom I am chiefe, 1 Time. 1.15. Hee hath sayd I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee, therefore we may bold∣ly say, the Lord is my helper, and I will not feare what man shall doe unto me, Heb. 13.5.6. (g) Therefore now Lord let the thing that
thou hast spoken concerning thy servant, and doe as thou hast sayd, 1 Chron. 17.23. See to the end of that, Chap. and ver. 17. Establish thy word unto thy servant, let thy mercies come also to me O Lord, even thy salvation according to thy word. Remember thy word unto thy servant, upon which thou hast caused me to hope, Psal. 119.38.41.49. See 25.76 116.154. Verses. (h) He that walketh in darkenesse and hath no light, let him trust in the Name of the Lord, and stay upon his God, Isa. 50.10. Therefore I will looke unto the Lord, I will wait for the God of my salvation, my God will heare mee: rejoyce not against me O mine enemy, when I fall I shall arise, when I sit in darkenesse the Lord shall be a light unto me, Micah. 7.7.8. Being fully perswaded that what God had promiseth, he was able also to per∣forme, Rom. 4.21. See 18, 19, 20. Verses. (i) It is the Lord: let him doe what seem∣eth him good, 1 Sam. 3.18. 2 Sam. 10.12.15.26.
Good is the word of the Lord, which thou hast spoken, 2 Ki. 20.19. O my Father, if it be possible, let this cup passe from me, never the lesse not as I will, but as thou wilt, Mat. 26.39. (k) For yee have need of patience, that after yee have done the will of God yee might receive the promise, Heb. 10.36. Rest in the Lord and wait patiently for him, psal. 37.7.34.33.20. O Lord be gratious unto us, we have waited upon thee, Is. 33.2. Mich. 7.7. (l) Trust in the Lord, and doe good, so shalt thou dwell in the Land, and verily thou shalt be fed, Psal. 37.3. He shall give his Angels charge over thee to keep thee in all thy wayes, Psal. 91.11. Arise therefore and be doing, and the Lord be with thee, 2 Cron. 22 16. (m) Thou hast dealt wel with thy servant, O Lord, according to thy word, Psalme, 119.65. In God will I prayse his word, in the Lord will I praise his word, Ps. 56.10. (n) Call unto me, and I will answer thee, and shew thee great and mighty things that thou knowest not. Ier. 33.3. See Iob. 8 5.7.
Evening and morning and at noone will I pray, and cry aloud, and he shall heare my voyce, Psal. 55.17. See. Pro. 2.3 4. Continue in praying, Col 4.2. See, Eph. 6.18. (o) If any of you lack wisdome, let him aske of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not, and it shall be given him, Iam. 1.5. I am thy servant, give me understanding that I may know thy Testimonies, Psal. 119.125.18. Give therefore thy servant an under∣standing heart, 1. Ki. 3 9. () Incline my heart unto thy Testimonies, Pal. 119 36. (q) Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may obtaine mercy and finde grace to help in time of need, Heb. 4.16. (r) Teach me good judgement and know∣ledge: give me understanding according to thy word, Psal. 119.66.169. () Lord, I believe; help thou mine unbelief, Mar. 9.24. (t) Give me understanding and I shall keepe thy Law, yea I shall observe it with my whole heart, Psal. 119.34.
Doe not my words doe good to him that walkes uprightly. But for further helpe every manner of way, in the right understanding and use of the Pro∣mises I most earnestly commend, Master Cul∣verwells and Master Balls Treatises of Faith, also Master Byfields Treatise called the Pro∣mises, and Doctor Gouges whole Armour  God, especially that part thereof, where h Treats of the shield of saith. Now follow the promises themselves as fitly and orderly, as J was able to digest them. THe first maine part containing Generall pro∣mises to be applied upon any accasion, in case for the present we cannot remember the par∣ticular promises concerning our present necessities and this part hath these foure Branches. 1. Safety from Evill. (v) 2. Removall of Evill. (w) 3. Supply of all good. (x) 4. A turning all to our good. (y)
As our God sees most for our good. (z) () But the Lord is faithfull who shall stablish you, and keepe you from evill, 2 Thss. 3 3. Thou art my biding place, thou shalt pre∣serve me from trouble, Psal. 32.7. There shall no evill befall thee, Psalme, 91.1. () God will redeeme my soule from the power of the grave for he shall redeeme me, Psal. 49.15. Many are the afflictions of the righte∣ons; but the Lord delivereth him out of them all, Psal. 34.19.17.6. ver. I wil be with him in trouble, I will deli∣ver , Psal. 9.15. (x) There is no want to them that feare him, Psal. 34.9. They that seeke the Lord shall not want any good thing, Ver. 10. The Lord is my Sheapheard, I shall not want, Psal. 23.1. The Lord is a Sunne and Shield, the Lord will give grace and glory, no good thing will he withold from them that walke uprightly, Psal. 84.11. But seeke yee first the Kingdome of God
and his righteousnesse, and all these things shall be added unto you. Math, 6.33. My God shall supply all your need, ac∣cording to his riches in glory by Christ Jesus, Phil. 4.19. Casting all your care upon him, for he careth for you, 1 Pet. 5.7. He hath said, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee; so that we may boldly say, the Lord is my helper, &c. Heb. 13.5.6. O Israel thou hast destroyed thy selfe, but in me is thy helpe, Hose. 13.9. All are yours. 1 Cor. 3.22. He that spared not his own Sonne, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all things? Rom. 8.32. (y) We know that all things worke toge∣ther for good to them that love God, Rom. 8.28. I know it will be well with them that feare God, Ecle. 8.12. Say yee to the righteous that it shal be wel with him Isa. 3.10. Mke the perfect man, and behold the upright rth end of that man is peace, P 37.37.
() Now therefore be not grieved nor an∣gry with your selves that yee sold me hither, for God did send me before you to preserve life. So now it was not you that sent me hi∣ther, but God, Gen. 45.5.8. But as for you, you thought evil against me, but God meant it unto good, Gen. 50.20. The Lord shal give that which is good, Psal. 85.12. See al those proofes, of Letter. y. The second maine part containing such Promises as assure us freedome, 1. from the pollution. 2. from the punishment, from the power of sin. First, from the Pollution of sin, as 1. THat we shall know (o) remember (p) b hamed of (q) loath our selves for () b confounded in our selves from our sins. () () He sheweth them their Transgressions, Iob. 36.9.
(p) Then thou shalt remember thy wayes, Ezek. 16.61. Yee shall remember al your doings wherein you have beene defiled, Ezek. 20.43. Yee shall remember your owne evill wayes, and your doings that were not good, Ezek. 36.31. (q) Thou shalt remember thy wayes, and be ashamed, Ezek. 16.61. (r) Yee shall loath your selves in your own sight, for al your evils that you have com∣mitted, Ezek. 20.43. () That thou mayest be confounded and never open thy mouth any more, Ezek. 16.63. I abhor my selfe, Iob. 42.6. 2. That we shall confesse our sinnes (t) with di∣ligence (u) and the sinnes of our Fathers (w) That we shall be humblea (x) and mourne (y) and weep for our sins (z) and acknowledge Gods judgements to be due unto us for them (a.s (t) They shal confesse their iniquity, Levi. 26.40. (u) In their affliction they will seeke me di∣ligently, Hos. 5.15. () They shall confesse the iniquity of their Father, Levit. 26.40.
(x) If then their uncircumcised bearts be humbled, Levit. 26.41. (y) They shal mourn for him (viz. Christ who was pierced for their sins,) as one mourn∣eth for his only son, and shall be in bit∣ternesse for him, as one that is in bitter∣nesse for his first borne, &c. . Zec. 12.10 (z) They shal come with weeping, Ieremy, 31.9. In that time sayth the Lord, the children of Israel; shal come, they and the chil∣dren of Judah together, going, and weep∣ing, Je. 50.4. (a. 6.) Yee shal loath your selves in your own sight, for al your evils that you have committed, Ezek. 20.43. & 36.31. 3. That the Lord will forgive all our sins in ge∣neral (b) our back slidings (c) these particular sins viz. Originall sin (d) ignorance (e) blasphemy () dolatry (g) uncleannesse (h) unrighteousnesse () Vowing, swearing▪ rashly, lying, fraud, rob∣ery, violence oppression, perjury () The sins of our oly duties. () yea every particular sin (m) al∣hough our sins be never so hainous (n) yea, that all our sins are forgiven us, only for Iesus Christ his sake who suffered for them. (o) (b) The Lord, who forgive ll thine ini∣qies Psal. 10.3.
He shal redeeme Israel from al his ∣quities, Psal. 130.8. Who is a God like unto thee, that par doneth iniquity, and passeth by trans∣gression? Mica. 7.18. Thou wilt cast a our sinnes into the depths of the Sea Verse 19. All manner of sinne shal be forgiven un∣to you, Mat. 12.31. I wil forgive their iniquity, and remem∣ber their sin no more, Ie 31.34. See 50.20. & Isa. 40.2. & 43.25. Mark. 2.5 & 3.28. Heb. 8.12. & 10.17. And be said unto her. Thy sinnes are forgiven, Luk. 7.48. So also. c. 5.20. & 12.10. (c) I wil heale your backslidings, I. 3.22. & 33.8. To the Lord our God belong mercies and forgivenesse, though we have rebel∣led against him, Dan. 9.9. If any say, I have sinned, and perverted that which was right, he (God) wil de∣liver his soule from going into the pit, &c. Iob. 33.27.28, 29, 30. See Deut. 4.30.31. (d) If through the offence of one, many be
dead, much more the grace of God, and the gift by grace, by one man Jesus Christ hath abounded to many; The judgement was by one to condem∣nation, the free gift is of many offences to justification, Ro. 5.15.16. (e) If a Soule shal sinne through ignorance against any of the Commandements of the Lord, Levit. 4.2. if it be the whole congregation, ver. 13. if it be a Ruler ver. 22. or if it be any one of the common people, ve. 27. Atonement shal be made for them and it shall be forgiven them, v, 20.26.31.35. (f) All blasphemies wherewith soever men blaspheme, shal be forgiven them, Mark. 3.28. so Mat. 12.13. (g) From al your idols wil I cleanse you, Ezek. 36.25. See also Deut. 4.28.29.31. (h) From al your filthinesse wil I cleanse you, Ezek. 36.25. And I wil save you from al your uncleannesses, v. 29. There shal a Fountaine be opened to the house of David for sin, and for unclean∣nesse, Zech. 13.1. (i) I wil be mercifull to their unrighteous∣nesse, Heb. 8.12.
If we confesse our sins, he is faithful and just, to cleanse us from al unrighteous∣nesse, 1 Joh. 1.9. (k) If a Soule sweare, pronouncing with hi Lips (or vowing) to doe evil or to doe good: And he shal confesse that he hath sinned in that thing. The Priest shal make an atonement for him, for his sin, and it shal be forgiven him, Leu. 5.4.5.10. If a Soule sin, and lie unto his neigh∣bour in that which was delivered him to keepe, or in dealing, or in a thing taken away by violence, or hath deceived his neighbour, or have found that which was lost and lieth concerning it and sweareth falsely. Then it shal be if he shal restore that which hee tooke violently away, or the thing which he hath de∣ceitfully gotten, or that which was de∣livered him to keepe, or as a lost thing which he found, or all that about which he hath sworne falsely; he shal even re∣store it in the principal, and shal adde the fifth part more thereto, and give it unto him to whom it appertaineth, and atonement shal be made for him, and it shal be forgiven him, Lev. 6.2.3.4.5.7.
() That Aaron may beare the iniquity of the holy things, which the children of Israel shal hallow in al their holy gifts, Exod. 28.38. (m) All manner of sin shal be forgiven unto you, Mat. 12.31. (n) The Lord, the Lord God merciful and gratious, long suffering and abundant in goodnesse, forgiving iniquity, trans∣gression, and sin, Ex. 34.6.7. Though your sins be as Scarlet, they shal be as white as Snow, though they be red like crimson, they shal be as Wool. Isa. 1.18. I have blotted out as a thick Cloud thy transgressions and as a Cloud thy si. Isa. 44.22. See Je. 33.8. (o) With his stripes we are healed: The Lord hath laid on him the iniquity of us al: For the transgression of my people was he stricken; He shal beare their ini∣quitles, Isa. 53.5, 6.8.11. He shal save his people from their sins, Mt. 1.21. This is my bloud, which is shed for ma∣ny, for the remission of sins, Mat. 26.28. See Lu. 22.19.20.
The Son of man came to give his Life, a ransom for many, Mark 10.45. And that remission of sinnes should be preached in his name, Lu. 24.47. See Act. 2.38. & 10.43. & 13.38. Behold the Lambe of God which taketh away the sinne of the World, Iohn. 1.29. Him hath God exalted to be a Prince and a Saviour, to gve forgivenesse of sins, Acts 5.31. Who was delivered for our offences, and raised againe for our justification, Rom. 4.25. & 8.32. Christ dyed for our fins, 1 Cor. 15.3. & Rom. 5.8. He hath made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousnesse of God, in him, 2 Cor. 5.21 In whom we have redemption through his bloud, even the forgivenesse of sins, Co. 1.14. & 1 Pet. 1.18.19. Who gave himselfe for our sins, Gal. 1.4. & Tit. 2.14. Christ was once offered to beare the sins of many, Heb. 9.28. See 1 Pet. 2.24. & 3.18.
The bloud of Jesus Christ cleanseth us from al sin, 1 Ioh. 1.7. Se c. 2.12. & 3.5. & Re. 1.5. Thus ar of our freedom from the Pol∣lution of sin. Secondly, from the Punishment of sinne: as 1. THat the Lord will have compassion upon us (p) and be gracious and mercifull unto us (q) that he will deferre his anger (r) and turne away the same from us (s) and will spare us (t) and forgive the punishment of our iniqui∣ties (u) and not destroy us. (w) (p) He wil have compassion upon us, Mica. 7.19. See Deut. 13.17 &. Psal. 103.8. (q) Therefore wil the Lord waite that he may be gratious unto you, and there∣fore will he be exalted that he may have mercy upon you, Isa. 30.18. The Lord is merciful and gratious, Psal. 103.8. So Deut. 13.17. (r) For my names sake wil I deferre mine anger, and for my praise sake wil I re∣fraine for thee, Isa. 48.9. The Lord is slow to anger, Ps. 103.8.
(s) That the Lord may turne from the fierce∣nesse of his anger, Deut. 13.17. I wil heale their backsliding, for mine anger is turned away from him, Hose. 14.4. So Isa. 12.1. (t) I wil spare them, as a man spareth his own son, that serveth him, Mal. 3.17. (u) Thou forgavest the punishment of my sin Psal. 32.5. (w) The Lord thy God is a merciful God, he wil not destroy thee, Deut. 4.31. So Ex. 34.7. & Numb. 14.18. & Mi. 7.18. I wil not cause mine anger to fal upon you, Ier. 3.12. & Isa. 54.9. & 56.57. & Hose. 11.9. & Psal. 103.9.10. Repent, so iniquity shal not be your ruine, Ez. 18.30. The Lord is gracious and merciful and repenteth him of the evil, Ioel. 2.13. & Iona. 3.9.10. & Ps. 145.8. 2. That we are saved from the wrath of God, on∣ly through Christ Jesus. (x) (x) To waite for his Sonne from Heaven, even Jesus, which delivered us from the wrath to come, 1 Thess. 1.10. We shall be saved from wrath through him, Rom. 5.9.
Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us, Gala. 3.13. There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, Ro. 81. See Heb. 2.14. 3. That the Lord justifies us from all sin (y) only through Jesus Christ (z) by imputing our fins to him (a. 7.) and his righteousnesse to us (b) all be∣ing apprehended by Faith. (c) (y) He is neere that justifieth me, who wil contend with me? The Lord God wil helpe me who is he that shal condemne me? Isa. 50.8.9. Who shal lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? it is God that justifieth: who is he that condemneth? it is Christ that died. &c. Rom. 8.33.34. He hath not beheld iniquity in Iacob, neither hath hee seene perversenesse in Israel. Numb. 23.21. He shal receive righteousnesse from the God of his salvation, Psal. 245. & Isc. 61.10. Jsrael shal be saved in the Lord, with an everlasting salvation, Isa. 45.17. He justifieth the ungodly; R. 4.5. See Zech. 3.4.
David describing the blessednesse of the man, unto whom God imputeth righteousnesse without workes, saith, Blessed are they, whose iniquities are for∣given, and whose sins are covered. Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord wil not impute sin, Rom. 4.6.7.8. Com∣pared with, Psal. 32.1.2. (z) This is his Name whereby he shal be called, The Lord our righteousnesse, Je. 23.6. & Mal. 4.2. Christ Jesus of God is made unto us, righteousnes, and redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30. (a. 7.) He hath made him to be fin for us, who knew no sin, 2 Cor. 5.21. Christ also hath once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, 1 Pet. 3.18. His own selfe bare our sins, 1 Pet. 2.24. () Christ is made unto us righteousnesse, 1 Cor. 1.30. (c) Christ is the end of the Law for righte∣ousnesse to every one that believeth, Rom. 10.4. By him al that believe, are justified Act. 13 39. Faith is counted for righteousnesse, Ro. 4.5.9.15. to 24.
4. That our God is reconciled to us (d) in Christ Jesus. (e) (d) He shal pray unto God, and he wil be favourable unto him, and he shal see his face which joy, Iob. 33.26. The Lord wil repent himselfe concer∣ning his tervants, Psa. 135.14. (e) God hath reconciled us to himselfe by Jesus Christ. God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himselfe, 2 Cor. 5.18.19.20. Jesus Christ the righteous is the propi∣tiation for our sins, 1 Ioh. 2.1.2. & 4.10. Rom. 3.25. The chastisement of our peace was upon him, Jsa. 53.5. That he might be a mercifull and faith∣full high Priest to make reconciliation for the sins of the people, Heb. 21.17. Now in Christ Jesus, yee who sometimes were far of, are made nigh by the bloud of Christ; For he is our peace: and having abolish∣ed the enmity, hath reconciled us to God Eph. 2.12. to 18. Thus far of our Freedom from the punish∣ment of sinne.
Thirdly, from the power of sinne, that weshall not serve any sinne in the lusts thereof. 1. THat the Lord will mortifie our sinnes, (f) and convert us from them (g) that sin shall not rigne in us, (h) (f) He will subdue our iniquities, Micah. 7.19. I will purely purge away thy drosse. Isa. 1.25. VVhen the Lord shall have purged the bloud of Ierusalem, by the spirit of bur∣ning, Isa. 4.4. & 27.9. I will cleanse them from all their ini∣quities, Ie. 33.8. & Ioel. 3.21. & Ezek. 36.25. I will remove the iniquity of that Land, in one day, Ze. 3.9. (g) They shall returne unto me with their whole heart, Ier. 24.7. & 30 31. The remnant shall returne, even the rem∣nant of Iacob unto the mighty God, Isa. 10.21. & 17.7. & 19.22.
All the ends of the world shal turne unto the Lord, Ps. 22.27. (l) Stu shal not have dominion over you; Rom 6.14. VVlke in the spirit, and yee shal not ful∣fil the lusts of the flesh, Gal. 5.16. 2. That the Lord will heale the evill of our na∣turts (i) and recover us from our backslidings (k) and bring us to newnesse of life. (l) (i) The Lord healeth al thy diseases. Psal. 103 3. They shal returne to the Lord, he shall heale them, Isa. 19.22. Jesus sayd unto them, they that be whole neede not a Physitian, but they that be sicke? I came not to cal the righteous, but sin ners to repentance, Mat. 9.12.13. & Mark. 2.17. & Lu. 5.31.32. (k) I wil heale your backslidings, Je. 3.22. & 33.6. Though he fal, he shal not utterly be cast down, for the Lord upholdeth him with his hand, Psal. 37.24. & 23.3. & 145.14. If thou returne to the Almighty, thou shalt be built up, Job. 22.23. & 33.25. to 30. I will bring againe that which was dri∣ven
away and wil bind up that which was broken, Ezek. 34.16. The Lord shall deliver me from every evil worke, and shal prese ve me to his Heavenly Kingdom, 2 Tim. 4.18. (l) And you being dead in your fi hath he quickned together with him, (Christ) Col. 2.13. That you might be partakers of the Di∣vine nature, having escaped the corrup∣tion, that is in the World through lust, 2 Pet. 1.4. 3. That the Lord will convert us from, or mo∣tifie in us, or preserve us from falling in o a∣articular si (n) from evill company (n) from whoredom (r) from, Adultery (p) idolatry (q) hardnesse of heart () pride (s) lying (t) unclean nesse (u) unrighteousnesse (w) worldly usts (x) Family sinnes (y) and from backs ing (z) All which are promised us in Christ Jesus (.8) (m) The Lord shal preserve me from every evil work, 2 Tim. 4.18. (n) When wisdom entreth into thine heart, discretion shal preserve thee, from the way of the evil man, from the man that speaketh froward things, who leave the
paths of uprightnesse, &c. pro. 2.10. to 16. (o. p.) Shee shal deliver thee from the strange woman, which forsaketh the guide of her youth, pro. 2.16, 17. Who so pleaseth God, shal escape her, Eccl. 7.26. (q) Ephraim shal say, what have I to doe any more with idols? Hose. 14.8. & Ezek. 37 23. & Hose 2.17. He shal not looke to the Altars, the work of his hands, Isa. 17.8. Yee shal defile the covering of thy gra∣ven Images, thou shalt cast them away as a menstruous cloath, Isa. 30.22. From all your Idols wil I cleanse you, Eze. 36.25. (r) Neither shal they walke any more after the stubbornnesse of their evil heart, Ier. 3.17. (s) Thou shalt no more be haughty in my holy mountaine, Zeph. 3.11. (t) The remnane of Israel shal not speake lies, neither shal a deceitfull tongue be found in their mouth, Zeph. 3.13. (u) From al your filthinesse wil I cleanse you, Ezek. 36.25. (w) He is faithful to cleanse us from al un∣righteousnes, 1 Ioh. 1.9.
(x) The grace of God teaching us to deny worldly lusts, Tit. 2.11.12. & 2 Pet. 1.4. (y) Thou shalt put away iniquity far from thy Tabernacles, Job. 22.23. & 5.24. (z) The Law of God is in his heart, none of his steps shall side, Psal. 37.31. & 16.8. & 21.7. & 26.1. & 145.14. Thou shalt walke in thy way safely, and thy foote shal not stumble, Pro. 3.23. Thou shalt cal me my Father, and shall not turne away from me, Jer. 3.19. I wil heale their backsldings, Hos. 14.4 The Lord is faithful, who shal stablish you, and keep you from evil, a Thess. 3.3. & 2. Tim. 4.18. If yee doe these things, yee shal never fal, 2 Pet. 1 10. (a. 8.) Our Saviour Jesus Christ, gave him∣selfe for us, that he might purifie unto himselfe a peculiar people zealous of good works, Tit. 2.13, 14. Our Lord Jesus Christ, gave himselfe for our sins, that he might deliver us from this present evil world. Gal. 1.4. God sent his Sonne Jesus to blesse you, in turning away every one of you from his iniquities, Acts 3.26. & 5.31.
How much more shal the bloud of Christ purge your conscience from dead works? Heb. 9.14. Thus far of our Freedom from the power of sin and of the second maine part of this Collection. The third maine part conteineth such Promises as assure us many excellent gifts from the Lord. First, many saving graces are promised unto us. As 1. THat the Lord will give us his holy Spirit () for which Christ hath prayed on our behalfe (c) and will sanclisie us to himselfe (d) in the Lord Jesus. (e) (b) A new spirit wil I put in you, Ezek. 36.26. I wil put my Spirit within you, ver. 27. & 11.19. I wil power out my spirit upon al flesh. upon servants and handmaidens in these dayes wil I powre out my spirit, Ioel. 2.28.29. & Acts 2.17.8.39.39.
How much more shal your heavenly Fa∣ther give the holy spirit to them that aske him? Lu. 11.13. I wil send unto you from the Father the Spirit of truth, Ioh. 15.26. Now we have received not the spirit which is of the World, but the spirit which is of God, 1 Cor. 2.12. (e) I will pray the Father, and he shal give you the Sririt of truth, Ioh. 14.16, 17. (l) I the Lord sanctifie you, have seveter you from other people that you shou be mine, Levit. 20.8.26. & 21.8.15.23 & 22.9.16. Hee shal Baptize you with the hei Ghost, Mat. 3.11. & Mark. 1.8. & L. 3.16. Acts 1.5. My grace is sufficient for thee, 2 Cor. 12.9. Having predestinated us unto the adop¦tion of children by Jesus Christ to him∣self. Eph. 1 5. The very God of peace sanctifie you wholy; Faithful is he who calleth you, who also wil doe it. 1 Thess. 5.23.24. & 4.3.4. Yee are an holy Nation, a peculiar people. 1 Pet. 2.19.
(e) Of his fulnesse have al wee received. Joh. 1.16. Of him are yee in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us sanctification, 1 Cor. 1.30. Christ loved the Church and gave him∣selfe for it, that he might sanctifie and cleanse it, that it should be holy and without blemish, Eph. 5.25 26.27. & Tit. 2 14. & Ro. 6. ch. & Heb. 9.14. By the wil (of God) we are sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ, Heb. 10.10. 2. That the Lord will cause us to know him () and our duty to him (g) and give us Faith in him. (h) (f) I wil give them an heart to know me, Jr. 24.7 & 16.21. & 31.34. compar'd with Heb 8.11. Thou shalt finde the knowledge of God, Pro. 2.5. Then shal we know if we follow on to know the Lord, Hose. 6.3. I shal shew you plainly of the Father, John. 16.25. (g) I wil instruct thee, and teach thee in the way which thou shalt goe, Psal. 32.8. & 25.8.9.12.14. & Isa. 48.17.
He wil be our guide even unto death, psa. 48.14. & 73.24. You need not that any man teach you, but the same anointing teacheth you of al things. 1 Joh. 2.27. The secret of the Lord is with the righte∣ous, Pro. 3.32. Thine eares shal heare a word behind thee, saying, This is the way, walke yee in it, Isa. 30.21. & 29.18. Then the Eyes of the blind shal be ope∣ned, and there shal be a way that shal  called the way of holinesse, the way∣faring men though fooles shal not erre therein, Isa. 35.5.8. & 42.16. & Lu. 4 18. I wil direct al his wayes, Isa. 45.13. & 54.13. And he sayd unto them, unto you it is given to know the mystery of the King∣dome of God. Mark. 4.11. If any man wil doe his wil, he shal know of the Doctrine, Ioh. 7.17. (h) In his Name shal the Gentiles trust, Mat. 12.21. Unto you is it given to believe on Christ Phil. 1.29. The just shal live by his Faith, Habak. 2.4. & Heb. 10 38.
They shal looke upon me whom they have pierced, Zech. 12.10. Jesus sayd unto them; this is the worke of God that yee believe on him, whom he hath sent, Ioh. 6.29. I, if I be lifted up from the earth, wil draw al men unto me, Joh. 12.32. Faith, it is the gift of God, Eph. 2.8. 3. That the Lord is our God (i) and Father (k) and loveth us () with an undeserved (m) infi∣nite (n) unchangeable love (o) of which he will assure us, (p) in which he will confirme us un∣to the end (q) by his holy Spirit (r) in Christ Jesus. (s) () I wil be their God. 2 Cor. 6.16. & Exodus 29.45. & Jeremy 7.23. & 31.1.33. & Heb. 8.10. I ascend unto my God, and your God, Joh. 20.17. (k) I wil be a Father unto you and yee shal be my sons and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty, 2 Cor. 6.18. I am a Father unto Israel. Je. 31.9. I ascend to my Father, and your Father, Joh. 20.17. (l) The Father himselfe loveth you. John 16.27.
The Lord thy God wil love thee, Deut. 7.12.13. God wil be favourable unto him, Job. 33.26. & Ps. 5.12. & 149.4. & Pro. 3.4. & 12.2. The Lord loveth him that followeth after righteousnesse, Pro. 15.9. I wil betroth thee unto me in loving kindnesse, Hos. 2.19. I wil cal her beloved; that was not be∣loved, Rom. 9.25. (m) I wil Love them freely, Hose. 14.4. (n) Can a Woman forget her suckling child, that she should not have compassion on the son of her wombe? yea, they may forget, yet wil I not forget thee, Isa. 49.15. (o) I have loved thee with an everlasting love, Jer. 31.3. Having Love his own which were in the world, hee loved them unto the end, Joh. 13.1. I am perswaded that neither death nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come nor heighth nor depth, nor any other Cture shal beable to separate us from
the Love of God, which is in Christ Je∣sus our Lord, Rom. 8.38.39. (p) The Lord shal stablish you, 2 Thess. 3.3. & 2.17. He shal strengthen your heart, Ps. 31.24. (q) The Lord Jesus Christ shal confirm you unto the end, 1 Cor. 1.8. (r) The Spirit beareth witnesse with our spirit, that we are the children of God, Rom. 8.16. God hath sealed us, and given the earnest of the Spirit, in our hearts, 2 Cor. 1.22. & Eph. 1.13, 14. () God stablisheth us, in Christ, 2 Cor. 1.21. 4. That the Lord will give us inward peace (t) in Christ (u) that he our God (w) and our Saviour (x) will give us inward joy, or spirituall satis¦faction by the worke of the Holy Ghost, (y) and that freely (z) and which shall never be taken from us (a. 9.) which comforter God the Father, and Christ our redeemer have promised to send us (b) for which on our behalfe our Saviour hath prayed (c) a Yea all the consolations of the holy Ghost we shall assuredly enjoy in his Name and for his sake (d). (t) The Lord wil speake peace to his peo∣ple, and to his Saints, Ps. 858. & 29.11. & 125.5.
And as many as walke according to this rule, peace be on them, Gal. 6.16. His soule sha dwel at ease, Psal. 25.13. Lord, thou wilt ordaine peace for us, Isa. 26.12: Great shal be the peace of thy children Isa. 54.13. & 55.12. & 66.12. & 57.19. I wil reveale unto them, the abundance of peace and truth. Je. 33.6. The peace of God shal keepe your hearts and minds through Christ Jesus, Phil. 4.7. Being justifyed by Faith we have peace with God, Rom. 5.1. Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you, Joh. 14.27. (u) Christ is our peace, Eph. 2.14 17. God hath reconciled us to himselfe by Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 5.18.19. (w) Let the righteous rejoyce before God, Psal. 68.3. & 33.21. & 97.11. & 64.10 & 107.42. My heart shal rejoyce in thy salvation, Psal. 13.5. & 34.2. & 36.8.9. & 45.15. & 63.7. & Isa. 61.10. In thy Name shal they rejoyce al the day, Ps. 89.16.
Thou shalt have thy delight in the Al∣mighty, Job. 22.26. God giveth to the man that is good in his sight, joy, Eccl. 2.26. & Isa. 29.19. & Jer. 31.12, 13, 14, 25. The redeemed of the Lord shal returne with singing, and everlasting joy shal be upon their heads. Isa. 51.11. & 55.12. & 56.7. & 35.1.2.6.10. & 65.13, 14. The Lord shal yet comfort Sion, Zach. 1.17. Blessed are yee that weepe now, for yee shal Laugh. Luke 6.21. & Mat. 5.4. & Acts 2.28. The God of al comfort, comforteth us in al our tribulation, 2 Co.r. 1.3 4. & 7 6. (x) The water that I shal give him shal be in him a wel of water, springing up to everlasting Life, Joh. 4.14. (y) The Comforter, the holy Ghost, he shal teach you al things Joh. 14.26. (z) I wil give of the Fountaine of the wa∣ter of Life freely, Revel. 21.6. (a. 9.) Your sorrow shall be turned into joy, your joy no man taketh from you, Joh. 16.20.22. (b) Te Father, he shal give you another
Comforter who shall abide with you for ever, Joh. 14.16.26. I wil send the comforter unto you, Ioh. 16.7 (c) I wil pray the Father, and he shal give you another Comforter, the spirit of truth, Joh. 14.16.17. (d) A Comforter, that may abide with you for ever, Joh. 14.16. 5. The Lord will give us his feare (e) which shall never depart from us (f.g.) and will cause us and our seed to love him with all our hearts (h) and will give us a new heart and a new spirit (i) and will make us both willing (k) and able to obey him (l) yea our Saviour will make us zea∣lous to serve him. (m) (e) I wil put my feare in their hearts, Jer. 32.40. They shall feare thee as long, as the Sun and Moone shall endure, Psal. 72.5. & Isa. 59.19. Israel shal feare the Lord and his good∣nesse, in the latter dayes, Hose. 3.5. (f.g.) I wil give them one heart, and one way, that they may feare me for ever, and I wil put my feare in their hearts, that they shal not depart from me, Jer. 32.39, 14.
(h) The Lord thy God wil circumcise thine heart, and the heart of thy seed, to love the Lord thy God with al thine heart and with al thy Soule, Deut. 30.6. He hath chosen us in Christ, that we should be without blame before him in love, Eph. 1.4. (i) A new heart wil I give you, and a new Spirit wil I put within you, Ezek. 36.26. & 11.19. (k) This people shal be willing in the day of thy power, Psal. 110.3. One shal say, I am the Lords, and ano∣ther shal cal himselfe by the name of Jacob; and another shal subscribe with his hand unto the Lord, Isa. 44.5. I wil take the stony heart out of their flesh and wil give them an heart of flesh, Ezek. 11.19. I wil turne to the people a pure Lan∣guage, that they may serve the Lord with one consent, Zeph. 3.9. & Zech. 8.20.21.22.23. (l) I wil give them an heart, that they may walke in my statutes, and keep my Or∣dinances, and doe them, Ezek. 11.19.120. & 36.26.
I wil give them an heart to know me, that I am the Lord, and they shall be my people and I wil be their God, Jer. 24.7. & Heb. 8.10. I have ordained you, that you should goe, and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit should remaine, Joh. 15.16. It is God, that worketh in you, both to wil, and to doe, of his good pleasure, Phil. 2.13. (m) Jesus Christ gave himselfe for us, that he might purifie unto himselfe a pecu∣liar people, zealous of good workes. Titus, 2.13, 14. Thus far of the first head of the third maine part. Secondly, ability to worship the Lord is promised unto us, as THat the Lord will cause us to worship him aright (n) to pray unto him (o) to praise him (p) to heare his word (q) to remember good things () to meditate thereon (s) to confer there∣of
(t) to make (u) and pay holy vow s unte him (w) (n) The houre commeth, and now is, that the true worshipers, shal worship the Fa∣ther in spirit, and in truth, Joh. 4.23. & Psal. 22.27. & 86 9. In mine holy mountaine, saith the Lord, there shal al the house of Israel serve me, there wil I accept, and require your holy things. Ezek. 20.40. & Jer. 17.26. () Thou shalt make thy prayer unto him, Job. 22.27. & 14, 15 & 33.26. Every one that is godly shal pray unto thee, Psal. 32.6. & Jr. 30.21. He shal cal upon me, and I wil answer him, Ps 91.15. & Jer. 29.12.13 & 3.19. They shal returne, and seek the Lord their God, Hose. 3.5. & Zeph. 3.9. We know not what we should pray for, as we ought, but the spirit it selfe maketh intercession for us, Ro. 8.26.17. (p) They shal come from al places, bringing Sacrifices of praise unto the Lord, Jer. 17.26. & 30.19. They shal praise the Lord that seek him, Ps. 22.26. This people have I formed for my selfe,
they shal shew forth my praise, Isa. 43.21. & 51.3. Yee shal be satisfyed, and shal praise the Name of the Lord your God, Joel. 2.26. & Ps. 50.15. (q) The eares of them that heare, shal hear∣ken, Isa. 32.3. & 50.4. & Act. 28.28. The eares of the deafe shal be unstopped, Isa. 35.5. Other Sheepe I have, and they shal heare my voyce. Joh. 10.16. (r) The holy Ghost shal bring al things to your remembrance, that I have said to you, Joh. 14.26. (s) Thine heart shal meditate terror, Isa. 33.18. (t) They shal aske the way to Sion with their faces thitherward, saying, come, and let us joyne our selves to the Lord in a perpetual covenant, that shal not be forgotten, Jer. 50.5. (v) They shal vow a vow unto the Lord, Isa. 19.21. (w) Thus shalt pay thy Vowes, Jb. 22.27. Thus far of the second head of the third maine part.
Thirdly, the Lord promiseth us divers Abi∣lities for our particular callings, and o∣ther commendable vertues, as 1. THat the Lord will give us direction (x) and sufficiencie to discharge our duties. (y) (x) I wil instruct thee, and teach thee in the way which thou shalt goe. Psal. 32.8. & 25.12. & 37.24. In al thy wayes acknowledge him, and he shal direct thy paths, Pro. 3.6. & 28.5. & Isa. 45.13. God gives to a man that is good in his sight wisdom and knowledge, Eccl. 2.26. & 8.5. & Jer. 33.3. (y) And the Lord sayd unto him. Goe in this thy might, and thou shalt save Israel, have not I sent thee? And he said, O my Lord wherewith shal I save Israel? Be∣hold my Family is poore, and I am the least in my Fathers House, And the Lord sayd, surely I wil be with thee, and thou shalt smite the Midianites. Judg. 6.14.15, 16. & Ex. 3.12. & 4.10.11.12.15. & Josh. 3.7.
I wil goe in the strength of the Lord God, Psal. 71.16. Mans goings are of the Lord, Pro. 20.24. 2 Such places as may move us to be couragious, and doe valiantly (z) That we shall not feare (a. 10.) That the Lord will give us true valour, boldnesse, or courage of heart (b) and enable us to fight resolutely against his and our ene∣mies. (c) (z) Be strong and of a good courage, feare not, nor be afraid of them; for the Lord thy God he it is, that doth goe with thee, he wil not faile thee, nor forsake thee, Deut. 31.6.8. & 7, 18. & 20.1, 2, 4. & Josh. 8.1. & 10.8.25 & 11.6. 1 Chron. 28.20. Be strong and couragious, be not afrayd, nor dismayd for the King of Assyria, nor for al the multitude that is with him; for there be more with us then with him, With him is an arme of flesh, but with us is the Lord our God, to helpe us, and to fight our battels, 2 Chron. 32.7.8. & 13.12. & 1 Chron. 22.13. & 2 Ki. 6.16. & Joel. 2.21. Thus sayth the Lord, that created thee,
feare not, I have redeemed thee, thou art mine; When thou passest through the waters, I wil be with thee, when thou passest through the fire, thou shalt not be burnt; For I am the Lord thy God, the holy one of Israel, thy Saviour, Isa. 43.1, 2, 3. & Ier. 46.28. (a. 10.) Thou shalt be stedfast, and shalt not feare, Iob. 11.15. & 5.21.22. & Deut. 3.32. Thou shalt not be afraid of them, but shalt wel remember what the Lord thy God did unto Egypt, Thou shalt not be affrighted at them, for the Lord thy God is among you, a mighty God, and terrible, Deut. 7.18.21. The Lord is my salvation, whom shal I feare? the Lord is the strength of my life, of whom shal I be afraid? though an host should encampe against mee, my heart shal not feare, Psal. 27.1.23. & Isa. 12 2. When thou liest down, thou shalt not be afraid, Pre. 3.24. & Jer. 23.4. & 30 20. (b) He giveth power to the faint, and to them that have no might, he increaseth strength,
They that waite upon the Lord, shal re∣new their strength, they shal run and not be weary, they shal walke, and not faint, Isa. 40.29.31. & 2 Sam. 22.3.33. & Psal. 18.1, 2.31.32 & 28.7.8. He shal strengthen your heart, all yee that hope in the Lord, Ps. 31.24. & 68.35. & 71.16. Through God we shal doe valiantly, psal. 60.12. & 108.13. The Lord is my Rock, and my salvation, he is my defence, I shal not greatly be moved, Ps. 62.2. Thou shalt be secure, thou shalt take thy rest in safety, none shal make thee afraid, Iob. 11.18, 19. Hee that walketh upnightly, walketh surely, The way of the Lord is strength to the upright, pre. 10.9.29. Trust yee in the Lord for ever, for in the Lord Iehova is everlasting strength, Isa. 26 4. & 28.5, 6. I, even I am he that comforteth you: who art thou that thou shouldst be afraid of a man that shall die, and of the Son of man, that shal be made as grasse? Ise. 52.12.
(o) They shal be all mighty men, which tread down their enemies in the mire of the streetes in the battell, and they shal fight, because the Lord their God is with them, I wil strengthen them in the Lord, Zech. 10.5.12. The people that doe know their God shal be strong and doe exploits, Dar. 11.32. 3. That the Lord will give us contentation (d) and enable us to governe our tongues (e) and our carriage (f) and will cause us to deale justly in our common dealings (g) and in executing justice. (h) (d) That every man should enjoy the good of his labour, it is the gift of God, Eccl. 3.13. & 5.18. I have learned in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be content. Every where and in al things I am in∣structed both to be full and to be hungry, both to abound and to suffer need; I can doe all things through Christ which strengtheneth me, phil. 4.11, 12, 13. (e) I wil be with thy mouth, and teach thee what thou shalt say, Ex. 4.12.15.
The tongue of the stammerers shall be ready to speake plainly, Isa. 32.4. & 50.4. (f) I wil teach you what you should doe, Ex. 4.15. (g) Thou shalt understand righteousnesse, judgement, and equity, Pro. 2.9. & 8.20. (h) The Lord shal be for a spirit of judge∣ment to him that sitteth in judgement Isa. 2.8.6. & 32.1. It is joy to the just, to doe judgement Pro. 21.15. Thus farre the third Head of the third maine part. Fourthly, that the Lord will increase good gifts in us (i) particularly, Saving knowledge (k) true Faith (l) righteousnesse (m) expression of knowledge (n) That we shall persever in good (o) That the Lord accepteth our persons (p) and services (q) particularly. Our publike worship () our prayers in generall (s) our prayers for or thers (t) for such as are in authority (u) oue thanks giving (w) for others (x) for such as are in authority (y) our singing psalmes (z) our Almes (a. 11.) our Charity to our kindred (b) our Suffering wrong (c) if we serve God in
right eousnesse, peace and joy in the holy Ghost (d) We and all our services are accepted only in Christ Isus. (e) (i) Though thy beginning was small, yet shal thy latter end greatly encrease, Iob. 8.7 They goe from strength to strength, Psal. 84.7. The righteous shall grow like a Ce∣dar in Lebanon, Those that be plainted in the House of the Lord, shall flourish in the Courts of our God, They shall still bring forth fruite in old age, Psal. 92.12 13 14. & 115.14. & 1.3 & Pro. 11 28. & Isa. 35.1.2. The path of the just is as the light that shines more and more unto the perfect day, Pro. 4.18. I will poure my spirit upon thy seed and my blessing upon thine off-spring. And they shall spring up as among the grasse, as willowes by the water courses. Isa. 44.3 4. I am the Lord thy God, which teacheth thee to prefit, Isc. 48 17. Blessed is the mā that trusteth in the Lord, He shall be as a Tree planted by the wa∣ters,
he shal not cease from yielding fruit, Jer. 17.7.8. & 31.12. & Hose. 14.6, 7, 8. Yee shall grow up as Calves of the stal, Mal. 4.2. Whosoever hath, to him shal be given, and he shall have more abundance, Mat. 13.12. & 25.29. & Luk. 8.18. & 19.26. He hat abideth in me, and I in him, the same bringeth forth much fruit. Joh. 65.5. & 2. If these things be in you, and abound, they make you that you shal not be un∣fruitful, in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 1.8. (k) I wil shew unto you, great and hidden things, which thou knowest not. Jer. 33.3. A man of knowledge increaseth strength Pro. 24.5. (l) The righteousnesse of God is revealed from faith to Faith, Rom. 1.17. (m) The Lord will cause righteousnesse to spring forth, Isa. 61.11. (n) The wise in heart shal be called prudent, and the sweetnesse of the Lips increaseth learning, Pro. 16.21. (o) Being confident of this very thing, that he which hath begun a good worke in
you, wil perfect it unto the comming of Jesus Christ, Phil. 1.6. Though he fall, he shal not be utterly cast down, for the Lord upholdeth Him with his Hand, Psal. 37.24. & 28. The Lord shall never suffer the righteous to be moved, Psal. 55.22. & 66.9. &. Pro. 10.30. & 12.3. My mercy wil I keepe for him for ever∣more and my covenant shall stand fast with him, Ps. 89.28. & 2 Sam. 7.15. & 1. Chron. 17.13, 14. The Lord will not cast off his people, neither wil He forsake His inheritance, Ps. 94.14. & 1 Sam. 12.22. The righteousnesse is an everlasting foun∣dation, Pro. 10.25. I wil build them up, and not pull them down, I wil plant them and not plucke them up. Jer. 24.6. I have loved thee with an everlasting love 1.31, 3. Thus saith the Lord, if Heaven above can be measured, and the foundations of the Earth, searched out beneath, I will also cast off the seed of Israel, for all that they have done, Ier. 31.37. & 33.25.26.
I wil betroth thee unto me for ever. I wil even betroth thee unto me in faith∣fulnesse, Hose. 2.19.20. I give unto them eternall Life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my Hand; My Father which gave them me is grea∣ter then all, and no man is able to pluck them out of my Fathers Hand, Joh. 10.28.29. Jesus, having loved his own, hee loved them unto the end. Ioh. 13.1. I am perswaded that neither Death, nor Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, Nor Height, nor Depth, nor any other Creature shall be able to separate us from the Love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord, Rom. 8 38 39. Who shall also confirme you unto the end, 1 Cor. 1.8. The Lord is faithfull, who shall stablish you, 1 Thess. 3.3. Who are kept by the power of God, through Faith unto salvation, 1 Peter 1.5.
(p) In every Nation he that feareth Him, and worketh righteousnesse, is accepted of Him, Acts 10.35. If thou doe wel, shalt thou not be accep∣ted? Gen. 4.7. (q) Their burnt offerings and their Sacri∣fices shall be accepted on mine Altar, Isa. 56.7. & 60.7. Thou shalt be pleased with the Sacrifices of righteousnesse, Ps. 51.19. That the offering up of the Gentiles might be acceptable, being sanctified by the Holy Ghost, Ro. 15, 16. (r) See the proofes immediatly before. (s) The prayer of the upright is his delght, Pro. 15 8. (t.v.w.x.y) I exhort, that first of al supplica∣tions, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for almen, For Kings, and for all that are in au∣thority, For this is good, and acceptable in th sight of Godour Saviour, 1 Tim. 2.1.2.3 (z) I will praise the Name of the Lord with a Psalme, this shall please the Lord. Psal. 69.30.31. (.) To doe good, and to communicate
forget not, for with such Sacrifices God is wel pleased, Heb. 13.16. If there be a willing minde, it is accep∣ted according to that a man hath, and not according to that Hee hath not, 2 Cor. 8.12. (b) Let children, or nephews learne to shew kindnesse at home, and to require their parents, for that is good, and acceptable before God, 1 Tim. 5.4. (c) If when yee doe well, and suffer for it, yee take it patiently, this is acceptable with God, 1 Pet. 2.20. (d) The Kingdome of God is not meate, and drink, but righteousnesse, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost, For hee that in these things serveth Christ, is acceptable unto God, Rom. 14.17.18. (e) He hath made us accepted in the belo∣ved, Eph. 1.6. Through him we both have an accesse by one Spirit unto the Father, c. 2.18. & 3.12. & Heb. 10.19.20.22. 1 Pet. 3.18. Thus far the fourth and last head of the third maine part.
The fourth maine part conteineth such promises as concerne Affliction. First, Concerning Affliction in generall, as 1. THat the Lord will have his to suffer (f) and will visite his for sinning (g) and yet will inable us to beare affliction aright. (h) (f) In the world yee shall have tribulation, Ioh. 16.33. I will cause you to passe under the rod, Eze. 20.37. Whosoever doth not beare his Crosse, and come after me, cannot be my Dis∣ciple, Luk. 14.27. & Heb. 12.6 7. We must through much tribulation en∣ter into the Kingdome of God, Acts 14.22. & 2, Tim. 3.1.2. Unto you is given in the behalfe of Christ, not only to believe on Him, but also to suffer for His sake, phil. 1.29. (g) As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten, Rev. 3.19. They that are left of you, shall pine away
in their iniquities, Levit. 26. 39. See also v. 14. to 42. He shall be my sonne; if he commit ini∣quity I will chasten him, 2 Sam. 7.14. & 1 Ki. 11.39. & Ps. 89.32. & pro. 3.12. By fire and by his sword, will the Lord plead with all flesh; For I know, their workes and their thoughts, Isa. 66.16.18. Thus saith the Lord, because you are all become drosse, I will gather you into the midst of Jerusalem, As they gather filver, and brasse, and iron, into the midst of the Furnace, to blow the fire upon it to melt it, so will I gather you in mine anger, and melt you, I will gather you, and blow upon you in the fire of my wrath, and yee shall be melted in the midst thereof, Eze. 22.19, 20, 21, 22. You only have I known of all the Fami∣lies of the Earth, therefore I will pu∣nish you for all your iniquities, Amos. 3.2. & Heb. 12 6. () God is faithfull, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are able, 1 Cor. 10.13. They shall accept of the punishment of their iniquity, Levit. 26.43.
We faint not in afflictions, 2 Cor. 4.16. 2. That we shall gaine much good by Afflicti∣on (i) particularly, The tryall of our Christi∣an graces (k) assurance we are Gods children (l) that the Lord loves us (m) that we belong to Christ (n) the mortification of our sinnes (o) Sanctification to newnesse of life (p) the stirring us up to earnest prayer (q) to confidence in the Lord (r) it procures us peace (s) preserves from hell (t) furthers us unto (u) and assures u of Heaven. (w) (i) He chastens us for our profit, Heb. 12.10. Happy is the man whom God correcteth Iob. 5.17. & Psal. 94.12, (k) The Lord trieth the righteous, psal. 11 5. & Iob. 23.10. Some of them of understanding, shall fall, to try them, Dan. 11.35. & Ze. 13.9. (l) The Lord scourgeth every sonne whom he receiveth, If yee endure chastening the Lord dea∣leth with you, as with sons, Heb. 12 6, 7, 8. & pro. 3.12. (m) Whom the Lord loves, he chastens, Heb. 12.6. & Pro. 3.12. & Rev. 3.19.
(n) To you is given in the behalfe of Christ, to suffer, Phil. 1.29. (o) By this shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is the fruit to take away his sin, Isa. 27.9. If they be holden in cords of affliction, Then hee sheweth them their Trans∣gressions; He openeth also their eare to discipline, and commandeth that they returne from iniquity, Job. 36.8, 9, 10. (p) Many shall be purifyed, and made white, and tryed, Dan. 12.10. & 11.35. Though our outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed, day by day, 2 Cor. 4.16. (q) Lord in trouble have they visited thee, they poured out a prayer when thy chastening was upon them, Isa. 26 16 & Zech. 13.9. They shall cry unto the Lord because of the oppressors, Isa. 19.20. In the time of their affliction they will seeke me early, Hose. 5.15. & Ier. 2.27. (r) I will bring them thorow the fire, and they shall say, The Lord is my God, Zech. 13.9.
(s) Chastening yeeldeth the peaceable fruit of righteousnesse, to them which are exercised thereby, Heb. 12.11. Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest that thou mayest give him rest from the dayes of adversity, Psal. 94.12, 13. I know the thoughts that I thinke to∣wards you sayth the Lord, thoughts of peace, Ier. 29.11. (t) If any say, I have sinned, and it profit∣ed me not, He will deliver his soule from going in∣to the pit. Iob. 33.27.28. (v) We must through much tribulation en∣ter into the Kingdome of God, Acts 14.22. Our light affliction, which is but for a moment, Worketh for us a farre more exceed∣ing, and eternall weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4 17. (w) If we suffer we shall also reigne with him, 2. Tim. 2.12. 3. That no affliction shall be too heavy for us (x) no new nor strange affliction shall befall us (y) the Lord will afflict us in manner and measure convenient for a (z) N ing us thereby to
contend with him (a. 12.) nor sinne against him (b) he hath a fellow feeling of our miseries (c) and layes them to heart to deliver us (d) he will ease us therein (e) and deliver us thereout (f) yea out of them all, though never so great (g) and that speedily (h) in due season (i) at the appointed time (k) so as he will afflict us no more (l). He despiseth not our afflicted estate (m) nor hideth his Face from us (n) nor forgetteth us (o) but knoweth our sorrowes (p), seeth our troubles (q) bath respect unto us (r) and heareth our groanes (s) desires (t) sighings (u) cries (w) and calling upon him (x) not suffering our hope to perish (y) but remembreth his Covenant (z) all those to assure us, he is our ready helpe at hand (a. 13) in greatest extremities (b) when we are most hope∣less. (c). (x) God will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are able, 1 Cor. 10 13. (y) There hath no temptation taken you, but such as is common to man, ibid: (z) I will convert thee in measure, Ier. 46.28. Hath he smitten him, as he smote those that smote him? or is he slaine according to me slaughter of those that are slaine by him?
In measure, when thou sendest it forth, thou wilt debate with it, Isa. 27.7, 8. (a. 12) He will not lay upon man more then right, that he should enter into judge∣ment with God, Iob. 34.23. (b) The rod of the wicked shall not rest up∣on the lot of the. righteous; lest the righteous put forth their hands unto ini∣quity, psal. 125.3. (c) In all their afflictions hee was afflicted, Isa. 63.9. (d) I know the thoughts that I thinke to∣wards you, saith the Lord, thoughts of peace, to give you an expected end, Ier. 29.11. (e) The Lord will lighten my darkenesse, 2 Samuel 22.29. & 18.28. & 112.4. Mica. 7.8. Come unto me all yee that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest, Mat. 11.28. (f) The righteous is delivered out of trouble, pro. 11.8. He maketh sore, and bindeth up, hee woundeth and his hanes make whole Job. 5.18. Why art thou so cast lown O my soule
hope in God, I shall yet praise him Psal. 43.3. I will gather her that is driven out, and her that I have afflicted, Mica, 4.6. (g) Many are the afflictions of the righte∣ous, but the Lord delivereth him out of them all, Psal. 34.19. God will redeeme my soule from the power of the grave, Ps. 49.15. Though yee have lien among the pots, yet shall yee be as the wings of a Dove covered with silver, and her feathers with yellow gold, Psal. 68.13. Thou which hast shewen me great and sore troubles, shalt quicken me again, and shalt bring me up againe from the depths of the Earth, Psal. 71.20. They draw neere unto the gates of death, Then they cry unto the Lord in their trouble; he saveth them out of their distresses, Psal. 107.18.19. Though I walke in the midst of trouble thou wilt revive me, Psal. 138.7. The Lord he hath torne, and hee will heale us; he hath smitten, and he will bind us up, Hose. 6.1. Rejoyce not against mee O mine ene∣my;
when I fall, I shall arise, when I sit in darkenesse, the Lord shal be a light un∣to me, Mica. 7.8.9. The Lord is good, a strong hold in the day of trouble, Nehu. 1.7. (h) Behold at eventide trouble, and before the morning, he is not, Isa. 17.14. His anger endureth but a moment, weep∣ing may endure for a night, but joy com∣meth in the morning, Ps. 30.5. Yet a little while, he that shall come, will come and will not tarry, Heb. 10.37. & Hab. 2.3. (i) The Lord will be a refuge for the op∣pressed, a refuge in times of trouble Psal. 9.9. (k) The vision is yet for an appointed time, but at the end it shal speak & not lie, Ha. 2.3 (l) Though I have afflicted thee, I will af∣flict thee no more, Naham 1.12. Though the Lord, give you the bread of adversity and the water of affliction, yet shall not thy teachers be removed into a corner any more, Isa. 30.20. (m) He hth not despised nor abhorred the ffliction of the afflicted, Psal. 22.14. (n) Neither hath hee hid his f .
(o) The needy shall not alway be forgot∣ten, Psa. 9.18. (p) The Lord sayd, I have surely seene the affliction of my people, for I know their sorrowes, Ex. 3.7. (q) God looked upon the children of Israel, Ex. 2.25. And see the precedent quotation. (r) God had respect unto them, Ex. 2.25. (s) And God heard their groaning, v. 24. (t) Lord, thou hast heard the desire of the humble. psal. 10.17. (v) For the sighing of the needy, now will I arise saith the Lord, Ps. 12.5. (w) The righteous cry, and the Lord hea∣reth, Psal. 34.17. (x) When he cried unto him he heard, Psa. 22.24. & Ex. 2.23. & 3.7. (y) The expectation of the poore shall not perish for ever, Psal. 9.18. (z) God remembred his Covenant, Ex. 2.24. (a. 13) God is a very present help in trouble, Psal. 46.1. (b) Alas, for that day is great, so that none is like it; it is even the time of Jacobs trouble, but he shall be saved ou of it, er. 30.7.
(c) I looked on my right hand, and be∣held, but there was no man that would know me, refuge failed me, no man cared for my soule, I cried unto thee O Lord, I sayd, thou art my refuge, Psal. 142.4, 5. & 71.20. & Mica. 7.8. Thus farre the first head of the fourth maine part. The second Head concerning divers par∣ticular Afflictions, as First, to such as are persecuted for the truth. SƲch shall be inabled to suffer (d) to answer for themselves at the very push (e) The Lord will maintaine their cause (f) and be their strong redeemer (g) and deliver them (h) and avenge them on their adversaries (i) Their estate is happy (k) they shall be rewarded here plentifully (l) and in heaven eternally. (m) (d. e.) When they deliver you up, take no thought how or what yee shall speake. for it shall be given you in that same houre what yee shall speake,
For it is not yee that speake, but the spirit of your Father which speaketh in you, Mat. 10.19.20. & Mark. 13.11. & Lu. 12.11.12. (f. g.) Their redeemer is strong, the Lord of hostes is his name, he shall throughly plead their cause, Jer. 50.34. (h) I will deliver thee out of the hand of the wicked, and I will redeeme thee out of the hand of the terrible, Ier. 15.21. & Psal. 72.14. (i) Hee will avenge the bloud of his servants, and will render vengeance to his adversaries, Deut. 32.43. Shall not God avenge his owne elect, which cry day and night unto him, though he beare long with them? I tell you that hee will avenge them speedily, Lu. 18.7.8. (k) Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousnesse sake, Mat. 5.10. Blessed are you when men shall hate you, and when they shall separate you from their company, and shall reproach you, and cast out your name as evill, for the son of mans sake, Lu. 6.22. (l) Jesus sayd, verily I say unto you, there
is no man that hath left House, or bre∣thren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife or children, or lands for my sake, and the Gospels. But hee shall receive an hundred fold, now in this time, Houses, and brethren and sisters, and mothers, and children and lands, with persecutions; Mark. 10 29.30. & Mat. 19.29. (m) Theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat 5.10. & Lu. 6.22.23. He that Ioseth his life for my sake shall finde it, Mat. 10.39. & 16.25. & Mark. 8.35. & Lu. 9.24. They shall receive in the world to come eternall life, Marke. 10.29.30. & Math. 19.29. Be thou faithfull unto death, and I will give thee a Crown of life, Revel. 2 10. Secondly, to such as are hated for God and goodnesse sake. Such shall have joy (n) are in a blessed state (o) and those that hate them shall be (ashamed. (p) (n)(p) Your brethren that hated you, an cast you out for my names sake, said, Le the Lord be glorified: but he shall ap∣peare to your joy, and they shall be a shamed. Isa. 66.5.
(o) Blessed are yee, when men shall hate you for the Son of mans sake. Lu. 6.22. Thirdly, to such as are cast out of the Congre∣gation for the same cause; See the fore∣going proofes at. (k)(n.) Fourthly, to such as are reproached, reviled, rayled upon, and evill spoken of for the same Cause. Those that use us so shall not hurt us as they would (q), The Lord will cleanse our innocency (r) and cause reproach to cease (s) and so cause them and others to see we are wronged (t) their thus abusing us is an assurance that Gods spirit resteth on us, and he is glorified by us (v) Our estate is blessed here (w) and shall be rewarded in Heaven. (x) (q) Thou shalt be hid from the scourge of the tongue Job. 5.21. & Ps. 3.20. (r) He shall bring forth thy righteousnesse, as the light, Psal. 37.6. (s) I will no more make you a reproach, Joel 2.19. (t) I will beare the indignation of the Lord, untill he plead my cause: he will bring me forth to the light; Mica. 7.9. & Eze. 36.15.
(u) If yee be reproached for the name of Christ, happy are yee, for the spirit of glory, and of God resteth upon you: on their part he is evill spoken of, but on your part he is glorified, 1 Pet. 4.14. (w.x.) Blessed are yee when men shall re∣vile you, and shall say all manner of evill against you falsly for my sake, Greate is your reward in Heaven, Mat. 5.11.12. & Lu. 6.22.23. Fiftly, to such as are tempted to sin, and troubled in mind. Christ having suffered, and been tempted, (y) is sensible of our sufferings (z) and able to suc∣or us (a. 14.) We shall be supported, obtaine mray and finde grace therein (b) temptations shall not prevaile against us (c) Satan shall not have his will over us, Christ hath praied for us (d) God will strengthen us to beare the temptation (e) The Lord Iesus will ease us there∣of (f) God will give us victory over Satan and all temptations (g) so that wee shall be delive∣red from them (h be they never so great. () (y.z.) We have not an high Priest, which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but was in all points tempted, like as we are, Heb. 4 15. (a. 14) In that he himselfe hath suffered.
being tempted, hee is able to succour them that are tempted, Heb. 2.18. (b) Let us therfore come boldly to the thron of grace, that we may obtaine mercy, and find grace to help in time of need He. 14.6. (c) The gates of Hell shall not prevaile against the Church, Mat. 16.18. (d) The Lord sayd; Satan hath desired you, that he may sift you as wheate, But I have prayed for thee, that thy faith faile not, L. 22.31 32. (e) God will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are able; but will with the temptation make you able to beare it, 1 Cor. 10.13. (f) Yee that labour, and are heavy laden, I will give you rest, Mat. 11.28. (g) The God of peace shall tread Satan un∣der your feete shortly, Rom. 16.20. Rsist the divell, and he will flee from you, Iam. 4.7. (h) The Lord knoweth how to deliver the godly out of temptations, 2 Pet. 2.9. God will with temptation make away to escape, 1 Cor. 10.13. (i) Alas, that day is great, there is none like it, it is even the time of Jacobs trouble,
but he shall be saved out of it, Ier. 30.7. Sixth. To such as are desolate, and for∣saken of Friends. The Lord will have compassion upon us, and re∣member us with everlasting mercy, yea when our spirits are afflicted, although he seeme to be angry with us and to have forsaken us (k) he will never forsake us, whosoever doe (l) nor forget (m) nor fayle us (n), but will come unto us (o) and dwell (p) and continue with us alwaies in this condition (q) he despiseth not (r) but heareth our prayers (s) and will performe his promises to us (t) he will take care for, helpe and deliver us when we cry (u) even when our neerest and deerest friends forsake us (w) and when we are counted as castawayes (x) and all helpe fayles us (y) and no man lookes after us (z) yet the Lord will restore us to joy, and dignity, be we never so much hated, contemned, and rejected. (a. 15) (k) The Lord hath called thee as a woman forsaken and a wife of youth when thou wast refused: for a small moment have I forsaken thee, but with great mercies will I gather thee, With everlasting kindnesse will I have mercy on thee, Isa. 54.6.7, 8.
(l) I will not leave thee, Gen. 28.15. & Heb. 13.5. I will not forsake my people, 1 Kings, 6.13. & Ps. 94.14. & 2 Sam. 12.22. Deut. 31.6.8. (m) Can a woman forget her sucking child? yea they may forget, yet will I not forget thee, Behold I have graven thee upon the palmes of my hands, thy wals are conti∣nually before me, Isa. 49 15, 16. (n) I will not fayle thee, Heb. 13.6. & Josh. 1.5. & Deut. 31.8. (o) I will come to you, Ioh. 14.18. (p) I will dwell among the children of Israel, 1 Ki. 6.13. The Lord forsaketh not his Saints, Psal. 37.28. (q) Lo, I am with you alwayes, even unto the end of the world, Mat. 28.20. I am with thee in all places whither thou goest, Ger. 28.15. (r) He will not despise the prayer of the destitute, Psal. 102.17. (s. (v.) He shall deliver the needy when he cryeth; the poore also, and him that hath no helper, psal. 72.12.
(t) I will not leave thee untill I have done that which I have spoken to thee of, Gen. 28.15. (w) When my father and my mother for∣sake me, then the Lord will take me up, Psal. 27.10. (x.y.z.) I will heale thee, saith the Lord, because they called thee an outcast, say∣ing, this is Sion whom no man looketh after, Ier. 30.17. (a. 15.) Seaventhly, To the Fatherlesse. The Lord will be their Father (b) their Saviour will not leave them fatherlesse (c) he will come to them (d) and shew them mercy (e) and heare their prayers (f) and send them helpe (g) and relieve their wants (h) and preserve them alive and prove for them food and raiment (k) and maintaine their cause (l) and doe them right against such as wrong them. (m) (b) God is a Father of the fatherles, Psal. 68.5. (c.d.) I will not leave you Orphanes, Iohn 14.18. (c) In thee the fatherlesse findeth mercy, Hose. 14.3. Thou wilt cause thine Eare to heare the fatherlesse, Psal. 10.17.18.
(g) Thou art the helper of the Fatherlesse, verse. 14. (h) The Lord relieveth the Fatheriesse, Psal. 146.9 (i) (k.l.m.) He doth execute the judgement of the Fatherlesse, giving him food d ral∣ment, Deut. 10.18. Thou wilt judge the Fatherlesse, Psal. 10.18. Eightly to Widdowes. The Lord will preserve them (n) and relieve their wants (o) and maintaine their cause (p) and will doe them right (q) and blesse their estate. (r) (n) Let thy Widowes trust in me, I will preserve them, Jer. 49.11. (o) The Lord relieveth the Widow, Psl. 146.9. (p) A judge of the Widowes is God in his holy habitation, Ps. 68.5. (q) He doth execute the judgements of Widow, Deut. 10.18. (r) The Lord will establish the border o the Widow, Pro. 15.25.
Ninth. To Strangers. The Lord loveth (s) preserveth (t) provideth for them (u) and will dee. (s.v.) The Lord loveth the stranger,  giving him food, and raiment, Deut. 10.18. (t) The Lord preserveth the strangers, Psal. 146.9. Tenth. To these, or any of these, or any other any way injured by others. The Lord respecteth their miseries (w) ac∣cepteth their enduring griefe (x) and outward wrongs (y) he will heare their prayers against them that wrong them (z) and maintaine (a. 16) and defend thest cause (b) and execute judge∣ment for them (c) and doe them right (d) and preserve them from such, when they sigh unto him (e) and will deliver them out of their hands, though they be most wicked and cruell (f) al∣though the oppressed be poore and miserable, and though their oppressours be to strong for them and spoyle them, (g) and will avenge those or them (h) and playne such terribly (i) and will save the oppressed from their hands, though they
watch to wrong them (k) and seeke to stay them (l) and have caught them (m) and would con∣demne them (n) and had judged them (o) they shall not be left to their wills that hate them, (p) God will helpe them (q) and cause the op∣pressours, and their terrour to cease (r) and will bring them under us, deale they never so deceit∣fully, and violently against us (s) All these the Lord will worke for us, against such as doe us any kind of injury (t) That oppresse us (u) that vex us (w) That oppresse us with Ʋsury (x) that spoyle us (y) That deceive us (z) That doe us violence (a. 17) That rob us (b) that wrong us in justice (c) that tyrannize over us (d) or an way trouble us (e) for our further assurance of all these, The Lord beholds the injuries done unto us (f) and taketh our cause into his own hands (g). (w) Pretious shall their bloud be in his sight Ps. 72.14. (x.y) If a man for conscience toward God, endure griefe, suffering wrongfully, This is acceptable with God, 1. Pe 2. 19.20. (z) Thou shalt neither vex a stranger nor oppresse him, Yee shall not afflict any Widow, or Fa∣therlesse Child,
If thou afflict them in any wise, and they cry at all unto me, I will surely heare their cry, If thou lend money unto any of my peo∣ple that is poore by thee, thou shalt not be unto him as an Usurer, If thou at all take thy brothers rai∣ment to pledge, thou shalt deliver it to him; It shall come to passe, when hee cryeth unto me, that I will heare, for I am gra∣tious, Ex. 22.21.22, 23.25, 26, 27. & Ps. 10.14.18. & 12.5. & 22 24. (a. 16) The Lord shall throughly plead their cause, Ier. 50 34. (b) Their Redeemer is mighty, he shal plead their cause, Pro. 23.11. & 22, 23. (c) The Lord executeth righteousnesse, and judgement for all that are oppressed, Ps. 103.6, 7.8. & 72 4. & 146.7. (d) See the foregoing proofes, & Ps. 9.8. (e) For the oppression of the poore, for the sighing of the needy, now will I arise saith the Lord, I will set him in safety, Thou O Lord shalt preserve them, Psa. 12.5.7. (f) I will deliver thee out of the hand of
the wicked, and I will redeem thee out of the hand of the terrible, Ier. 15.21. (g) Lord, who is like unto thee, who de∣liverest the poore, from him that is too strong for him, yea the pore and the needy from him that spoileth him? Psal. 35.10. (h.i) (k.l.) The wicked watcheth the righteous, and seeketh to slay him, The Lord wil not leave him in his hand, Psal. 37.32, 33. (m) I will set him in safety from him that would ensnare him, Psal 12.5. (n) Hee shall stand at the right hand of the poore, to save him from those that con∣demne his soule, psal. 109.31. (o.p) The Lord will not leave him in his hand, nor condemne him when he is judged, psal. 37.33. (q.r.) The poore committeth himselfe un∣to thee, thou art the helpe of the father∣lesse, that the man of the Earth may no more oppresse, psal. 10.14.18. (s) He shall judge the poore of the people he shall save the children of the needy, and shall breake in pieces the oppres∣sour.
He shall redeeme their soule from deceit and violence, psal. 72.4.14. (t.u.w.x) See the quotation at the fore∣going letter (z) Exedus 22.21.22.23.25, 26, 27. (y) See the foregoing (g) psal. 35.10. (z.a. 17) See the precedent (s) psal. 72.14. (b.c) Rob not the poore, neither oppresse the afflicted, For the Lord will plead their cause, and spoyle the soule of those that spoile them, pro. 22.22.23. () See the foregoing quotation at (f) Ieremy 15.21. (e) If thou afflict them in any wise, I will surely heare their cry. Ex. 22.23. (f.g) Thou beholdest mischiefe and spite, to requite it with thy hand, psal. 10.14. Eleventh. To such as are Banished for the Truth. The Lord pitties them, there is hope for them, (h) They shall returne home againe (i) to their own heritage (k) They shall be blessed here pleatifully, and enjoy heaven for evermore. (l) See the fifteenth. (h.i.) There is hope in thine end, sayth the
Lord, that thy children shall come againe to their owne border, Jeremi. 31.17. (k) It shall come to passe, after I have pluck∣ed them out, I will bring againe e man to his heritage, Ier. 12.15. (l) Every one that hath forsaken Houses, brethren or sisters or father or mother wife or children, or Lands for my name sake, shall receive an hundred fold, an shall inherit everlasting Life, Mat. 19.29 & Mar. 10.29.30. Twelf. To such as forsake whatsoever is neerest and deerest to them for the same Cause, See the precedent Quotation. (l) Thirteenth. To such as suffer the losse and spoyling of their goods for the same cause. The Lord will defend their cause (m) and re∣store their losses (n) Those that spyle us shall be spyled (o) Those, that rob us shall be robbed (p) The Lord will spyle their Soules (q) and restore rest to us (r) and blesse us here (s) and give us hea∣ven for ever (t) and all that were our Adversaries shall be captived. (v)
(m) The Lord will plead their Cause Pro. 22.23. (n) The Lord hath torne, and he will heale us, and he hath smitten, and he will bind us up, Hose. 6.1. (o.p) They that spoyle thee, shall be a spoyle, and all that prey upon thee, wil I give for a prey, Ier. 30.16. (q) The Lord shal spoile the soule of those that spoile them, Pro. 22.23. (r) Jacob shal returne, and be in rest, Ieremy 30.10. (s) See the precedent. (l) (t) Yee tooke joyfully the spoyling of your goods, knowing that you have in Hea∣ven a better, and an induring substance, Heb. 10.34. (v) All thy adversaries every one of them shal goe into captivity, Ier. 30.16. Fourteene: To such as are wounded for the same Cause. The Lord wil heale us. (w) (w) I wound, and I heale, Deut. 32.29. Hose. 6.1. I am the Lord that healeth thee, Ex. 15.26. & Iob. 5.18.
Fifteene, To Captives. The Lord will not cast such off (x) nor abhor (y) nor destroy them (z) nor roote them out (a. 18.) but will plant and build them againe (b) and not breake covenant with them, nor despise them (c) but will have compassion upon them (d) and re∣member his Covenant to them (e) and be a Sanctuary for them (f) yea though they were Cap∣tives a far off, and among the heathen (g); God will give them favour in the sight of their cap∣tivers (h) that they shall use them well (i) it shall goe well with them (k) The Lord will regard them to doe them good (l) he will heare their mourn∣ing (m) and be found of them (n) and will reward their sufferings (o) and deliver them (p) and will bring them back to their own Country (q) and heritage (r) not forgetting one of them (s) though never so much scattered (t) Our captived chil∣dren shall be delivered (u) when they and we are in greatest extremity (w) He will settle us in our former estate, (x) and will preserve us safe (y) and give us rest (z) and make us prosper (a. 19)  will contend with them; that contend with  (b) None shall makeus afraid (c) All these things will he Lord doe for us, that his Name may begl  among his and  enemies. (d)
(x.y) When they be in the Land of their e∣nemies, I wil not cast them away, neither will I abhor them, Levit. 26.44. (z.a. 18. b) I wil bring them againe to this Land and I will build them, and not pull them downe, and I wil plant them, and not pluck them up. Ier. 24.6. (c) Neither wil I abhor them, to destroy them utterly, and to breake my covenant with them, Levit. 26.44. The Lord despiseth not his prisoners, Psal. 69.33. (d) I will cause their captivity to returne, and have mercy upon them, Ieremy 33.26. (e) I wil for their sakes remember the Covenant of their Auncestours, Levit. 26.45. (f.g) Thus saith the Lord God, although I have cast them far off among the hea∣then, and although I have scattered them among the countries, yet wil I be to them as a little Sanctuary, Ezek. 11.16. (h) He made them to be pitied of all them that carried them captives, Psal. 106.46. (i.k) The Lord sayd Verily it shall be wel with thy remnant, verily I will cause the
enemy to entreate thee well in the time of affliction, Ier. 15.11. (l) I wil set mine eyes upon them for good, Ier. 24.6. (m) The Lord did heare the groaning of the prisoner, Ps. 102.20. (n) I will be found of you, saith the Lord, Ier. 29.14. (o) Thy worke shal be rewarded, Ieremy 31.16. (p) Thou shalt goe even to Babilon: there shal thou be delivered, Mics. 4.. He bringeth out those, which are bound with chaines, Psal. 6.8.6. The Lord looseth the prisoners, Psal. 146.7. I will cause their captivity to returne, Ier. 33.26. (q.r.s.) I wil bring againe every man to his hentage, and every man to his Land, Ier. 12.15. & 31.17. & 24.6. I wil bring you againe into the place, whence I caused you to be carried away captive, Ier. 29.14. I wil assemble you out of the courtries, whee you have bin sttered, and I wi gie you the Land of Isral, Ezek. 11.17. &  30.10. & 46.27.
(t) See the precedent Quotations, & Ezek. 20.41. (u) I will save thy seed from the Land of their captivity, Jeremy 30.10 & 46.27. (w) The Lord wil loose those that are ap∣pointed to death, Psal. 102.20. (k) I will bring them againe to this Land, and I will build them, and plant them, Jer. 24.6. (y) I wil cause them to walke in a strait way, wherein they shal not stumble, Jer. 31.9. (z) a. 19) They shal returne, and be in rest and be quiet, Jer. 30.10. (b) I wil contend with him that contendeth with thee, Isa. 49.25. (c) None shall make them afraid, Jeremy 46.27. (d) I wil bee sanctified in you before the heathen, and yee shal know that I am the Lord, when I have wrought with you for my Names sake, Ezek. 20.41.44.
Sixteene. To such as are Sick. That the Lord will strengthen (e) and case us (f) and take away all manner of sickenesse (g) and Diseases (h). See before the fourteenth. (e.f.) The Lord wil strengthen him upon the bed of languishing, thou wilt make all his bed in his sicknes, psal. 41.3. (g) I wil take sicknesse away from the midst of thee, Ex. 23, 25. (h) The Lord wil take away from thee all sickenesse, and will put none of the evill Diseases of Aegypt upon thee: Deut. 7.15. Seventeene. To such as suffer Hunger, and Thirst. The Lord will not forsake such (i) but will heare (k) and deliver them (l) when it is greatest (m) so that there seems no reliefe (n) The Lord will give food (o) to fulnesse (p) yea in abundance (q) of the best things (r) in due season(s) assuredly (t). The Lord will provide such a dwelling place (u) and settle them (w) They shall sow and plant (x) and be satisfyed (y) with fruitfull increase (z) rea rather then faile God will work wonders for such. (a 20)
(i) When the poore and needy seeke water, and there is none, and their tongue fail∣eth for thirst, I the Lord will heare them, I the God of Israel wil not forsake them, Isa. 41.17. (k.l.m.) Hungry and thirsty, their soule fainted in them, Then they cried unto the Lord in their trouble and hee delivered them out of their distresses, psal. 107.5.6. (n) See the precedent Quotation, at (i). (o) The Lord giveth food to the hungry. Psal. 146.7. Verily thou shalt be fed, psal. 37.3. (p) The first borne of the poore shall feed, Isa. 14.30. & Deut. 10.18. (q) Thou openest thy hand, they are filled with good, psal. 104.28. (r) He should have fed them, with the finest of the wheate, psal. 81.16. (s) Thou givest meate in due season, Psal. 104.27. (t) In truth thou shalt be fed, psal. 37.3. (u.w.x.) Hee maketh the hungry todwel; that they may prepare a City for habi∣tation, And sow the fields and plant vineyards Psal. 107.36.37.
(y) I will satisfie her poore with bread, Psal. 123.15. (z) He makes them sow the fields, which may yield fruits of increase, Psalme 107.37. (a. 20) When the poore seeke water, and there is none, I will open rivers in high places, and fountaines in the midst of the Vallies, I will make the Wildernesse a poole of water, and the dry land, springs of water. Isa. 41.17.18. Eighteen. To such as are naked. That the Lord will cloath them (b). (b) If God so cloath the grasse of the field, which to day is, and to morrow is cast in∣to the oven, shal hee not much more cloath you; O yee of little faith? Mat. 6, 30. & Lu. 12.28. Nineteen. To such as are in any kind of outward want. The Lord forgetteth not their complaint (c) nor their poore estate (d) He will not forsak (e) nor despise (f) nor hide his face from us (g) nothing good for us shall be wanting (h) Our hope shall not perish for ever (i) The Lord will shew us mer∣cy
(k) esteems our sufferings deerely (l) will pre∣serve our Soules (m) and be our hopein adversi∣ty (n) and our strength (o) even when we are in distresse (p) He will prepare our hearts to seek him (q) will up at our sighs (r) heare our desires (s) and prayers (t) He will be our refuge (u) our portion (w) God will provide (x) in greatest ex∣tremity, apparently (y) and will take care for us (z) and susteine us (a. 21) and nourish us as a Father (b) He is our helper, when we are poore, and in Heavines (c) He will deliver us out of all our trouble (d) though never so great (e) when we have no helper (f) He will help us in due time, (g) and raise us from a poore to a better estate (h) yea to dignity and authority (i) and give us power to get wealth (k) and make us rich (l) and increase our estate (m) though our beginning be small (n) yea though our Condition be needy, meane beggarly, and most contemptible, yea from the dust and dunghill (o) The Lord will save the poore (p) and the children of the needy (q) He chuseth such to be rich in Faith (r) and heires of heaven. (s) (c.d) He forgetteth not the cry of the af∣flicted. The expectation of the poore, shal not perish for ever, psal. 9.12.18.
(e) The poore,  the God of Israel wil not forsake, Isa. 41.17. & Heb. 13, 6. (f.g) He hath not despised the afflicted neither hath he hid his face from him. Psal. 22.24. (h) There is no want to them that feare Him, They that seeke the Lord shall not want any good thing, Psal. 34.9.10. & 23.1. & 84.11. (i) Thine expectation shall not be cut off. Pro. 23.18. The poore hath hope, Iob. 5.16. (k.l.m) He shal spare the poore, and shalsave the Soules of the needy, Precious shall their bloud be in his sight, Psal. 72.13, 14. & 116.15. (n) Thou art my hope in the day of evill, Ier. 17.17. (o p.) Thou hast beene a strength to the poore, a strength to the needy in his distresse, Isa, 25.4. (q) Thou wilt prepare their heart, Psal. 10.17. (r) For the sighing of the needy, now will I arise saith the Lord, Psal. 12.5. (s) Lord, thou hast heard the desire of the humble, psal. 10.17.
(t) This poore man cryed, and the Lord heard him, psal. 34. & 6.22.24. & 72. & 12.69.29.33. (u) The Lord wil be a refuge for the oppres∣sed. psal. 9.9. (w) The Lord is the Portion of mine inhe∣ritance, psal. 16.5. (x) And Abraham sayd, My son, God wil provide, Gen. 21.8. Consider the Ravens, for they neither sow, nor reape, and God feedeth them, how much more are yee better then the fowles, Lu. 12.24. Seeke yee the Kingdome of God, and all these things shal be added unto you. ver. 31. (y) In the mount of the Lord, it shal be seene, Gen. 22.14. (z) Casting all your care upon him, for he careth for you, 1 pet. 5.7. (a. 21) Cost thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall suaine thee psal. 55.22. (b) As a man feedeth his sonne, so the Lord thy God feedeth thee, Deut. 8.5. () I am poore and sorrowfull, let thy sal∣vation. (s) God set me upon high psal. 69.29.
Behold God is mine helper, psal. 54.4. I am poore and needy. Thou O God art my helper and deliverer, psal. 70.5. Heb. 13.6. (d) This poore man cryed, and the Lord heard him, and saved him out of all his troubles, psal. 34.6.17. The just shall come out of trouble, pr. 12.13. (e) Thou which hast shewed me great and sore troubles, shalt bring me up againe from the depths of the earth, Psal. 71.20. (f) He shall deliver the poore and him that hath no helper. psal. 72.12. (g) The Lord wil be a refuge in times of trouble, psal. 9.9. (h) The Lord raiseth the poore out of the dust. (i) And lifteth up the beggar from the dunghill, to set them among Princes, and to make them inherit the throne of glo∣ry, 1. Sam. 27.8. (k) The Lord it is that giveth the power to get wealth, Deut. 8.18. (l.m.n) Though thy beginning was small, yet thy latter end shall greatly increase, Iob. 8.7.
(o) He raiseth the poore out of the dust, and lifteth the needy out of the dunghill, Psal. 113.7. (p) The afflicted people thou wilt save, 2 Sam. 22.28. & psal. 18.27. (q) He shal save the children of the needy, psal. 72.4. (r.s) Hath not God chosen the poore of this world rich in Faith, and heirs of the Kingdome? Iam. 2.5. Thus farre of the second head of the fourth maine part. The third head, conteineth such Promises, as concerne Perills in Generall, and divers Perills in particular. First, Concerning Perils in Generall. THat the Lord will preserve us from them (t) and deliver us out of them (u) yea out of every mischiefe (w) though they be many (x) and great (y) from and out of all (z) every where (a. 22) in due time (b) speedily (c) carefully (d) constantly (e) continually (f) that the mis∣chiefe shall not touch us (g) nor come nigh us (h)
For more assurance of all these the Lord is and will be our Buckler () Saviour (k) Salvation (l) Refuge (m) Rock (n) Fortresse (o) Shield (p) Tower (q) defence (r) Deliverer (s) Help (t) Strength (u) Hope (w) He is and will be with us (x) charges his Angels to secure us (y) assures us wee shall not be confounded in Evill times (z) nor left to the will of our Ene∣mies [a. 23] (t) The Lord shall keepe you from evill. 2 Thss. 3.3. & 1 Sam. 2.9. In the time of trouble, he shal hide me in his pavilion, Psal. 27.5. & 32.7. & 91.4. The Lord preserveth the faithfull, Psal. 31.23. & 97.10 & 116.6. & 145.20. Be not affrayd of sudden feare, For the Lord shal keepe thy foote from being taken, pro. 3.25.26. And it shal be sayd in that day, Lo, this is our God we have waited for him, and he wil save us, Isa. 25.9. (u) The Lord is my deliver, 2 Sam. 22.2. My heart trusted in him, and I am helped. He is the saving strength of his anointed, psal. 28.7. The Lord will deliver him in time of trouble,
Thou wilt not deliver him unto the wil of his enemies, Psal. 41.1.2. & 91.15. God will redeeme my soule from the power of the grave, psal. 49.15. (n) Many are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord delivereth him out of them al, psal. 34.19. (x) He shal deliver thee in six troubles, yea in seven there shal no evil touch thee, Iob. 5.19. (y.z) See the precedent quotation at. (w) (a. 22) Thy life wil I give unto thee for a prey, in all places whither thou goest, Jer. 45.5. (b) The Lord is a refuge in times of trouble, Psal. 9.9. (c) God shal helpe her, right early, psal. 46.5. (d.e.) I the Lord doe keepe it: I wil water it every moment, lest any hurt it, I wil keepe it night and day, Isa. 27.3. (f) The Lord shall preserve thy going out, and thy comming in; even for evermore, psal. 121.8. & 125.1.2. (g) Troubles shal not touch thee, Iob. 5.19. (h) A thousand shall fall at thy side, and
ten thousand at thy right hand: but it shall not come nigh thee, psal. 91.7. (i) I am thy buckler, Gen. 15.1. (k) Thou art the Saviour of them, that put their trust in thee, psal. 17.7. (l) He is become my salvation, Ex. 15.2. (m) The eternall God is thy refuge, Deut. 33.27. (n.o) And he sayd. The Lord is my Rock, and my fortresse, 2 Sam. 22.2. (p) He is my shield, psal. 144.2. (q.s) My high Tower, and my deliverer, ibid. & 2 Sam. 22.31. (r) He is my defence, psal. 62.2. (t) He is our helper, psal. 33.20. (u) Thou hast beene a strength to the poore, a strength to the needy in distresse Isa. 25.4. (w) Thou art my hope O Lord God, psal. 71.5. () The Lord of hosts is with us. Ps. 46.11. (y) He shall give his Angels charge over thee to keepe thee in all thy wayes. psal. 91.11. (z) They shall not be ashamed in the evill time, psal. 37.19. (a. 23.) Thou (Lord) wilt not deliver
him unto the will of his Enemies, psal. 41.2. There are many the like frequent and obvious. Second: concerning diverse par∣ticular Perils, as 1. Of Fire. T The Lord will shelter us there from (b), it shall not hurt us, though we were in the midst thereof. (c) (b) There shall be a tabernacle for a shadow from the heate, Isa. 4.6. (c) When thou walkest thorow the Fire thou shalt not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee, Isa. 43.2. 2. Of Water. The Lord will preserve us therefrom (d) will be with us in the midst thereof, that we be not hurt thereby ( (d) Surely in the floods of great waters they shal not come nigh unto him, psal. 32.6. (e) When thou passest thorow the waters, I wil be with thee; and thorow the
Rivers, they shall not over-flow thee, Isa. 43.2. 3. Of stormes at Sea. The Lord will be a refuge there from and there∣in (f) and give deliverance there out (g) when Feare, Sorrow, Extremity be at the high∣est (h) and when every one is at his wits end, and knowes no more what to doe (i) God makes the storme which he raised, a calme, and the raging waves still (k) and turnes our griefe unto glad¦nesse, by making all quiet, though the waves went never so high and hollow (l) and brings us to our desired haven (m), The Lord Jesus by one word causeth the violentest tempest to be a great calme (n) though the Ship be covered with waves (o), and filled with water (p) and ready to sink (q) and though the Lord seem to neglect us (r) and we be ready to perish (s) for the winds and Seas obey his voyce (t) Read at large that great deliverance of Paul, and those with him at Sea, from that most terrible tempest  all was most desperate (u), and look to the Lord in like distresse (w) for he ruleth the raging of the Sea, when the waves therof arise, he stilleth them. (x) (f) Thou hast bin a refuge from the storme Isa. 25.4.
(g.h.i.k.l.m.) He commandeth and raiseth the stormy winde, which lifteth up the waves, They mount up to the Heaven: they goe down again to the depths; their soule is melted because of trouble, They reele to and fro, and stagger like a drunken man and are at their wits end. Then they cry unto the Lord in their trouble, and hee bringeth them out of their distresses, He maketh the storme a calme; so that the waves thereof are stil; Then are they glad because they bee quiet: so he bringeth them unto their desired haven, Psal. 107.25.26.27.28, 29, 30. (o.p.q.r.s.) There arose a great tempest in the Sea, insomuch that the ship was covered with waves, (and was now ful) but he was asleepe, And his Disciples came unto him, and awoke him saying, Lord save us, we perish (or, Master, carest thou not, that we perish,) And hee saith unto them; why are yee fearefull, O yee of little faith? Then he
arose, and rebuked the winds and the Sea, and there was a great calme, But the men marveiled saying, What manner of man is this, that even the winds and the Sea obey him? Mat. 8.24, 25, 26, 27. Compar'd with Mk. 4.37, 38 39, 40.41. (u) See Acts 27.14. To the end of the Char. (w) Thou which ast shewed me great and sore troubles, shalt bring me up againe, from the depths of the earth, psal. 17.20. (x) The words of, Ps. 89.9. 4. Of Famine. The Lord will not suffer us to famish but preserve us in time of Famine (y) He will leave a little remnant from the famine (z) and will now  us (a. 24.) That in the dayes of famine we shall have enough (b) in famine he will deliver us from death (c) and greatest extremity () He will restore us plenty () and lay no more fa∣mine upon us (f) for all these the Lords Eye on us. (g) (y) The Lord will not suffer the soule of the righteous to famish, pro. 10.3. The eye of the Lord is upon them that
feare him; To deliver their soule from death, and to keepe them alive in famine, psal. 33.18.19. (z) I will leave a few of them from the fa∣mine, Ezek. 12.16. (a. 24) He shall sustaine thee, Psal. 55.22. (b) In the dayes of famine they shall be sa∣tisfyed, psal. 37.19. (c) In famine he shall redoeme thee from death. Job. 5.20. (d. g) See the Quotation at the fore∣going, (y). (. f.) I will call for the corne, and will in∣crease it, and lay no famine upon you, Ez. 36.29. (g) The eye of the Lord, is upon them that feare him, to keepe them alive in famine, Psal. 33.18 19. 5. Of Pestilence. The LORD will leave a few there from (h) and deliver us thereout, e it never so noy me, (i) and destroying (k) cutting of day and night (l) though a very fu escape (m) we shall no be affraid therof, be it never so terrible (n) The ame shall not come nigh us, (o) nor our dwellings (p) though never so many perish round about  (q)
(h) I wil leave a few of them from the pesti∣lence, Ez. 12.16. (i.k.) Surely he shall deliver thee from the noysome pestilence. Thou shalt not be affayd for the terrour by night, nor for the arrow that flyeth by day, Psal 91.3.5. (m) See the precedent. () (n.o.p.q) Thou shalt not be affrayd, for the pestilence, that walketh in darkeness nor for the destruction, that wasteth  noone day, A thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right hand, but it shall not come nigh thee. psal. 91.6.7. 6. Of Inchantment. The same shall not hurt us. () () There is no inchantment against Jacob Numb. 23.23. Promises to comfort settle,  and incou∣ragens, against and in a day of battell, against Gods and our enemies; or against any other imployments of Warre, with the severall dangers thereof.
The LORD will fight for us (s), Wshall not goe with haste and disorder against our Enemies (i) nor fly from them (u), The LORD goes with us (w) His presence is more for us, then al that can be against us (x) God can as easily help with none, as with the greatest power (y) He will preserve us, from our Enemies (z) is most perillous times (a. 25.) when we call up him (b) and will deliver us out of their hands () though they tompasse us (d) with multitudes (e), and thrust sore at us (f) We shall not be hurt by the sword (g) no not in the day of Batteh (h). As he hath preserved us (i) he will pre∣serve us (k) The greatest must have safety from him (l), when nothing clse can avayle, (m) We shall e secured from our foes, be they never so  (n) gilant (o), and industrious (p) wick  (q) cruell; Though never so many fall a∣bout us (i) though never so few escape (s) thoug  fare them (t) We shall not fall by the swr (u) The last harme shall not befall us (w) nor comnigh us (x) None shall touch us to hurt u (y) though no other meanes can secure us (z) The LORD will be an Enemy to our Enemi (.26) He will afflict them that afflict us (b) he will frustrate their subtile enterprizes (c)  violent attempts against us (d) None shall stan
against us (e) nor prespr (f) Their secr Counsels shall be confound (g) they shall feare us (h) and flee from us (i) We shall chase then () One shall chase many of them (l) many wayes with great disorder to them (m) They shal fall before us (n) and be overthrown (o) We shal tread them under foot (p) God shall trea them down for us, (q) He will cast them o (r) and destroy them all (s) and root them o (t) and give them before us (u) and destroy th with a mighty destruction (w) even their nam from under Heaven (x) They shall fall by our sword (y) they shall be cast down, and destroy∣ed sudenly (z) till they be brought to nought (a. 27) Without mercy (b) Therfore their hearts shall be hardned to come against us (c), The LORD will subdue them unto us (d) and cloath them with shame (e) and give us power to be aveng'd n them (f) and lift up our heads above thm (g) We shall see their fall (h) and have our dsire pn them (i) and rejoyce in their ruine (k) and laugh them to scorne (l) yet feare, considering Gods judgments upon them (m): for all these the LORD who is a man of War (n) walketh in the mst of our Camp (o) and is our chief Captain. (p) (s) The Lord shall sight for you. Ex. 14.14.
& Deut. 1. 29.30 & 3.22. & 20.3, 4. & 2 Chror. 32.8. & Ps. 118.6, 7. (t.u.) Yee shall not goe out with haste, nor goe by flight: Isa. 52.12. (w) The Lord your God is hee that goes with you to fight for you, Deut 20.4. (x) Feare not, for they that bee with us, are more, then they that be with them 2 Ki. 6.16. (y) And Asa. cried unto the Lord, and sayd; Lord, it is nothing with thee to help, whether with many, or with them that have no power, 2 Chron. 14.11. (z) I will cal upon the Lord who is worthy to be praised, so shall I be saved from mine enemies, Ps. 18.3. (a. 2) They shal not be ashamed in the evil time, Psal. 37.19. (b) I will call on the Lord, who is worthy to be praised; so shall I be saved from mine enemies, 2 Sam 22.4. (c) He shal deliver you out of the hand of all your enemies, 2 Ki. 17.39. & Exodus 14.13. & 1 Sam. 7.3. & 2 Sam. 22.2. & Jer. 1.8. (d.e.f) They compassed me about, all Nati∣ons
compassed mee about, but in the Name of the Lord I wil destroy them, Thou hast thrust sore at me, that I might fall, but the Lord helped mee, Psal. 118.10.13. (g) He delivereth David his servant from the hurtful sword, Psal. 144.10. (h) Thou hast covered my head in the day or battell, Ps. 40.7. & 55.18. (i.k.) David sayd, The Lord that delivered me out of the paw of the Lyon, he wil deliver me out of the hand of this Phili∣stim, 1 Sam. 17.37. (l) See the preceding g. (m) This is the Word of the Lord unto Ze∣rubbabel, saying, Not by Army, nor by power, but by my Spirit, Zech. 4.6. & Ps. 33.16, 17. (n) I wil not be affrayd of ten thousands of people, that beset me round, Salvation belongeth unto the Lord, Psal. 3.6.8. & 27.1, 2, 3. & 2 Chrona 20.15. (o.p.q) The wicked watcheth the righte∣ous, and seeketh to slay him, But  sation of the righteous is of the  shall delie them from the
wicked, Psal. 37.32.39, 40. & Jer. 15.21. (r) See, Psal. 91.7. (s) I will leave a few of them from the sword, Ez. 12.16. (t.u) Thou shalt not be given into the hands of the men of whom thou art affrayd. For I wil surely deliver thee, and thou shalt not fall by the Sword, Jer. 39.17, 18. (w) There shal not an haire fall from the head of any of you, Acts 27.34. & Mat. 10.30. (x) See 91.7. (y) I am with thee, no man shall set on thee to hurt thee Act. 18.10. (z) An horse is a vaine thing for safety, Behold the eye of the Lord is upon them that feare him, to deliver their soule from death, Ps. 33 17, 18 19. (a. 26. b) I wil be an enemy unto thy ene∣mies, and I wil afflict them that afflict thee, Ex. 23.22. (c.d) The Lord is the strength of my life, of whom shal I be affrayd? When the wicked even mine enemies came upon mee to eae up my flesh,
they stumbled, and fell, Psalme 27.1.2. (e) There shal not a man of them stand be∣fore thee, Iosh. 10.8. & Deut. 11.25. (f) Fight you not against the Lord God, for you shall not prosper, 2 Chron. 13.12. (g) Be not affrayd, fight for your brethren, And when our enemies heard, that it was knowne unto us, and God had brought their counsel to nought, that wee re∣turned every one to his worke, Nehemiah, 4.14 15. (h.i) I wil send my feare before thee, and I wil make al thine enemies turne their backes unto thee, Exodus 23.27. Deut. 11.25. (k. l. m. n.) Yee shall chase your enemies, and they shall fall before you, by the Sword, Five of you shal chase an hundred, and an hundred of you shal put ten thou∣sand to flight, Levit. 26.7.8. Iosh, 23.10. Deut. 32, 3. & Deut. 28.7. () My persecutors shal be ashamed, the everlasting confusion shal never bee for∣gotten, Ier. 2.80. () Through God w shal doe
For hee it is that shal treade downe our enemies, Ps. 60.12. & Mal. 4.2. (r.s) I wil destroy all the people, to whom thou shalt come, And I wil send hornets, that shal drive out the Canaanite before thee, Ex. 23.27, 28. & 33.2. (t.u.w.x) The Lord thy God, wil put out these Nations before thee, I shal deliver them unto thee, and shal destroy them with a mighty destruction, Thou shalt destroy their name from un∣der heaven, Deut. 7.22, 23, 24. (y) See, Levit. 26.7. (z) Hee shal bring them down before thy face, so that, thou shalt destroy them quickly Deut. 9.3. (a. 27) See the foregoing, t. (b.c) It was of the Lord, to harden their hearts that they should come against Israel in Battell, that hee might destroy them utterly, that they might have no f∣vour. Iosh. 11.20. (d.f) It is God that avengeth me, and bring∣eth down the people under me, 2 Sam. 22 48. Psal. 18.27. (e) His enemies wil I cloath with shame, Psal. 132 18.
(g) Now shal my head bee lifted up a∣bove mine enemies round about mee, Psal. 27.6. (h) The righteous shal see their fal, Pro. 29.16. (i) The Lord taketh my part, with them that helpe mee, therefore shal I see my desire upon them that hate me, Psal. 118 7. & 59.10. & 91.8. (k.l) The righteous see it, and are glad, and the innocent laugh them to scorne, Iob. 22.19. & Ps. 58.10. (m) The Righteous, shal see and feare, Psal. 52.6. (n) The Lord is a man of War, Ex. 15.3. (o) The Lord thy God walketh in the midst of thy Campe, to deliver thee, and to give up thine enemies before thee, Deut. 23.14. (p) God himselfe is with us for our Cap∣taine, 2 Chron. 13.12. Ioshua lift up his eyes, and behold there stood a man over against him, with his sword drawn in his hand, And he said, as Captain of the host of the Lord, am I now come, Iosh. 5.13, 14. Thus farre, the third chiefe head, of the fourth maine part.
The fourth chiefe head conteineth such Promises, and comfortable places, as concerne Death. THE LORD hath appointed Death to all Men (q) He sendeth it (r) and hath set the time (s) The place () The manner therof in generall (u) in particular, as if we dy by the Sword (v) by famine, (x) by pestilence (y) or in Captivity (z) None can deliver, either him∣self (a. 28) or any other from Death (b). The Lord will be with us when we are dying (c) to direct (d) to comfort us (e) to deliver us from the feare therof, for which Christ dyed, and over∣came the Devill (f) He will deliver us from Death, that it shall not hurt us (g), nor have pow∣er, or victory over us (h) Our Death, when, where or howsoever it be, is highly esteem'd of God (i) We need feare none evill in the midst therof (k) By death, we are freed from all sin (l) and misery (m.) Our Soules are presently carried into hea∣ven (n) by the holy Angels, to that end ap∣pointed by the Lord (o) Our bodies shall rest in their graves, as in a sweet bed, in peace (p) Our
rotting flesh shall rest in hope (q) Our stinking carcasses shall have an happy Resurrection, (r) and these our vile bodies shall be changed into incorruptible (s) immortall (t) spirituall (u) and most glorious bodies, like to the glorifyed body of Christ Jesus (w) and this by his all powerfull working (x). We shall be most graciously acquit∣ted, and received by our blessed Saviour, at that great day of judgement (y), and then in Soule and body enjoy all perfect holines, and happines in heaven for evermore (z) See the Promises of everlasting life; So that death by Christ is to us advantage, (a. 29.) and the passage to life eternall (b) By death we are the Lords (c) to live for ever with him (d) The Righteous hath hope in his death (e) The day thereof is better, then the day, that one is born. (i) (q) It is appointed unto all Men once to die, Heb. 9.17. & Psal. 49.19. &, Eccl. 3.2. (r) The Lord killeth; hee bringeth downe to the Grave, 1 Sam. 2.6. & Deu. 32.39. (s) Iob. 28.3. () There yee shal die, Ier. 42.16. He shal die in the place, whither they have led him captive, Ier. 22.12. Ez. 17.16. Isa. 22.18.
(u) Unto God the Lord, belong the issues of death, Psal. 68.20. (w.x.y.z.) Thus saith the Lord, such as are for the Sword, to the Sword, and such as are for the famine to the famine; and such as are for the captivity to the cap∣tivity, Jer. 15.2. Yee shal die by the Sword, by the fa∣mine, and by the pestilence, Ier 42.22. & 21.9. & 38 2. & 42.17. & Ez. 7.15 Amos 7.11. & Ez. 5.12. & 6.12. & 17.16. (a. 28) What man is he that shall deliver his Soule from the hand of the Grave? Psal. 89.48. (b) None can by any meanes redeeme his brother that he should not see corrupti∣on, Ps. 49.7.9. (c) Though I walke through the Vallies of the Shadow of Death; thou art with me, Psa. 23.4. (d) Hee wil be our guide even unto Death Psal. 48 14. () Thy rod, and staffe, they comfort mee, Ps. 23 4. (f) He himselfe tooke part of the same, that through Death, he might destroy him that had the power of Death, that is the Devil,
And deliver them, who through feare of Death were all their life time, subject to bondage, Heb. 2.14, 15. (g) I wil ransome them from the power of the Grave, I wil redeem them from death Hos. 13.14. (b) See the preceding g and, 1 Cor. 15.54. (i) Precious in the sight of the Lord, is the Death of his Saints, Psal. 116.15. & 72.14. (k) In the valley of the shadow of Death, I wil feare no evil. psal. 23 4. (l) Hee that is dead, is freed from sinne, Rom 6.7. (m) Blessed are the dead, which die in the Lord, they rest from their labours, Re. 14.13. & Isa. 57.2. There the wicked cease from troubling, and there the weary be at rest, They heare not the voyce of the op∣pressour, The servant is free from his Master, Job. 3.17.18, 19. (n) And Jesus sayd unto him, to day thou shalt be with mee in Paradise, Luke, 23.43. (o) Are they not ministring spirits, sent
forth to minister for them, who shal be heires of salvation? Heb. 1.14. () He shal enter into peace, they shal rest in their beds, Isa. 57.2. (q) My flesh shall rest in hope, Psal. 16.9. (r) Though after my skin▪ wormes destroy this body, yet in my flesh shal I see God, Job. 19.26. Many of them, that sleepe in the dust shal awake, some to everlasting life, and some to everlasting shame and contempt, Dan. 12.2. This is the Fathers wil, that al which he hath given me, I should raise up agai at the last day. John. 6.39.40. & Matth. 24.30. There shal be a resurrection of the dead, both of the just and unjust, Acts 24 15. & 1 Thess. 4 15. To the end. 1 Cor. 15. Cap. (s..u) The dead shal be raised incorrup∣tible, For this corruptible must put on incor∣ruption, and this mortal must put on immortality, It is sowne a naturall body, it is rai∣sed a spiritual body. 1 Cor. 15.44.52.53.
(w) The Lord Jesus shall change our vile body, that it may be fshioned like unto his Glorious Body, Phil. 3.20.21. (x) According to the working, whereby hee is able to subdue al things to him∣selfe, ibid. (y) Then shal the King say unto them on his right hand, come yee blessed of my Father, Inherit the kingdom prepared for you. Matth. 25.34 & 23. Ez. 18.22. 2 Thess. 1.7.10. (z) See the forequoted, Rev. 14.13. at. m. (a. 29) To me to die is gaine, Phil. 1.21. (b) Hee that believeth on him that sent me, is passed from Death to Life, Jh. 5 24. (c) Whether wee live or die, wee are the Lords, Rom. 14 8. (l) We which are alive, shall be caught up in the Clouds, to meate the Lord in the Aire, and so shal wee ever be with the Lord, 1 Thess. 4.17. (e) The words of Pr. 14.32. (f) Eccl. 7.3. Thus farre of the fourth and last head, of the fourth maine part.
The fift maine part, assures us many out∣ward blessings, as the Lord sees best for us. First, Such as concerne our selves, as 1. THat the Lord will blesse us (g) with all manner of blessings (h) in all that we set our hand unto (i) he will command his bles∣sing to be upon us (k) and nothing shall hinder or alter it (l) His blessing shall appeare in keeping Evils from us (m) in removing things hurtful (n) in that no good things shall be wanting (), Al things shall be ministred () and all our necessities supplied (q) The Lord will doe us good () and all shall goe well, goe all how it will (s), yea, rather then sayle he will work wonders for us. (f) (g) I will blesse thee, Gen. 26.3 & Deut. 7.12, 13. & 30.16. Psal. 115.12, 13 Pr. 10.6. (h) All these blessings shal come on thee, and shal overtake thee, if thou shalt hear∣ken unto the voyce of the Lord thy God Deut. 28.2.
(i) The Lord shal command the blessing upon thee in al that thou shalt set thine hand unto, Deut. 28.8. Gen. 49.29. (k) See the preceding, i. (l) He hath blessed, and I cannot reverse it Num. 23.20. (m) There shal no evil befall thee, Psal. 91.10. (n) Cal upon me in the day of trouble; I wil deliver thee, Psal. 50.15. (o) There is no want to them that feare him, Psal. 34.9 (p) All these things shal be added unto you, Mat. 6.33. (q) God shal supply all your need, Phil. 4.19. (r) The Lord wil rejoyce over thee for good, Deut. 30.9. Psal. 85.12. Iob. 22.21. Ie. 1.19. (s) All things worke together for good, to them that love God, Rm 8.28. Deut. 4.40. & 6.3.24. & 28.8. Eccl. 8.12 Isa. 3.10. () I wil open you the windowes of heaven, and power you out a blessing. Mal. 3.10. Psal. 46.1.2. Mica. 7 8. Alas, for that day is great, so that none
is like it, it is even the time of Jacobs trouble but hee shal be saved out of it▪ Jr. 30.7. 2. That the Lord will dwell with us () and make us dwell safely (), therefore he will cover us (x) all the day, (y) wen we walk (z) when we rest (. 30) No evill Creatures shall harmeus (b) we shall be quiet from fare of evil (c) and sleep in peace and safety (d); for, for all these the Lord watcheth over us carefully and con∣tinually. () (v) I will dwell amongst the children of Israel, Ex 29.45. Levit. 26 11, 12. 2 Cor. 6 16. 1 Ki. 6.13. (w) Whoso hearkeneth unto me shall dwel safely, Pro. 1.33. Levit. 25.18 19. & 26.5.6. Deut. 33.12.27. Micha 4.3. Zech. 3.10. (x.y) The Lord shal cover him all the day long Deut. 33.12. (z) Thou shalt walke in thy way safely Pro. 3.23. (a. 30) Thou shalt lie downe, and none shall make thee affrayd. Job. 11.19. (b) I wil rid evill beasts out of the Land, Le. 26.6. (c) Pro. 1 33.
(d) Levit. 26.5, 6. (e) A land which the Lord thy God ca∣reth for: the eyes of the Lord thy God are alwayes upon it from the beginning of the yeare, even unto the end, Deut. 11.12. 3. That the Lord will give us outward peace; he will ordain it for us (f) and send it (g) and set∣tle it among us (h), We shall enjoy the fruit of our labours which War had destroyed (i) The enemy shall no more destroy the same (k) The Sword shall no more goe thorow the Land (l) Violence shall no more be heard in the Land (m) nor desolation, nor destruction any more seen (n) The Lord will cause our enemies to haste from , all wapons of War shall be turned into in∣struments of peace (p) and war shall be quite out fuse. (q) (f) Lord thou wilt ordaine peace for us. Isa. 26.12. (g) The Lord wil blesse his people with peace, psa. 29.11. (h) He setteth peace in thy borders, Psal. 147.14. (.k) I wil no more give thy corne to be meat for thine enemies, But they that have gathered it, shal eate it, and praise the Lord, Isa. 62.8.9.
(l) Neither shal the Sword goe through you nd. Lev. 26.6. Mic. 4.3. (m. n) Isa. 60.18. (p. q) They shal beate their Swords into plow-shares, and their Speares into pruning hookes; Nation shal not lift up a Sword against Nation, neither shall they learne Warre any more, Mic. 4.3. 4. That the Lord will give us a setled outward condition; For he will appoint a place for us (r) even of our own (s) and settle us therein (t) in peace (u) and safety (w), without inward vexati∣on or outward trouble (x) or being any more re∣moved (y) though our estate be most miserable and unsetled (z). (r.s) I wil appoint a place for my people, and wil plant them, that they may dwel in a place of their owne, and move no more, neither shal the children of wickednesse afflict them any more, a Sam. 7.10. (t) They that wait upon the Lord, shall in∣herit the land, Psal. 37 9. (v.w) My people shal dwel in a peaceable habitation, and in sure dwellings, and in quiet resting places, Isa. 32.18.
(x) See the foregoing, (r, s) (y) Neither wil I any more remove the foote of Israel from out of the land, 2 Chron. 33.8. (z) The redeemed of the Lord, whom hee gathered out of the lands from the East and from the West, from the North, and from the South, They wandred in the wildernesse, in a solitary way, they found no City to dwel in. Hungry, and thirsty, their soule fainted in them, Then they cryed unto the Lord in their trouble, and hee delivered them out of their distresses, And he led them forth by the right way, that they might goe to a City of habita∣tion, Psal. 107.23. to 7. 5 That the Lord will give us plenty (a. 31) of the best things (b), without scarcity (c) or lack of any thing (d) all this in safety (e) he will giv us power to get substance (f) that it shall be mavle∣lous. (g) (a. 31) The Lord shal make thee plenteous for good, Deut. 28 11. & 11.25. & 33.28. Gen. 49.25. ps. 107 35 37, 38.
(b) Hee filleth thee with the finest of the Wheate, Psal. 147.14. & 81.16. Deut. 33.28. (c) I wil cal for the Corne, and wil increase it, and will lay no famine upon you, Ezek. 36.29. (d) Thou shalt eate bread without scarce∣nesse, thou shalt not lacke any thing, Deut. 8.9. () Israel then shal dwell in safety alone, Deut. 33.28. (f) It is the Lord, that giveth the power to get wealth, Deut. 18.18. (g) Yee shal eate in plenty, and praise the name of the Lord that hath dealt wondr∣ously with you, Joel. 2.26. 6. That the Lord will give us advancement (h) authority (i) and honour (k) though our con∣dition be meane and low, poore and bggarly, vile and miserable (l) though we be sorrowfull and in heavines (m) God will increase the honuor of his servants (n) and make them very high and to be extolld. (o) (h) Waite on the Lord, and keepe his way, and he shall exalt thee, psal. 37.34. Deut. 28.13. & 15.6. Promotion commeth neither from the
East, nor from the West, nor from the South, But God is the Judge; he putteth downe one, and setteth up another, Psal. 75.6, 7. Pro. 4.8. (i) The Lord raiseth up the poore out of the dust, and lifteth up the beggar from the dunghill, to set them among princes, 1 Sam. 2.7.8. psal. 113.7.8. (k) Them that honour me, I wil honour, 1 Sam. 2.30. (l) See the preceding i. and, Psal. 107.41. (m) That those which mourne may be exalted to safety, Job. 5.11. Psalme, 69.29. (n) Thou shalt increase my greatnesse, Psal. 71.21 (o) My servant shal be exalted, and extolled and be very high, Isa. 52.13. 7. That the Lord will give riches (p) in abund∣ance (q). (p) The Lord maketh rich, 1 Sam. 2.7. (q) A faithfull man shal abound in blessings, pro. 28.20. & 15.6. Psal. 112.3. Thou shalt lay up gold as dust, and thou shalt have plenty of silver, Iob. 22.24, 25.
3. That the Lord will open his treasures to us, to helpe us out of debt, and make us able to lend and that we shall not be forced to bor∣rn. (r) (r) The Lord shal open unto thee his good treasure, and thou shalt lend unto many Nations, and thou shalt not borrow, Deut. 28.12. & 15.6. 9. That we shall have a good name (s) among alt (t) even where we have suffered shame (u), for God will cleare our innocency (w) and our memory shall be blessed (x). See reproach. (s.t.u) I wil give them praise and fame in every land, where they have been put to shame, I wil make you a name and a praise, a∣mong al people of the earth, Zeph. 3.19.20. Rom. 13 3. (w) Heshal bring forth thy righteousnesse as the light, and thy judgement as the noone day, Psal. 37.6. (x) The memory of the just is blessed Pr. 10.7. 10. That the Lord will give us health; for we shall not be sik (y) but be kept from Dis∣cases (z) and our maldies shall be remove (a. 32) health shall be restored (b), cur
and amendment shall bee granted, (c). (y) The inhabitant shall not say, I am sick Isa. 33.24. (z.a. 32. b) The Lord will take away from thee al sicknesse, and wil put none of t evil Dileases of Egypt upon thee, Deut. 7.15. Ex. 15.26. I wil restore health unto thee, Jer. 30.17. (e) I will bring it health and cure, and I wil cure them, Ier. 33.6. 11. The Lord will give us favour with men (d), he will make our enemies at peace with us (e) they shall have compassion on us (f) He will cause them to intreate us well in our fflicti∣tion. (g) (d) wil give this people favour in the sight of the Egiptians, Exod. 3.21. & 12.36. Pro. 3.4. (e) When a mans wayes please the Lord, he maketh even his enemies to be at peace with him. Pro. 16.7. (f) Hee made them to be pitied of all those that carried them captives, Psal. 106.46, Ier. 42.12. (g) I wil cause the enemy to intreate thee wel, in the time of evill, and in the time of affliction. Ier. 15.11.
12. The Lord will blesse our warrantable pro∣ceedings in our particular callings (h) for he will never fayle, forsake, or forget us therein (i), but will certainly be with us (k) that we shall prespr (l) and have good successe (m) and all shall goe well (u) and our work shall have a reward (o) He will direct our wayes (p) and establish our counsels (q) and enterprises (r) and bring our busines to passe (s) He will command his blessing to be with us, in all we set our hand un∣to (t) and in every particular employment (u) As he was with others of his, he will be with us (w) in despite of all discouragements and op∣positions. (x) (h) Thou shalt eate the labour of thine hands, happy shalt thou be, and it shal be wel with thee, psal. 128.2. (i) I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee, Heb. 13.5. (k) I am with you saith the Lord of Hosts, According to the word, that I cove∣nanted with you, when yee came out of Egypt, so my spirit remaineth amongst you, Hag. 2.45. Ex. 3.7. (l) Then shalt thou prosper, if thou ta∣kest heed to fulfil the statutes and judge∣ents 1 Chr. 22.13.
(m) Then thou shalt have good successe. Josh. 1.8. (n) See the quotation at (h), Psal. 128.2. (o) Let not your hands be weake, for your work shal be rewarded, 2 Chron. 157. (p) In all thy wayes acknowledge him, an he shal direct thy paths. pro. 3.6. (q) Thou shalt decree a thing, and it shal be established unto thee, Iob. 22.28. (r) By him actions are ordered, 1 Sam. 2.3 (s) Commit thy way unto the Lord,  he shall bring it to passe, psal. 37.5. (t) The words of Deut. 28.8.1 Ki. 2.3. (u) The Lord thy God wil make thee plen∣teous in every worke of thine hand, Deut. 30.9. (w) As I was with Moses so wil I be with thee, Iosh. 1.5. (x) Be not affrayd of their faces; for I am with thee, to deliver thee. Ier. 1.8. 13. The Lord will blesse our journies; For he will never fayle, forsake, or forget us in them, (y) himselfe is (z) and will be with us in them (a. 33) his own especiall presence shall goe with us (b) oimselfe will goe before us (c) to the place ap∣pointed (d), he will send his Angel before us (e) to keep us in the way (f) and to bring us
to the place (g) he will give his Angels charge to guard us in all our journies (h) that the least harme shall not befall us (i), Therefore they are commanded to look carefully, and tenderly to us (k) till they bring us where we would be (l). The Lord himselfe will keep us, whereso∣ever we gee (m), He will goe down with us, and bring us up againe (n) he will protect us going, and returning (o) and wil blesse us, comming in and going out (p) and that continually (q) that the least inconvenience shall not betide us (r) At the end of our journey, he will give us rest (s) and will never leave us, till he hath performed his pro∣mises unto us. (t) (y) The Lord, he it is that doth goe be∣fore thee, he wil be with thee, he will not faile thee, neither forsake thee, Deut. 31.8. Gen. 28.15. (z.a. 33) See the preceeding proofes. (b) My presence shal goe with thee, Ezod. 33.14. (c) See before (y). () I send an Angel before thee, to keepe thee in the way, and to bring thee in∣to the place which I have prepared, Exod. 23 20. (e.f.g) See the foregoing d.
(h.i.k) He shal give his Angels charge ove. thee to keepe thee in all thy wayes. They shal beare thee up in their hands; left thou dash thy foote against a stone, Psal. 91.11, 12. (l) See d before and, Ex. 32.34. (m.n) I wil keepe thee in all places whither thou goest, and wil bring thee againe in∣to this land, Gen. 28.15. (o) The Lord shall preserve thy going out, and thy comming in, for evermore, psal. 121.8. (p) Blessed shalt thou be when thou com∣mest in, and goest out, Deut. 28.6. (q) See o before. (r) Thou shalt walke in thy way safely, and thy foote shal not stumble, pro. 3.23. & 4.12. (s) I wil give thee rest. Ex. 33.14. (t) I will not leave thee, until I have done that which I have spoken to thee o Gen 28.15. 14. Th Lord will blesse our dwellings (u) a e hath blessed (w) and doth blesse the same (x)  that the plague nor any other evill shall  them or us (y) Surly he will wake for  make our abitation pros us (z), Sin shal
be banish'd from (a. 34) peace shall be within (b) and quietnesse without our dwellings (c) We shall dwell safely (d) free from feare of evill, (e) our dwellings shall flourish (t) with pleasure and wealth (g) and be establish'd (h) so that it shall be apparent (i). (v.w) Now it hath pleased thee to blesse the house of thy servant, thou blessest O Lord, and it shal be blessed for ever, 1 Chro. 17.27. (x) He blesseth the habitation of the just, pro. 3.33. (y) There shal no evil befal thee, neither shal any plague come nigh thy dwellings psal. 91.10. (z) The words of Job. 8.6. (a. 34) Thou shalt put away iniquity farre from thy Tabernacles, Iob. 22, 23. & 5.24. (b.c) My people shal dwel in a peaceable ha∣bitation, and in quiet resting places, Isa. 32.18. (d, e) Whoso hearkneth unto me shal dwel safely, and shal be quiet from feare of evil, pro. 1.33. (f) The tabernacle of the upright shal flou∣rish, pro. 14.11.
(g) There is treasure to be desired, and Oyle in the dwelling of the wise, pro. 21.20. (h) The house of the righteous shall stand, pro. 12.7. (i) Thou shalt know that peace shal be in thy tabernacle, Iob. 5.24. 15. The Lord will blesse our store, for he will command his blessing to be theron (k) our Ordi∣nary provision shall be blessed (l) ye our meanest provisions though but of bread and water shal be blessed (m) so that we shall have provision from yeare to yeare. (n) (k) The Lord shall command the blessing upon thee in thy store-houses, Deut. 28.8. (l) Blessed shall be thy basket, and thy dough, Deut. 28.5. (m) He shal blesse thy bread and thy water, Ex. 23 25. (n) Yee shal eate old store and bring forth the old because of the new, Leviticus 26.10. 16. The LORD will blesse us in the field or fruit of the ground (o) plentifully (p) this in every k of fruit (q) in the fruite of our land (r) of our tree (s) of our Cerne, of our Wine (r) our Oyle (u) a
these with increase (w) abundantly (x) that we shall be satisfyed (y). He will give rain to our seed when we sow (z) and bread, of the Earths increase (a. 35) Our sowing (b) our planting shall bring forth fruitfull increase (c) yea exceedingly (d). The Lord will give good things, and our land shall give such increase, (e) that one yeare shall bring forth for three (f) Our threshing shall reach to the vintage, our vintage shall reach to sowing time with plenteousnes (g) and to the fall (h) this from year to year, for untill the fruit of the new come, we shall eate of the old (i) all this for our wealth (k) Therfore our ground shall be fat and fertill () the fruit of the ground shall not be devoured (m) neither shall the vine be barren (n) These bles∣sings we shall enjoy, although there be great scarci∣ty by former miscarriage of fruits (o) yea all these God prepareth, and appointeth for us (p) and unto this end, the Lord will send seasonable weather in sowing time (q) in our severall reapings for Corn, for Wine and Oyle, (r). (o.p) Blessed shalt thou be in the Field, Blessed shal be the fruit of thy ground, The Lord shall make thee plenteous in the fruit of thy ground, De. 28.34.11 (q.) The Lord thy God wil make the plen∣teous in every worke of thine hand, in
the fruite of thy Land for good, Deut. 30.9. (s) I wil multiply the fruite of the Tree, Ezek. 36.30. (t.u) He wil blesse thy Corn, and thy Wine, and thine Oyle, Deut. 7.13. (w) I wil cal for the Corne, and wil increase it, Ezek. 36.29. (x) The floores shal be ful of Wheate, and the fats shal overflow with Wine and Oyle, Ioel. 2.24. Hos. 2.21.22. (y) I wil send you Corne and Wine and Oyle, and yee shal be satisfyed there∣with, Ioel. 2.19. Levit. 25.19. (z.x. 35.) He shal give the raine of the seed, that thou shalt sow the ground withal; and Bread of the increase of the Earth. Isa. 30.23, (b.c.d) They sow Fields, and plant Vine∣yards, He blesseth them so that they are multi∣plied greatly, psal. 107.37, 38. (e) The Lord shal give that which is good, and our land shal yeild her increase, Psal. 85.12. (f.g.h.) Yee shal eate your fil, The land, it shal bing forth fruit for three yeeres,
Until her fruits come in, yee shal eate of the old store, Levit. 25.19.21.22. Your threshing shal reach unto the vin∣tage, and the vintage shal reach unto the sowing time, Levit. 26.5. Psal. 107.36.37.38. (k) The Lord wil make thee plenteous for good, Deut. 30.9. (l) The earth shal be fat and plenteous, Isa. 30.23. (m.n) I wil rebuke the devourer for your sakes, and he shal not destroy the Fruits of your ground, neither shal your Vine cast her Fruit before the time, Malac. 3.11. (o) I wil send you Corne, and Wine, and Oyle, and yee shal be satisfyed there∣with, And I wil restore to you the yeares that the Locust hath eaten, the Canker-worm and the Caterpillar, and the Palmer-worm, Joel 2 19.25. (p) Thou preparest them Corne, when thou hast so provided for it psal. 65 9. (q.r) I wil give you the raine of your land in his due season, the first raine, and the latter raine, that thou mayest gather in
thy Corne, and thy Wine, and thine Oyle Deut. 11.14. & 28.12. Levit. 26.4. Icel. 2.23. Isa. 30.23. psal. 65.10. 17. Promises of seasonable weather upon any occasion. See the last proofes to (q.r.) Thus farre the first head of the fifth maine part. The second head of the fifth maine part containing such Promises, as concerne ours. 1. Such as concerne our children, as, that THE Lord is in covenant with them to be their God for ever (s) he will give them his word and spirit continually (t) he will circumcise their hearts that they may love the Lord unfaignedly (u) he will increase his graces in them (w) his promises belong to them (x) they shall be blessed (y) and not beg their bread (z) The Lord will preserve them though they be poore (a. 36) & provide for them (b) and settle them (c), we shal perceive our seed to be many & great (d) and mighty (e) it shall go well with them after us (f) We shall see our childrens
children (g) The Lords loving kindnesse and righteousnes shall never faile them. (h) Of such is the Kingdom of Heaven (i) for they are holy, (k) (s) I wil establish my Covenant, betweene me and thee, and thy seede after thee in their Generations for an everlasting co∣venant to be a God unto thee, and to thy seede after thee, Gen. 17.7. (t) My spirit and my words shal not depart out of thy mouth nor out of the mouth of thy seede, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds seed, Isa. 59.21. (u) The Lord thy God wil circumcise the Heart of thy seede, to love the Lord thy God, with all thine Heart, and with all thy Soule, Deut. 30.6. (w) The Lord shal increase you and your children, Ps. 115.14. (x) The promise is unto you, and your chil∣dren, Acts 2.39. (y) His seede is blessed, psal. 37.26. pro. 13 22 & 20.7. (z) Yet have I not seene the righteous for∣saken, nor his seede begging their Bread, Psal. 37.25. (a. 36) Hee shal save the children of the needy, psal. 72.4.
(b) His seede shal inherite the Earth, psal. 25.13. (c) The children of thy servants shal con∣tinue, and their seed shal be established before thee, psal. 102.28. (d) Thou shalt know also that thy seede shal be great, and thine off-spring as the grasse of the earth, Iob. 5.25. (e) His seede shal be mighty upon Earth, Psal. 112.2. (f) Thou shalt keepe his statutes, that it may goe wel with thy children after thee, Deut. 4 40. & 5.29. (g) The words. psal. 128.6. (h) The mercy of the Lord, is from everlast∣ing to everlasting, upon them that feare him, and his righteousnesse unto childrens children, psal. 103.17. (i) Jesus sayd, suffer little children to come unto mee, for of such is the Kingdome of God, Matth. 19.14. Mark. 10.14. Luk. 18 16. (k) Your children are holy, 1 Cor. 7 14 Mal. 2.15. 2. Such as concerne our Cattell. The fruit of them in generall shall be blessed (l)
particularly of our kine (m) of our sheep (n) and thus with increase (o) plentifully (p) exceed∣ingly (q) without diminishing (r) The Lord will send Grasse in our Fields for our Cattell (s) and feed them in large, fat, and healthfull pastures. (t) (l.m.n.o.p) Blessed shalt thou be in the fruite of thy Cattell, the increase of thy Kine, and the flockes of thy sheepe. The Lord shal make thee plenteous in the fruite of thy Cattell, Deut. 28, 4.11. & 7.13. & 30.9. (q.r) He blesseth them, that they are mul∣tiplyed greatly, and suffereth not their Cattell to decrease, psal. 107.38. (s) Deut. 11.15. (t) Thy Cattell shal feede in large pastures, Isa. 36.23. 3. Of blessing upon the fruit of the Wombe either of man or beast, as The fruite of the Womb is the gift of God (u) He will keep from barrennesse (w) he maketh the barren fruitfull (x) preserveth the fruit in the Womb (y) keepeth from untimely births (z) and every way blesseth the fruite of the VVomb. (a. 37)
(u) The Lord shal make thee plenteous in the fruit of thy body, and in the fruit of thy Cattell, Deut. 20.11. (w) There shal nothing cast their young, nor be barren in thy Land, Exod, 23.26. Deut. 7.14. (x) Hee maketh the barren Woman, to be a joyfull mother of children, psalme 113.9. (y) He wil blesse the fruite of thy VVombe, Deut. 7.13. (z) See the foregoing (w). (a. 37.) Thus shal the man be blessed, that feareth the Lord, Psal. 128.4. & 127.3. & Deut. 7.13. Thus farre the second head of the fifth maine part. The third head of the fifth maine part, containinh such promises as concerne the Church of God. First, of generall restauration after generall desolation. THat the LORD will cause the ruin'd pla∣ces to be reedifyed (b) and all things to be or∣dered
after the former manner (c) be the pla∣ces never so desolate (d) and be all never so much out of Order (e) be our Estate never so despised or forsaken (f) were we never so far scattered (g) be it never so unlikely, and impossible i mans judgement (h) that all that heare therof shall wonder, feare, and tremble (l) especially consider∣ing how the Lord will plague them, that plagula us (k) and establish us in all peace (l) prosperity (m) health (n) safety (o) joy (p) and pleasure (q) fully freeing us from the hands of our Ene∣my. (r) See before promises to Captives: And concerning this at large, Ez. 34. & 3 cap. & Isa. 49. & 60. cap. &c. (b.c) Thus saith the Lord, the City shal be builded upon her owne heape, and the palace shal remaine after the manner therof, Ier. 30.8. (d. e) Againe there shal bee heard in this place that is desolate, with ut man, and without inhabitant, and without heast.) The voyce of joy, the voyce of the Bride∣grome, the voyce of them that shal bring the sacrifice of praise into the house o the Lord, Ier. 33.10.11. & 18.20.
(f) I wil heale thee of thy wounds, because they called thee an outcast saying, this is Sion whom no man seeeketh after, Ier. 30.17. (g) Lo, I wil save thee from afarre, Jer. 30.10. (h) If it be marvellous in the eyes of the remnant of this people, should it also be marvellous in my eyes saith the Lord of hosts? Zech. 8 6. (i) And it shal be to me an honour before all the Nations of the Earth, and they stral feare and tremble for al the prospe∣rity, that I procure unto it, Jer. 33 9. (k. l) They that spoyle thee, shal be made a spoyle, Thy children shal be as aforetime, and their Congregation shal be established before me, and I wil punish all that op∣presse them, Ier. 30.16.20. Levitious 26.6. (m. n. ) Jacob shal returne and shal be in rest, and in quiet, and none shal make him af∣fraid, J. 30.10. There shal yet old men, and old women dwel in the streets of Jerusalem, And the streetes of the City shal be ful of
boyes and girles, playing in the streets thereof Zech. 8.4, 5. (. q) See before (d.e) Jer. 33.10.11. (r) Strangers shal no more serve themselves of him, Ier. 30.8. Secondly, that the Lord will restore his pure wor∣ship among us; yea in the very place where we for∣merly'd enjoy the sam () and in the same manner (t) we shall be freed from evill teachers and will provide for us good teachers (u) who shall bring us good tidings, (w) and shall teach us what G commands (x) in due season (y) watchfully (z)  constantly. (a. 38) (s.t) Againe there shal be heard in this pl the voyce of them that shal say, praise the Lord of Hosts, and of them that shal bring the Sacrifice of praise, Jerem. 33.10, 11. (v) I am against the Sheaphards, I wil cause them to cease from feeding the flock neither shal the Sheapheards feede them∣selves any more, I wil feede my flocke in a good pasture and they shal lie in a good fold, I wil set up one Shepheard over them, Ez. 34.10.14.23. (w) I wil give to Jerusalem one that bring∣eth good tidings, Isa. 41.27.
(x) I wil raise them up a prophet, and he shal speake unto them. al that I shal com∣mand him, Deut. 18.18. (y) The Lord hath given me the tongue of the learned, that I should know how to speake a word in season, Isa. 50.4. (z.a. 38) I have set watchmen upon thy wals, O Jerusalem, which shall ne∣ver hold their peace day nor night, Isa. 62.6. Thirdly, the Lord will restore good government among us, namely good Judges and Counsellours as in former times (b) They shall be indued with wisdom for counsell (c) and judgment for Justice (d) They shal reverence and cherish the Churches welfare (e), so that all good government in the Commonwealth shal be maintained (f). (b) I wil restore thy Judges as at the first, and thy Counsellours as at the begin∣ning, Isa. 1.26. (c) The Lord giveth wisdome, Pro. 2.6.9. (d) In that day, shall the Lord of Hosts, be for a spirit of judgement, to him that sit∣teth in judgement, Isa. 286. (e) Kings shall be thy nursing Fathers, and their Queenes thy nursing Mothers, Isa. 49.23. & 60.16.
(f) I wil make thy officers, peace and thine exactions righteousnesse, Isa. 60.17 Psal. 85.10.11, Zech. 8 3. Fourthly, We shall see the wealth of Gods Church and peace upon Israel (g). Psalme, 128.5.6. Thus farre of the third and last head of the fifth maine part. The Sixth and last maine part, contei∣ning, 1, Such promises as assure plenty of mererfull rewards to severall  saving Graces, and other good Gifts. 1. Sanctification, Uprightnesse, or consei∣able Obedience; SƲch an one is the child of God (h) and in his favour (i) he shall have saving knowledge (k) his sins shal be forgiven (l) he is justifyed from them (m) and freed from Gods anger punishing of them () He feares God (o) shall leave sin (p) ha∣teth lying (q) hath the Lords Name for his re∣fuge
(r) his prayers are heard (s) he shall be strog  the Lord (t) and walketh surely (u) and bold () even as a Lion (x) He shal have joy (y) and peace (z) His enemies shal be at peace (a. 39) and al crea∣tures in league with him, (b) he shall b reserved from evil (c) and escape out of troubl (d) shll have an happy outward estate (e) he shall want no good thing (f) God wil honor him (g) so wil our Saviour (h) He excels his neighbour (i) The evil man shal bow before him in feare, obedience & respect to him (k) his house shal have much treasure (l) The riches of the wicked shal fal to his share (m) he shal find favour with men (n) he shal have content in minde (o) If he be poore, he is dears in Gods sight, & worthier then the ungodly rich (p) If he be in presperity others ioy (q) if in authority the people rejoyce (r) the poore have Justice from them, nd fare the better for them (s) He is a joy to hs pa∣rents (t) His children shall escape evil (u) and be blessed after him (w) The land where he lives shal be preserved, and if it be in distresse be delive∣red by his meanes (x) The place where  shall prosper, (y) He is and shewes himself truly wise (z) He shall be well gouern'd (a 40) keeps his Soule (b) Shewes he love Christ (c) belongs to Christ (d) GOD the Father d Christ the Redeemer loves him (e) and
will reveale himself to him (f) Aske what he will, he shall have it (g) He shewes he is justifyed by Christ, (h) All shall be great gaine to him (i) He  all find that Christ esteems, affects, remembers, will guide, preserve, provide for, and every way doe good unto him, as if he were his brother, fifter, Mother, for so he names him (k). Of what Na∣tion, calling, degree soever he be, the Lord will give him glory, honour and peace (l) He shall have long life on Earth (m) be happy in death (n) be freed from damnation (o) His labour shall not be in vaine (p) but he shall have a mercifull and full reward of every good work (q) He hath right in the Tree of life, and shall enter into the Gates into the City (r) shall sit in the throne of Christs Majesty with him (s) and judge the World (t) and the evill Angels (u) He shall be every way blessed here (w) and for ever∣more. (x) (h) For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sonnes of God, Rom. 8.14. psal. 15, 1.2. (i) So shalt thou finde favour and good un∣derstanding in the sight of God and man. Pro. 34. He loveth him that followeth a ter righteousnesse, Pro. 15.9. (k) A wicked man hardneth his face: but
as for the upright he directeth his way. The integrity of the upright shall guide them. The righteousnesse of the per∣fect shall direct his way, Prov. 21.29. & 11.3.5. (l) By mercy and truth iniquity is puged: and by the feare of the Lord men depart from evill, Pro. 16.6. (m) The just man walketh in his integrity. He that followeth after righteousnesse and mercy, findeth life, righteousnesse and honour, Pro. 20.7. & 21.21. (n) Riches profit not in the day of wrath: but righteousnesse delivereth from death Pro. 11.4. (o) He that walketh in his uprightnesse fea∣reth the Lord, Pro. 14.2. (p) The high way of the upright is to depart from evil, Pro. 16.17. (q) Good understanding giveth favour: but the way of Transgressours is hard, Pro. 13 15. (r) The Name of the Lord is a strong Tower: the righteous man runneth to it, and is safe, pro, 18.10. (s) But if any man be a worshiper of him and doe his wil, him he heareth, Joh. 9.31.
(r) The way of the Lord is strength to the upright, Pro. 10.29. (u.w) He that walketh uprightly walketh surely, pro. 10.9. (x) But the righteous are bold as a Lyon, Pro. 28.1. (y) But the righteous doe sing and rejoyce. Light is sowen for the righteous: and gladnesse for the upright in heart, pro. 29.6. psal. 97.11. (z) And as many as walke according to this rule, peace be on them, and mercy, and on the Israel of God, Gal. 6.16. Pro. 15.15. (a. 38.) When a mans ways please the Lord, ee maketh even his enemies to be at peace with him, Pro. 16.7. (b) For thou shalt be in league with the stones of the Field, and the Beasts of the Field shall be at peace with thee, Jb. 15.23. (c.d.) The righteousnesse of the upright shal deliver him, The righteous in delivered out of trouble Pro. 11.6. Id. 8.6. () What man is he that desireth life, and loveth many daye, that he may see good.
Depart from evill, and doe good, seeke peace, and pursue it, Ps. 34 12.14. (f) No good thing will he withhold from them that wlke uprightly, Ps. 84.11. Seeke yee first the Kingdome of God and his righteousnesse, and all these things shall be added to you, Mat. 6.33. But he that keepeth the Law, happy is he, Pro. 29.18. Godlinesse is profitable to all things: having the promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come, 1 Tim. 4 8. (g) For them that honour me I will ho∣nour, 1 Sam. 2.30. Hee that followeth after righteousnesse, and mercy, findeth life, righteousnesse, and honour, Pro. 21.21. (h) If any one serve me, him will my Father honor. Jo. 12.26. (i) The righteous is more excellent then his neighbour, Pro. 12.26. (k) The evill bow before the good, and the wicked at the Gates of the Righteous, Pro. 14.19. (l) In the House of the righteous is much Treasure. pro. 15.6. (m) Though he heape up silver as the dust,
and he prepare raiment as the day: he may prepare it, but the just shall put it on, and the innocent shall divide the sil∣ver, Job. 27.16.17. (n) Let not mercy and truth forsake thee: binde them about thy neck, write them upon the Table of thine heart: so shalt thou finde favour and good understand∣ing in the sight of God and man, Pro. 3.3.4. (o) The righteous eateth to the satisying of his soule, pro. 13.25. (p) Better is the poore that walketh in his uprightnesse, then he that is perverse in his wayes though he be rich, Pro. 28.6. (q) When it goeth well with the righteous the City rejoyceth, pro. 11.10. (r) When the righteous are in authority, the people rejoyce, pro. 29 2. (s) The righteous considereth the cause of the poore, pro. 29.7. (t) The Father of the righteous shall great∣ly rejoyce: and hee that begetteth a wise child shall have joy of him, Pro. 23.24. (u) But the seede of the righteous shall be delivered, pro. 11.21.
(w) The just man walketh in his inte∣grity; his children are blessed after him pro. 20.7. (x) He shall deliver the Island of the inno∣cent: and it is delivered by the pureness of thine hands, Iob. 22.30. (y) When it goeth well with the righteou the City rejoyceth, and when the wic∣ed perish there is shouting. By the blessing of the upright the City is exalted, pro. 11.10.11. (z) Who so keepeth the Law is a wise fo pro. 28.7. (a. 39) By the wisedom of the upright the City is exalted, pro. 11.11. The integrity of the upright shall guide them, v. 3. The righteousnesse of the per∣fect shall direct his way, v. 5. (b) He that keepeth the Commandement, keepeth his own soule, pro. 19.16. (c. d. e. f.) He that hath my Commandements and keepe them, hee it is that loveth mee: and hee that loveth mee shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and manifest my selfe to him, Io. 14 21. (g) If yee abide in me and my words abide
in you, yee shal aske what yee will, and it shall be done unto you Jo. 15.7. (h) For not the hearers of the Law are j∣stified befre God but the doers of the Law, Rom. 2.13. (i) But godliesse with contentment is great gaine, 1 Tim. 6.6. (k) For who soever shall doe the wil of my Father which is in Heaven, the same is my brother, my sister, and mother, Mat. 12.50. Mar. 3.35. My mother, and my beethren are these which heare the word o God and doe it, Lu. 8.21. (l) But Glory, Honour, and peace to every man that worketh good, to the Jew first, and also to the Gentiles, Romans 2.10. (m) What man is he that desireth life and loveth many dayes that he may see good? depart from evill, and doe good seeke peace and pursue it, Psal. 34 12.14. (n) But the righteous hath hope in his death Pro. 14.32. But righteousnesse delivers from death, ch. 10.2. & 11.4. (o) In the way of righteousnesse there is life and in the path way thereof there is no death, Pro. 12.28.
(p) Be yee stedtash, unmovable, alwayes abounding in the worke of the Lord for you know that your labours not in vaine in the Lord, 1 Corin. 1.15.58. (q) Blesse are they that doe his Comman∣dements that they may have right in the Tree of life, and may enter in thorow the gates into the City, Rev. 1.22.14. (s) And Jesus said unto them, verily I say unto you, that yee which have followed me in the regeneration, when the Son of man shall sit in the Throe of hi glory, yee also shall sit upon  Thrones, judging the twelve tribes o Israel, Mat. 19.28. (t.u) Doe you not know that the Saint shall judge the world, 1 Cor. 6.2. Know you not that we shall judge Angells? Much more things that pertaine to this life? v. 3. (w) But he that keepeth the Law happy i he, Pro. 29.18. Blessed is he that keepeth the sayings.  the prophecy of this booke, Rev. 22.7. I yee know these things appy are yee  yee doe them, Iob. 13.17.
(x) To them who by patient continuance in well doing seeke for glory, and ho∣nour, and immortality; eternall life, To him that ordereth his conversati∣on aright, will I shew the salvation of God, Ps. 50.23. & 15. & 24. Righteousnesse tendeth to life, Pro. 11.19. In the way of righteousnesse is life, Pro. 12.28. Hee that followeth after righteousnesse and mercy findeth life, righteousnesse, and honour, Ch. 21.21. Who so walketh uprightly shal be saved, Ch. 28.18. 2. To saving Knowledge. Such shall understand Gods Word and walk in his wayes (y) shal discerne things aright in his calling (z) shall be guided in the way of life. (a. 40) and instruct others () and govern his tongue (c) and increase thingin (d) and be estemed wise (e) & in∣crease in wisdom (f) walking sleeping, wakeing he shall have peace and good government (g) and honour (h) and find good (i) and be strong in grace, and vertue and boldnesse (k) and in∣crease his strength (l). His Family shall prosper, be made rich, and be established (m)  shall have eternall life (n) and a great measure of glory. (o)
(y) Who is wise and hee shall understand these things, prudent and he shall know them? for the wayes of the Lord are right, and the just shall walke in them, Hos. 14.9. (z) A wise mans heart discerneth both time and judgement, Eccl. 8.5. (a. 40) When thou goest it shall lead thee, when thou sleepest it shall keepe thee; and when thou awakest it  talke with thee. For the Commandement is a lamp, and the Law is light. Pro. 6.22.23. (b) Daniel 10. (c.d) The heart of the wise teacheth his mouth, and addeth learning to his lips, Pro. 16.23. (e.f) Understanding is a wel-spring of life to him that hath it, pro. 16.22. (g) When thou gest it shall lead thee; when thou sleepest it shall keepe thee; when thou awakest, it shall talke with thee, Pal. 6.22. (h) Length of dayes are in her right hand and in her lefe hand are riches, and ho∣nour, Pro. 3.16. (i) He that handleth a matter wisely shall  good, Pro. 16.20.
(k.l.) A wise man is strong: yea a man of knowledge encreaseth strength, Pro. 24.5. (m) Through wisdome is an house builded, and by understanding it is established. And by knowledge shall the Chambers be filled with all pretious and pleasant riches, Pro. 24.3.4. (n) And this is life eternall, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent, Jo. 17 3. (o) And they that be wise shall shine as the brightnesse of the firmament: and they that turne many to righteousnesse as the stars for ever and ever, Dan. 12.3. 3. To confession of sinnes. He that does so, though for his sins he were fal∣len into extreams misery; the Lord will not for∣get, despise, abhor, or forsake him utterly; but will remember his covenant to deliver him (p) He shall have mercy (q) and have all his sins forgiven him (r) His Soule shall be restored often times (s) shall escape Hell, and injoy Hea∣ven. (t) (o) If they shal confesse their iniquity and the iniquity of their athers, with their trespasse which they trespassed
me, and I that also they hvewalked con∣trary unto me. And that I also have walked contrary unto them, and have brought them in∣to the Land of their enemies, &c. Ver. 41, 42, 43. I will not cast them away, neither will I abhor them to destroy them utterly, & to break my covenant with them, for I am the Lord their God. But I will for their sakes remember the covenant of their Ancestors, whom I brought forth out of the Land of Egypt, in the sight of the Heathen, that I might be their God, Lev. 26 40, 41, 42 44. (q) But who so confesseth and forsaketh them shall have mercy, Pro. 28.13. (r) If we confesse our sinnes, hee is faith∣full, and just to forgive us our sinnes, and to cleanse us from all unrighteous∣nesse, 1 Ioh. 1.9. (s.t) He looketh upon men and if any say I have sinned, and perverted that which was right, and it profited me not: He will deliver his Soul from going into the pit, and his life shall see the light; Lo all these things worketh God often times with man,
To bring back his Soule from the pit, to be enlightned with the light of the live∣ing, Job. 33.27, 28, 29 30. 4. To an humble heart, and godly sorrow for sinne. The LORD dwelleth with such an one (u) and hath especiall respect to his griefes (w) he is nigh at hand to heare, and to help in distresses (x) a con∣trite spirit is acceptable to God, a broken heart he will not despise (y) he healeth the broken hearted and bindeth up his sores (z) He will re∣vive the spirits of the humble (a. 4) And the heart of the contritones (b) and will not con∣tend herein for ever, nor be alwayes wrath, lst the spirits should faile before him (c) The Lor will restore comforts to such mourners (d) their condition is blessed (e) they shall be comforted (f) and their sorrow shall be turned into joy (g) the LORD takes especiall notice of such relenting, weeping▪ humbling (h) He will preserve such from generall calami (i) and give them his heavenly Kindom (k). (u) For thus saith the high and lofty one that inhabiteth eternity, whose name is called holy; I dwell in the high and holy place: with him also that is of a humble and contrate spirit to  the
spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite ones, Isa. 57.15. (w) But that this man will I looke, even to him that is poore and of a contrite spirit, and that trembleth at my word. I have seene his wayes and will heale him, I will leade him also, and will restore comforts unto him, and to his mourners, Isa. 66.2. & 57.18. (x) The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a broken heart: and saveth such as be of a contrite spirit, Psal. 34.18. (y) The Sacrifice of God are a broken spirit: a broken and a contrite heart (Oh God) thou wilt not despise, Psal. 51.17. (z) He healeth the broken heart; and bind∣eth up their wounds, Psal. 147.3. (a. 41. b) I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble and to revive the heart of the contrite ones, Isa. 57.15. (c) For I will not contend for ever, neither will I be alwayes wroth; for the spirit should faile before mee and the soule which I have made, Isa. 57.16.
(d) I have seen his wayes and will heale him: I wil leade him also, and restore comforts unto him and to his moumers, vers. 18. (e.f) Blessed are they that mourne: for they shal be comforted, Mat. 5.4. Blessed are yee that weepe: for yee shall laugh, Lu. 6.21. (g) Looke unto Abraham your father, and unto Sara that bare you; for I called him alone and blessed him and increased him. For the Lord shall comfort Zier. He wil comfort all her waste places, and he wil make her wildernesse like Eden: and her desert like the garden of the Lord: Joy and gladnesse shall be found therein, thanksgiving and the voyce of melody, Isa. 51.23. (h) Because thy heart was tender, and thou hast humbled thy selfe before the Lord, when thou heard st what I spake against this place, and against the inhabitants thereof, that they should become a deso∣lation and a curse, and hast rent thy cloths, and wept before me; I also have heard thee, saith the Lord, 2 Ki 22.19. (i) Behold therefore I wil gather thee unto thy fathers, & thou shalt be gathered in
to thy grave in peace, and thy eyes shal not see all the evil that I wil bring upon this place, v. 20. Blessed are the poore in spirit: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven, Mat. 5.3. 5. To our mourning for the sins of the times. The Lord gives his Angel most strickt charge to mark such, that they may be spared from, and to preserve such, that they be not so much as touched, by any generall calamity. (l) (l) And the Lord said unto him go through the midst of the City, through the midst of Jerusalem, & set a mark upon the fore∣heads of the men that sigh, and that cry for al the abominations that are done in the midst thereof. Slay utterly old and yong; both maids, and little children, and women but come not neere any man upon whom is the mark. Ezek 9 46. 6 To true Faith in Jesus Christ. Such as have the same are Gods children (m) shall have remission of their sins, & justification from them (n) The father himself loves them (o) Such shall repent (p) & be obedient (q) And abound in grace (r) & patiently waite Gods leisure (s) They are in a blessed estate (t) shall prospe (u) shall not perish (w) but by death shall passe to life (x) And have everlasting like. (y)
(m) But as many as received him, to them gave hee power to become the Sons of God, even to them that believe on his name, Io. 1.12. Now to Abraham and his seede, were the promises made, Gal. 3.16. (n) To him give all the Prophets wit∣nesse, that through his name whosoever believeth in him shall receive remission of sins, Acts 10.43. (o) For the Father Himselfe loveth you, because yee have loved mee, and have believed that I came out from God, Joh. 16.27. (p) He that believeth in me though hee were dead, yet shall he live. Joh. 11 25. Whosoever believeth on me, should not abide in darkenesse, Jo. 12.46. (q) Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that believeth on me the workes that I doe, shall he doe also, and greater workes then these shall he doe because I got un∣to my Father, Ioh. 14.12. (r) He that believeth on me, as the Scrip∣ture hath said, out of his belly shall flow Rivers of living waters, Joh. 17.38. (s) He that believeth, shall not make haste, Isa. 28.16.
(t) Blessed are they that have not seeme, and yet have believed, Jo. 20.29. (u) Believe in the Lord your God: so shall you bee established believe his pro∣phets: so shall yee prosper, 2 Chron. 20.20. (w) That whosoever believeth in him should not perish but have everlasting life. He that believeth on him is not con∣demned. Hee that believeth on the Sonne hath everlasting life, Ioh. 3.15.18.36. He that heareth my word and believeth on him that sent me hath everlasting life, and shal not come into condemnation, but is passed from Death unto Life. Ch. 5.24. And whosoever liveth, and believeth in me; shall never dy, Ch. 11.26. (x) He that heareth my word, and believeth on him that sent mee, hath euerlasting life, and shall not come into condemna∣tion, but is passed from Death to Life, Joh. 5.24. (y) And this is the will of him that sent me that every one that seeth the Sonne, and believeth on him may have everlaste∣ing life  6.40.
For God so loved the World that he gave his only begotten Sonne that who∣soever believeth on him, should not pe∣rish but have everlasting life, Ch. 3.16 & 20.31. Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt bee saved and thy House, Acts 16.31. For by grace you are saved, through Faith, and not of your selves, Eph. 2.8. For God sent not his Sonne into the World to condemne the World: but that the World through him might be saved Joh. 3.17. For therefore we both labour and suf∣fer reproach, because we trust in the li∣ving God, who is the saviour of all men, especially of those that believe, 1 Tim. 4.10. 7. To turning from, or forsaking of sie. Such shall have mercy (z) The LORD is reach to forgive such (a. 42) And will forgive such (b) And repent of the evill threatned (c) And will not suffer his wrath to fall upon such (d) nor keep his anger against such (e) nor punish such (f) He will returne to such (g) And dwell with such (h) And be alwayes with such for
good (i) such shall injoy outward blessings (k) and inward peace (l) Christ will give such light both light of knowledge, and comfort (m) such shall not be damned (n) But sa∣ved (o). (z) He that covereth his sinnes shal not prosper, but he that confesseth and for∣saketh them, shal have mercy, Pro. 28.13. (a. 42.) Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts: and let him returne unto the Lord and hee wil have mercy upon him; and to our God for hee will abundantly pardon, Isa. 55.7. (b) It may be that the House of Juda wil heare all the evill that I purpose to doe unto them, that they may returne every man from his evill way, that I may for∣give their iniquity, and their sinne, Jer. 36 3. (c) Turne yee unto me with all your heart, with fasting with weeping, and with mourning. And rent your heart and not your garments, and turne unto the Lord your God. for he is geacious, and mer∣cifull, slow to anger, and of great kind∣nesse, and repenteth him of the evill, Ioc. 12.13.
(d.e.) Returne thou back-sliding Israel, saith the Lord, and I will not cause mine anger to fall upon you: for I am mercl∣full, saith the Lord, and will not keepe anger for ever, Jer. 3.12. (f) And goe not after other Gods to serve them and to worship them and pro∣voke me not to anger with the workes of your hands, and I will doe you no hurt, Ier. 25.6. And the redeemer shall come to Zion, & to them that turne from transgression in Iacob, Isa. 59.20. (g) Turne you unto me, saith the Lord hosts, and I will turne unto you, saith the Lord of hosts, Zoc. 1.3. Mal. 3.7. (h.i) Now let them put away their whore∣dome, and the carcasses of then Kings far from me, and I will dwell in the middest of them for ever, Ez. 43.9. (k) If yee be willing and obedient, you shall eate the good of the Land, Isa. 19. If thou wilt put away thine abomina∣tions out of my sight, then shalt thou not remove, Jer. 4.1. (l) Aske for the old paths where is the good way, and walke therein, and yee
shall finde rest for your Soules, Jer. 6.16. (m) Awake thou that sleepest, and arise from the dead, and Christ shal give thee light, Eph. 5.14. (n) But if the wicked will turne from all his sinnes, that he hath committed, and keepe al my statutes, And doe that which is lawfull and right: shal surely live he shal not die, Ez. 18.21. (o) O Jerusalem wash thy heart from wicked∣nesse that thou mayst be saved, Jer. 4.14. 8. To VVatchfulnesse over our wayes. We are in a happy condition (p) and shall be most happy when our Saviour comes to us either by leath, or judgement (q) For the Lord will plenti∣fully reward us (r) and make us most happy in Heaver, where Christ himself will servens. (s) (p) Happy is the man that feareth alwayes, pro. 28.14. (q) VVatch therefore for you know not what houre your Lord will come. Bles∣sed is that servant, whom his Lord, when he commeth shal finde so doing. Mat. 24.42 46. (r) Vide suprà (q) of a truth I say unto you he wil make him ruler over all that hee hath. Blessed are those servants whom
the Lord when he commeth shall finde watching: verily, () I say unto you, that he shal gird him∣selfe, and make them to sit downe to meate, and wil come forth and serve them. And if he shal come in the second watch, or come in the third watch, and finde them s, blessed are those servants, Lu. 12.43.44.37.38. v. 9. To hope in, or patient awaiting for Gods helpe. He that does so is in a blessed estate (t) his ho shall not faile nor deceive him, (u) he shall not  ashamed (w) the Lord thinks thoughts of peac towards him, and will give an nd according to his hop (x) The Lord will comfort him (y) the end shall be gladnesse (z) he shall have outward prosperity (a. 43) The Lord will heare him (b) and increase his spirituall and temporall wel∣fare. (c) Hereby he may be assured of salvation (d) And shall injoy unconceiveable, unutterable hap∣pinsse in heaven (e). () Happy is he that hath the God of Jacob for his helpe, whose hope is in the Lord his God, psal. 146.5. Jer. 17.7. Blessed i he that waiteth, Dar. 12.12.
(u) The expectation of the poore shall no perish for ever. psal. 9.18. (w) Let none that waite on thee be asham'd, psal. 25.3. (x) For I know the thoughts I thinke to∣wards you, saith the Lord, Thoughts of peace and not of evill, to give you an expected end, Ier. 29.11. (y) Waite on the Lord: be of good cou∣rage, and hee wil strengthen thy heart; waite I say, on the Lord, Psal. 27.14. (z) The hope of the righteous shall be glad∣ness, Prov. 10.28. (a. 43) But those that waite upon the Lord, they shall inherit the Earth, psal. 37.9. (b) I wil waite for the God of my salvation my God wil heare me, Mic. 7 7. (c) Blessed is the man that trusteth in the Lord, and whose hope the Lord is. o he shall be as a Tree planted by the wa∣ters, and that spreadeth out her  by the River: and shal not see when heate commeth; but her leafe shal be greene and shal not be carefull  the yeare of drought, neither shall cease
from yeelding Fruite, Jer. 17.7, 8. (d) For we are saved by hope, Rom. 8.24. (e) For since the beginning of the World, men have not heard nor perceived by the care, neither hath the eye seene O God, besides thee, what hee hath pre∣pared for him that waiteth for him, Isa. 64 4. 10. To trust in God. He that does so is blessed (f) the Lord takes espe∣ciall notice of him (g) and will be good unto him (h) he will preserve such from back-sliding (i) and comfort his heart (k) Surely his heart sha Joy in the Lord (l) The eye of the Lord is up∣on him (m) Such shall be delivered from grea∣test extremity (n) And be preserved in famine (o) Such shall be exalted (p) The Lord will be a sheld to him (q) And give him good successe (t) And a plentifull roward for ever (). (f) Who so trusteth in the Lord happy is e, Pro. 16.20. He that putteth his trust in the Lord shal be made fat, Pro. 28.25. Blessed is the man that trusteth in him. Psalme 34.8. Vidspr (c)  17.7.8.
(g) The Lord is good, a strong hold in the day of trouble, and he knoweth them that trust in him, Nahum. 1.7. (h) The Lord is good unto them that waite for him, to the Soule that seeketh him, Lam. 3.25. (i) I have trusted also in the Lord, there∣fore I shal not slide, Psal. 26.1. For the King trusteth in the Lord, and through the mercy of the most high he shal not be moved, Ps. 21.7. (k) Waite on the Lord, be of good courage, and hee shall strengthen thy heart, Psal. 27.14. (l) For our heart shall rejoyce in him: be∣cause we have trusted in hys holi name, psal. 33.21. (m.n.o) The eye of the Lord is upon them that feare him, upon them that hope in his mercy, psal. 33.18. To deliver their souls from death, and to keepe them alive in famine, v. 19. (p) But who so putteth his trust in the Lord shall be safe, Pro. 29.25. (q) He is a buckler to all those that trust in him, Psal. 18.30. Hee is a shield unto them that put
their trust in him, Proverbs 30.5. (r) Trust also in him: and he shall bring it to passe Psal 37 5. Believe in the Lord your God so shal you be established: believe his Pro∣phets, so shall you prosper, 2 Chron. 20.20. (s) Cast not away therefore your confi∣dence, which hath a great recompence of reward, Heb. 10.35. 11. To such as have inward Peace. It is acceptable to God (t) And the God of Peace, will be with us (u). (t) For the Kingdome of God is not meate and drink, but righteousnesse, and peace, and Joy in the holy Ghost. For he that in these things serveth Christ is accep∣table to God, and approved of men, Rom. 14.17, 18. (u) Live in peace: and the God of love and peace shall bee with you. 2 Cor. 13.11. 12. To such a have joy in the holy Ghst That Joy is cur strength (w) And coueth go bath (x) And math a cheerfull countenanc (y) And causeth continually  in the Lora Name (z) We are herin aseptable to God (a, 44)
And shall have our hearts desire (b) And be every way bessed (c). (w) For the joy of the Lord is your strength Neb. 8.10. (x) A merry heart doth good like a medi∣cine, Pro. 17.22. (y) A merry heart maketh a cheerfull coun∣tenance. Pro 15.13. (z) Blessed is the people that know the jo∣full sound: they shal walke, O Lord.  the light of thy countenance. In  name shall they rejoyce all the day, a  in thy righteousnesse shall they be ex∣ted. For thou art the glory of  strength, and in thy favour our ho  be exlted, Psal. 89.15, 16, 17. (a. 44) Vide suprd (t) Rom. 14.17 18. (b) Delight thy selfe in the Lord and he shall give thee the desires of thy heart, Psal. 37.4. () Blessed are the people that know the joy∣full sound: they shall walk, O Lrd, in the light of thy countenance, ps. 89.15. 13. To such as feare God. As the Texts quoted are annexed thereun∣to, out of the 112. Psalme as followeth, He is in a blessed condition (d) his seed shall be  sled
(e) And mighty (f) He shall have abundance (g) with contentment (h) is iustified by Christs righteousnesse (i) in greatest sorrow he shall have comfort, and in greatest need, deliverance (k) He is endued with mercy, compassion, sin∣cerity, and charity (l) He shall persevere in goodnesse; and the Lord will never forget him (m) Nor his good works (n) He shall live fear∣lesse in evill times (o) And not be troubled at evill tidings (p) His heart is fixed (q) yea established (r) He trusteth in the Lord (s) He shal see his desire upon his Enemies (t) He shall be happy here and for ever (u). And further out of the 28. Psalme, he is and shall be blssed (w) God will provide for him (x) And prosper him in his particular calling (y) He shall be blessed with many sweet children (z) He shall see th peace of Gods people all his days (a. 45) And his childrens children (b) The wicked shall be ex∣treamly vexed at his prosperity (c). And lastly out of divers other places of Scripture, he is accepted of God (d) The Lord will teach him and be in covenant with him (c) He shall de∣part from evill (f) Be justified from sin, have his Soule Eased, and his evill nature healed (g) his inward peace shall be continued (h) And he shal increase in grace (i) Gods feare is the beginning
of wisdom (k) The Lord will shew him the bs way (l) his Eye is upon him (m) to preserve him in famin (n) To keep him from Calamity (o) T deliver him out of extremity (p) He is, (q) An shall continue in the way of life (r) he shall hav riches, and honour (s) Life, and health (t) J (u) And contentment (w) And outward prosp∣rity (x) His seed shall prosper also (y) he shal prolong his days (z) And shall persevere in go (a. 46) God will heare his cry (b) And fulf his desires (c) he shall prevaile against his En∣mies (d) he is in the right way to happines (e) An shall be saved. (f) (d) Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord, Psal. 112.1. (e.f) His seede shall be mighty upon earth, the generation of the upright, shall be blessed, v. 2. (g.h.i.) Wealth and riches shal be in his house and his righteousnesse endureth for ever, v. 3. (k.l) Unto the upright there arifeth light in the darkenesse: he is gracious, and full of compassion, and righteous. A good man sheweth favour, and lend∣eth: he will guide his affaires with dis∣cretion, v. 4.5.
(m) Surely he shall not be moved for ever: the righteous shall be in everlasting re∣membrance, v. 6. (n) He hath dispersed, he hath given to the poore: his righteousnesse indureth for, ever, v. 9. (o.p.q) He shall not be affrayde of evill tide∣ings: his heart is fixed trusting in the Lord, v. 7. () His heart is established, he shall not be affrayd, v. 8. (s.u) (s) Vide suprà (o) (t) vid. (r) vid. (n). (w) Blessed is every one that feareth the Lord, Psal. 128.1.8. (x) For thou shalt eate the labour of thy hands, v. 2. (y) Happy shalt thou be, and it shall be well with thee idem. (z) Thy wife shall be as a fruitfull vine by the sides of thine house: thy children like Olive-plants round about thy Table. Behold, thus shal the man be blessed, that feareth the Lord, v. 3.4. (a. 45.) The Lord shall blesse thee out of Zion: and thou shalt see the good of Jerusalem, all the dayes of thy life. v. 5.
(b) Yea, thou shalt see thy childrens chil∣dren and peace upon Israel. v. 6. (c) The wicked shall see it and be grieved, hee shal gnash with his Teeth and melt, away, psa. 112.10. (d) But in every Nation he that feareth him, and worketh righteousnesse is accepted of him, Act. 10.35. (e) The secret of the Lord is with them that feare him: and he wil shew them his co∣venant, psal. 25.14. (f) By the feare of the Lord, men depart from evil, Pro. 16.6. (g) But upon you that feare my name shall the son of righteousnesse arise with hea∣ing in his wings, Mal. 4.2. (h) His soule shall dwel at ease, an his seede shal inherit the Earth, psal. 25.13. (i) Vide suprà (g) Mal. 4.2. And yee shall goe forth and grow up as Calves of th stll. (k) The feare of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, pro. 1.7, psal. 111.10. () Who is the man that feireth the Lord Him shal he teach in the way that  choose, Ps. 25.12.
(m) The eye of the Lord is upon them that feare him, psal. 33.18. (n) To deliver their soule from death: and to keepe them alive in famine, v. 19. (o) The feare of the Lord tendeth to life, and hee that hath it shal abide satis∣fyed: he shall not be visited with evil, Pro. 19.23. The feare of the Lord is a fountaine of life, to depart from the snares of Death, pro. 14.27. (p) Vide suprà (m) and (n) psal. 33.18.19. (q.r.) The feare of the Lord tendeth to life, and he that hath it shall abide satisfy∣ed: hee shall not be visited with ev Pro. 19.23. (s.t) By humility and the feare of the Lord are riches and honour, and life, Pro. 22.4. Feare the Lord and depart from evil: it shal be health to thy navell, and marrow to thy bones, pro. 3.7, 8. (w) His soule shal dwel at ease, and his seed (x, y) shall inherit the earth, Psal. 25.13. (w.x.y.) (z) The feare of the Lord prolongeth days, Pro. 10.27. Like as a Father pitieh his children:
so the Lord pitieth them that feare him, Psal. 103.13. (a. 46) The feare of the Lord tendeth to life; and he that hath it shall abide satisfied, Pro. 19.23. (b.c.) He wil fulfill the desires of them that feare him he also wil heare their cry: and wil save them, Ps. 145.19. (d) Yee shall treade down the wicked: for they shal be ashes under the soles of your feete, Ml. 4 3. (e) Vide suprà (c. 46.) pro. 19.23. (f) Vide surà (b.c.) psal. 145.19. Whoso∣ever among you feareth God, to you is the word of this salvation sent, Acts 13.26. pro. 22.4. Vide suprà (s.t.) 14. To such as feare Gods Word. The Lord will look to him for good (g) And re∣ward him in mercy (h). (g) But to this man wil I looke, even to him that is poore, and of a contrite spirit, and trembleth at my word, Isa. 66.2. (h) Who so despiseth the word shall b destroyed: but hee that feareth the Commandement shall bee rewarded, Pro. 13.13.
15. To such as love God and Christ. God the Father (i) Christ our Saviour loveth him (k) And will reveale himselfe to him (l) our Father and Redeemer will come unto him, and dwell with him (m) God will bring him to his house, there his service shall be accepted, and he shall be refreshed (n) The Lord preserves such here (o) And will make them happy in heaven (p). (i) He that loveth me, shall be loved of my Father, and I wil love him, and wil manifest my selfe unto him, Joh. 14.21. I love them that love me, pro. 8.17. (k.l.m.) If any man love me, he wil keepe my words: and my Father wil love him and we wil come unto him, and make our abode with him, Jo. 14.23. (n) Also the Sonnes of the stranger that joyne them selves to the Lord, to serve him and to love the Name of the Lord, even them wil I bring to my holy moun∣taine, and make them joyfull in my house of prayer: their burnt offrings and their services shal be accepted up∣on mine Altar: for mine House shall bee called an House of Prayer, Isay, 56 6.7.
(o) The Lord presveth all them that love him, psal 145.20. (p) Eye hath not ene nor eare heard, nei∣ther have ened into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him, 1 Cor. 2.9. Blessed is the man that endureth tempta∣tion, for when he is tryed he shall re∣ceive the Crowne of life which the Lord hath promised to them that love Him. Jam. 1.12.8, 2.5. 16. To delight in Gods VVord. Such an one shall have his hearts desire (q). Delight thy selfe also in the Lord and he shal give thee the desires of thine heart. Psa. 37.4. 17. To love to Gods VVord. Such shall have no hurt (r) But great prespe∣rity (s). (r.s.) Great peace have they which love thy Law: and nothing shal offend them, Psal. 119.165. 18. To delight in Gods Word. All as to the feare of God before, pag. 124, 125. out of the 112. Psalme. 19. To our love to Gods Church. The Lord will blesse (t) And prosper suol. ()
() And I will blesse them that blesse thee, and curse him that curseth thee, Gen. 12.3. Numb. 24.9. (u) Pray for the peace of Jerusalem they shall prosper that love thee. Psal. 122.6. 20. To our love to Gods Ministers. In receaving (w) in hearing them, we receive and heare Christ (x) The good we doe to them, is done to Christ (y) And the same will be reward accordingly. (z) (w) He that receiveth you receiveth mee, Mat. 10.40. (x) Hee that heareth you heareth mee. Lu. 10.40. (y) He that receiveth whomsoever I send, re∣ceiveth me, I. 13.20. (z) He that receiveth a prophet in the name of a Prophet shal receive a Prophets re∣ward: and he that receiveth a righteous man, in the name of a righteous man shal receive a righteous mans reward, Mat. 10.41. 21. To our love to Gods Children. Thereby we know we are of the truth (a. 47) And our hearts are assured (b) We are true members of Christs Church, and shall continu
so to the end (c) And are translated from Death to life (d) And shall inherit Heaven for even (e). (a. 47. b) Let us not love in word, nor in tongue; but in Deede and in Truth. And hereby wee know that we are of the Truth, and shall assure our hearts be∣fore him. (c) In whose eyes a vile person is contemn∣ed, but he honoreth them that feare the Lord, Ps. 15.4. (d) Wee know that we have passed from Death to Life because wee love the bre∣thren, 1 Joh. 3.14. (e) Lord who shall abide in thy Taber∣nacle? who shal abide in thy holy hil? He in whose eyes a vile person is con∣temned, but he honoreth them that feare the Lord, psal. 151.4. 22. To our love to Christs comming. We shall have everlasting life. (f) (f) Henceforth there is laid up for mee a Crowne of ighteousnesse, which the Lord the righteous judge shall give me at that day, and not unto me onely, but to them also that love his appearing, 2 Tim. 4.8.
23. To live in untry peace and concord. Such the God of love and peace will live with (g) And will blesse here (h) And make happy for evermore. (i) (g) Be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one minde, live in peace, and the God of love and peace shal be with you, 2 Cor. 13.11. (h. i.) Behold how good and how plea∣sant it is for brethren to live together in unity! For there the Lord comman∣deth his blessing, even life for evermore, Psal. 133.1.3. 24. To those that counsell others for peace. They shall have Ioy. (k) (k) But to the counsellers of peace is joy, Pro. 12.20. 25. To those that make peace with others. They shall bee called Gods Childen, and are blessed. (l) (l) Blessed are the peace-makers: for they shall be called the children of God, Ma. 59. 26. To the humble hearted. God will teach such his way (m) They are
wise (n) The Lord beholds them with love and care (o) And will preserve and deliver them (p) even when others are cast down, they shall be sensibly upheld, and lifted up (q) Their re∣ward is riches (r) Hnour (s) And glory (t) And advancement (t) God gives grace to such (u) Will save them from his wrath in the very day thereof (w) The finall and full reward of humility is everlasting life. (x) (m) The meeke will he guide in judgement: and the meeke wil hee teach his way, Psal. 25.9. (n) But with the lowly is wisdome, Pro. 11.2. (o) Though the Lord be high, yet hath he respect unto the lowly, psal. 138.6. (p.q.) When men are cast down, then thou shalt say there is lifting up: and he shal save the humble, Iob. 22.29. (r) By humility and the feare of the Lord is Riches, and Honour and Life, Pro. 22.4. (s) And before honour is humilitie, Pro. 15.33. (t) But honour shal uphold the humble in spirit, Pro. 29.23. (u) Remove the Dadem, and take off the
Crowne: this shall not be the same: Exlt him that is low, and abase him that is high, Ezek. 21.26. And hee that humbleth himselfe shal be exlted, Matth. 23.12. Luk 14.11. & 18.14. (u) But hee giveth grace to the lowly Prov. 3.34. Iam. 46.1 Pet. 55. The same words. (w) Seeke yee the Lord all the meeke of the Earth, which have wrought his judgement, seeke righteousnesse, seeke meekenesse: It may bee yee shall be hidde in the day of the Lords ange Zeph. 2.3. (x) Vide suprà (r) pro. 22.4. Whosoever there∣fore shall humble himselfe as this little child, the same is greatest in the King∣dome of Heaven, Mat. 18.4. Blessed are the poore in spirit: for theirs is the Kingdome of Heaven, Mat. 5.3. But honour shal uphold the humble in spirit, Pro. 29.23. 27. To the meeke in carriage. They shall be taught spirituall (y) And tem∣porall wisdom (z) And find rest to their Soules (a. 48) And have inward and outwary joy
(b) They shall joy in the holy one of Israel, though they should want outward comforts (c) The Lord will relieve their wants (d) And give them prosperity (e) And honour (f) And full contentment (g) They shall escape Gods wrath (h) And have great and glorious deliver∣ances. (i) (y) The meeke wil hee guide in judge∣ment: and the meeke wil he teach in his way, psal. 25.9. (z) But with the lowly is wisdome, Pro. 11.2. (a. 48) Come unto me al yee that labour and are heavy laden and I wil give you rest, Mat. 11.28. (b.c.) The meeke also shal increase their joy in the Lord and the poore among men shal rejoyce in the holy one of Israel Isa. 29.19. (d) The Lord lifteth up the meeke, Psalm 147.6. (e) But the meeke shall inherit the Earth: and shal delight themselves in the a∣bundance of peace, psal. 37.11. (f) Before honour is humilitie, Prov. 18.12. (g) Vide suprà. [] psal. 37.11.
(h) Videu ra (w) Ze. 2.3. (i) He wil beautify the meeke with salvati∣on, Psal. 149 4. 28. o such as beare affliction aright. They are blessed (k) And shall receive the Crown of glory. () See to hope, pag. 120. And to trust in God pag. 121. (k.l.) Blessed is the man that indureth temptation, for when hee is tryed he sha receive the Crowne of life, which the Lord hath promised to them that love him. Iam. 1.12. 29. To our increasing in goodnesse. Abundance of all hapinesse in heaven for ever more. (m) (m) Well done thou good and faithful servant, thou hast beene faithfull in few things: I wil make thee ruler over many things, enter into the joy of thy Lord and Master. Matth. 25.21. Reade the whole parable, Lu. 19 11. To ver. 20. 30. To perseverance in grace and goodnesse. The Lord will be our God, and make us his Children (n) Our Saviour will confesse our
Names before his Father, and the Angells (o) He will not put our Names out of the Book of life (p) ƲƲe shall be rewarded in due season (q) And not be damned (r) But essaredly saved (s) Christ will grant us to sit with him on his thron () And there to enjoy all fulnesse of blessed∣nes for evermore. (u) (n) He that overcommeth shal inherit al things, and I wil be his God, and hee shal be my Son, Rev. 21.7. (o.p) He that overcommeth the same shal be cloathed in white rayment, and I wil not blot his name out of the Book of life, but I wil confesse his name be∣fore my Father, and before his Angels, Rev. 3.5. (r) He that overcommeth shal not be hurt of the second death, Re. 2 11. (q) Let us not be weary in wel-doing, for in due season wee shal reape if we saint not, Gal. 6.9. (s) But he that shal endure to the end the same shal be saved, Mat. 24.13. (t) To him that overcommeth will I grant to sit with mee in my Throne, Rev. 3 21. (u) Vide supra (n) Rev. 21.7. Be thou faith∣ful
unto Death, and I wil give thee a Crowne of Life, Rev. 2.7 10 11. To him that overcommeth wil I give to eate of the hidden Manna, v. 17. To him wil I give power over the Na∣tions, v. 26. And I wil give him the Morning, Starre. Vers. 28. Thus farre of the first head of the sixt maine part. The second Head of the sixt maine part containing Promises of bles∣sings to giving Almes or works of Charity. 1. To Almes in generall. WIth such Sacrifices God is well pleased (w) The will for the deed is acceptes (x) Although it be never so little, but a Cup cold water (y) Yea more then much given un∣illingly or for by-respects (z) The Lord wi  all we undertake, or that concerns
(a. 49) ƲƲe shall have plenty (b) And be bles∣sed abundantly (c) And shall have a sure re∣ward (d) Such honour (e) And lend to the Lord (f) And shall be recompenced of him (g) The Lord will not forget it (h) But ac∣compts it as done to himself (i) Such shall obtaine mercy (k) And have favour from God (l) God will guide such continually (m) When they call and cry, the Lord will answer and help (n) The Lord will give such inward peace (o) And joy (p) Such shall increase (q) And persevere in grace (r) Such shall have a good name (s) And have adversity turned into pros∣perity (t) Such shall be provided for (u) And not want (v) Neither such (w) Nor theirs shall be forsaken nor beg their bread (x) But be bles∣sed also (y) Such shall be preserved from harme (z) And delivered from their Enemies (a. 50) Such shall be strengthened in trouble (b) Ed in Sicknesse () And delivered out of misery (d) God will mercifully reward our almes with ever∣lasting happines. (e) (w) But to doe good, and to com∣municate forget not, for with uc Sacrifices God is well pleased, eb. 13.16. () For i there be first a willing minde, i
is accepted, according to what a man hath, 2 Cor. 8 12. (y) And there came a certaine poore widow and shee cast in two mites, which make a farthing; And hee calleth unto him his Disciples and saith unto them, verily I say unto you that this poore widow hath cast more in then al they which have cast into the treasury. For they did cast in of their abundance but she of her want did cast in all that shee hid even all her living, Mark. 12.42.43.44. For whosoever shal give you a Cup of water to drinke in my Name, because you belong to Christ verily I say unto you he shal not lose his reward. Mark. 9.41. Mat. 10.42. (z) Vide suprà (p) In the foure quoted places. (a. 49.) If there be among you a poore man, or one of thy brethren within any of thy Gater. Tou shalt not harden thine heart, no shut thine hand from thy poore bro∣ther. Thou shalt surely give him and thine
heart shal not be grieved when thou givest unto him: because that for  thing the Lord shal blesse thee i, all thy worke and in all that thon puttest thine hand unto, Dent. 15.7.10. He hath dispersed, hee hath  to the poore: his righteousnesse endureth for ver his home shal be exalted with honour, Psal. 1.12.9. But he that hath mercy upon the poore, is he, Pro. 14.21. (b) The mercifull men doe good to the own soule, pro. 11.17. (c) Honour the Lord with thy substance and with the first fruits of all thine in∣crease, so shal thy barnes be filled with plenty; and thy presses shal burst o with new wine, Pro. 39.10. (d) But to him that soweth righteousesse shal be a sure reward, Prov. 11.18. But when thou doest Almes, let not thy right hand know what thy left  doth. That thine Almes may be in ∣cret, and thy Father which seeth in se∣cret, shal reward thee openly. Mat. 6.3.4. Vide suprà (y) Matht. 10.42. (e) But hee that honoureth his ker
hath mercy on the poore, Prov. 14.31. (f.g) Hee that hath pitty upon the poote lendeth unto the Lord, and that which hee hath given will hee repay him, Pro. 19.17. (h.i) For God is not unrighteous to forget your worke and labour of love which ye have shewed towards his Name, in that yee have ministred to the Saints, and doe minister, Heb. 6.10. (k) Blessed are the merciful, for they shal obtaine mercy, Mat. 5.7. (l) Then shal thy light breake forth as the morning and thine health shal sprir forth speedily: and thy righteousnesse shall goe before thee: the glory o the Lord shal bee thy rereward, Isa 58.8. (m) And the Lord shal guide thee conti∣nually, and satisfy thy soule in drought, and make fat thy bones: and thou hak be like a watered Garden, and like spring of water whose waters faile not Isay; 58.11. (n) Then shalt thou call and the Lord shal answer: thou shalt cry and he shal say he am I, Isay 58.9.
(o.p.q.r) Vide suprà (m) Isay. 58.11. (s) Vide supra (l) Isa. 58.8. (t) And if thou draw out thy soule to the hungry and satisfy the afflicted soule: then shal thy light rise in obsurity, and thy darkenesse be as the noone day, Isay, 58.10. (v) Now hee that ministreth seede to the sower, both minister bread for your food, and multiply your seede sowne, and in∣crease the fruits of your righteousnesse 2 Cor. 9.10. And God is able to make al grace abound towards you, that yee alwayes, having al sufficiency in al things, may abound in every good work, v. 8. (w.x) I have beene yong and now am old, yet have I not seene the righteous  saken, nor their seede begging their bread, psal. 37.25. (y) He is ever merciful: and his seed is bles∣sed, psal. 37.26. (z) Blessed is he that considereth the poore: the Lord wil deliver him in the time of trouble, Ps. 41.1. (a. 50. b. .) The Lord wil strengthen him in his bed of languishing: thou wilt mak
all his bed in his sicknesse, psal. 41.3. (d) Vide supra (z) psal. 41.1. (e) Goe thy way, sel whatsoever thou hast and give to the poore: and thou shalt have treasure in Heaven, Mar. 10.21. He that followeth after righteousnesse and mercy findeth life, pro. 21.22. Mat. 19.21. As before. Mar. 10.21. Then shal the King say unto them on his right hand come yee blessed of my Fa∣ther inherit the Kingdome prepared for you from the foundation of the world. And the King shal say unto them in so much as you have done it unto one  the least of these my brethren yee have done it unto mee, Mat. 25.34, 40. & 6.20. Lu. 18.22. As before Mark. 10.21. & 12.33. Charge them that are rich in this world, that they be not high minded nor trust in uncertaine riches, but in the living God who giveth us all things richly to enjoy. That they doe good that they be rich in good workes, ready to distri∣bute, willing to communicate laying up in store for themselves a good foun∣dation against the time to come, that
they may lay hold on eternal life, 1 Tim. 6.17.18.19. 2. To divers particular workes of charity. As I finde them annexed in the Texts; although all places quoted to almes in generall may be ap∣plied to each of these particulars. 1. Lending to the Poore. Gods blessing in all that concernes us (f) and to our seed is promised. (g) () If there be among you a oore ma of one of thy brethren within any  thy gates—thou shalt not harden thne heart, nor shut thine hand from thy poore brother. But thou shalt open thine hand wide unto him, and shalt surely lend him sufficient for his need, in that which hee wanteth. Thou shalt surely give him, and thy heart shall not be grieved, when thou givest unto him: because that for this thing the Lord thy God shal bless thee al thy works and in al ht tho puttest thine hand unto, Deut. 15.7.8.10. (g) Hee is ever mercifull and lendeth: and his seed is blessed, P. 37.26.
2. To restring the Pedge. It is a note of Righteousnesse in us, and of ou Justification by Christ unto us (h) and that we shall be saved (i) and not be punished, or perish for our Fathers unrighteousnesse (k). (h) And if the man be poore, thou shalt not sle with his pledge. In any case thou shalt deliver him the pledge againe when the Sonne goeth downe, that hee may sleepe in his owne raiment, and blesse thee: and it shal be righteousness unto thee before the Lord thy God, Deu. 24.12, 13. But hath restored to the debtor his pledge, hath spoiled none by violence, hath given his bread to the hungry and hath covered the naked with a garment: Hee that hath not given forth upon Usury neither hath taken any increase that hath drawne his hand from iniqui∣ty, and executed true judgement between man and man, Ez. 18.7.8. (i) Hath walked in my statutes and hath kept my judgements to deale truly: he is just, hee shal surely live, saith the Lord, v. 9.
(k) He shall not die for the iniquity o his fathers: hee shal surely live saith the Lord, v. 16.17. 3. To leaving gleanings of Corne, or Vintage. The LORD will blesse all the workes of our hands. () (l) When thou cuttest downe thy harvest if the field and hast forgot a sheafe in the field, thou shalt not goe againe to fetc it: It shal be for the strangers, for the fatherlesse, and for the widow, that the Lord thy God may blesse thee in al the worke of thy hands: when thou bea∣test thine Olive-Tree, thou shalt not goe over the boughes againe, it shalt be &c. When thou gatherest the Grapes of the Vineyard, thou shalt not gleane it after∣ward it shal bee for the stranger, for the Fatherlesse, and for the widow, Deut. 24.19, 20 21. 4. To Selling Corne to the Poore. The blessings of the LORD shall be upon such. (m)
(m) He that withholdeth corne, the people shall curse him, but blessings shall bee up∣on the head of him that selleth it, Prov. 11.26. 5 To feeding the Hungry, giving Drinke to the Thirsty, Lodging to the har∣bourlesse, cloathing to the Naked, visit∣ing the Sick, and Prisoners, and receive∣ing poore Strangers. These are signes of our Justification by Christ and that we shall not be punished, or perish for our Fathers faults (n) Christ takes all as done to himselfe (o) And will accept and acquit us in mercy according to such Workes at the last day (p) And reward them with Eternall life. (q) () Vide supra Ez. 18.7.9. (g(h). (o) And the King shal answer and say unto them, verily I say unto you, in as much as yee have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it un∣to me. Ma. 25.40. (p) Come vee blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdome prepared for you, from the oundation of the world. For I was an hungry and you gave mee
meate: I was thirsty and yee gave mee drinke: I was a stranger and yee tooke me in. Naked and ye cloathed me: I was sick, and yee visited mee, I wat in prison and yee came unto me, Mat. 25.34.35, 34. (q) And these shal goe away into everlast∣ing punishment; but the righteous into life eternall, v. 46. 6. To relieveing our poore Kindred. It is acceptable to God, and honest in the fight of men. (r) (r) But if any widow, have children or ne∣phews, let them learne first to shew iety at home and to requite their parents, for that is good and acceptable before Go, 1 Tim. 5.4. 7 To comforting the soules of others. As before out of Isay. 58.10.8, 9. 11.12. Thus farre of the second head of the sixth maine part.
The third head containeth Promises to our conscionable worshipping of GOD. 1. Generall. THat the Lord will heare us (s) We shall be settled among his people (t) And glorify our Grd. (u) (s) But if any man be a worshipper of God and doe his wil: him hee heareth Job. 9.31. (t) If they will diligently learne the wayes of my people to sweare by my Name (The Lord liveth, and they taught my people to sweare by Baal) then shall they be built in the midst of my people, Jer. 12.16. (u) And thou shalt sweare. (The Lord li∣veth) in truth, in righteousnesse, and in judgement, and the Nations shall blesse themselves in him, and in him shal they glory. Jer. 4.2. 2. In particular. To our worshipping the Lord egether in his horse
in our families, or with others. The Lord wil come unto us (w) And be in the middest of us, be we never so few, to assist and blesse us, in our duties (x) Whatsoever wee shall aske shall be given us (y). He will blesse us in our other proceedings (z) And oppose our enemies, and increase, and se∣cure oure state (a. 15.) (w) In all places where I record my name, I wil come to thee, and wil blesse thee, Ex. 20.24. (x) For where two or three are gathered to∣gether in my Name, there am I in the midst of them Mat. 18.20. (y) If two of you shall agree on earth, as touching any thing that they shal aske, it shall be done for them of my Fa∣ther which is in Heaven, Matthew, 18.20. (z) Vide supra.) Ex. 20.24. (a. 51) For I will cast out the Nations be∣fore thee and enlarge thy borders, nei∣ther shall any man desire thy Land, whe thou shalt goe up to appeare bel the Lord thy God, thrice in the year Ex. 34.24. 3. To receiving the publique blessing.
The Lord will blesse us with mercy, peace, com∣fort, safety, and wel-fare. (b) (b) On this wise yee shall blesse the chil∣dren of Israel saying unto them. The Lord blesse thee, and keepe thee. The Lord make his face shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee. The Lord lift up his Countenance upon thee and give thee peace. And they shall put my Name upon the Children of Israel and I wil blesse them, Numb. 6.23, 24.25 26, 27. 4. To sanctifying the Sabbath. It is a signe of our sanctification (c) God will give us a name and place in his Church (d) We shall know the Lord is our God (e) And serve him willingly (f) To our great joy and con∣tentment (g) Our service shall be accepted (h) We shall delight in the Lord (i) And prosper (k) And increase in grace and good (l) Our wel-fare shall be established (m) And wee shall have honour (n) And everlasting life (o). (c) Moreover also I gave them my Sabbaths, to bee a signe betweene me and them, that they might know that I am the
Lord, that sanctifis them, Ezck. 20.12. Verily, my Sabbaths yee shalkeepe, for it is a signe betweene me and you, through∣out your generations, that yee may know that I am the Lord that doth sanctify you, Ex. 31.13. (d) Even unto them wil I give in mine house, and within my wals, a place and a name better then of sonnes and daughters: I wil give them an ever∣lasting name that shal not bee cut off, Isay 56.5. (e) And hlow my Sabbaths, and they shal be a signe betweene me and you, that yee may know that I am the Lord your God Ez 20.20. (f.g.h) Even them wil I bring to my holy Mountaine: and make them joyfull in my house of Prayer, Their burnt of∣frings, and their Sacrifices, shall be ac∣cepted upon mine Altar: for mine house shal be called a house of prayer for all people, Isa. 56.7. (i) If thou turne away thy foote from the Sabbath from doing thy pleasure on my holy day, and call the Sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord, honou∣rable
and shalt honour him; not doing thine own wayes, nor finding thine owne pleasure, nor speaking thine owne word. Then shalt thou delight th selfe in the Lord, and I wil cause thee to ride upon the high places of the Earth and feede thee with the heari∣tage of Jacob thy Father: for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it, Isay, 58.13 14. (k) Then shal there enter into the gates of thy City, Kings and Princes siting up∣on the Throne of David, riding in Chariots and on Horses, they and their Princes the me o Judah, and the in∣habitants of Jerusalem: and this City shal remaine for ever. And they shall come from the Cities of Jdah, and from the places about J∣rusalem, and from the Land of Ben∣jamin, and from the plaine, and from the Mountaines, and from the South, bringing burnt-Offrings and Sacri∣fices, and Meate-Offrings, and incense and bringing Sacrifices of praise unto the House of the Lord, Jeremy 17.25.26.
(l) Vide supra (k) Jer. 17.26. (m) Vide supra (k) Jer. 17, 25. (n) Vide supra (i) Isay. 58.14. (o) Vide supra (d) Isay 55.6. 5. To our prayers in Generall. In what distresse soever we be, if we call vpon the LORD for helpe, he will assuredly  us. (p) (p) Call upon me in the day of trouble I wil deliver thee, and thou shalt glorifie me, psal. 50.15. The Lord wil heare, when I call unto him, psal. 4.3. The Lord will receive my Prayers, Psal. 6.3. For thou Lord hast not forsaken them that seeke thee. When hee maketh in∣quisition for blood he remembreth them he forgetteth not the cry of the the hum∣ble, Ps. 9 10.12. The Eys of the Lord are upon the righte∣ous; and his Eares are open to their cry. The righteous cry, and the Lord hea∣reth, and delivereth them out of al their troubles, Ps. 34.15.17. & 38.15. Evening, morning, and at noone, wil I
pray and cry aloud, and he shal heare my vyce, Psal. 55.17. The Lord is nigh to all them that call upon him: to al that call upon him in truth. He wil fulfill the desire of them that feare him, hee also wil heare their cry, and wil save them, Psalme 145.18.19. In the day of my trouble, I wil cal upon thee, for thou wilt answer mee, Psal. 86.7 & 91.15. Foole because of their transgression, and because of their iniquities, are afflicted. Their Soule abhorreth all manner of meate: and they draw neere unto the gates of death: Then they cry unto the Lord in their trouble: hee saveth them out of their distresses, Psalme 107.17, 18 19. If yee seeke him, hee wil be found of you 2 Chron. 15.2. If thou wouldest seeke unto GOD be∣times: and make thy supplication to the Almighty; Though thy beginning was small, yet thy latter end should greatly increase. Job. 8.5.7. Thou shalt cal, and I wil answer thee. Iob 14.15. & 22.27.
Hee wil be favourable unto him, and hee shall see his face with joy. Chap. 33.26. And his ears are open unto their prayer, 1 Pet. 3.12. Then shal yee call upon, and yee shall goe and spray unto mee, and I wil hearken unto you; And yee shal seeke mee and finde mee, when you shal search for mee with all your heart, Ieremy, 29.12, 13. Whosoever shal call on the Name of the Lord shal be delivered, Ioel. 2.32. Acts 2.21. Rom. 10.13. Seeke the Lord, and yee shal live, Amos 5.4.6. I wil waite for the God of my salvation, my God wil heare me. Mica 7.7. They shal call upon my name and I wil heare them, Ze. 13.9. Aske and it shal be given you, seek and yee shal finde; knock and it shal be ope∣ned unto you. For every one that as∣eth, receiveth; and hee that seeketh, findeth, and to him that knocketh it shal be opened, Mat. 7.7.8. And al things whatsoever yee shal aske in
prayer, believing yee shal receive, Mat. 21 22. Mar. 11.24. But if any man be a worshipper of God and doe his wil, him hee heareth Ioh. 9.31. If yee abide in me, and my words abide in you, yee shal aske what yee wil, and it shal be done unto you, Iohn 15.. Luk. 11.9.10. The same with Mar. 7.7.8 Draw nigh to God, and he wil draw nigh to you, Iam. 4.8. 6. If in any of these particulars follow∣ing, wee cal on the Lord for helpe, he hath promised to heare, and help us, as. 1. If we have fallen into grievous sinnes, an afflictions, the LORD, will forgive our sinnes, remove his Judgements, and heare our Pray∣ers. (q) (q) If I shut up Heaven, that there be no raine, or if I command the Locus to devour the Land, or if I send pestilence among my people. If my people which are called by my Name shal humble themselves, and pray, and seeke my Face, and turne from their wicked wayes:
then wil I heare from Heaven, and wil forgive their sinne, and wil heale their Land. Now mine eyes shall bee open, and mine ears attent unto the Prayer that is made in this place, 2 Chron. 7.13.14, 15. and Chap. 6. from Verse 21. To the end. 2. Be our troubles never so many, the Lord will heare and deliver us out of them all (r) (r) The righteous cry, and the Lord heareth and delivereth them out of all their trouble, Psal. 34 17. 3. If we be in any danger whatsoever, we shall be heard, helped, and delivered. (s) (s) In an acceptable time have I heard thee, and in a day of salvation have I helped thee: and I wil preserve thee and give thee for a Covenant of the people, to establish the Earth, to cause to inherit the desolate heritage, Isay, 49.8. 4 If in danger of our Enemies. Or for Souldiers in or against any perillous im∣ployment, (t) We shall be secured from harme (u) Our Enemies shall turne backe (w) God will fight against and afflict them. (x)
(t) I wil call upon the Lord who is worthy to be praised? So shal I be saved from mine enemies, Ps. 18.3. (v) Hee that delivered my Soule in peace, from the Battell that was against mee for there were many with mee. GOD shall heare and afflict them, even hee that abideth of old, Psalme 55.18, 19. (w) When I cry unto thee: then shal mine Eemies turne back, Ps. 56.9. (x) Vide suprà (u) Ps. 55.18.19. 5 If we be Prisoners. The LORD will heare, and notd spise us, or o Prayers (y) He will be found of, and inlarge us. (z) () For the Lord heareth the poore, and de∣piseth no his prisoners, Ps. 69.33. (z) And yee shal seeke me, and finde mee when yee shall search for mee with all your heart. And I wil be found of you saith the Lord, and wil turne away your captivity: and I wil gather you from al the Nations, and from all the places, whither I have driven you, saith the Lord, and I wil bring you againe
into the place, whence I caused you to be carried away captive, Ieremy, 29.13.14. 6. If we be desolate, and forsaken of friends. The Lord will turne unto and not despise our Prayers. (a. 52) (a. 52) Hee wil regard the prayer of the destitute, and not despise their Prayer, Psal. 102.17. 7. If we be wronged by others. The Lord will deliver us. (b) (b) For they shal cry unto the Lord, be∣cause of oppressours, and hee shal send them a Saviour, and a great one, and he shal deliver them, Isay 19.20. 8. If the wronged Fatherlesse, Widow, or Stranger doe pray. The Lord wil heare their cry, (c) (c) Thou shalt neither vex a stranger nor oppresse him: for yee were strangers in the land of Egypt. Yee shal not afflict any widow or fatherlesse child. If thou afflict them in any wise and they cry at al unto me, I wil surely heare their cry, Ex. 22.21.22, 23.
9. If we be Hungry or Thirsty. The Lord will relieve us, (d) Though he sh work wonders for us. (e) (d) Hungry and Thirsty: their Soule fainted in them. Then they cried unto the Lord in their trouble, and hee deli∣vered them out of their distresses, Psalm. 107.5, 6. (e) When the poore and needy seeke wate and there is none, and their tongue fail∣eth for Thirst, I the Lord wil hea them, I the God of Israel wil not for sake them; I wil open Rivers in hi places, and fountaines in the midst: the Vallies, I wil make the wildernesse a poole of water, and the dryland spri of water, Isay 41.17, 18. 10. If we be in Temptation. We shall finde mercy grace, and helpe i need, (f) (f) For we have not an high Priest that can∣not be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but was in al points temp∣ted as we are, yet without sinne. Le us therfore come boldly unto the throne
of grace, that we may obtaine mercy, and finde grace for helpe, in time of neede, Heb. 4.15.16. 11. If we be in doubting. We shall be directed (g) and our businesse shall be effected. (h) (g) Commit thy workes unto the Lord, and thy thoughts shal bee established, pro. 16.3. (h) Trust in the Lord and waite patiently for him, fret not thy selfe because of him that prospereth in his wy, because of the man who bringeth wicked devises to passe, psal. 37.7. 12. If we pray for the Knowledge of God. We shall finde is. (i) (i) Yea if thou cryest after knowledge and liftest up thy voyce for understanding. Then shalt thou understand the feare of the Lord, and finde the knowledge of God, pro. 2.3, 5. 13. If for Faith. It shall be granted. (k) (k) Jesus answered if thou knowest the
gift of God and who it is, that saith to thee, give me to drink, thou wouldst have asked of him, and he would have given thee living water, Joh. 4.10. 14. If for the feare. (l) And favour of God, (m) We shall obtaine them. (l) If thou cryest after knowledge, and liftest up thy voyce for understanding. Then shalt thou understand the feare of the Lord, and finde the knowledge of God. For the Lord giveth wisdom,  his mouth commeth knowledge, and ∣derstanding, Pro. 2.3.5.6. (m) He shal pray unto God and he wil befa∣vourable unto him, and he shal see his fa with joy, Iob. 33.26. 15. If for inward joy. We shall have it (n) to the full. (o) (n) Vide suprà (m) Iob. 33 26. (o) Aske and y shal receive: that your joy may be full, Ioh. 16.24. 16. If wee lack wisdome and strength, to beare Affliction aright. The Lord will bestow it freely, and plentifully. (p)
(p) If any of you lack wisdome, let him aske it of God that giveth to all men li∣berally, and upbraideth not, and it shalbe given him, Iam. 1.5. 17. Or to order our Affaires wisely. We shall have it assuredly. (q) (q) But they that seeke the Lord, understand all things, Pro. 28.5. 18. If wee pray for increase of good Gifts in generall; (r) Or of saving Knowledge (s) Or for Gods spirit to supply all our necessities (t) They shall be vouch∣safed to us. (r) If thou wouldst seeke to God be times, and make thy supplication to the Al∣mighty. Though thy beginning was small, yet thy latter end should greatly increase, Iob. 8.57. (s) Call unto me and I wil answer thee and shew thee great and mighty things which thou knowest not, Jer. 33.3. Covet earnestly the best gifts: and yet shew I unto you a more excellent way, 1 Cor. 12.31.
(t) If yee then being evil know how to give good gifts to your children: how much more shal your Heavenly Father give the holy spirit to them that aske him, Lu. 11.13. But my God shal supply all your neede, according to his riches in glory by Christ Jesus, Phil. 4.19. 19. If for the Kingdome of God, and his Righteousesse. I shall be given us, and all other things shall be ministred unto us. (u) (u) Seeke yee first the Kingdome of God and his righteousnesse: and all their things shal be added to you, Mat. 6.33. 20. If we pray for Others. Sinnes shall be pardoned, and judgements re∣moved. (w) () Is any sike among yo? let him call for the Elders of the Church, and let them pray over him, anointing him with oile, in the Name of the Lord. And the prayer of Faith shal save the sick; and the Lord shal raise him up: and i hee have committed sins, they shal be forgivn him.
Confesse your faults one to another, and pray one for another that yee may be healed, the effectuall fervent prayer of a righteous man, avayleth much, Iam. 5.14, 15, 16. 21. If we pray for the peace of Zion. We shall prosper. (v) (x) Pray for the peace of Jerusalem: they shall prosper that love thee, Psalme 122.6. 22. If for the peace of the place where we live; Therein we shall have peace, though the people be our Enemies. (y) (y) And seeke the peace of the City, whe∣ther I have caused you to be carried away captives, and pray unto the Lord for it, for in the peace thereof shal yee have peace, Ier. 29.7. 23. If Gods people pray together; Our Heavenly Father will heare and helpe us. (z) (z) If two of you shal agree on Earth, as touching any thing that they shal aske.
it shal be done for them of my Father my Father which is in Heaven, Matth. 18.19. Further, many most comfortable places, abundantly, and infallibly declaring in what most gracious manner, the Lord will heare our Prayers. 7. He heareth our inward groanes in our extreamest Miseries. Even when we cannot expresse our selves (a. 53) Our mourning (b) Sighs (c) Desires (d) Tears (c) Complaining (f) Our very voye (g) And naming of Christ (h) He will heare, wi cut despising our prayers (i) Or hitting us is the Teeth with our fore-past sinnes, or present frailties (k) He will prepare our hearts too, and help us to draw our petitions (l) He ac∣cepts our prayers (m) He takes delight in them, and in hearing of them (n) He looks down of purpose to heare our groanes (o) To deliver us when we are past hope (p) His Ears are open, there is not the least impediment in his hearing (q) It is his very nature to be a GOD that heareth prayers, It is not contrary to his dis∣position (r) He thinks thoughts of place to give an end to our troubles according to our ex∣pectations
(s) He will be plenteous in mercy to all that call upon him (t) And will give us liberally (u) He will remarkeably help us, and shew us sometimes, wonderous things that we know not (w) He will refresh us also with much joy and comfort of heart, he will be ma∣ny times as the dew, to our hearts. (x) He will heare every one that asketh of him aright (y) Yea in whatsoever we aske, wee may have what we will, according to his will (z) When we cannot pray as we ought his Spirit shall help our infirmities. (a. 54) God will Crowne our prayers with this honour, to be signs of  Sanctification (b) And Salvation (c)  will heare us speedily (d) In the very , in due time, when we are in trouble, yea so as he will in our affliction in especiall manner, let us know hee is our God, and will deliver u. (e) He is ready to be found (f) He will heare at the very first, even while we are speak∣ing to him (g) And answer us before we can expresse our selves (h) Yea the Lord heareth us, when we thinke he hath forsaken us (i) all our prayers are heard and granted only through Christ Jesus. (k) (a. 53.) And God heard their groaning, and God remembring this Covenant
with Abraham, with Isaack, and with Jacob, Ex. 2.24. (b) From Heaven, did the Lord behold the Earth, to heare the groaning of the prisoners, Ps. 102.19.20. (c) For the sighing of the needy, now wi I arise (saith the Lord) I wil set him i safety, from him that puffeth at him, Ps. 12.5. (d) Lord thou hast heard the desire of the humble, thou wilt prepare their heart, and wilt cause thine eare to heare, Psal 10.17. The Lord is nigh unto all them that cal upon him: to all that cal upon him in truth. He wil fulfill the desire of them that feare him, hee also wil heare their cry, and wil save them, Psalme 145.18.19. But the desire of the righteous shal be granted, Pro. 10.24. () Hold not thy peace at my Teares Pl. 39.12. But thou my Teares into thy bottell, Psal. 56 8. (f) He forgetteth not the cry of the humble Psal. 9.12.
(g) My voyce shalt thou heare in the mor∣ning, Ps. 5.3. & 55.17. Hee wil bee very gracious unto thee at the voyce of thy cry: when hee shall heare it hee wil answer thee, Isay 30 19. (h) And let every one that nameth the Name of Christ depart from iniquitie, 2 Tim. 2.19. (i) I wil regard the Prayer of the desti∣tute, and not despise their Prayer Psal. 102.17. (k) If any of you lack Wisdome,  him aske of GOD that giveth to  men liberally, and upbraideth not Jam. 1.5. (l) Thou wilt prepare their heart, thou wilt cause thine Eare to heare, Psalme 10.17. (m) But the prayer of the upright is his de∣light, r. 15.8. (n) I wil praise the Name of God with a Sng: and wil magnifie him with Thanksgiving. This also shall please the Lord better then an Oxe or Bullock, that hath hornes, and hoofes, Psalme 69.30.31.
(o.p) For he hath looked downe from the height of his Sanctuary; from Hea∣ven did the Lord behold the Earth. To heare the groaning of the prisoners: to loose those that are appointed to death, Psa. 102.19, 20. (q) His ears are open to the righteous cry psal. 34.15. 1 pet. 3.12. (r) Heare my cry, O God, attend unto my prayer, Ps. 61.1. (s) For I know the thoughts that I thinke towards you, saith the Lord, thoughts of peace and not of evil to give you an expected end. Then shall yee call upon me, and yee shal goe and pray un∣to me, and I wil hearken unto you. And yee shall seeke me, and finde mee, when yea shall search for mee with all your heart, Ier. 29.11.12, 13. (t) Seeke yee the Lord while hee may be found, cal yee upon him while hee is neere. Let the wicked forsake his way and the unrighteous man his thoughts; and let him returne unto the Lord, and he wil have mercy upon him, and to our God, for he wil abundantly pardon, Isay 55.6, 7.
(v) Vide supra. (k) Jam. 1.5. (w) Call unto mee, and I will answer thee, and shew thee great and migh∣ty things which thou knowest not, Jer. 33.3. (x) He shal pray unto God, and he shal be favourable unto him, and he shal see his face with joy, Job. 33.26. I will bee as the dew unto Israel, Hose. 14 5. (y) For every one that asketh, receiveth; and hee that seeketh sindeth, Luk. 11.10. Mat. 7.8. (z) What things soever yee desire when yee pray, believe that yee receive them, and yee shal have them, Mark 11.24. (a. 54.) The spirit also helpeth our infir∣mities, for we know not what we should pray for as we ought, but the spirit  selfe maketh intercession for us with groanings, which cannot be uttered, Rom. 8.26. (b) But if any man be a Worshipper of God, and doth his wil, him he heareth, Jo. 9 31. (c) Hee shal call upon me and I will
swer him: I wil bee with him in trouble, I wil deliver, and honour him, Psal. 91.15. (d) In the day when I cl, answer mee speedily, ps. 102.2. My voyce shalt thou heare in the mor∣ning, O God, psal. 5 3. (e) The Lord also w be a refuge for the oppressed, a refuge in times of trouble, Psal 9.9. & 50.15. He shall cal upon mee and I wil answer him, I wil be with him in trouble; I wil deliver him, and honour him. Psal. 91.15. (f) God is our refuge and strength, a very present helpe in trouble, psal. 46.1. (g) From the first day, that thou diddest set thine heart to understand, and to chasten thy selfe before thy God, thy words were heard, and I am come for thy words. Dan. 10.12. (h) And it shal come to passe, that before they call I wil answer: and whiles they are yet speaking I will heare. Iay, 65.24. (i) For I said in my ste, I am cut off from before the : nev the
lesse, thou I eardest the voyce of my sup∣plication, when I cried unto thee, Pal. 31.22. (k) Whatsoever yee shal aske the Father in my Name, hee sh give it you, John 16.23. And watsoever yee shal aske in my Name, that wil I doe, that the Father may be glorified in the Sonne. If yee shal aske any thing in my Name, I wil doe i. J. 14 13 14. And this is the confidence that we have in him, that if wee aske any thing  cording to his wil, he heareth us. And if we know that he heareth us, what∣soever we aske wee know that wee have the petition that wee desired of him, 1 J. 5.14.15. For through him wee both have an ac∣cesse by one spirit unto the Father, Eph. 2.18. 8. To our Thankesgiving to the Lord. It is a good thing (l)  (m) It is most acceptable to the Lord () And  is glorified thireby. (o). (l) It s a good thing to give thank
unto the Lord, and to sing prayses unto thy Name, O most high, Psalme 92. 1. (m) Rejoyce in the Lord, O yee righte∣ous, for praise is comely for the upright, Psal. 33.1. (n) I wil praise the name of God with  Song and will magnifie him wih Thanksgiving. This also shall please the Lord, better then an Ox or Bullock. that hath hornes, and hoofes, Psalm. 69.30, 31. (o) Whose offreth praise, glorifieth mee, psal. 50.23. 9. To our conscionable hearing Gods Word. It is a signe we are in Gods Covenant (p) And of Christs Flocke (q) And most near and deare to him (r) He knowes us, and takes es∣peciall notice of us (s) We shall be inabled to heare better (t) Grace in generall (u) Saving knowledge (w) True Faith (x) The feare of the Lord (y) Holy joy or spirituall satisfaction (z) Increase of grace in generall (. 55) In∣crease of Faith (b) Here shall be wrought in us (c) We shall be bless here (d) Art
freed from Damnation (e) And be assured of Sal∣vation for evermore. (f) (p) Incline your eare and come unto me heare and your Soule shal live: and I wil make an everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David, Isay 55 3. (q) My Sheep heare my voyce: and I know them and they follow mee, John 10.27. (r) Behold my Mother and my Bre∣thren. For whosoever shall doe the wil of God, the same is my Mother, and my Sister, and brother, Marke 3.34.35. (s) Vide suprid (q) Ioh. 10.27. (t.v.) Vide suprà (p) Isay 55.3. (w) But unto them that are called both Jewes and Greekes Christ the power of God, and the Wisdome of God, 1 Cor. 1.24. (x) So then Faith commeth by hear∣ing and hearing by the Word of God, Rom. 10.17. (y) Come yee Children hearken unto me, I wil teach you the feare of the Lord, Psa. 34.11. (z) Psalme,
(a. 55.) For this cause also thanke wee God without cesing, because when yee received the Word of God which yee heard of us, yee received it not as ew and of men, but s (it is in such) the Word of God, which ffctually worketh also in you that believe, 1 Thess. 2.3. (b)) For I am not ashmed of the Gos∣pel of Christ, for it is the power of God unto Slvation, to every one that believeth, to the Jew first, and al∣so to the Gk. For therein is the Righteousnesse of GOD revealed, from Faith to Faith, Romans 1.16, 17. (d) Bessed is hee that readeth, and they that heare the words of this prophe∣cy; and keepe those things which are written therein, Rev. 1.3. () e that heareth my word, and be∣lieveth on him that sent mee, hath ever∣lasting life and shall not come into con∣demnation. J. 5.24. (f) It pleased God by the foolishnessed preching to save them that b  1 Cor. 1.21. Vid.  (c) o. 1.16.
10. To our reading in Gods Word. If any in authority, or in any conditio els loe so conscionably, they are assured the Lord will teach them, his feare, and to obey him and shall be preserved from pride and back∣sliding, and procure prosperitie in their par∣ticular imployments, and long life in their place, and the prosperite of their Children (g) Wee shall bee every way blessed (h) And know and sinde the way to eternall life. (i) (g) And it shall be with him, and hee shall reade therein all the dayes of his life, that hee may learne to feare the Lord his God, to keepe all the words of this Law, and these statutes, to doe them. That his heart bee not lifted up above his brethren, and that hee turne not aside from the Commande∣ment, to the right hand, or unto the left, to the end that hee may prolong his dayes in his King some, hee and his children in the midst of Israel, Deut. 17.19.20. (h) Blessed is hee that readeth, &c. Rev. 1.3.
(i) Search the Scriptures for in them yee thinke yee have eternall life, and they are they which testifie of me. And yee wil not come to me, that yee might have life, John. 5.39. 11. To Meditation on Gods Word. Preservation from sinne, especially from whore∣dome (k) Direction to good (l) Increase in grace (m) Safety from evill, seeping and waking (n) good successe in all things (o) Perseverance in grace. (p) (k) For the Commandement is a Lamp, and the Law is light, and reproofes of instruction are the way of life: To keepe thee from the evill Woman, from the flatterie of the Tongue of a strange VVoman, Proverbs 6. 23.24. (l) When thou goest it shal leade thee, when thou sleepest it shall keepe thee; and when thou awakest it shall talke with thee, Verse 22. And againe, Verse 23. (m) Hee shal be like a Tree planted by the Rivers of water, that bringeth forth his fruit in his season, his leafe also shall
not whither, and whatsoever hee doth shal prosper, Psa. 1.3. (n) Vide suprà, Prov. 6.22. (o) But thou shalt meditate therein Dy and Night—for then thou shalt make thy way prosperous and then thou shalt have good successe, Jeshua 1.8. (p) Vide suprd (m) in Ps. 1.3. 12. To holy Conerence. The Lord takes gracious notice thereof, and Records the same (q) He favoures such, and will spare us as a man spareth his own Sonne (r) Hee will put a difference betweene such and the wicked (s) And all shall goe well with us (t) (q) Then they that feared the Lord spake often one to another, and the Lord hearkned, and heard it; and a Booke of remembrance was written before him, for them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his Name, Mal. 3.16. (r) And they shall bee mine, saith the Lord of hosts in that day when I make up my Jewel, and I wil spare them an
a man spareth his own Son that serveth him, v. 17. (s) Then shall yee returne, and dis∣cerne betweene the Righteous and the Wicked, betweene him that serveth God, and him that serveth him not, Vers. 18. (t) Vide supd (c) Josh. 1.8. 13. To holy Fasting. We shall obteine our desire (u) GOD will re∣move evills from us that we feele (w) And prevent those we feare and deserve (x) He will punish the instruments of our harmes (y) He will restore us the good we have lost (a. 56) And give us good things in abundance (b) The meanes shall serve our turne (c) Our prayers shall bee turned into Thankesgivings (d) We shall be assured of GODS Favour (e) And his goodnesse shall continue with us al∣wayes. (f) (v) Turne yee even to mee with all your heart, and with fasting and with weep∣ing, and with mourning. Feare not, O Land, be glad and rejoyce for the Lord will doe great things, J. 2.12.21.
(w) But I will remove farre off from you the Northern Army, and wil drive them into a Land barren and deso∣late with his face towards the East Sea, and his hinder part towards the ut∣most Sea, and his stinke shall come up, and his ill savour shall come up, be∣cause hee hath done great things, Ver. 20. (x) Then will the Lord be Jealous for his Land, and pitty his people. Yea the Lord will answer, and say unto his people: Behold I will send you Corne, and Wine, and Oyle, and yee shall be satisfied therewith; and I will no more make you a reproach among the Heathens. And yee shall eate in plenty, and bee satisfyed, and praise the Name of the Lord your God, hee that dealt won∣derously with you: And my people shall never bee ashamed, Joel. 2.18 19.26. (y) Vide supra, (w) in Joel. 2. 20, (c. 56) And I will restore to you the yeeres, that the Locust, hath eaten, the Canker-Worme, and the Cater-pillar,
and the Palmer-Worme, my great Army, which I sent amongst you, Verse, 25. (b) Vide suprà (x) in Vers. 19. (c) Beglad then, yee Children of Zion, and rejoyce in the Lord your God: for hee hath given you the former raine moderately, and hee wil cause to come downe for you the raine, the former raine, and the latter raine, in the first moneth, Jeel. 2.23. (d) Vide suprà (x) vers. 26. (e) And yee shall know that I am in the mid'st of Israel, and that I am the Lord your God, and none else: and my people shall never bee ashamed, Verse 27. (f) Vide suprà (x) in vers. 26. 14. To Swearing Religiously. Hereby God is glorisied (g) Others bensited (h) contentions are ended. (i) (g.h) And thou shalt sweare [The Lord li∣veth] in truth in judgment and it righte∣eousnesse, and the Nations shall blesse themselves in him, and in him shall they glory, Jer. 4.2.
(i) For men verily sweare by the grea∣ter, and an Oath for confirmation, is to them an end of all strife, Hebrewes 6.16. 15. Promises to comfort and settle us a∣gainst our weake (if Sincere) per∣forming holy Duties. The Lord tenders us dearely (k) And will not extinguish the least beginning (l) But will strengthen our weakenesse. (m) And accept the will for the deed, the desire for the perform∣ance. (n) (k) Hee shall feede his Flock like a Shep∣heard. He shall gather the Lambes, with his Arme, and carry them in his bosom, and shal gently lead those that are with young, Isay 40.11. Behold at that time I will undee all that afflict thee, and I will save her that hlteth, and gather her that was driven out, Zeph. 3.19. Michael 4.7. (l) A bruised Reede will hee not breake: and smoaking flax shall hee not quench, till he send forth judgement unto victo∣ry. Mat. 12.20. Isay. 42.3.
(m) I will seeke that which was loft, and bring againe that which was driven a∣way and will binde up that which was broken, and will strengthen that which was sik, Ez. 34.16. () Fr if there be first a willing minde it is acceed according to that a man hath and not according to that he hath not, 2 Cor. 8.12. 16. The Lord will make our holy duties profita∣le to our Souls (o) So that our labours neither are nor shall be in vane () But shall be roward∣ed. (q) (o) For I will pour Water upon him that is Thirsty, and Flouds upon the dry ground: I will poure my spirit upon thy seede and my blessings up∣on thine off-spring. And they shall spring up as among the Grasse as VVil∣lowes by the VVater-courses, Isay 44.3.4. (p) Be yee stedfast, unmovable, alwayes abounding in the worke of the Lord∣forasmuch as you know that your labour is not in vaine in the Lord. 1 Cor. 15.58. (q) Be yee strong therfore, and let not your
hands he weake for your worke shall be rewarded, 2 Chron. 15.7. And let us not be weary in wel doing: for in due season wee shall reape if wee faint not, Gal. 6.9. Thus farre of the third head of the sixt maine part. The fourth Head of the sixt maine part containeth such Promises as are made to avoyding divers particular sins, as 1. To avoyding sinne in Generall. THat the Lord will blesse us (r) Our sinnes though never so haynous shall be pardon∣ed (s) We shall be justified from them (t) We shall have spirituall contentment (u) And out∣ward prosprity (w) And a long life (x) and be aved. (y)
(r) Blessed is the man that doth this, and the Sonne of man that layeth hold on it: that keepeth the Sab∣bath from polluting it, and keepeth his hand from doing any evill, Isay. 56.2. (s) Learne to doe well, seeke judge∣ment, relieve the oppressed, judge the Fatherlesse, plead from the Widow. Come now and let us reason together, saith the Lord, though your sianes be as Scarlet, they shall be as white as Snow, though they be red like Crim∣son, they shall be as wooll, Isay, 1.17.18. (t) Hee that hath not given forth upon U∣sory, neither hath taken any increase; that hath withdrawne his hand from iniquity, and hath execute true judge∣ment betweene man and man, hath walked in my Statutes, and hath kept my judgements to deale truly: he is just, he shall surely live, saith the Lord God, Ezk. 18.8, 9. (v) Bee not wise in thine owne eyes: feare the Lord, and depart from evill: It shall bee health to thy Navell: and
Marrow to thy Bones, Proves b 3.7.8. (w) If yee bee willing and obecien yee shall eate the good of the Lnd, Isay 1.19. (x) What man is hee that'd streth life, and loveth many dayes,  see good? Depart from ll, and doe good, seeke peace, and pursue it, Psalme 34.12.14. For hee that will love life and se good dayes, let him refraine his Tue from evil: and his lippes that y speak no guile. Let him eichew evil and doe good, let him seeke peace and ensue it, 1 Pet. 3.10.11. (y) Vide supra (t) in Eze. 18.89. 2. To avoyding evil Company. The Lord will receive us and be our Father, and make us his children (z) And will blesse us (a. 57) We shall increase in grace (b) And pros∣per in all we doe (c) And persev  good∣nesse. (d) (z) Wherefore come out from among them, and be yee separate, saith the Lord and touch not the uncleane thing, and I wil receive you. 2 Cor. 16.17.
(a. 57) Blessed is the man that walketh not in the Counsell of the ungodly, nor standeth in the way of sinners nor sitteth in the seate of the scornefull, Psal. 1.1. (b.c) He shall be like a Tree planted by the rivers of water, that bringeth forth his fruit in his season; (d) His leafe also shall not whither, and whatsoever hee doth, shall prosper, verse 3. 3. To avoyding evill Counsell. (B.c.d.) in Is. 1.3. 4. To avoyding Idolatry. As before out of, 2 Cor. 6.14, 15, 16, 17, 18. And we shall be saved. (e) (e) And hath not eaten upon the moun∣taines, neither hath lit up his eyes to the Idols of the house Israel nei∣ther hath defiled his neighbours wile, neither hath come neere to a men∣strous Woman. But hath walked in my Statutes, and hath kept my judge∣ments to deale truly: bee is just, hee shall surely live, saith the Lord, Ezek. 18.5.6.9.
5. If we fly Adultery, God in mercy will justifie, and save us. (f) (f) Vide supra (e) in Ezc. 18.5.6.9. 6. And avoyd dealing with a Separate Woman. (g) (g) Vide supra (e) in Eze. 18.5.6.9. 7. If wee avoyd all othes sorts of Un∣cleanesse. The Lord will receive us, and be our Father, and makes us his children. (h) (h) Touch not the uncleane thing, and I will receive you, and will be a Father unto you, and you shall be my sons and daughters, 2 Cor. 6.18. 8. If we avoyd oppression, and injuring others. The Lord will justifie and save us (i) And be our defence (k) And provide for us (l) And exalt us here (m) And glorify us here∣after. (n) (i) Vide supra (e) Eze. 18.5, 6, 9. (k.l.m) Hee that walketh righteously, and speaketh uprightly, hee that des∣piseth
the gaine of oppressions, that shaketh his hands from holding of bribes, that stoppeth his ears from hear∣ing of blood, and shutteth his eyes from seeing evill. He shal dwell on high, his place of defence shal be munition of rocks, Isa. 33.15, 16. (n) Thine eyes shal see the King in his breauty: they shall behold the Land that is very far, off, vers. 17. See as before to Almes out of Isay, 58.8, 9, 10, 11. 9. If Covetousnesse, We shall prolong our dayes, Pro. 28.16. 10. And if Usury, It is a token we are of Gods Church (c) He will justify and save us. (p) (o) Lord who shal abide in thy Tabernacle, who shall abide in thy holy hill? Hee that putteth not out his mony to Usury Psal. 15.1.5. (p) Hee that hath not given forth upon Usury, neither hath taken any increase — He is just, hee shal surely live, saith the Lord, Ez. 18.8.9.
11. Bribery. As before out of Isay 33.15, 26, 17. (m) We are of Gods Church, (q) shall live happily here (r) And be saved for evermore. (s) (q) Lord who shall abide in thy Taber∣nacle, who shal abide in thy holy hill?—He that taketh not a reward against the innocent, ps. 15.1.5. (r) But hee that hateth gifts, shall live, Pro. 15.27. (s) He that doth these things shall never be moved, Ps. 15.5. 12. And slandering of others. It is a signe we are of Gods Church here, and shall be saved for evermore (t). (t) Lord who shall abide in thy Taber∣nacle? &c. Hee that back-biteth not with his tongue, nor doth evill to his Neighbour, nor taketh up a reproach against his Neighbour, hee that doth these things shall never be moved, Psal. 15.1.3.5. 13. And receiving Slanders. The last words of the third Vers. 14. And Scorning others in Heart.
As before, Psalme 1.1.3. In) b) 15. And Scornefull mocking gestures. As Psal. 1.1.3. Isa. 58.8,9,10. 16. And mocking Words. Both the same. 17. And justifying our selves and others in sinne. As Psal. 1.1.3. In (a.b) 18. And the scornefull, Idem. 19. If we cast out the Scorner. Inward strife, outward contention, and reproach shall cease. (e) (e) Cast out the Scorner, and contenti∣on shall goe out: yea strife, and reproach shall cease, pro. 22.10. 20. If we avoyd judging others. We shall not be judged of others. (f) (f) Judge not, that yee be not judged. For with what judgement yee judge yet shall be judged, and with what ma∣sure ye mete, it shal be measured to you againe, Mat. 7.1. Judge not, and yee shall not be judged,
condemne not and yee shall not be con∣demned, Luk. 6.37. 21. If we avoyd Wrath, Anger, Passion. Such an one is of great wisdom (g) And shews great discretion (h) it is his glory to passe by anffnce. (i) He prevents (k) And appea∣seth strife (l) is better then a mighty man (m) And then he that winneth a City (n) For it is his honour to cease from strife. (o) (g) He that is slow to wrath is of great un∣derstanding. Prov. 14.23. (h.i) The discretion of a man deferreth his anger, and it is his glory to passe over a Transgression, Prov. 19.11. (k) A soft answer, turneth away wrath, Pre. 15.1. (l) But he that is slow to anger appeaseth strife, Pro. 15.18. (m.n) Hee that is slow to anger, is better then the mighty: and hee that ruleth his spirit then hee that taketh a City. Pro. 16.32. (o) Itian honour to a man to cease from strife, Pro. 20.3. 22. And Discord, Strife, and Contention.
All the same as to the last. 23. If we avoyd Lying. See to speaking truth. 24. And evill Speaking, As before out of Isay 58.8, 9, 10, 11, 12. 25. And swearing falsely. We are of Gods Church, are justifyed, shall be blessed, and saved. (p) (p) Hee that back-biteth not with his tongue, nor doth evill to his neighbour, nor taketh up a reproach againe his Neighbour. In whose eyes a vile per∣son is contemned; but hee honoureth them that feare the Lord: hee that swea∣reth to his owne hurt, and changeth not. He that putteth not out his money to Usury, nor taketh reward against the innocent: hee that doth these things, shall never be moved, Psal. 15.3, 4, 5. 26. And surety-ship. We are free from much sorrow, shame, vexation, trouble, losse, and charge. (q) (q) Hee that is surety for a stranger shall
smart for it: and hee that hateth sureti∣ship is sure, Pro. 11.15. Thus farre of the fourth head of the sixt maine part. The fift head of the sixt maine part, con∣taining Promises to imbracing many duties specified, as 1. If wee receive and imbrace Instruction. WE are in the way of life (r) VVe shew our love to knowledge (s) it is a  of wisdom (t) We shall get understand∣g (u) And judge among the wise (w) The Lord will teach us his wayes (x) We shall increase as Wisdom (y) And grace (z) And be pre∣served from mischiefe (a. 58) it graceth us (b) it procureth us honour (c) And much good (d) And long life (e) We shall persevere in goodnesse (f) And be happy for ever. (g) (r) Hee is in the way of life that keepeth instructions, Prov. 10.17.
(s) Whoso loveth instruction, loveth know∣ledge, Pro. 12.1. (t) But he that regardeth reproofe is pru∣dent, pro. 15.5. (u) When the wise is instructed, he receiveth knowledge, Pro. 21.11. But he that heareth reproofe, getteth un∣derstanding, pro. 15.32. (w) The eare that heareth the reproofe of life, abideth among the wise, prov. 15.31. (x) Turne you at my reproofe, behold I will pour out my spirit unto you, I will make knowne my words unto you, prov. 1.23. (y) Teach a just man, and he wil increase in learning, pro. 9.9. (z.a. 58.) The Law of the wise is a foun∣taine of life: to depart from the snares of death, pro. 13, 14. (b) My Son heare the instruction of thy Father; and forsake not the Law of thy Mother. For they shall be an orna∣ment of grace unto thy head and chains about thy neck, pro. 1.8.9. (c) But he that regardeth reproofe, shall be honored, pro. 13.18.
(d) A reproofe entereth more into a wise man, then a hundred stripes into a foole, prov. 17.10. (e) Heare, O my Sonne, and receive my sayings, and the yeeres of thy life shall be many, prov. 4.10. (f) Heare counsell, and receive instruction, that thou mayest be wise in thy later end, prov. 19, 20. (g) Take fast hold of instruction let her not goe, keepe her, for she is thy life, prov. 4.13. 2. If we instruct and reprove others. Such as are wise will love us (h) And gaine knowledge by us (i) And increase inwisdom (k) And performe an acceptable work to God (l) And shall at length finde more favour then a flutterer (m) We shall have contentment (n) And enjoy Gods blessing. (o) (h) Rebuke a wise man and he will love thee, Pro. 9.8. (i) When the wise is instructed, he receiveth knowledge, por. 21.11. (k) Give instruction to a wise man, and hee will bee yet wiser: teach a just
man, and hee will increase in learning, Prov. 9.9. (l) As an eare-ring of Gold, and an Ornament of fine Gold. So is a wise reprover upon an obedient eare, Prov. 25.12. (m) Hee that rebuketh a man, afterwards shall finde more favour, then hee that flattereth with the tongue, Prov. 28.23. (n. o) But to them that rebuke him shall be delight, and a good blessing shall come upon them, prov. 24.23. 3. If wee be Instruments to Conven Others. It is a signe of wisdom (p) We shall cover many sinnes (q) And shall be a means to save Soules (r) And shall have great glory in Hea∣ven. (s) (p) Hee that winneth Soules is wise, Prov. 11.30. (q.r) He which converteth the Sinner from the errour of his way, shall save a Soule from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins, Jam. 5.20. (s) And they that be wise shall shine as
the brightnesse of the Firmament, and they that turne many to righteous∣nesse, as the Starres for ever and ever, Dan. 12.3. 4. If wee passe by Offences. It is a true marke of a wise man, (t) And an honour to us (u) And a meanes to gaine love. (w) (t)(u). The discretion of a man, deferreth his anger: and it is his glory to passe by a Transgression, Pro. 19.11. (w) He that covereth a Transgression seeketh love, prov. 17.9. 5. If wee forgive Others. God will forgive us (x) And deliver us from our adversaries. (y) (x) If yee forgive men their Trespasses, your heavenly Father also will forgive you, Mat. 6.14. Forgive, and yee shall bee forgiven, Luk. 6.37. (y) Say not thou I will recompense evill: but waite on the Lord and hee shall save thee, Prov. 20.22. 6. If we doe Good for Evill.
The Lord wil recompense us (z) And their punish∣ment that wish and seek our shame and harme, shall be the greater, (a. 59) (a) If thine enemy be hungy give him bread to eate: and if he be thirsty give him water to drink. (a. 59.) For thou shalt heape coales of fire upon his head, and the Lord shall reward thee, Proverbs 25.21, 22. Rom. 12.20. 7. If we be Secret. It shews a wise (b) And a faithfull heart (c) And we glorifie God. (d) (b) A prudent man concealeth knowledge, pro. 12.23. (c) But he that is of a faithfull spirit con∣cealeth the matter, pro. 11.13. (d) It is the glory of God to conceale a thing. Pro. 25.2. 8. If wee keepe Silence it is a note of Wisdome. See to governing the Tongue, (e). (e) But a man of understanding holdeth his peace, Prov. 11.12. 9. To speaking the Truth.
It is a signe we are Gods Children (f) God de∣lights in us (g) We shall get understanding from God, and be reputed wise among men, we shall have favour from God, and good will from men (h) We shall be inabled to deale directly (i) And delight great men (k) They will love us (l) And imploy us gladly (m) We shall have long life (n) And happy dayes (o) ƲƲe shall persevere in grace (p) And in∣joy heaven. (q) (f) Lord who shall abide in thy Tber∣macle? Who shall dwell in thy holy hill?—He that speaketh the truth in his heart, Psal. 15.1.2. (g) But they that deale truely, are his de∣light, Pro. 12.22. (h) Let not Mercy and Truth forsake thee: binde them about thy necke, write them upon the Table of thine heart. So shalt thou finde favour, and good understanding in the sight of God, and man, Pro. 3.3, 4. (i) He that speaketh Truth, sheweth forth righteousnesse, pro, 12.17. (k. l.) Righteous lipps are the delight of Kings; and they love him that speaketh right. pro. 16.13.
(m) Every man shall kisse his lips, that gi∣veth aright answer, Pro. 24.26. (n.o) What man is hee that desireth life? And loveth many dayes that hee may see good. Keepe thy tongue from evill and thy lips from speaking guile, Ps. 34.12.13. 1 Pet. 3.10. (p) The lip of Truth shall be established for ever, pro. 12.19. (q) Lord who shall abide in thy Taber∣nacle? &c. Hee that speaketh the truth in his heart. Hee that back∣bteth not with his Tongue, Psalme, 15.1, 2, 3. 10. If we deale Truly. The Lord delighteth in us, and will keepe us from harme (r) See to dealing justly. (r) There shall no evill happen to the just, but the wicked shall be filled with mis∣chiefe. Lying Lips are abomination to the Lord but they that deale truly are his delight. 11. If wee performe our lawfull Oaths. Covenants, Contracts and Pro∣mises, though made to our owne, hinderance.
We are Gods children, shall persevere in grace, and be saved. (s) (s) Lord who shall abide in thy Taber∣nacle? Who shall dwell in thy holy hill? He—in whose eyes a vile per∣son is contemned: but hee honoureth them that feare the Lord: he that swea∣reth to his owne hurt and changeth not. He that putteth not out his mo∣ney to Usury: nor taketh a reward against the innocent: he that doth these things shall never be moved, Psalme 15.1.4, 5. 12. If we instruct our Children. They shall by Gods blessing reape continuall be∣nefit therby (t) See the next proofs. (t) Traine up a Child in the way he should goe, and when he is old, he will not de∣part from it, Pro. 22.6. 13. If we correct our Children. Their naturall perversnesse shall be driven out (u) They shall be made wise (w) We shall have peace by them (x) and pleasure in them (y) Our correcting shall not hurt them (z) But be a means to save them. (a. 60)
(u) Fooishnesse is bound in the heart of a Child, but the rod of correction shall drive it farre from him, Prov. 22.15. (w) The rod, and reproofe give wisdome. Pro. 29 15. (x) Correct thy Snne and he shall give thee rest: yea he shall give delight unto thy soule, Pre. 29.17. (y. z) Withhold not correction from the Child, for if thou beatest him with the rod, hee shall not die, Proverbs, 23.13. (a. 60) Thou shalt beate him with the rod, and deliver his Soule from death, prov. 23.14. 14. I we obey our Parents. Wee shall have long life, and prosper on Earth. (b) (b) Honour thy Father, and thy Mo∣ther, that thy dayes may bee long upon the Land which the Lord thy God giveth thee, Exdus 20.12. Dew. 5.16. 15. If we obey Superiours. The two last and we shall be praysed, (c).
(c) VVilt thou then not be affrayd of the power, doe that which is good and thou shalt have praise of the same, Rom. 13.3. 16. If we have a good name. It procureth great contentment, (d) And is more worth then great riches. (e) (d) And a good report maketh the bones fat, pro. 15.30. (e) A good name is rather to be chosen then great riches, pro. 22.1. 17. If we govern our minds it is a note of VVisdome, (f) We shall be reputed wise (g) And be able to govern our Tongues (h) And expresse good go∣vernment (i) And excell. (k). (f) VVith the well advised is wisdome, Prov. 13 10. (g) The wise in heart shall be called pru∣dent prov. 16.21. (h) The heart of the wise teacheth his mouth, and addeth learning to his lips. prov. 16.23. (i) Hee that is slow to anger is better then the mighty: and hee that ruleth his
spirit, then hee that taketh a City, Prov. 16.32. (k) A man of understanding is of an excel∣lent spirit, pro. 17.27. 18. If we govern our Tongues. We shall have long life, and happy dayes (l) Our talke shall abound with goodnesse (m) It is a signe of wisdom in any (n) Yea the foolish in that is counted wise (o) It declareth under∣standing (p) It is a signe of Sanctisication (q) VVe edify many (r) And converse acceptably (s) VVe prevent, and deliver our selves from much mischief (t) VVe procure our selves contentment (u) And health (w) We keep our selves secure (x) We prevent and appease wrath and contenti∣on (y) We use knowledge aight (z) VVeare esteemed wise and well governed (. 61) VVe preserve our Soules from afflictions (b)  Sum∣me, quiet and diquiet, flly, and wisdom, safy, or harm, life or death, are in the power of the Tongue. (c) (l) VVhat man is hee that desireth lie, and loveth many dayes, that hee may see good? Keepe thy Tongue from evll, and thy lips from speaking guile, Psal. 34.12, 13. 1 pet. 3.10.
(m) The mouth of a righteous man, is a well of life, Pro. 10.11. (n) In the lips of him that hath under∣standing wisdome is found, Prov. 10.13. (o) Even a foole when he holdeth his peace is accounted wise, pro. 17.28. (p) Hee that refraineth his lips is wise, Pro. 10.19. (q) The Tongue of the just is as choise sil∣ver, Pro. 10.20. If any man among you seemeth to be re∣ligious and bridleth not his Tongue, but deceiveth his owne heart, this mans Religion is vaine, Iam. 1.26. (r) A wholsome Tongue is a Tree of life. The lips of the wise disperseth know∣ledge, Pro. 15.4.7. (s) The lips of the righteous, know what is acceptable, pro. 10.32. Pleasant words are as an hony-combe, sweete to the Soule, and health to the Bones, Pro. 16.24. A word fitly spoken is like Apples of Gold in Pictures of Silver, Pro. 25.11. (t) But the mouth of the upright shall deliver them. pro. 12.6.
(u) A man shall be satisfyed with good, by the Fruite of his Mouth, Proverbs 12, 14. (w) But the Tongue of the wise is health, Prov. 12.18. (x) He that keepeth his mouth keepeth his  pro. 13.3. But the lips of the wise shall preserve them. prov. 14.3. (y) A soft answer turneth away wrath, prov. 15.1. (z) The Tongue of the wise useth know∣ledge aright, prov. 15.2. (a. 61.) Hee that shutteth his lips is esteemed a Man of understanding, prov. 17 28 (b) Whoso keepeth his Mouth, and his Tongue keepeth his soule from troubles, prov. 21.23. (c) A mans belly shall be satisfyed with the fruite of his Mouth: and with the increase of his lips shall hee be filled. Death and Life are in the power of the Tongue, and they that love it, shall eate the Fruit thereof, pro. 18.20 21. 19. To ordering our Affaires wisely.
Such shall gaine more wisdom (d) And shall be preserved from sin and misery (e) He shews understanding (f) And wins commendation (g) And carries himselfe acceptably (h) Cir∣umspectly (i) worthily (k) He seareth and evoydeth iniquity (l) Abounds in knowledge (m) And makes fools ashamed (n) He is a de∣light to wise men, even to great men (o) He walks uprightly (p) Shall find good (q) And be esteem'd prudent (r) And guideth his mouth wisely (s) And hath much contentment (t) Thugh mean, he shall rule over the greater (u) And come to wealth (w) His countenance ews wisdom (x) He seeketh (y) And obtai∣th knowledge (z) He understandeth deep cunsell (a. 62) Hath happinesse in his house (b) Prevaileth against great strength (c) Discerneth evill ere it come, and avoyds it (d) He is of great sufficiency (e) And increaseth therin (f) Furthereth the peace of the Land where he liveth (g) Discovereth the pride and self-conceitednesse of others, (h) Shall be delivered out of trouble (i) Is a joy to his parents (k) Shall understand the VVill of God in his Word (l) And have great glory in Hea∣ven. (m) (d) A wise Man will heare, and
will increase learning, Proverbs. 1.5. The wise in heart shall be called pru∣dent; and the sweetnesse of the lips in∣creaseth learning. Understanding is a well-spring of life unto him that hath it: but the instructi∣on of fools is folly. The heart of the wife teacheth his mouth, and addeth learning to his lips prov. 16.21, 22, 23. (e) When wisdome entereth into thy heart, and knowledge is pleasant unto thy Soule. Discretion shall preserue thee, understanding shall keepe thee: To deliver thee from the way of the evill man, from the man that spea∣keth froward things, Prov. 2.10.11, 12. (f) But a man of understanding hath wis∣dome prov. 10.23. (g) A man shall be commended according to his wisdom. pro. 12.8. (h) Good understanding giveth favour, pro. 13.15. & 16.24. (i) The prudent man looketh well to his ging prov. 14 15. (k) Every prudent man dealeth with know∣ledge, prov. 13.16.
(l) A wise man feareth, and departeth from evill, Prov. 14.16. (m) The prudent are crowned with know∣ledge, prov. 14.18. (n. o) Wisdome resteth in the heart of him that hath understanding: but that which is in the midst of fooles is made known, Prov. 14.33. (p) A man of understanding walketh up∣rightly, prov. 15.21. (q) He that handleth a matter wisely, shall finde good, prov. 16.20. (r) The wise in heart shall be called pru∣dent, prov. 16.21. (s) Vide suprà (d) in prov. 16.23. Hee that hath knowledge spareth is words, Pro. 17.27. (t) Wisdom is before him that hath under∣standing, pro. 17.24. (u.w) A wise servant shall have rule over a Son that causeth shame: and shall have part of the inheritance among the bre∣thren, pro. 17.2. (x) Vide suprà (t) in pro. 17.24. (y.z.) The heart of the prudent getteth knowledge: and the Eare of the wise seek∣eth knowledge, pro. 18.15.
(a. 62) Counsell in the heart of man is like deepe water: but a man of understanding will daw it out, pro. 20.5. (b) There is Treasure to bee desired, and Oile in the dwelling of the wise, prov. 21.20. (c) A wise man scaleth the City of the mighty: and casteth downe the strength of the confidence thereof, prov. 21.22. (d) A prudent man fore-seeth the evill. and hideth himselfe, Prov. 22.3. & 27.12. (e. f) A wise man is strong, yea a man of knowledge increaseth strength, Prov. 24.5. (g) By a man of understanding and know∣ledge the state of the Land shall be pro∣longed, prov. 28.2. (h) The rich man is wise in his owne conceit, but the poore that hath understanding searcheth him out, Prov. 28.11. (i) But whoso walketh wisely, he shall be delivered, prov. 28 26. (h) Whoso loveth wisdome, rejoyceth his father, prov. 29.3.
(l) Whoso is wise and he sh underst nd these things; prudent, and the shat know them? Hos. 14.9. (m) And they that be wise shall shine as the brightnesse of the fimame nd they that turne many to righteous∣nesse, as the Starres for ever and ever, Da. 12.3. 20. To courage in a good Cuse. Gods Angel is by uch () God will not forsake ch (o) See to trast in God. (n) The Lord is with thee thou mighty man of vasour, Judg. 6.12. (o) Blehold God is migty and despiseth not any: hee is mighty in strength, and wild, Job. 36.5. 21. To Diligence. Such shall be imployed by great men (p) And hall be advanced (q) And grwrich (r) With clenty (t) and contentment (u). (p) Seest th a man delight in his bu∣nesse? hee shall stand before Kings, hee shall not stand before meane men, prov. 22.29. (q) The hand of the diligent shal bare rule, prov. 12.14.
(r) The hand of the diligent maketh rich, prov. 10.4. (s) The Soule of the diligent shall be made fat. prov. 3.4. (t) The thoughts of the diligent tend only to plenteousnesse, prov. 21.5. (u) Vide suprà(s) In prov. 13 4. 22. To Faithfulnesse. Such secure themselves and others (w) Are most acceptable to them that imploy them (x) Shall abound with blessings here (y) And be plentifully rewarded for evermore, (z). (w) A faithfull Embassadour is health, Prov. 13.17. (x) As the cold of Snow in the time of harvest: so it a faithfull Messenger to them that send him; for hee re∣fresheth the soule of his masters. Prov. 25.13. (y) A faithfull man shall abound with bles∣sings, prov. 28.20. (z) VVell done good and faithfull ser∣vant, thou hast beene faithfull over a few things: I will make thee ruler over many things, enter thou into the joy of thy Lord, Mat. 25.23. See all the parable Lu. 19.12.
23. To Contentation. It is a signe of godlinesse (a. 63) And is much better with a little, then abundance with strife (b). (a. 63) The righteous eateth to the satisfy∣ing of his soule, prov. 13.24. (b) Better is little with the feare of the Lord, then great Treasure, and trouble therewith. Better is a Dinner of herbs where love is, then astalled Oxe, and ha∣tred therewith, pro. 15.16.17. Better is a dry mosell and quietnesse therewith: then an house full of Sacri∣sices with strife, pr. 17.1. 24. To Thriftinesse. Such shall increase in wealth, (c). (c) Hee that gathereth by labour shall in∣crease, pro. 13 11. 25. To executing Justice in Judgement. Such shall have long life and happy dayes (d) The Lord wil assist such in judgement (e) And blesse them (f) To doe justice is more accep∣table then Sacrifice (g) It preserveth, and ectablisheth the Judge (h) Maintaineth the
Counry (i) Procures inward peace, and out∣ward quietnesse, and great assurance (k) And honour (l) And safety (m) And succour (n) God will bring such to his house (o) And accept his service, and make him ioyfull thereby. (p) Shall be Justifyed from sin (q) and saved. (r) (d) That which is altogether just shall thou follow, that thou mayest live and inherit the land, which the Lord thy God giveth thee, Deut. 16.20. (e) And hee said to the Judges, take heede what you doe for yee judge not for man but for the Lord, who is with you in the judgement, 2 Chron. 19.6. (f) Blessed are they that keepe judge∣ment: and he that doth righteousnesse at all times, Ps. 106.3. Thus saith the Lord, keepe yee jdge¦ment, and doe justice: for my salvtion is neere to come, and my righteousness to be revealed. Blessed is the man that doth this, and the Son of man that layeth hold on it, &c. Isay 65.1.2. (g) To doe justice and jugement, is more
acceptable to the Lord then Sacrifice, prov. 21.3. (h) Mercy, and truth preserve the King: and his throne is up holden by mercy prov. 10.28. The King that faithfully judgeth the poore: his throne shall be established for ever. prov. 29.14. (i) The King by judgement establisheth the land prov. 29.4. (k) And the worke of righteousnesse shall be peace, and the effect of righteousness quietnesse, and assurance for ever, Iay 32.17. (l) Hee that walketh righteously, and speaketh uprightly, &c. (m.n) Hee shall dwell on high, his place of defence shall bee the munition of rocks, bread shall be given him, his wa∣ters shall be sure. Thine eyes shall see the King in his beauty: they shall behold the Land that is very farre off, Isay 33.15.16, 17. (. ) Keepe yee judgement, and doe Justice. Even them will I bring to my holy
Mountaine, and make them joyfull in my House of Prayer: their burnt-Offrings, and their Sacrifices shall bee accepted upon mine Altar, Isay, 56.1.7. (q) He that hath executed judgement bet∣weene man and man. Hath walked in my Statutes, and hath kept my judgements to deale truly: hee is just, hee shall surely live, saith the Lord, Ezek. 18.8.9. (r) Keepe yee Judgement, and doc Justice: for my Salvation is neere to come Isay 56.1. 26. To dealing Justly with others in our common course. The Lord loveth such (s) And delighteth therein (t) It is a marke of Gods Child (u) Others shall deale so with us (w) Such shall have long life (x) And prosperity (y) Are more happy with little, then others with great riches of Ʋnrighteousnesse (z) Shall have honour (a. 64) Bee justifyed, and sa∣ved (b). (s) But he loveth him that followeth after righteousnesse, Prov. 15.9.
(t) But a just weight is his delight, Prov. 11.1. (u) Lord who shall abide in thy Taber∣nacle? who shall dwell in thy holy hill? Hee that walketh uprightly and worketh righteousnesse, Psalm: 15.1.2. (w) With what measure yee mete, it shall be meted to you againe. Matth. 7.2. Lu. 6.38. (x) Thou shalt have a perfect and just weight, a perfect and just measure shalt thou have, that thy dayes may bee lengthned in the Land, which the Lord thy GOD giveth thee, Deutre. 25.15. (y) That which is altogether just shalt thou follow, that thou mayest live and inherit the Land which the Lord thy God giveth thee, Deutero. 16.26. (z) Better is a little with righteousnesse, then great Revenues without right, Pro. 16.8. (a. 64) Hee that followeth after righte∣ousnesse and mercy findeth life, righte∣ousnesse and honour, prov. 21.21.
(b) Hee that hath walked in my Sta∣tutes, and hath kept my judgements to deale truly: hee is just, hee shall surely live, saith the Lord GOD Ezek. 18.9. Lastly, Such places of Scripture as assure us of infinite, and endlesse happinesse in Hea∣ven, being the most mercifull, finall, and full reward of all our sincere, (though ne∣ver so weake) endeavours, in Christ Iesus (c) There we are assured to be fully freed from all sinne (d) Sorrow (e) And misery (f) Curses (g) And death (h) And to enjoy all holinesse (i) Joy (k) Peace (l) Glory (m) And life (n) And this for ever∣more (o) The same is given us of GOD through Iesus Christ (p) And is reser∣ved for us in Heaven (q) Yea our alone al-sufficient Saviour Iesus Christ is goe thither before us, to prepare a place for us, and will come againe to receive us to himselfe (r) That where he is, wee may be also (s) and this, he who was heard in all things that he desired, hath prayed for (t). So that we shall never perish, neither shall any pluck us out of his hand, For our Hea∣venly
Father which gave us to him is grea∣ter then all, and none is able to take us from him, out of our Fathers hand (u) And this is the promise that he that promised us, even eternall life. (w) (c) To him that ordereth his conver∣sation aright, will I shew the salvation of God, Psa. 50.23. With long life will I satisfie him, and shew him my Salvation, psalme 91.16. For God so loved his Sonne, that he gave his onely begotten Sonne: that whosoever believeth in him should not perish but have everlasting life, Iohn 3.16. Eye hath not seene, nor Eare heard, neither hath entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him, 1. Cor. 2.9. Now are wee the Sonnes of God, and it doth not yet appeare what we shall be: But wee know that when hee shall appeare wee shall be like him: for we shall see him as hee is, 2 Ioh. 3.2. Rev. 21.
(d) For without are Dogs and Sor∣cerers, and Whoremongers, and Mr∣derers and Idolaters, and whosoever loveth and maketh a lie, Revelati. 22.15. And there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defileth, neither what∣soever worketh abomination or mak∣eth a lie: but they which are writ∣ten in the Lambes Booke of Life, Rev. 21, 27. () And the voyce of weeping shall be no more heard in her, nor the voyce of cry∣ing, Isa. 65.19. Hee will swallow up Death in victo∣ry, and the Lord God will wipe a∣way Teares from off all Faces, and the rebuke of his people shall hee take away from off all the Earth, Isay 25.8. The Lord shal be thine ever lasting light and the dayes of thy mourning shall b ended, Isay 60.20. And God shall wipe away all Teare from thine eyes: and there shall b no more Death, neither Sorrow, no crying, neither shall there be any mor
paine for the former things are passed away, Rev. 21.4. (f) Violence shall no more bee heard in thy Land; wasting nor de∣struction within thy borders, Isay 60.18. They shall not hunger nor thirst, nei∣ther shall the heate nor Sun smite them, Isay. 49.10. Where no thiefe approacheth, nor moth corrupteth, Lu. 12 33. Vide suprà (e) Rev. 21.4. (g) And there shall bee no more Curse, Rev. 22.3. (h) And he wil swallow up Death in victo∣ry, Isai. 25.8. And there shall bee no more Death, Rev. 21.4. (i) Thy people also shall be all righteous, Isai. 60.21. Neverthelesse wee according to his pro∣mise, looke for new heavens, and a new Erth, wherein dwelleth righteousnesse, 2 Pet. 3.13. (k) In thy presence is fulnesse of joy, psal. 16.11. Behold, I create Jerusalem a rejoyc∣ing,
and her people joy. And I will rejoyce in Jerusalem, and joy in my peo∣ple, Isai. 65.18, 19. I will make thee an eternall excel∣lency, the joy of many Nations, Isai. 16.15. (l) To them who by patient continu∣ance in well-doing seeke for glory, and honour, and immortality; eter∣nall life. Glory, honour, and peace to every man that worketh good, Rom. 2.7.10. (m) I will delivr him, and honour him, psal. 91.15. If so be that we suffer with him, that we may bee also glorifyed together. For I reckon that the suffings of this present time, are not worthy to be com∣pared with the glory, which shall be re∣vealed in us. Whom he justifyed them he also glori∣fyed, Ro. 8.17.18.30. For our light affliction which is but for a moment, worketh for us a far more exeeding and eternall weight of glory, 2 Co. 4.17. Henceforth there is laid up for mee
Crowne of righteousnesse, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that day, and not to me onely, but to them also that love his appearing, 2 Tim. 4.8. When Christ who is our life shall ap∣peare, then shall yee also appeare with him in glory, Col. 3.4. (n) Hee that believeth my VVord, and believeth on him that sent mee, hath everlasting life. And tehy shall come forth they that have done good, to the resurrection of life, Joh. 5.24, 29. (o) At thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore. psal, 16 11. For as the new heavens, and the new Earth which I shall make shall re∣maine before mee, saith the Lord, So shall your seed and your name, re∣maine. And it shall come to passe, that from one new Moone to ano∣ther and from one Sabbath to another, shal all flesh come to worship before me, Isa. 66.22.23. And they that bee wise shal shine as the brighnesse of the Firmament, and
they that turne many to righteous∣nesse as the Stars) for ever and ever, Dan, 12.3. But the righteous into life everlasting, Mat. 25.46. Whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life, Ioh. 3.16. We have a building of God, a house made without hands, eternal in the hea∣vens, 2 Cor. 5.1. And this is the record, that God hath given us eternall life, 1 Joh. 5.11. And they shall reigne for ever, and ever, Rev. 22.5. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ which according to his abundant mercy, hath begotten us againe unto a lively hope, by the resur∣rection of Jesus Christ from the dead, To an inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fadeth not away, reserved in heaven for you, 1 pet. 1.3 4. (p) But the gift of God, is eternall life, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Rom 6.23. For God hath not appointed us to
wrath: but to obtaine salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Thess. 5.9. (q) Vide suprà(o) In 1 pet. 1.3.4. () I goe to prepare a place for you. And if I goe and prepare a place for you, I will come againe, and receive you, unto my selfe, that where I am there yee may be also, Ioh. 14.2.3. (s) Father, I will that they also whom thou hast given mee where I am, Joh. 17.24. (t) Who in the dayes of his flesh, when he had offred up prayers and suppli∣cations, with strong crying, and tears, unto him that was able to save him from death, and was heard in that hee feard, Heb. 5.7. (u) And I give unto them eternall life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any man plucke them out of my hand. My Father which gave them me is grea∣ter then all: and no man is able to pluck them out of my Father hands, Joh. 10.28.29. (w) And this is the promise that he hath promised us even eternall life, 1 Iok. 2.25.
And Iesus Christ said unto me, these words are faithfull and true (x) And the spirit, and the bride said com and lt him that heareth, say, come and let him that is athirst come, and let whosoever will take of the water of life fre∣ly; He which testifyed these things saith surely I come quickly; even so come Lord Jesus Amen. Rev. 22.17.20. (x) Rev. 22.6. Thus farre of the fift and last head, of the sixt and last part of this Collection of Promises. CAn he be poore whose portion is Gods free and faithfull Promises? Much I have lost and more may lose, Far well to all; These these I choose. Beyond Sea service me undid, Because to sark conscience forbid. What if J never more shall gaine Except my babour for my pain? I then did trust, and still will make, Gods promises my surest stake: His promis'd help I thn did sinde: More of the sam is still behinde. Can I be poore whose portion it Gods fr and faithfull mises?
Blessed be the Lord that hath given rest unto his people Israel: according to all that hee promised: there hath not fayled one word of all his good pro∣mise, which hee promised by the hand of Moses his servant, 1 Kings 8.56. All possible praise bee onely to my God, through Jesus Christ, who hath most graciously given mee, (who am most weake and unworthy) Understand∣ing Dersie, Time, Health, and Ability, to begin, continue, and finish this worke: which I beseech him of his meere Mercy, by the effectuall worke of his holy spirit (whatsoever opposeth) to make profit∣table to his people, comfortable to my Soule, to the Soules of mine, and of eve∣ry one that mournes in Zion, through Jesus Christ, amen. Even so be it, Amer.
A Soliloquy betweene the most gratious Lord, and his most unworthy Servant. LORD alone Ps 44. At home Ps. 101 2 Abroad Gen. 24.63. In thought Isai 55.7 word Ps. 34.13 deed 1 last. To doe what's good 1 last and fly whats ill take heed Isa. 1.16, 17.. With whom thou hast to doe 1 Cor. 20.31. where ere thou art, Ps. 139.7. In all thy wayes from Gods wayes never start, Ps. 119.6 15.59. All by respects abhor Ps. 119.113.1: 8. regard thou not, Luke 6.22 23. A bad mans censure Luke 6.22 23. 'tis a good mans lot, Ps. 33, 15, 16. If good and bad men both should judge amisse, Isai 66 5 Keepe Conscience cleare, thou neen'st not care, I wisse, 1 Pette 3.16. When, and wherein thou fayl'st, with me make peace, Hes. 14.1.
Be wise Ex. 23.13 warn'd Eph. 5.15 watchfull Mar. 13.37. Labour me to please Acts 11.3.. Be confilent Ps. 27.14 thy cause I wil maintaine, Jer. 50.3, 4. Peace 2 Ps. 85 8 credit Zep. 3.19 comfort Ps. 68.3. welfare thou shalt gaine Eccle. 8.12.. Ser. Lord make mee humble Mic. 8.8. circumspect Ex 23.13 upright Gen. 17, 11.. Guide Joh. 16.23. governe me Ps. 119.133. in dark∣nesse be my light Mica. 7.8.. Make mee my God as thou would'st have me be, Ps. 119.35. And give mee all thou knowest good for me. Ps. 84.11 Forgive Ps. 25.18 give faith Lu. 17.5. on thy ne're fayling word, Ps. 119.89. Cause me rely Ps. 119.42. thy promis'd aid afford, Ps. 119.49. O that I could in doing well commend, All unto thee Ps. 37.3. thou surely help wilt send; Ps. 37.5. In Christ, thy Christ, my Christ heare, helpe, grant doe, Dan. 9.17.19. Speak but one word, it must, it shall be so Ps. 33 9 Mat. 8.8.
Lord, I the Lord say it, therefore it must be, Isay. 16 11. My grace alone shall be enough for thee, 2 Cor. 12.9. It was, it is, it shall be so for ever Ps. 33.11.. My mercy Ps. 136 power Cor 98 truth decayeth never, Ps. 117.72. Take courage the Ps 27.14. though all that can be named. Should it oppose Gen. 18.14 thou shalt not be ashamed. Ps. 34.5. Beiv Mar 5 36 await Ps 27.14. submit unto my wi. Ps 37.5.. I'le help in neede Ps. 50.15 and bring good out of il. Gen. 40.20. Serv. So then my Soule, doe no feare, faint or doubt. Psa. 4.5.11. No woe so great, but God wil help thee ou, Ier. 30.7 All that he is, hee's thine to doe thee good, Ps. 62. What can anoy if this be under∣stood. Isa 43.11 As thou art God declare this every way. Ps. 86.15 16, 17.
That blest my state may be both here and aye. Ps. 145.15. Let all bee done as thou Lord God seest fit, Mat. 26.39 Amen, amen Ps. .19 Lord Jesus so be it. Rev. 22.20. Thy humble, faithful servant, Lord I am Ps. 116.6 I trust thy word Ps. 119.42 and so sub∣scribe my name Isai. 4.5. Phillip. Skippon. Miles Christi indignissimus. Mat. 8.8. No end of truth there is, 1 Pet. 1.25. Isa. 40.8. Ps. 100.5. Ps. 1.7.. Ps. 93. ult. But her's the end of this. FINIS.
