S6018 R17656 13038627 96857
A TRUE RELATION OF THE Cruelties and Barbarities OF THE FRENCH, UPON THE ENGLISH PRISONERS of WAR. BEING A Journal of their TRAVELS from Dinan in Britany, to Thoulon in Provence: And back again. With a Description of the Situation, and Fortifications of all the Eminent Towns upon the Road, and their Distance. Of their Prisons and Hospitals, and the Number of the Men that died under their Cruelty: With the Names of many of them, and the Places of their Deaths and Burials: With an Ac∣count of the great Charity and Sufferings of the Poor Prote∣stants of France: And other Material Things that hapned up∣on the Way. Faithfully and Impartially Performed by Richard Strutton, being an Eye-Witness, and a Fellow Sufferer. LICENS'D June 27. 1690. James Fraser. LONDON: Printed for Richard Baldwin, near the Black Bull in the . MDCXC.
TO THE Most Serene and Mighty PRINCESS, MARY, By the Grace of God, QUEEN of Great Britain, France, and Ireland. Most Illustrious Princess, SINCE God, the Fountain of all Goodness, hath given us Your Maje∣sties most Sacred Persons to Rule and Reign over us, to the great Joy of all those that wish well to our Zion, and a Terror to the Disaffected; I do humbly be∣seech Your Majesty out of the Abundance of Your wonted Clemency, That when Your Majesties most weighty Matters shall give leisure, that then Your Majesty would be pleased to lend Your Gracious Ear to the Travels and Sorrows of Your Majesties poor Subjects in France. So the great God above, by whose Power alone Monarchs Reign, Bless Your Majesties with a Long and a Happy Reign over us, and Crown You with Glory Everlasting. So Prays, Your Majesties most Loyal, and Obedient Subject, RICHARD STRƲTTON.
TO THE Courteous Readers: Especially to all SEA-FARING Men. AS it is neither usual nor convenient to jump at once from the Title-page to the Matter, I shall therefore make this small Digression, not to tire your ears with Tautologies, or unnecessary Trifles, but on the contrary, to give you an Account of the whole End and Scope of my Design in gathering together this small Tractate of the Hard Ʋsage of some of our Country-men in France, that whosoever shall read this ensuing Relation, and will be pleased to compare it with the Actions of other Nations, may then give their Judgments in the general, whether or no this looks like the actions of Christians or not, and of those who stile themselves of the better sort. So that when you have had a clear view of some part of their work, you may the better judg the Artifices of the Workmen: That whensoever it may fall in your way, as I doubt not but it will of many of you; then let me desire you to re∣member the words of the Law, (That whosoever sheddeth blood, by man shall his blood be shed) Many will be apt to say, That these words were signified by Moses to the Com∣mon-wealth of Israel, for the propagating of a Civil Government; yet notwithstanding, we see that this Law hath been translated and continued in all Ages, and amongst the most Civilized people since that time; as for example, all those under the Gospel-Dispensation: Yet still many will object and say, These words are purely meant in case of wilful Murther: To all such I shall humbly desire, That they would be pleased to read, or else at least to give ear to this ensu∣ing Diary; wherein they will find the Manner and Method that was used by them, was to put men to the worst of Deaths, (viz.) by Travelling, Beating, and also starving them with Hunger and Cold; which is no less than wilful Murder; then pray let them judg whether their Deaths was not designed by them when this work was first cut out: True it is, Nero had his varieties of Deaths, which he was pleased to impose upon the Primitive Christians in his time, for the which he became famous for Cruelty, and was justly stiled the Enemy of Mankind. But had Nero lived in these days, he might very well have been comented, before he commenced Master of Cruelty and Tyranny, to have become the Scholar of this Most Christian Tyrant, who would have taught him better methods to have accomplished his most Bloody Design, and not have fallen one jot short of it: For as Nero did delight to see those innocent Christians Blood spilt in sport in his Theatres, as he did, at that time there was no Power upon Earth that was able to stop him in this his full Career of Blood, until the hand of Divine Justice had done it, and brought his misery upon him at home, that he was forc'd to say, when he was so miserable
and forsaken of all Men, that he had not so much as a Man that would kill him upon his own request: Nec amicum habeo, nec inimicum; i.e. I have never a Friend nor Enemy. Just so it had happened with us, the People of England, but that it pleased the Almigh∣ty God of his great goodness to settle the Crown of these Kingdoms upon the Heads of this Royal Pair, William and Mary, in that mutable time when the very breath of the Factious had so much disturbed the Air, that the Seas became dangerous to all that Navigated; that then they put a stop to the full Career of this Tyrant's Fury, whom nothing else must have served, but a Sea of Innocent Blood. Then, since it hath so pleased God to avert that great Judgment which was hovering over this Land, which tended to no less than the absolute Overthrow of both Church and State: and on the other side, hath given us a Nursing-Father and Mother, to secure us safe under their shadow; let none of us therefore, English-men, whom the matter doth concern, that lay any Claim or Title to the Heroical Blood of the Britains, whose Valour hath formerly run through the whole World, and hath eclipsed the Glory of France more than once; let none therefore, that putteth his hand to this Plough, look back; especially now they see the Examples of our Renowned Monarchs revived (viz.) those of Edward III. and of Henry V. who to re∣deem the dying Honour of England, exposed themselves to the greatest dangers, and came not back empty-handed; for it is said, Audentes fortuna juvat; i. e. Fortune helps the Bold. Let us therefore set God and the Gospel's Purity before us; and let That be the chief Mark we aim at; and without doubt, by God's Assistance, we may eclipse the Glory of Louis le Grand, as he is now stiled. I do not doubt but it will fare with my poor Endeavours in this Boook, as it hath fared with those of ten thousand times more worth, to be carp'd at by some of the Criticks of this Age, who can sooner find Ten Faults in the Actions of another person, than mend one in themselves. I have not one word to say in the praise of it, it being but a rough thing, and not so well polished as if it had been done by a more skilful hand; and besides, my great trouble and weariness of Body, when these things were collected together; my right-hand being chained, in which I held my Pen, for thirty seven days together: When all these things are considered rightly, it will render me the more excusable. Yet I have this to say, Although it is not put in∣to a lofty Stile, as might have been done by another Man; yet I am sure that what is in it is so true, that it is able to contend with Truth it self; and therefore I hope that Truth is not to be de∣spised, although she be but in a plain Dress. I shall therefore desire you to take this notice as you read, for your better understanding of some particulars, which is not known to every Man: The Sirdena signifies a small Fish, a little bigger than a Sprat; and as for Beverage, that is meant Vinegar and Water, or Wine and Water; Denires is also spoken of very often, which is the small Money of that Country, of which Twelve makes one Souse, or Penny English. So wishing you more pleasure in the reading, than I had in the writing, I take my leave, and subscribe my self, Yours in all Love,Richard Strutton. Deptford,  June 21. 1690.
A TRUE ACCOUNT OF THE Cruelties and Barbarities OF THE FRENCH, UPON THE ENGLISH Prisoners of WAR, &c. June 8. 1689. I Then being come from the Canaries, in the Ship Merry Frigat, Emanuel Dart Commander, right off Portland we met a Privateer of St. Malo; after what resistance we could well make, many of our Men not shewing themselves so valiant as did become English-Men, but on the contrary ran down into the Hold, and left the Commander, with only Three more, to fight this Privateer; which thing we did to our utmost endea∣vour, killing them several Men; Our Commander being dangerously wounded in the Shoulder, and the Gunner shot in the Leg, we were at last forced to yield to merciless Men, who, after we were taken, treated us like themselves, by strip∣ing us almost quite naked, and wounding several of the Men. The Eleventh of this Month they put us ashore into the Prison of St. Malo; the wounded were sent to their Hospital. In this same filthy Prison we remain'd until the 25th of July, and then they sent about 180 of us to Roch∣fort. July 25. 1689. die Jovis. About Ten in the morning came the Guard a Marine, with his Company, for to take us out of the Prison of Dinan; he having a Roll of our Names, call'd us over two by two, and drove us into an Apartment, where
we were Hand-cuff'd two and two to∣gether, with Hand-cuffs made of Leather, and so lock'd with a small Padlock; That being in this manner done to us all, we Marched out of the Castle into the Town, where we found a Hundred or more of our English which were the same day brought from St. Malo, all in the same order, Handcuff'd, two and two; we no sooner met, but away we marched to∣wards Rochfort in a most miserable conditi∣on, some almost naked, and many bare∣foot and bare-legg'd; in this manner we marched from Dinan to a Village call'd Bechereal, fourteen Miles distant; in this place they gave us that Victuals for Sup∣per which we were to have had for Din∣ner in Dinan: As for our Liquor it was Water; so here we slept in the Stables, and in Barns, and many were forc'd to sleep in the open Yard in some Hay that lay there. Friday 26. In the morning before we set forth, several of our Men that were naked almost, Spun Hay Ropes, and so wrapped them about their Bodies, Legs, and Arms, to keep them from the cold by night, The Hand∣cuffs galling, the mens Hands were loosed many of them, up∣on promise of their walking quietly and orderly. and the scorching of the Sun by day; after they had given us a small bit of Bread and Butter, away we marched towards the City of Rhemes, Nineteen Miles di∣stant; as we were on the way, several of our Men fell lame, and could not travel; then were they forced to hire Carts for them. By the way we saw two Country-men at work in the Field, whom the Guard a Marine com∣manded to fetch their Horses to draw the Carts; the two Men seeing the Belt by which he commanded, ran away; they being in the Fields, and an high Bank be∣tween them, thought to get clear of them; but one of them dismounted and ran after them, and so brought them into the Road, where the Guard a Marine drub'd them so long, that I believe he gave them at least Fifty blows, so that I saw the Piss run out of the Knees of the Breeches of one of them; and when that was done, he made each of them down on their Knees, and of them take a good lusty heavy Lad, and carry him upon his back at least a Mle. When we came into the City, we were brought into a close Yard belonging to an Inn, where we were ser∣ved with Bread and Water, and our Lodg∣ing was in the Stables, and many lay in the open yard, for want of room. The savage people many of them kept heaving of Stones over the Walls at us; and those Soldiers that kept Guard over us, would not let us sleep, but kept singing of Songs all night about the Prince of Orange. Saturday 27. About Nine in the morn∣ing they gave us our breakfast, which was the Broath of the Meat they boiled this morning. After our Drivers had bought them all new Whips to drive us along, we began our March, Marching through Two Companies of Soldiers who made a Lane for us, and beat the Drum; we Marched about Nine Miles, until we came to a lone House, where was a Well un∣der a Hedge, by the which we sat down and eat our Dinner, which was but very small; that done, away we Marched Nine Miles farther, to a Town called Polonia. When we came near any Town, then our Drivers would begin to smack their Whips, and upon the least occasion in the World, whip us too, if we did not keep in even Ranks to very great exactness; so that Lashes was dealt amongst us very plenti∣fully,
insomuch that one of them which took great delight in this Exercise of Whipping, we nicknamed Whipping Tom. When we came into the Village of Polonia, the people appear'd very few, so that im∣mediately the Town was alarm'd by Ringing of the Church-Bells, according to the manner of an Alarm; then soon, into the place where we were, came all the people which lived within the noise of the Bells; but truly Nine parts in Ten of the people that we saw, was of the Fe∣male Sex, and Children. Inever saw a Country so thin of Men before, which was contrary to what I did expect; for it was usual in England, to hear people speak much of the popularity of France. When they had served us our Supper, which was a piece of Black Bread and Water, they put us, some into a Stable, and the rest into an empty House, where we lay on the Brick-Floor, the Country-people being all in Arms to Guard us, both within doors and without. Sunday, 28. Early in the morning, we were carried out of our Lodgings into the streets, where we all sate down on the ground, Ten and Ten together, for such were our Messes. Now they served us our Breakfast and Dinner together, which was Broth cut pretty thick with black course Bread, which was so four, that the major part of our Men thought they had put Vinegar into it, until by the taste of the Bread by it self, it was discerned: The Meat, that little there was, they also gave us, which was not considerable; our Drink was Water. When we had thus eaten, away we marched nine miles, to a Town called Beant: Just as we came into this Town, the People were all go∣ing to Mass, so that we had a full sight of the major part of the people of this place; which were but few, in respect to the largeness of the Town; and of those, the most were Women and Priests. Here our Guards made us sit down all on a row in the middle of the streets, and so they commanded the Country-people with their Pails and Buckets to fetch us Water to drink. After we had all drank, away we marched nine miles farther, to a Mar∣ket-Town called Dervalle: When we came into this Town, we were ranged a∣long the street for the people to behold us; which were not many, and of them the major part were Women and Chil∣dren. After this was over, that the peo∣ple began to return to their Houses, being satisfied with the fight of so many English, which I presume to think, they never saw before, they put us into two Stables, and there served us a Supper, a piece of brown, or rather black Bread, and a Cup of Wa∣ter for each Man. This black Bread was not given to us for the want of any bet∣ter to be had; for this Country abound∣eth with plenty of good Corn; such as Wheat, Rye, Barley, &c. but because they would not go to the Price of it, although it was very cheap. When we had supp'd, we went to sleep on the Horse-dung, not having so much as a little Litter to cover it. Monday, 29. Early in the morning, we were ready to march, each Man getting a Cup of Water, but that was all; so a∣way we marched seven miles, to a large Town called Nesce. Now because there was not a Town upon the Road within less than twenty miles, we continued here all day in an Inn, whose Yard and Stables did contain us all: They gave us here for our Dinner about an Ounce of Meat per Man, with the Pottage it was boil'd in; and at night they gave each Man a piece
of brown Bread: Water was brought in to us in a great Kettle, so that we had e∣nough of that, and that was all our Drink. At night, we were put up close into Stables, Weather fair. and were guarded by the Country-people, who brought their Arms along with them; such as wooden Pitchforks, some Hedging-bills, and here and there one of the best of them had a Gun; to some of them our Guards gave their Pi∣stols and Carbines; but, alas, many of them knew no more what to do with them, than those that never saw one in their lives. I saw one looking upon his Pistol, holding the Muzzle in his hand, and with the other hand he was tampering with the Lock: I stood looking on him a good while, thinking by and by to see the foolish Dog shoot himself; and so he had, if he had not been prevented by one of his Brother-Clowns, who came to him, and told him the danger of holding the Pistol in that manner; and so shew'd him which end he should hold in his hand: Another of them in the night I saw take the Candle, and because it did not burn bright, he was knocking the Candle in∣to the Muzzle of his Carbine; which, if Fortune had not certainly favoured Fools, he had without doubt shot himself. Here our Lodgings were in two Stables, indif∣ferent well littered with Straw. Tursday, 30. Early in the morning, we marched out of this Town, the weather being fair and clear, we marched twelve miles to a single House, which was an Inn upon the Road. Here we dined; we had here Meat and Pottage a pretty conside∣rable quantity; but no other Drink but Water. When we had dined, we marched eight miles farther, to a small Village called Treverah. When we came thither, there was no Lodging to be had for us, nor any thing else; so here they got some of their Country brown Bread, and gave every Man a bit; and also they gave a Pot of Wine of about three English Pints, a∣mongst ten Men; so we were all forced to lie down on the cold ground in this open Field, having nothing over head, saving the Heavens only, whose Spangled Sub∣urbs entertain'd our eyes for the most part of the night. Here they also alarm'd this place, that all the Country Boors came in with their Pitchforks and Bills to guard us. Wednesday 31. By the rising of the Sun we began to March towards Nants; which was distant ten Miles; when we begun to come near the Town of Nants, they began to exercise their Whips upon every loose occasion; he that chanced but to stir out of the Ranks, was sure to be lashed, if any of the Guards were near them; so that with their continual Whipping, they had whipt all their new Whips to pieces, that they bought at Reens, and so here they bought more new Whips. When we had past through great part of the Town, we were brought to an Inn, in the which place we were kept backwards in the Yards; here they gave us each Man a penny Loaf of good white Bread; and as for Water, it was brought in by a Horse in Burreco's, be∣cause the Water in the Inn was not fit to drink. Here many People came to see us, but none were admitted, except they were known to be such as was like their Grand Master. It happened that there was a Gentleman came into this Inn to drink, which went up into an upper Room on purpose to speak to us out of the window; but as soon as he was heard to speak English, he was immediately
hurried out of the House, and withal threatned to be put in prison: our Dri∣vers had for a long time promised to us, That as soon as we came for Nants, they would give us a Hogshead of Wine, but instead of giving a Hogshead, they stop the Money that a Gentleman gave us, e∣nough to buy a Hogshead, and then they gave a grand pot of sad sorry Wine be∣twixt ten men, which was not above each man a glass; towards night they went into the Market, and bought up a great great deal of the Refuge Flesh in the Market; such as Sheepsheads, Bullocks Livers and Lights, and the like; so that for our Supper we had about an ounce and 2/1 per man, with the Pottage this stuff was boil'd in; our want made any thing to go down with a pleasant taste; our lodging was in the Stables. Thursday, Aug. 1. We remained still in this place, our Guards had determined to stay all this day to give us a day of rest: In the morning they gave us each man a souse Loaf, and at night just such a Sup∣per as we had last night of such Flesh and Pottage; so after Supper we were put up close into the Stables, and a Guard kept at the door. Friday, 2. Early in the morning we made ready, being soon drest, to march, receiving every man a souse Loaf before for breakfast and dinner; so away we march'd for a Town call'd Egreville, di∣stant from Nants 12 Mile; as we were upon the Road this day, many of us suffe∣red great drought for want of water, the Road being very dusty, neither did we pass by any Spring or Wells upon the Road; when we came into the Village call'd E∣greville, we were put into two Stables, and there we were served with Bread; and as for Drink, we had no other than what the Well afforded; after our Supper was end∣ed, we were put up into the Stables to sleep; this afternoon four of our men had contracted to run away, if any oppor∣tunity presented; the which thing they did accomplish this night. Saturday, 3. About six in the morning we were call'd out, and counted, as was their constant custome; they mist four men; then they began to count over a∣gain, and so they did at least six times; but when they found that four of our men had deserted themselves, you would admire to hear how Jack French-man be∣gan to swear, and to abuse all the rest. Immediately Horses and Men were sent in pursuit several ways, but none of them could have any intelligence of them; in the mean time we were all carried into a close Barn, and a Guard set over us all day: about night our Guard a Marine came back, and taking his Roll of our names, call'd us over two by two; and as they came out of the Barn, they were sorely drubb'd, until such time that he was quite weary, and not able to drub more; withal commanded them to tell where the four men were which had de∣serted themselves; but alas! no man was able of us to give that account; for, I believe, poor men, they did not know well themselves where they were. But as for our parts we were all hand-cuft a∣gain: and because they had lost some of their handcuffs, they bound many of our men with Cords; so away we were car∣ried to the place where we lay last night, having a great Guard over us all night, giving us nothing but Bread and Water this day.
Sund. 4. Early in the morning we march'd out of this Town into a small Town, whose name I have lost; in this Town we were conducted to a close yard, where we were served our Dinners, which was brown bread and water; after we din'd, away we march'd to a Town which was distant from Egreville twelve miles, call'd St. Saravan: now the weather being very Rainy, we went no farther than this Town, but lodged all night in a Stable; our supper was such as our Dinner, bread and water; so here we were well guar∣ded all night by the Inhabitants of the place. Monday, 5. Early in the morning we were served with bread and water, so away we march'd twenty miles to a Town call'd St. Vincean, the Road very good; but by reason of the dustiness of the Road, and the want of water, we suffered great drought; when we came into Town, we were drove into a great Inn, in which was a great square Yard; here they served us our Supper, brown bread and water, but here they gave us each man a small bit of Butter; I am sure the Pot would not hold six pound that served two hundred, the quantity and goodness were both alike, for it had ma∣ny colours, and very nasty stuff; not but that there is good Butter to be had here, and enough. After we had supp'd, we went into the Stables to sleep, where our Lodging was on the dung, having very little or no Litter under us; the House was also well guarded by the Inhabi∣tants. Tuesday, 6. Early in the morning we made ready to march, eating our Break∣fast and Dinner both under one, before we came forth, which was brown Bread and VVater, by the strength of which we were to march Twenty Miles, before we were to eat any more: In this Town, several of the Towns-people came to me, and very kindly asked me, how I did, and would, if it had been possible have persuaded me, that I was a French-man, and born in this Village, and therefore desir'd me to speak my Native Tongue to them; they did not stick to swear, that I was born here, unto our Guards. From hence we marched Twenty Miles, to a Village, called St. Jacque, when we came into this Town, we saw our Guard a Marine, who left us at Egreville, in pur∣suit of the four Men that deserted. He told us, that he had taken them; and withal told us, that he had beat them so long, that he had broke three Sticks over their Backs, which we after knew to be false, for he pretended he had sent them to Rochefort before us, which when we came there, we found there was no such Men. In this Town they put us all into an empty House, where our Lodging was on the bare Floor. At our entrance into the Town they rang their Bells to larm the People, who by the quantity that ap∣peared, would have gave a Man to think, that there had lately been some Contagion that had swept all, or most all away, so few did the People appear. Our Supper was here Bread, and each Man a Glass of Wine and Water; so after Supper was done, we lay down to Sleep, but were prevented by their beating a Drum at the Door all Night; and so like to Negroes they beat and made a noise, as if they had been the same. The chief Man in this place was upon the Guard to Night, and his Accoutrements were such, that for want of a belt for his Sword, he was forc'd to make it fast to him with a piece
of an old Halter; and this Man, our Guard told me, was the Mayor of the place. Wednesday 7. About Noon we march'd out of this Town; but before we went out of the Town, we expected we should have some Food; some of our Men asked the Guard a Marine, if he would give us any Food, for he told him our People were not able to March without; he presently fell to whipping him with his whip, and told them they should have none until Night: So away we march'd twelve Miles to a Village, call'd Shearone; we cross'd over a River just by this Town in a Ferry-boat at twice, all of us; and when we came in∣to the Town, we were put some into a Barn, and the rest into Stables very well Litter'd; our Supper was here a piece of brown Bread, and about half an Ounce of Butter per Man, and our Drink was water: Now we being near the Sea-side, they were very fearful we should make our Escapes in some of their Bur∣toons, which lay in sight; for the pre∣venting of which, they got at least 30 Men very well arm'd with Firelocks to guard us all Night. Thursday, 8. Early in the Morning we began to march toward Rochel, which was distant twelve Miles; within six Miles of Rochel, was a Town in the which they gave us Bread, and several heads of Garlick, which they heaved into the road amongst us, to make us scramble in the dirt for it: here they took off all our Mens handcuffs, and loosed them, because they should not be seen in that manner in the Town of Rochel. About three in the af∣ternoon we came into the Town of Ro∣chel, where we saw many of their Soldiers at work, with other Artificers, in building of Mud-walls, and digging of Moats, and laying out several Lines of Fortification. As we passed by the Soldiers, they left off their work, and came running at us open-mouth'd, calling us what ugly names they could, and withal railing against the Prince of Orange most desperately, until such time that their Officers came and drubb'd them to their work. VVhen we got into the City, we heard many of the people speak good English, giving us their pray∣ers to God for our Deliverance; and all that could well come near us, pri∣vately gave us their Charity. VVhen they brought us to a round Tower next the water-side, we sate down in the Street for the space of half an hour, in the which time the good people of the place brought us a great quantity of pure white Bread, and would have given us many things else, but were hindred by those Rogues that guarded us. After the half-hour stop, as aforesaid, we were all put into this round Tower. Our Guards here gave us no∣thing to eat or to drink; but the good people of this place got leave of the Men that belonged to the Town, that guarded us, to come in and relieve us, and so they did, for they brought us white Bread and Butter enough, and a sufficient quantity of good VVine. At night we lay all down to sleep on the cold Stones. Friday 9. About Eight in the Morning we were brought out of this Tower; and as we past along the Streets, the People gave us their Charity. Towards the further part of the Town, we were ordered to sit down in the Street, where we were served our Breakfast, viz, a six Denire Loaf, and one Sirdena per Man; that done, away we marched towards Rochefort, being distant Fifteen Miles, some
call it Twenty one Miles; but by the way, at a single Inn, about half way be∣tween Rochel and Rochefort, we sat down and were served with Bread and Water; from hence we marched to Rochefort; a∣bout Seven in the Evening we entred in∣to the Town, and so were carried to the Prison; there we found about 200 of Dutch-Men, which were seized upon, and stopt at Bourdeaux. This Prison of Rochefort, is, I believe, as fine a Prison as any is in Europe, for without doubt, it was not designed for a Prison, for the Rooms were very neatly laid out with very fine Chimneys, and curious Glass Lash-lights. It is said, those Houses were built for the King's Officers to live in; within the Gates of the Prison was a large Square Court, which did not contain less than 140 Square Perches, and all over-grown with Grass. In this place, when we came in, we sat down on the ground, and to every Seven Men we had a Loaf given, and a Can of pretty good Wine; after we had Eat and Drank, we went into the Prison, where we lay on the Floor. The Dutch-men that were there before, had Beds to lye on in very good order; neither were they bare of Cloaths, as we were, by reason they had liberty to save both Cloaths and Money, being only stopt and seized in the River of Bour∣deaux and Sherant. Saturday, 10. About Ten in the Morn∣ing the Clerk came in, and took our Names, with the Ships Names we were taken in; after which, we Mest our selves seven and seven together. Four days in the week they gave us Meat, but it was but very little; and at night Beans: The other three days we had Fish; but the quantity did not exceed an Ounce per Man; and those nights we had Pease. Three times a day we were served Wine about half a Pint per Man for a Meal, and the VVine not much to be found fault with. As for Bread, we had about six Pound per day for seven Men. Every thing now was ten times better than it was when we came from Thoulon. Our Lodg∣ing was on the Floor for the most part of us. Saturday, 17. Very near 200 more English-men were brought hither from Brest, who came all the way in Irons: They told us, they far'd very well upon the Road, in respect to us. About thirty came also from Port-Lewis, presently af∣ter. Amongst those that came from Brest, were two of those Men that deserted them∣selves from us at Egreville. They told me, They had been down at Penbeef, and there lay a Dane; they got on board of him; but the Dane was so unkind to them, he would not carry them out, but put them ashoar again, and would not entertain them; and as they were wandring up and down, they knew not which way, they chanc'd to cross the Road just as these Men were passing by, who came from Brest: now because this Provost had lost some of his Men upon the Road, he sei∣zeth these two Lads, and put them in Irons, and brought them hither. Friday, 23. About Noon, this day of English, Scots, Sweeds, and Danes, were mustered to the number of 200. and were drawn out of the Prison into a Close, opposite to the Prison, by twenty Couple together; when we came there, there was a strong Guard of Soldiers, and with them several Smiths, having all things for their purpose in readiness; so we were forthwith all put into Irons, Handcuff'd two and two together; and
after this was done, to make us the more secure to them, they made twenty Couple of us fast together, by ranging a Rope, and fastning it to each pair of Handcuffs, giving us about three Foot space, just to tread clear of one anothers Heels. In this order we were all com∣manded to sit down in Rank on the Ground; that done, they gave Shoes to all such as wanted to perform this long Journey; after this they gave us our Dinners, Bread and Sirdena's, with a Cup of sowr Beverage; our Dinner be∣ing ended, we began our march, crossing the River of Sherant in the Ferry-boats; so away we march to a Town three Leagues distant, call'd St. Jan Englae, on the outside of which Town was an old Castle, and a great Farm adjacent; in this Close we were all rang'd in rank on the ground; so they served us our Sup∣per, which was one Egg and one Sirdena for a Man, with a Cup of Beverage VVine; that done, we were all put into a Stable or Barn, wherein was plenty of Straw, where we got a very good nights Rest, the best I ever got in France. Saturday, 24. Early this morning, we were rouzed to march, being soon drest: so being roped together, and counted, we marched three Leagues, without eat∣ting or drinking, to a Town called Ogua: In this Town they drew us all together into a place which formerly was a Bury∣ing place for Protestants; here they gave us our Dinner, which was a Dish of Broth, as they call it; but it was such, that the like I never tasted for nastiness, having no Meat boil'd in it: I do suppose they threw into it a little nasty Oyl, and so, with some brown Bread put into it, they gave us this stuff for our Dinner; but this stuff fell short, that it would not serve all the Men; so they afterward gave amongst us about thirty Eggs; so with this, and a Cup of small Beverage, we made our Dinner: After Dinner, a∣way we marched to a small Town at the Mouth of the River of Bourdeaux, called Raan. Entring this Town, they made us all sit down on the Sand by the Sea-side, because that none of the Inhabitants of the Town should come near us; in which place we sate until such time as they had provided us a Lodging-place; keeping, in the mean time, strict Guard over us, to hinder the Towns-people from giving us any thing; so that they could only stand at a distance, bemoaning our sad condition with showrs of tears, but durst not come near us, for fear of the Guards. The people of this Town, and likewise of the Town of St. Jan Angliae, are known to be the major part of them Protestants. We sate so long on the Sand, before they had provided us Lodging, that the flow∣ing Tide had driven us up to the very doors; after which, we were driven into an empty House, in which we lay all night, not suffering one man to go out to ease himself, so that those that had occa∣sion, were forc'd to do it where we lay. They gave us for our Supper an Egg, and one small Sirdena, with a piece of Bread, and a Cup of Beverage for each Man, so here we slept, though most sadly annoy∣ed with the ill scent of our own Excre∣ments. Sunday, 25. We remained in this Town until Two in the Afternoon, and had our Dinner here, which was one Egg and one Sirdena, with a piece of Bread and a Cup of Beverage per Man. All this morning was not one Man admitted to go out to ease himself; in which sad manner we continued, until the two Barques were
ready to take us in. At Two in the Af∣ternoon we came all forth; and as we came out, we were strictly searched for Knives or Razors, notwithstanding our being so strictly searched at Rochfort: that done, we were all made fast together in two parcels, an hundred Men in each par∣cel, for all we had no further to march than about a Bowe-shot: but such was their great fear of our being rescu'd by these Protestant People, or at least con∣veying us away from them. Many of the people of the Town followed us at a distance, heaving after us Apples, Pears, and Plums, &c. We walked down almost as low as Low-water-mark, where we entred into two small Barks, call'd Bur∣toons, alias Brittoons. When, and as fast as we came aboard, we were an hundred of us forced down into her small Hold, stowing one upon the other in a most miserable condition; so that neither with Tongue nor Pen am I able to express the misery we endured while we were on board the Barque, both for want of Air and Room; and many times were the Hatches all laid close over us for some time, until we that were next to them were forced to heave them open, for fear of stiffing all the rest of the Men. At the first of the floud, we floated, and away up the River we went, having in our Company the Pottash, or Guard-ship of that place, to be our Guard. At night they gave us one Egg, and one Sirdena, with a small bit of Bread and a cup of Water per Man; so here we remained in a most miserable condition, not having room to sit, stand, or lie down. Monday, 26. We continu'd still on board the Barques, anchoring every Tide of Ebb, the Wind being Easterly, so upon the Flood turned it up the River. Our whole days allowance to day was a small bit of Bread, with one Egg, and one Sir∣dena, and a cup of Water per Man, conti∣nuing still on board the Barque, in a most miserable condition. Tuesday, 27. About Noon this day we got up as high as Bourdeaux, anchoring opposite to the Town. As soon as the News of our being there was got ashore, off came the People of all sorts and sizes, both gentle and simple, and besides a very great number stood on the Shore∣side. Those that came off to us were not suffered to come near us; yet some of our people did get some relief by stealth, and did privately convey some Letters ashore. About Four in the Afternoon, they gave us each Man a Bisket-Cake, and two Sirdena's, and a cup of VVine. Supper being done, several of our Men were put into a great flat Boat, to give more room for the rest: but their Lodging was this night very bad, for about Nine at night it began to thunder, lighten, and rain, as if Heaven and Earth would have met; in the mean time, our poor people lay in an open Boat, having no shelter at all; nor in the morning any dry Cloaths to shift themselves; but if they had, they could make no shift, by reason of their Irons; which would not admit of any such thing. Wednesday, 28. About Eight this mor∣ning we were all put into two flat Boats, in order to our passage up the River: in these Boats also we were stow'd very close, but yet not half so close as before. Ere we loosned from before the Town, off came an English Merchant, who got per∣mission to share amongst us some Money which he had collected for us amongst the rest of our English Merchants: He
gave amongst us very near Twelve Pound sterling, and also several French Merchants gave us Loaves of Bread, and Jars of VVine and Brandy, and several roasted Geese; all of them wishing us well. Our English Merchants promised us. That they would write to England, and give an ac∣count of us. About ¾ Flood, we loosed, and away we went, until the Tide was done; then we came to an Anchor oppo∣site to a single House on the North-side of the River, where we staid until the Ebb was done. Our Supper was two Sirdena's per Man, with Bread and Beve∣rage; so the first of the Flood away we went, Sail and Oars. Thursday, 29. About Noon this day we were tract up as high as the Town of Langoon; a little higher on the North side was a small Village, opposite to which we Din'd; our Dinner was one Egg, and one Siderna per Man, with Bread and Beverage, as at other times; at night we came to a small Town on the North-side of the River, called Quo∣dero, here we went ashore all of us, and lay all Night in an empty House, our Supper was Mutton and Broth; but as for the Mutton, the quantity was so ex∣tream small, that one Man might with ease eat Twenty Mens allowance; with about Two Gallons of Beverage for Twenty Men: many that had no Vessels, such as Drinking-Pots, &c. were forced to put their Broath or Wine into their Hats: In this savage manner were we often served by these Bruitish French-men. Supper being ended, we went all to sleep on the bare floor, the House being well guarded round, both within and without. Friday 30. Early in the Morning we came down to the Boats, being flouted and scoffed at by the people all the way we we passed, calling us Rebellious Rogues for Fighting against our lawful King James; one who, as they say, was as righteous as a God; and withal run∣ning out strangely against King William, calling him Jack Orange, and saying, they would cut his Throat in a short time, and make us all Gally-slaves; yet for all this, we past along, taking no o∣ther notice of them than this, by laugh∣ing at their foolishness: We entred all into the Boats, and away we went; about Noon they gave to each Man of us for Dinner one Sirdena, and one Head of Garlick, with Bread and Beverage; and for Supper, one Egg and one Sirdena, with Bread and Beverage: So we slept all Night in the open Boats, having no Canopy but the Heavens, the Weather fair and clear. Saturday 31. In the Morning very early, the Boat-men began to work, tracking us up the River; sometimes we had at least Thirty to a Boat; about Noon we came opposite to a great Town on the North-side of the River, called Marmanda, and went all ashore, where our Guards, upon some suspicion, search∣ed all our Irons, some they found had broke their Forelocks, to them they gave a sufficient quantity of drubs with a great stick; so immediately a Smith was sent for to secure them, and make them faster: That done, we were ordered into the Boats again, where they gave us our Dinner, one Egg and one Sirdena, with Bread and Beverage; and for Supper the like. We came to an Anchor close by the Shore, near no Town, where we
lay all Night in the open Boats, having nothing to cover us: our Bodies being watered with several great showers of Rain. September, Sunday, 1. In the Morning early we began to put forward, and a∣bout Noon we came opposite to a Town on the North-side of the River, called La∣port; this day they pretended we should make a very great Feast of Flesh; so at, or about Noon they gave us about an Ounce of Fat Pork; for it is the fashion of this Country to cut away all the Lean clean off the Pork, and then eat the Fat after it is Salted. They stop'd us about half an hour before the Town, on pur∣pose to make a show of us to the People, the major part of them standing laugh∣ing at us, as if such foolish Slaves as they are, were not subject to the fortune of War as well as we: Then we went up∣wards until night, when they always came to an Anchor, by reason that there is no Tracking in the Night, for the ma∣ny Shoals and Islands there is in the River. At Night they gave us for Supper one Egg and one Sirdena per Man; so we lay all night in the open Boats, the Weather fair and clear. Monday 2. This day we past by several small Towns on both sides of the River, whose names are insignificant; the peo∣ple of one of them, when we put ashore, brought us down into the Boats to sell, several Roasted Geese; those that had Money amongst us, bought of them very cheap, a good Roasted Goose, not ex∣celling the price of Six Souse; our Guar∣dians gave us for Dinner one Egg and one Sirdena, with Bread and Beverage, and the like for Supper; so we lay still in the open Boats all Night. Tuesday 3. We continued still on Board the Boats, not going by Night ashore; our poor bodies lay open to the Dew of Heaven, it Rained on us several great showers of Rain this Night. By this time we had about Twenty four Men sick, some of one Malady, and some of an o∣ther; our Diet was to day our former al∣lowance of Eggs, and Sirdena's, and Bread, &c. Wednesday 4. We continued still on Board the Boats in this sad condition; our Diet to day was about an Ounce of nasty greasy Pork; and for those that were sick, that could not eat it, they must fast; for there was nothing else to be given to them, although all manner of things fitting for the body of Man, for food, was extream cheap all over this Country; this we had for Dinner and for Supper. At Night we came up to a Town on the South-side of the River, called St. Anns, here we Anchored very near the Shore, about Eight at Night it began to Thunder, and Lighten, and Rain, as if Heaven and Earth would have met; we got a thin Sail to heave over the after-part of the Boat; but that did us but little service, it not being proof against Water, we were all desperate wet: The people of the Town kept a strong Guard all Night on the Shore. About Eleven this Night died one of our sick Men, named Thomas Smith, who was lately, Mate of a Virginia Ship, he was put in Irons to one of his Sons, who when his Father was dead, vvas yet kept in Irons fast to his dead Father, for the space of Eight hours; the sight of vvhich vvas able to melt a heart of stone to see a poor Youth vveeping and lamenting the loss of his Father, and at the same time to be Chained to him.
Thursday, 5. About Eight this Morn∣ing they carried ashore the body of the Dead man, by Four men; but like them∣selves they carried him, one taking hold of a leg, another of an arm, and so dog-like, heaved him into a hole by the way-side: They gave us our Din∣ner here before we came from before this Town, which was about an Ounce of rusty Pork with Bread and Beverage, and the same for Supper: By Night we came to a Town on the South-side of the River call'd Ratta, at which Town we went ashore, where we lay all night in a Barn, having a great Guard over us all night, quite round the House. Friday, 6. While we lay in this Barn, sick and well all together, we were most sadly annoyed by the ill scents of our mens Excrements; for they were not admitted to go forth to ease themselves, the Inhumanity of the Guards was such; much like to the rest of their Countrey-men, who are, by all that I can discern of them in general, the most inhumane, barbarous Wretches, that e∣ver lived since the Creation. In the Morning one of our Boys spied a hole in the Wall of the Barn, that look'd into another Barn, in which was a Wine-press, and abundance of Grapes ready for the Press; one of our boys crept in at the hole, and handed out to the most part of our men their hats full of Grapes, which was a great re∣freshing to us, besides filling our empty stomachs. About Nine in the morning we came out of this Barn; and as we were marching down towards the Boats, several of our sick men com∣plained to the Provo of their extream illness; he presently told them in French, That they must pray to God for for∣giveness, for from him they must not expect any Mercy or Comfort. At Dinner they gave us one Sirdena, and one Onion betwixt two men; and for Supper just the same. At night we were brought up opposite to a Town call'd Burdoon, on the South side of the River; close by the Shore side, we were brought to an Anchor: When the rumour of being there was spread abroad about the Town, both Gentle and Sim∣ple came down to stare on us, and so spend their Verdict, and so away again. All this night we lay in the Boat, ha∣ving a great Guard over us all Night on the Shore side. Saturday, 7. Before it was day, we weighed from before the Town, the morning being foggy, and the day ve∣ry hot; as soon as it began to clear up, we saw the high Granada Hills very plain, the middle of them bearing South from us. Our Dinner was one Sirdena per man, and one Onion betwixt two men, with Bread and Beverage. About two in the Afternoon we came to a Shoal place in the River, where we were all forc'd to get out of the Boat to lighten her. So we walk'd about a mile, at the end of which the Boat put ashore, and those that were able to walk a mile, came out of the boat; that done, we took up that little baggage we had, and away we march'd, leaving our sick men on the shore, until such time as they could get Carts to carry them. About a mile from the place where we landed, was a Town call'd Grana∣da: close by the Gates of the Town we sat down until the sick men were brought to us. We sat there at least
two hours before the Carts came; in the mean time some of us joined our stocks together, and sent into the Town for some Wine by a Soldier, that was as a Spectator, looking upon us; he took several of our Jars, and brought them full of Wine, and the rest of our Money back, when we our selves did not expect that our Money would have bought a quarter so much; but Wine was so ex∣traordinary cheap, that by Retail it was sold for less than three half-pence per Gal∣lon, that is, eight deniers the grand Pot; and the Wine was also very good; when our sick men came to us, we all entred the Gates of the Town, and were con∣ducted to the Market-house, and by it was an empty house, where they used to put dry Goods, as Wheat, &c. into this house we were all for close cramm'd, that we had scarcely room to stand one by the other; here many of our men got their loads of the Juice of the Grapes, insomuch that they fell to fighting one with the other; the Guards coming in to part them, began to strike several of them, but they immediately left off fight∣ing one with the other, and fell foul on the Guards, but alas! they came off by the worst, being all hand-cufft two and two together. At night they brought us our Supper, Bread and Onions, with some few Eggs and Sirdena's, but in∣stead of serving us, they paed us, hea∣ving both the Eggs, and Sirdena's, and Onions at us, with all their force; I had a blow just on my belly with a great Onion, that truly I thought it had beat all the breath out of my body, and the Eggs were most of them broke all to pieces, the rest were thrown on the ground in the middle of the house, just as if they were serving so many Hogs. Before we went to sleep, they took many of the sick men out of the house, and put them into another, to make a little more room for the rest to lye down: That being done, we went to sleep, but were most sadly annoyed before morning, with the sad stink of our mens excrements; the Towns Guard being so like themselves, they would not suffer any man to go forth to ease himself. Sunday, 8. After our Guards had been at Mass, we came forth out of this place, and so with two Ropes they made us fast together, about Eighty men or thereabout, in a Rope; for some of the sick they had provided two Carts, but two Carts was not sufficient to carry all of them; the rest they made fast to us in the Ropes, on purpose that if they could not march, we might drag them along, which we were forc'd to do by their continual drubbing us with Whips, Swords, Sticks, and with their Guns likewise, if we did but stop to the cries of our sick men; just as I have seen Car∣ters in England do to their Horses when they were upon a dead pull, giving each one a lick to mend his pace; so did the barbarous Frenchmen to us; many times the sick fell down on the ground, not being able to stand; then were these poor souls dragg'd along on the ground by one arm, with a Frenchman following them, drubbing them, crying, March ye bug∣gering Dogs, and so never leave drub∣bing, until he had made them to stand; and if by no means they could, then they would use them after this manner; They would take them out of the rope, and so heave them into the Carts, like so many dead Dogs one upon the other; so that I think it would melt a heart of stone to behold it. I saw one of these Rogues drub a poor man that had the Calenture,
and was at the same time as senseless as a Stone, most desperately, to cause him to make more room in the Cart; and alas, the poor Man he cried at his Blows, but did not conceive what the occasion of them was; the next day the Man died of his Distemper; in this manner we marched two Leagues, and the end of which, we came to a single Inn by the Road-side; here we sat down to eat our Dinner and Break∣fast, which was always given us at one time, and now it was a piece of Bread, and one Egg per Man, with a Glass of VVine; Dinner be∣ing ended, Tholuse, Languedo. away we marched three Leagues further to the great City of Tholuse; a∣bout Eight at Night we came close to the Gates of the City, where thou∣sands of People of all sorts and sizes came out to see so many English-men as we were in that Condition, but none was suffered to come near us, ex∣cept by stealth; on the out-side of the City we were all drove into to a cold, wet Stable, Sick and VVell all together; where we had neither bit of Bread, nor drop of Drink given us; neither would they let those that had any Money buy any; the place was guard∣ed all round by the Inhabitants of the place. Monday, 9. This Morning about Ten of the Clock, we were all brought out of the Stable, and as we were counted, so we were ro∣ped together; we were then order∣ed to sit down on the Ground in the Close, just without the Stable; and here, to make us amends for our Supper, they gave us this great Dinner, viz. about an Ounce of na∣sty, rusty, greasy Pork, such it was, that many of our hungry Stomacks could not away with; but withal, we had a souse Loaf, and a Cup of Wine and Water per Man; Din∣ner being thus ended, we remained in this place to be made a show of to the People; the end for which we travelled about the Country; for the People of the place gave Money to come in to see us, and the Rogues the Guard told them, that we were a Man of Wars Mens Company, whom they had taken; also alledging us to be a pack of Rebellious Rogues, that had fought against Righteous King James, and that by the King of France we were condemned to be made Gal∣ly-slaves of, and most of the common sort of People believed it, but the better Sort of People were more in∣quisitive into the truth of the matter; this we understood by some of our People that spoke French very well; who told them, that as yet, they had not as we could hear, gained that point of Honour as to take an English Man of War; Five of our Men was left here in their Hospi∣tal. but otherwise we were of us at least thirty Ships Companies of Merchants Ships Men, and most of them Ships of no force at all; several of the Gentry seem'd to pity us; but ha∣ving Information, that we were not of their Opinion, but on the con∣trary, that we were Calvinists; their Charity to us was barefooted and cold; while we lay in this place, I do be∣lieve
there was not less than Twenty several Orders of Clergy-men came in to see us, telling us we were wretch∣ed People, for fighting against God and the True Religion; withal, tel∣ling us, That their Beads which they shew'd to us, and their Prayers in their Cloyster, was of greater force than our Arms of England; they in∣quired of us, if there were a∣mongst us any Roman Catholicks? we told them, none of the English; but we had one Irish-man that was, which was a poor silly Soul, that scarcely knew Good from Evil; we brought them to him; and when they came to him, he understood not one word they spake; they crost him, and that the French had done before by taking him; and blest him, and that was but small benefit to him; so away they went; the poor Soul kist their Sleeves at their departure, to shew his Obedience to their Church. About Two in the Afternoon, we marched from hence; the People flock'd to see us in a great number, both Gentry and others: For this City is as near as I can guess, who was born in London, to be very near, if not quite as big as the City of London with∣in the Walls; and besides, the City is very populous, the City is wall'd round with a Brick-wall, with a Trench or Ditch without the Wall, but that was filled up, and Gardens made in the same; there is little or no Suburbs belong∣ing to this City, except it be here and there a stragling House; and a∣bout the Town-walls, I could not see one piece of Ordnance, nor any For∣tification; and I am sure we walkt the Wall three quarters of it Circuit; we had not marched above a quarter of a Mile, but we saw two Men that was broke on the VVheel not long since; as far as I could gather, it was for be∣ing Hugonots or Calvinists; and we had several Men with us that spoke French naturally; we marched two Leagues further, to a Town call Castinata; when we came there, we were made to sit down on the cold Ground, until they had served us our Supper, which was a half-peny Loaf, and a Cup of VVine; that being done, we were put into a Stable, and lay on hot Horse-dung, like so many Swine, the Town being all in Arms to guard us. Tuesday, 10. Early in the Morning we were counted like so many Sheep, and we were roped together, and away we marched three Leagues to a Town called Basiego, just about Twelve of the Clock we entred the Town; just at our Entrance, we met a great Concouse of People attending a Funeral, which was so∣lemnized after this manner: I taking especial notice thereof in all its Cere∣monies, which was thus: The Priest walking before the Corps reading the Service, which was carried on a Bier very neatly drest, and before him was car∣ried a wooden Crucifix, the Priest was drest up in his Pontifical Habit, and after him came one carrying Holy VVater, sprinkling the People as he past; but that which made me almost ready to Laugh, was to see a VVoman that came after, assisting
the Ceremony with two Tallow Can∣dles burning in one hand, and her Apron held before the Candles with the other, to keep the VVind from blowing them out, the Tallow of the Candles running about her fist, the Sun at the same time shining very resplendently: The Ceremony was no sooner done, but in comes the Priest into the Town, and pulls off the old Trumpery of the Pope, and got amongst the Crowd staring on us, and by his Countenance was very well pleased at the sight, to see so many English-men in Irons, and Roped to∣gether, sitting on the Ground in the middle of the Street, eating an Egg, and one Onion, with Bread and Be∣verage for their Dinner; by this time they had followed their drubbing us so close, that they had broke all their Sticks, and most of their Swords, and the Barrel of one of their Guns about our Backs: we have now about thir∣ty of our Men very Sick in the Carts, who never mist of drubbing scarcely two hours in the day; some because of their weakness, they were not able to get up into the Carts; and some for stirring in the Carts, sometimes to get a little ease; we marched two Leagues further to a Town, called Villa Franko, where we sat down in the middle of the Streets, and got our Suppers, one Egg per Man, and one Onion betwixt two Men; when our Supper was end∣ed, we were drove into a Stable, where our Lodging was on the hot Horse-dung, the House being guard∣ed all round by the People of the Town. Wednesday, 11. Very early in the Morning we were brought forth, be∣ing roped together, and counted like Sheep, the Sick put into the Carts, who never mist of drubs, for that they had duly paid, and that very often in a day; away we marched three Leagues to a large Town, called Ca∣stela; when we came into the Town, we sat down in the Streets in three Ranks; here they gave us for Dinner, three small Sirdena's per Man, with Bread and Beverage; several of our People would have bought something else of the People, but durst not, ex∣cept it were by Stealth; there was one of our Men went to buy of a poor Woman, a little plate of fry'd Meat, which was discovered by the Rogues the Guards, who took away the Meat from the Woman by force, and hove away the Meat, Plate, and all into the middle of the Streets, broke the Plate, and spoil'd all the Meat, and this was their Cruelty, who would not give us Victuals scarcely enough to keep Life and Soul together; neither would they suffer those that had Money to buy any, except it were by stealth: we marched from hence three Leagues to a Town, called Villa Picta, it was Eight at Night before we entred in∣to this Town, we being most of us most desperately tired with this days Walk, which was six Leagues, and every League in Languedock, contains four Italian Miles; when we came into the Town, we were all put into a great Stable, our Supper was one Sirdena per Man, with Bread and Be∣verage; our Lodging was on the hot
Horse-dung, so in this manner we rested our weary Bones: This Afternoon we saw the Highland of Barcelona in Spain, very plain. Thursday, 12. Early in the morn∣ing we began our march, and marched three Leagues to a Town called Villa Sancta, in which place we sat down in the middle of the streets in ranks; here they served for Dinner, a small bit of bread, with one Egg, and a cup of sad Beverage Wine, a very poor Dinner. Our sick men were this day, as well as others, sorely drubb'd with Swords, Whips, and Sticks, because by their weakness many of them were not able to help themselves up and down; from hence we marched three leagues farther, to a Town call'd Carkasonna; when we came there, the Inhabitants of the Town shut the Gates against us, and would not let us enter until such time as the Pro∣vost, who was our Grand Signior, made use of his utmost Authority, by shewing his Commission, &c. Then the Gates were opened, and in we all entred, where we were conduct∣ed to a very large stable, in which we were all put, sick and well. Our Supper was a bit of fat Pork, about the bigness of a Wallnut, and bread to the quantity of a souce loaf, and each man a cup of Beverage. Our lodging was on the hot horse-dung, which was as hot as any horse-dung whatsoever. This Town of Carkasonna is a very fine fenced Town, with good Fortifications about it, yet in all the Fortifications I could not see any Ord∣nance, mounted or unmounted: The Town seemed to be very populous, but at this time there were no men in Arms in this Town, such as Soldiers, &c. Friday, 13. Before we came out of this Stable, they served us our Dinner, which was a small bit of Pork, like that last night, with Bread and Beverage. After that was served us, we were roped together, in readi∣ness to march; our sick men were likewise crouded into two Carts: About Ten of the Clock we march'd hence four Leagues, we march'd to a Town call'd Porsarick; here we made a stop in the streets for about half an hour; in the mean time seve∣ral women came to us, and distribu∣ted among us their Aprons full of Grapes, and took great pity on us; [we were often, and in many pla∣ces, much pitied by many of the tender Sex]: At last we were con∣ducted to a great stable, that held most of us that were well in health, and the rest were put into another stable with the sick men; they gave us nothing for Supper, saving one small Loaf, worth about Six Deniers, with∣out ever a drop of drink, and if we call'd for any water, in came the Rogues our Guards, and would fall to drubbing us with their drawn Swords most furiously; I was at this time most bitterly inflamed to see their barbarous usage, and withal be∣ing very thirsty, walked with my Mate to the door, desiring them to do that
favour, as to give me a little water, but I partly guess'd before what would be the effect of it; in comes one of the Guard, and salutes me over the Head and Shoulders with his drawn Sword, and withal gave me a prick on the Arm; the lights being all out, I took him a good box under the ear, and struck him down to the ground, and then I seconded it with a kick on the guts; that done, up he gets, and away he runs to call in the rest of the Guards; but I immediately slunk into a hole; in comes the Guards with Swords drawn, and Guns cockt, looking to see if they could find who it was that struck the Corporal, but could not find him, by reason it was done in the dark, and I my self lay down, as if I had been fast asleep. This night they were very fearful of our rising against them; so the Mayor of the Town was brought to us, to examine the bu∣siness; to him we made our Com∣plaint; he to appease us, promised that we should have a good Supper, and all things necessary, as Wine, and Straw to lye on, &c. that done, away he goes, and present∣ly instead of performing his promise, he forthwith orders a strong Guard to be set round the house, both within and without, and this was all we got of Mr. Mayor, he being very like the rest of his Country∣men, viz. great and notorious Ly∣ars, and deceivers of men. Close by my side was posted a Centi∣nel, a poor innocent fellow, who not long after he was placed there, fell fast asleep; I having just at my Entry a good view of a Hen∣roost, went with my Mate, and each of us got a very good Pul∣let; that done, down we came to our places, without any noise, putting our Poultrey into the knees of our Breeches; our Guard at the same time was fast asleep on the Ground, and with ease might any man have disarm'd him, but alas his looks did shew him to be a poor Innocent Fel∣low, and by that means we let him alone. Saturday, 14. Early this morning we made ready to march, all the Town Guards that watcht us last Night, going with us: Before we got out of the Town, at the Sta∣ble door where the rest of our men lay, we saw the dead body of one of our men upon a ladder, whose name was Alexander Montgome∣ry: Away we march'd; and when we had opportunity on the Road, we pickt our Fowls. This part of the Countrey is very mountainous, and yet abounds with plenty of Vineyards and Olive-yards: On the very scraggy Rocks and Mountains, grow great plenty of sweet Herbs, such as Thyme, and Lavender, Rosemary, Mirtles, and other odo∣riferous Herbs. This morning two of our men did get out of the Rope, and so slipt into the cran∣ny of a Mountain, and knockt off their Irons, and went away undis∣covered by any of the Guards. After we had marched three Leagues, we came to a lone Inn by the Road
side, near a Town called Puzola; we were here conducted into our old Halls, the stinking Stables; here we got our Fowls drest, and made a great Feast; we gave four parts in five to the poor sick men, who be∣cause they were not able to get up and down, and help themselves, they would not suffer them to come out of the Carts from Morning till Night, but sat there all Weathers that blew; they gave us here for dinner a small bit of Pork, with Bread and Beverage: As soon as we had Din'd, we march∣ed out, and being counted out, as was their usual manner, they mist two of the number, which were the Two that got away; they counted us over at least six times, but when they found that two Men were gone, the Provost, with the rest of them, was in a despe∣rate Rage, swearing by all their gods, that they would travel us to death; and when we could march no longer, they swore they would shoot us, and let us lye dead on the Road: But alas! all their swearing at us was but to small effect; for although many of our people saw them when they went, yet no Man would say any thing of it to them, for fear lest they might be closely pursued, and so taken; and if they should be taken again by any of these Rogues, it were better for them they had never been born. Away we marched one League, to a lone House, by the which was a close place, wherein they used to keep Sheep, into this place were we drove, sick and well, all together; when we came in, we found it to be a most loathsome place, full of Sheps-dung, and the Dung full of Maggots; there was no place for any Air to come in to us, saving a small hole or two in the Wall. Before Morning we were most of us well-near stifled, what with the stink, and for want of air toge∣ther: Our Supper here was a piece of Bread and a Cup of Beverage; when our Supper was served us, the House was beset all round with a strong Guard. Sunday 15. About Six in the Morn∣ing we sat forth out of this place, the Morning Rainy, with all the Guard that guarded us last Night, which were about Fifteen in number, besides our usual Guard, which were about Four∣teen Horse and Foot; we marched Three Leagues, to a Town called Ca∣pista, and all was very foul; when we came to Capista, which is a fine Walled Town, we walked almost round the Town before they could find an empty Stable big enough to hold us; at last they found a Stable that held us all, and would have held as many more, if there had been so many more of us: Here they gave us our Dinner, which was a piece of Bread worth Six Deniers, and about half an ounce of Fat Pork, with a Cup of Beverage per Man. Dinner was no sooner ended, but away we marched; We had been on the Road not much above an hour before it began to Thunder, Lighten, and Rain, as if Heaven and Earth would have met; along we marched through thick and thin for the space
of three hours in this sad Weather: (the Water runningout of the Knees of our Breeches) until we came to a fine fenced Town on the top a Hill, called Besias, Three Leagues distant from Capista: When we came near the Town, we that were before stayed for those behind, which were quite foundred; thus in this wet condition we stayed in the Road near half an hour in the Rain, until that they were come up to us: That done, we entered the Town, and were put, as near as I can judge, into the Town-Hall; here we staid near Two Hours in this wet condition, as thick and close one by another as we could well stand; at last we were carried out of this place through the Rain, the Spouts of the Houses running, or rather pouring on our Heads for the space of half a Mile, and in this wet condition were we drove into a large cold Stable, where we had nothing to lye down on but the cold Ground, and the wet Horse-Dung, our Cloaths being as wet on our backs, as if we had been plunged in a River, and could not get one rag off our backs, because of our Irons. For Supper we had a small Loaf of Bread, with about half a mouthful of Meat; the quantity of the Meat, I am sure, was not suffi∣cient to give a Jack-Daw a meal, and that which was of it was most part Bullocks-Liver and Lights. The Wo∣man that brought it in to us, brought it in a Earthen-pan under her Arm, covered with another Earthen Pan; so that any one may judge whether Meat for Two Hundred Men could well be carried in the nature afore∣said: With our Bread and Meat, and each Man a Cup of prick'd Wine, we made our Supper; that done, we lay all down to sleep on the wet ground. Monday 16. The Morning, and all the rest of the Day being Rainy, we continued still in this Stable; a∣bout Ten in the Morning they gave us some dry Straw, when we had little need of it, our Cloaths be∣ing almost dry on our backs by the heat of our bodies; in this Stable some of our Men found out a door that entered into a Wine-Cellar, in which was a Butt of special strong Wine, into which Cellar a little French — Boy and others got in, and handed out to the Men all their Pots and Jars full of this good Wine, which did so heat and comfort ma∣ny of them, that they soon forgot sorrow. In fine, before it was dis∣covered, we had drank out the best part of the Wine. Our Dinner was to Day, a small Loaf per Man, and about a mouthful of boiled Guts, and Lights, and Liver, and half a pint of sowre Wine; for Supper a Loaf and Wine: This day died a Man named Francis Evans a Carpenter. Tuesday 17. About 10. this Morning we came out of the Stable into an open place, and being all roped together, we in our usual manner were served ac∣cordingly, which was Bread and Be∣verage. Twenty five of our Sick-Men we left here in their Hospital, and yet
we had at least Twenty Five or Thirty more that were sick and weak. We marched from this place Four Leagues, to a Town call'd Pezeain, a very fine wall'd Town, standing in a very fine level place, and well Moated round. Into this Town we entred, and were put into a very large Stable, well littered with Straw. For Supper, we had our usual Allowance of Bread, and Pork, and Beverage; so here we had a very good Nights-Lodging. Wednesday 18. We being roped to∣gether, and counted, as was their usu∣al manner, we marched four Leagues, to a Town call'd Dishean, where we went into a Stable, and had for our Dinner Bread and Beverage, with a little bit of Pork, of about an ounce weight. From thence we marched three Leagues, to a Town called Punian, where we took up our Lodging in a Stable; our Supper was Bread and Beverage: So we slept in the Stable on wet Horse-Dung. In the middle of the Night it began to rain ve∣ry fast, the Stable not being well covered, the rain came down upon us, and almost floated us: Thus, and such like, was our Lodging in this Coun∣trey. Thursday, 19. The Weather being still rainy, we continued still in this Stable all this day: We had se∣veral Priests and Gentry came to gaze on us; who gave us no comfort, but derided us, our King and Religion: Telling us withall, that King James had routed General Schomberg in Ireland; and moreover, that next Summer, England also was to be theirs. They said also to us, Your condition is here very bad, but if you were in England, your case would be far worse; for says they, There is at present a very sore Famine, and no Bread hardly to be had for any Mo∣ney. By this I did conjecture, that they had in their Countrey a Lying-Oracle, and that Truth to them was a great Stranger. We were obliged to give them the hearing of all their Stories, although we did not believe one word they said. They gave us here for Dinner a piece of Bread, and a small bit of Mutton, with Beverage; but so small was the quantity of Mut∣ton, that one Man might very well have eaten twenty Mens shares: So that of that little they gave, bread was nine parts in ten of our Provision: The rest was not worth the naming; our Beverage was sometimes pretty good in those places where they could get no bad Wine; but many times it was worse than Water. For Supper they gave us Bread and Beverage; and the Water they boild their Ru∣sty-Pork in, under the Name of Bon-Supper: This was our Fare; so here we slept this Night also, in the same Stable, on the Wet — Horse-Dung.
Friday 20. Early in the Morning the sick Men were put into two Carts, and the rest of us being roped together and counted, began to march, wading through several Rivers, whose Depth took us up to the Belly, the Stream running so swift with the Freshes of the last great Rain, that it was like to overset our weak Bodies: but our being forty or fifty in a Rope, the one held up the other. As we past along by the Road side we had leave to enter into the Vineyards and gather Grapes, which we did plenti∣fully. Many Vineyards in this Country lie as open to the Road, as many Commons do in England or elsewhere. We marched about four Leagues before we came to Mom∣pellier, which is as fine a wall'd Town, and as curiously situated as ever I beheld a Town in my Life, the bigness of the City I do verily belive to be about the bigness of the City of Bristol; but about it is a far more pleasant Landskip, having about it several curious Champion Hills, and fine Vine-yards and Olive-yards, and about four or five Mile to the Southward of the Town is the fair Mediterranean Ocean, viz. the Bay of Languedock. When we came near the Town, we were put into a very large Stable, without the Walls of the Town. This Country is the best fitted with large Stables of all the places that ever I was in in all Christendom, which have been many. Here it is counted a very small Sta∣ble that will not hold two Troops of Horse. And as for their Building, they are built with very much cost and charge; most of them are built of hewn Stone, all arched over head most neatly. In this Stable which we were all put in, I took especial notice of one thing that is just at every Horses place all round the Stable: upon the Wall was writ the Name of one Saint or other; what might be the humour of it I cannot guess: but this I am certain must be the end of the design, either for the Horses to worship, or else the Ostler; the Letters were large Capitals. They gave us here for Dinner our usual Quantity of Pork with Bread, and Beverage; that done, away we march'd two Leagues farther, to a small Village called Columbeas, where we were put into two Stables; our Supper was Bread and Beverage; and our Lodging on wet Horse-dung. Saturday 21. It being a very dreadful Night all the last Night for Thunder, Light∣ning and Rain, and continued until about eleven this Morning, about which time it began to clear up: so here we had our Din∣ner, which was a bit of fat Pork of about three quarters of an Ounce Weight, and a piece of Bread, and a Cup of Beverage: that done, we were roped together and counted, and away we marched four Leagues to a Town called Imergos; here we were put into a loathsom place where they used to keep Sheep in: our Lodging was on the Sheeps Dung, having no Straw at all: some of us got the Hurdles to lie on, such as they fold Sheep with, but the most part lay on the ground: It would grieve the Heart of a Stone to hear the Groans all Night of our sick and dying Men which lay in this sad Condition. Our Supper was a piece of Bread, and a Cup of Beverage, which was far worse than Water: so here we lay until the break of Day. Sunday 22. We were rouzed very early this Morning out of our stinking Den, and being counted like so many Sheep, we were roped together, not without many Drubs, for those we had daily and hourly: so away we marched for Cicile. The People of I∣mergos told our Guards that much of the Country was overflown that we were to pass through to day, and therefore advised them to get Carts to carry us over the deep∣est of the Flouds. According to their advice they got two Carts, which when they came to a small place not above Knee-deep, they
carried us over in the Carts, and so dismist the Carts: And within less than Pistol shot of this Place, was a Place twice as deep, and ten times the length; over this they made us to wade, which took us up to the middle, and with the strength of the Stream was like to have carried us off the Ground, but that we were roped together in great quantities, so we held up one ano∣ther; thus were we all tantalized with their Carts, making us to wade all the deep Places we came at this day. About two in the Afternoon we came to the Town of Cicile, being four Leagues distant from Imergos; in which Town we were all put into a Stable, where they gave us for Din∣ner, Bread and Beverage, so we all conti∣nued here until Night; for Supper they gave us Mutton and Broth, but so small a quantity was the Mutton, that one Man might easily have eat as much as twenty Men had; the Broth they served in such a manner, that he that had not a Cup or Dish of his own, was forc'd to take his Broth in his Hat or Cap; by this means one of our Men got scalded most sadly: At Night the People brought us Straw to lie on, so here we got a good Nights Lodging. Monday 23. In the Morning, about six a Clock, we made ready to march (being soon dress'd) to a City called Arlaā, four Leagues distance: We past most of this day through Fenny Land, that was all grown over with Tamarass, and by a River side: Before we came to Arlaā, we cross'd o∣ver this River in a Ferry-boat, at three se∣veral times, Sick and Well: On this side of the River they discharged the Carts which could not pass over in the Ferry∣boats; we that were well, march'd about a Mile to the Town, but those that were sick lay on the Ground until such time as they had got Carts to bring them to the Town. Before we entered the City of Arlaā, we pass'd over a Bridge made with Boars, and so mored in the River, Head and Stearn, over which pass'd all their Carriage, such as Carts, &c. This Town of Arlaā is a very fine Town; and close by the Walls runs the River, and in the River is much Crast, such as Settees and Tartans, &c. This River is that which divides Languedock from Pro∣vence. When we had past almost through the Town, at the Eastermost end, they put us into a Stable, and gave us Bread and Beverage for Dinner; several of our Men that had no Money, being almost starved with their sad Allowance, did protest joint∣ly, that they would not march out of this Stable, unless they would give them more Victuals; and if their Law would bear them out to kill them that were their Pri∣soners of War, they were willing rather to die by the Sword, than to be starved and travelled to death. They hearing our Re∣solution, gave us our Supper here; which was pretty considerable, a Souse Loaf, and about an ounce and half of Pork, with Be∣verage, which was large Allowance to what they used to give us: So here we lay all Night, being well guarded by the Town Guards, who were indifferent civil to us, admitting us to go forth to ease our selves; which we took as a great kind∣ness, being most an end denied that small Priviledg, but made us ease our selves where we lay. Tuesday 24. Early in the morning we marched out of the Town of Arlaā; the way was level, but extream stony. Just as we parted with the Town, we passed through a Burying-place, where we saw hundreds of Tombs hewn out of solid Stones of a vast breadth and length, most of them between 8 and 9 foot long, co∣vered with a Stone of a vast weight: The People of this place did tell us, that this Town was anciently the Seat of their Kings; and by the infinite quantity of
Tombs, we could conjecture no less: which may signify that much Gentry did attend the Place, as is usual in the Court of Kings: This is the first Town we en∣tred in Provence; we marched 3 Leagues unto a lone House, where there was no En∣tertainment to be had for us, nor scarce any thing to be had for Money: Here our grand Driver, or Provost, gave us five Souse a Man, in a place where nothing fitting for Men was to be had; we were forc'd to give them their own price, what they plea∣sed to ask, for mouldy Horse-bread, or any thing else that the House would afford. After our Dinner was ended, we marched full five Leagues to the Town of Sealoon; the way was extraordinary level, though very stony; so that for the space of five Leagues, we past by but one or two Hou∣ses. About seven in the Evening we en∣tred the Town of Sealoon; our entertain∣ment here was very bad, not for any want there was in the Place, but through the barbarousness of the People; we were all put into a large Stable, Sick and Well al∣together; and for every thing we had, we paid double the price: When we had got what we could, we went to sleep on the hot Horse-dung, like so many Swine, having a great Guard both within and without. Wednesday 25. Early in the Morning we made ready to march, the Sick were put in two Carts; many being in a manner dead, those they hailed out by the Legs, and by the Throats; many of them were so weak, that they were not able to feed themselves; yet these Wretches would not desist, but kept drubbing them daily and hourly with their Swords, and punching them with the muzzle of their Guns. We marched three Leagues to a single House by the Road side; the way very mountanous: at this fingle House we sat down, and got our Dinner, which was a brown Loaf, and half a pint of Beverage. From hence we marched three Leagues, to a great Town called Anis; we were no sooner entred into the Town, but were conducted to a very large Sta∣ble, the Mobile thronging about us, scof∣fing at us; we were scarcely entred into the Stables, but several Stones were hove in at the Windows, one of them cut one of our Men through the Lip; here we were barbarously used; our Supper was a Souse Loaf, and about half an ounce of salt Cheese, with a cup of Beverage Wine; we slept here like so many Hogs on the hot Horse-dung. Thursday 26. About ten in the Morning they put the Sick into the Carts; those that were not able to help themselves, were most miserably drubb'd, hailing them along on the ground like so many dead Dogs, to the Carts, and there beat them in a most dread∣ful manner; one of our Men that was thus served, died within an hour after he was put into the Cart: We that were well, were roped together after our usual man∣ner; and away we marched, the People many of them hooping and scoffing, and the Boys throwing Stones at us: The Rogues, our Guards, had given us such a Character of Rebels, that had rebell'd a∣gainst our Righteous King, as they call'd him, that the People thought verily, I suppose, that we were worse than Devils; and withal told them, that we were going to the Gallies: We march'd about two Leagues and an half to a lone House, where we sate down and eat Bread, those that had Money bought Wine, and to those that had none, our Guardian gave a Souse-worth of Wine between two Men; our Bread we brought with us from Ais; hence we marched 3 Leagues to a Town call'd Reca∣valia; the way was very mountainous and bad for Carts: When they came to any steep Hill, this was their manner, they made fast all the Sick to the Carts-Arse with Ropes,
with a Man following them, whipping them along, left they should hang on the Cart to ease themselves. This was the Me∣thod they used with our sick Men. About seven at Night we came into the Town of Recavalia: here we were put into two Sta∣bles (here in the Night our Men came a∣mongst the Hen-Roosts, and got several Hens, &c.) They gave us for Supper a small Loaf, and about half an Ounce of salt Cheese, with a Cup of Beverage. In this place they buried the Man that died that day in the Cart: they gave us in this place a little Straw to cover the wet Horse-Dung: These People that were our Guard were so abuseful to us all Night, that we that were near them could not sleep all Night for the Noise they made of flouting and laughing at us, and calling us ill Names. Friday 27. We being roped together and counted, according to usual manner, we marched three long Leagues to a lone House by the Road side: the way was very moun∣tainous, and the said Mountains all over-ran with pine Trees, so that here much Rosin is made. When we came into this lone House, they gave us Bread with about half an Ounce of fat Pork, with a Cup of sour Be∣verage Wine. Our Men here pick'd up Sticks; and in their drinking Pots they boil'd the Poultry they got last Night. After we had dined we marched two long Leagues to a Town called Prussia, where we lay in two Stables very well littered with Straw: they gave us for Supper a souse Loaf and one Onion per Man. The Towns-People were here indifferent civil to us, by admitting us every one, one after another, to go forth and ease our bodies, which we always took as a great favour, and very sel∣dom obtained. Saturday 28. We set out of this Town very early in the Morning, and we marched two Leagues to a Town called Olivera, a fine large Town; here we dined, our Din∣ner was a Souse Loaf and two Sirdenas a Man, with each Man a Cup of Beverage. In this Town died John Wall, a Lad of about sixteen Years of Age, whom these barbarous Villains had been beating not above an Hour before, for no other cause than this, The poor Lad being cramb'd into the Cart amongst the rest of the sick, when the bitter Pains of Death was upon the poor Soul, he seemed to struggle for ease, and to get a little more room in the Cart; this was all the occasion. Now after he was taken dead out of the Cart, for fear lest he should not be dead, one of the beasts that guarded us, run his Sword into the Belly of him, and so left him to be buried by the Towns-People. Dinner being ended, away we marched for Toloun, being about a League distant. The Afternoon proved rainy, and the way very bad. About four in the Afternoon we came near the Town, but not suffered to enter; we were imme∣diately sent aboard of an old Man of War of theirs, which lay in the Mold, where we found about sixty English Men, which were Prisoners of War, who were taken in the Mediterranean Seas, and about two hundred Dutch: When we were got aboard, they gave us orders to knock off our Irons, which we did forthwith, and hove many of them into the Mold: The Scrivan belonging to the Ship took all our Names, and the Ships Names we were taken in, and our places of Residence: which done, we were mest, se∣ven Men together in a Mess; and so for Sup∣per we had Bread and good Wine, half a Pint per Man, which was pretty considera∣ble to what we used to meet with. Our sick Men, which were forty in number, were put aboard of a Fly-boat which was lash'd aboard the other Ships: and this they called the Hospital Ship; but it were more proper to call it a Slaughter-House; for the poor sick Men the major part of them had no other Lodging but the bare hard Decks.
Their Food was something bettter, although much lesser than the well-People had, viz. Mutton and Broth every day. The Doctors that had charge of the poor sick Men were the Chyrurgions of the Ships that they took here, some English and some Dutch; but whether it were through Ignorance or Idleness, or both, or for want of good Me∣dicines, I am sure the Men died here ve∣ry fast, sometimes two, three, or four a day out of that number aforesaid. Sunday 29. It so hapned that he that was Captain of the Guard for this Day, was one of my Dear Joys: who makes an Oration about the Ship for all those that were Ro∣man Catholicks to go aboard the Admiral with him to Mass; but amongst our Crew there was but one, and that proved to be the Captains dear Country-Man, which I spake of before at Tholuse: but amongst the Dutch there were several Romans. The Captain promised great matters to his Country-Man, what he would do for him for his Country and Religion sake; but to my Knowledg he forgot to perform any thing of it. When Mass was over, and the Men come aboard, we were served our Break∣fast and Dinner, all under one double A∣lowance of Bread and Wine, and of Meat only one Allowance, which although it was but small, yet was it very considerable to what we ever met with yet in France; for the Bread and Wine were both very good; and as for the Meat, it did exceed the Weight very seldom of an Ounce, or an Ounce and half, or thereabouts: But this was the Order in the Morning, every Man had a Loaf and very near half a Pint of Wine; at Dinner the like, and Meat too if it were Flesh-day; and so the same for Supper, Bread and Wine, and either Beans Pease, Rise, or Callavansis: and those days that were Fish-days, because of the Scarcity of Fish, they gave us either Beans, Pease, or Callavansis, instead thereof. Our Diet was very well amended, but our Lodging was on the bare Decks: But as for those Prisoners of English and Dutch that were here before, they had all Hammocks and Ruggs to lie on. The Dutch here seeing of us very poor in Habit, and weak in body, began to insult over us, in pretending we should stay till they were served their Victu∣als every day, before we were served: but as soon as we discovered their Ambition, we fell to work with them, and for all they thought to have been too strong for us, yet were they deceived, for we soon put them to the Rout, and made them take turns to be served, one first one Day, and the other the other Day. The Irish Captain would very often make an Oration to us, requiring of us to be loving and kind one to the other: and as we were Fellow-Prisoners to be quiet together; but it was soon ordered by the Intendant, that there should be another Ship brought alongst this Ship-side for the English-Men to be in by themselves; for while the English and the Dutch were toge∣ther, the Dutch would neither pump the Ship which was very leaky, nor go in the Boat to fetch Water, or any thing else aboard; such was their Pride, that tho I had ever much Charity for the Dutch before, yet I was sorry to see them so arrogant. But that day that the Ship was to be mored by the other, which was the third day of Octo∣ber, there came an Express from Paris, that all the English Prisoners should be car∣ried back into West-France, in order (as they said) to be exchanged. But in the mean time they took these Methods to keep our Men at work, that fifty every day they sent aboard of a Fly-boat Man of War, much like the King-Fisher, there they served and fitted standing Rigging for their Ships, but as for wages they had none: Others they sent ashore to the Rope∣walk, to lay Cables to them; for their days work they were paid four Souce a day:
Another Gang was sent aboard of a Mer∣chant's Ship belonging to some of the Grandees of the Place, to heave out her great Stone Ballast, and make her fit to Careen: Their Wages was three Souse and a half a day. Another Gang of Carpen∣ters were drawn out to go to Calk this Ship's side; to them they gave se∣ven Souse a day. Thus Necessity forced us to do that, shrewdly against our wills. In this place of Touloun, Sea-men were so scarce, that by the Report of the People, there were not Twenty in the place; as for my part, I never saw ten whilst I was there. Their own Carpen∣ters were now fitting out ten Sail of Ships to be ready to come down into West-France next Spring, and ten Sail is the most that is here left, which will be any way fit for the Sea. The Ad∣miral is a curious fine Ship to look to, but she is broken-back'd, and not fit for the Sea; those Ships that are capa∣ble of coming to Sea, are Ships of good Force, from Fifty to Seventy Guns. We heard, whilst we were here, that the French had lately forced many of the Dutch Prisoners of War to go to Sea in the Crusers, by heaving them off their Gunnil into the Boat, if they did not go themselves into the Boat: And since, the Ships which had these Men in them are taken, many of them into Algier, and are now made Slaves; which Action is contrary to the Law of God and Nature. The Weather being very bad as yet, we could not begin our Journey until the tenth day of October; in the mean time we buried many of our Men, and yet many more left Sick. We heard, after our depar∣ture, that they sent all our Men, both Sick and well, to the Hospitals, to strengthen and refresh them, left there should be none left to travel back, which was very true, as I heard it repor∣ted by many of the Men when they came back to Rochfort: There were two hundred more that came here, ten days after our departure.
From Toulon to Rochfort. October. THursday 10. About ten in the Morn∣ing, the Weather being fair, all the English that were able to march, were com∣manded on Shore: So entring the Town, we were brought to one of the French King's Magazines, where we were all cal∣led over by Name: In the interim, in comes the Intendant, and makes an Oration to us, which was Englished thus; Swearing by all his Gods, that we were clear Men, only we were to travel to Rochfort, and from thence to St. Malo, where we were to be exchanged. We desired him, (by the way of an Interpreter) that since his Excellency was pleased to say we were clear Men, that we might travel back with∣out being afflicted with Ropes and Irons, which we saw lay ready for us, and about six couple were already ironed; we pro∣mised upon our Faith, that we would march quietly through the Country, without running away: He granted our Request, alledging, we were clear Men. As soon as we came into West-France, we all gave great credit to his words, not doubting but that a Man of his Rank and Dignity would scorn to tell us (who were at present his Prisoners, and lay at his Mer∣cy, to do with us as he pleased) Lies: But we after found his Words to be like the rest of his lying Country-men, (who are the greatest Liars upon Earth); I ne∣ver heard Word or Promise made by any of them, since I have been in the Coun∣try, that proved to be true, except it were when they promised to plague us. The Intendant ordered to those that were al∣most naked (that were many) to have Canvase Jackets, and to some Shirts, and the major part new Shoes. After these things were served, away we march'd, having for our Guard, four of the Guarda-Marine, (who wears a Belt em∣broidered with Gold and Silver, the Flower-de-Luce, and the Cross Anchors and Cables, which is their Commission) besides the Provost and two Foot Soul∣diers. When we came to the outer Gates of the Town, we stopt about two hours, waiting for more Company, which were the Men that were taken in the Mediter∣ranean Seas, belonging to Capt. Willbourn and Capt. Blake, their Number was a∣bout sixty: So now we were near two hundred of us. About three in the After∣noon we went out of Toulon, we mar∣ched three long Leagues to a Town call'd Prussia; it was very near eight at Night be∣fore we came into this Town; yet we marched along briskly, although the Road was hilly and stony, we were in hopes the Intendant's words would prove true; our Guards were somewhat civiller than they were before; neither was there such strict Orders given to those that guarded us by Night as before, for we were now admit∣ted to go forth at any hour of the Night to ease our selves, if it was required: They gave us here for our Supper each Man a small Loaf of six Denires, and a cup of
Wine; so here we slept very well, the Sta∣ble being indifferently well littered. Friday 11. About seven a Clock in the Morning we came out of the Stables, eve∣ry Man receiving a Loaf of six Denires, (which is half a Peny English); the place we were to dine at this day, being a lone House, where Bread was not to be had for such a Company of Men: Three Leagues we marched to this lone House, the way very Mountainous; when we came there, they gave each Man a cup of sour Wine, and that with our small Loaf we brought with us, we made up our Dinner: After this we marched three large Leagues to a Town called Racavalia; after about an hours stop in the Streets, we were put into two Stables: For our Suppers, they gave each Man a Souse Loaf, and a dish of Pork∣broth: now when they came to serve us the Meat we expected, they gave not one Man in ten any; it was my chance to get a bit so small, that I could have put twice as much into my Mouth at once: and as for our Drink, it was down-right Vinegar, that no Man was able to drink it: Al∣though good Wine was so plentiful here, and so cheap, that it was not worth above one Crown the Hogshead by whole-sale: The Vinegar they gave us, we set it out at the Door, and drank Water, a Brook running just at the Stable-door: We bore all this with patience, hoping once, if it pleased God, to get out of these Rogues hands; so we went to sleep quietly in these Stables. Saturday 12. Early in the Morning we came out of these Stables; every Man re∣ceived a six Denire Loaf as he past, for we were to dine to day at a single House: Seve∣ral of our Men that were foundred in their Feet got Asses, some upon their own cost, and some upon their charge that guarded: so away we marched two Leagues to this lone House; there with our Bread and a Cup of Beverage we made our Dinner, which was very little for poor Men to travel with so far as twenty and twenty four Miles a day, and many times more: We saw most part of this Morning the Alps, that divide Italy from France very plain, bearing about East North East, and North East from us: From hence we marched three Leagues to the City of Ais, the way very moun∣tainous, but the Mountains were all over∣ran with sweet Herbs, such as Thyme, La∣vender, Rosemary, Mirtles, and the Hedges of Pomgranates, which cast a very sweet Odour. When we came near the City, we were put into a large Stable without the Walls: This Ais is a very fine scituated Place, and the City laid out in excellent order, being built in a level place, and cir∣cumdated with Hills all round: they gave us here for our Supper a small Loaf of Bread, and about half an Ounce of salt Cheese, and to each Man was measured half a pint of good Wine, for no bad Wine here was to be got, or else to be sure we had had it. After we had supp'd, we laid us down to sleep on the Ground, but many of us got some Hay and some Straw: we had here, as at other places, a Guard of the Towns-People that watch'd over us all Night. Sunday 13. This Morning our Guards went all to Mass, and by that means we were all kept in until eleven of the Clock, at which time they gave us our Dinner of Bread and Wine. When our Dinner was ended, away we marched five long Leagues to a Town called Sealoon. The Afternoon proved rainy, and the Road very foul. Before we got into Town it was eight at Night. Most part of us being wet through those few
Rags we had. This Town is a very fine wall'd Town, scituated at the bottom of the Provencial Hills, having on the South, West and North part of the Town a great Plain near thirty Miles long, which in comparison of Land, is as level as the Sea; yet not∣withstanding the Land is very stony and full of large peble Stones, much like a Beach, and by that means very barren: yet sweet Herbs grow wild upon it, such as Thime and Lavender; and in the Plain some Wood of the ever-living Oak. We were here put all into one Stable, where they gave us for Supper Bread and Wine; and the Stable was very well littered with Straw; so we slept very sweetly all Night, having a great Guard about us. Monday 14. Early this Morning we came out of this Stable, every Man received a six Denier Loaf as he pass'd, because we were to dine at a single House upon the Plain: We marched five Leagues over this Plain, before we came to this lone House, at the end of which they gave each Man a Cup of Wine and Water to our Bread. When Dinner was ended, away we marched three Leagues farther, to the City of Arlaa. Before we entred this Town, we heard that there were in the Town two hundred of English and Dutch Prisoners of War, onward of their March for Toulon. This News struck ma∣ny of us into a damp, thinking that this was not the way to be exchanged. When we came into Town, we were all cramb'd into a Stable, where we lay desperate thick, one almost upon the other. One of our Men got leave of the Guards to go where these other Prisoners were, to speak to them; who when he came there, he saw several of our sick Men which we left upon the Road, which were re∣covered; they were all in the same dress as we were in, as we went for Toulon, viz. in Irons, two and two together: They also reported, that they were far worse pinch'd for Victuals than we were: and as for their sick Men, they were worse served; for when their weak∣ness was so great that they could not fit upon an Horse, or Ass, then were they thrown thwart a Horse's back, like a Calf, with their Heads downwards, un∣til such time that they died. Our Sup∣per here was a six Denier Loaf, and a Cup of Beverage a Man. So here we slept upon the Horse-dung, for want of Litter; for except it were the Charity of the People to give it to us, we very seldom had any. Tuesday 15. About ten in the Morning we saw the English and the Dutch Prisoners which lay in this Town last Night pass by here: So we spoke to several of them which were of our Company which we left sick upon the Road, they march'd near the manner as we did formerly, as we were going upward towards Toulon: We remained in this Town until two in the Afternoon; at which time they gave us our Dinner, which was a small Loaf of Bread, and an Onion, with a Cup of Beverage a Man. This place of Arlaa is a very fine fenced Town, standing on level Ground; and in it are very stately Buildings. On the East side of the Town is a most famous Aquaduct, which stands up∣on abundance of Arches; and for the length of it, I suppose it may be near a Mile. At this time the Land about the Town was much overflown with the Freshes that came lately down out of the Hill-Country; so that in the green Fields that were, as we past by here before, we saw many Boats and Nets set to catch Fish,
for the Water was considerable deep; and beside, the strength of the Floods had car∣ried away the Town-bridg that was built upon Boats, as I said before; now the Land being thus drowned, we were forc'd to march round the drowned Land, (our sick Men came after us by Water in a Boat) upon a very fine Causey, which was made on purpose: for it seems these Floods are not unusual, but common, once a Year in the time of Rain. We marched three Leagues to a fine Town called Terrascoon; there we crost the River in two Ferry-Boats, to a Town opposite, call'd Boucaro, in the Province of Languedock; for this River, as I have said before, divides Pro∣vence from Languedock. This Boucaro is a very large Town; when we were entred into it, we were conducted to a great Sta∣ble, which was both wet and nasty: Our Supper was a small Loaf of Bread, with a Cup of Beverage; and as we were serving, in comes our Sick and Lame People to take part of our hard Night's Lodging: the Ground was so wet and cold, that we were forc'd to walk up and down the most part of the Night, to keep our selves warm, the Weather being very cold. Wednesday 16. About Eleven in the Morning we had our Dinner served us, which was a Loaf of Bread worth six Denires, and one Oni∣on betwixt four Men, with a Cup of Beverage; which, as soon as we had eat and drank, away we march'd. Just as we came without the Town, we met about twelve Men, who were pinioned and bound together, going towards Boucare, with a Guard with them. We asked the Peo∣ple of the place, what their Fault was that they should be thus led? They made us answer, that they were Hugonots, or Calvinists, and were going for the Gal∣lies. This Report made my Heart to ake, to see so many good-look'd Men to be thus treated, (by a cursed Tyrant of Hell) for their acknowledging and profes∣sing the Doctrine of Jesus Christ. We marched four Leagues to a fine compact fenced Town called Nimes in Langue∣dock. When we came near the Town, I went, with three more of my Consorts, to a Tavern just by, to buy a little Wine: When we came to the Door, the good Man of the House asked us of what Nation we were? we told him, Of the English, (by one of our Companions that spoke very good French, he being a Guernsey-Man); away went the good Man of the House, and fetch'd a Pitcher of pure good Wine, and four clean Glasses; he gave to each Man a Glass full of Wine, which we drank up; he filled the Glasses again, so we drank each Man his second; the Glasses be∣ing large, and the Wine very strong, we were afraid to venture upon the other Glass: We asked the good Man, what we were to pay? he answered us, Nothing; but asked, if we would drink any more? we gave him hearty thanks, and answered, No: He again asked, if we were of the Religion of the Church of England? we told him, Yes. With that he took us by the Hands, and squeezed our Hands, and desired God to be with us: we admired at the Humour of this Man, not expecting a∣ny such kind of People here. As we were returning to the rest of our Companions, we met with a poor Woman, (by her Dress we could imagine no less) she had a fine white Cake of Bread in her Apron; she held it out to me, I imagined it had been for me to buy it; but she bad me break and eat, which I did; so she handed it amongst the rest of our Company, un∣til it was all gone: I durst to have sworn, that by my first sight of this Wo∣man, that she had been more apter to
ask than to relieve. Before we went in∣to the Stable, a very brisk young Man came up to me, who had lived in Eng∣land a considerable time, and spoke Eng∣lish very proper; he asked many Que∣stions concerning our Affairs in England, for it seems here the current News is, that Schonberg is routed in Ireland, and that the French had defeated our Fleet at Sea. I told him, they had in their Country a damnable lying Oracle; and, that Knaves they project, and Fools be∣lieve; but I said, if he had Faith to be∣lieve what I should say, I must, to tell you the truth, tell you quite contrary; for in the first place, Schonberg hath advanced at a great rate in Ireland: And as for your Fleet, they durst not shew their Heads at Sea. I also told him, that it was true, the French Fleet were out last Summer, but staid but a very little while out, and presently ran into their Har∣bours again. I also told him how our English Fleet lay against Brest, and sent them in a Defiance. The Man was much taken with my Discourse, but time would not admit of it, for we were drove in∣to the Stables immediately: but before he and I parted, I asked of him what kind of People the People of this place were; he told, that not long since the 9/10 of the People were Calvinists; and so they were still, although they were forc'd to appear otherwise; and that you will find, says he, if you stay here but un∣til to morrow about eight of the Clock, as soon as People can have notice of you; for as yet we did not enter the Town, neither was it designed that we should. When this Man and I parted, he promised to see me the next Morning; but, alas, he was prevented, for we march'd a∣way hence by that time it was well light, we were here put into a Stable, where we were paid off with a great Supper that they had long promised; for our Supper was about a Mouth-full of boild Gut, or a piece of Liver or Lights, with a Loaf worth no more but three Denires; the People of the place report, that the old Woman which served us our Meat, brought it all in a Dish under her Arm, covered with ano∣ther Dish; so that it is easy to judg how much one Man must have, when we were to have no more; each Man had a Cup of Wine: Also the Supper being soon ended, we went to sleep, the Stable be∣ing very well littered: the Governor of the Town, just as we were going to sleep, sent his own Guards to guard us; and very suspitious they were, what-ever their Humour was I cannot tell, of our set∣ting the House on fire. Thursday 17. Very early this Morning, before scarce any of the Inhabitants were stirring, we be∣gan to march: many of our People got Relief by those People that were up, which were generally the poorer sort: Away we march'd four long Leagues to a Town called Lunae: We came into this Town many of us before our Guards, so those walked up and down. The People of this place were very charitable to our People, by relieving them with such things as they had, as Bread, Meat, Wine, Rasins, and to some Hats, they also told many of us that they were Calvinists. The major part of the People of the Town withall praying for the Success of the Arms of our King William, who fought the Battle of God, (this they spoke in private to some of us.) Many of our Men by the Liberality of the People, got mellow with Wine. When our Guards came into Town with the rest of
our People, we were confined into a Yard, where they gave us a small Loaf of Bread worth fix Denires, and a Cup of Wine for Dinner; that done, away we marched two Leagues farther, to a Town called Colum∣beas: About eight at Night we came into this Town, where we were put into four Stables, the Stables being here very small: The Supper we had was Bread and Beve∣rage, and a couple of Sirdenass's a Man, which was extraordinary. The Stables be∣ing very well littered with Straw, we slept very well here; neither was there any Body to guard us, for in this small Town were very few Men. Friday 18. Early in the Morning we came out of this Village, the Weather being fair and clear, our sick and lame Men were put into two Carts; so away we marched two Leagues to the City of Mompelier: We walked round the City close by the Walls, but were not admitted to enter thereto, because here are many well-affected Persons, who wish well to our Nation. In the Suburbs of this City we were all put into a great Sta∣ble, where our Dinner was served us, six Deniers worth of Bread, and about half an Ounce of miserable sad choaky Cheese, with a Cup of Beverage for each Man. When Dinner was ended, away we marched three Leagues farther, to a Village called Punian: In our way we met several Regi∣ments of Foot Souldiers, who came from their Campagainst the Spaniards in a great Disorder. We heard by the way that the Spaniards had defeated the French Army in Catalonia, and had taken two eminent Places from them, and were still advancing upon them. When we came into Punian the People did not care to come near us; for at the fame time they had the Plague in the Town, which, as they report, we left behind us as we were going to Toulon, for in this Place we lodged two Nights and one whole Day, by reason of the Rain: We were here lodged in a very cold Stable, where our Supper was a small Loaf, and half an Ounce of Cheese with Beverage, as at other times. When we had supped we laid us down on the cold Ground to sleep, but were not able to lie there long; so that many of us got up and walked about the best part of the Night, to keep our Selves warm. About three in the Morning another Man and I went out of the Stable, where we saw a Fire just by us, with four French-men fitting round it with their Guns to guard it; we walked towards the Fire, which when these poor Fellows saw, they called out to us, asking us whither were we going? we told them to the Fire; they bid us keep back, but nevertheless we went up to the Fire, which when these poor Souls saw that we were not affrighted at their Words, which was the utmost they durst do, they presently got up, and away they went, calling us Bugera's, &c. and left the Fire to us, so here we two sat by it until we sat it out, which time it began to be day: now we found that as last Night no body would come anear us to let us have any Wine to drink, but what the Guards were forced to fetch a Mile off; so by the Virtue of our ill Report, we got a good Fire to warm some of us to our selves. Saturday 19. Before the rising of the Sun we marched out of this Village, the Morning clear but cold: We marched to a Town call'd Lupe∣an, marching very near the Sea side, and rounding the Bay of Languedock. All the Places upon the Road were infected with the Plague. The People as they passed by
kept stopping their Noses for fear they should get the Plague of us: and truly our greatest Plague was, that of their own Country-Men, who drove us up and down until we were almost all starved; so that the greatest Disease we had amongst our poor Men did proceed from Hunger and Cold, and our stinking Lodgings. When we came into Lupean, we were conducted to our old Halls the Stables, where our Dinner was a small piece of Bread, and one small Onion, and a Cup of Beverage a Man. From hence we marched three Leagues farther, to a Town called Pezeain, a very large Town: (by the Town we saw about fifty or sixty Women carrying Earth in Baskets to make a Bridg over the Low-land, with their O∣verseers by them, to keep them close at work: This is done for Punishment for some Malefact committed or supposed.) Here they were likewise infected with the Plague too, and all the Fault was laid upon us, for they all say we left it behind us, as we marched this way: We told them no, we left none of our Plagues behind us, for as yet they stuck so close to us, we could not get rid of any of them. In this Town we were kept up very close in a Stable, no body coming near us but our Guards that tra∣velled with us: here our Supper was no more than six Deniers worth of Bread, and half an Ounce of sad Cheese, with a Cup of Beverage a Man; and by reason that no body came near us, we found out the place where the Straw lay; we took what we thought fit, and made our Lodging very good: this made well on our sides. Sunday 20. Early in the Morning we put our sick and lame into two Carts, each Man receiving a six Denier Loaf as we came out. We marched one League and half to a very small Village; there we sat down and dined, here they gave each Man a Cup of new thick Wine, and that with our Bread made up our Dinner: so away we marched two Leagues and a half farther, to the Town Besias: both this days Journey, and that yesterday, the Land was most curiously planted with Vineyards and Olive-yards, and besides most of this Province is so like∣wise. When we came into the Town, we saw several of our sick Men which we left here behind us, that were somewhat reco∣vered; they were quartered in private Houses, yet kept so close, that what they spake to us was out of the Windows: We asked the reason why they were put out of the Hospitals; they told us because so many of their own People, both sick and wounded came into the Town, who came from the Camp against the Spaniards, that they filled the Hospitals and more Places besides; they told us of the Defeat the Spaniards had given them, killing them 1500 Horse one Morning, besides Foot. This I heard to be verified by one that was in the Fight, which I shall make men∣tion of in its place. They told us also that the Spanish Army was advanced within four Leagues of that Place; and that the Spanish Army did consist of eighty Thousand Men Horse and Foot, and that of the French sixty Thousand: And moreover they told us, of those Men we left here, three were dead, and two more lay a dying, and the rest that were recovered were carried to Tou∣lon in the last Company that past this way. We past quite through the Town towards the outside; there we were put into a Stable where we were most into∣lerably throng'd for want of room, yet was there no such Guard over us as in some of the other Towns, the People here being more humane, and better
knows the Fortune of War: Our Supper here was very inconsiderable; for unless it were Bread, some got nothing at all; them that had any more, it was about an Ounce of Liver or Lights, and a Cup of four Wine; so we lay most desperately throng'd, not having any room many of us to lye down. Monday 21. About seven in the Morning we came out of the Town of Besias, taking along with us three sick Men of ours, which were something recovered: Away we marched two Leagues to a fine fenced Town called Capista, in which Town we dined; our Dinner was a six Denier Loaf, and about half an Ounce of sad choaky Cheese, with a Cup of Beverage a Man. When Din∣ner was ended, away we marched four Leagues and a half to an Inn by the Road side near the Town of Puzola. In our way we both crossed and marched a∣long the Banks of the cut River. In our way we saw a number of Women at work, in banking and repairing the Sluses of the River: The Women seeing so ma∣ny Men pass by, began to geze at us, but immediately comes their Overseer, and drives them to work with a Blow over the back. Thus are the People of this Coun∣try plagued by their King who Tarquin-like studies Torments; for the Men Gal∣lies, and for the Women the new River: so that he comes but little short of a Plague to all Mankind within his Verge: About eight at Night we came into our Lodging, where we found our Stables well littered with Straw, but I suppose it was not done for us, but for the Souldiers which past by here lately, for the Straw was very louzy. Our Supper was a small Loaf of six De∣niers price, and about half an Ounce of Cheese, like the former, and a Cup of sad Beverage: With this and such like was our Fare, very seldom exceeding the price of two pence half penny a day. Tuesday 22. Before it was day we began our March, every Man receiving a half penny Loaf, as he past out of the Stables: away we march∣ed three Leagues to a Town called Porsa∣rick; we no sooner entred the Town, but we were conducted into a large Stable; where with our. Loaf that was given us in the Morning, and half an Ounce of Cheese, and a Cup of Beverage, we made up our Dinner. Our Men this Afternoon began to be disturbed at their short Feeding; they did protest to the Guards that served us, they would go no farther, neither were they able, except they gave us more Food. The Guards go and tell the Provost that the Prisoners would not march without more Victuals: Presently in comes the Provost with some of the rest, with Swords drawn, and Pistols cock'd, swearing he would be the Death of that Man that did but refuse to march: up stands two Men and desired to be heard by the way of an Interpreter: he seeing two Men speak, he immediately cuts one of them over the Head, and the other he takes away and commanded to be pinion'd. So in fine both of them were pinioned and made fast to the Carts Arse: and after this be began to display his Sword over the back of all near him: I my self was one of the two that was made fast to the Carts Arse, and Henry Robinson the o∣ther, he had his Head cut: and I was made fast with my back towards the Cart, so close, that I could not turn my Face, but was forc'd to follow the Cart backwards; and with the sudden fall of the Cart into Holes, I thought verily with the Jerks, it
would at once have broken both my Arms and Back: Moreover my Arms were pini∣oned so straight, that my Veins in my Hand were ready to burst: for the space of a League was I forced to walk backwards until we came to a small Town called Mar∣cheletto: When we came to the Town they loosed both me and the other Man; so we were all put into a Stable, sick and well to∣gether; and for our Supper they gave us about an Ounce and half of brown Bread, and that was the most of it, with a Cup of Beverage; and they pretended they could get no more; but this was all great Lies, for when they came to never so plentiful a place, it did not much differ. In this Sta∣ble was a door that opened into a Wine-Cellar, which our Men found a way to open; and so went in and filled all their Pots and Jars, and had they not been disco∣vered by chance, by a Woman that came and catch'd a Man at it, without doubt they had made clear work. Wednesday 23. Before the Sun rising we began our March: our sick and lame were put into two Carts; but to those that were the most helpless, the Beasts would lay them on stoutly in their getting up into the Cart. From hence we marched two Leagues to a Town called Traevis, in which Town we were put into a Stable, where we were served our Dinner, a small Loaf, and about half an Ounce of Cheese like the former, with a Cup of musty Beverage, far worse than Water. From hence we marched one League farther, to the Town of Carkasona: And from thence we marched two Leagues farther, to a Village called Villa Sancto, in which Village we were put into a most loathsom stinking Stable: Our Supper was a Piece of Bread and one Onion a Man, and a Cup of sad Beverage: so here we slept like so many Hogs in this stinking place. At Night we were shut up so close, that not one Man could go out to ease him∣self, whatsoever Necessity he had: this Pri∣viledg we were not denied ever since we came from Toulon until now: I suppose it was out of Revenge for yesterdays work at Porsarick, in denying to march. Thursday 24. About Eight this Morning we began our march, according to our usual man∣ner, without Eating or Drinking. Our Sick were put into two Carts, many of them now almost famished with Hun∣ger. Away we marched towards Villa Picta, two Leagues distant: Upon the Road we met with a Flock of Sheep; and so our Men managed their Business, that they singled one Sheep from the rest, and hove a Rug upon him, and carried him away undiscovered, both from the Shepherd and our Guards. In our way also we met several fine Troops of Horse going towards Beasias. When we came into Town, we were put into a Stable; and so well our Men managed their Mutton, that it was not discovered, tho the Men were told in one by one. Now when they had the Sheep safely in, they soon kill'd it, and buried the Intrals in the Litter; and so cut it into Quarters, and shared it amongst those that were of the Cabal: Our Dinner here was a piece of Bread and a cup of Beverage. So away we marched three Leagues farther, to a Town called Castlelador; when we came into this Town, it was so full of Souldiers, that there were no quarters to be had, so that after we had sat down on the Ground for the space of an Hour in the cold, they got an order to put us into an Hospital without the Town: Those Men of ours that were sick, lay upon Beds here,
but as for the rest, they lay on the cold Stones. Our Supper here was a piece of Bread and two Sirdinasses, with a Cup of Beverage a Man: Our Men got some part of the Sheep drest here, with several Pul∣lets they pick'd up on the Road; so the Broath they distributed amongst our poor sick Men. After we had supped, we laid us down to sleep, but were not able to lie long, so up we got and walked about most part of the Night to keep our selves warm. Mr. George Winshuft was a dying all this Night. Friday 25. About eight this Morning we began to march, every Man receiving half a Souse Loaf. As we came out, our sick Men we put into two Carts. This Morning died Mr. George Winshuft, as soon as he was put into the Cart. Away we mar∣ched three Leagues, to a Village call'd Vinunut; here we dined; our Dinner was a Cup of very good Wine, which was so extream cheap, and no bad Wine to be had, that they were in a manner forc'd to give good Wine against their will; for in my sight they went all over the Village to see if they could get any Trash for us, but could not: So with our Bread and Wine we made up our Dinner. After Dinner we went se∣veral of us to work, where they appoin∣ted us to dig a Grave to bury the Man that died this day; so we made his Grave, just by the Way side, whilst o∣thers were imployed in sowing him up in his own Blanket. After we had bu∣ried him, away we marched, two Leagues further, to a Town called Villa Nova, where we were lodged in two Stables; our Supper was a piece of Brown Bread, and a Cup of Beverage. The Priest of this Place came to us, and discoursed one of our Men in Latin: He told him, he had Charity for all Men that were Christians, and therefore he did not dis∣respect us for our Opinion. He shewed his Charity to us more than all the Clergy-men in the Country: He told us, he had no Money, but he would send us a Pitcher of Wine amongst two or three of us; the which he did. The Stables being well littered, we slept ve∣ry well: This Night died Henry Fullstone, Gunner of the Levantine. Saturday 26. Early in the Morning we began our march, leaving the dead to be buried by the People. Hence we marched three Leagues to a Town called Castinata: Here we dined; our Dinner was a small piece of Bread, and two small Sirdenasses a Man, with Beverage as at other times: Here they took the Horses out of the Cart, and laid our sick and dying Men in the High-way, until we were ready to go. After we had dined, we put our Men up into the Carts; and away we marched, two Leagues further, to the City of Tholouse: When we had surrounded a great part of the City Walls, we were put in the same Stable without the Town that we were in before. Here were we put, Sick and Well altogether, in this cold wet Sta∣ble. Our Supper here was like our Lodging, a half Souse Loaf, and one Onion a Man, with a Cup of sad Beve∣rage. When we laid down to sleep, we could not for the Sick and dying Mens Groans. The Rogues that guarded us kept the Door shut, that we could not get out to ease our selves, many of our Men having the Flux; but twice this Night we broke open the Door, and made way for our Sick Men. About twelve this Night died Peter Holt, Car∣penter of the Levantine.
Sunday 27. We staid here in this Sta∣ble until near two in the Afternoon, hear they gave us our Dinner, which was a Souse Loaf and about an Ounce of fat Pork, with a cup of Wine: af∣ter we had dined, we made ready to march; six Men more were brought into our company, which were left sick upon the Road, and so put into the Hospital here. When we marched hence we left two Men dying in the Stable, viz. Richard Vincent Carpenter, and Peter Rose: from this Place we marched about three quarters of a Mile, to the River-side, to take Water; when we came there, there was two Boats provided for us, the sick went all into one Boat and had the advan∣tage of lying in the Stern; after they had placed themselves, the rest of the Men went in and fill'd up both Boats, so full that there was not room enough for them all to lie down; yet, not∣withstanding, we could have no reme∣dy: after we were all Imbarked, away we went swiftly with the Stream, a∣bout eight at Night we came to a Town on the South-side of the River, call'd Blewnack, where we put ashoar, here we lodged in two Cellers; the People of this place were struck into a panick fear of us, for as soon as we were got into the Cellar they would not let one Man come out to ease him∣self, and many of our Men had the Flux; but when they saw that the Door was almost broke in pieces by us, they came upon Tearms with us; that was, that we should come out onely one at a time, and so when he was return'd then another might come, so they went and guarded each Man with three Men, one taking hold of each Arm, and another stood to hold the Candle to him, and so in this manner they held them out: our Men would fit and laugh at them, and were mightily pleased to see themselves so erided. Our Supper was a small four Denier Loaf and a Cup of Beverage; so here we slept until Day-break. Munday 28. Early in the Morning we went aboard the Boats, the Morn∣ing fair and clear, by Noon we were fall'n down as low as Burdoon, there we got our Dinner; which was Bread and Beverage, and one Onion per man: From thence we fell down as low as St. Anns, at which place we laid the Boats along the Shoar, where they gave us our Supper, which was a Loaf of three Deniers or one Farthing Price, with one Sirdena and one Onion per man; here we remained all Night in the Boats, not having scarce room to sit, and much less to lie down; over the after part of the Boat they spread the Boats-Sail, which was so thin, that if any Rain had fallen it would have sig∣nified no more, in comparison, than a Cobweb; and as for all those which lay before the Mast, they had no∣thing at all over them but the Heaven∣ly Canopy, which was very cool and sharp. Tuesday 29. About six in the Morn∣ing, before the Boat put off, they fer∣ved our us Dinner, (which was) a Loaf of three Deniers Price, with about an Ounce of nasty rusty Pork, and a Cup of Beverage: From hence we fell down as low as the Town call'd La Port, which was about Eight of the Clock at Night; as we went out of the Boat every man received a Loaf of six De∣niers, and one Sirdena; and when we were got into the Stable, where we were to lodge, they gave each man of
us a Cup of special good Wine: so af∣ter we had supt we went to sleep in the Stable, it being very cold. Wednesday 30. Early in the Morning, before the break of Day, we came out of this Stable, and so went aboard the Boats, the Morning cold and foggy; as soon as we were stow'd the Boats put off, and so down we went to the Town of Marmanda, the Boats put a∣shoar here to get Bread: our Dinner they served us here, which was a piece of Bread and about three quarters of an Ounce of rusty fat Pork, with Be∣verage as at other times. After we had dined the Boats put off, and down we went to a Town on the North-side of the River, call'd Runae; at this Town we went all ashoar, and as we went out of the Boats we were served with Bread; so into the Town we went, and because the Stables here were full of Soldiers Horses, they lodged us in a Colledge, or a School; here they gave us Wine to our Bread, our usual quan∣tity: our Lodging, for the major part of us, was on the cold Stones; but to our sick. Men they gave a little Straw too. Here being in this Town now a great many Soldiers lying upon free Quarters, two of them, being Germans, came to see us: It so happened that we had a German amongst us, who was not only one of their Country-men, but was also born in the same Town where one of these two Men was born, after some mixed ceremony was past between them, both of Joy and Sor∣row, the one for Joy to see the other alive; and the other with Sorrow to see his Country man in such a misera∣ble state; he asked of his Country∣man how he came to be in Arms for the French King? (he thus replied,) Out of the desire I have to be in Ger∣many; for, says he, when it is Spring we shall be drawn out to go against the Emperor, and then my design is to make my escape home. He told his Country-man, that when the Imperial Forces lay against Buda, that he and several other, being Scouts, were taken by the Turks, and so carried to Constan∣tinople, and from thence sent to Smyrna, and from thence to Scanderoon, and from thence to Grand Cairo, and from Grand Cairo they came down to the Sea-side, to Imbark for Constantinople; but in their way they were happily met and took by a Maltese Gally, and so got his freedom. Afterwards he came over into Spain, and there he listed himself in the Spanish Army, and was in the Army when the Spaniards gave the French that Defeat I spoke of before: and told us the number of Men in each Army, and of the great loss the French had. After we had ta∣ken our leaves of them both, we went and laid down to sleep, but what with the coldness of the Stones, and of the Weather together, we were forc't to walk all Night long to keep our selves warm. Thursday 31. Early in the Morning, by the break of Day, we went aboard the Boats, making no stop, but as soon as we were all aboard put off, so down we went towards Langoon, the Morning very cold and foggy; when we came opposite to Langoon they served us our Dinner, (which was) a piece of Bread and one Onion, with a bit of Pork like the former, and a Cup of Beverage, making no stop with the Boats at all; by that time it was Night we came to a Town on the North-side of the River call'd Poeno;
Here we came to an Anchor; but we remained in the Boat all night in great misery, for want of room, and by rea∣son of the Cold. Our Supper was a piece of Bread and one Head of Gar∣lick per man. The Night was very foggy. November, Friday the First. About eight in the morning it was here High-water, and presently after we weighed, and about eleven of the clock we came down as low as Burdeaux: The Boats were brought to an Anchor here, a good space off the Shore, very near oppo∣site to the middle of the Town. They served us our Dinner here, which was a small piece of Bread and about an ounce of fat Pork, with a Cup of sour Beveridge. For all that Wine is so ex∣tream cheap here, yet could they not afford us any thing else but sour Stuff, and the meer Lees and Trash. Many People came off in Boats to us; but the most part came to scoff at us. We were told here, That all our English Merchants were gone home that lived here. We remained in these Boats un∣til about five in the Afternoon, about which time we were put aboard of three Burtoons, in order for our Passage to Roan. Our Supper was a piece of Bread and one Sirdena per man, with Beveridge; and our Lodging was on the Stone Ballast; some had a little Straw to lie on, but very few. Saturday, 2. This morning we had the Wind Easterly, and the Weather fair; and this morning died Edward Davis of Boston in New-England. About seven of the clock we were under Sail, and fell down about three Miles be∣low Blois; at the last quarter of the Ebb our Boat ran aground there, and there we lay until the first of the Flood: The other two Barks kept far∣ther to the Southward, and went clear. As soon as we fleeted away, we stood galing a head upon the Tide; about High-water the Wind began to freshen at N.E. so away we went briskly: A∣bout eleven at night we came down to Roan: Our Dinner and Supper were both alike, viz. Bread and Beveridge, and one Sirdena per man; so we re∣main'd in the Burtoons until morning. Sunday, 3. In the morning our Guards went ashore to Mass, and at their return they gave us our Dinner, a piece of Bread and a Sirdena, with Be∣veridge, as at other times; after we had eat, we went ashore, the Boats ly∣ing dry: They had provided two Carts to carry our Sick men, which came to the Boat sides. The People of this Place are in general poor Fisher∣men, and Pilots, and the like; but great was their Love and Charity to∣wards us, whom they relieved with a bountiful Hand, both with Money and Food; but when the Rogues our Guard saw it, they drubb'd the poor Women for giving, and us for receiving, for no other reason, as I judge, but because the People of this Town are known to be the major part Protestants. From hence we marched three Leagues, to a Town called Ogua, in which Town we were lodged, some in a Stable, and the rest in a Bakehouse. Our Lodging was on the cold Ground, and our Supper was like our Lodging, a piece of brown Bread and one Sirdena per man. We that lay in the Bakehouse lay so cold all night, that some of our men made a Fire, and burnt all the Ba∣kers Tools they could lay hands on.
Munday, 4. This day, being the last day that the Rogues our Guard expected to have us under their Juris∣diction, they pretended to give us a very good Farewell; so they bought a whole Sheep, which they boil'd, and gave us the Broth amongst us, and the Meat they carried with them to the next Town, where we were to dine this day. Our Sick and Lame being put into two Carts, away we marched two Leagues, to a Town called St. Jan Anglia: the major part of us got into this Town above an hour and half be∣fore the Carts came in with the Sick men, by reason they were drawn by slow-paced Oxen; in the mean time we remain'd in the Market-house, where we found such Charity of the Inhabitants as was not expected; for they gave us great quantity of Bread, and Wine, and Butter, and such other things as they had in their Houses, with a most liberal Hand. They told us the Name of this Town was deriv'd from one of our own Country-men, which was a Preacher in this Church, when there was but one House built besides the Church; and now it is a pretty large Town. They also told us, That for a hundred Years together there did not a Popish Priest preach in their Church. They gave us their Prayers, beseeching God to bless us in our Un∣dertakings, and prosper our King. These Words they spake to us in their own Houses, privately. I must needs say this of the French Protestants, That I do verily believe they are the most faithful and charitable People that lay any claim to the Title of a Protestant upon the Earth. When the Carts came into Town, they served us our Dinner, Bread and Mutton; but very little of the last came to our share; not above an ounce per man; and there was above twenty of us that had none at all. Af∣ter we had dined, away we marched towards Rochfort; distant from hence three Leagues. Just as we came to cross the River of Sherant, it began to rain, when the most of our Passage, especially the last twenty days, we had no Rain, so favourable have the Hea∣vens been to us. About four in the af∣ternoon we came into the Town, and so into the Prison, where we found of English and Dutch Prisoners to the num∣ber of Four hundred. When we first went out of Rochfort, we had Two hun∣dred, and when we came from Toulon Sixty more, and at Tolouse Six more; and now we had no more but One hun∣dred seventy three, the rest being dead and scattered about the Country. Tuesday 5. This morning the Scri∣van took all our Names that came in last night, with the Ships Names we were taken in; also two of our Men that were not attentive to give in their Names, were most sorely drub'd. Now I shall describe the manner of the Pri∣son-Diet. In the morning the Men were told out, and to every seventh Man a Seal was given to him to go to the Cook, who gave him upon the re∣ceipt thereof a Loaf weighing about six Pound, and that is the most, and a Can of Wine, but more fitly to be call'd Be∣veridge, for the better half was Water, and the other part sour Wine; of this we had to the quantity of seven half Pints; and at noon were we thus told out again, and these Seals given in the same manner, to be carried to the Cook, who upon receipt of it gives them a Bowl with about seven ounces of Meat, and a Can of Beveridge.
Now the Meat was most an end either Liver, or else Lights or Milts; and if there was any other sort of Flesh, to be sure it should be the worst that could be had, and that often would stink most desperately. The World may very well imagine what good Stuff it was; for it was common for a Man to sell his whole Days Allowance of Meat for three Deniers, and that is but one Farthing: Their Drink they sold all they had at a Meal for two Deniers, and that was thought a great Price; and truly so it was; for whosoever bought any of the aforesaid Trade at these Rates, paid more than it was worth. Their Bread was most an end very good, for that was all we had to keep us alive. As for Food at night, they told them out in the same manner, giving them a Seal to go to the Cook for Beans and a Can of Beveridge. The Beans were most an end Horse-beans, and the quantity of them was so small, for all three fourth parts of it was Wa∣ter, that when every Man got seven Spoonfuls, we reckon'd we had large Allowance. I have several times taken this especial notice of them. Fish-days are all one with them as the Flesh days, only this, they have seven ounces of Fish for Dinner, and this is the most. When they give their full Allowance, they give them to their Fish a little Oil and Vinegar also; but Fish soon be∣came so scarce, that they would give us none, so the room of that was sup∣plied with Horse-beans. Every thing here is now ten times worse than it was before we went for Toulon: Our Lodging is upon the baro Floor, many of us, for these seven first days, in which time our Men fell sick so fast, that sixty went to the Hospital in two days, and but very few came back. The eleventh of this Month they gave us Straw Beds, but nothing to cover us; the Weather now was very cold and frosty. On the 13th of this In∣stant there came hither 120 Men from St. Malo, of our English Nation; Hand∣oufft and Roped together; this gave us but small hope of Redemption, when so many Men were brought from the Place where the Exchange was to be made. December the first here came al∣so from Brest 130 Men, which did be∣long to the Portsmouth and to the Lively. December the fourth they gave us Blan∣kets; but after such a manner they gave them, that the better half of the Men had none at all: Some had a Blanket for four, and some for fix, and some for ten, and to above 300 Men they gave none at all. And moreover, al∣though they divided them among the aforesaid men in such a manner, yet were the Blankets very near all of a bigness, and would not well cover a∣bove three men; the measure of them was about six Foot square, and six Foot and a half was the biggest. The Wea∣ther now was very frosty and cold, and for want of Food, Clothes, and Co∣verings, our poor men fell sick at a strange rate, and died in the Hospital, seven or eight in a night, and many times more: We had an account one night of twenty one Englishmen that died in the Hospital, besides many that perished in the Prison meerly for want. December the fourteenth here came eighty four men more, most of them belonging to the Fire-drake; from Brest. Before we went for Toulon, we were guarded by the Towns people; but now were we guarded by Soldiers, who like cowardly Rogues did tyrannize o∣ver us at a very strange rate, every pi∣tiful
Rogue carrying a great Stick in his Hand, to drub the poor Prisoners at their pleasure. Many of the ragged Villains, if they chanc'd to be coming along, and were to pass by us, if there was not a Lane made for them to pass, immediately would fall to flourishing their Sticks amongst us, laying on about them Thresher-like. The occasion of all this sprang from a young foolish Fellow, that was their Major, who did most desperately hate all those of the English Nation, Fool like, for he knew not what; so by that means he tolle∣rated all manner of Villany that was acted upon us, both by the Cook and Guards. This same Major was so Fool∣like, that his Person and his Actions declared him more fit to have kept Geese upon a Common, than to have had the Command over so many Pri∣soners. About the latter end of this Month there came in here a great many of their Ships, which were so full of Sick men, that they fill'd up all their Hospi∣tals, so that those few English that were alive, they sent away to the Isle of Ole∣roon de Shattu, where those good People did relieve them with a liberal Hand; and in the Hospital they were also very kind to them, as it did appear by them at their return. I have heard our Peo∣ple say, when they came back, That the People of this Place have taken off their Clothes from their own Backs, and given to them; and the Women have pluck'd off their own Stockings in this cold Weather, to give to some of our poor Lads. But to return to our Prison at Roch∣fort: Our Men, by the hard Usage here, fell sick so fast, that they preten∣ded to make an Hospital for the Sick in the Prison; which when they had brought to the utmost perfection, it might more fitly have been termed a Slaughter house. I shall, as near as I can, describe the manner of it. In the first place these Rooms were an Apartment from the rest of the Prison; yet were these as strongly fitted with Iron Bars in the Windows, as the rest; and in these Rooms all round by the Walls they laid Straw Beds as close the one to the other as they could lye, and to every Bed was a Straw Bolster, and one single white Blanket; then to every Bed was two Men appointed, who were laid down most an end with all their Clothes on they had, or else they could not be warm, their co∣vering was so thin; now they lay so thick in a Room, that a Room of a∣bout Seventeen Foot square should have Thirty eight and some Forty Men; their Excrements annoy'd one the other so sadly, that when a Man was newly come out of the Prison to be laid there, they were almost ready to dye with the smell: This I speak by my own sad experience, their Excrements lying open in Buckets; so that what with the smell of some having the Small Pox, and some who would foul under them, with the Flux, and so by one means or another, there was such a stink that cannot be expressed by Tongue nor Pen: Yet was not this all their Annoiance, for in the next place was Lice, with which many of the sick did so swarm, that I my self have seen a Man lye dead, and his Face so covered with Lice, that until they were swept off I could not discern what man it was, although he was my familiar Acquaintance; no man∣ner of Shift had they here, whatsoever occasion they had. In the next place, their attendance was some of the Pri∣soners,
generally either Guernsey or Jer∣sey men, who for the coveniency of their French Tongue were thought most fit; of these there were about Six, whose business it was to empty the Buckets, and to help the weak Men to Stool, and to serve the Sick with Victu∣als: As for their Victuals I cannot say but that it was very good, and the Wine likewise, which they gave the sick men; for truly some of their Do∣ctors, who had the chief ordering of these matters, were good tender heart∣ed men, and would have done more for us if it had lain in their power; poor men the best of them was taken sick, and some dyed, so at last our men had no body to come near them. Here was an account of above One hundred and fifty men that died out of this Slaughter-house, not one in five that went there that ever came out a∣gain alive; it was common to see Ten or Eleven, sometimes more and some∣times less, lye dead under an Arch in the open Prison yard: Then as for their Burial, it was much like their end, for if any of the Soldiers buried them, they would heave them into a hole like a Dog, if they fell on their Face so they lay, or if on the Side; and if the Grave did fall out to be too short, as sometimes it did, that the Head of the man would not go down, these Beasts would beat down their Heads with the Butt ends of their Muskets; the Ground was so full of Water, that they were not able to dig above two Foot deep. The faster and the more our men dyed, the more we were ty∣rannized over by the Soldiers, who would drub us, and put our Men into Irons upon the least occasion. I saw a Man drub'd once by one of these Rogues only for letting a Can fall out of his Hand, and afterwards was put into Irons, such Irons as Gally slaves are chain'd to at their Banks, where he remain'd for Eight days with nothing but Bread and Water, in a place where they kept their own Countrymen Slaves, such who were Malefactors, for they hang but very few here; if a Man commits any considerable Fact, he is sentenced forthwith to be a Gally slave for Seven or eight year; if it be for Theft, Murder, or Rapes, they cut off a Piece of their Nose, and a piece of their Ear, and so burn two Flowerde∣luces, one in each Cheek, and shave his Head, and so he is Condemned to the Gallies for his Life. Their Soldiers that desert their Colours are served in the same manner, and Seamen that leave their Ships. These things I write not by guess or hear-say, but to my own knowledg and sight. This is the manner of the French Tyrant, who is Cosin to Death (the King of Ter∣rors) but yet after all the Law is past upon these Malefactors, they after that take such methods, to the best of their endeavour, to preserve these their Slaves in Life and Health, by giving them Clothes to keep them from cold, good Shooes and Stockings, and good Food to eat, and Covering to keep them warm; and when they are sick, great care is taken for them in their Hospi∣tals, both for good Bedding, clean Sheets, and Linnen to shirt, and both the best Food and Physick, and careful Women to look after them as is to be be had; which is far different to what we have heard of them, it being quite contrary. I shall now mention one more of their most horrid Actions to us at the latter end of January, which was thus; at this time the Weather was ve∣ry Tempestuous, blowing a meer Huri∣cane
of Wind, it so happened that a Stone fell off the House top, where there was many laid to keep the Tiles from blowing off, and so it was, that this Stone fell near to the Sentry Box, out came the Sentinel, and swore that the Prisoners hove Stones out of the Window at him: It now being late, and all the Prifon Doors shut, and most of the Men asleep, they came not in that Night, but staid until the next Morning; then they came into the Room, where I my self lay, and demanded of us who it was that hove Stones last night out at the the Sentinel; we all protested that we were altogether Innocent of the thing, and knew nothing of the matter, which was really so: Yet for all we laboured to perswade them to the contrary, by all the means we could use, all pro∣ved in vain. So forth they took Ten Men out of our Room, I my self was one of the Ten, being at that same time very weak and lately recovered of a great Fit of sickness. I being very well acquainted with their Cruelty, did my best endeavour to give them the slip, which thing I did when we came down amongst the thickest of our Peo∣ple, and so I hid my self: Now they not having any great knowledg of me, I put off my Coat, and altered my self so much, that they did not know me when they saw me; the other Nine they carried away, and put them into such Chains as the Gally-slaves were kept in, until about Night; then in comes the wise Major, according to his accustomary manner, so to him they told their Tale; he comes imme∣diately to the Men in Irons, and bids them confess who it was that did heave the Stones, or else he would whip eve∣ry Man that lay in that Room, which were Forty in number; our Men still protested that they knew nothing of the matter; then he told them that should not serve their turn; so he or∣dered one of them to be stript naked to the Waste, and so laid down upon the Ploor on his Face, with two Men to hold his Hands; that done, he com∣manded a Slave to give him Twenty Stripes with a double smart Rope, that cut him in every stroke most sadly: That done, he was sent into the Pri∣son to us; he told them withal, that he would serve them the like, and every Man in the Room, if they did not con∣fess. But his Fury ended in this, so that the rest that were in Irons was to be kept there during his Pleasure; so that if they had not taken several of them out, and carried them to the Hospital, they had died there, the rest remain'd there Fourteen days, and had nothing but Bread and Water; the Man that was thus whipt, his name is Mathew Milbourn of Scarborough, and came well over to England in the begin∣ning of June. At the latter end of January several of our Men broke the Prison, and got away, and where there was One got away Ten might, had not a parcel of Dutch men, who were well heated with Drink, made such a noise that alarm'd the Guard, and by that means were prevented, and some of them taken and cut most pitiously, and put in Irons Legs and Arms, whereof one dyed of the Wounds they gave him. About this time we had an Account, that from the Fourth of November 89. to the latter end of January 90. Three hundred English men had dyed in the Prison and Hospital, besides a great many Dutch. At this time the Protestants of Rochell sent both Money
and Cloaths, a considerable quantity, to be distributed amongst us, and for several Weeks together they sent every Lords day neer Ten Bushels of good Bread, which was shared amongst us by one Mr. Hosea, who was Interpreter to the Intendant of Rochefort, by reason they durst not be seen in doing of it themselves. If I should describe all the Acts of Charity that we have felt from the Protestants since our first being in France, would deserve of it self a par∣ticular Treatise; so I shall say no more but this, that I wish all English People, who live under the sweetest umbrage of the most wholsomest Laws upon the Earth; where the most Interlucent Beams of the most Holy Gospel of Christ are spread abroad; where every Man holdeth in Right and Property all that he possesseth; these People, I wish they had but the Charity and Faith as some of the distressed Protestants of France have. February. The beginning of this Month several of our Carpenters were by the Pithy perswasion of the Inter∣preter, for their health sake, perswad∣ed to go forth to work upon their Ships, and withal they were promised more Victuals, and Twelve Souse per day, which they imbraced, and went out to work; so that in a little time they were bravely refreshed, when as before they look'd like so many Objects of pitty, both for want of Food and good Air and Clothes, which now many of them got; so they were imployed only in Caulking their Ships upper and lower Decks. Soon after they got a Com∣pany of Seamen to go forth to work as Labourers in the Yard, giving them Twelve Pence per day, which was a great comfort to them: This method they used, that in a small time they had all the Men by turn out to work. One day they call'd a List of Fifty Men, and two days after call'd another List, and so by this method most of the Men got a little Money; now whether this working of the Men on this nature were purely for their own Interest or no, which I believe it was, because their great Expedition required more Men than they could have; but yet I am sure that it ended also in the Interest of our Men, for now our Men were more healthful, and of a better Countenance. February the 16th. Several of our Men made an attempt and got over the Wall, but were discovered, and seve∣ral of them taken; about Twenty got away clear; those that were taken were sorely drub'd; and after all that, they were put into Irons, and fastned to the Wall, where they lay exposed to the Weather night and day; their Fare being only Bread and Water, except it were any thing they got from their Fel∣low Prisoners: No Men were admitted to come near them, except it were by stealth; those that did, run the hazard of being drub'd: this was some part of the Majors love to us. Not long after this some of our Men found a convenience to make their escapes, by cutting through a Wall, and then after lowring themselves out of a Window Three Stories high; so by this means Three and forty of them made their escapes; and by the neglect of those that stay'd behind, which did not hail the Rope in, they were discover'd, and the whole Country allarm'd, and Men sent every way in the pursuit of them, all Rodes and By-ways, and the Woods searcht: several of them were taken at several times and places; and as fast as
they were taken they were brought back and put into Irons, and so fastned to a Wall under an Arch, where they lay in a most miserable Condition: and if they had got no other sustenance but what the French gave them, they with∣out doubt had the better part of them perisht, if not all. These are the names of several of the Men that suffered in this kind, William Deacons, Benjamin Guy, James Ingle, John Hutchins, Wil∣liam Punton, Jacob Williams, James Ellis, and several others; and a Declaration was made about the Country, That if any Person was found to give entertain∣ment to any English Prisoner, they should be put in the Gallies. Much a∣bout this time they began to Lanch some of the Fisteen Sail of Gallies that were built here, and so kept lanching One, Two, or Three a Week, so that by the latter end of April they were all lancht. Before they lanch either Ship or Gally, this is their method, about a dozen of their Infallible Doctors goes aboard, with their Crucifixes and other Popish trumpery to bless the Ship or Gally, and when that is done, they are sure all things must needs go well with them. I observed this at the lanching one of the two Ships that was built here, whereof one was a Three Deckt Ship of Ninty odd Guns, and the other a Two Deckt Ship of Sixty odd Guns; the least of these two, before she was lancht, had a great number of the Po∣pish Priests went aboard to give her a thorough Blessing, with at least Five hundred People after them: The next day this Ship was lancht, and in her lanching she broke her Scag, and sha∣tered the After Part of her Keell, so that they had enough to do to keep her above Water; and if with the stroke she had not after run over some Mud, that filled much of the Rent up, she had without doubt sunk. Now these Ships were lancht long before they were finish∣ed their upper Work being built a flote: When they had near finished this Ship, they fitted for the Careen, and so hove her down, and cut out Fifteen Foot of the After part of the Keell. Our Men that remained here in the Prison, and would not go out to work, were by the Intendants Order kept hear to work, wheeling Rubish into the Prison Yard to raise it, having Soldiers to be their Overseers, continually following them which way soever they went. One of our Men, named Thomas Fenwick, who refused to work in this kind for them, the Major and a Serjeant immedi∣ately fell upon, beating him with their great Sticks in such a barbarous manner, that it was thought by all the men that beheld it, that they designed nothing else but to murder the man. After all this, they made him work with the Wheel-barrow several days toge∣ther, Slave like; nay, far worse then Slaves were we treated by them in eve∣ry respect; for, as for the Slaves, the French King alloweth them very con∣siderably for the work they do on Shore, by which they get both good Victu∣als and good Drink; but all the Re∣ward our poor men get of them for their work in the Prison, is nothing but ill Words, and many a blow on the Back. March the Sixth Two hundred of our men were sent away hence for Dinan, in order to be exchanged; this added to us new Life, thinking it might come to our turns once to be Redeem'd of this cruel Place, if it pleased God to spare us our Lives, when as just be∣fore our hopes of getting clea was quite worn Thread-bare.
In the beginning of April here came an Express from Paris, for the speedy fitting out of Five Sail of Ships of Sixty odd Guns a Piece: but the last Ships that went away from this Place carried away all their Seamen, that they had not so many left as was able to Rig these Ships; so that Orders was given by the Intendant that they should take the English Prisoners out of the Prison, and put them aboard these Ships, and make them rig them, which was done accord∣ingly; and when some of their Commis∣sion Officers, with other Soldiers came into the Prison to us; our Men refused to go out at their Command, so forth with they drew all their Swords, Cowards-like, and began to lay on; and so by force they drove aboard One hundred and nineteen of them, and divided a∣mongst these Five Ships, where they continued Twelve days, working ma∣ny times both night and day; and when they had any time to sleep, their Lodging was on the hard Deck: their Victuals also was very little, but yet they said they gave to them as much as they did to their own People, which by the Descriptions of it, is not half so much as the King of England al∣loweth his Men, for Bread is the three fourths of their Provision. After they had rigged these Ships, they also help∣ed to carry them down the River, un∣to the Place where they used to take in their Guns; one of these Ships taking in her Guns with our Men. After this was done, the Captains of these Ships ask∣ed our Men if any of them were wil∣ling to serve either the French King or King James; they all answer'd, they would not willingly serve either of them, but that they would rather dye in Pri∣son, if King William would not Re∣deem them. Upon these Answers they were all of them sent to Prison again, and this was all the Reward they had for their work. April 5. here came Eleven hun∣derd and fifty Gally-Slaves from Mar∣seilles, who gave us this account, That as they were crossing the Bay of Lan∣quedoc, in several Gallies and Settests, they were chased by several Ships either English or Dutch, or both; and they were of this Opinion, that if they had had but two hours day light more they had took them every Man; for it seems they came up with them so fairly, that they took the Stern of most of them which were laden with Provisions for the Slaves, such as Clothes, and Covering, &c. This gave such encou∣ragement to the Slaves, that they did not fear to say before the Face of their Patroons, that they did not doubt but that the English would set them at liber∣ty, if ever they went out to Sea in their Gallies. The major part of these Slaves were Turks and Moors, and the rest were French men. The Turks and Moors had also Contracted, that if ever they came but near an English Man of War, they would do their utmost en∣deavour to give the Gally away to the English, in hopes thereby to get their freedom: But I rather think these Gal∣lies will not venture to go out in these Sea, but rather keep them in Harbour on purpose to plague his poor Subjects up∣on every small Offence. These Gal∣lies are much less then the Gallies in the Mediterranean Seas, but in Form al∣together like them, being about One hundred and twenty Foot long, and about Eighteen Foot by the Beam, and not above Seven Foot deep in the Hold, which when they have all their Men, and other Provisions aboard,
they will be so deep, not above Two Foot from the Water edge in the Midships, only their Oars and Banks lye higher above the Body of the Gally, as is their manner so to do. These Gallies carry Four Guns right for∣ward in their Prow, and in the Mid∣ships right forward in time of Service they have a Cushe Piece of about Six thousand weight, which runs in a Trunk, and so lyes when Service is done near the Mast for Ballast. These Gallies that were here built at Rochfort, will Row with about Fifty four and Fifty six Oars a piece, having six Men to an Oar; so that these Gallies will carry Three hundred thirty six Slaves, besides Seamen and Soldiers, which will be very near One hundred and fifty more. I am clearly of Opinion, that if they come out into the Biscayan Seas, which they must of necessity do if ever they come out, they will not find them like the Mediterranean Seas; and if there doth but blow any Gale at all considerable, without they can im∣mediately get into a Habour, the Sea must be their Graves, for I am sure that these Gallies will not be able to endure any Sea at all. Just about the time aforesaid, we had six of our Englishmen brought here, which were taken as they were striving to make their Escape, in this manner: They were in the Hospital of Oleroon de Chattu, and when they were some∣what recovered of their Illness, they did their endeavours to get for England; and watching an Opportunity to get a Boat, which they had one night, they went away, rowing along the Shore side, thinking to meet a small Burtoon laden with Wine and Brandy, and so to clap her aboard, & then car∣ry her away for the Coast of England; but, poor men, on the contrary, they met a Privateer, who chased them a∣shore in the River of Burdeaux, at a Town called Roan, where they were seised, and so sent hither, and put in∣to Chains, in the open place where they used to put the other men that I mentioned before. Four days after these men were taken, there came the Scrivan of Oleroon, to inquire of them who it was that helped them to the Boat they got away with: They told him, No body; for they took the Boat without the assistance of any one. Now in this Island of Oleroon, as there are many Protestants, so, amongst the rest, there is a very wealthy man, who used to extend the utmost of his Charity to our Englishmen, for which he was hated by the other Party most desperately. Now this Scrivan would fain have per∣suaded these men to confess, that it was this Protestant that helped them to the Boat to make their Escape; for they needed no more for the undoing of this good man, but only to have this laid to his Charge: But the men stout∣ly denied the thing, and notwithstand∣ing all his Threatnings, they told him, they would not speak against their Consciences, to the undoing of any In∣nocent man. The Scrivan swore by all his Gods, That he would make them confess that it was that man, or else he would burn them with lighted Matches betwixt their Fingers and Toes: Now whether he did so to them or no, I can∣not tell; for the next day I came away, with two hundred more, in order to be exchanged. April the twenty second in the morn∣ing, before we marched, the good Peo∣people of this place gave two hundred Shirts to our men that were to march to day, the most of them being new.
From Rochefort to Denan, April 22. 1690. TUesday, About Eleven in the Morn∣ing 200 of the English and Scots Nation were call'd out of the Prison, in order for a march for Denan, to be exchanged as they told us: just before we march'd, they gave us a bit of Bread and a cup of Beverage per Man: that done, away we went with great Joy, leaving behind us of our English Men, in Prison and in the Hospital, a∣bout One hundred and forty or there∣abouts: the Morning was rainy, and by that the Ways dirty, but the After∣ternoon proved favorable and fair. Just as we came without the Town∣gate, we gave the rest of our Country∣men, which we left behind, three Cheers or Hollows: That done, away we march'd Six Leagues, to a Town call'd Lazerean, leaving Rochel on the left hand. About two Leagues off this Town was lately a Town where re∣sided much Protestant People; but, alas, all the Remains that is to be seen of them now, is to see their Houses, which are many of them pluck'd down to the Ground, with their Churches al∣so: they quarter'd us all here in one empty House, where the Floor was spread with Rushes: our Supper was a piece of Bread and one Sirdena per Man: the inhabitants of the Town gave us Wine to our Supper. Wednesday 23. By six in the Morning we were all drawn up in a square Place to be counted, and to be served our Dinner; and while we were at it, we heard a small Hand-Bell tinkling, presently appeared a young Man car∣rying a Crucifix, after him a great con∣course of poor Men bare-headed, sing∣ing some of their Popish Canticles: after them followed a Man bearing a white Flag, in the manner of an Ensign of War; and after him, an other bore a Flag of red colour, with a cross in it like that of St. Georges; but it was thus carried, the Flag was made fast to a Staff just the breadth of the Flag, and in the middle of the Staff was a piece of Line made fast, and so made fast to the end of another Stick, so it hung like a square Sail: After this followed the Priest in his Pontifical Habit, and after him a whole drove of Women; who, as far as I could perceive, minded us more than their Devotion: I did admire, that I saw but one Vulture a∣mongst all these Geese, for I always observed that these sort of Foul most an end goe in flocks. After we had eat a piece of Bread and a Sirdena, and drank a cup of poor sorry Wine, away we march'd for the Town of Maraine, distant five Leagues, the Wea∣ther fair and clear, and the Road good. When we came into the Town we were put into a great empty House, where our Lodging was on the Floor; but some of us got a little Litter out of the Stable, but most none at all: our Supper was a piece of Bread and one Egg, with a Cup of Beverage. Thursday 24. About six in the Morn∣ing we came out of the House, and as we past out they gave each Man a small Loaf, and so we stood in two-Ranks to be serv'd Drink, which was a Cup of Beverage. Here many of our People receiv'd much Charity of some of the tender Sex, who gave some of
us Stockings and Shirts: That done, away we went into three Boats, and so was carried up the River of Maraine three Leagues, and were landed at a Town call'd Pouray; from thence we march'd five Leagues to a Town call'd Terray, the Weather fair and clear, and the Road good: When we came into this Town it was quite dark, so we were throng'd all into a Barn, where our Lodging was very bad, and our Supper very slender, viz. a piece of Bread and one Egg per Man. Friday 25. About nine this Morning they gave us our Dinner, a Souse-Loaf and about 50 Eggs for two hundred Men, with a Cup of sowre Wine: That done, away we march'd six Leagues, to a Town call'd St. Vincean, here they gave us a half Souse-Loaf per Man, with one Egg and a Cup of sowre Wine; and as for our Lodging, we were all throng'd together in a Stable. Saturday 26. About seven in the Morning they gave us our Dinner, a small brown Loaf, worth eight Deniers, with one Egg and a Cup of sowre Wine, so away we march'd six Leagues to a Town call'd St. Georges, the Wea∣ther very fair, and the Road good, be∣ing all very good Champion Land in this part of the Country. At our arri∣val into the Town we were conducted into a great Barn, and some into a Stable, where our Lodging was very cold in the Night; our Supper was a small brown Loaf and one Egg per Man, with a Cup of sad sorry Wine. Sunday 27. After our Guards and Provo had been at Mass they gave us our Dinner, which was such as our Supper, a small brown Loaf and one Egg, with a Cup of sad stuff of Wine After we had eat and drank, away we march'd four Leagues, to a Town call'd Egreville; the Way being very good, but the Day very calm and hot. When we came into this Village, we were quarter'd at the same House we were quarter'd at in our passage to Rochfort, at the Sign of the three Kings; our Lodging was in a Stable, our Supper was a small Loaf and one Egg per Man, with a Cup of poor Wine. Munday 28. About eleven in the Morning we were all served our Din∣ner, a small Loaf, with one Egg and a Cup of sowre thick Wine: that done, away we march'd four long Leagues, to the City of Nantes; when we came into Town we were put into a close strong Prison, where we were most desperately throng'd; and our Supper was Bread and Eggs, as before, with the like Drink as before. We heard that the Captain of the Portsmouth was kept here close Prisoner. Tuesday 29. About eight in the Morn∣ing we were served our Dinner and Breakfast all under one, as they used; but now they gave each Man two Eggs and a small Loaf, with a Cup of Wine; the Morning was rainy, and so it con∣tinued until about three in the After∣noon; yet notwithstanding we march'd seven Leagues through all the Rain, so that we were the most part of us as wet as well we could be, and at the end of seven Leagues we came to alone Inn, where we had very cold enter∣tainment, nothing but Bread and Wa∣ter, and very bad Lodging. Wednesday 30. About six in the Morn∣ing we march'd four Leagues to a Town call'd Nosce, where we remain'd
all Day, we lodged in the very same House we did when we went for Roch∣fort; the Afternoon proving very rainy. They gave us here a piece of Bread and a little bit of Butter, so we remained in two Stables. At Night they gave us the Flesh that they had long promised, about a pound for ten Men, and that was the most, yet Meat was very rea∣sonably cheap in this place: they gave us to drink some nasty foul Cyder; I should chuse rather to drink Water than it. May, Thursday the First. The Morn∣in being Rainy we continued here un∣til about ten of the Clock, about which time the Weather began to clear up: then were we served our Dinner, just such a quantity of Meat as before, as near as could be guest at, with the same sort of Drink. From hence we march'd seven Miles, to a Town call'd Dervall, and there we stopt an Hour or thereabouts; and from thence we march'd five Miles to a Town call'd Fushgecea. Here was a great Fair of Cattle in this Town: and this Day we were carried through the Fair, and so put into two Stables; our Supper being a small Loaf and one Egg, with Wa∣ter, our Lodging on the cold Ground. Friday 2. About eight in the Morn∣ing we were served our Dinner, a Loaf and one Egg per Man, with a Cup of foul nasty Cyder; so away we march'd three Leagues, to a Town call'd Beant, and from thence to a poor Village call'd Polonia, one League and a half further; the Weather was showry to Day, but the Road indifferent good, the Land very hilly, but all the Hills very fertile; our Lodging in this place was very hard, lying in an open Barn on the bare Ground, the covering of the Barn was quite gone on the one side; our Supper was a small Loaf and one Egg, and Water for Drink. Saturday 3. About eight in the Morn∣ing we were served our Dinner, which was a small Loaf and one Egg per Man, with Water; so away we march'd six Leagues, to the City of Reens, where we lodged, some in an empty Barn and some in Stables: Our supper was a piece of Bread and one Egg per Man, and Water to drink; so we lay ma∣ny of us like so many Pigs in a Stye. Sunday 4. About eight we were served our Dinner, viz. a small Loaf and one Egg per Man; so away we march'd four Leagues and half to a Village call'd St. Chapell, but by the way Three of our Men deserted us. After they had given us our Supper, which was a small bit of old Irish salt Beef, with a Loaf and a little sowr Syder, they began to miss those Men: by this means we were all call'd out into the Close to be counted, and after many times counting, they mist Three of their number; but good lack, what a toss was Jack Provo in, and his Hounds swearing and cursing. These Men were Two of them Guernsey or Gersey, and the other an English Man that they mist; after this we went to sleep in the Stables. Munday Five. About Nine in the Morning they gave each Man about an Ounce of old Irish Beef, with about half a Souse worth of Bread. From hence we marched six long Leagues to the Town of Denan: about Four in the Afternoon we came into the Town,
where we saw many Dutch Prisoners, and this day they cleared Thirty six English Prisoners. After we were rang'd in the Praid, and counted, we were call'd over by our names; that done we were put into two close Pri∣sons, 100 in a Prison, where we got neither bit nor sup for Supper; in the Prison we found several small heaps of Straw, on which we slept, our hopes of getting clear was our greatest comfort. In this Prison of Dinan were we kept for twenty days, a hundred of us in one Prison, and the other hundred in another Prison. In the one of these Prisons we had the benefit of a little fresh Air, but in the other none at all, both of them being miserable stinking places, under Ground, in old Castles, whose Walls were fifteen Foot thick, and the Windows treble barr'd; yet for all this place was so strong, they kept Centinels within the Prisons night and day, for fear we should break Prison; and every day the Officers came and counted us, for fear lest they should lose some of us. The Wall of this Place was so thick, that the Prison was very cold, considering the time of the Year. For our Lodging they gave us Straw, and as for our Food, it was ve∣ry well, considering the place we were in, being far better than any we met with yet in France; and our Liquor was only Water. Those People that guard∣ed us here were very civil, not abusing any of us, as they had done in other places: Our greatest Annoyance in this place was the horrid stink of the Pri∣son, which did not only offend the Nose, but make the Eyes smart also. May the 24th. Mr. John White, Com∣mander of the Betty, being employed by the King to fetch and carry Priso∣ners of War, came here to day, and with a great deal of Prudence and Ex∣actness brought over a hundred and five Englishmen into England, supplying ma∣ny of them with Money according to their present Occasions, giving them, whilst they were in their Passage, the best of Food, and good Drink, and by God's assistance landed us May 31. at Weymouth; where when we came a∣shore, we were kindly treated by those good People. June the first we got our several Passes of the Mayor; so away we travelled to Dorchester, where we were relieved by the People, the Mayor also giving us his Charity very liberally; and at night we got to Blan∣ford, where we were very charitably relieved by the good People of the Town: But in all the rest of the Towns we came through, our Men had so lit∣tle Charity bestow'd on them, that if some of us that had Money had not reliev'd them, they had without doubt died on the Road. When we came to Salisbury, thirty of us went directly to the Mayor, and shewed him our Passes; who gave a∣mongst us all four shillings: Our Men de∣sired his Worship to consider them, they having eaten nothing all day, and as for this Money, they knew not well what to do with it: He hastily replied, Give it me again, and I will give you no∣thing: So away they went with that little they had. Now this Mayor of Salisbury had a Son that was taken by the French, and travell'd with us up from St. Malo to Toulon in Irons; and when we came back to Rochfort, died in a most lamentable condition with the Small Pox. There were in our Company two Men that belonged to the Ship this Mayor's Son did, whose Names were Samuel Westmore and Tho∣mas Dicas; and these men had taken
care of this young man in his Sickness, and when he was dead, made his Grave, and buried him: Now they had often heard him in his Life-time say, That his Father lived well and in good fashion in Salisbury; and it so hapning as they came through this Town, they en∣quired for one Mr. Phelps; the People told them that Mr. Phelps was the May∣or; so away they went to him, expe∣cting to be sure a Belly full of Victuals. They told him they came out of France, and that his Son Charles was dead: He asked them what Ship he did belong to: They told him the Ships Name and Commander too. Well, said he to them, I do believe your Testimony, and withal gave betwixt them two a Dou∣ble Stiver, and dismiss'd them; now I heard the Men say, that the People of that Town would take it for no more than a Peny. By God's assistance the major part of us got into London the fifth day of June. So here is the End of my hard Travels; which as it is not the full Sum of our Sorrows, so I am able to produce the Testimony of at least twenty Men, in a short time, if occasion required, that are able to make Oath, that I have not writ any thing in this whole Work that is contrary to Truth. So I wish all good People good Success in their ho∣nest Employments. FINIS.
Books Printed for Richard Baldwin. THE Memoirs of Monsieur Deageant; containing the most secret Transactions and Affairs of France, from the Death of Henry IV. till the Beginning of the Ministry of the Cardinal de Richlieu. To which is added, A Particular Relation of the Archbishop of Embrun's Voyage into England, and of his Negotiation for the Advancement of the Ro∣man Catholick Religion here; together with the Duke of Buckingham's Letters to the said Archbishop, about the Progress of that Affair: Which hapned the last Years of King James I. his Reign. Faithfully Translated out of the French Original. The Cabinet Open'd: or, The Secret History of the Amours of Madam de Maintenon with the French King. Translated from the French Copy. The History of the Most Illustrious, William, Prince of Orange: Deduc'd from the first Founders of the Ancient House of Nassau: Together with the most considerable Actions of this present Prince. The Second Edition. A Collection of Fourteen Papers, relating to the Affairs of Church and State, in the Reign of the late King James. The Character of a Trimmer. His Opinion of I. The Laws and Govern∣ment. II. Protestant Religion. III. The Papists. IV. Foreign Affairs. By the Honourable Sir W. Coventry. The Third Edition carefully Corrected, and cleared from the Errors of the First Impression. An Impartial Relation of the Illegal Proceedings against St. Mary Magdalen Colledge in Oxon, in the Year of our Lord 1687. Containing only Matters of Fact as they occurred. The Second Edition. To which is added the most Re∣markable Passages, omitted in the former. Collected by a Fellow of the said Colledge. The Absolute Necessity of standing vigorously by the present Government: Or, A View of what both Church-men and Dissenters must expect, if by their unhappy Divisions, Popery and Tyranny should return again. The Justice of the Parliament, in inflicting of Punishments subsequent to Of∣fenders, vindicated; and the Lawfulness of the present Government asserted.
An Account of Mr. Parkinson's Expulsion from the University of Oxford, in the late Times; in vindication of him from the false Aspersions cast upon him, in a late Pamphlet, intituled, The History of Passive Obedience. The way to Peace among all Protestants; being a Letter of Reconciliation, sent by Bp. Ridley to Bp. Hooper, by Mr. Samuel Johnson. Purgatory prov'd by Miracles: collected out of Roman-Catholick Authors. With some Remarkable Histories relating to British, English, and Irish Saints. With a Preface concerning their Miracles. By Mr. Samuel Johnson. A Seasonable Discourse, shewing the Unreasonableness and Mischiefs of Im∣position in Matters of Religion: Recommended to serious Consideration. By Mr. Andrew Marvel, late Member of Parliament. The Revolter. A Tragi-Comedy, acted between the Hind and Panther, and Religio Laici. A Collection of Poems, Satyrs, and Songs, against Popery and Tyranny. In Four Parts. An Answer to the Bishop of Rochester's first and second Letters, &c. The Intrigues of the French King at Constantinople to imbroil Christendom; dis∣cover'd in several Dispatches past between him and the late Grand Signior, Grand Vizier, and Count Teckley; all of them found among that Count's Pa∣pers. With some Reflections upon them. Plain English: In Relation to the real and pretended Friends to the English Mo∣narchy. Humbly offered to the Consideration of his Majesty, and his Great Council, the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled. The Second Edition. With a short Preface, and an Appendix, concerning the Coronation Oath admi∣nistred to King James the Second. The New Nonconformist: Or, Dr. Sherlock's Case in Preaching after a Depriva∣tion, incurr'd by the Express Words of a Statute: Fairly Stated and Examined. With short Reflections upon Mr. Cook's Sermon, February the 2d, 16 89/90. which was Licens'd by the Arch-Bishop's Chaplain. The Fate of France: A Discourse wherein it is shewed, That by the Happy Re∣volution in England, all the Designs of the French King for the Universal Monar∣chy, are disappointed; and the Rational Grounds to believe his Downfal near. In three Dialogues betwixt Father Petre, Father La Chaize, and two Protestant Gentlemen.
The Anatomy of a Jacobite-Tory: In a Dialogue between Whig and Tory, occa∣sioned by the Act for Recognizing King William and Queen Mary. The Great Bastard Protecter of the Little One. Done out of French. And for which the French King put forth a Proclamation, with a Reward of Five thou∣sand Louis d'Ors, to discover the Author. A True Narrative of the Murthers, Cruelties and Oppressions, perpetrated on the Protestants in Ireland, by the Late King James's Agents, since his Arrival there. Published for the Information of the Jacobites, that endeavour his Re∣turn again. Reflections upon a Form of Prayer, lately set forth by the Jacobites of the Church of England: and of an Abhorrence, rendred by the Late King, to some of our Dissenting Bishops, upon his present Majesty's Landing. A Sermon preach'd before the High-Court of Parliament at Edinburgh, on Sunday the 27th of April 1690. And published by their Special Command. By George Meldrum, a Presbyterian Minister, and till of late one of the Episco∣pal Clergy of that Kingdom.
