S751 12591967 63969
palmistry hard
PALMISTRY, The SECRETS thereof DISCLOSED, Or a Familiar, Easy and New Method, whereby to judge of the most General Accidents of mans Life from the Lines of the hand, withal its Dimentions and Significations. As also that Most Useful Piece of A∣strology (long since promised) concerning ELECTIONS for every particular Occasi∣on, now plainly manifested from Rational Principles of ART, not Pub∣lished till now. By RICHARD SAUNDERS, Author of the former Book of Chyro∣mancy and Phisiognomy. Cuique sua est Tempestas, et tempus cuique voluntati sub Caelis, Eccle. Cap. 3. verse 1. to 12. Tempus est potentius Legibus. LONDON, Printed by H. B. for G. Sawbridge, at the Signe of the Bible upon Lud-Gate Hill. 1663.
TO THE READER. Negotia humana Astris indigent. Nihil tam humanum est, tamque jucundum quam ea cognoscere et scire, quae natura inter arcana sua condidit, nihil tam praestans ac magnificum, quam dei max∣imum opus intelligere ac con∣templari. THerefore rejecting all execrable vanities of Magick, which are neither Divine or Natural, but Diabolical, reject∣ing all Heathen Superstitious conceits, as also the opinions of them that affirm all future events to proceed from the Stars by a fatal necessity, on
which ground they perempto∣rily and proudly run into ex∣cess, as also refragating and ex∣ploding, on the contrary, their opinion that deny any future events can be predicted by Hu∣mane and Natural Science, viz. Astrology Chyromancy and Phisi∣ognomy, whiles they affix this only, and alone to the Divine will, they infinitely derogate from his immense liberallity and bounty; for certainly if God in his superlative Munifi∣cence hath granted to the Coe∣lestial bodies, and Elementary virtues, a continued faculty and power of Production, dayly ge∣nerating a new, as appears in Mi∣nerals, Vegetables, Animals, and Man himself, and hath given to the Fowles of Heaven, and to the Beasts on Earth, such a Sa∣gacity by the instinct of Nature, that they can by a certain moti∣on
of their bodies praenuntiate of the Changes, Perturbations, Serenity, and various tempera∣ments of the Ayr; what then? Shall the Almighty deny to man which only bears his own I∣mage, whom alone he hath in∣spired and indued with a divine Soul, to know so much of future things, as mear Animals? Shall not He more superlatively Elar∣giate to man this Divine proper∣tie of Fore-knowledge, then to Fowles, and Animals? Far be it from us to think the contrary, there is no man so meanly read in Scripture, and History, but may see eminent Tracts of this Learning, amongst the Patri∣archs, Noah foretold the Flood, (God inspiring him) from the Conjunction of the grand Supe∣riours in Cancer, some years praeceding the same, and in all Ages have famous Phylosophers
And Divines Flourished, that have Highly Honoured and Advanced Astronomy, Astrology, Chyromancy and Physiognomy, all in Effect but the same, even the productions of the Hea∣venly Influences, for as saith Cajetan, Sup. Psal. 104. Cae∣lum est vehiculum Divinae Vir∣tutis, quo mediante motu & lu∣mine, &c. Heaven is a vehicle, of Divine Power and Virtue, by the motion and influence of which stellified bodies, as second causes, Deus cuncta haec inferiora, & elementaria corpora, ordinat atque disponit, The Al∣mighty ordereth and disposeth all sublunary Elementary bodies, as Divinity and Astro∣logy, groundedly averre, and as he hath Expanded the most glorious peice of Nature, the Firmament, and decorated it with such Variety of Beauty,
and different influences, so he hath exposed it to our eye (and given us erected countenances a∣bove all the Creation) to be Viewed, Studied, and Contem∣plated, which being known, viz. the disposition of the Hea∣vens, there will be no difficul∣ty, but that we may with fa∣cility Prenote and Predict the Future contingencies of the World, for in this voluminous Universal Book of Nature, he hath miraculously Described, and Ingraven as it were, all Fu∣ture accidents that are within the compass of Natures bounds, Unde Caeli enarrant gloriam Dei, & opera ejus annuntia Firmanen∣tum, and as they proclaim the glory of the Creator, so they are to us for signes of suture contingencies, not absolutely Necessitating cur Natures to this or that, but strongly incli∣ning,
and so consequently Dis∣posing our Wills, the Active productions of which are the subjects of fore-knowledge, be∣ing future in time, the which future events are considerable under three notions: The first of them which have a certain de∣terminate and infallible Cause, as the motion of the Heavens, the rising and setting of the Signes, the Conjunction of the Planets, the Eclipses of the Lu∣minares, and the like; of these may be had a certain infallible Praecognition, which being had, the Effects clearly discover themselves in the general Acci∣dents of the World, as Warre, Famine, Pestilence, Peace, Plen∣ty, and Barronness, the muta∣tions of Sects and Kingdoms, the great Perturbations of the Ayr, the Commotions of Elements, Earth-quakes and the like, all
which from age to age, are day∣ly acted by a Syderial motive power, which because they equally depend upon an inva∣riable uniform, motion of the Heaven, the Expert Astrologer cannot easily deviate from the Truth, unless the second causes be miraculously impeded by the prime cause, which is God himself, but those Actions which the Almighty doth ab∣solutely by his imediate power, besides, or against the order of second causes, are very Rare, and never acted in the World, but upon some superlative occasi∣on, not usual, as the Eclipse of the Sun, at our Saviours death, which made Dionysius Areopa∣gita break forth into this Ex∣tasy, (not knowing any thing of the Stupendious death of Christ) Aut tota Mundi machina resolvi∣tur, vel Deus Naturae patitur, be∣cause
this Eclipse was near a Full Moon, besides the course of second causes, as also in Joshu∣ahs time, the retrogradation of the Sun, against Nature, &c. Secondly, other future con∣tingencies are in the world which have an indeterminate and fallible cause, such are the operations and actions of men, meerly, purely and simply volun∣tary; these are said to have nei∣ther a determinate verity, nor a dererminate falsity, the will of man being indeterminate, as saith the Phylosopher, and there∣fore vertible to either, because to him that purposeth this or that, there may occurre many impe∣diments, wherefore seeing the Soul of man is more Noble then the visible Heavens, nor can any corporeal created substance act upon the same necessarily which is Spiritual; therefore it fol∣lows
that the Caelestial Influ∣ences, cannot change the Soul nor work thereupon, unless in∣directly and contingently by inclining the same, from whence we may conclude that Arts, or any Humane Science in respect of the Voluntary Acti∣ons of the Mind, are in their Foreknowledge, onely Conjectu∣ral. In a Third Series we may consider things that have a Cause determinated, and most part certain, yet therewith is somewhat fallible, as namely, those Actions which partly de∣pend on our Wills, and partly on the Caelestial Influx, and this because man hath a two-fold Nature in him, One Caelestial and Aetherial, that is to say, an Intellectual Soul, but the Other compact of the Substance of the Elements, which is a
frail and mortal Body, from hence it follows that Man is Necessarily acted by two princi∣ples, the Caelestial Influx, and the humane Will, and so mans Operations and Actions are found mixt and various, the foot-steps of which our following Subject of Chiroscopia, alias Palmistry, doth not obscurely trace out, as Aristotle avers, Deus & Na∣tura nihil efficiant frustra, it fol∣lows then, that not lightly at all-adventure, in vain, and without Reason are the Lines impressed in the hands of Men and Women, but principally they depend upon the Caele∣stial Influx, and the Formate Principles of the Microcosme, Therefore, according to the Number of the Seven Planets, in the hollow and inside of the hand, are the seven mounts Efficted which produce the
grounds of Chyroscopia, and from the Lines posited in the same compass, the Artist fore∣knoweth of the Complexions, Manners and Ingenuities of per∣sons, their Fortunes likewise, and Infortunes. This Natural, Laudable and harmless Science wants not its Patrons and Praises in all ages, Quid Utilius esse potest quam scire futura? Quid Jucundius? quam divinitatis alicujus hac in parte participem esse? Quidnam Astro∣logus bonus aliud est, quam conci∣liorum quae in Coelo fiunt partici∣pes? saith Cardanus, and So∣phocles, ceterum cum hoc nectar sit haec Deorum Ambrosia, cur non merito etiam faelicissimi erunt, qui vel hoc poculi genus aut sibi gustaverint? Quamobrem ne∣cesse est Astrologian omni alia di∣sciplina, & Jucundiorem, & Di∣viniorem esse, at vero etiam vti∣liorem
fore, quis dubitet? cum et futura si prospera sunt sequi do∣ceat, si adversa, vel vitare, vel Aequius ferre: namquae diu quisque ante praeviderit, levius feret. And Divine writ gives it its suffrage, Job. 37. Cap. ver. 7. Manum cujusque hominis obsig∣nat, ut recognoscat omnes opera∣rios suos, according to Tremelius, and according to Jerome and the septuagist, signat in manu omnium hominum, ut singuli no∣verint opera sua. Although the Sence of this hath been vari∣ously explicated by Antient and Modern Divines, yet obser∣vable it is, that from the very Contemners of Palmistry, re∣specting the Original, the holy tongue, and consulting the most learned Doctors of the Hebrews, they all conclude, this can no otherwise, but ought to
be understood of the significa∣tion and use of this Science of Palmistry. The knowledge of the Chi∣romantick principles is chiefly attained by rightly under∣standing the qualities of the four Elements from the com∣mixtion of which, divers kinds in generation are produced, yet so as one Element, alwayes Predominates, and one is most Subservient, and the other have their Co-operations. Amongst the which, as the most Noble Qualities, Heat and Moisture are the active for∣matives in Nature, Calidity and Humidity equally proporti∣onately joyn'd, compose the most superlative constitution, fully protending and dilating the parts, but if Heat much exceed moisture in composition, so that it passe into a siccity, it much
protends the body, but little dilates it, causing a long slender meager form, even as frigidity mixt with Humidity products a Body spread broad, but short, but heat and moisture predomina∣ting, confer to the body a due longitude and latitude of parts. Frigidity with Humidity predominating inpedes the na∣tural heat and vigor, from whence bodies are formed fat and grosse, but not long but sic∣city and frigidity prevailing, cause long, but not dilated bo∣dies, by reason of the want of moisture, and the impediments of natural heat; therefore Ari∣stotle affirms the soetum much to increase in Longitude, and extend, by reason of the super∣abounding heat predominating in the Embrio, because it much extends the Materia, which self same thing, is conspicu∣ously
discernable in vegetables, for Herbs that are hot and moist, extend their leaves much in longitude and latitude, the more hot, the longer the stalks which bring forth the leaves, by how much the more any thing hath of heat, by so much it is the more contracted & extended in length, and by how much the more it hath of moisture, by so much the more it is shorter and broader, as is observable in Plants, the hotter they are, the more narrower and longer leaves they bear, the more Hu∣mid and Moist, the shorter and broader. These things being through∣ly pensitated from the lines found in the hands of Men and Women, the Complexion and the Properties of nature is in∣quired, as lines long and broad, shew a callid and hot complexi∣on,
lines long and small, indi∣cate a hot and dry complexion, lines grosse and short, intimate a super-abounding of evil, nox∣ious humours in the Body, and a cold constitution; Lines slender, small and disjoyned, plainly de∣monstrate a cold and dry tem∣perament. By this small hint I hope the Reader will see the Usefulness of this Science, in respect of all People, and espe∣cially Physitians, whose studies ought principally to be conver∣sant about the Temperaments and Complexions, and as to par∣ticulars, the utillity of praesci∣ence is very great, for, Incogni∣tum malum non evitatur, cogni∣tum tamen potest evitari si prae∣sciatur maxime a remotis, A∣gainst unknown Dangers is no prevention, but Evils foreseen beforehand, may easily be avoided, as if a man (as Jacol)
apprehend a Dearth to ensue, a War in his Country, Pestilence or any Evil at hand, he may make Provision before hand by a Removal or otherwise, and avert so great evils from Him∣self & His, insinite might I be, both from Scripture and Hysto∣ry to shew Examples herein, of Prudent Persons in all Ages; but as my Scope commands Brevity, so the Ingenious cannot but Indulge me a Cessation from that labour. Having thus far asserted the laudable utillity of Christian Prudent Science, let me warn my Reader of those Sycophants, and Delusive Ignorants, through whose Sides this pretious Science is dayly wounded, such spawn of shame, that impudently make Profession of Art, not onely in several Countryes, but lurk in Obscure corners, in and about
this Famous City, many Illit∣terate peices of Non-sence and Impudence, of the Female kind, whose Ignorance transcends the Vulgar Gypsies, and Impu∣dence sufficient to out face a whippingpost, Ptolomy in his time complain'd of such, and Car∣dan found a Generation Qui∣cum saith he non sint, videri vo∣lunt, lucrique cupiditate Artem profitentur, quam vix a limine salutarunt, such though they were not, yet would seem to be Artists, and for Lucres sake professe it, though they had not saluted the thresholds there∣of; Haly mentions One before His time, that Affirmed when Cor. Leonis in such a Year, came to the fifteenth Degree of Leo, it would set the World on Flame through excesse of Heat, the consequence of which was, it was the most cruel cold
and sharpest Winter known before, and Petrus Aretinus mentions such an Ignoramus in his time, that predicted a great Flood, or rather a deluge in the Month of February, 1524. Which so frighted the people (notwithstanding the evil sea∣son of the year) that they left their dwellings, and fled with their Goods to the Mountains, which when the time came, there was not any Month in the Year so fair nor more Serene Weather, no Rain, nor clouds threatning the least of Rain, which in many Ages was not known before, there hath not wanted such Ideots in our times, frighting the People, and Prog∣nosticating in their Illiterate Hare-brain'd Predictions, the End of the World, which I have not omitted to take notice of in my Apollo Anglicanus, especi∣ally
for the Year, 1656. &c. But for the time to come, that our Country may be undeceiv'd, I will premise such Quallifica∣tions as every able Artist ought to be indued with, according to the approbation of the best Learned and Judicious, which will serve as a Touch stone to examine every Professor, and to discern the Prudent from the Unworthy. 1. The First Qualification requisite to constitute an Artist is, that he be highly Ingeni∣ous. 2. Is required, a good and strong memory. 3. That he be Prudent, Discreet, Honest, and of a Good and sound Judgement. 4. That he chiefly value and esteem the Truth in and above all things. 5. That he be a good
Linguist and Scholler. 6. That he be a good Phy∣losopher, skil'd in all parts of Phylosophy, viz. Logick, Phy∣sicks, Ethicks, and Metaphi∣siques. 7. That he be well verst in the Stars; their Natures, Mo∣tions and Accidents, viz. be a good Astronomer. 8. That he be a Good and Able Arithmetition. 9. That he be a Diligent Hearer and Observer of the most Eminent men in his time, which hold forth the most Ex∣cellent and Admirable Con∣clusions, drawn down to us by their own Experience, and that he give much Diligence to Reading those Books which have been written by the most Wor∣thy, Judicious and Famous Au∣thors upon that Subject. 10. That he be Assiduously
Diligent in Studies and La∣bours, wholly intent upon the Art. 11. That he be sedulously diligent in Collecting, Recording and Observing all practical Ex∣periments. 12. It's very requisite that he be furnished with a meet knowledge of Agriculture, with knowledge Nautical, Millitary and Physical, as also the Geo∣metrical and Geographical Posi∣tion, and description of places, the Habitual Dispositions and Manners of Men, of Regions, of their Laws, Religious Customs, and generally of all things. These Qualifications pre∣mised, will sufficiently inform such of the forfeit of their Judgments, Reason and Discre∣tions, that heed Babling Wo∣men and Obscure Persons, Se∣ducers, the very Shame and bane of Science.
Courteous Reader, this Trea∣tise of Palmistry, that is offered here to thy view, is in all things different from my former Book of Chyromancy; the Method be∣ing new, and very compendi∣ous, and the matter for the most part, being later Observations, (which I might have kept in my own brest, but that the Common Utillity is my end, and virtue over-ruling self ends, as the Philosopher in his Ethicks, Optimus est, qui non so∣lum utitur virtute ad se, sed ad alios,) That treating Copiously and plainly of all grounds, uni∣versally relating to the whole Art, which are wondrous ne∣cessary to be known, this, be∣ing compos'd for a Pocket Com∣panion doth in a brief and new method, very facile and de∣lightful, discourse, though not so largely, yet all the most prin∣cipal
subjects, wherein the cu∣riosity of nature requires satis∣faction, as long life, short life death natural, and violent, Riches, Poverty, and all things of most useful concernment in the whole Life of man, being such Choice Conclusions, and grounded on so good Authority and comprobated Experience, that it need not crave any Pa∣tronage beyond the Merit of it's own desert, supposing it needs no Encomium, I will submit it to thy candid ingenuity (Courteous Reader) to speak for it self, and Divert thy thoughts to the con∣sideration of the second part of this Subject, viz. the Science of Elections, which in effect, is a prudent forecast whereby we prevent the inconveniences of an after-wit, (for a great part of our lives, is uncomfortably spent, about a post inquiry, viz.
how to rectifie our mistakes, ignorantly in our Actions Pre∣committed, instructing us how we may prevent uncomfortable disasters, fortunate all honest de∣signes, and consequently pro∣ducing a comfortable end, in all our undertakings; Therefore may this part of Astrology, claim to its self the superlative place, amongst all humane Sciences, being Justified, Asser∣ted and honoured by all Worthy Authors, both Antient and Mo∣dern,, it being the Science, by which our present safty, and future tranquillity is acquired. What Elections are, where∣in they consist, and their Useful ends, will appear in the second part of this Treatise, which I suppose, needs no Apologie, it's own Utillity, will best bespeak it's Worth, and excellency, which, the ingenious Reader
will Perspicuously apprehend, if he eye, the Subject, and over-look the weakness of the composer. I had intended above ten years since he Publication of this Subject, and it was much ex∣pected in the World, but inter∣rupted through prevailing rea∣sons, I then found to the con∣trary, but at last, from more mature experience, consulting the best and profoundest Au∣thors, you are presented with this, most useful and profitable Subject more briefly handled, I consess, then formerly intend∣ed, this being as an Epitomy of a largier Copy, yet so full, as I question not but the ingenious will say it is sufficient. It's possible my Reader may expect the Introductive part to be here added, which teacheth the way of composing a Schaeme of Heaven, to each opportunity,
and informing of the Natures, Qualifications and positions of the Planets, which is so necessa∣ry, that it is of absolute neces∣sity to be known, as without the which information, no lau∣dable use can be made of this subject; But this being in ma∣ny Books, yet most largely, fully and incomparably performed by my Honoured Friend Mr. Lilly in the first part of his ne∣ver sufficiently praised Intro∣duction; and Domifying Tables Annually performed by the same Author, which here to in∣sert were but actum agere, and considering it's inconsistence with this small Volume, as ap∣pearing to be too injurious to the portabillity of this Pocket Companion, I have omitted it, referring my Reader to the aforesaid Author, in perusing of whom he will not lose his la∣bour,
and as it here presents it self, I only leave it to the can∣did censure of my Ingenious Readers, till more opertune time shall make further Discovery, to whom is wished, all Useful, Beneficial and delightful sa∣tisfaction in the perusal there∣of, By Richard Saunders. Vale & fruimini. From my House, the three Cranes in Chancery Lane, May the 27. 163.
FOR HIS HONOURED FRIEND, Mr. Richard Saunders. THE Author of this Treatise, having some Years since Publish∣ed a large Volumn of Chyromancy and Metaposcopy, a Work very acceptable with the Learned; hath now thought it convenient after some years Study, and further Labour in this Science, to Pub∣lish in a Pocket Volumne, his more Secret Experiences, and
Private Animadversions, in a narrow compasse, to comprise (in a manner) the whole Art of Palmistry, producing New and Experienced Aphorismes, not formerly published, the better to facillitate those, who are de∣sirous to spend time in these so pleasing Studies; In a Word, He hath vindicated the Art from Superstition, and judici∣ously by the portracture of a few hands discovered Chyro∣mancy, in it's intire, natural and Pristine verity, more faithfully and more easy to be apprehend∣ed, then either Taisner, or any other Author. As for his Book of Elections, he hath therein followed the Tract of the Antients, clearing many doubts and Ambiguities in their Writings, making all things more plain and easy, then they did, for which the Ingeni∣ous,
are obliged unto him, and will doubtlesse own his indu∣stry for such his discovery, and explaining those Knotty pieces he met with in their Labours. I do Heartily approve of both his Labours, and as the mean∣est in the Number of Astrolo∣gers, give him my Suffrage, and thanks for his paines, and am his Assured Friend William Lilly.
THE FIRST PART Treating of PALMISTRY. WHEREIN I first present to my Reader va∣rious, Pleasant and profitable con∣clusions of Chiromancy (alias) Palmistry, drawn from the Theorick and Practick parts thereof. Not before Imprinted. AMongst the several species of Physical Divinations, Chyrosco∣pia merrits not the least, or last place, it being a most Noble and Antient
Science, as antient as Man himself; Chiroscopia, I say, that is the consi∣deration by inspection of the in∣ward part, or Palm of the hand, as it is distinctly differenced by Cha∣racters and Lines, from which if we Divine, or Judge it is called Chiro∣mantia, that is, Divination from, and by the lines of the hands, even as Metopomantia from the lines of the Forehead. This Science informeth us to know and discerne by the hand, the Com∣plexions, and Constitutions of Bodies, the Sufferings and Sorrows of Hu∣mane life, the felicity and infelicity thereof, and in fine, all things good or bad, that may befal or betide man or woman, Naturally in the course of this their Pilgrimage: The Subject of this Science is that part of the hu∣mane body as I said before, the hands, in the which are contained the foresaid Lineaments, which are called lines for the similitude and participation they have with a Line, which is defined by Euclid to be a Longitude, without Latitude or pro∣fundity, the extream parts of which
are indivisible points per se, or as Phylosophy hath it, i. e. Linea est Magnitudo longa, non lata, cujus par∣tes puncto copulantus, A Line is a mag∣nitude having only length, compo∣sed only of punctos, or points by ad∣dition, and this is the subject of our ensuing Discourse, from which lines in the hand of man, most excellent and singular Speculations, and con∣clusions are drawn, that is to say from their Longitude, Latitude, Pro∣fundity, Rectitude, Obliquity, Inter∣cision, Application, Opposition, Con∣junction, Separation, continuity, dis∣continuity, Proportion, Disproportion, Lucidity, Apparency, Pallidity, Rube∣dity, Fuscedtiy, which is a Cloudy darkness of colour, nigredity, Aspe∣rity, Mollicity, Feminine Tender∣ness, from their Position, Colligation and Form, as of a Triangle, Qua∣drangle, circumscription of Circle, and Semicircle; there is also obser∣vable in the hands Crosses, Stars, Rayes, Branches, Letters, Ascensi∣ons, and Descensions, Right and torted, as we shall shew more cleer∣ly in their due places, but amongst
all this diversity of lines, which are found in the hand, some only are principal, as namely, the Vital line, the Natural the Hepatick, and the Mensal, which Lines have a most beautiful, and profitable speculation, and are most dilligently to be heed∣ed, in men of sound Bodies, and well composed Temperaments, the good Position and constitution of the line of Life, shew the heart is good, the life long and comfortable, and the like, by the natural line is seen the good disposition of the head and brain, and those accidents thereto relating; from the Hepatick Line is judged the constitution of the Li∣ver, and its consequent Accidents; from the Mensal line, the state and disposition of the whole body is clearly perceived, and by the Har∣monical correspondency of the lines whether to Health, Infirmity or Sickness; and from these all the condition and state of Fortune, good or bad, as to Riches or Poverty, for Riches are meerly the consequents of careful and fortunate ingenuity, and Poverty the Products of supine
careless, selfish stupidity: To pro∣ceed there are many other Lines then these four, to be seen and found in the han is, (as the Learned Car∣dinal Morbeth observes) either from nature therein inserted, or from the Coelestial Influences, altering and changing in the hand, according to the mutable configuration of the Planets in their Revolutions, as they are annually or otherwise chan∣ged and suffer mutations, as by ex∣perience is suffently comprobated, of which colligation of the Planets, & of this most renownedly honourd Science, the famous Hermes wrote a most ellegant Treatise, which Aristotle afterwards found in a Tem∣ple upon an Altar, Dedicated to Her∣mes, written in Golden Letters, as witnesseth the same Aristotle, which Book he presented to his Disciple the Great Allexander, with infinite joy and exultation, as a Present of most inestimable worth and value, more worth in his learned esteem, then all his Conquests. Tully in his Book, De Divinatione, mentioneth many waies of Prognosticating
things to come, but amongst all, he gives the precedent Honour to A∣strology, and Chyromancy, by which the courses, fluxes, and refluxes of the Celestial bodies are known, and the Phylosopher in the first of his Me∣teors, saith, Motus Coeli est perpetu∣us, est principium, & causa omnium motuum inferiorum, i. e. The moti∣on of the Heavens is perpetual, is the beginning, Original and cause of all inferior, sublunary motions; and in his second Book, of De Gene∣ratione & Corruptione, the motion of the heavens and of all the other Planets, in an Oblike Circle are the proper Physical causes of Generati∣on and Corruption; and in his Book, De secretis secretorum, in that Chap∣ter where he shews how the King ought to govern by Astrology: He saith, Oh Rex clementissime, fi fieri potest non surgas nec sedeas nec come∣das, neque bibas, nec penitus, aliquid facias sine consilio periti in Astrorum Arte, Oh most Grations King, as much as in you lies, neither rise nor rest, neither eat nor drink, nor do any other action without the Coun∣sell
of those expert in the guberna∣tion, and power of the Stats; and in the 12. Chapter, writing to Alex∣ander the Great, Scias certe, quod nil vacui & otiosi facit Deus gloriosus, sed omnia fact a sunt ex causa probabi∣li & certissima ratione, Know for certain, (saith the Philosopher) that the Glorious God hath made no∣thing in vain, but all things are con∣cluded within the limits of most sure Reason, and are produced from cer∣tain causes; to which opinion the greatest Philosophers agree, as well Modern as Antient, as Instance the unparraleld learned Sir Kenelm Digbey in his Observations on Reli∣gio Medici, Pag. 28. I beleive (saith he) that all Causes are so immediately chained to their ef∣fects, as if a perfect knowing Na∣ture get hold but of one link, it will drive the intire series or Pedi∣gree of the whole to each utmost end, so that in truth there is no fortuirness or contingency of Things in resect of themselves, but only in respect of us, that are ignorant of their certain and ne∣cessary
causes; from hence Aristo∣tle proceeds in his exhortation, Ideoque nil magni tentes praeter conci∣lium alicujus in scientia Astrorum pe∣riti, nec insipientium dictis fidem ad∣hibeas, qui dicunt scientiam Astro∣rum it a difficilem, quod nemo ad ipsius cognitionem pervenire possit; This scruple many quaking judgements make at this day, but he proceeds, Nesciunt quid dicunt quia apud poten∣tiam intellectus nihil est difficile, & cuncta sunt scibilia secundam viam rationis, and proceeds sunt alij non minus stulti, There is another Ge∣neration no less foolishly sottish then the former, meaning the Fata∣lists Dicentes Deum cuncta praevidisse & praeordinasse ab aeterno, & cuncta futura de necessitate evenire, unde di∣cunt quod nil prodest futura praecogno∣sere, ex quo debeant necessario eveni∣re: Quid ergo valet, scientia stella∣rum, Astrologiae, chiromantiae, quib us futura praecognoscuntur? he answers, Errant similiter & terpitur falluntur, quia quamvis quaedam sunt necessario futura, tamensi praesciantur levius to∣lerantur: prudentius declinantur, &
sic quodammodo evitantur, quia eo ip∣so quoque futura sunt in nostra sunt no∣titia, & pervide & discrete transeunt sine molestia & maxima lesione, verbi gratia, quando homines futurans AE is hyemalis tempestatem, nimis frigidam praecognoscentes: remedia tempori provident & si pest is intali lo∣co futura sit, & sic de aliis. And the Fa∣mous Petrus Apponensis, otherwise called Consiliator, who flourished in the Year of Christ 819. wrote a most pithy and elegant learned Tract of Chiromancy, alias Palmistry I might instance Iob, and many places in the sacred Scriptures, as also pro∣duce multitudes of famous Authors, and honourers of this Science, of all Ages, and of all Countries, both Divines and Philosophers; but I am here forc'd to brevity, and this al∣ready is indifferent well performed in my Subject of Chiromancy, Prin∣ted in 1652. for Nath. Brooks in Cornhil London, and if any thing be wanting, shall (God sparing life) be supplyed in the next Edition at large: But to proceed, great is the con∣sent, ad identitatem between this
Science of Chiromancy and Astro∣nomy, by reason of the inseperable connexion and cognation of the su∣perior bodies with the inferior, the Macrocosme with the Microsme, all the great Masters in Chiromancy have unanimously in judging obser∣ved this Herauldry to blazen the hand and Lines by the Planets and Signes, alwaies observing the same as to method and signification, and good reason, for all agree that the Impression of the Lines are caused by the superior bodies, at the forma∣tion and birth, and so answerably in the actions of humane life illustrate each other, and confirme each others significations, yet if to our appre∣hension either is more certain in its predictions: It may be said of Chi∣romancy, as having its principles and grounds not so remote from our apprehensions as Astronomy: Much to be lamented is it, to see such cheating, Deluding Impostors, silly Women, ignorant Quacks who swarm in every place City and Country, to undertake and be dayly conversant in this so Sublime and Noble a sci∣ence;
from whose ignorant and false delusive Oracles and misgrounded judgements, much Infamy and Re∣proach hath adhered to this so Sub∣lime a Subject, and no wonder, for the persons pretending the profession of it, as Gypsies, and other fordid Quacks, men and women, through whose imposturisme this Noble Sci∣ence hath been much wounded, and the credit thereof much impaired, which hath been the long and seri∣ous Study and Contemplation of the greatest Sages, and Masters in Philosophy, as not to be attained o∣therwise, for it comprehends the summe of all Physical Notions, as the Nature of Elements Simple, their infinite differences in reference to composition, the qualification and composure of the body both in∣ternal and external, and all Anato∣mical conclusions, and simetrical proportions as shall in due place be observed; and is not here matter for the most learned capacities, the most laborious and serious studies, and the longest measure of life to compre∣hend this so Sublime a Subject?
From hence then be excluded all those cursed Imposturisms, which the Divel acteth. In the persons of igno∣rant Impostures Men and Women, to obscure the works of God and to deceive poor miserable easie be∣lieving creatures; from hence be ex∣cluded all those Deceivers and de∣ceptious persons, who willingly or malitiously, through Superstitious Exercises, Spels or inchantments, (of which Monsters there are many at this day) attempt and endeavour to presage to the ignorant of future things; all which impious and super∣stitious presages and Prophesies, I seriously abhor & detest, there being not the least of my Chiroscopia com∣mon with them: It being only con∣versant within the Limits of Nature, and bounded with Physical limitati∣ons, wanting all things of Impostu∣rism and Superstition, and taken from Physical causes and effects, and from Natural and ordinary Signes, not at least bordering upon igno∣rance and Non-sence. All men know that man is com∣posed of a twofold Nature, that is to
say a Celestial and Aetherial, as the Rational soul, and a corpus, carducum mortale, a mortal, frail body com∣posed of the Elements; therefore being agitated, and acted from these two different principals, to wit, the Celestial infiux, and the humane wil, it comes to pass that his operations are rendred, mixed and various. The Tract, Signs, and footsteps of which operations our Chiroscopia doth not obscurely demonstrate to every judicious eye, cum igitur (teste Philosopho primo de coelo & mundo) Deus & Natura nihil efficiant fru∣stra, seeing that God and Nature have made nothing in vain, id est, Natura Naturans & natura natura∣ta, Haec que propositio universalis, non solum a Philosophis verum & a Theo∣logis approbatur, this being a recei∣ved maxime, both with Philosophers and Divines, Sequitur non temere & frustra lineas in manibus hominum esse impress a presertim quia ex influxu celesti, & ipsius microcosmi principiis dependet: It follows then, that not inconsiderately and in vain are such various Lines impressed in the
hands of men and women, princi∣pally seeing that they depend on the celestial influence, and the principals of the Microcosm. But farther to remove that de∣tracting and vulgar opinion of them which say, that the lines of the hand are caused by the constriction and plication thereof. The falcity of which opinion, e∣very one may more clear then the Sun discern by his own hands, for can one and the same plication or folding of the hand constitute Stars, Triangles, Quadrangles, Crosses and marks of several different forms in the hand? neither is their two men in ten thousand that in all re∣spects have the lines in their hards alike, although they use one and the same exercise with their hands: Fur∣ther for refutation of this error, we see Nature hath impressed lines in the forehead, which is not capable of restriction or plication; therefore this cannot hold that the constriction of the hands should cause the for∣mation or appearance of the Lines in the hands, for in the Condils, between
the joynts of the fingers, many have many Lines, and of different forms, others very sew or none at all, and here is no flexation, constriction or plication, and oft-times are lines transverse, circular, and cemicircu∣lar between the joynts of the fing∣ers, where no constriction is of the hand. Which is sufficient to silence any Antagonist: Furthermore this truth is confirmed by Astrology, for Chiromancy and Astrology prove the verity each of other, for let the Astro∣loger considering the Nativity of a∣ny one, observe the nature of good fortune to come to that person thereby, to the same end and sence will it appear to the Chiromancer by observing and judging the hand, which hath been much delightful to me in my Observations; therefore where I can have the Nativity of a∣ny one under examination, I will if possible, subjoyn my Chiromantick observations, for I have very oft ex∣perienced, that what the Nativity shall signifie, the Chiromantick ob∣servation of the hand shall confirm, and ratify, as thus, if the Astrologer
by the Scheam of heaven radically considered, finde the Native sub∣jected to ill fortune, the same will appear in the hand, by considering the proper significations of the pro∣per parts thereof; beside shall Astro∣logy in the Nativity find any Planet more then ordinarily savourable to the Native, or more favourable then another, let the Chiromantist consi∣der the proper place of that Planet in the hand, and he shall find it beau∣tified and adorn'd with significant Lines to that purpose, and so on the contrary. Another vulgar error fit to be re∣moved, is, that it is by some affir∣med that the right hand, others the left ought to be inspected. To which I answer, Noste etiam natis sinistra magis favet, die vero & in aurora natis dextra, quamvis utra∣que manus probe inspicienda & exa∣minanda est. To those persons born in the night the left hand is of most signification, to those born in the day, or by day∣light, the right hand is most obser∣vable, yet both are seriously to
be impected and examined. Thus it is apparent that, Chiro∣mancy, est ars recte divinandi ex line∣is manuum, that Chiromancy or Palmistry is an Art which rightly draws its conclusions from the lines of the hand, rightly I say, that is not preposterously lightly, and rash∣ly, as ignorant Rogues do, but Lear∣nedly with Judgement and Reason, observing the causes and ground from whence every line deduceth its Original. The Subject of our judgement is the hand impressed with Lines, for you shall never see the hand of any one living void of lines. Next, its requisite to subjoyn cer∣tain necessary notions, fit and conveni∣ent to be observed before giving of judgement. 1. As First, that you may pro∣nounce a right judgement, let In∣dulgent affection overweaning in Love, and hatred, or ill will be ab∣sent from the party judging, for these are hindrances to true judgement, and Byas the spirits, for the powers of the soil cannot rightly conceive
of things being impedited by these passions. 2. Next let the hands be decent∣ly washt and clean, and a little rest after taken to compose the parts, and with an empty stomack, that is not overcharg'd with Gluttony and Drunkenness; in the Summer time in a place not over hot, in Winter∣time in a place not too extream cold, nor in a place where the Sun-beams are violent, because the natural heat is extracted thereby, and the inward powers debillitated, the skin grows red, and the visive Organs and Spi∣rits are resolved by the Suns Rayes, let not the hand or body be over wearied with labour, because heat draweth out the blood and the spi∣rits from the Center, to the circum∣ference, and in a clear and inoffensive light. 3. In the next place is necessarily considerable, the Sex, Age, State, Condition, and Exercise, for all these are observable, and do not a little help or hinder the signification; of the Lines. 4. Consider the hands in which
the lines are most obvious and con∣spicuous, for usually the right hand is most apparent of them which are born in the day, and by day-light, and the left of them which are born in the night; observation of the hands is to be made from the four principal lines, and others visible in either hand conteyned. 5. Next are to be noted the co∣lours of the lines, for paleness com∣monly denoteth an evil tempera∣ment of body, in those lines which look otherwise coloured, for redness in some lines signifies evil, and pale∣ness good. 6. Its very considerable that the usual temper of womens hands is ex∣prest by imperfect lines by reason of the exility of heat, but if the con∣trary happen, that they have strong lines well and clearly exprest, that woman is to be judged a Virago, if not worse, for its proper for a wo∣man to have imperfect lines; But on the contrary, if a man have soft hands, flaccid, faint or withered, smooth and shattered lines scarce appearing he is effeminate, timidus,
and too much inclining to the na∣ture of women, but it is to be noted that we speak of a hand render and Effeminate, besides the condition of the person, otherwise to some ten∣derly bred, a tender small near hand is a grace, and comly. 7. The quantity of the hand is to be noted whether it bears an apt proportion to the body, in like man∣ner is to be understood of the lines, bearing a fit proportion they denote holdness, and a good temperament, but if the hands be shorter, longer, or smaller then the due proportion, its an argument of Cavillers, Con∣tentious, Crafty, and Malignant spi∣rits, the fingers over short denote Theft, and a Man full of Malignity, a long Palm with gross fingers, de∣notes one dull, heavy, and fatuous: a woman having a short hand, notes to her pain and difficulty in child∣bearing; long slender hands, denote Tyranny, by reason of the excess of choller, hair in a mediocrity on the back of the hands denote a good temperament and ingenuity, but if they over much abound, the person
in condition is flashy, light, and of much instability. 8. Next is observable whether the line or lines be continued, or ab∣rupt, for if it be contrarily effected to what is requisite, it lessens the signification, for so it comes to pass that continuity diminisheth the sig∣nification in adverse things. Lastly, it remains to note, that the lineaments of the hand cannot be so exquisitely taken that they may exactly be graven, its possible they may a little evariate in position or figure, and the signification abide, neither can it for a light or small dis∣simillitude or disconguity be dimini∣shed in efficacy. In the next place we arrive to the Practical part of Chiromancy, and by these two next ensuing figures, give you to understand the parts, the lines, and the divisions of the hands, requisite to be understood of all, who will reap the pleasure and pro∣fit of this ingenious study.
The Names of the Lines and parts of the hand follow in the two next Figures, by their proper Letters, as they offer them∣selves to be understood. A The line of Life. B The Sister of the line of life, or line of Mars. C Rascetta, restricta, carpus, the wrist. D The natural line, or line of the Head. E Epatica, or Liver line. F The line of Saturn. G The Table line. H The Table of the hand. I The Sister of the Liver line, and the via lactea. K The Mount of Iupiter. L The Mount of Saturn. M The Mount of Sun. N The Mount of Mercury. O The Mount of The Moon. P The Mount of Venus. Q The Mount of Mars.
R The Solar line or line of the Sun. S The Girdle of Venus. T Stethos the forepart of the hand∣wrist. V Thenar, that part between the Thumb and the forefinger. X Hypothenar, the Percussion of the hand. 1 The first, second, and third joynts of the Fin∣gers. 2 The first, second, and third joynts of the Fin∣gers. 3 The first, second, and third joynts of the Fin∣gers.
palmistry hand
palmistry hand
IN the next place is Considerable the proportion of the hand, for this holdeth a due proportion of parts, as to it self, and likewise to the whole body; and when we find a due Proportion in the hand as to the parts thereof, it signifies, a just Symetrical proportion of the body, and so consequently good fortune, courage, equality of temperaments, and a healthful constitution, which due proportion of the hand is thus demonstrated, the palm of the hand transversly under the roots of the fingers, ought to be divided into four equal parts, beginning at outside of the root of the auricular finger, as you see in the following figure, to which proportion, the midle finger is to answer in length, setting your compasse in the root thereof at the figure five, and to the foresaid parts, the palm of the hand from the root of the midle finger to the root of the thumb is to answer in just propor∣tion as you may discern in that line, from the figure 1. to 5. and from the root of the midle finger to the Ra∣cetta,
the wrist is contained just 5. of those equal parts, so that the length of the hand exceeds the breadth in just proportion, one e∣qual part, as may be seen in the fol∣lowing figure, to which proportion of 5. parts the altitude of the fore∣finger or Index just answers, from the end of the finger to the root of the thumb, as appears likewise by the following figure; Further ob∣serve, that the thicknesse or grosnesse of each finger (measured, as laying your hand upon the back, the palm open and fingers extended) answers to almost the fourth part of the lon∣gitude of the finger, as suppose, the finger divided into four equal parts, and one of those parts sbdived into eight equal parts, the crassitude of the finger, doth answer to, and contain just seven of those parts, the pollex or thumb is thicker and stronger then any of the other fingers, this being complicated, and bowed to∣wards the judex, the end thereof ought to touch the root of the fore∣finger, and to exceed one half part of four of the length thereof, beyond
the root of the index or fore-finger, the index or fore-finger is to contain in length three parts, and one fourth part of the midle finger, the annu∣laris or ring-finger is to contain in longitude three parts and one half part of the middle finger, and the Auricularis or little finger is to con∣tain two parts and one half part of the midle finger, the said midle fin∣ger being equaly divided into four parts as before said, and as the fol∣lowing figure aptly demonstrates: Thus have you the whole proportion of the hand, which as it is pleasant & useful for all, so especially for Pain∣ters, Statuaries and Architectures to take notice of, this being the true and just Symetrical proportion, from which if any one differ more or less, he swerves from the true proporti∣onate quantity, and likewise from the right medium in temperament, and quallifications as well as in quan∣tity: Lastly in this figure, behold the true mensuration of the Liver∣line which keepeth no due propor∣tion in the hand, but is sometimes longer, and sometimes shorter;
therefore set the foot of your com∣passe in the utmost end of the line of life on the Rascetta, and extend the other end of the Compasse to the midle of the line of life, and turn the same to the Liver-line, keeping the foot of the Compasse on the line of Life fixt, and divide that pro∣portion into two equal parts, count∣ing to the first twenty five years, be∣ginning at the time of life, and twenty five years for the second proportion and what exceeds, (as in some hands this line is long) count it according to the same proportion beyond fifty years, which will clear to you the several times, and years in which accidents shall happen, an∣swerable to the significations of the Liver-line, behold the figure follow∣ing, will in all things aptly inform you.
palmistry hand
TRicassus, Coohlitis, Corvus and others have proposed certain mensurations of the line of Lise, and as they dister one from the other, so have they all deviated from the Truth, therefore have we here ad∣ded a more perfect Geometrical mensuration, Arithmetically suppu∣tated wherein the perfect Symetry of the hand appears, by which the Life and Death, Sickness and other Ac∣cidents of life may be discerned to the true time, and this division is such as (is manifect) in the ensuing figure, that a mean capacity may with much facility comprehend it, as also the mensal and natural lines are Sy∣metrically considered, by the men∣suration of which, the times of all accidents of fortune may be before∣hand understood. 1. And first of the vital line or line of life, prepare a neat, handsome pair of compasse, and set one foot thereof in the midle of the root of the judex or forefinger, extend the other foot thereof to the midle of the root of the annular or Ring-finger, (as in the figure follow∣ing)
and remove the point of the Compass from the root of the Ring finger, to the contaction of the vital line, and that space from the begin∣ning of the Angle to the figure 10. shall point out the first ten years of life, & look what lines are in that di∣vision, the effects will shew themselvs in the first ten years according to that time of proportion: Then, 2. Secondly open the compass (let∣ting the end upon the root of the in∣dex stand still fixed) and extend the point to the parting of the ringfinger, & little finger, and draw another line Quadrantwise, and where that touch∣eth upon, the vital line, there ob∣serve the twentieth year of age, after that. 3. Thirdly, Place the point of the Compass next in the midest of the root of the little finger, as in the preceeding examples, and where that toucheth the vital line, is the demention of thirty years, which according to the greatest Masters in this Science falls in the midst of the vital line, so that there will appear a perfect Geometrical proportion
from this point to the wrist, and from this point to the supream an∣gle the beginning of the vitall line. 4. Fourthly Fix the foot of your Compasse in the midst of the root of the fore-finger, as is before said, and extend the other point to the out∣side of the little finger, and draw a line to the line of life, over the per∣cussion of the hand, and this shall demonstrate the fortieth year of age. 5. Fifthly, Which is chiefly to be Noted, (because some differ in opinion) but our resolve is, the Compasse being fixt as before, ex∣tend the other part to the end of the Mensal or Table-line, and draw a line over the Percussion of the hand, to contact, or touch the line of Life, and this point in mensuration, shall constitute the fiftiteh year of age. 6. Sixthly, The foot of the Com∣pass fixt as before, consider upon the outside of the percussion of the hand, just the same amplitude of space that was betwixt the years fifty and forty before, and from that part draw a line to the line of life, and where that point doth touch, there let be
noted the sixtieth year of life, which method will make unequal proporti∣ons in the line of life, which must be allowed, and not otherwise expect∣ed, yet constitute distinctly the years as you see in the following figure. 7. Seventhly, In the next place, if a third part of the amplitude be taken away upon the line of life, i. e. if by removing your compass from the point sixty years, the space of two thirds (of the last demention) further upon the line of life, there you shall observe the 70. year, and by remo∣ving two thirds from that further, shall note the 80. year of age, and by removing the foot of the compass two thirds more of the last dementi∣on, shall make the bound of the 90. year, and in like manner to the hun∣dredth, and beyond, if such age be in the hand, by this method most easily may be observed the exact times of mans age, upon the vital line, which hitherto under correction, no man hath found out, nor attempted with∣out the ship-wrack, and loss of their lbours.
palmistry hand
THe true mensuration of the vi∣tal line thus demonstated, (be∣hold the figure,) next are observable the Geometrical proportions of the mensal and natural lines; These two as they differ in method and opera∣tion from the vitall line, so they hold a uniformity, (as to mensuration) between themselves, being both to be equally divided (as to their longi∣tude) into three equal proportion are parts, which parts respect the three principal ages of man, the first part proportionating the first twenty five years of mans life, the next, the se∣cond twenty five years which brings our life to fifty years; the last pro∣portionating the last twenty five years, which brings our age to seven∣ty five years, or the utmost term of Life; But here is cheifly and warily to be noted, that these lines are not in measure alwayes to be considered, as they are found in the hands, but to be considered in measure, according to their proper natural & certain pro∣portion that they should bear in the hand (as thus) the midle natural
line ought to begin at the Supream Angle, or the Thenar part of the hand between the root of the pollex and the Index finger, upon the midle of the mount of the Index, and to extend it quite cross the hand, over-against the midle of the mount of the Auricular or little finger, and just there to terminate, which if it be found longer or shorter, it im∣plyes the extreams of fortune; The mensal or Table-line, ought to as∣cend beyond the mount of the midle finger, if it be longer or shot∣ter, of greater or lesser quantity, it then answers not to the right pro∣portionate rules of mensuration, for the proportionate measure of the midle natural line, for the first age or term of years, viz. twenty five, it is to be measured from the begin∣ning of the line to the opposite place just against the midle of the mount, to the midle finger for the first twenty five years, and for the next twenty five years, measure from the foresaid place of the midle finger, o∣ver against the midst of the mount of the Ring-finger, what remains of
the line, is to be considered for the remaining term of Life, the Mensal or Table-line, for the first twenty five years of age is to be measured from the beginning thereof, (which is on the out-side of the hand) unto that part of the line, which is just a∣gainst the midle of the Auricular, or little finger, for the second age, or space of life, the next twenty five years is to be measured from the last point over against the mount of the little finger, to the point of the line just against the midst of the mount of the Annular or Ring-finger (as appears in the fore-going figure, the remainder of this Table-line is to be considered for the remaining part of life, according to the former propor∣tion; so that here you may see plain∣ly that this proportionate mensurati∣on is rational, and may give apt con∣jectures of the times of Life, and length thereof, as also by help of this mensuration, predictions are made, judgements given of Dignities, Of∣fices, Honour, Riches and good For∣tune, when and in what times of a mans age, such, or such a thing shall
come to pass, as also if marks in the hand appear, signifying Death, Sick∣ness, Imprisonment Poverty, or any o∣ther mischance, it is discerned accor∣ding to the position of the several marks in the hand commensurately proportionated, according to the fore said dimention, their places and sig∣nifications being considered as to good or bad, As for example, in the next following hand I have observed the most principal marks, that in any hand signifie a violent death, either by Hanging, Drowning, Heading by Wound, or other mischance; Now any of these being found in the hand of any person, let them be consider∣ed in reference to the part of the hand and place they are found in and by this former measure of the Lines, you will see plainly at what years of age, such, and such a mischance shall happ, and the occasions thereunto conducing, that thereby by prayer, and watchful diligence it may be prevented; Behold the following Hand, and the variety of Characters therein posited.
palmistry hand
IN the next place Courteous Reader I shall present you by way of Demonstation, all those prin∣cipal Marks or Characters which in the hand of any person signify Riches, and according to the time of age, in obtaining and injoying of them, you must consider the former mensura∣tion, yet let me premise this, that finding any of these Characters in your hands signifying Riches, you presume not to suppose such a neces∣sity in nature as will miraculously ac∣complish this end, no, there is requi∣red the use of your Reason, industry and pains (for so saith Divine Writ it is the Almighties injunction, Genesis, 3. Cap. 9.) In sudore vul∣tus tui, vescitor cibo, donec revertaris in humum,) Honest policy, and prudent industry must be carried on by us for the idle person saith Solomon, Esuriet shall suffer hunger, yet where these following Characters are found, they either have an inclination to this fru∣gallity, or else the old Proverb is verified, fortuna favet fatuos, fooles have fortune, though this be some∣times,
yet so rare, that it ought not to incline us or any to a Supine seg∣nitions palmistry hand stupidity, behold the figures following.
palmistry hand
All the Principal Observations in the hand that signify Riches, or good Fortune, by play, or o∣therwise, I shall deliver in six∣ty nine Aphorismes, most of which you may see visibly De∣monstrated in the two foregoing hands, as also Honour or Ma∣gistracy. 1 THe Letter A. in the root of the Index or fore-finger, promiseth much Riches to him that is poor. 2. G. In the mount of the hand noteth the man to be made Rich by means, of Princes, Nobles, Great Per∣sons, or Women. 3. A certain line passing the Ra∣setta from the root of the arme, touching the line of life, or the natu∣ral line, denotes multiplication of Riches. 4. The Vital line putting forth Branches towards the Supream Angle, signifies Riches with Ho∣nour.
5. The Mensal or Table-line straight, and subtill in the end to∣wards the index or fore-finger, sig∣nifieth Rule, and aboundance of Sub∣stance. 6. The Mensal casting forth straight and right lines towards the supream angle, and not impedited, promiseth Honours with Riches. 7. The Sister of the line of life continued in the mount of the thumb,, with a triangle towards the palm of the hand, well coloured and proportioned, extended to the wrist, signifies Riches in the whole course of life, and where this line fails, ac∣cording to the rules of the former demensions, there also Riches and prosperity fails, at those proportio∣nate times. 8. Small lines well coloured proceeding from the root of the fore-finger, pointing towards the Supream angle, promise increase of Substance, and Honour, from Per∣sons of much excellency. 9. Two lines touching in the nature of an Acute-Angle, on the mount of the midle finger or the
fore finger, promiseth Riches, and good to come for the future. 10. Lines right, and straight stretching themselves from the Ra∣dix, or outside of the hand in the mount and brawn of the hand of good form and colour, these denun∣tiate, a continued good fortune. 11. A Character like a Star up∣on the Thenar or outfide of the In∣dex, or fore-finger, shews a man to be Luxurious, yet to come to riches and some degree of Honour by wo∣mens-means. 12. A Line in the wrist conti∣nued straight and well coloured go∣ing cross between the arme and the hand, signifies to him that hath Riches, the perpetuity and conti∣nuance of them, and to him that is in poverty that hath such a line the may expect better fortune, especially if this line and its Branches be conti∣nued right and straight, and not ab∣rupted or broken. 13. A Character like a Sheild, triangle or of a sperical form, on the mount of the Sun, denotes an honest life, and promiseth perpetual, and durable Riches.
14. The Letter B. in the mount of Jupiter promiseth much Riches, and great fortune. 15. A Character like a Cross, or Star in or near the vital line to∣wards the wrist, promiseth riches in old age. 16. A Star, or Stars appearing in the beginning of the line of Life, or cutting the Vital Line especially if two stars appear, they demonstrate the person glorious, rich & wealthy. 17. Many lines from the root of the thumb between the thumb and the line of Life, pointing to∣wards the Ring-finger, promiseth great Riches. 18. A Crosse under the Natural Line, signifies the acquisition of riches, but with great labour and in∣dustry of the hand. 19. Eminent rising like Carun∣cles, or warts of the line of life, sig∣nifies Riches. 20. A Line pointing from the Mensal, between the index and the midle finger, shews the person to be favoured by fortune, yet certifies withal, that the person through dis∣simulation
and flattery, useth one only Friend, as the rise to his for∣tunes. 21. The Mensal or Table-line, ending between the Index and the midle finger, promiseth a sufficiency of all necessaries, respecting humane Life. 22. A Line falling between the midle finger and Ring-finger, touch∣ing the roots, and joyned to another on the mount of the midle finger, pointing to the midle finger, it in∣dicates much future good, the same if it point to the mount of Jupiter. 23. A Line well disposed, well coloured, and thick, beginning be∣tween the root of the little finger and Ring-finger, and from thence descending and pointing towards the Mensal, declares an excellent State of fortune, Good, Large, and full of Riches. 24. Lines from the out-fide of the Percussion of the hand, Right, Straight, and extended on the brawn of the hand, if they be well colour∣ed, they promise good fortune to him or her that have been long vex∣ed with bad.
25. The Line of the Sun, or magestry, of Ingenuity, of Regallity, of Fame, of Honour and Riches, ex∣tending with a trine proportion to the root of the Annular or Ring-finger, consignifies Riches, especial∣ly if the mount of the finger be well formed. 26. A Triangle Aequilateral, and a semi-circle in the supream an∣gle, annexed to the Vital, whose points, or hornes respect the Vital line, Denuntiate, a gradual augmen∣tation of good fortune. 27. Lines like Crosses in the first joynt of the thumb, certainly signifie Riches. 28. Little lines well coloured passing from the root of the index, over the mount of the midle finger, signifie good fortune; by how much the nearer they are, so much the more good is prenoted with increase, and that he should receive the same from some Excellent and Honour∣able Person, and these often times signifie Ecclesiastical Honour, and preferment. 29. A Line or lines under the
root of the midle finger, transverse without incission, or being cut by any other lines, note much good, and the superlative of fortune. 30. The Line of Saturn, run∣ning from the wrist, and continued, not intersected, and of good colour, argues prosperity, and faelicity even unto death. 31. The Letter D. in the Field of Mars, signifieth good fortune to him that hath it. 32. The Saturnine-Line make∣ing a trine proportion from the wrist, extending it self straight to the root of the Ring-finger, by the side of the Auricular, or little finger design∣eth prosperity. 33. Lines going from the natu∣ral Line to the Table-line, making a triangle with the Table-line, Goods and Riches to be given him. 34. A Star in the quadrangle, or table near the natural line, pro∣miseth Riches and Substance in its defined time, if he have been poor, he shall be made Rich, and want nothing, because he shall enjoy the wealth of others.
35. A Red Star in the midle of the Quadrangle and broad in the ex∣tremities, this intimates a man in∣finite solicitous about such Riches, which he shall never attain. 36 A Crosse in the Quadrangle, noteth poverty in the first age, in the second not over rich, but in the third age Want. 37. The Natural line extending it self over the mount, or percussion of the hand circular, denotes indif∣ferent Riches in young years, but in the last age, (without great provi∣dence,) want. 38. A right line and of good colour from the beginning of the natural line, and ending at the root of the index, promiseth Riches, al∣though fortune her self should be op∣posite, yet chiefly in the first age. 39. The former line, extended to the root of the midle finger, sig∣nifies Riches in the second age of Life. 40. If the same line extend to the Ring-finger or the little fin∣ger, then Riches will come in the last age.
41. Four lines equally distant in the side of the mount of the thumb, towards the Arm or Wrist, ettending themselves towards the most eminent parts of that mount, it is a signe of Honour and Riches in the first age, a Star there, Idem. 42. If the foresaid lines are near the juncture of the thumb, the for∣mer good fortune will come in the second age. 43. If the foresaid lines are near the nail of the thumb, then the said Honour and Riches come in old age. 44. Several lines in the wrist, cutting themselves in a due propor∣tionate distance, like dice, or che∣querwork promise Goods and Riches in old age. 45. A Star, or Triangle in the wrist, well form'd and dispos'd, de∣notes Riches in old age. 46. Four lines in the wrist cross the arm, the two superiour next the hand being larger then the other in∣feriour, the inferiour next the arme being subtill and small, they promise Substance, and Copious Riches, to
midle age, but after midle age ex∣pect a Diminution of Riches, and de∣bility of strength. 47. The two inferiour lines, if they are large and well formed, and the two superiour be small and slen∣der, they denote eighty years of age, and that in the first and second age the person shall experience poverty, after that Augmentation of estate. 48. If the first line be grosse, and the second slender, the third again, grosse and full, and the fourth subtil and small, In the first age is promi∣sed Fortitude and Riches, and in the second age a deminution of both, and so likewise of the other be they, full, or small alwayes ob∣serving that the grosse and full lines, signifie good and increase, and the small, Diminution and decrease of good fortune, and every line in the wrist represents the time of twenty years. 49. If the first line in the wrist be discontinued and crooked, and the rest strait and right, debillity, and e∣genity is fignified in the first age, and the remainder prosperous and happy.
50. If Characters like angles be found in the wrist, or between the lines, they denote debillity of Life and Goods, and that the person shall be laborious without honour, of mean wit and ful of vice. 51. A Shield, Triangle, or spe∣rical form in the mount of the In∣dex, well formed and conditioned, if his Condition was never so poor from Infancy to the end of youth, yet he shall be opulent and Rich. 52. A. B. C. or D. In the mount of the little finger evil co∣loured, they denounce poverty to midle age, and afterwards riches, to the end of life. 53. The Mensal line much branchy, and the branches tending towards the superiour part of the hand, they attest an affluence of all things, and the more the branches are extended, the more in old age Riches shall abound, but if they cease their extention, the abundance of Riches shall cease. 54 Slender branches in the end of the Mensall-line, verging towards the superiour part of the hand being
well coloured they signify a restau∣ration of goods in the second age of life. 55. The Mensal-line sorked in the ends, intimates the person to sustain a laborious life, even untill twenty years of age, afterwards his sorrrows ceasing, he shall exprie∣ence, much increase of good fortune. 56. The triangle flexed, and higher then the angle of life, it de∣notes poverty and debillity of life, yet in old age, he shall be delivered from his penury. 57. Branches passing from the line of life, transiting the triangle, also cutting the natural line, after adversity, prosperity shall succeed. 58. Crosses or stars in the mount of the hand denote the acquisition of riches with great labour, but in old age with honour. 59. All marks upon the mount of Jupiter, which is the root of the fore-finger, (except like ladders or grid-irons) signifie Ecclesiastical pre∣ferment and benefit by Ecclesiastical persons. 60. Two lines crosse the mount
of Mercury, the person is fortunate. 61. Two Stars, or Crosses, or little lines like minnum's at the root of the Ring-finger on the mount, promise wealth by womens means. 62. Two lines deep, and straight, Crossing the first joynt of the Ring-finger plainly and certainly discovers much riches by wives. 63. The Letter B. in the tri∣angle promiseth Riches, and famili∣arity with Princes. 64. A Star upon the mount of Jupiter, or the Sun promiseth Digni∣ty, Princely Regency, or a Crown. 65. A Line from the root of the little finger, to the second or third joynt, of good and equal proportion and the mount well proportionated, and not afflicted, promiseth prefer∣ment, and Magistracy, to the per∣son. 66. Many short, and even, cut∣ting transverse, the midle Natural line, or the Hepatika, that person is put upon much business, and design∣ed to places of Magistracy and Ho∣nour. 67. Many small and clear lines
in the finger of Mercury, the person is addicted to Musick, and if he practice it, he grows rich thereby, e∣specially if he have other good marks in his hand; these lines also signify one of a close mind, & secret Spirit. 68. The mount of the thumb be∣ing full of little rimularies or clests, signifies Faelicity and good Fortune in Cattel. 69. In the figure before going, observe the mount of the thumb, and those many grosse, short and lit∣tle lines within the Circle; This is the Character of an ungrateful per∣son, and one that will borrow, or take all you will give him, but never give you thanks, or pay. The following Aphorismes, and Hands shall demonstrate po∣verty, losse and universal mis∣fortune, by Imprisonment, and many other wayes. 1 All Mark like a ladder de∣painted in the mount of the fore-finger, signifies a man poor,
suffering losse and dammage. 2. The vital line short, sending branches below notes poverty with ill fortune, and to be deceived by his own Servants and Strangers. 3. The Mensal line sending hairy branches towards the table, denotes losse, misery, and ill for∣tune. 4. The Natural line touching in circular manner the mensal de∣monstrateth great losses, and sad mis∣fortunes. 5. The mensal line naked with∣out branches, and touching the root of the index, prognosticateth pover∣ty, losses, shipwrack of fortune, and calamities. 6. A Semi-circle gross in the bottom of the Annular finger, dis∣covers an unhappy man, and of e∣vil mind, and resolution. 7. The fingers, standing at a distance, and much disperst, notes poverty, misery, and confident loqua∣city, as is manifest in the generality of beggers. 8. Many little lines on the mount of the middle finger, and
more then any other place, especi∣ally the line of Saturn descending from the wrist to them, denotes the man alwayes conversant in continu∣all labours, sorrows and troubles, and opprest with poverty, if it hap to Princes it hath the same fignification for many Princes having the mount of Saturn conglomecated with many lines, have been expulsed their prin∣cipallities, and possessions, and this is chiefly to be understood of Satur∣nine infortunate persons. 9. The Mensal closing and ma∣king an angle with the natural line, denotes a deminution of the goods of Fortune, as oft hath been experi∣enced. 10. Many little lines interseca∣ted in the mount of the thumb, be∣ing not straight, nor perpendicular, in∣dicates a man suffering many things for riches. 11. Four marks or Fossulaes, like puncts in the palm of the hand, being blackish, prenote tribulati∣ons, and poverty. 12. Certain crooked uneven lines in the mount of the hand, near the
natural line, and a certain line sepe∣rating from those lines towards the wrist, signifie a man alwayes a bor∣rower, never intending to pay, but ever remain a misserable debter. 13 A certain oblique crooked line in the midle finger, declares a perdition and losse of all the donati∣ons of fortune, as also of honour and riches. 14. A triangle in the first joynt of the midle finger threatens detriment, and the highest of mis∣fortune. 15. A line semi-circle, and gross extending from the root of the ring-finger to the midle of the same, no∣teth the person to abound in debts, of evill quallities, and unhappy, and of most malignant Spirit, and if such a line be found under the root upon the mount of the same finger, and the mount be raised and well con∣ditioned, it shews a man able to shun the aforesaid evils, by his own diligence and industry, the same may be said of any the other fingers, if the like Characters be there found. 16. A line in the beginning of
the vital line extending towards the concavity of the hand, threatens po∣verty and much ill fortune. 17. The Rascett a oblique dis∣continued, and intersected, attesteth a miserable vagabond. 18. Lines intersected like a grid∣iron, in the mount of the index, de∣noteth misery. 19. The fingers grosse and short with great joynts promise misery, and ill fortune, and he that hath the last joynts thick and everst turning backwards, such a one though he were rich, yet in succession of time, he shall become poor and needy. 20. The table-line directed to, and ending in the root of the midle singer, it signifies want, ignomy and shame. 21. The Mensal line divided by certain little lines, signifies the losse of goods, by reason of enemies, but if those little lines transit the men∣sal, and passe over it, then this pre∣judice by enemies is now in act∣ing, or hath lately been; (Note) that this table-line ought to be pro∣found of good appearance, free from
crosses, and well coloured, being so, it signifies good, but being other∣wise, the contrary; We are to note that the antient Fathers, as also the Modern Writers fully agree that the table line hath the signification of enemies, and so the Mensal line and the quadrangle, are the ostensive marks of enmity. 22. The Natural line passing the concavity of the hand, denoteth some hardship; and a careful labori∣ous life. 23. The nails plain and pale, testi∣fie misfortune. 24 The letter E. in the triangle of Mars, notes adversityes, and ex∣perience of many evils. 25. A crosse in the quadrangle, being of evil disposition and colour, crooked, winding, wrinkled, and un∣equall in form, is a very bad signe. 26, Branches in the end of the vital line verging towards the wrist, threatens poverty and misfortune, especially in old age. 27. Fleshy nodes, or risings in the skin, suffused on the root of the index finger unto the second joynt,
or about the midle of the finger, sig∣nifie inordinate labour, continued painfulness and adversity of body, e∣very one of these joynts being unfor∣tunately marked, signifie misfortune, according to the signification of the Planets, to whom these mounts are appropriated. 28. The line of the Sun, obli∣que and ill posited by reason of the essentiality of place, and that it be contexed, and obsessed with other lines, it denotes misfortune with Princes; and therefore they want the presence, and conversation of Princes, who have such a line, they are not good for Courtiers. 29. Such a line crossing the Men∣sal, and stretching over the mount of the Annuler unto the root there∣of, denotes the infortune of enemies, as also defamation and misfortune with Princes. 30. The line of the Sun is of greater vigour and efficacy than the other lines cutting it, therefore it being most conspicuous, denotes de∣liverance from misfortunes, but ob∣serve how many lines crosse the So∣lar
line so many bitter enemies they are, greater or lesse portended, ac∣cording to the present magnitude, and parvity of the lines; some are of opinion that when this line is cut or broak off and discontinued, and no branches cut or intersecate the same, that such a one will shun the presence of his Prince, as apprehend∣ing his Life in danger, and the more he fears and is in danger, the more pale the lines are in colour. 31. A Scale, or steps like a lad∣der in the mount of the index, if there be hollows and Scissures an∣nexed, with many transverse lines, this argueth Dammages, Persecu∣tions and snares of great Princes. 32. Four or five lines cutting the table line against the mount of the midle finger, denote labours, anxietyes, and troubles by Princes or Great Men, and losse of Sub∣stance. 33. More lines in the mount of Saturn then else where, threatens Losses, Labours, and Inconvenien∣cies. 34. Fingers thick at the joynts
and small elsewhere, denote a lasci∣vious person, and one that useth all means to get in debt, but never cares to come out of it. 35. The via lectea, or a line ex∣tending from the wrist to the root of the little finger, marked and cut with cross lines, prognosticateth, Hurt, Loss, Dammage and Misfor∣tune by women, and their means. 36. The mount of Venus, emi∣nent and swelling, soft and tender, beset or crossed with many lines, chequer-like, argueth much evil to a man, by reason of women in re∣ference to his House and Family. 37. A semi-circle line in the tri∣angle, near the supream angle, whose hornes verge towards the fingers, note troubles, and disturbance about House and Family. 38. Many lines extended from the mensal line, to the root of the midle finger, shews Troubles, Sor∣rows, and Afflictions, he which hath such lines oft sustains Captivity, Im∣prisonment and Wounds; so many lines as passe through from the line of life to the root of the finger, so
many times the person shall be put in prison, but if they go not quite through, the party may be arrested, and in danger of Prison, yet not be put in Prison. 39. Lines from the hollow of the hand cutting the Table-line, and extending beyond the juncture of the midle finger, were he Generall, Prince or Emperour of the whole World he would dye in bonds. 41. The mount of Saturn depres∣sed, pale, shews the party so unfor∣tunate, that he hardly scapes a pri∣son under-ground, a Dungeon. 40. The line of Saturn from the wrist, transiting the mount of Sa∣turn, touching the root of the midle finger, threatens Imprisonment, and usually in a Tower, or Ruine; Stars, Crosses or ill marks upon this mount of Saturn, signifie the same. 41. Certain little lines by rowes, ascending from the wrist over the mount of Venue to the root of the thumb, signifie the Party to be spoy∣led, Robbed, Taken or Banished by his Kindred, Neighbours or near Ac∣quaintance.
42. An oblique line, discontin∣ued, and cutting the triangle, denote a person of a blockish Condition, obtuce wit, and obnoxious to Im∣prisonment. 43. Two lines extending from the wrist to the root of the little fin∣ger, bespeak a man, a Vagabond, Servil, and subject to great Capti∣vity. 44. Observe how many lines cut and crosse the table-line, over against the mount of the midle fin∣ger, so many times will he be inju∣red, Stopt or Robbed by Hy-way∣men, or Murtherers. 45. A line, grosse in the midle like a hole or holes, pitted, from the first joynt of the little finger to the second, denotes a thief, and that shall suffer punishment by the same. 46. A hole or dent in the midle of the natural line, describes a thief. 47. A certain crooked obscure line in the root of the little finger, declares a vitious person if it extend far towards the midle of the hand, it denotes a thief, or one that shall suffer cause of suspition of theft.
48. Right lines between the first and second joynt of the fore finger, look how many lines are there, so many wounds on the head the per∣son receives. 49. Two lines transversing up∣on the mount of the thumb, that party will be unfortunate, having great strong and powerful enemies. 50. Crooked lines in the second joynt of the Ring-finger, signifies a wound, or bite by a horse. 51. The table line joyned to the midle natural line, near the supream angle, making an angle therewith, threatens so great misfortune that the person shall be weary of his life, and wish he had never been born. 52. Two lines betwixt the first and second joynt of the thumb, sig∣nifies the person to be given to play, and shall incur great danger, dam∣mage and peril thereby. 53. More lines in the finger of Saturn then elsewhere signifies po∣verty, wrath and lasting anger. 54. The finger of Saturn fuller of lines then others, denots a great pas∣sion and imperfection of the nervs, inclination to the palsy.
palmistry hand Figures, In all their Characters, de∣note Poverty, Want, and ill fortune.
palmistry hand
ALL Persons by a certain Na∣tural inclination, greatly de∣sire to know the length, and period of their lives; therefore shall this in the next place be the subject of our discourse, for if the life of a per∣son appear by the hand to be short; Its in vain for the Chyromancer, farther to examine as concerning his State, future Condition, Ingenu∣ity, Manners, Preferment or the like, or of any thing tending to a long life, that cannot be accomplished in a short, and indeed this ought to be the first observation we make in the Method of judgement. But before we come to the par∣ticular demonstration of the signes of long or short life, its necessary to propose these eight following gene∣ral rules. First, When it haps that the vital line, or line of life, be disjoyn'd or discontinued, and that discontinua∣tion of the branches, extend towards the mount of the thumb, and there desist or end, it sheweth the period or term of life there to end, accor∣ding
to the dimensions of the hand, in the measure of time before trea∣ted of, although the Saturnine line be continued, and many other good marks appear in the hand. Secondly, When the line of Sa∣turn suffers a fraction, and is broken off in the hollow of the hand, be∣fore it touch the natural line, and there appear branches in or near the Natural line, its alwayes a fignifica∣tion of eminent peril of death, by reason of some infirmity, or Acro∣nick distemper, and it is a receau'd o∣pinion that circular figures in the Natural Line, intimate murther, yet there be very few, that well, or any whit understand this position. Thirdly, Its to be noted that the Saturnine line most commonly sup∣plyes the place of the vital line, prin∣cipally when it is bowed and reflex∣ed towards the superiour part of the wrist, above the mount of the thumb; and the Natural line ap∣peareth in or against the place of that fraction, inclining towards the Sa∣turnine line, and when the Saturnine line by circumflexion which it
makes about the mount, inclines to∣wards the inferiour part of the wrist, it signifies the longer life. Fourthly, It is to be noted that a∣bout the roots of the fingers, are those lines and Characters that de∣note hurts and wounds in the whole body, as those in the root of the In∣dex or forefinger, shew hurts or wounds on the head, on the Midle finger, on the breast, on the Ring-fin∣ger, wounds and hurts about the reynes, on the Auricular or little-fin∣ger those wounds that may hap to the Arms, Hands, Leggs and Feet, the parts of the body are to be ob∣served, according to the position of the Characters before named, as they incline to one part more then another, as those marks about the forefinger, if they appear about the midle of the root, of the finger, then they shew wounds on the head, to∣wards the hinder part, the Occiput; If they appear on the lower part of the mount towards the midle finger, then they denote wounds towards the forehead, or neck, and by so much as they incline nearer the midle
finger, by so much they shew wounds nearer the shoulder, that have been, or will be, those Chara∣cters as shew wounds on the breast, are the lines on the root of the midle finger, and if they incline too, the anterior part next the fore-finger, then they denote wounds on the breast, if on the midle of the mount, then on the back, or back-part, or sides between the back and breast, as their position is from the midst of the root towards the ring-finger in like manner are we to judge of those that appear on the ring-finger, and from the midle of the root to the out side towards the Auricular or lit∣tle finger, these denote usually infirmities or hurt in the Genitalls, and those which are near the root of the little finger, signifie wounds on the thighs or hipps, and those on the midle of the little finger signifie wounds, or hurts on the feet, and the nearer to the lower part of the root, or outside of the hand, the more near to the lower part of the Foot, or Toes, Knees, or Ancles which are the lower part of the thighs, and leggs.
Fifthly, Those lines figurated in the vital line, as they constitute di∣vers forms, so they have different significations, when they make a long form, and are not like trenches, but appear as a formal line so far as they go, these signifie wounds by Iron, if circular or semicircular, then wounds are generally signified, if like trenches in the vital line, they signifie blows or hurts by some other means, but lesse perilous, as to the matter of life, but if they appear, not square or long, but like pits, or holes, and look withal red, then they signifie blows, or wounds in the head or death. Sixthly, Many are mistaken in the terms of Tumida, or swelling, and Grossa, or broad belonging to the lines, supposing these terms to signify one and the same thing, when as they much differ in their significati∣on, a line is said to be grosse when it is deep, and when it keeps the same latitude in the superficies, as it hath in its profundity, but a line is said to be tumid or swelling, which hath somewhat of depth, and spreads in
the superficies, and is dilated to∣wards the palm, the natural line pos∣sibly may be found tumid in the be∣ginning and end, and hath in either, in a manner the same signification, but if it be tumid in the beginning, it hath the more malevolent signifi∣cation, it signifies blood, and that the party shal desperately wound others, but when in this tumiddity there appear little trenches, somewhat circular and of evil appearance, this signifies murther, and the more of these marks, the more murthers are fignified; The same evil is signified when the supream angle is some∣what disjoyn'd or separate, and that space seems to be Caellous with cer∣tain little Fossulaes, or trenches, of which let every one beware, Seventhly, We are to understand, that as oft, and wheresoever we find the principal lines Bifurcated, they commonly shew duplicity of heart & mind, and chiefly according to the signification and nature of those lines yet this hath not alwayes its signification, for whensoever the vi∣tal line is forked in the beginning,
it signifies Honesty, Justice, and Fi∣delity, the reason is, because it shews a man Callid Astute, and secret in his carriage; but when the vital line is forked in the end, it is not much commended by the Masters of this Science, the Reason is because, in the beginning of the vital line, the first and second age of man are de∣monstrated, in which times the power and virtue of natural heat a∣bounds, by which means, they are strong, and will not permit them∣selves to be occupied in sordid and vile actions, because the vigour and virtue of natural heat predominates, humidity, and frigidity which are the causes of infirm, weak actions, and instability in youth, which vigor is not retain'd in age, from whence it comes, that they that have the vi∣tal line forked in the end; in youth, are rendred unfaithful, unstable, and not to be trusted as serious friends, for this Bifurcation at the end, de∣notes much frigidity, which is onely proper for age, therefore in age this betokens good, because it denotes a refrenation from rash actions, and
the temper most proper for age. Eightly, The Liver line in any manner forked at the ends, signifies alwayes evil, because it denotes, an evil Complexion, and an impotency of Natural heat, from whence pro∣ceeds malignity, and double decep∣tious dealing. Ninthly, The Natural line for∣ked towards the percussion of the hand, fignifies alwayes evil, and if it be not by little branches united to the vitall line in the supream angle, it implies a laborious, and a trouble∣some life. Tenthly, And lastly, we are to re∣member & heed, that whensover we observe any line that indicates long or short life, we are to have recourse to the vital line, according to which proportion, comparatively the line is to be judged, as we have taught in the rules of mensuration, thus for in generall.
In the next place, as all men have a desire, and propensity, (by Natural inclination) to know the period of their lives, whe∣ther long or short life, for if short life appear, in vain is it for the Artist to make any pro∣ceed in the State, Condition, Manners, and particulars of the person, therefore we shall insist on these particulars and first of long life. 1. THe Line of Life extend∣ing to the wrist, con∣tinued, and of Equall Latitude de∣cently Broad, Deep, and Equal, and well coloured, notes a long life. 2. If the line of the brain, of Sence, of the Head, and midle natu∣ral Line (which are all one) as are declared in my first Vollumn of Pal∣mistry be of good and equal latitude; profundity, well articulated, exten∣ded to the top of the mount of the Moon, or Percussion of the hand and not beyond, this promiseth
long life, and giveth strength, and audacity, if this natural line, in the superiour part constitute a right an∣gle, or near unto a right angle, it shews long life, but if it make an a∣cute angle with the line of life, the person shall be of a crafty, fearful, and wavering unconstant Nature. 3. The Line of the Liver suffici∣ently long that is to say, extending to the midle of the natural line, deep, large, continued and well co∣loured, it denotes a goodness of the liver, and of Digestion, and so conse∣quently long life, if the basis of the triangle (which this line makes, be right and large and in the midle a little divided with certain small Ri∣mulaes, and of good colour it attest∣eth a good disposition and long life. 4. The Right Angle straight, well appearing and of good colour denoteth goodness of the heart and blood, strong, vigor, and vitals, and so by on sequence long life. 5. The left angle right, or near thereunto, shews a good constituti∣on together with long life. 6. The hands big and well pro∣portioned
in every part, according to quantity and quallity, argue a good Complexion of humours, and so consequently length of life. 7. The hands fleshly, and con∣tracted with a good solidity, demon∣strate long life. 8. If in the midle space, be∣tween the lines of the triangle there be a plain and smooth place, and well coloured, it manifests a good, and sound complexion, and conse∣quently length of life. 9. The Line of Saturn straight, not intersected, and joyn'd to the midle natural line against the finger of Sa∣turn, or extending it self near there∣unto, the triangle it makes, keeping its due proportion, dictats a long life. 10. The Table of the hand con∣stituted with equal space, indicates a good complexion, and so conse∣quently a long life. 11. A certain line passing from the wrist through the concave of the hand, toward the mount of Mercury, (called by some Via Lactea) continu∣ed, and converse with the Natural line, witnesseth a good constitution,
with agility of mind, and so length of dayes. 12. The Mensal line continued sufficiently long, Deep, Broad and Strait, signifies a nature sound, of good digestion, a right proportion of the Radicals, and vitals, and conse∣quently long life; It is to be obser∣ved that the term or end of this table line is perfected two wayes, some say if it end against the midle of the mount of the midle finger, diame∣trically, its of the best signification, others, that if it extend or touch the beginning of the mount of the In∣dex, especially if it incline towards the root thereof, its of special signi∣fication, but either of these opinions are true, and the termination or ending good, so the line be of equall form, and well coloured. 13. The space of the wrist clear, and well coloured, signifies a good complexion, and by consequence, length of life. 14. The Tubercle, or mount of the thumb, decently round, fair and well coloured, with a good com∣plexion, confirm a long life, the
same when all the mounts of the hand and fingers are of a decent e∣minency, and well proportioned, they indicate long life. 15. The triangle Aequilaterally and well proportioned, if it be of clear, fair lines and well proportio∣nated, it is a signe of equality of humours good temperament, and so consequently long life. 16. The Sister of the line of life, arising from the supream angle, pas∣sing by the mount of the thumb, and extending near so far as the wrist of the hand or there abouts, it is a sign of long life and luxurie. 17. Corvus is of opinion that when the natural line passeth the mount of the hand, it argueth long life with want, poverty and evil com∣plexion of humours, for nature is sig∣nified to be superfluous herein. 18. Few lines in the mount of Venus, or the thumb, shew a rarity of infirmities health of parts, and consequently long life. 19. The Table line casting two or more branches to the midle of the index and line of life, argues long life.
20. Teeth big, thick, or long argueth long life, no principal cause impediating, for amongst the Phisi∣ognomists there is not a signe of such excellency and valour, as that which concludeth simply without any o∣ther additional Significations, be∣cause it shews the specifical and oc∣cult virtue to be well fixed, and also representing the vivacity and strength of the radical moisture, and the vitallity of the Natural Spirits; as also the strength of spermatical Spirits from the first of Generation. It oft-times is the practise of igno∣rant illiterate people to judge of the length of life, without the concor∣dency of causes, and comparing one to another, as likewise it is an errour in them that pretend to know the period of life by any other way or means, then by those grounds and rules of mensuration before in this work propos'd the common way that Tricassus, Cocles, and others have u∣sed refer to the common ages of man seventy years, beyond which they give no grounds or rules of judging, when as we see by experi∣ence
that many persons live to eighty, ninety or a hundred years, which by our Rules of Mensuration may be observed upon the line of Life, many who might happily pro∣tract their dayes to a great age by intemperancy, anticipate the same, and through indiscretion, abreviate and shorten that sweet time which otherwise they might comfortably enjoy, would they with reason resist their natural inclinations, therefore we ought not rashly, and unadvisedly judge the time of life, because the Almighty hath determined the pe∣riod, beyond which a man cannot passe, as he hath likewise delineated in the hand as may plainly be read, but it is no where said, that a man may not abreviate by anticipation, the time of his life if he resist not the exorbitant inclinations of Nature, wherefore in judging of Life or Death, let our reason, carefully dis∣cern, between a man of a temperate and intemperate life. 21. Fair Lines in the root of the Index or forefinger, arising from the root of the finger over the
mount,Ecclesi∣astical prefer∣ments. or stretching towards the root of the finger, from the supream an∣gle, declares long life, Ecclesiastical or Law-Preferments. 22. Two or three little lines from the root of the fore-finger, or lines paralel, or a perfect crosse, or a Star, or a round sperical figure, all argue long life and Ecclesiastical pre∣ferments, to prelacy or the like. 23. A Star without-side the in∣dex-finger discovers a man to be lux∣urious,Fortune by wo∣men. yet shall have good fortune by women, and come to great Ho∣nour and Riches by them, and long life. 24. The Letter C. or a semi∣circle on the mount of Jupiter pro∣miseth long life and good fortune, and riches by women. 25. Certain little lines parralel to each other on the mount of the Annular, or Ring-finger, or little lines like Crosses, or Stars, promise Riches and good Fortune by wo∣men. 26. Two lines deep and straight on the first joynt of the Ring-finger doth most certainly promise much wealth by wives.
27. Four lines going over the wrist transverse and straight,Of such that shall receive Inheri∣tances by the death of others, signifie Honour, Riches, and Inheritance by the death of others. 28. If there appear on the hand near the wrist a triangle, or two, with Stars or lines, and make an accute angle, these signifie long life, and great Inheritance from or by the dead, and promise in age, Honour, Riches, and a Quiet life, and the more good, the more Angles, Lines, and Stars are found therein. 29. Two lines from the first joynt of the thumb, towards the line of life, these promise great Inheri∣tance by succession from the dead, but if there be but one line, then small Inheritance is signified, but the more in number they are, and of good appearance the more, the more greater good they signifie, yet not without contentions, law-suites, and controversies. 30. A star in any part of the tri∣angle promiseth the party to gain in∣heritance of the dead, and the more Stars the oftner, as in the figure fol∣lowing.
31. The Sister of the Naturall Line (as in the figure following) clear, and well appeasing, signifies inheritance to come, how much the better the line appears, so much the greater the inheritance. 32. Various lines, chequer-wise appearing in the wrist, at a formall distance, prenuntiate Inheritance to come. 32. A Star or triangle in the wrist of the hand, presages future Inheri∣tance but not till old age, or there a∣bouts. 33. Lines extending themselves from the root of the thumb,Of the quantity of Wives or Hus∣bands. over the mount thereof, so many as there are in the hand of a man, so many Wives, or Women, as Wives; he shall have; the same in a woman, so many husbands, or lovers-like hus∣bands she shall have, if these lines be right extended and fair, so many Wives, or Husbands, the person shall be married unto; but if one line be greater then the rest, then the Man shall have one Wife, or the Woman one Husband, greater in Riches and Dignity then the rest.
34. As many lines as cut the first joynt of the Ring-finger, (as ap∣pears in the following figure) so many Husbands or Wives shall the party have. 35.Friends. Lines on the mount of the hand at the end of the Natural line, (as in the following fi∣gure) so many lines as there are, so many friends it promiseth, of Stran∣gers. 36. But the like lines inclining towards the wrist, declares so many Friends of the same Nation and Country. 37.Son. Certain little lines cutting the line of life, being well coloured, so many as there be, so many sons they promise, both in the hand of man or woman. 38. A certain line, Right,Chastity. Sub∣till, and well Coloured, tending from the mensal line to the root of the little finger, noteth in a woman vir∣ginity, or chastity. 39. A nt equal line transiting the mensal line from the natural, to∣wards the auricular finger (as in the following hand,) denotes Virginity,
and Chastity, and the grosser, and more equal the line is, the better signification it hath. 40. That Woman who hath the principall lines strong,Easy Di∣livery. keeping a due proportion, and proper terms, all the lines being straight and fair, these presage Safe, Quick, and Easy deli∣verance in child-bed. 41. The palm of the hand, long and broad, shews facillity in Child∣bearing. 42. The triangle, straight and well disposed in the hand of a wo∣man, indicates to her, ease and speed in delivery. 43. A Round sperical mark,Fidelity. or a triangle in the mount of Jupiter denotes Wisdome and fidelity. 44 The letter C. on the mount of Venus denotes a person faithful and true. 45. The vitall line straight, sub∣till and well coloured especially to∣wards the supream Angle, noteth a man of sound Councel, of a subtill intellect and faithful. 46. The Right Angle straight and well appearing, argues a good com∣plexion,
good manners, and conse∣quently fidelity. 47. Lines branching like palm branches in the beginning of the na∣tural line, verging upwards, indicate fidelity. 48. The table line continued sufficiently long, deep, broad, and straight, denotes a good complexion, good nature, and by consequence fidelity. 49. The Quadrangle right, and well coloured, promiseth rectitude and fidelity. 50. Two lines, straight, and e∣quidistant in every juncture of the fingers, except the thumb, signifies the person, man or woman, faithful, and of much truth.
palmistry hand This Hand Contains all the Significa∣tions Of the foregoing Aphorismes.
Characters and Marks in the hand that signifie short Life, Lust, Concupiscence whoredom, and many other Quallifications, be∣hold the Figure following. 1. THe Natural line not passing the Diameter or midle of the mount of the midle finger, sig∣nifies the party to dye in youth. 2. The midle Natural line, pale of colour, subtil and small, argueth debillity and weakness of the brain, and complexion, and so consequent∣ly, short life. 3. A certain little Crosse in the end of the midle natural line, oppo∣site to the midle of the midle finger, or the Ring-finger, signifieth death within a year, or there abouts. 4. A sperical figure like a round (O) or a figure like a Y. near the vitall line, discovereth many weak∣nesses and infirmities if it be in the superiour part, i. e. In the begin∣ning
of the line, it sheweth them past, if in the inferiour part, it no∣teth infirmities to come, and death nearly approaching, if in the midle of the vital line, it discovereth the par∣ty to be afflicted with present debil∣lities, and infirmities. 5. The midle Natural line tran∣siting the mount of the hand, implies brevity of life, and the party to be much afflicted with Rhume in the Head, and the more it descendeth to the inferiour part of the hand, i. e. the outside of the hand, the more speedy death it signifies, but from a wound, 6. The Mensal line making an angle with the Natural line, indicates a short Life. 7. The shortnesse of the Vital Line indicates a short Life, unlesse there be a good appearance of the Sister of the Line of Life, or any o∣ther significant Line. 8. An imperfect triangle in the hand not appearing alike in any part, affirms shortness of life, especially if the lines be small, fracted, or hairy. 9. The Table, Line bearing an
unequal distance from the Natural Line, discovereth an evil, and bad complexion in the party, and con∣sequently short life. 10. If in the midle space be∣tween the triangle Lines, there be not a comly plaineness but of evil aspect and colour, it demoteth a de∣fect of heat, and so consequently bre∣vity of life. 11. The mensal line not keep∣ing a trine proportion, being evil proportioned and evil coloured, fracted, or hairy, is a signe of short Life. 12. The Hepatick or Liverline, not observing a trine proportion, and being intersected with many little, small lines is a signe of short life. 13. The teeth rare and small, de∣note brevity of life. 14. The Line of life continued, broad, deep, and well coloured to the midle, or more, or less, shews health to that time, according to the usual proportionate time in the fore∣going mensuration. 15. Let what signes of Death will be in the hand, if the triangle
be found equilateral and well pro∣portioned, there is less danger. 16. The Sister of any line being directly against the fraction of any line, much abateth the malice, and the evil signified thereby. 17. Two Sisters of the line of life, on both sides a fraction in the line of life, do consolidate the line, and signifie the less prejudice. 18. It is not to be forgotten that the position of the mensal or table line, in its continuation, dis∣continuation, obliquity, punctation and fraction is the Radix, and signal of sicknesses and imperfecti∣ons. 19. A figure like a ring-worm in the mount of the thumb, indicates much sickness if not death. 20. A grosse line coming from under the thumb, from the outside of the hand, cutting the Vitall and Natural line in the manner of a semi-circle, threatens untimely and suddain death, by intoxication, poy∣son or the like. 21 The Vital Line, inter∣rupted,
and reflexed towards the mount of Venus, noteth a mortall palmistry hand infirmity, but if it have branches, it is the better, behold the figure.
These following Aphorismes, and answerable Characters in the figure fore going in the hands of women, denote Lust, and commonly whoredom. 22. A Line grosse, and crook∣ed from the root of the little finger to the Mensal, Denotes a person of light behaviour, and most commonly a Whore. 23. Lines Chequer-wise in the mount near the wrist of the right or left hand, denotes women superla∣tively lustful, with infinite appeten∣cy and desire to love the company of men, and so lustful as to delight in nothing more then variety; and not satisfied in Stuprating, and prostitu∣ting themselves, but chiefly if these be of various form and colour. 24. Little red puncts or points in the root of the little finger, clear∣ly denote Whoredom and Baudery, and the more they are, the more
unsatiableness is signified. 25. A Crosse in the mount of the hand, near the wrist, and the Vi∣tal Line, whose branches being inter∣sected by an other line, declare the most of wickedness in a woman, she is superlative in Whoredom. 26. A thick, dark redness of the skin in the face, not clear implieth great Luxury, and argueth a woman to be given to Gluttony and drink, and the more it is of this nature, the more she is Luxurious. 27. The Via Lactea, or cingulum veneris in the hand of a woman, de∣notes her venerial. 28. The table line forked at the end towards the fore finger in a wo∣man, such is, or will be a Cuckquean or Lemmon. 29. The Natural line forked in the end towards the Liver-line, de∣notes a light person. 30. The Vital Line, in the supe∣riour part red and crooked, signifie Luxury. 31. The Sister of the Vital Line, upon the mount of the thumb, long and reddish, is the signal, of one that is Whorish.
32. The mount of Venus high and elevated with a multitude of Crosse irregular lines, is a signe of Lightness. 33. The table line Small, and Forked, and the mount of Jupiter, eminently rising, in the root of which are little marks like pricks, differen∣ced apart, usually signifie a man to have more then one wife, and a Wo∣man to have more then one husband. 34. A Little crosse between the first and second joynt of the fore-fin∣ger, denotes great strength and de∣sire to Luxury, and the man to be a Mastuprator. 35. Two or three Stars or more, upon the mount of the thumb near the arm, denote defamations, and accusations, by reason of women, let such be the more wary of their company. 36. The line called Via Lactea, in both hands, conspicuous and plain, is a very great signe of effemi∣nacy. 37. The tubercle, or mount of the thumb, craticulated like a grid∣iron, or chequer-work signifies, that
person shall bring himself to poverty and want, the same if the like figures be upon the mount of the little fin∣ger. 38. A line extended from the wrist over the palm of the hand, to∣wards the little finger, called by the Arabians Via Lactea crost, or cut with many lines, or with one as a crosse, apertly shews, great dam∣mages, losses, ruines, in comodities and ill fortune by means of Women, and imprisonment, as hath been too often experienced.Inprison∣ment. 39. Black spots in the nails of∣tentimes denote Imprisonment, as also declare great Cares, Vexations, Affronts and Disdain. 40. A star, or grid-iron on the root of the finger of Saturn, threa∣tens servitude, and Captivity. 41. The Line of Saturn, passing from the wrist quite over the hand, to the root of the finger of Saturn, and be crossed by other lines, it threatens Auxieties, Flights, Perse∣cution, Imprisonment, and Accusae∣tions, and finally whatever can con∣duce to a wretched, miserable life.
42.Theft. A Sperical figure in the end of the thumb near the nail, (as in the former figure,) denoteth the person to be a Thief and threatens Hanging. 43.Difficul∣ty in Child-bearing. The table line ending be∣tween the midle finger and the fore∣finger in the hand of a Woman, sig∣nifies death in Child-bed, or grie∣vous, dangerous Accidents. 44. A grosse line or lines be∣tween the little finger, and ring-fin∣ger, indicates great pains, and Diffi∣culty in Child-bed, but if there be any fraction in the Vital line, or that the Natural line have fracti∣ons in it, or be evil disposed, She cer∣tainly dyes in Child-bearing. 45. A Line grosse, and red, be¦tween the Index and midle finger, as in the foregoing figure presageth death in Child-bed. 46. The palm of the hand nar∣row and straight, threatens much danger in Child-bed. 47. The table line small, hairy, and intersected with lines, shews great danger in Child-bed. 48. The triangle evil formed in
the hand of a woman, with inter∣sected lines, prenuntiateth perril of death in Child-bed. 49. Ungrateful persons are above all to be avoided,Ungrate∣fulnesse. seeing ingratitude is the greatest crime, and such per∣sons are known by their hands if they have a semicircle, like a C. on the mount of the Sun, besides, this no∣teth him to be guilty of most bad qualities. 50. Many Lines small,Persidi∣ousness. scatter∣ing, or conglomorated together in the mount of the thumb, declare in∣fidelity. 51. Two Lines, circling the thumb, in the last joynt, without in∣cission, argue a perfidious person, the same if they mutually cut each o∣ther. 52. The table line crooked, and bearing an unequal distance from the Natural line, declares infideli∣ty. 53. The Supream Angle Reti∣culated net wise, acute, or seperate, prenuntiateth infidelity. 54. Lines like scales, or a grid∣iron much duplicated on the mount
of Jupiter threatens Imprisonments, and Persecutions, and most com∣monly by means of Clergy-Men, or Church Affairs. 55. Many Lines grosse, and in∣ordinate, and disorderly scattered up and down the mount of the thumb, demonstrate an ungrateful person, and one that will never be true to his Friend. This being the worst of qualities shall conclude this ill Subject. As my great Affectation, and desire is the common utillity, and Publick good, so my Study shal be principally conversant about those things which may principally conduce to the benefit of every one in their most helples condition. ANd whereas the Inclination of the body to sickness, being not timely observed, oft times brings vio∣lent sickness, and accellerates Death, especially in the Country, where the poor helpless people (for so in this sence I may call all) by their re∣motenes from, or the want of able means, are supprised with inevitable distempers, therefore I will promise
some plain Rules how every capa∣city may perceive, an approaching sickness, and so in time consult the remedy, before the distem∣per too strongly and violently invade and assault Languishing Nature. And in the second place, where∣as much detriment oten times be∣fall, both the Sick and their Friends, by reason of the Ignorance of their present condition, to the Sick, when having the Symptoms of Death up∣on them, being not known by their Friends, are oft flattered into a care∣less, hopeless expectation of longer Life, and so frustrated of a due pre∣paration for death; Many evil con∣sequences likewise accrue to the Friends by not observing the mortal symptomes appearing, as that they addresse themselves not rightly to the sick, and that very oft, they too long defer the setlement of the Worldly Estate, to their great pre∣judice, and discontent of the depart∣ting creature, wherefore for preven∣tion of these great inconsiderate, yet necessitated inconveniencies, I shall here propound the most, and most
usual Symptomes of approaching death, proper to any distemper affli∣cting Nature, And first, Note these Signes which follow, which being discovered in the Phisiognomy, argue an inclination to diseases, fit to be known of all, especial∣ly Physitians. ALl Physicalphisiognomists hold, that the Rheumatick distilla∣tion of the eyes, being inflamed with redness, argue much super-abounding humidity of the Brain and Flegm, and that the ample grosness of the Nostrills, argueth Dulness, Stolidity, and debillity of Sence and Reason, but when the Nose is Blewish, Wan, or of a leadish Colour, having little red specks, or veines like Fibres, in∣terwoven as it were, this argues a great Heat, and driness of the Liver, so the face Red, discovers a Hot com∣plexion, Blue, Pale, or dark in co∣lour, indicates the depth of Melan∣cholly, but if white, and a clear pa∣lish hue, denotes a cold and flegma∣tick Constitution. The Body inclined to sickness and distempers, is quickly, and timely
discerned, by observing these following Rules. As first. The colour of the Face, and body Yellowish, the Amplitude and distention of the veines, a weary, heavy, irksomeness in the sight, a dulness and unwillingness to motion and action, shew a plenitude and ful∣ness of the vessels, repleat with gross humours. Rule. 2. The Sence and Animal Spirits op∣pressed with Melancholly, Heavy, and discontented, the Face looking dull, and gastly of colour, swollen, and puffed up, a painful wringing grief in the body, after the reception of food, these Symptomes indicate obstructions. Rule. 3. The involuntary falling of tears from the eyes, the quaking of the lips and other members, the oblivi∣on of things past, the ignorant fense∣lesness of present, much heat, vehe∣ment cold, difficulty in breathing, pain of the head, if these symptomes appear in any critical time, they pre∣sage
a future conflict of Nature, a sicknesse at hand. Rule. 4. The dussines and Rhume of the eyes, the redness of the Nostrils the stretching and extention of the Mid∣rife and short Ribs without pain, difficulty of aspiration, an inflaming, and smiting pain of the head, the Nose and Face, iching pain of the Temples, presage a future, accute sickness, with efflux of blood from the Nose. Rule. 5. The sadness of the face, and dark∣ness of the countenance, straightnes of breath, head-ach, the trembling of the lower lip, the spittle much, and thin, the extention of the Na∣vel, in acute diseases, and about a critical day, argues a necessity of vo∣mit. Rule. 6. If in a critical day the hair stand up roughly after evacuation, it denotes a good Crisis. There are many other physiogno∣mical signes, which not only shew the nature and progression of the
Crisis, but also the reason of future disseases, and the disposition of the present, which are worth the study of every Artist, but too long here to insert. Next in these Cannons which fol∣low are explicated, the preg∣nant signes of approaching Death. Cannon. 1. IN this is found an approved verity amongst the most excellent Phy∣losophers, and by the most judici∣ous Physicians comprobated, that if the sight or image in the ball of the eye of the sick party, appear not as formerly, or wontedly it did, it is a certain Argument of an instant spee∣dy death. Cannon. 2. If the eyes sink into the head, hi∣ding themselves in the concavity of the holes deeper than ordinary, it is a presage of Death, unless the Pulse testifie the contary. For a noxious fume from the Cerebellum, or hinder part of the brain, penetrating the
branches of the opticks, rendreth a Chrystaline contracted hardnes, from when it is, that the eyes in a Convulsive manner are drawn in∣wards. Can. 3. If the eyes (in the sickness) be turned into a blewish azure, or red∣dish colour, it is an index of death quickly to ensue. Can. 4. When the Nose groweth sudden∣ly sharp, and is pale withall in the time of his painful fits, it denotes the danger of instant death; the writhing or depression of the Nose, signifies the same, as also the distil∣lation of a pale, yellowish water from the Nose. Can. 5. If the mouth be observed to open for Aire, as if the membranes, or Li∣gaments of the jaws were loosed, the disease being violent, prognosti∣cates Death shortly to ensue. Can. 6. If the teeth seem smaller and longer then usual, as also being rough, its a signe of a speedy end.
Can. 7. If the skin of the face, and other parts, be converted into a pale, yel∣lowish, or ashy colour, it is a bad o∣men to the sick. Can. 8. If the sick party languishing, suddenly grow worse, and after a long pale wandness, his face and cheeks come to be ruddy, it shews the patients Case to be desperate. Can. 9. If in the Height of his sicknesse, his breath stink, changing from what it was before, it is an Argument of approaching Death. Can. 10. If the sick party, in his extremity begins to Stammer and Faulter in his Speech, and cannot pronounce his words without imperfection; ex∣perience shews it to be a signe of death, in like manner if the voice change small or very hollow. Can. 11. If the spiration and breath seem to be fetcht up from the Lungs, with much difficulty and pain, being fumously grosse it is an ill omen.
Can. 12. If in the extremity of sickness the roots of the hair, and nails, and teats, and the bottom of the feet change colour into a wan blacknesse, it is an evil signe. Can. 13. If the intestines come forth at the Fundament, by reason of acide and sharp humour, death is to be feared. Can. 14. If the face and lips suddenly change into a pale earthy colour, it is a signe of Death, especially if the body be very weak. Can. 15. The Darknes of the white of the eyes or the ablation of the fight, the writhing of the eye-browes; In like manner the crooked, and wry sqin∣ting with the eyes, in acute disseases, signifies evil. Can. 16. The smalness of one eye water flowing from the eyes, & chiefly one eye, a dry bleardness of the eyes, the sight fixed, A vehement, eager o∣pening of the eyes, white pussels ap∣pearing under the eyes, all these are Mortal signes.
Can. 17. In Accute disseases, the face shi∣ning, smooth, a flux of the belly, not hungry, and inclining to sleep, are bad signes. Can. 18. Sleeping with the eye-lids open, and the eye-lids dry, is a mortall signe. Can. 19. The Exication, Inversion, and con∣traction of the ears, and the loss of hearing in accute disseases, is deadly. Can. 20. The grating of the Teeth, their colour being dark, pale and clammy, and the often cleansing them with∣out cause in accute disseases, are Ar∣guments of death. Can. 21. After sweating, to tremble, quake, or have the hair stare, in accute dis∣seases, a cold sweat, chiefly about the neck and head, is an evil signe. Can. 22. The Blackness of the tongue, stench of the mouth, crooked wri∣thing of the lip; the mouth open∣ing, without yawning, like a graine,
or small pea upon the tongue, with the desire of hot things, are Argu∣ments of death. Can. 23. The Contraction of the testicles, and yard, Arguments of Death. Can. 24. A hot vapour from the skin, with a cold breath, and the coldness of the extream parts, are Arguments of Death. Can. 25. The singultus with a yelking, fol∣lowing vomiting, or a flux of the bel∣ly, in like manner the flux of the belly much, with debility of parts; the jaundies before the seventh day, with leanness, are Arguments of ap∣proaching death.
For the benefit of my Country-men, I will here subjoyn certain pro∣per qualifications whereby e∣very man may rightly judge his own temperament, and thereby much benefit himself in the pre∣serving his health, and help himself by the means of Physick. The Signes of the Cholerick Temperament are ten. 1. THe Habit of the body hot in touch, dry, lean, hard and hairy. 2. The colour of the face yellow. 3. A Natural siccity of the mouth and tongue. 4. The Natural thrist great and frequent. 5. The Mobility, Activity and inquietude of the body. 6. The Pulse hard, swift and beating oft. 7. The spittle bitter. 8. The dreams are most of yel∣low things, of brawles, fightings, and quarrels.
9. The Urine, Subtile, thin, and yellow. 10. The Nutriment converting most to yellow Choller. The properties of a Flegmatick Constitution, are chiefly ten. 1. THe Habit of the body, cold and moist, in touch soft, fat, grosse, and not hairy. 2. A Constant natural white∣ness or wanness in the face. 3. The superfluity of mois ex∣crements, as spittle and snot. 4. The Urine white and gross. 5. The pulse weak, slow, and rare. 6. The Appetite of thirst little, seldom desiring drink. 7. The dreams most usually of white things, floods, inundations and all actions or accidents belonging to water. 8. Sleep much, and frequent. 9. A slow unapt dulness of the body to exercise. 10. The Chyle most converted into flegm.
The Signes of a Sanguine constitu∣tion in eleven particulars. 1 THe Habit of the body hot and moist in touch, fle∣shy, soft, and hairy. 2. The colour of the body fresh, sanguine and lively. 3. A natural and constant blush in the face. 4. A Plenitude, and natural swel∣ling of the veines. 5. The Pulse moist, soft and full. 6. The urine red and grosse. 7. The Spittle sweet. 8. Dreames most commonly of Red things, of Beauty, of Feasting, Dancing, Musick, and all jovial Re∣creations. 9. A Continued habit of pleasant∣ness and Affabilliy. 10. Often affecting Jests, Mirth, and Laughter. 11. The food converting most into blood.
The Signes and Symptomes of a Melancholy temperament. 1. THe Body in Touch, Cold, Dry, Hard, Leane and Smooth. 2. The Body of a Dark, Dull, Gloomy, Leaden-Colour. 3. The spittle little in quantity and sowre. 4. The urine subtil, blewish and pale. 5. Pulse little, rare, and hard. 6. The dreams often of black and terrible things, as of Spirits, Ghosts, of Infernal Apprehensions, of Choaking, Heading, or Hanging. 7. Much sorrowful, and subject to greeving. 8. Much and often oppressed with fear. 9. A Stability in Cogitations, and constancy in performance of the thing intended. 10. The Dyet increasing Melan∣cholly.
The Brain and Heart are the two Regal and Principal parts of man of which Nature renders divers Physiognomical Symp∣tomes, which be observed as fol∣loweth. Signes of a hot brain are, 1. A Natural Heat, and red∣ness in the face. 2. The sudden growth of hair. 3. The Hairs hard, crisping, or very black, and quickly growing bald. Signes of a cold brain are, 1. A Natural wan paleness in the face. 2. The slow growth of hair. 3. The hair straight, flag, thin, and oftimes yellowish. Signes of a dry brain are, 1. A Paucity of the Excrements, in the eyes, nose, eares and pallat. 2. Hair hard, and quickly bald. 3. A quick sharpness of the outward sences, and the sleep, sel∣dome, and little.
Signes of a moist brain are, 1. The superfluity of Excrements at the Eyes, Nose, ears, and pallat. 2. The Hair Soft, and long con∣tinuing. 3. A Lazy, Dull Stupidity of the outward Sences. The Symptomes of the Heart, be∣ing hot, exceeding the temperament, are, 1. A Great and frequent respira∣tion, 2. A strong, swift, and frequent pulse. 3. A large and hairy rough brest. 4. Alacrity to action. 5. Hasty and rash anger. Signes of a frigid and cold temper of the Head, Are, 1. The respiration small and rare. 2. The pulse, small, slow and rare. 3. The breast narrow and smooth, or at least covered with small and faint hairs. 4. A dulness to action. 5. Anger slow, and moderate. The Symptomes of a dry heart, Are 1. The pulse sharp and hard. 2. Anger long continuing, and implacable.
The moist heart hath these Sym∣tomes of discovery. 1. The Pulse sharp, and hard. 2. Anger quickly passing and transient. Pleasant Physiognomical Observati∣ons, from the quantity of the body. THe Body very small, signifies a man partly Ingenious, partly fit for Action, and partly Loquaci∣ous; the reason is because the Vi∣tal Spirits in a small body, are the more contracted, and therefore the more strong, and in a little Body so small is the space between the heart and the brain, that the Vital Spirit doth with much Celerity ascend, from whence it comes to pass that Nature oft-times supplies in wit, what is wanting in Body, and from hence it is that Creatures of small body are so ingenious, as the Ant, the Bee, the Spider, and the like; And Hystory informs us that many Wise, Prudent, Stout and Couragi∣ous men were of small sttature, in antient time, as Ulisses, Alexander the
Great, Horace, Aristotle, and many others, and on the other side, (for the most part) a Big and Large Sta∣ture is a signe of a Dull, Slow, and timorous person, the cause hereof appears because the Vital Spirits in a great Body, are dilated, and dispersed, and great is the distance between the heart and the brain, so that the spirits cannot easily, or without pre∣judice make their ascent, as for ex∣ample, the Crane, being a fowle of big body, and long neck, is of a Heartless, Fearful, Foolish Conditi∣on, and Ajax is reported to have been large of body, and furious, and foolishly disposed in his mind, and lastly, a body of midle Stature, that is neither over-tall, nor over-short, is a signe of mean Nature, and best composed manners. The Application of this Doctrine is rightly made, when the Physiog∣nomical Rules, and Signes, are right∣ly applied to the Inclinations, and Natural habits of men, concerning which observe this caution when you see a man suspected of any vice, or supposed to be naturally indued with
any vertue, have recourse to these rules, and behold Him, and you shall see All, or Most part of those signes of Virtue, or Vice, shall herewith con∣curre. Observe these following Rules, and you may judge of any man, according to his Intellectual, Moral, and Artifi∣cial Habits. THe Intellectual Habits, are wis∣dome and pudence, with their opposites. The Moral Habits are Virtues and Vices. The Artificial Habits, are Arts, Li∣beral, and Mechanical. And first of the Animal faculties, and Intellectual-Habits, amongst which I praemise Ingenuity, or Wit, understanding thereby (in this place) an Aptitude to apprehend any thing the fancy, moves to, which is either Theorical, Practical or Poeti∣call, according to, and after the va∣rious Disciplines unto each apper∣taining. A Good ingenuity or wit is consider∣able in General or Speciall.
THe Physiognomical Signes of a Good Genius,Signes of a good genious. (in general) are, 1. A straight erect body, rightly proportioned, neither over tall, nor short. 2. The Habit of the body mean, betwixt Fat and Lean. 3. The Flesh Naturally soft. 4. The Skin subtil; being a medi∣um betwixt, soft, smooth, and rough. 5. The Colour and Complexion of the body White, verging to a little blush of Redness. 6. The Hairs between Hard and Soft, Crisping and Straight or smooth as also between brown and yellow, and often with us blackish. 7. The Head of a mean bigness. 8. The Face mean, between fat and lean. 9. The Fore-head raised indiffer∣ent high, and not to plain. 10. The Eyes meanly big, round and clear, and of an azure, yellow shining hazel colour. 11. The Aspect milde, and hu∣mane. 12. The Eares handsomly (as it were) graven and hollow.
13. The teeth so mixt, that some are broad, some narrow, some thin, some thick, and more grosse. 14. A subtil tongue. 15. A mean Voice, betwixt in∣tense, and remiss. 16. The Neck comly, mean, and smooth. 17. Thannel bone of the throat, appearing and moving. 18. The Back, and the Ribs, not over fleshy. 19. The Shoulders plain, slender, and mean. 20. The Ligaments, and Arte∣ries, well composed, and knit toge∣the. 21. The Hands indifferent long, comly and smooth. 22. The Fingers mean in length, and breadth, equally distant in all places. 23. The Feet comly, tender and not fleshy. 24. The Nails plaine, white, thin, somwhat mixt with Red, and shining. 25. The Carriage of the Body up∣right in walking.
Rule. 2. The Signes of a dull,Signes of an evil genious. and evil Ge∣nious, are contrary to the former signes. 1. THe Stature of the body over∣big and long. 2. The Habitual form of the body over Fleshy and Fat. 3. The Flesh hard. 4. The complexion of the Body over-black. 5. The Head, over-big, or little, as also over hairy, hard and sharp. 6. The fore part of the head, Con∣cave, and the hinder part of the head much Convex. 7. The Face exceeding big and fleshy. 8. The Fore-head great, fleshy and round. 9. The Eares very round, plain, and not sculptated, or little, and stand flaring up. 10. The Eyes obscure, and mo∣ving slowly or sixed and immoveable. 11. The Cheeks large and fleshy. 12. The Neck, hard, short, fle∣shy, and fat. 13. The Channel bone of the throat ill placed, or deform'd in place
14. The Shoulder-blades, standing or appearing upwards. 15. The Loyns much fleshy. 16. The Breasts, big and fleshy. 17. The Belly standing forth. 18. The Armes very carnosus. 19. The Thighs short, and about the huckel bones gross, fleshy, and round. 20. The Toes of the feet, short, smal, and crooked in part, or in whole Rule. 3. The sensitive part and Memory,Signes of a good memory. are discovered to be good by these signes. 1. THe upper parts of the body, not to big comparatively, but mean, wel formed, fleshy, yet not fat. 2. The Brain dry. 3. The hinder part of the head ex∣tended forth, which is the seat of Memory. 4. The Eares meanly big. Rule 4. On the other part a weak Trecherous memory is known by these contrary signes. 1. AS if the upper parts of the body be small, and ill formed and fat.
2. The Brain moist. 3. The hinder part of the head depressed. 4. The Eares small, Mouce like. Rule 5. Signes of a good Judgement are the same with the signes of a good Ge∣nious, only by way of Addition take these few. 1. THe eyes are meanly move∣able. 2. The temperament more dry then otherwise. 3. The voice slow, discreet, and advised, yet unwearied. These do sufficiently demonstrate the clarity, and firmness of the Ani∣mal spirits, and what is requisite to the acquiring, and compleating sound judgement; from hence by the contrary is easie to judge the Symptomes, of a weak, and infirm Judgement. Rule. 6. The Symptomes of Wisdom, and Pru∣dence (they being considered as intel∣lectual Habits) are thus Notified. 1. THe Stature of the body, mean or little.
2. The head mean in the fore part, and somewhat in larged in the hinder part. 3. The Face of mean bigness, and somewhat fleshy. 4. The Fore head some what square and long extending to the Temples. 5. The Eyes, full, lofty, clear, and moving. 6. The tongue subtil and smooth. 7. The Nose handsomly, and fitly proportionated to the face. 8. The Voice mean, between small and great. 9. The Neck inclining some∣what to the right side. 10. The knot of the throat, swel∣ling forth. 11. The Channel bone well and decently ligated. 12. The Breast large. 13. The shoulders large, and even. 14. The hands long, as also the fingers, naturally acting, and mo∣ving as he speaks. Rule. 7.Signes of impru∣dency. The symptomes of a simple foolish imprudent person, Are.
1. THe Stature very big, and the body inclining to the lest side. 2. The head the forepart and hin∣der part hollow, and globous. 3. The hair exceeding red, or growing down in the neck. 4. The face very large and fleshy. 5. The Eyes small, reddish, and obscure, clowdy, little moving verg∣ing upwards and swelling out of the head. 6. The Eares, big, long, and sta∣ring upwards. 7. The Nose, disproportionable, and undecent on the face. 8. The Forehead very small, round and high. 9. The Cheek contracted and as it were lowring. 10. The Mouth pouting out, slit as it were. 11. The Lips big, and swelling. 12. The Voice small, sharp, and Canorous. 13. The Discourse babling, dull and weak. 14. The Laughter much, and fre∣quent. 15. The Neck over-much erected upwards.
16. The Shoulders hairy. 17. The Loynes fleshy. 18. The hands very short, haveing the joynts, long, thick and sharp. 19. The Finger short and fleshy. 20. Walking in a careless stoop∣ing posture, and the countenance lifted up and wandring. In the next place are observable (according to our proposed Method) Moral habits, viz. Virtues and vices. Rule 8. The Signes and Symptomes of a man Pious, Plain, and Honest. 1. THe Face, Serene, fair and ami∣able. 2. The Forehead mean between serene and cloudy. 3. The Eyes decently big, incli∣ning to four square. 4. The Eyes, Moist, Lucid, usual∣ally open and intentively fixed upon the object it beholds. 5. The aspect mildly humane. 6. The Voice mean, between great and small. 7. The Laughter mean, and not to excess.
The Contrary Quallification hath these Signes. Rule 9. 1. THe Face deformed. 2. The Ears long and narrow. 3. The Eyes dry, pale, swelling out, and shining, 4. The Eye-brows hairy, and joyn∣ed, beetle brow. 5. The Mouth little, yet swelling outward. 6. The Teeth long, standing out and firm. 7. The nether lip slender, the teeth Hanging over it. 8. The Voice small, quick, and pronounced thorough the Nose. 9. The Neck awry. 10. The back crooked. 11. The legs very slender, and small. The signes of Moral Prudence are the same with intellectual prudence, which you have in the sixth Rule fore∣going to which I refer you. Rule 10. The Characters of a just man. 1. THe Body commensurately pro∣portioned.
2. The Fore head long, and the temples both wayes extended. 3. The Hair dark or darkish, brown or obscure, and the hair of the beard of the same colour. 4. The Eyes somewhat big, sub∣lime, bearing forth and shining. 5. The Voice grave. 6. The Countenance grave and laudable. Rule 11. The Signes of injustice, Are, 1. THe Eyes blue, dry, and some∣what red, and little moving, but roling, staring open, and fixed. 2. The Aspect sowre, glouting, and threatning. Rule. 12. The Symptomes of Fortitude. 1. THe Body erect and upright. 2. The Head somewhat big. 3. The Hairs mean betwixt straight and curling. 4. The Fore-head square, of a proportionable Magnitude. 5. The Eyes blewish, yellow and reddish, of a mean magnitude and open. 6. The Eye brows crooked.
7. The Nose from the fore-head crooked or round, and obtuse at the end. 8. The Mouth large. 9. The Chin four square, and hairy. 10. The Lips thin, the mouth big. 11. The Voice big, and sounding. 12. Respiration strong, and con∣stant. 13. The Neck big and straight. 14. The Brest full and large. 15. The Back parts big, and strong. 16. The Shoulders broad, big and large. 17. The Joynts big, and well knit together. 18. In Walking he makes some motion with his shoulders, and takes large steps, the same also are the signes of a Magnanimous person. Rule. 13. The Signes of a fearful, timorous, pusillanimous nature, Are. 1. THe Body bowing, or inclining. 2. The Habit of the body lean, and without hair. 3. The Hair of the body thin and soft. 4. The Motion of the body, dis∣covering
a languishing posture. 5. The Complexion of the body a wan white, black, or of a wan leaden colour. 6. The Head in the fore-part, and hinder part, depressed and hol∣low. 7. The Hairs white, or very black. 8. The Face pale and sorrowful. 9. The Forehead big, fleshy or bony. 10. The Mouth little with spare lips. 11. The Respiration, little, rare, and weak. 12. The Voice accure, and smooth or remisse with a little trembling, sounding in the Nose. 13. His Discourse accute, weak, and short. 14. The Neck long and slender. 15. The Brest narrow, smoath and imbecile. 16. The Joynts and Arteries sost, inarticulate and weak. 17. The Arms short. 18. The thighs small and slender. 19. The Hands long and small.
Rule 14. The Symptomes of Audaciousnesse, which is the extremity of Fortitude. 1. A Cloudy lowring forehead. 2. Long Eye brows. 3. Dry Eyes, bloody, open, dart∣ing and shining. 4. An Austere, and crabbed sowre countenance. 5. The Nose long, extending near the mouth. 6. The Mouth big, bearing out. 7. The teeth long, standing at a distance, sharp and strong. 8. The Neck short, and some im∣perfection. 9. The Brest large. 10. The Shoulders very big. 11. The Arms long, and large. 12. The Fingers sharp and thick. Rule 15. The Symptomes and Characters of a temperate man. 1. THe Hair mean, betwixt thick and thin. 2. The Forehead mean, between light, and cloudy. 3. The Eyes big, and shining, ha∣ving the balls mean.
4. An equal proportion, of the parts of the body. 5. An equal distance between the Navil and the bottom of the brest, as between the bottom of the brest and the throat. Rule 16. The Figures of an intemperate per∣son, are these, 1. THe Face of Saffron colour. 2. The Eyes big, somewhat moist, swollen, somewhat red, pierce∣ing and obscure. 3. The Mouth hollow, and much deformed. 4. The Speech big, and weak. 5. The Respiration quick and full. 6. The Neck fat, and the gullet of the throat, much bearing out. 7. The belly big, soft, and pend∣ing downwards. 8. The Duggs hanging amply up∣on the brest, yet lean. 9. The Hands slender. 10. The Space from the Navil to the lower part, or bottom of the brest larger, than the space from the bottom of the brest to the throat.
Rule 17. The Characters, a Venerious, and Libidinous person are, 1. THe Head hairy, rough, and rugged. 2. The Hair straight thick, harsh, and black. 3. The Eyes hollow, clear and la∣civious. 4. The Often and frequent mo∣tion of the eye lids. 5. A Low forehead, or the hair growing much down towards the eye brows. 6. The Ears exceeding small. 7. The Contraction of the Cheeks in laughter. 8. The hollownes of the nose. 9. The Chin much hairy. 10. The Neck inclining towards the left side. 11. The Brest hairy, large and lean. 12. The Paps hanging downwards. 13. The thighs subtil, rough and harsh. 14. The Belly fat, and hairy. 15. The Arms strong and Ner∣vous.
16. The toes of the feet not much parted, but (as it were) joyned toge∣ther. 17. A flow pace when he walks with standing and looking about him. Rule 18. Signes of Stupidity. 1. THe Eyes pale, gazing, and staring about. Rule. 19. Signes of Fidelity. 1. THe Forehead Austere, and de∣clining. 2. The Eye brows compressed. 3. The Eyes mean, inclining to an azure, or dark colour, wishly look∣ing and shining. Rule 20. The Characters of a Perfidious person. 1. THe Head very small, of a rude and undecent proportion, and debillity in the back part thereof. 2. The Forehead sharp, like little mountains and full of holes. 3. The Eyes small, hollow, dry, obscure, moveable, and of a piercing quality.
4. The Shoulders elevated upwards. 5. The hands small and slender. Rule 21. The Characters of a Bashful modest per∣son, composed with a gentle confidence. 1. THe Stature of the body some∣what inclining, or loueing to stoop. 2. The motion of the body slow and mean. 3. The Eyes somewhat obscure, cloudy, not much opening, nor quite shut, but pinking (as it were) half winking. 4. The motions of the Eye-brows moderate. 5. The Blush of the cheeks quick∣ly arising, and soon vanishing. 6. The Voice, and discourse grave, meditated, lingring and slow. 7. The Eares having a ruddy blush, and complexion. Rule 22. On the contrary, The Signes of bold, immodest persons are, 1. THe body straight and piercing. 2. The complexion of the bo∣dy reddish. 3. The Head accute in the
Crown, and extended in length. 4. The Hair very red. 5. The Face very round, or very long. 6. The Eyes much open, and shining. 7. The Eye-lids hairy, and ruddy. 8. The Eye-brows very long. 9. The Discourse and Speech, shameless, malapert, and reproach∣full. 10. The Nose grosse and blunt, crooked or writhed, near the fore∣head. 11. The brest smooth, and eleva∣ted. 12. The toes, and nails crooked. 13. He Walketh rashly and hastily. Rule 23. The Characters of Meek and Courteous persons are, 1. THe Head of what fashion so∣ever yet is somewhat big. 2. The Figure of the body, is somewhat inclining. 3. The Habitual constitution of the body, is moist, soft, smooth, and somewhat hairy. 4. The Hair is plain, smooth,
bright, or somewhat yellow. 5. The Eyes black. 6. The Eye brows standing straight out. 7. The Voice heavy, slow, soft, and effeminate. 8. The discourse negligent, slack, and mild. 9. He walketh slowly and carelesly. Rule 24. Contrary to meekness, are the Signes of Wrathful and Cruel persons. 1. THe body erect straight, and meager. 2. The Colour and complexion of the body reddish and yellow. 3. The Face round. 4. The forehead round, or Goat∣like wrinkled. 5. The Eye-brows converse, crook∣ed and extended. 6. The Eyes big, heavy, bloody, shining, and sparkling. 7. The temples raised, (as it were swollen) and the Veines much ap∣pearing. 8. The extream of the nose sharp. 9. The Nostrils large spread, and hollow.
10. The Mouth as it were trem∣bling. 11. The teeth straight and sharp. 12. The tongue quick, and stam∣mering. 13. The Voice big, and entangled, or sharp and vehement, or beginning low, or big, and ending a Sentence, sharp, or squeaking. 14. The Speech hasty, hare-braind, rash, and hardy, and such a person usually reiterates, or triplicates his words to little purpose, many a∣mongst us, may thus be observed. 15. The Countenance doggedly soure and cruel. 16. The Neck long, thick, fat, and the veines much appearing. 17. The throat rough, and swel∣ling forth, under the throat bone. 18. The brest large, meager, and of a flamy complexion, and colour. 19. The Shoulders large. 20. The shoulder blades broad. 21. The joynts big and strong. 22. Using motion with the fingers in speaking. 23. A Grinning, or gnashing with the teeth.
Rule. 25. The Qualifications of a Carelesse, Negligent Nature, being opposed to Discretion, Meeknesse and Gentleness, of which the notes are, 1. THe Hair smooth. 2. The Face big and large. 3. The forehead little and small. 4. The Eye-brows verging to∣wards the Nose. 5. The ears exceeding small. 6. The eyes of the colour of Goats. 7. The mouth deformed, as being awry, or the Lips cut with Shares. 8. The lips excessive thick. 9. The teeth close and even. 10. The voice rough, or sharp, clamorons or depraved. 11. The Speech hasty and even, or low and weak. 12. The neck, thick and fat. 13. The belly fleshy, soft, and hanging down, Cow-bellied. Rule. 26. Characters of fincerity, Are, 1. THe Mediocrity of the face, and the proportional composure of the cheeks and temples, somwhat a little inclining to fatness.
2. The Voice mean betwixt big and small. Rule 27. The Physiognomical Signes of a Lyer, Are, 1. THe Body crooked, and de∣formed, 2. The Face fleshy. 3. The Nose high and elevated in the middle. 4. The Eyes merry, jocund, being surrounded with azure circles. 5. The Eye brows inclining down∣wards. 6. The Lower eye-lids, as Ar∣ched, or rendring, a rain-bow-like colour. 7. The Speech quick, and fawning pronounced something thorough the Nose. 8. Laughter, even to derision. Rule. 28. Next unto the Lyer, the dissembler claims his place, and his Physiognomi∣cal Signes are these, 1. THe Face fat, with a supine sleepy countenance. 2. The Fore-head, wrinkled and rough.
3. The Eye brows inflexing, and knitting towards the temples. 4. The Eyes little, roundish and shining. 5. The Voice dull, his speech seemingly negligent, and dark. 6. He hath a Frisking bumour in his walking or travels, soon here and soon there. Rule 29. To the Dissembler, is next of kin a flatterer, whose Characters are these, 1. MOst esually a little Wee∣sel-face. 2. A Serene clear forehead. 3. Little wandring eyes. 4. His Countenance and voice plea∣sant and affected. 5. His Pace, and acting, is with many, and often, Circumtorsions, tur∣nings and windings, and whiskins to and fro. Rule 30. The Character of a Liberal and Benevolent person. 1. THe Hair naturally descend∣ing towards the Nose. 2. The Hinder part of the neck, erect Goat-like.
3. The Shoulders well compacted. 4. The Fingers something bend∣ing backwards, the Arms long. Rule 31. The Signes of a Covetous sordid person. 1. THe eyes every small. 2. The Face exceeding little. 3. The Eye brows incurvating to∣wards the Nose. 4. The Back deformed by crook∣edness, or the like. 5. The Shoulders ill compacted, too much verging, and inclining to the brest. 6. The Fingers contracted stif, and bending forwards, emblems, of hold fast. 7. Speedy in going, and treads thick and quick. Rule. 32. The Physiognomical Characters of a person Courteous, Civil, Elegant, Facetious, are these, 1. THe Fore-head large, fleshy, plain and smooth. 2. The Eyes moist and shining. 3. The Countenance expressing
Joy, Content, and Mirth. 4. The Voice pleasant and pleasing. 5. The Motion of the body flow, &c. Rule 33. On the contrary, the Signes of a Churlish, Discourteous, Rough-hew'd Nature are, 1. THe Form of the body Mea∣ger, and lean. 2. The Forehead, cloudy, sullen, and wrinkled. 3. The Eyes cast down-ward, or down-look'r. 4. A Nimble tongue. 5. Walking a short and quick pace. 6. A secret Murmuring to him∣self as he walks, &c. Rule 34. Declares the Signes of a laborious person. 1. THe Head little, or not over bid. 2. The Habitual constitution of the body dry and hard. 3. The Face lean, and bony. 4. The Eyes quick, and moving. 5. The tongue quick. 6. He taketh long steps, and walk∣eth fast.
Rule. 35. On the contrary, the Notes of a Lazy, Idle person, are, 1. A Great blockhead. 2. The Constitution of the body humid and tender. 3. The Face fleshy, inclining to a honey complexion. 4. The Fore head large. 5. The Eyes moving slow. 6. The lower part of the nose thick. 7. Blub cheek't. 8. Slow tongue. 9. Short in discourse. 10. He Walketh a slow, short and lazy pace. Rule 36. The marks of a Sleepy, Dull, Drow∣sie disposition, are, 1. THe Members of the upper part of the body, are dis∣proportionably greater then the members of the lower parts. 2. The Habitual constitution of the body is flegmatick. 3. The Head over much swelling. 4. The Eyes swelling or gogling. 5. The Countenance, dull, dead and drowsy.
6. The Veines small, hardly per∣ceptable. Rule 37. The Signes of humillity, are, 1. THe Stature not altogether erect, but somewhat in∣curvating. 2. The Eyes narrow and quiet. 3. The Voice mild and moderate. 4. Seldom Laughter. 5. A Slow, equal and gentle pace in walking. Rule 38. Contrary, the Signes and Symptoms of Pride, are. 1. THe Figure of the body e∣rect. 2. The Eye brows elated, and Arch-like. 3. The Eyes great, shining, dan∣cing in the head, and verging up∣wards. 4. The Voice sharp and sounding. 5. Ridiculous in laughter. 6. The Neck thick and long. 7. The throat sharp, and extend∣ed. 8. The Fingers long and small. 9. A proud deportment in the face.
10. A stiffe advanced Neck. 11. A slow Spanish pace. 12. Circumspection and looking about. 13. And often staying, or stand∣ing still in walking. Rule 39. In the next place, we will observe the Symptomes of secresy, which are necessary to observe. 1. THe Face fair, inclining to a whitish complexion. 2. The Forehead long, looking somewhat downwards, mournful and somewhat sharp. 3. The Eyes fat, and smiling, but frequently subject to tears. Rule 40. On the Contrary, the Signes of a babler, are, 1. THe upper parts of the body bigger then the inferiour. 2. The Complexion of the face, a dark, yellow, or honey colour. 3. The Ears big, standing up. 4. The Nose straight. 5. The Cheeks very long. 6. The mouth stretched forth in length.
7. The Chin very long. 8. The upper Lip hanging over the lower. 9. The tongue nimble, and volu∣ble. 10. The throat sharp, and rough. 11. The Ribs bunching out before. 12. The Fingers long and slender. Rule. 41. Discovers the Signes, of a Benevo∣lent merciful person. 1. THe Face fair, inclining to a whitish Feature. 2. The Forehead long, looking somewhat downwards, mournful and somewhat sharp. 3. The Eyes fat, and smiling, but frequently subject to tears. Rule 42. On the Contrary, the Signes of a Malevolent person are, 1. THe temples concave and hollow. 2. Beetle brows, or the temples conjoyn'd and hairy. 3. The Eyes little and pale. 4. The Dissection, and deformity of the mouth. 5. The teeth, tuskish-like, long.
6. The Arms Short. Rule 43. To Malevolency may fitly be ad∣joyned, Envy, the Characters of which are, 1. THe Body Meager, and lean. 2. The face plain, and in aspect, black and blew. 3. The Ears long, and narrow. 4. The Eyes little and pale. 5. The Voice sweet, and pleasing. 6. The Speech and discourse, sharp and accute. 7. Sparing in langhter, yet some∣times seemingly merry. Rule 44. The Notes of a hasty person. 1. THe Voice low, and grave in the beginning of his dis∣course, but in the end Elevated, A∣cute and Sharp: 2. The teeth mixed, viz. some broad and close united, some small, and standing at a distance. Rule 45. The Characters of a Gentile, Hero∣ick, Noble Nature. 1. THe stature straight, elect, and well proportioned.
2. The Complexion of the bo White, with a Bluss of redness, throughout defused. 3. The Head of a moderate mag∣nitude and roundness, both wayes swelling forth. 4. The Hair fair, inclining to yel∣low. 5. The face fair, and comly. 6. The forehead square, and of a mean magnitude and mean, betwixt calm and cloudy. 7. The Eyes big and sublime. 8. A Splendour of Admirable Dig∣nity in the forehead. 9. The Eares neatly insculpted, of mean bigness, somewhat square, and quick of hearing. 10. The Mouth large, and lovely. 11. The Sqeech sober and grave. 12. The Mirth moderate. 13. The Brest and shoulders large. 14. The Hands ample and open. 15. The finger indisterent long, small, comly, and retorting back∣wards from the first joynt. 16. A slow pace, grave and Mag∣nificent.
Rule 46. On the Contrary, Signes of a Sal∣vage, Ignoble Nature, Are, 1. THe figure of the head, in∣curvated. 2. The Head hard, edged or poin∣ted. 3. The Hair thick, hard and rug∣ged. 4. The faee wan, undeformed. 5. The forehead hard, and rough. 6. The Eares over big, flagging, as much as to say, Bang ear'd. 7. The Eyes little, dry, hollow, obscure, of gray, and saffron colour. 8. The Eye brows joyned together with hair. 9. The sight sharp and peircing. 10. The Countenance dreadful and threatning. 11. The Cheeks long and hairy. 12. The Mouth long, wide, af∣fecting babling. 13. The Voice and speech fierce. 14. The Back parts of the body hairy. 15. The shoulders grosse, and ri∣sing. 16. The Belly big.
17. The feet short, and fleshly. 18. The Nails crooked, narrow and long. 19. The fingers short and thick. Rule 47. The Characters of a compleat Ar∣tist are comprehended under these Heads. 1. THe stature of the body Mo∣derate in proportion. 2. The eyes clear and bright. 3. The Complexion of the body, verging to sanguine. 4. The Habit of the body in a mean between fat and lean. 5. The skin and the flesh subtil. 6. The face mean, between fleshy and lean. 7. The Aspect of the countenance mild and humane. 8. The tongue subtil. 9. The joynts well compacted. 10. And the Hands neatly propor∣tionated. Rule 48. The Phisiognomical Signes of an iegenious Mechanrick, Are, 1. THe Stature of the body, well commensurated.
2. The hands slender, and long. 3. The Nails white and shining. 4. The Complexion of the body white, inclining somewhat to red∣ness. 5. The Head of mean magnitude. 6. A Spruce and upright carriage of the body in walking. THus Courteous Reader, (my limits Commanding brevity) I shall here put an end to this Dis∣course, which how usefull, the Knowledge, of these Praeceding Purticulars are, and how beneficial, I leave to all Ingenious Souls to judge, besides they want not their pleasure and delight likewise, as will easily be found in their Observation; But who well receive fuller pleasure and profit, let him Consult, my larger Treatise of Phisiognomy, Printed for Nathaniel Brooks, to which if he ap∣ply a Sympathetical genius, he may both be delighted; and satisfied, to which I refer him.
A Brief Table OF THE Principal Matters Contained in this First Book. A. ACtions of men various, why? Fol. p. 13. Answers to Nice Questions. Fol. p. 8, 9. Andaciousness the Sigues. Fol. p. 136. Authors Eminent in Palmistry. Fol. p. 5. Artist good, the Signes. Fol. p. 156. B. Bashfulness the Signes. Fol. p. 140. Blood-shedding. Fol. p. 76. Brain, the Signes. Fol. p. 119. Brain cold and dry. Fol. p. ibid. Brain Moist the Signes. Fol. p. 120. Benevolent Person the Signes. Fol. p. 146.
Babler the Signes. Fol. p. 151. C. Carelesness the Signes. Fol. p. 140. Chassiry the Signes. Fol. p. 89. Childbed danger the Signes. Fol. p. 102. Chyromancy and Astrology the same in Effect. Fol. p. 15. Chirocopia, what? Fol. p. 1, 2. Conciliator when flourished. Fol. p. 9. Chollerick temperament the signes. Fol. p. 81. 91. Complexion good. Fol. p. 115. Considerations of much weight be∣fore judgement, from Fol. p. 18. to 24. Covetousnesse the signes. Fol. p. 147. Courteous and Civil person the signes Fol. p. 147. Churlish Conditions, the signes. Fol. p. 12. 148. D. Death by violence the signes. Fol. p. 39. 40. Death By poyson the signes. Fol. p. 96. Death, the signes thereof from page Fol. 109. 114. Deliverance in Child-bed good. Fol. p. 90. Debt signes of one suffering thereby. Fol. p. 65.
Difference of lines, whence? Fol. p. 14, 15. Dissembler the signes. Fol. p. 145. Dull disposition. Fol. p. 149. E. Ecclesiastical preferments the signes. Fol. p. 86. Effeminate, when? Fol. p. 19. Envy the signes. Fol. p. 153. F. Fearfulness the signes. Fol. p. 134. Fidelity the signes. Fol. p. 90, 91. 139. Fingers measured. Fol. p. 28. Fegmatick Constitution. Fol. p. 116. Folly the signes. Fol. p. 129. Fortitude. Fol. p. 133. Flatterer the signes. Fol. p. 146. G. Genius good the signes. Fol. p. 124. Genius Dull. Fol. p. 126. Generation, and corruption the causes. Fol. p. 6. H. Hands measured by compasse. Fol. p. 30. Hand which to be judged Fol. p. 16. Hands due praportion. Fol. p. 20. 26. to 0. Heavens motion what. Fol. p. 6. Hearts temperament, hot Fol. p. 120. cold. ibid. dry, ibid.
Hurts in secret parts. Fol. p. 74. Husbands how many. Fol. p. 88, 89. Humility the signes. Fol. p. 150. Hasty person. Fol. p. 153. I. Impostures censured. Fol. p. 10, 11, 12. Inheritance. Fol. p. 88. Ingenuity good the-signes. Fol. p. 123. Immodesty signes. Fol. p. 140. Judgement sound, signes thereof. Fol. p. 128. Justice, signes thereof. Fol. p. 132. Ignoble natures the signes. Fol. p. 155. K. Kings Honoured by Astrology. Fol. p. 6. Sr. Kenelmne Digby, on causes. Fol. p. 7. L. A Line what. Fol. p. 3. Lines of the hand their different names and quallifications. Fol. p. 3. 22. 23. Laborious person the signes. Fol. p. 148. Lazy person the signes. Fol. p. 149. Nature of the Lines. Fol. p. 4. Lines in the hand caused by the pla∣nets. Fol. p. 10. Lines in the hand, whence? Fol. p. 13, 14. Liver-line measured. Fol. p. 28, 29, 30. Line of life measured from Fol. p. 31 to 35.
Life long, from Fol. p. 70. to 91. Life short from Fol. p. 93. to 97. Life troublesom. Fol. p. 78. Life may be several wayes abridged. Fol. p. 85. Law Preferments. Fol. p. 86. Lust vide Whoredom. Luxury signes thereof. Fol. p. 83. Lyer the signes thereof. Fol. p. 145. M. Meekness the signes. Fol. p. 141. Melancholy Constitution. Fol. p. 118. Memory good. Fol. p. 127. Memory bad the signes. Fol. p. 128. Murther the signes. Fol. p. 67. Merciful person the signes. Fol. p. 152. Mechanick ingenious the signes Fol. p. 156. N. Names of all the lines. Fol. p. 22, 23. Natural line measured from Fol. p. 35. to 38. Noble Nature the signes. Fol. p. 153. O. Observations to be noted before judg∣ment from Fol. p. 17. to p. 21. P. Palmistry its Antiquity. Fol. p. 9. 11. Palmistry more certain then other
Arts. Fol. p. 10. Palmistry owned by all the Learned and Highly Honoured. Fol. p. 13. Palmistry what it is? Fol. p. 17. Palsie the signes. Fol. p. 68. Plain honesty the signes. Fol. p. 131. Play, fortune thereby, signes thereof. Fol. p. 68. Perfideousness signes thereof. Fol. p. 103, 104. 139. Poverty in all its kinds and causes, signes thereof from Fol. p. 57. to 71. Practical part of Chiromancy. Fol. p. 17. Imprisonment, signes thereof. Fol. p. 101. Pride the signes. Fol. p. 150. Q. Quietness of life, the signes. Fol. p. 187. R. Riches, signes thereof. Fol. p. 41, 42, 43, to 57. caution therein. 41. how many wayes obtained, ibid. Riches by women. Fol. p. 56. Riches by Cattel. Fol. p. 57. Riches by Musick. Fol. p. 57. And many other wayes, ibid. Robberies prejudice thereby: signet. Fol. p. 67. S.
Sanguine Constitution signes thereof. Fol. p. 117. Sickness, how to know beforehand. Fol. p. from 105. to 108. Sincerity the signes. Fol. p. 144. Stupidity the signes. Fol. p. 139. Suits and Controversies by Law. Fol. p. 87. Secresie, the Symptomes. Fol. p. 151. T. Table-line measured from Fol. p. 36. to 39. Temperance, signes thereof. Fol. p. 136. Theory of Palmistry from Fol. p. 1. to 23. Intemperance, signes thereof. Fol. p. 137. Teeth big, what? Fol. p. 84. Thief, who? Fol. p. 67. V. Vagabond, signes thereof. Fol. p. 67. Venerious the signes. Fol. p. 138. Violent Death, signes thereof. Fol. p. 39, 40. Vitals strong, signes thereof. Fol. p. 80. Virginity and Chastity signes. Fol. p. 84. Union between Astrnomy and Pal∣mistry. Fol. p. 10. Unstable in Conditions signes thereof. Fol. p. 77. Ungrateful, signes thereof. Fol. p. 57. 103.
Unjust signe thereof. Fol. p. 323. W. Wives how many and what. Fol. p. 88, 89. Wisdom and Prudente the signes Fol. p. 128. Woman a Virago. Fol. p. 19. Riches by Women. VVhoredom. Fol. p. 98, 99. VVounds on the head. Fol. p. 68. VVounds on the body. Fol. p. 73, 74. VVounds in the secret parts. Fol. p. 74. VVrathfulnesse signes thereof. Fol. p. 142. Y. Youth, dye in youth. Fol. p. 93.
ERRATA SIC CORRIGE. PAge 7. line 27. read respect. p. 8. l. 26. r. turpiter. p. 13. l. 2. r. cad∣ducum p. 14. l. 10. r. falfity. p. 21. l. 5. r. affected p. 104. l. last r. premise. p. 108. l. 10. observe the Comma between the words, touching, and pain. p. 120. l. 19. r. heart. p. 125. l. 9. r. the Channel.
THE SECOND PART OF THIS TREATISE, Treating of that most Usefull, and Profitable Subject, viz. THE DOCTRINE OF ELECTIONS, OR The Right way to prevent the evil Con∣sequence of after Wit, or Had-I-Wist. Vidi sapientem ipsum ut cui sunt oculi in capite Ecle. 2.14. Pro. 13 c. 16. English, Every Prudent Man dealeth with know∣ledge. Nam cuique voluntati est tempus et ratio: tempus e∣nim ac rationem novit animus sapientis, Prov. 8.5, 6. Astutus praevidens malum, abscondit se, fatui autem transeuntes, mulctantur, Pro. 22.3. v. & 27. c. 12. v. Fatuus credit omnibus rebus, prudens autem adver∣tit ad gressum suum, Prov. 14, 15. Qui vero Auscultat mihi, habitabit secure, ut tran∣quillus a pavore mali, Prov. 1. ult. By RICHARD SAUNDERS Author of Chiromancy and Phisiognomy. LONDON, Printed by H. B. for G. Sawbridge, at the Signe of the Bible upon Lud-Gate Hill. 1663.
Of Astrological Elections. Discovering those things about which the Doctrine of Elections is conversant, and within what limits the truth thereof is bounded. THe Doctrine of Elections con∣sists in the finding out fit, apt, and congruent times, for the shun∣ning and avoyding of Evil signified to any Person in his Nativity, or feared, and the accomplishment and obtaining of that Good, which is promised, or desired, as also for the right directing of all Actions (in the Humane life of Man) to a good awished and desired end,) therefore Elections differ from Horary questi∣ons, which rest and determine in the knowledge of the thing Sought, but Elections in reference to their dispo sing ends, referr unto future Actions. Elections in their constitution,
offers themselves to us under a double consideration: The first hath its ground from the Radical Nativi∣ty of the Person, for whom the E∣lection is made, is grounded there∣upon and consimulates therewith, and this is the most Legitimate and true ground, of forming Electi∣ons, as being certain and sure; from whence may be discerned the great Utility, the knowledge of a mans Nativity conduceth to him, in his disposal of Humane Actions. The second ground is, the Nati∣vity of the person being not known, to form your Election on general grounds, or build them on a Horary question: This ground is much more weake, and invalid then the former, and admits of much uncer∣tainty: the Learned much contro∣vert this point, but the summe is, that in a figure of Election of time, though it be in signification apa∣rently most happy, yet notwith∣standing, if it be contrary to the Radical figure of the Nativity, not known, it will produce little or no∣thing of Good, but rather the E∣lection
will prove unfortunate; for perhaps the Horoscope of the time Elected, may be the Signe of the eight, or twelfth Houses in the Radi∣cal Position of Heaven: I'ts possible a Man may Elect to himself, a most fortunate and happy hour to begin a Journey, or Voyage, in respect of the present General state and Posi∣tion of the Heavens, yet may he begin his Journey in a most unhap∣py time in reference to his Life, goods and Estate; whilst another making choice apparently of an unfortunate and unlucky time, may every way experience good Fortune and Felicity, the reason is because to many in their Nativitys the Malevolent, and unfortunate Planets (as we call them) are signi∣ficators of Life, Dignity, and Ri∣ches, and well affected, &c. and the Benevolent and fortunate Pla∣nets are Significators of Evils to them and Evil affected, and so to o∣thers the contrary; therefore Haly Exhorts that no Election be made for him, of whose Nativity thou art Ignorant, unless (saith he) thou
hast a ground from the ascendant of his question, Haly seems to per∣swade that the time of a Horary question is Equivalent to the Nati∣vity; as to the Election of time for any Action, but by his leave we hold not this so Legitimate a ground for a good Election. CHAP. II. Of many things Generally to be Noted about Elections. COncerning the Elections of times, generally these things offer themselves to our considera∣tion. First Elections of time profit, not only for the obtaining of good in our daily actions, and the useful, profitable, and happy management of good received and obtained, but also is profitable as to the shun∣ning, and avoiding of any Eminent Evils feared, for he that would con∣cilliate
to himself the favour of his Prince, contract a happy designed Marriage, or would build a House, Castle, or City, it Superlatively pro∣fiteth him to make choise of such fit and congruent times, that are only proper to such particular affaires, in which the Caelestial Influences may favour, and fortunate him in those undertakings; for the Celestial In∣fluences only affect the person by himself principally about those things which are said to be affected or moved by accident for the for∣tune of Building a House, ∣eth not in the State and Poon of Heaven considered in it self  the hour in which the House beg to be built (which should be assum∣ed, if the Caelestial Influence did principally, and by it self affect the Subject, made and Operated) but considered in respect of the Arti∣chect and him that causeth that House to be built, for so it's possible the Position of Heaven to be For∣tunate in the first sense, and Unfor∣tunate in the second acceptation. From whence that House may be
rendred Unhappy to him that oweth or enjoys it, and the same Reason we may conceive in all other things. In like manner he that would prevent an Eminent Disease pre∣signified by the Stars to him, Hav∣ing found the time thereof by Di∣rections, and the Revolutions of Sun and Moon, may choose a fit time by this Art before the Disease invade Nature in which he may let Blood if necessary, or safely Purge those Noxious Humors afflict∣ing. As also a King fearing War from another Prince, may hereby before the beginning of the War, take up those grounds and resolutions, by consulting a fit and proper time of acting, and by consulting with, and acting by those men that are fortu∣nately affected and disposed, consil∣liate a laudable Peace, or prosper in a fortunate & honourable War; the same reason is of any eminent con∣troversie in which life or goods are concerned, and the event feared. Secondly, any Man may as for him∣self, so for any other Person Elect a
Congruent and fit time as well to Good, as to an Evil end, to Good; as if one would procure Dignity for his Son, or the like. To Evil, as if one should study & design the Ruine of another, in Life or in Goods (as often times it comes to pass by e∣vil men, over much abusing their Authority to the prejudice of o∣thers,) as he that contrives Evil, will Sagaciously consult the Nativi∣ty of his Adversary, and the time when Evil Directions, Revolutions, or Transits, accomplish their effects, then will he take his time to Ruine him by Play, Quarels, Contentions, Law-suits, Wars, or by Implicat∣ing him in Dangerous, and pernici∣ous Designs; and will Oppose & En∣counter him in Combat, War, or the like, at such a time when himself is Fortunated by the Stars; and the other Unfortunate: The same Rea∣son is there of one King undertake∣ing, or waging War against another King, the Event Depends not upon the justness of the Cause, so much as the time undertaking the same; neither doth he wisely undertake a
War, that doth it upon the Ground, of some slight Directions Signifing Good, when as the Revolutions are strongly unfortunate, and as he fortifies himself, so he must deal in the contrary with his Enemy, he must Elect a time, when the Posi∣tion of the Heavens do Infortunate the Enemy and Fortunate himself: therefore it comes to pass that it is of great concernment, to know the genitures of the Generals, and cheif Officers that lead an Army, and Command in chief; by the know∣ledge of which, through a good Election of time, a desired end may be obtained, and these things not heeded, and understood, are often times the causes of most Unfor∣tunate Accidents, and the ruine of Good undertakings. Thirdly for the making an apt and fit Election of time for the more happy Contracting of Matri∣mony. These two things are re∣quired. First, that the Nativity have good Signification of Marriage. Secondly, That the time of the Contract, or Marriage be backt
with congruent Directions, Revo∣lutions, and Transits of the Radical Significators: either of these failing. Election profiteth not much, al∣though it seemingly promise never so much good Fortune; for Electi∣ons are not able to avert, the Radi∣cal Significations, nor truely the Ra∣dical Directions, and Revolutions. The Radical Significations may be considered in a Supreans, an Infime, and a Mediate Degree, as also the Significations of Elections ad a∣gendum, respecting Action; as if those grounds taken form the Nativity a∣gree with the Rules of Election; in the supream & highest degree, great, and quick shall the effects following be, conformable to either significa∣tion; if in the Infime and lowest degree, it shall be the meaner, or as it were Fortunate in appearance only: if in the Mediate degree the effects shall be answerable proporti∣onably; the Superlative degree of the one, with the inferior degree of the other, shall produce something more then the capacity of the Low∣est degree wil admit, and with the
mediate degree above the Medium, cheifly if the Supream degree be taken from the Natal Significa∣tion. The fourth principal of this Doctrine referring to Practice; con∣sists in this: that those things which we intend to do, and act in, are to be begun in that moment of time, signified by the Caelestial, Elective constitution of the Heavens; for the whole vertue of an Election, consists in that very proper Position of the Heavens, which is made choice of, conformable and con∣gruent to the end of the thing in∣tended; otherwise the virtue is dis∣solved, by a continued motion of the Heavens, and your desired, and wished success is lost and perished. As for Example, to Elect a time to make a Fortunate Journey or Voy∣age, The ninth house is to be For∣tified, by the Position of fortunate Planets therein, which by a little delay of time & the swift motion of the Heavens; all those Significators are devolved into the Eight House, where Death and Danger of life is
portended: and in like manner those fortunate Positions of the Planets, which are Located in the first House for the health & Sanity of body and minde, are quickly by the swift foot of time revolved into the Twelfth House, which hath the signification of Mischiefs & Diseases; & therefore seeing the whole consists in that ni∣city of proper time Elected, all things relating to the business in hand, ought to be made ready, and prepa∣red that nothing be to be done; but to observe the exact Moment of time, which is not to be taken by common vulgar Clocks and Di∣als, which ofttimes vary half an hour or more from the true time; but by the Sun or Stars, or some exact Clock or Watch rectified thereby: so having all things prepared ready to that Moment intended, right∣ly shall he be called Master of Time, which knows how thus to use it to his own liking and benefit: Thus is the use of a Figure of Electi∣on, which is a particular Figure.
CHAP. III. Of the great Profit and Utility of the Doctrine of Elections THe Doctrine of Elections is of so great Utility, if rightly appre∣hended, that the practick good and benifit of all Astrology, is found com∣prehended the rein; for to no other end is the Science of the Stars given to Men, by the most Great and wise God, then this, that the Evil im∣pending Men, signified in their Na∣tivityes, they might foresee and shun, and the Good the Heavens promise, they might readily with deligence imbrace. Thus men have within there own capacitys, a Na∣tural rule and direction, for all their Human undertakings, adoring the dispensation of Divine Providence by the Stars, in all Sublunaries, and admiting the power of free will, a∣bove the influence of the Stars:
Thus certainly so large as is the field of Human Actions, so capari∣ous is the Utility and Profit of Elections. Of what great worth and con∣cernment is Astrology, and princi∣pally that part thereof, viz. The Doctrine of Elections, as to the undertaking and management of the greatest and weightiest affairs, may evidently be gathered from multitude of instances in all ages, and in particular, from the constant and sure practice of the most po∣tent Prince, the King of China; the management of whose great and weighty affairs, are wholly per∣formed by Himself, and a Privy Counsel consisting of twelve men, which are chosen out of the ablest and wisest in all His Kingdom; no∣thing but Wisdom gives them ad∣mittance to this so great a dignity, and not one of these is admitted, which is not a most excellent and singular Astrologer; for in refe∣rence to all humane affairs, he in his Counsel consults the Stars, as well of the thing to be done, of the
persons to act, as of fit congruent and choice times to act all things in: Which thing, such knowing men, such Excellent and Superlative expert Politicians, would not with an unanimous consent, constant∣ly-practice, but that they have multitude of ages fully and certain∣ly experienced, that it doth infi∣nitely and chiefly conduce, to the assured establishment of them∣selves, and the best Regiment of their affairs, and people; nothing was more usuall and customary in the first Ages, and Monarchies of the World, then for Princes, and Emi∣nent persons, who alwayes, In re∣bus Arduis suos consulebant Magos; In their affairs of most concern∣ment, and greatest difficulty, to consult their Magi; no otherwise, so called, than from their sublime Skill and Knowledge in Astrology, which they accounted a Divine Science. I cannot, but consent to, and much honour the opinion of the Learned Morinus, who saith, he really believes, and certainly
knows, that nothing could be more profitable, and of greater utility to the King, or chief Magistrate in any Countrey, than to have of his private Counsel, three at least of the most expert skilful and expe∣rienced Astrologers, who might consider and consult the true Nati∣vities, not onely of the King, Prince, or chief Magistrate, but also of those nearest to him, of his Neigh∣bour Princes, of all the great men and conspicuous persons belonging to the Court, and aspiring after Dignities; from hence should be known, from what King or State, and when, to shun War, against what Prince, and when, to under∣take War: And who would be fit∣test (amongst his Nobles) to make a fortunate General, to be chosen to lead his Armies, and who to be refused; infinite good and benefit must needs accrue to any State by this means, is Rationally evident. When on the contrary side very oft it falls out that War is undertaken by an unfortunate Prince, and in the consequence tends more to the
Dissipation, rather than the Aug∣mentation of His State & Kingdom; as also it may be undertaken in an unfortunate year of the King; it may also be managed by Commanders unfortunate in the Success; and it be waged also against a fortunate Prince, who will be victorious and fortunate in that year, and time: All which things (through impro∣vidence) concurring, Quid nisi magna clades venit expectanda? What can be expected but absolute rue; what is said of War may in like manner be understood of the health, welfare, and Marriage of the King, of sending Ambassadors, and of receiving Ambassages, and of all other principal affairs of State, of what nature soever; Tres autem Astrologos saltem suaderem; (saith Morinus,) three Astrologers at the least I would advise to; for one alone, would be unfit for so great a Work, and two might jar, and fall at variance; therefore it's neces∣sary a third should be admitted, see∣ing that in Controversies and Mat∣ters of far less moment, many
Judges are oft times required; Nec quisquam mei causa hoc dictum fuisse putet: Let no one interpret my words to any self-end, I wish my Soveraign the greatest happiness in the world, and the means there∣unto conducing, Cordially wishing I were able to add the least Mite to his Renown, and wishing him those, whose abilities may add a ful & Re∣quisite assistance in all difficulties. What Advantage would this give to a Prince, amongst his Friends, o∣ver his Enemies, at all times, in all places, and on all occasions? Sed dictum sit duntaxat in gratiam veri∣tatis & Astrologiae Dignitatis, qui∣buscunque me Defuncto ipsius Astro∣logiae excellentia ex hoc opere inno∣tescet. If so be it (as hath been said) Astrology be thus necessary and useful to Kings and Princes in their most great & weightiest affairs, and principally this part of Astrology, viz. the Doctrine of Elections; no man then can doubt but it is useful and profitable to others of meaner Rank, to all sorts of persons what∣soever
it conduceth inestimable be∣nefit, in the happy managing, and fortunate undertaking of all their particular Affairs, whether as to A∣griculture to the procreation and generation of Rational, and Dome∣stick Animals, to Physick and Me∣dicine, or to all things, times, and seasons that appertain to humane commerce; as also for the shun∣ning and avoiding those unfortunate Positions of Heaven, under whose Influences the greatest Evils usually hap and befal us; especially in those years when there are evil Di∣rections and Revolutions, as might abundantly be proved, & in particu∣lar in that Moment of Time, when Gustavus Adolphus the late famous K. of Sweden, began that fatal Battail in which he was unfortunately slain with many others of great quality, consider the figure and judgement, as it was taken and rendred by a Learned and Judicious hand, who was an Eye-witness in the Battail. Gustavus Adolphus King of Swe∣den began his Battail against the Im∣perials the 16th day of November
1632. New Stile, and the fixt ac∣cording to the Iulian accompt with us, at 9 of the Clock in the Morn∣ing, in the Latitude of 50 degrees North, at which time being slain, thus were the Heavens disposed, horoscope chart 1632. Novembris D. Hor. M. 16. 9: 0 Lat. 50. New Stile. It is most worthy observation, that the Position of the Heavens, at the time of this sad Accident (his
Death) did much Sympathize with his Radical Geniture, being in most points the same, and came very near the Revolutional Position, be∣ing almost the same with the Revo∣lution of the Sun, which was Octo∣ber 24: Hor. 0. min. 4. P M. 1632. and very near the Moons Revolution likwise, but that it were tedious to insert the Radical and Revolutional figures, it would ap∣pear that all things did declare a most Illustrious Battail, but mortal. But to pass this, it being our pur∣pose to shew how the Position of the Heavens at that punt of time the Battail did begin, did demon∣strate plainly the following event; for Venus Lady of the medium Coeli significatrix in this mortall Direction, was in the Horo∣scope the primary Significator of Life, with Antares of the se∣cond Magnitude, and other violent fixed Stars in the constellation of the Scorpion, and near the Ecliptick, besieged by ♄ and ♂, who were Anarrettaes in that direction, which 3 Planets, ♄ ♀ and ♂ did
arise, and possess the Ascendant, the hour he began his Battail, and was slain: Mars also at that instant of time applying to the Radicall place of the ☉ Lord of the 8th, existing partilly in the radical place of ♂, and Radical □ of ♄ in the 12 house, opposed to ♃ Lord of the Horoscope, and Dispositor of ♄ ♀ and ♂, the ☽ also Lady of the 8th, exil'd peregrine, and weak, in △ partill of ♃, and opposite to the 8th, House; therefore was this hour most unfortunate. As it did portend Action, so it did chiefly in∣timate Susceptum bellicum lethale; a mortal incounter, and moreover, there were mortal Transits made that Day. To return from whence we Di∣gressed; But because it oft time falls out that neither the King, his chief Officers nor Ministers, nor indeed the generality of persons, take any care of obtaining the Na∣tivities of those persons, with whom they are most concern'd in businesses; therefore it comes to pass, notwithstanding fit and con∣gruent
Elections, be properly made from the Geniture of the King, his chief Ministers and Officers: yet sometimes it so falls out, that they are disappointed of the hoped for, and expected good success desi∣red; for the Kings Minister hath up∣on himself, the fortune, or unfor∣tune of his Prince whom he serves, and the King and his Vicegerent have between themselves the for∣tune, and the unfortune of those persons, whom actively they im∣ploy to manage their affairs, & exe∣cute their commands, wherefore the proper fortune, or infortune of the Prince, in the common concourse of affairs depends upon them im∣ployed therein: Therefore all these Considerations, (according to art) are to be inspected, and rightly ballanced in judgement, for advancing the more certain predi∣ction of the event, no otherwise than are mixed together the influ∣ences of many Planets concurring to one, and the same effect: But if the Geniture of subordinate per∣sons, serving in any design cannot
be known, then let onely be obser∣ved, what the Stars, (in reference to their Nativities) of the Prince or chief Commander do presage, in that year by Directions, or Revolu∣tions, and also by the Transits that Day, and the Hour of a fit Ele∣ction, if nothing more can with convenience be done, or known, its better to know so far, then to be ignorant of all: This knowledge as it tends to the creating confi∣dence, and boldness in the hearts and spirits of the Actors, so it pro∣fiteth much more, than injoyning and prescribing cautions from more ignote causes, and grounds. The same is Applicable to the chief General of any Army, and to all his inferior Officers; as also to all which serve and submit them∣selves to the will of another, or commit their own affairs to the hands of another; for in all mat∣ters of great and considerable mo∣ment, its better for a man to know the Heavens favor his designs, than, not to know it, or to know the con∣trary, it will increase Valour and
Courage; for suppose two Generals, or Princes ingag'd in Battail one a∣gainst the other, now if either of these, knew that in the time of Bat∣tail the Heavens would propitiously favour him, although he know no∣thing to the contrary but that the influences may equally favour the Adversary, yet he will fight more audaciously and boldly; but most safe it is to have the knowledge of the enemies Nativity, and from a judicial inspection of both, he might choose a time propitious to himself, and Adverse to his enemy; then might that King whom the Caelestial influences most favour, certainly expect the Victory; yet so understood, that he add his own endeavour, and Cooperate with that fortunate Caelestial influence. Farthermore we are to know, that amongst those acts which the Caelestial bodies particularly signifie to any one; to the effecting of which, a man may be said to con∣tribute nothing of his own, but is meerly passive in the act, as when a man unawares falls from a High
and dangerous place, or falls among Theives, or receives some benefit or Dignity from the King, of which he had no thoughts, nor expectation; these things as to good and bad, are only brought to pass to man, by the Malevolent, or benevolent Influ∣ence of his Stars. Other Actions there are to which the Stars excite, stir up, and invite the minde of man, but yet not pro∣duce a perfection of the thing, but require a Cooperative power of the person to be joyned therewiith, in reference to the accomplishment and end, of which sort are contro∣versies, Wars, Negotiations, and all things in Nature that concerne a man as to Action: for as the Hea∣ven is in it self, the most perfect I∣mage of God, in suo agendi modo; as Philosophy doth abundantly Dilu∣cidate, & as their Natural Influence is most like to the Supernatural Influence of God which is called Grace: For as God by his Grace and spirit exciteth the will to Act, not compelling it, nor subjecting it to himself, or finishing the Action
himself, but a free Cooperation of man is required herunto, which God leaves to the free will of man: even so the Heavens by a particular In∣fluence, stirreth up, and exciteth a man ad Agendum as to Action, not forcing, or compelling him, nor per∣fecting the work of it self, but the Cooperation of mans will, and power is requisite hereunto, which whilst this Cooperation of man is congruent, and conformable to the Caelestial Influence, the effect falls out either good, or bad, ac∣cording to the quality of the In∣fluence, but if the Cooperation of man be contrary to the Caelestial Influence, or work not therewith, no Influence towards him shall have its effect, as by it self. From hence is manifest the great Deception of them, who so far presume upon Astrology, that they confidently beleive, that faeli∣city and good success promised to them by the Stars, must needs Crown all their undertakings, though they do nothing at all, or Incongruently Act, supposing it e∣nough,
if the Heavens signifie good, and that the success must needs be prosperous; i it fall out otherways, then they think Astrology to be false and unsufficient, or themselves to be deceived by the Astrologer, when as the Astrologer by predict∣ing good success to the Native in his Actions and Liberal undertak∣ings, presupposeth a Congruent compliance, and indeavour to the utmost, in the Native, for the ac∣complishment of that end, who by Prudence may Avert and shun that Evil premonitated by the Stars, as also by his Negligence, and Impru∣dence may obstruct that good, and bereave himself, of that felicity promised him by the Heavens, for the Astrologer is not held in every point to the Nicety of the success of his Prediction, it sufficeth that he predict according to Art, and the Active Influence of the Stars: for in truth the Stars by their Influen∣ces incline men to this, or that, and to what they incline, may be truly predicted, but then what depends on mans will, as to Liberal and free
Actings (by reason he may in some measure hinder, or farther their op∣perations being a free Agent in Human things) can be predicted conjecturally, in reference to the future. Seeing that Astrology conver∣sant about these things, is at least to a Human Genus, but only a con∣jectural Science, as also for the in∣differency of free will, to this, or that, or either, as also for the con∣course, and concurrence of other Causes oftime free, and tyed to no necessity, which how they are af∣fected by the Caelestial Influences, is unknown, although the greatest part of mankinde, in their Actings follow their innate propensions, (which much conduceth to a right and safe Prediction) yet there are many, who out of Prudence, Reli∣gion, Coaction, Captivity, or sever∣al other conditions elude the Influ∣ence of the Stars, and of these more Caution is to be used in Predicting, consideration being seriously had, as to their estate and condition: these things I thought good, here
to appose that it may appear how great care, and Sagacity is requisit in an Astrologer in predicting future Events, seeing that in Liberal Acti∣ons, by reason of mans free will, nothing can certainly, infallibly, and definitively be resolved, but on∣ly conjecturally, yet notwithstand∣ing with the more certainty and probability as the ability of the Astrologer is the greater and the Influence of the Heavens of more vallid Signification. But to return let all men avidus of Predictions be so far admonisht, as to know that the Heavens do certainly presage the Events of things, and in this, the Science of the Astrologer is certain, but the Event, and effect (as to man) cheifly depends on mans Cooperation and Acting, either as to Good or Evil, these things before propounded, be∣ing well and duly weighed, it will appear of how great force and con∣cernment to the right ordering and well constituting of Human Affaires, the proper Election of fit and Con∣gruent times are, and is not in the
least to be doubted, but very great Utility and profit frequently ac∣crues from thence to every deligent observator: for the farther Dilucida∣ting and clearing this Truth to the Reader, that nothing may be left that may disrelish his Pallate, its necessary to carry it through the mouths of its greatest Enemies, and so clear it from their aspersion, for as a Learned Author hath, Insur rexe∣runt mihi plures fatui at{que} Idiote tuni∣cati dicentes, Electiones nihil valere att{que} penitus nihil esse, and this shall in the first place ingage us against A∣lexander de Angelis where as in this. CHAP IV. We shall shew how vain and fri∣volous his Arguments are against Elections. THis Alexander De Angelis in his 4th. Book and 15th. Chap. that he wrote against Astrologers
hath many Fictions, vaine, fond, and foolish Arguments against Elections in which he much prides himself, but none of them are worth any Answer, only two of them (con∣ceiting them as maine Engins) he placeth against this part & thinketh thereby to btter down and over∣turn the Universal Foundation of Astrology. The first begins thus, Either (saith he) in the business thou under∣takest (speaking to the Astrologer) thy Natal Stars (meaning the Radi∣cal Position of the Heavens at thy Birth) promise thee happy success, and a desired end, or an unhappy, and unfortunate end; either they promise good or bad, or else just nothing; if in the first sense good, which Star shall undertake to bring about pro∣sperous success? if they signifie evil Radically, then no Star at any time can prosper thy designs, against this first and general Infortune: But if neither of these, that thy Human affaires pertain not to thy Radical Horoscope, then all thy genethiacal Discipline, and Doctrine of Nativi∣ties
falls to the ground, which dedu∣seth all things from the Stars cheif∣ly Predominate, and ruling in the Conception and Birth. The two last parts of this Argument granted, I begin & Answer to the first. Here Alexander de Angelis, most evidently certifies his sottish Igno∣rance in Astrology, for he knoweth not that the Ruling Stars in the Na∣tivity, promise not good felicity, or good success, in every time, but at certaine Definitive times, which time is measured by directions, and confirmed by Congruent Revo∣lutions; As in the Birth, the Hea∣venly Position being Congruent to the Constitution of the In∣fant, miraculously educeth it from the Womb, upon this Worldly Stage, where the Ruling Stars im∣print their Jurisdiction thereon, and subject it Influentially to them∣selves, and so the good signified in the Nativity being maturated, by direction and Congruent Revolu∣tion, the Caelestial figure being answerable. By the Position of the Heavens, and the proper apt
Transits of the Planets, traduceth, de potentia, in Actum, from a Po∣tential possibility into Act, which is the most true and genuine Founda∣tion of Elections. And farther he knoweth not that in every Nativity both good & bad, and bad as well as good are signi∣fied, (Nulla enim est omni ex parte beata, velinfausta) no Fortune but is Chequered, (as it were) with good and bad; Its absurd to think that all mischeifs and evils should come together, or all good toge∣ther, or all good, and all evil toge∣ther, or at one time, to the Native, when could such a time be that a thing thus should hap? Or if at one time, what should be the business of the remaining time of Life? or why should good rather then evil, or evil rather then good at certain times happen? Therefore must needs be granted, that good & evil have their Vicissitudes, and proper times, as is proved by directions, from whence the falseness of his Assertion appears who saith what time soever, or under what Position soever you undertake your business, you may bring
bring it to a happy, and prosperous end. The second is like unto this, where he saith, Let us Elect a time for a long Iourney, by the Position of the Heavens, for any person, and so or∣der all things in Art that the Iourney may be as succesful as can be desired nothing desired more happy: shall this Constitution of Heaven indure the whole time of a long Iourney, or no? here it behoves the Heavens to stand still, whiles men are moved; who possi∣ble (saith he) can beare this madness? and shall not this Position glide away time, where then shall be the safety of this so long Iourney, of Days, or Months? Or whether shall it be said a man is thus Planet favoured from the stars when he first takes Horse? and if so, shall the Stars continue this Luckie safety, and sucess the whole time of the Iourney? Do you think so, doth not he that takes a long Iour∣ney, every day ascend his Horse Affresh? Why how comes it then that he is diarily affected with variety of chances according to the various Do∣mination of secondary Causes? What
profiteth then a Lucky, or an unlucky beginning of a Iourney? Neither can Astrologers make good to him that takes this Iourney, when the Stars shall make good his way, nor clear the way from Theives, nor by dispersing the Clouds temperate the heat of the Sun, and give him a pleasant Air, nor support his Horse from stumbling, and him from falling, nor the way by equalling the Hills and Vallys, all which things the Heavens and the Stars must performe if they, ill per∣forme a Lucky Iourney. These things equally deserve Laughter & are rediculous with the former, and altogether unbecom∣ing a Learned man; as I shall make plainly appear, That Alexander de Angelis knew not wherein the pro∣sperity of a Journey doth consist, I demand of him whether the Jour∣ney that the Virgin Mary made to visit Elizabeth, was prosperous and happy? And that was made over the Mountains of Iudea,Luke 1. which were not Levelled nor made plain, as neither the Mountains Sepher, Gadgad, Hoc and Abacim in which
the Children of Israel pitched their Tents in their Peregrination from Egypt to the Land of Promise, Numb. 33. Now I pray, must all those Journeys made over Hills and Mountains be unlucky, and those only Lucky and fortunate, that are Travel'd in the Plains, which is the Ground usually chosen for Bat∣tels, in which place (notwithstand∣ing there be no Mountains,) is not one side in the Battel worsted, and suffers misfortune? Why doth not this Antagonist as well urge, that the Stars ought to divide the Rivers from the Sea, as they were divided in the Peregrination of the Chil∣dren of Israel? Now in these whimsies and the like sottish Que∣rys, consists not the good Fortune and success of a Journey, but in this that the person undertaking a Jour∣ney, do it with health and prosper∣ous success, without any preterna∣tural or extarordinary Obstacles, which he is not able to overcome, and without the loss of Goods or damage by the way, or company, and that he come opportunly to his
desired place, this is the scope of Travel. But again to that which our An∣tagonist Quesits whether that E∣lected constitution of the Heavens, shall continue the whole time of a long Journey? Which (saith he) it cannot be unless the Heaven stand still; whilst men are moved. I Answer, The same absurdity may be demanded concerning the Figure of Heaven under which any one is said to be happily Born, which truly continueth not in the World, by a quiescent stationary Constituti∣on of the Heavens, so long as the Native lives, but is infixed on the Native, by its first Impression, and indures in the Heaven by its Deter∣mination; To that which Iohannes de Angelis Quesits, whether a man be Fortunated by a Lucky Influence the time he takes Horse, and whe∣ther that Astreal Fortunate Influ∣ence, shall continue and preserve him Fortunate all his Life long? In Answer, Considering rationally the Subject matter of this Discourse, the same absurdity is here as in the
former; here De Angelis urgeth meer Nugacious trifles, and foolish Suppositions, where as the truth is the contrary to his Suggestion: for in the Sympathy of man the Cae∣lestial Bodys powerfully operating, the present Constitution of the Hea∣vens, at the time of Birth, is the only Rule of all the concernments of man during his Natural Life, for as man generally at his production into the World is subjected to a certaine Determinate Influence of the Stars, for his whole Life, not that he putteth himself Diaryly un∣der a New Subjection or changeth, with the unutterrable Mutations changes of the Heavens, as is ap∣parent from experience in the Na∣tural Genius, Inclination, Wit and manner of Action, in every one; from hence it comes to pass, that a man entring or beginning any Acti∣on, or business, Congruent to the Radical Position of the Heavens at the Birth, and conformable to the Radical direction, and Annual Re∣volution, by a Figure of Election, aptly and properly made for the
moment of time in which he begins his af∣faires receives from the Heavens, an Actuall particular Astreal Influ∣ence, to the perfecting and finish∣ing this work begun, in like manner as the Astreal Influx signates, Po∣tentially in the Radix, which power∣ful Influence by consequence, con∣tinues in effect so long time, as is requisite to the perfecting and fini∣shing this Enterprise so begun, not changing every day, for so there would be no Caelestial power to fi∣nish and perfect a Business, but on∣ly to begin if so be, every day, and hour, the various Influences should be variously operated upon the Action, or business begun cer∣tainly, because the Caelestial Radij, as well by the constant motion of the Sphear, as the proper motion of the Planets, is so variable, that nothing could be brought to any Fortunate effect, or at leastwise make discon∣gruous and disorderly progression; so also in all things the Radical Fi∣gure in the Nativity should be false, as also in long Journeys Fortunated, by a good Election, which shall after
appear to be most false, the same validity in other Argu∣ments. But one Objection remains, that carrys more seeming force, and validity as thus, be Heavens not on∣ly presignify future Accidents to each Person Born, but also the par∣ticular time of the Accidents, by their Revolutions, and directions, which is a truth fully in Art evinc'd; Therefore the Heavenly Influences shall in those particular desired times, effect and accomplish what they have Signified, or not accom∣plish it, if so, then whatsoever is said of Election of Days or Hours is superfluous, vaine and of no effect. But to this I Answer, the Decrees of Heaven are not of Fatal neces∣sity, especially in free Actions, but in their effects depend upon the Cooperation of mans will which they incline, and excite in apt and certain time but not Determine and Limit, for this time hath a cerraine Latitude, in the Compass of which a man may Determine and resolve
of himself, ad agendum, as to Acti∣on. Now seeing that during this succession of time, the places of the Planets have their vicisitudes and are continually changing, and the Face of Heaven admits of much variation every hour; It can∣not be denyed but that in the under∣taking every Action, as a long Jour∣ney, or the like, that shall always be the most happy, and cheifly pro∣sperous, which is accomodated and favoured by the Heavens, and to which the Astreal Influence, doth most conveniently concur, and this only is accomplisht by Elections: therefore Elections are greatly pro∣fitable, nay rather necessary to the obtaining the more happy, and de∣sired event, of every considerable Action. Many other frivilous Objections urged by the Ignorant Enemies of Art I might here trouble the Rea∣der with, but being so weak not worth the Answering, I shall for∣bear to spend Paper and pains, on so useless a matter, altogether disliking Fictitious Tautalogies.
CHAP. VI. Treating upon certain General Rules necessaryly relating to Elections, shewing in the General how Elections of apt time are to be made for Things. THose Things being premised that we hitherto Discourst of, its covenient that we subjoyn cer∣tain General Rules necessary to be understood, for the apt forming of Elections, wherein is shewed how in the General a fit and Fortunate Election of time, for every occa∣sion is to be made, these following Rules we have selegated, and chosen out of various Authors, especially the Arabians, which we have sound mixt with many vain and frivolus Positions, and here render them in order for the greater facillity of Learning, and working, principally
applying those which are valid to our purpose, and neglecting those pertinent. But here we are to take Notice, that these Rules are not simply, and absolutely sufficient to ground E∣lections upon, as the Arabians, and those that closely follow them af∣firme, but always we are to have an eye, with due regard to the Nativi∣ty of the Person, and considering those things which depend upon that, with the time of Election; as also respect is to be had to the Radi∣cal Directions the Revolutions of the ☉ and ☽ and their directions, as so the diary Transits of the Pla∣nets. Let therefore this be the first Obser∣vation. That every able and sufficient E∣lection be made by inspecting the Genesis, or Nativity, or the Revolu∣tion, Directions, and Transits of the Planets, the Radical places of the Nativity and Revolutions, acco∣modating every thing herein, as much as may be to the scope of Elections.
Secondly, Seriously it is to be considered to what House of the fi∣gure the thing belongs, for which you would make an Election (which you may finde in the Introductive, part) if it be Dignity or Honour it belongs to the 10th. House, if a Wife to the 7th. if a long Journey to the 9th. if a short Journey to the 3d. &c. And if an Election of time were made for the obtaining of Dignity and Preferment, Schonerus and others make choice of that time when the Progressions of the Horo∣scope, Medium Coeli, and the ☉ and ☽ Radically shall be in the 10th. House of the Radix, but this obser∣vation of Profections and Progressi∣on we finde invalid; therefore chuse that time in which the Directions of the Horoscope, Med Coeli, ☉ and ☽, and all the Lords in the Revolu∣tions of the ☉ and ☽ shall come to the 10th. of the Radix, or his For∣tunate Aspect, or to a Benevolent Planet therein, or to the Lord of the 10th. House, or to the place, or good Aspects of the ☉ and ☽ in the Radix, or the Lords thereof, or to
the happy and Fortunate Rayes of any of these, and what day these shall happen, account it the more happy: then chuse an apt and fit hour to Act in, in that day, that is Erect your Figure, take the Position of the Heavens, Congruent to the scope and purport of your business: the same reason, and operation is in the undertaking a Journey, Con∣tracting Matrimony or the like. Thirdly, in the Figure of Electi∣on, respect is cheifly to be had, to the Horoscope, the Significator of the Person for whom the Electi∣on is made, of the Mid Heaven like∣wise which hath the Signification of the Actions and undertakings of the Person, as also to that House of the Figure, to which the matter belongs, for which the Election is made, to the Moon likewise who claimes rightly, much in our con∣sideration in Every Election, that she be well posited, well affected, & Aspected from and by the other Planets, and not afflicted, for special care is to be had least the Radical places beforesaid, viz. The Horo∣scope,
Medium Coeli, and the Moon should be evil affected, or the same should be the Cusps of evil Houses Radically, but the Cusps of apt, good and Congruent Houses. Fourthly, in your Figure of E∣lection, take care that the House which hath the Signification of the thing for which the Election is made, be Fortunate in the hour of Election, and if it so fall out that it be Fortunate in the Nativity, and in the Revolution of the ☉ and ☽ that doth highly promise good suc∣cess: moreover it shall be Fortuna∣ted by the presence, or Dominion of Benevolent Planets, which Radi∣cally, and Revolutionally, were by Nature Benevolents and well af∣fected, and rightly determined in body, Dominion, or a Congruent Aspect to the thing for the which the Election is made, which if the Election be for Dignity and Honor, and the Signe of the 10th. of the Nativity, or present Revolution culminate in the Figure of Election or that Signe in which the Lord of the 10th. was in in either of them,
the Election is much the better, and the more efficacious, and so of all o∣thers but cheifly you shall take care that no Planet, Evil by Nature or by Radical Position, & contrary in na∣ture to the scope of your Election, be in the House of Election (i.e.) the House fignifying your business, but carefully indeavour that a Benevo∣lent Planet be admitted or posited therein, or that the Lord of that House Fortunately, by Dominion or Aspect be united, or joyned with the Horoscope or the Medium Coeli or their, or either of their Lords or Governing Planets. Fiftly, in a mans own proper bu∣siness, that is, that which he can of himself performe, let him make the Ascendent of the Election the same of his Nativity; But in com∣mon things, that is such as he can∣not go through with himself,  shall need the help of freinds, let him make the Cusp of the 11th. or 5th. Houses in his Radicall Geni∣ture, the Horoscope of his Election, but Scover makes the Question why in all common Actions, in whose
performance there is required the help of friends, the Radical Cusp of the 11th. House should be the Ho∣roscope of the Election, rather then the Horoscope of the Radix? Be∣cause if the Horoscope of the Radx should always be put for the Horo∣scope of the Election, it would foo∣low that the Horoscope of every E∣lection, should be the same as in the Nativity, and none other, because all Actions performed are either proper or common, but this is not in Art required: and furthermore because the Ascendant of the E∣lection always hath the Significa∣tion of the person for whom the E∣lection is made, we conceive it re∣quisite that at least the Horoscope be Radiated with the Lord of that House in the Geniture, to the which pertains the thing for which the Election is made, or with the Planet existing in that House, thus for particular and proper operations; so in the like manner the Horoscope is strengthened by the Radical Lord of the 11th. House or the Planet therein existing, if your business re∣quires
the help of friends, or your Election be for the obtaining or Conciliating of Friendship, the same reason and proceed is in all other opperations. Sixly, in choosing the Horoscope of your Figure of Election, consi∣deration is to be had to the Nature of the thing for which it is made, that the Horoscope may properly, and conveniently thereunto agree, therefore for a business in the which you deserve quick dispatch as in a Journey or they like, choose to as∣cend to a moveable Sign, and not a fixed Sign, but for a business in the which you desire firmity, and duration, as Marriage, the build∣ing of an House, City, Church or the like, take you here a fixed Sign, and avoid a moveable Sign, and take heed that the Lord of the Ascendant be not slow in motion, Retrograde, or afflicted by the Malevolents, or any wise applying to them. Sevethly. In the day time cause to ascend a Diurnal Sign, in the Night a Nocturnal, and let the Sun be by day in a Diurnal Sign, and the ☽ by
Night in a Nocturnal Sign, and let the Lord of the Ascendant be right∣ly posited, Aspecting the ☉ or ☽, and it shall much meliorate the E∣lection, and render it more effica∣tious, if the Diurnal Planets shall be above the Earth in the day in Masculine Signs, and Oriental of the ☉, and Nocturnal Planets above the Earth in the Night in Feminine Signs, and occidental from the ☽. Eightly, If the Lord of the As∣cendant of the Election, shall be the Lord of the Horoscope in the Radical Geniture, and shall be Be∣nevolent in Nature, and every way in both Fortunate, it shall render the Election most happy. Ninthly, If you are to desire any thing by Petition from the King, Queen, Prince, or other Great Person, Great in Birth or Dignity, or to treat about any businesses, with such Eminent Persons, Coapt the Horoscope and Lord thereof, with the Lord of the Medium Coeli of the Radix, and present Revolution, and the Planets proper to your business, as the ☉ for the King, the ☽ for the
Queen, ♃ for Chancellour President, or Bishop, ♂ for the General, and Cheif Commanders of an Army, or Eminent in Millitary Discipline; and so in like manner of all other Significations, and if this proper and Significant Planet shall be Lord of the Med. Coeli, it is the more Sig∣nificant, and efficatious, but take heed that in the Radix or Revoluti∣on, that Radically or Revolution∣ally it be not afflicted, or evilly Sig∣nificant; the like reason is of all things and Persons relating to all o∣ther Houses, as the 3.4.5.7 9. &c. Tenthly, All the Antient Astrolo∣gers grant so great efficacy to the ☽ in Elections, that if not the cheif∣est, yet the second place of power at the least, they ascribe to her, not∣withstanding I cannot see they have any reason of such Determination in the Radical Figure, yet this Judge∣ment seems to me in Election of time very necessary, for although the Moon in the Geniture be the Sig∣nificatix of Death, in the Elections she may be taken for the Significa∣ix of Life either ways  ∣tion,
neither is this only observable in the Moon, but in every other Planet, of the Moon the Antients de∣liver these following considerations. 11th. The Native is admoni∣shed to begin no business anew, when the Moon shall be in the Radical place of ♄ or ♂, or in a∣ny Malignant Aspect with either of them, or in any Sign, which was evil affected in the Nativity, or in the 6, 8th. or 12th. House of the Radix, and in like manner in a figure of E∣lection see the ☽ be not afflicted, & unfortunate by ♄ or ♂ by body or Aspect neither in the 6.8. or 12 hou∣ses nor yet in the first House, as the most part would have it, for they say the ☽ is Injurious to the Horoscope by reason of her frigidity, which reason I take for vain and frivolous, unless in refference to Physick, and Agriculture, which may sometimes in these be verified. 12. In Elections these Appli∣cations are to be abhorred (viz.) The Moon applying to ♂ from the House of ♀, to ♃, from the Houses of ☿, and to the ☉ from the Houses
of ♄, be very careful to shun all these in your Elections. 13. Moon, ♄ and ♃ conjoynd, incrensing in number and light, are good as to all Significations, but diminished, or decreasing, evil in all things the direct contrary is to be understood when ♂ and ♀ shall be so conjoyn'd. 14. Have dilligent respect to the place of the Moon in your Figure of Election, if she shall be in △ or ✶ of any Planet Radically, it shall be good, safe and fortunate to have to do with those Persons which that Planet by Nature, or Radical Determination shall Signifie, but if the Aspect be □ or ☍, understand the contrary, as for Example, if the ☽ shall be in △ Radically to ♂ (or △ to the Radical place of ♂) which shall have Dominion in, or be Lord of the 7th. House well affected, this shall signify victory and conquest in War, Controversies and Law Suits, the favour and respect of the Soul∣diers, Horse and Foot, and the cheif Commanders in the Army, as also of the Judges Advocates, and principal
Lawyers, in a Law Suit and Con∣troversy, but if it be by □ or ☍, judge the contrary: the same reason and method observed in all other things. 15. That the Moon be placed in the House Signifying the thing for which the Election is made, as for Example, that the ☽ be posited in the 9th. if the Election be for Travel, so that the place be Fortu∣nate Radically, and having also the Signification of the same, the ☽ shall have the Signification of the same thing, and moreover if the ☽ Aspect the Horoscope Fortunately, or have cheif Dominion therein, nothing more happy can be desired. 16. Beware that the Moon be not joyned to a Retrogade Planet, or apply to him, for this destroys the success of your undertakings. 17. If you cannot posibly For∣tunate the Moon and the Horo∣scope, together, by day rather For∣tunate the Horoscope, by night the ☽ & if the ☽ shall be by day under, and by night above the Earth, it ads to the Fortification of the Horoscope. 18. Consideration is to be
had of the ☌ and ☍ of the Lumi∣narys, preceding the Election, that the places wherein they make these Aspects, be Fortunate in the Figure of Election, and Congruent to the matter in hand. 19. Cave, bewar of begin∣ning any thing in that moment of time when the Moon seperates from the ☌ or ☍ with the ☉, and ap∣plyeth to an Infortune especially if that Planet have of evil and Unfor∣tunate Signification in the Nativi∣ty for that time is exceeding e∣vil, and unlucky, and the Signi∣fication is the worse if the Appli∣cation be by □ or ☍. Twenty, From the good or evil state of the place and Position of the ☌ or ☍ of the Lumanarys preced∣ing the Election, and from the Be∣nevolent, or Malevolent Planet to whom the ☽ immediately applys, may be conjectured the Event of the thing for which the Election is made, as thus, if the state of the place shall be good, and the Planet Benevolent, the business shall hap∣pily and prosperiously succeed from
the beginning to the end, but if the position of the place be evil, and the Planet unfortunate, the business from the beginning to the end, shall unfortunately proceed, or ne∣ver be accomplished: if the state of the place shall be good, and the Planet Evil, the thing shall begin well, but end ill; if lastly the state of the place shall be evil, and the Planet good, the business shall be∣gin unluckily, and end happily. 21. Sometimes time, (in re∣ference to suddain business) may be so urgent, that we may not delay till a convenient time to aptate and fortify all the proper significa∣tors: But then if no more can be done, be sure to Aptate the Horos∣cope, & take care that a fortune be in an angle, beholding the Lord of the Ascendant with a benevolent aspect. 22. In every Election of time which requires speed and hast, if you cannot Fortunate the ☽, put ♃ or ♀ in the Horoscope, or Med. Coeli, and the ☽ in a Cadent House, but bewar least an Infortune Aspect the Horoscope, especially
with a Malignant Ray; or the Planet which Naturally, or by Radical Determination signifies the thing for which the Election is made, or their Lords, or the Lord of the House, to which the matter of your Election appertaines. 23. In case of urgent necessity, when delay cannot be had, and time cannot be staid for, wherein you might fitly and Congruently aptate all proper Significators, then aply your self to the Ascendant, and Me∣dium Coeli that they may be well, and auspiciously aptated, and let the fortunes be in Angles, happily As∣pecting the Horoscope or Medium Coeli, or their Lords; but by the way note, that in Elections it very sel∣dome so falls out, that you posibly can, fitly aptate all the proper Sig∣nificators, as you would or should; Therefore always be prudently at∣tentive to observe, what may best and most Congruently be done in reference to your intended scope, and that do, and what remains, let thy Prudence supply, always being mindful of mans indeavour and pru∣dent
Cooperation with the Stars, which by how mdch the more, Dull, Slothful, Lazy, and imprudent, his Indeavours is, by so much the less is good success to be hoped from the Stars; and by how much the more Dilligent, Resolute, Strong, and Sagatious mans will is, by so much the more, is good success to be hoped and expected. 24. In every Election take heed least the Malevolents be Angular, and cheifly in the Horoscope or Medium Coeli unless by Caelesti∣al Position, and Determination they have been Benevolent in the Radix; then make use of them to the utmost in good, it is specialy worth noting, and our Considera∣tion, that the Malevolent Planets, in things of their own Signification perform the greatest good, as Mars relating to War, Victory, Hunting, and Law Controversies, and the like, and Saturn, as to the rasing of Structures, and Building, Husban∣dry, and the like; and cheifly, and e∣specially if the Radical Determina∣tion, do Significantly intend these things.
25. The Consideration of the fixed Stars in Elections, are not to be ommitted, especially the most eminent, for being in Angles, and with the Significators, are very Potent, and produce remarkable effects, principally, if in the Radix they intend that thing for which the Question is made. Thus for the present these in the General shall suffice, but if please God to prolong life much more as to the Practique part Astrologically shall be handled, but let us serious∣ly from hence note so much, that the prudent, wise, and skilful E∣lection of time, is not the work of every one professing Astrology, but of the most Learned Prudent, and most Wise, who not only ought to attend the state and disposition of the Heavens, but also the disposi∣tion of Inferiour Causes, (id est) that their may be a right preparative disposition of all things, to the time Elected, and this is very easy to be done in things which are in our own power, as in the beginning of a Journey or the like, but in those
things not in our own proper pow∣er, as in speaking to the King, or the like, at a certain day and houre appointedly Elected, this would be very difficult in most times, and scarce ever to be accomplished, un∣less by some dear and eminent friends, by whose means access may be had, at the hour and time Elected, therefore these Causes are first to be disposed to the hour E∣lected, in like manner we are to proceed in other things. Thus from these before rehear∣sed Aphorisms Universally intend∣ing Elections, is sufficiently cleared, how in the General, every Election is to be made, but for every parti∣cular thing, as it relates, and ap∣pertains to any of the twelve Hou∣ses of Heaven, Signified in the Caelestial Figure and Position, as these are peculiarly perticular in each respect, so there are certain peculiar and convenient Aphorismes proper to each particular; of which sort (after the particular method of the twelve Houses) are these which in proper order, and method follow.
Its very necessary to premise the signification of each of the 12 hou∣ses, that thereby we may know how rightly to apply every Action, and understand the proper Significa∣tors. The first house hath signification of the Life of Man, Health and Sickness, of his Stature, Colour, Complexion, Form and Shape, and all things that concern the Body and Mind of Man. Of the particular Elections relating to the first House, and general and perticular Aphorismes requisite therennto. 1. ATtempt not (in your choice) Impossibilities, but so far proceed as the Discipline of Science and Natural Reason shall perswade. 2. Elections (saith Ptolomy) most profit, when they most correspond, and are congruent to the Nati∣vity. 3. The Nativity being known, begin your operations in that hour,
that signe ascends, that Ascended in the Nativity, and see that the four Angles be free from the Affliction of the Malevolents, unless they were Lords of the Ascendant, or sig∣nificant places at birth. This Rule hath truth in it, when as in casual acts you would in a common ordi∣nary way fortunate your designe in reference to your self, but if in your more common actings with others, you would be fortunate, begin your work in that hour in which the signe of the 11th. or 5th. Houses in your Nativity Ascend; and that the Luminaries be in Angles, or succedant houses, is alwaies good. 4. Begin your work when the Lord of the Ascendant in the Nati∣vity, shall be in a fortunate place in the present figure of Heaven, be he good, or be he an evil Planet, for the evil Planets, will work good to their proper Natives, accor∣ding to their Radical Significati∣ons. 5. It is good, an evil Planet be not posited in any the Angles of your figure, unless he the Lord of
the Radical Ascendant, or signifie the thing you desire to begin. 6. The Nativity being not known, Virgo and Pises, are gene∣rally thought the best Ascendants, so that the Luminaries be in Angles or succedants. 7. In every operation see that the Lord of the Ascendant be An∣gular, or at leastwise in a succe∣dent House. 8. In the time of a conjunction, the Luminaryes, with a fortune in the Ascendant, very good for the Inception of any particular business. 9. Not good to designe a day, or hour to any one to perfect his designes in, unless first the intention of the Querent concerning the thing he quesites, be resolvedly free. 10. In every Election erect your Figure according to the proper La∣titude of the place, where the que∣stion is made, for from the diversi∣fication of Climates followes a di∣versification of Ascendants, and in like manner different Aspects; and so by consequence different directi∣ons;
for the alteration of Latitudes alters the circles, and circular moti∣on, which heedfully observe. 11. If you are necessitated to begin a work that you cannot defer, cause that the Ascendant and Lord thereof be free from Affliction, and a Fortune in an Angle, especially the first or 10th. 12. In the undertaking of great Affairs, and the beginning of weigh∣ty Acttions, cause that the Lumi∣naries be in the terms of the for∣tunes, Aspecting themselves, and that the Lords of those terms, have the signification of the work in Action. 13. Make no address to King or Princes, to Petition or obtain a∣ny suite of them, the Moon existing in Aquary or Pisces. 14. In every Election Aptate Sol, and the Planet significator of the thing quesited, the part of Fortune also and his Lord, the fourth House and the Planets in whose houses these significators are found. 15. Address your self to Prin∣ces for Favours when the head of
the Dragon is in the tenth with ♃, the ☽ also applying thereto, or se∣perate from ♃ and applying to the Lord of the Ascendant, or the same to the Moon, the Scots (its sup∣pos'd) did excel in this Policy in King Iames his time. 16. In Election of times for Su∣periour Officers, the Signs of the Superiour Planets, and of the Sun are commended to Ascend, In E∣lections for popular Inferiours, the Signs of the Inferiour Planets and the Moon. 17. The Aspects of the ☽ to ♂, are not commended although from the Houses of ♀, nor to ♃ from the Houses of ☿, for here is Apertio portarum their Houses are oppo∣site. 18. A cheif Observation it is in every Election for good, that the ☽ be Fortunate and in a good place without the unhappy Aspects of un∣fortunate Stars. 19. More certain shall you make a sure and Fortunate Election for him whose Nativity you know, then if you be thereof Ignorant.
20. In Elections for men, Coap∣tate Masculine Signes, for women Feminine Signes, but so as they be without the Aspects of Malevolent Stars, and in like manner a Planet of either Gender, suitable to the Nature of either Person, and Acti∣on. 21. Every Signe according to the diversity of the Region may have various Signification, from what it hath in another Region. 22. The Debillitys of the For∣tunate Planets, are of greater prejudice, then of the Malevo∣lents. 23. The Caelestiall bodys, op∣perate according to their magni∣tudes their clarity, and Natures. 24. In every Election, choose your Significators Congruent in Nature to the thing required. 25. You may not Debillitate the Significators of the Nativity, especially If they were strong in the Radix. 26. In Election, if you cannot aptate and fortifie what you would do what you can, be sure not to
neglect the Planets Significators of your business. 27. The Eminent fixed Stars in the first and 10th. Houses, are not to be omitted, which should right∣ly be (if posible) of the Nature of the thing intended. 28. Its very requisite the Lord of the Nativity be placed in the most Eminent Significant place of Heaven, as also the Lord of the current Revolution be Fortunated, and the Planets that receive them, with the Lord of the houre, and part of Fortune, and if posible, place the Radical Ascendant in the first, tenth, or eleventh Houses, and all free from the Infortunes and their Aspects. 29. The time of effecting your desired ends, may be known from the Significator thereof, and the application he hath to other Pla∣nets, or from the ☽ to the degrees of a Fortunate Significant star, the distance of Degrees, (according to the Nature of the thing and Signe) shall signify Days, Houres, Months, or Years, the same doth the Moon
shew when she applys to the House Signifying the thing sought, all which according to the Nature of the places, and Signes are to be weighed. 30. Put a Child to Nurse, the ☽ joyned to, or Aspecting ♀, from Taurus or ♎, and if ♀ be descend∣ing in her Eccentrique or Epicicle it is the better. 31. Weane a Child and take it from the Nurse the ☽ receding from the ☉ 90. degrees at least, to 167. degrees, the ☽ may not be in any of the Houses of ♀, for then the Mo∣ther will not part with it through in∣dulgency, but if in ♎ the Child will willingly forsake the Brest, and far∣ther observv that if the ☽ and the Lord of the Ascendant be in Earth∣ly Signes, at the time of its wean∣ing as ♉, ♍ or ♑, the Child shall cheifly love Sallets, Roots, and such things as grow on the Earth, if in ♌ it shall cheifly affect the eating of flesh, if in ♋ ♏ or ♓ it will ever after delight in eating fish, but if in ♊, it cheifly loves Tame Domestick Fowls as Geese, Ducks,
Capons and the like, Quere, Whe∣ther many of our Churchwardens were not weaned under this PoSi∣on? if in ♈ ♎ or Scorpio, they indifferently love every thing that is good; if in ♒ they much affect Wild Foul, and if this were duly observed we might discerne some reason why one loves one thing and hates another, &c. but no more of this till a farther opportu∣nity. 32. In cutting nailes from hands or feet, observe the position of the ☽, though this with many (through their Ignorance) be a subject of laughter, yet the reason why the Nailes grow thick, crooked, defor∣med, and suffer many distasteful accidents; is from hence, of which rationally much might be said, the neatness and deformity of the nailes are of no small consideration, to prevent deformity let not the ☽ be in ♊ ♓ nor Aries, nor afflicted with the □ or ☍ of ♄ or ♂, these are the most considerable afflictions. 33. If you desire secresy in Counsel, or to do that which should
not be discovered, act when the ☽ is combust or under the ☉ beames, rather applying than separating 34. When the significator of a thing in reference to time, shall be between the ascendant and the 10th. house; it shall signifie hours, or days, answering the degrees: if between the 11th. and 7th. weeks or months, if between the 7th. and the 4th. it signifies years. 35. These are chiefly in most Elections considerable to be apta∣ted, viz. the Ascendant the Lumi∣naries, part of Fortune, the signe of the preceding conjunction, the Lords thereof, the Lord of the hour, as also the Lord of the thing quesi∣ted and his dispositor. 36. Alway take heed to the Lord of the thing quesited, consider the signe in which he is, if cadent, retrogade or in evil position to the sur. 37. In putting on new garments avoid the ☽ her being in ♌, (saith Ptolomy) but I judge the other fixed signes are likewise noxious, as ♉ and ♏, for then your clothes will
last long, or not wear out, the rea∣son is sickness or death will occasi∣on it, see likewise the ☽ be not in ☌ or ☍ with the ☉, nor impedited from the malevolents. 38. Begin not any building whiles the Moon is meridional des∣cending in ♏ or ♓, for such a Fa∣brick shall quickly come to ruine. 39. In building of Cities (saith Ptolomey) aptate the fixed stars, and see that the Lords of the As∣cendant, 10th. 6th. and 4th. be in good places, and free from the as∣pects of the infortunes. 40. Every inception, i. e. any work or business begun when a Retrogade Planet is joyned to the ☽, shall more quickly be ruined, and come to a worse end, than from any other affliction; this is worse then any other impediment. 41. The ☽ with ♄ or ♃ increa∣sing in light & Number, good as to all opperations; but if decreasing, the contrary: the same understand if she be with ♂ and ♀. 42. It predicts a false event of the thing to be done if ♏ ascend, the
Angles oblike, or ♂ in them. 43. As to good or evil, the thing shall be durable when the sig∣nificator therof shall be stationary, and angular, but of little conti∣nuance, when he shal be Retrogade, and in cadents from the Angles. 44. It is behoveful in the Electi∣on of time, to consider the seasons, for Summer requireth one conside∣ration, and Winter another; for the mutation of times may oft impede our actions, as oft it comes to pass through rains, and unseasonable weather. 45. As I hinted before of the nails, so the hair though it be an ex∣crement of nature, yet it is an emi∣nent ornament to the body, in man and woman, and makes as well for Beauty as for health; and therefore necessarily ought to be cherished, as the other parts of the body, which tends to external ornament: Now that which tends most to the conservation of the hair consists in the well ordring thereof, a principal part whereof consists in the orderly cutting and triming, which cannot
be done to the best advantage with∣out a fit election of time to that purpose, now I expect Momus and Zoilus will shew their teeth in cen∣sure of me, for treating of this so inferiour a subject, but as it is an natural ornament, necessarily tend∣ing to the Decoration of the body; and as it is valued in the decent use thereof, I hope my excuse is plea∣ded, and these Rules will not be un∣welcome to every rational ingeni∣ous mind, which observe as follow∣eth. Let the ☽ be in ♎ in ♐ in ♒ or ♓ when you shave head or beard, and in ♈ if you cut the hair of the head or beard with sissers but by no means shave it with a Razor the ☽ in ♈, or ♂ in the ascendant, the ☽ being thus posited, and applying to ♃, or ♀, but ♀ in this hath the best significa∣tion, because it tends most to beau∣ty and ornament, but if the ☽ ap∣ply to ♂ or ♄ it is of evil significa∣tion which be careful to avoid, &c. Thus much for the Signification of the first House.
Of the second House and its sig∣nifications in reference to Elections. FRom this house we are to un∣derstand concerning the estate or fortune of any one, of his wealth or poverty, of all moveable Goods, money lent, of profit or gain, loss or damage. In suits of Law, it signi∣fies a mans friends and assistance, in private Duels the querents se∣cond, in the body of man this house represents the neck, and hinder part thereof towards the shoul∣ders. Of Elections concerning Riches the subject of the second House. 1. IN Lending and borrowing beware that ♃ be not unfor∣tunate, and under the Suns Rayes, Combust, unless by reception.
2. In all pecuniary money mat∣ters, and in acts of honesty and justice, intending gain and profit, aptate i. e. fortify Iupiter, and the Lord of the second house, and their dispositors, that they be all fortu∣nately placed. 3. He which buyeth cattel or any commodity the ☽ passing from the beginning of ♋ to the latter end of ♐ buyes deer, and sels cheap, and he that buyes the ☽ passing from the beginning of ♑ to the end of ♊ buyes cheap and sells dear. 4. In negotiating and contract∣ing bargains, coaptate ☿, the Lord of the second house, tenth, Ascen∣dant and the ☽. 5. When you desire gain and profit, aptate the Planet which hath the proper signification of the thing, and the kind of gaine you de∣sire; as in Husbandry, sowing and planting ♄, in pecuniary matters ♃ In warlike affairs ♂, in Honours, dig∣nities & preferments the ☉, in or∣naments & espousals ♀, in all manner of writing & the like ☿, in journeys and popular affairs the ☽, which are
to be fortified and debilitated ac∣cording to the nature of your occa∣sional expeditions. 6. Moreover the Planets are to be aptated according to the names of the dayes, the Planetary houre, all which things are seriously to be weighed, and considered. 7. If you would keep your mo∣ney or goods long from damage, fortify the first house and the Lord thereof, the second house and his Lord, the ☽ and her dispositer, con∣sidering that ♃ be well placed and the part of fortune, and ♃ behol∣ding some of them with amiable Aspect, remove ♂ from all fignifi∣cation, and posite him in a cadent house, ♄ and cauda draconis are evil, debilitate them as much as may be: If you would preserve commestible goods posite the ☽ in the Ascendant, and in signes of that nature, as ♈ ♉ ♌ the last part of ♐ ♑ and ♓ and let not the ☽ nor the Ascendant be in any of the significations of ♄. In buying and selling, the Ascen∣dant and his Lord, and the Planet to whom the ☽ applies are significa∣tors
of the buyer: The 7th. House the Lord thereof, and the Planet from whom the ☽ seperates signifie the Seller, the 10th. House and Lord thereof signifies the Price; the 4th. House and Lord thereof signify the thing bought and sold, the Moon likewise hath Signification of the Price; Now observe of which side the Significators are strongest, that party shall have the better, either buyer or Seller: Farther observe if you would buy good Bargains (as it is the desire of all men,) aptate the part of Fortune, and posite the same in the House of ♃, and a Fortune applying thereunto, so it will be better for the Buyer then for the Seller, but if the Moon shall be in Signs of right Ascentions as ♋, ♌, ♍, ♎, ♏, ♐, and increasing in Light and Number, and applying to Fortunes, or in her Exaltation, heer it shall be better for the Seller then the Buyer: Its necessary that ♂ be Cadent form ☿ and the Moon, be∣cause ♂ in buying and selling and debts, signifies timourousness, Dis∣contents, contention and Quarels,
the same Signification hath Cauda Draconis; Therefore its necessary that the Moon be not neer the same, although it is less evil then ♂: An Eminent Author saith, it shall be good for the Seller, when the ☽ is in her Exaltation or triplicity, & Cadent from the Infortunes, and not beholding them, and removed from the Aspects of the Fortunes likewise, that then the seller shall sell to his own content: Futhermore the Moons Quarterly motion is considerable, for if you would buy in a Market, at a good and just price do it in the first quarter of the moon, the Moon joyn'd to, or aspecting ☿, and both free from affliction or at least that ☿ be free from infortunes, though not conjoyned to the Moon, and if you buy for gain, and desire advantageous markets do it in the Quarter after the full, the ☽ in Signs of oblique Ascentions and diminish∣ed in Light and Number, and safe without afliction Aspecting ☿, the buyer shall purchase good penny∣worths, from the first Quarter to the Full is best for the seller, from the
Full to the last quarter is best for the buyer, the ☽ in her last Quarter is good for him that buys, any secret, or hidden Commoditys, such as he would not have known, cheifly if the Moon be Aspected by a Fortune because this is of great use to all men, therefore I have been the lar∣ger herein. But farther, 9. Necessity oftimes compels poor Husbandmen oppressed with necessity,Selling Grain. to sell their Crops on the ground before Harvest, which that they may do it to their Advantage, let them sell the Quarter before the Full Moon, the Moon then increas∣ing in Light and in Signes of oblique Asentions as ♑, ♒, ♓, ♈, ♉, ♊, and let the Ascendant of time be some one of these Signes and a Mas∣culine Planet in some of these pla∣ces, and the Lord of the Ascendant, let the Medium Coeli, and the Lord thereof be free from affliction, and the Moon with ☿, or aspecting him, and swift of motion. One Observation more on this Sub∣ject, for the good of the Seller, let
sell when the Moon is in ♉, ♋, ♍, or ♓ free from impediments, and it is good that she seperate from one Fortune, by body or aspect, and apply to an infortune by aspect not by body, this is very good for he that selleth, he sells at a deer rate. 10.Remove∣ing from House to House. Taking and Letting Houses is very frequent especially in Citys, therefore its necessary to shew what is requisie to be considered, in Taking or Letting a House, and in re∣moving from one House to another. First when you are to Elect a time to this purpose, consider whether it be the parties own House, or a hired House he removes too, if his own, at his entring into it, let the As∣cendant be a fixed Signe viz. ♉, ♌, ♍, ♒, and the Moon in a fixed Sign, but if it be a hired House, let the Ascendant be a common Signe, and the Moon likewise in a com∣mon Sign, which are ♊, ♍, ♐, ♓. to which end likewise you must aptate the Ascendant and his Lord, the ☽ and the Lord of the Signe in which she is, the second House, and his Lord, the 4th, and the Lord thereof,
and the part of fortune, likewise is to be aptated, the Ascendant & Lord thereof, the Moon & her Dispositor are for the person Inhabiting: the se∣cond and his Lord & ♁ part of For∣tune, signify his goods & the conser∣vation of his Riches, already got, and this is very considerable, for there is little less Art in keeping an Estate, then getting it, many Fortune hath favoured in obtaining an Estate, but through inconsideration they have simply lost it, the fault of which may lye in not observing these Rules: Now the second house is well Fortunated if you posite love therein, Fortunatly aspected, but however Iupiter be Aspected, in the hour of entrance, its good to place him in the second House. The 4th. House is likewise to be aptated in reference to the end of the success of the whole business; Haly his O∣pinion is (and on good grounds) that ♉ or ♌ are best to be on the 4th. House, for these signify the House to be good, delightful, clean, neate healthful and prosperous; free from Impediments, as venomous Crea∣tures,
or noxtious unholsom Airs, or the like; be careful that ♏ be not in the 4th. House, or that ♄ do not aspect the 4th. or be posited therein, and you avoid the cheif and greatest inconveniences. According to these Rules you are to proceed, being careful that none of these places viz. The first, second, and 4th. Houses (if posible) be afflicted with the presence or Rays of the Malevo∣lents, but Irradiated, and fortunated with the presence, or Rays of the Benevolent Planets, If you cannot thus aptate all the Houses, be sure you fortunate the first and second as before said, and you may expect a comfortable enjoyment. Concerning Chymical Operations. 11.Of Chy∣mistry. MAny have formerly and do to this day study this Noble Science of Alchimy, and Chymical operations though some do it out of avaritious & coveteous ends, deceiving others, and in fine lose their labour, time and expen∣ces. Neither comes this to pass from
one only error, but often times from many as sometimes they are Igno∣rant of the right method conducing to the end of their work, sometimes erring not knowing rightly to pro∣portionate, the Materia, or bodys with the Spirits, & sometimes, & that very oft, they err, not knowing how to choose a right, and proper time to begin the work; nor under a right Ascendant not to posite the Moon, where she should be placed to bring to perfection the work, and this is one of the greatest Errors that can befall the Chymist, neither know they how to aptate the Planet pro∣per to the work they intend: There∣fore if any one intending this opera∣tion, and adress himself to an Artist for instruction, let him make choice of an hour for him to begin, in which the Moon is in common Signes, free from all Impediments, in position, Aspect, or what ever may render her unfortunate, and let the Ascen∣dant be a common Signe, and the Lord thereof aptated, and free from all Impediments, and cheifly aptate and fortify the Planet signifying the
Species you intend to work, As if in Lead, aptate ♄, if it be Tinn, or Au∣richalcum aptate ♃, If Copper, Brass, Iron, Antimony, Arsnick Brimstone, aptate ♂, if it be Gold, aptate the ☉, If Copper, white, Brass or the like aptate ♀, if it be Electrum aptate ☿ if it be Silver, aptate the ☽; Thus for∣tify every proper Significator in the beginning of the work according to the Species, and essence of every one, and success may be expected. Election of time for the obtaining of Money. 12.For the obtai∣ning of Money. HEre consider that the Ascendant and Lord thereof, are Significators of the Debtor, that owes the Mony, the 7th. House and his Lord are Signifi∣cators of him to whom the money is due, o that lends the money, ☿ and the ☽ signify the Debt, now when there is concord and amity of Aspects between the Lord of the Ascendant and 7th. House, ☿ in the Ascendant, or with the Lord there∣of fortunately aspected, the money
comes with facillity, but if the ☽ shall be under the Suns Rays, the Sun then shall signify the Substance, in place of the Moon, if the Moon shall be in via combusta, or descend∣ing in the Meridian, or shall be in the first degrees of ♌, ♊, ♓, ♐, or if any of those degrees shall be ascend∣ing, they signify not good to the giver, or payer, but confer Utillity and profit on the receiver, and some are of opinion that the hours of Saturn, and the Sun, are unfortunate in these Actions. Of Elections cocnerning the third House. 1. VVHich hath Significa∣tion of Bretheren,Brethren Kindred, Alliance, and Concord, Amity, Love, Friendship, and dis∣cord amongst them, for the concord and friendship of Brethren, aptate the third House, and the Lord there∣of, and see that the Lord of the third apply to the Ascendant, or Lord
thereof with ☌ or amicable Aspect either △ ✶, or by reception, it is good that the Lord of the Ascendant be in the 10th. or 11th. Houses, and that the Moon aspect them: If the Election be made in reference to Elder Brethren, its good to ap∣tate ♄, and that he behold the As∣cendant, third, or Lords thereof with a good Aspect, and with recep∣tion: In your business and affaires with middle Brethren aptate ♂ in stead of ♄, with Younger Brethren aptate ☿ instead of ♄, If with Sisters, aptate ♀ instead of the other as is aforesaid, in like manner you may consider Amity, and Concord with Parents, using the 4th. House, as we heer discurse the third; In like manner for Children, by considering the 5th. House, as here the third, for Friends, the 11th. House, ad so for any House taking the Signifi∣cation according to the Rules pre∣mised in the third. 2. To this third House we refer short Journeys Travel of one day or more or less, not relating to War, and when you would Elect an hour
to make such a Journey, aptate the Ascendant and his Lord, the Moon, and the Lord of the Sign she is in, and part of Fortune, and Lord therof, the third House and his Lord, and the Planet to whom the Moon is joyned, in like manner the Lord of the hour and House Signifying the business of the Travellor goeth a∣about, (if he Signify the same to thee,) and the Lord of that House. 3. But if it so fall out you cannot aptate all you should, aptate what you can, amongst which at least ap∣tate the Moon and the Lord of the hour, but if your Journey be such you cannot defer it, nor cannot dig∣nify the Moon as you should, at the least aptate the Lord of the hour, and cause that the Moon seperate from the Ascendant and Lord there∣of, and this shall Fortunate your Direction, although weakly; But these things will be more largely handled in the Elections of the 9th. House, but summarily. 4. Take these Rules, In short Journeys aptate the Lord of the third House, in long Journeys the
Lord of the 9th. and their Lords do this in Islands, as well as large Continents proportionably. 5. In Reconcilliation of Kindred viz. Brothers or Sisters, or the like, aptate the Ascendant, the third House, the Moon, and their Lords, with the Moons Dispositer, or the Lord of the third joyned to the Lord of the Ascendant, and the Lords of either joyn'd or aspecting Fortunes, and the Moon likewise joyn'd or aspecting the like, and see the Moon be Cadent from the Ascendant and Lord thereof. 6. ♄ ☉ and ♃ Signify the Elder Brother, or Kindred, ♂ the Mid∣dlemost, ☿ the Younger Brothers, ♀ and the Moon the Sisters, and all Feminine Kindred.
Elections Relating too, and con∣cerning the Significations of the Fourth House. 1. THe Elections of the 4th. House are conversant a∣bout the alteration of Buildings, the beginning of Foundations, Citys Castles, Churches, Tents, and Hou∣ses, the conveyance of Waters, in altering the course of Rivers, in digging the Earth, in sinking Mines, and searching for Treasures, and all Ceremonys relating thereunto, It instructeth also concerning the mak∣ing Mills, to sow, to Plant Trees, to take ground to sow or grase, to take Houses, to expell Evil Spirits out of houses possessed. 2. Chronos shall be chiefly apta∣ted or fortified in all Rustical affaires and vulgar business, as Tillage Cat∣tle Antient men, and Navigation the 4th. House, the Lord thereof,
and Dispositer is likewise to be for∣tunated; as having principal signifi∣cation of the end of Things, in like manner the Moon and her Disposi∣ter are to be fortified. 3. Note that the first beginning of a Building is not the Digging for the Foundation, but the laying the first stone, for without digging it might have been Erected. 4. In entring your own proper House, let the Ascendant be a fixed Signe, the Moon in a fixed Signe, but if it be a hired house taken for Rent, choose the Ascendant a Com∣mon Signe, and the Moon in a com∣mon Sign also, moreover aptate the Ascendant the 4th. their Lords, and their Dispositers. 5. In the purchase of an Inheti∣tance, (to enjoy it peaceably, and for continuance) aptate the ascendant and Lord thereof, the 4th. House also and Lord thereof, and provide there be some Fortunate Star in some of the Angles which if he have no dignitys there, at least see that one of the Luminarys behold the Ascendant, or the 4th. with a Bene∣volent
aspect, and let not the Lords of the Angles be Retrogade, nor a Planet nor Signe of the fity tryplicity in the 4th. (saith Lauren∣tius Boniventrius, Minoerenses) I know Venice (in her construction) to have ♂ in the 9th. which in pro∣cess of time indicates her Ruine by fire, which God avert. 6. A Fortune in the ascendant sheweth the goodness of Wood and Trees, and those things which Ele∣vate themselves above the Earth, A Fortune in the seventh sheweth the prosperity of the Tillers, and Occupiers of the Land, a Fortune in the 4th. goodness of the Seed and of the Crop, Infortunes in any of these places denote the contra∣ry. 7. Iupiter and the Planet from whom the Moon is seperate is given to the Buyer, & the Planet to whom the Moon applys and joyns her self shews the end of the matter. 8. In Reconciliation of Father and Son, you are diligently to Co∣aptate the first House, the 4th. and their Lords, and the Moon, and see
they are in good places, and in Amiable aspects of the Fortunes. 9. In the erecting, and building, of Towers, and Citys, coaptate the ☽, the ☉ part of Fortune their Lords and their Dispositors, and if posible posite some Benevolent fixed Star of the first or second Magnitude (of the Nature of the Benevolent, or of the nature of ♄ if he be well dispo∣sed) in the first or 10th. Houses, and let the Ascendant be a fixed Signe, and mars Cadent from the Signifi∣cator of the Building, which if this cannot be, posite ♂ in Trine to Ve∣nus. 10 In more particular and pri∣vate Buildings, those observations in the Building of Citys, are herein laudable, but it will suffice if Fortu∣nate Stars be placed in the first or fourth, or otherwise in any of the Angles. 11. In conveying Rivers and Channels of Waters aptate the ascendant, the Moon, their Lords, and Dispositers, let ♄ if posible be O∣riental, and the Lord of the first, and let them be in Angles in some of
their Dignitys, free from misfor∣tunes, and Malignant aspects, and the Moon in the third 5th. 10th. or 11th. Houses, in an Earthly Sign, and ♄ there likewise, but not joyn'd to the Moon, aptate also ♃, and be∣ware of any Infortune in the 10th. 12. The Plantation of Trees re∣quireth that the Moon be in ♉ joy∣to ♀, or in ♒ ♌ ♓ or ♍, and let ♄ be direct in some of his Dignitys in the first, second, 5th. or 11th. or have some Dignitys in these Houses and ♃ aspecting him. 13. In sowing Seed, let the As∣cendant be a moveable Signe, and the Moon be disposed, as in the last foregoing Aphorisme; Taurus rarifies the Seed therefore let more be sown (the Moon being there) then in any other Sign. 14. In Building Ships, coaptate the Ascendant, the Moon and their Lords, and let them be in the first, 11th. or 12th. House, let the Ascen∣dant be a fixed Sign, let the 4th. also and the Lord thereof be well for∣tified, and a watry Signe on the 4th.
or the Lord thereof in an Aquatique Signe joyn'd too, or aspecting the Fortunes, but suffer not the Lord of the 4th. or the Moon in any as∣pect with ♂. 15. In Erecting and Building of Water-mills observe the same Rules as in Ships, but let the Ascendant be the last halfe of ♓ or ♍, but for other Mills that go not by Water, let the Ascendant be a fixed Signe. 16. The time is good to digg for hid Treasure, if the Moon be not Infortunate in Angles, and cause that she fortunately aspect the Signi∣ficator of the thing hidden, and that the Lord of the fourth behold the Ascendant. 17. When you begin to build a Wind-mill, posite an Ayery Signe in the Ascendant, and the Moon in the like, and let her be in the first, 10th. or 11th. Houses, and not in ♋ or ♑. 18. Elect not any day or hour to dig for Treasure unless you cer∣tainly know it to be there. In Building of Houses, posite not the Moon in the Meridian, descend∣ing
in ♏ or ♓, because that building shall quickly be destroyed let the In∣genious observe this. 20. In the building of Churches observe, if it be ordinary, as a Parish Church or the like, Fortunate the Ascendant or Lord thereof, in like manner the Moon and he Disposi∣ter, the 9th. House and Lord there∣of; But if it be a Sumptuous pom∣pous Building, as a Cathedral or the like, consider these under the notion of Temporal Buildings, and not spiritual, and Elect a time as you would for Temporal stately edifices, here first aptate the As∣cendant, and Lord thereof, and the Planet who hath his exaltation in the Ascendant, the Moon and her Dispositer, and in like man∣ner Fortunate the 10th. House, and also the 9th. and if it be a House for study, aptate ☿, that he be strong and Fortunate, and behold the as∣cendant with a Trine, or Sextile aspect, if it be a house for pleasure, as a Banqueting house or the like aptate Venus, that she be Fortunate, well posited, and strong, and be∣hold
behold the Ascendant with an aspect of Amity, &c. If it be a House for a Storehouse for Victuals, or any manner of provision aptate ♃, posite him strong, and fortunate, and that he behold the Ascendant with a Laudable and friendly aspect, if it be a Prison you build, and would have it safe and Fortunate to that purpose aptate ♄, let him be strong and well placed, and let him behold the As∣cendant, with any aspect, except opposition. CHAP. V. Treating of Elections of times, for those things which properly concern the Signification of the 5th. House which are, to this effect. FIrst, concerning Reconcilliation between Father and Son, Gene∣ration and prolification, the putting Children to Nurse, weaning them &
changing the Nurses, repelling the milk and drying it up, the putting on of New Garments, the giving and receiving Presents, the sending of Messengers, making of writing Promises, and Bonds, of Feasting and sweet Odoriferous things, of quitting & avoiding the dead Birth, in setting Children to Learn any Art or Science, in storing a Dove∣house, and the time how to send out your Pidgeons to alliciate, and attract others, &c. 1. As the Father may discord with the Son, (as before is touched) so oftimes it comes to pass that the son of his own Motion may discord with the Father, from whence it may come to pass that the Father may design to be reconciled to his Son, and may designe an Artist to aptate, and Elect him a convenient time to that purpose, for which ap∣tate the Ascendant & Lord thereof, the Moon and her Dispositer, ap∣tate also the 5th. and his Lord, which hath signification of the Son, and cause that the Lord of the 5th. be joyned to the ascendant, or behold
the same with an aspect of amity, and if it be by reception it is much the better, moreover let the Lord of the first be in the Ascendant, or in the 10th. or 11th. Houses, and let the Moon aspect the Lord of the first and the Lord of the 5th. or either of them, that the Reconcilliation, and Friendship may be durable. 2. In reference to Generation, the Antients have not blusht to handle largely this Subject, as hold∣ing it very observable, for the pro∣creation of Noble spirits, and hope∣ful issue, which is no more (though to a more Nobler end) then Pru∣dent Country men at this day use in choice of times for the procreation of Domestick Animals, and might reason in this Predominate sense, in Rational Creatures, we might possible finde such Heroick spirits and Famous Worthys for Valour and Learning in the World, as past Ages have produced, whose worths instead of Equalizing, we discomfor∣table mention in our storys, finding no footsteps in these Ages (or very rare) of such productions, probably
for want of such rational modest observations, herein requisite to be observed: Our fore Fathers, have so far insisted on this Subject, as to in∣form of Convenient times for the procreation and production of all Qualifications in Nature, as to the Conceivement of a Son or daughter, whether for Learning, if so, for what Science, Art or Learning, so for Valour, for all particulers, Emu∣lating Eminency in all Qualificati∣ons; as also in the Constitution of the body, but should I inlarge on this Subject, posible I might offend the quesy Stomacks of some, and gain an immodest repute with the weak, and wilful to reason. In the Conception of Sons aptate the 5th. House the Lord thereof, in Masculine Signs, the Moon if po∣sible in the Ascendant, or in a Mas∣culine Sign, aptate also the Luminary of the time, that it be in a Mascu∣line Signe, or in a Masculine Quar∣ter of Heaven, which is from the 10th. to the first, its op∣posite part, a Masculine hour herein is likewise observable, which are the
odd hours, but be sure the 5th. House and Lord thereof be free from af∣fliction, and well fortified. For Daughters, what is said of Masculine, observe in the Feminine; observe also that when the Planets are Oriental they are accounted Masculine, when Occidental Femi∣nine. 3. In putting your Children to learn any Art or Science, let the Ascendant be ♊ or ♍ but Virgo is best, and let the Moon be seperate from the Malevolents, and joyn'd or applying to ☿ with a good Aspect, let ☿ be Oriental and strong as also his receiver, or Dispositer, and let the Moon be increasing in Light, and Number, and be sure that ☿ be not Retrograde nor the Moon slow in motion. 4. If you would send a Messen∣ger, ot Embassador to any person; in this consider cheifly the Moon a∣bove all other Significators, and cause that she be joyned to the Pla∣net Signifing the person to whom the Messenger is sent, or at least∣wise that she behold the same with
a Fortunate Aspect, a Trine or Sextil, and if you may, cause that Planet to receive the Moon, or the Lord of the Ascendant, as if you send to a King or Prince, let the Moon be joyned to the ☉ or the Lord of the 10th. House, and posite the ☉ or the Lord of the 10th. in the 10. or 11th. or first houses, if this may not with convenience be performed, posite them in the 9th. or 3d. and this will do indifferently well: In sending mes∣sages, or Embassys to the King, be ware the ☽ be not in ♒ or ♓, if you send to other Noble persons, or Eccle∣siastical persons, let the Moon be∣hold ♃ with the before mentioned Aspects, in an Angle, and a good place from the Ascendant, if your message be to warlike persons, let the Moon in like manner behold ♂, but let there be no Conjunction angular, nor ♂ in any Angle, but in succedant houses, if you send to An∣tient men, Usurers, Husbandmen, or the like, let the Moon in the be∣foresaid manner behold ♄, and let ♄ be well posited in succedant hou∣ses, if you send to the Feminine
Sex, let the Moon be conjoynd with ♀; if to Phylosophers, Scollers, Scribes, Merchants, and young per∣sons from 14. years of Age to 20. let the Moon be joyned to ☿, but take heed that ☿ be not impedited nor afflicted, nor any other Planet to whom the Moon is joyned. 5. Concerning Childrens Nursing, and weaning; & the buying & putting on New Apparel, these do partly be∣long to this house, but they are breisly handled in the Subject of the first House; therefore I shall only ad this, that in putting on new Apparel, let not the Moon be in a fixed Sign, unless it be in Warlike Garments, then a fixed Signe is best, in Aries let be excepted the 7. De∣grees, following the first 8. the 23. and 24. degrees of that Sign, its not good the ☽ should possess them, in ♋ except the first 6 degrees, and the last 3; or let the Moon be in the first half of Libra, or in the first 18 degrees of ♍, or the first 19 degrees of ♐, or the first 20 degrees of ♓, the first 20 degrees of ♉ are tollera∣ble, as being the House of ♀ and
exaltation of the Moon; But all Unanimously disapprove of ♌: Haly saith its best the Moon be in moveable Signs, and indifferent in common Signs, but by no means that the Moon be in ☌ with the ☉ or in ☍ thereof, nor the ☉ in the Ascen∣dant, nor in opposition thereunto. Of giving and Receiving Presents, Gifts, or Rewards. 6. IN this Subject are two Actions considerable, First the giving, Secondly the receiving, for as men are generally affected to receive, so sometimes also they are disposed to give, to be brief, would you Elect a fit time for any one, to receive a reward or gift from ano∣ther in, Aptate the first House and Lord thereof, the Moon and her dispositer, also the second House and his Lord that the gift may re∣dound to the good, and Utillity of the receiver, the part of Fortune, and his Lord is to be fortified for the amplification there of, in like manner Iupiter is to be aptated,
which is the Natural Significator of Substance, by this means acquired, that the Utillity and benifit thereof, may be conserv'd, and amplified, and (as it were) past into the Sub∣stance of the Receiver, and become habitually his. If you are to Elect a time for him that giveth, to honour beautify, and dignify his gift, aptate the 5th. House and Lord thereof, and Iupiter and let Mars in either Receiving or Giving, be Cadent from the Ascen∣dant and Lord thereof, from the Moon and her dispositer, from the second from the part of fortune, part of Substance, from the 5th. House and Lords thereof, and if pos∣sible let the 5th. and first Houses be common Signs amongst which ♐ and ♓ are best, ♍ next, & ♊, most inferi∣our, & take heed that ♄ behold not the Ascendant or his Lord, the ♁ or the part of Substance, without recep∣cion, and let the Lord of the Ascen∣dant be elevated above the Lord of the 7th. House, which if all these cannot be done, aptate the Moon the Lord of the second House, and
Iupiter in reception of gifts, in giv∣ing, aptate the Moon the Lord of the 5th. House, and Iupiter, or part of Fortune. Of Messengers. 7. IN sending Messengers on business, for the better suc∣cess, let the Moon apply to the Pla∣net which is Significator of the per∣son to whom you send, as suppose the King, let the Moon then apply to the ☉, if a Judge, Lawyer, Divine, or Marchant, to ♃, if to a General or great Commander, to ♂, if to a Ledy of quallity to ♀, and so of o∣thers, take heed that the Moon nor that Planet be Cadent from Angles, but free from the infortunes. Of Writing. 8. VVHen you would write with credit and suc∣cess let the Moon be free from In∣fortunes, applying to ☿, and Mercury strong, not afflicted, nor retrograde, and also see that the Ascendant and
Lord there be free from infortunes, and the Malevolent Rayes there∣of. Of the right ordering of Dyet in Feasts and at all times, for Mirth and Health. 9. THe Appetite as to Meat and Drink cannot conve∣niently scape our notice, or seem impertinent to this work, therefore this Chapter shall signify how use∣ful these following considerations are, to Princes, persons of quallity, Rich men, and all who live high, and do little, in their Feasts and dayly Dyet, as for the inferiour sort of persons whose dayly Labour af∣fords them only a mean necessary subsistance, they stand not so much in need of these prescriptions. Therefore let such who feed high, and feast often, In the first place, observe the Course of the Moon, for if she be in ♉ applying to ♀ you may safely eate Beeff and Veale, it shall not surfeit nor so soon offend Nature, so likewise when the Moon is in ♓
appling to to ♃ it shall not prejudice to eat Fish, fresh and salt, even as when the Moon is in ♎ or ♒, Milk and whatsoever is made thereof shall not hurt or offend the stomack, being eaten then: Note if the ☽ be in Virgo unfortunately afflicted by ♂ its hurtful to eat any Sallet raw or otherwise, as also boyl'd Cab∣bage and Colworts, but if the Moon shall apply to ♂ or the ☉ from the 3d. its good to feed on various, and several Dishes, it may then be done with less hurt, but if the Moon ap∣ply to ♄ have a care of eating meat long powdred, and salt; when the Moon applys to ♀, its good to eat fruits of various kinds, the Moon in ♈, or ♑ applying to Iupiter good to eat of Ox, Weather, and Creatures libd by Art, edible, as also all manner of Goats flesh, but when the Moon shall be in □ ☍ or Con∣junction of ♄, its not good to eat stale Flesh, neither when the Moon is in ♌, is it good to eat Wild beasts taken by hunting, also when the Moon is in ♊ and in the Airy tripli∣city applying to ☿ it is evil to eat
Wild fowle of a hot temperament, as also when the Moon shall be in ♌ applying to ♄ its evil to eat any food of cold constitution, so when she applys to ♂ bad to eat any manner of food of hot qualification. 10. This Section shall briefly shew the most proper time for that opera∣tion in the delivery of the mother from the fruite dead within her, or the after Birth, when any poor soul falls into that sad condition, (as very oft it comes to pass) and with∣out timely, and fortunate help it may be the death of the mother, its a matter of pitty, Conscience, and the greatest concernment, to con∣sult all lawful means conducing hereunto, amongst which this is not the least, therefore cheifly make use of such a time for this operation, when the Moon is diminishing in Light descending in Meridional La∣titude or in Meridional declination, and that the Moon be in the Ascen∣dant, and the Lord of the Ascen∣dant in Aspect of ♃ or ♀, and note that Feminine Signs are better then Masculine, and Signs of right assen∣tion,
better then oblique, more plainly if it be to be done by Chyrurgical operation by medicine, by proper industry, or by any other means, Let the Ascendant be a Feminine Signe, and of right assen∣tions, and let the Moon (if possi∣ble) be diminishing in Light, and 6 degrees or more beyond the Cusp of the 10th. House towards the Oc∣cident in the descending part of Heaven, and let some Fortune be∣hold the Moon with a ✶ or △ aspect or a □ rather then not at all, if ♂ behold the Moon in any aspect with reception it is good in this operation, and without reception it is no evil, so that the Moon be in a Femines Sign, and the Ascendant a Feminine Sign of direct Assentions, and cheif∣ly take care that the Ascendant be not a Sign of oblique Assentions nor the Lord of the Ascendant, nor the Moon in any of them. 11. For the sending out of Doves, Ducks, or any other fowle in the nature of a Decoy, to intice, and decoy others into their Snares, gins, and the like.
When you intend to send out fowles to this end, and to return orderly to their Nests or aboad, be sure the Moon apply not to any Pla∣net which quickly comes to com∣bustion, and this shall signify they shall goe forth, and timely returne safe, but beware the Moon apply not to ☿, because he often suffers Combustions, and Retrogradations, which will cause the fowle to be in Danger of taking, and impede their safe returne, its a good observation to posite the Moon in a watry Sign, and applying to ♀, and ♀ in a Sign of right Assentions, but its evil if the Moon apply to ♂ for usually they fly quite away, and return not, if the Moon apply to ♄, they lose their way, or faile for thirst, or some such inconvenience betides them, many that have been herein expert, have observed, that if they stay long they most usually return with their prey, when the ☽ comes to, or applys to that place she possest at their first going out, or that day she applied to that Planet, she beheld when they went forth.
Sixth House. HAving finished the most Mate∣rial conclusions of the 5th. House, now in order the Subject of the Sixth House offers it self to our consideration, and is conversant a∣bout helping, and healing all infirmi∣tys, by Chyrurgical, or Medicina∣ble means, as Clisters, Vomits, Purges, outward and Topical ap∣plications, respecting restrictives and Aperitives, Gargarismes, and Cataplasmes, to buy Captives, and hire Servants, to give Orders and Rules of Command to Captives or Servants, to tame Wild Beasts, to break Horses, to buy all manner of Beasts, Domestick, both great and small. 1. Note in the first place that the Antiens have assigned the three first hours after Sun rise, or the first fourth part of the day to the Sanguine con∣stitution as then principally predo∣minates: The next three hours to the gubernation of Choller, the next
fourth part of the day to Melan∣cholly, and the last three hours or fourth part of the day to the Fleg∣matick constitution, the same is to be considered of the Night, the Lunar month, and the Quarters of the Year, beginning with the Spring. Physitians assign the first six hours after midnight to the Sanguine con∣stitution, which is the reason, mor∣ning sleeps are more pleasing, sweet and comfortable then others. The next six hours before Noon Choller reigns, which vigourously acteth the body to motion. The next six hours after noon Melancholly predominates, which appears by a Segnitions, dull, stupe∣factive Humour dislocating the activity of the Spirits with unaptness to motion. The last six hours from Sun set to midnight the Phlegmatick humor predominates, and bears sway, which aptly madifies the brain, which attracts up Phlegmatick gross fumes which vapours seize the brain with a pleasing stupidity provoking rest and sleep &c.
2. Touch not any member with Iron or Instrument, the Moon ex∣isting in the Sign, governing that member, in like manner if the Lord of the Ascendant be there. 3. Phlebetomy is best performed in the beginning of a month, and Cupping glasses, and ventositys in the end. 4. Give no purging medicine, the Moon fortified by ♃, not that it is unfortunate, but that it too much fortifies Nature against the medi∣cine. 5. An apt time to prosecute a Fu∣gitive is when the ☽ is debillitated, and afflicted by the Lord of the first, for that imports his Captivity. 6. In ingaging against a general Distemper that invades the whole body, let the Ascendant be ♎ or a Human Sign if a perticular Disease afflicting some perticular part of the body, posite the Sign signifying that member in the first, and the Lord thereof free from impediments not afflicted, and the Planet Governing that part of the body free likewise, and then apply your remidy, which
when you do for the expulsion of any greif, let the moon be in the first joyn'd to a fortune, and the Ascen∣dant ♎ or ♏. none of the infortunes in Angles nor the Moon besieged by, them nor otherways unfortunate, which if this cannot all be, at least place the Moon in a good Aspect with the forunes, and in the Sign governing that member you desire to cure if the cure can be without incission. 7. In those cases where any In∣strument of Iron is useful, let the moon increase in Light and Num∣ber, fortunately aspected from ♃ or ♀, free from all impediments of ♂, and let the Lord of the first, in the first or the 10th. be joyned to the Lord of the 10th. House. 8. Phlebetomis forbids Mars his presence in the Ascendant, and ♊ in the first, or the moon therein, but aptate the Ascendant, and his Lord, and see that ♄ be not therein, the ☽ also free from affliction, and in good aspect with ♂, so that he be not in ♉ nor ♋, nor septentironal Ascending in his Ange, and let the
Lord of the House of the Moon, be∣hold him from good places. 9. Beware of the hour of the ☉ ♄ and ♂, in bleeding as also that the latter part of ♎ be not Ascend∣ing. 10. In the time of letting blood, put not in the Ascendant the Sign of the 6.8. or 12. in the Nativity, nor the Sign in which an infortune was in the Birth, neither let the moon be in them. 11. In Laxative medicines ap∣tate the Ascendant and his Lord, and posite the Moon in the last half of ♎, or beginning of ♏, and the Lord of the House of the moon, and of the Ascendant, free from afflicti∣on, provide also that the Ascendant be a Meridional Sign, and that it be not a Ruminating Sign where the Moon is, or the Lord of the Ascen∣dant. 12. In provoking of Vomit, let the Ascendant, the moon, and Lord thereof be in Ruminating Signs, let not the Lord of the Ascendant be going to his exaltation, thus you may safely administer your Physick.
13. Bathing requires the moon be in Aries or ♏, joyned to ♃, the ☉, or Venus, or in a good aspect of them. 14. In buying or hiring of Ser∣vants, posited the moon in ♉, or in the second mediety of ♐, and let the Horoscope be a Human Signe and the Lord thereof in a Human Sign, and beware you have not ♈, ♌ ♏ or ♑ on the 6th. House, nor the moon nor the Lord of the first, nor the Lord of the 6th. in any the foresaid Signs, for Aries indicates a negligent, careless Servant, ♌, a proud prodigal, self conceited fool, and wastful, Seorpto, an angry pee∣vish peice, and a lyer, and Capricoru shews he shall wast and consume his Masters goods. 15. In curing the Eys, let the moon be increasing in Light and Number, and free from the Aspects of the infortunes. 16. In buying of small Domestick Cattle, let the Ascendant, and moon be in a Sign signifying that Animal you intend to bny, fortunate, and in reception with the Planet Lord of that Sign.
17. In big Cattel it is good the moon be in ♉, or the second half of ♐, in smaller Cattel let her if possible be in ♈ or ♑ or otherwise in ♉. More particular Elections of Times for Physitians and Physick. 18. THat Physitian who first visits his Patient in the hour of Saturn, his Patient shall ei∣ther be long sick, or long in curing, and will suffer much pain and incon∣venience in his cure, nor shall he be cured until both Physitian and Patient almost dispaire. 19. He that first enters upon a cure in the hour of Mars, shall finde his Patient disaffected to him, and partly disdain, or reject his medi∣cines, his person slighted, and his pains ill rewarded. 20. He that first visits his Pati∣ent in the hour of Venus or Iupiter,
shall have good words of the sick, be well esteemed and paid for his pains, though he faile of the cure, yet shall he receive no prejudice there∣by, I mean in point of Estima∣tion. The verity of these few particulers will prompt the ingenious to farther inquisition: As, To take notice of the Crisis, ac∣cording to which, diversity of distem∣pers appears; as also with Hippo∣crates to observe the Cosmical rising of many Stars violently hot, of which nature are these, Procyon, Sy∣rius, Pygasus, Equus, Capella, Hercules Antares, Pallitium and others which are proper causes of Epidemical Diseases. Phlebetomy being of such conse∣quence to the Body humane: It is of necessity that there be a skilful, judicious and circumspect consider∣ration had, as to the causes and ends inducing thereunto: As whether it be proper for the Patient to bleed, for the evacuating of some naughty superfluous pecant humour; for o∣therwise blood letting is of danger∣ous
consequence, and open∣eth away to many inconveniences and infirmities; And note general∣ly, that it is not convenient for a lean and weak man, and a very fat and grosse man to be let blood; neither for a Child under 14. years of age, nor an old man above fifty and six: Moreover let not blood when the Moon is either in ♊ or Leo, for the one hath power of the Armes, the other of the Heart, to which some late writers (I know not for what reason) have added the latter halfe of Libra, but the other Signs are good for Phlebetomy, acording to this following method. For the Com∣plexi∣ons let blood the Phlegmatick the ☽ being in ♈ or ♐ For the Com∣plexi∣ons let blood the Melancholick the ☽ being in ♎ or ♒ For the Com∣plexi∣ons let blood the Cholerick the ☽ being in ♋ or ♓ For the Com∣plexi∣ons let blood the Sanguine the ☽ being in ♉ ♍ or ♑ For his Age, let blood in his Youth from the change to the first Quarter. For his Age, let blood in his Middle Age, from the first Quarter to the Full. For his Age, let blood in his Elder Age, from the full to the last Quarter. For his Age, let blood in his Old Age, from the last Quarter to the change.
Times of the Year. Spring good, Harvest indifferent. Times of the day. Morning after Sun rising, fasting, afternoon after perfect digestion, the Air temperate, the wind not South. Not good to let blood. AT the change of the moon nor two days before nor after, ☌ ☍ or □ of ♄ ♂ ♃ forbiddeth the open∣ing of a Veir, four hours before, and 10 hours after, ☌ of the moon with the Dragons Head or Tail, and the ☌ ☍ or □ of the moon to ♄ or ♂ for∣bids to bleed a day before or after. ♀ Combust not good. Good to let blood. THe moon in ☌ ✶ or △ or with∣in the Rays of ♃ and ♀, when the Sun shall be in △ or ✶ with ♃ or ♀, when ♃ and ♀ aspect each other with △ or ✶ or be in ☌, so likewise when ♄ and ♂ shall radiate them∣selves
by △ or ✶ these Aspects of the moon to ♄ and ♂ are not hurt∣ful. Mercury being fortunate and not afflicted, his aspects are good; hurt∣ful if contrary. The moon void of Course, for∣bids not the letting of blood. Directions after bleeding. SLeep not presently, stir not vio∣lently. Use no venery, feed thou warily. Notwithstanding the Phrensy, the Pestilence, the Squinancy, the Plu∣rasy, the Apoplexy, a continual Head∣ach, growing Choler and Blood, a hot burning Feaver, or any other extream pain, in this case a man may not tarry a chosen time, but incontinently with all convenient speed hast to seek and use his re∣medy, as if a chosen time might be respected.
Rules forgiving Purges. The ☽ in ♋ in ✶ or △ with ♃ Purge Melancholly ☉ Purge the Phlegm ♀ Purge Choler ♀ not Combust With Ele∣ctuaries. The ☽ in ♍ in ✶ or △ with ♃ Purge Melancholly ☉ Purge Phlegm ♀ Purge Choler ♀ not combust With Po∣tions. The ☽ in ♓ in ✶ or △ with ♃ Purge Melancholly ☉ Purge Phlegm ♀ Purge Choler ♀ not Combust With pils The ☽ in ♊ or ♒ in ✶ or △ with ♃ Purge Melancholly ☉ Purge Phlegm ♀ Purge Choler ♀ not Combust With any kind of Medicine. These are common Rules for Purging, but indeed I never could much approve of the moon being in ♒ or ♓ especially when she is in △ or ✶ of ♃.
Good to Prepare Hu∣mours The Moon in Gemini, Libra or Aquary Good to Vomit The Moon in Aries, Taurus or Capri Good to Purge by neezing The Moon in Cancer, Leo, or Virgo, Good to Take Gliy∣fters The Moon in Aries, Libre, or Scorpio, Good to Take Gar∣garisms The Moon in Cancer or Aries, Good to Stop Rheums and Flux The Moon in Taurus, Virgo or Capris. Good to Bath for Cold disases The Moon in Aries, Leo, or Sagittarius, Good to Bath for Hot diseases The Moon in Cancer, Scor∣pio, or Pisces In Bathing this is the Rule, be sure the moon be in Signs contrary to the nature of the Disease. The Governing powers in our bodys are, 1 Natural, 2 Vital, 3 Animal. The Natural comprehend. The Attractive Faculties. The Retentive Faculties. The Digestive Faculties. The Expulsive Faculties. The Natural power is seated in the Liver, by which are gendred the
Humours, Blood, Choller, Melan∣cholly and Phlegm is governed by ♃ ☽ and ♀ in the use of hot and moist things The Attractive power is Gover∣ned by the ☉, strengthned by the moon passing through ♈ and ♐. The Retentive faculty is cold and dry, Governed by ♄, strengthned by the moon passing through ♉, ♍, and ♑, especially in the Sanguine. The Digestive and Concoctive consists in heat and moisture gover∣ned by ♃ assisted by the moon pas∣sing through ♈ ♒ and ♊, The Expulsive faculty being cold and moist, is adjuvated by the moon existing in ♋ ♏ and ♓ especially in the Collerick. 2 The Vital power is governd by the ☉ having its proper seat in the heart; is best cherished when the ☉ is in good aspects, or within the benevolent Rays of ♃ and ♀ it is most cherished by things of hot and dry, and hot and moist qualifica∣tion. 3 The Animal faculty being sea∣ted in the brain, is divided into
The Intellective Powers. The Discursive Powers. The Sensitive Powers. The Intellective and Discursive are governed by ☿, the Sensitive by the moon, and are all strengthen∣ed by the benevolent raies of ♃ and ♀. The passing through ruminating Signs as ♈ ♉ ♌ ♑ it is good (unless necessity compel) to abstain from Physick; for by experience we finde they excite vomiting, the ☽ ascending in her Epicycle, the humours then arising, causeth an aptitude to vomit, the same if the Lord of the House of the moon or of the Ascendant be above the Earth when you give Phy∣sick. Of sweating; Natural sweat o∣pens the Pores dissolves gross and thick humours, cleanseth the blood, comforts the spirits, helps cold, con∣sumes raw humours, qualifieth and quencheth raging Feavers, helps numness and the Dropsie. Artificial sweat cleanseth Scabs and Itch, amends dulness in hearing, eases the Stone, dissolves congeal∣ed
and cold humours and melancholly blood. The best Signs to sweat in are when the moon is in ♈ ♌ and ♐, 2 or 3 days after the Change, and at the ful moon. Note, Sweating is better in the Evening then morning, for when the Body hath nourishment within, the spirits shall not so easily be drawn forth to the extreame parts. Note farther that lean and dry, or feeble persons must sweat little, but fat folks may sweat well. The Eys are best cured of a Pin, Web, Pearl or blow the moon be∣ing in ♋, ♊, ♒, ♓, ♐ or ♎. Thus he who ignorantly, or wil∣fully neglects the Magnetick cure of Diseases by sympathy and trans∣plantation; and these Astrological principles, my censure of him is in the words of Hippocrates, Optimus medentium, cujnsmodi medicus est qui ignorat Astronomiam & Astro∣logiam, Nemo debet se committere, manibus ejus, quia non est perfectus medicus. No man ought to commit himself to such a Physitians hands,
because he is insufficient in Art, and not safe to be trusted. Nam Rusticus ad haec non est Electus Non comunem tantum omnium Homi∣num Naturam medico cognoscendam, sed unius cujus{que} propriam. Which cannot be without Astro∣logie. Honicidas, medicos Astrologiae ig∣naros Avicen. Elections having the Signifi∣cation of, and appertain∣ing to the 7th. House. THis 7th. House hath variety and multiplicity of Significations, therefore I shall take liberty to insist more copiously herein, choosing rather, to serve the common Utillity, then Brevity, under this head we absolve all particulars concerning Matrimony, Quarrels, Law-suits, and mutual contentions, waging War, and making
peace with Enemies, the ruin and de∣struction of Castles, Camps, and War∣like places of defence, the making and procuring of Warlike Instruments, and Engins, of Partnerships, & participati∣ons, & all things & actions between two persons Inquisition concernig Theives, & Fugitives, to cause the Theife to con∣fess the truth, to buy & purchase, armes and Warlike Ammunition, concerning Dice, and all manner of play, for gaine the finding an apt and fit time for the casting out and allaying of EvilSpirits from out persons; places or houses, the discovery of vain Visions, Dreams and Phantasms, and the discovery of secret Plots, and combinations, of any partys, either against our selves or others, cum Multis Aliis. 1. In the first place, for happy Marriage, aptate the Ascendant, the Moon and their Lords with their Dispositers, and let the Ascendant be a fixed Sign as ♉, or ♌; (avoid∣ing ♏) and the moon in either of them in Trine, or Sextil aspect with the ☉. 2. In the Marriage of Virgins, let not the ☽ be in ♌ or ♋, but in the
marriage of Widdows, to be so posi∣ted doth well. 3. The 7th. House and his Lord, ♀ and the Planet from which the moon seperated, are the Significators of the Woman, the Lord of the 10th signifies what shall be hereafter be∣tween them, the 4th. and his Lord, the conclusion of both or either of their successes. 4. If a fortune posses the 10th. House in the hour of marriage, it signifies the woman shall be with child, (if capable) the first night she companies with her husband, if she were before corrupted, consider this Election. 5. In Contracting marriage for fortune and gaine aptate the Ascen∣dant, the moon their Lords and Dis∣positers, and posite in the Ascendant a common Sign, and the ☽ likewise in a common Sign except ♊ in like manner the Lord of the house of the ☽ let him be in ♌, the Significators all free (if posible) in good places, fortunate & in reception for recep∣tion signifies the benefit and gain, of their society, but if you cannot
observe all these aptate the First, 2d. 4th. 10th. and 11th. Houses, and their Lords, let the part of fortune be fortunated by ♃ or ♀, and let the Significators be free from the con∣sort, and aspects of the Malevo∣lents. 6. In the Invasion of Enemies, Debillitate the Lords of the 7th, and 8th. Houses, and fortifie the Lords of the first and second. 7. In Hunting, Debilitate the Lord of the 7th. and let the moon be infortunated, by the Lord of the first, or the 8th. and not other∣wise. 8. In Love affaires, fortify ♀ and the moon. 9. Its prejudice to him that fights a Duel, if the Lord of the first shall be an infortune, Retrograde, or Combust; in like manner judge of the Lord of the 7th. for the Adver∣sary, being so affected, he that be∣gins shall obtaine the Victory. 10. In the hour of going forth to fight, beware the Lord of the first do not apply to the Lord of the 7th.
11 Forbeare to besige, or assault that City, Fortress, or Castle, whose Lord of the Ascendant is the Lord of the Annual Revolution that year, therefore in Elections be Prudent. 12. In a Question arising of two Armys, suppose the one East, and the other West, the Planets their Signi∣ficators, are seriously to be consider∣ed for which of these is the most Po∣tent, shall obtaine the victory, there∣fore aptate and posite the Heavens for Signification, on that part you affect, and undertake for. 13. In choosing and selecting a fit time to fight, provide that the Lords of the first and second, be stronger then the Lords of the 7th. and 8th. for the stronger shall ob∣tain the victory. 14. Many of the Antients are of opinion that it is good to aptate the part of Fortune in the East part of the Circle, in the beginning of Bat∣tel, for if it be in the West, the In∣vaders shall be repulsed, and the In∣vaded will stoutly defend them∣selves. 15. In Wars, know that the for∣titude
of the Superiour Planets, is greater then the Inferiour. 16. if you would make peace and settle concord amongst Enemies, choose a time when there is good Aspects between the Lords of the Ascendant and 7th. Houses. 17. Beware the Moon be not In∣fortunate in the beginning of Bat∣tel, but rather free from all afflicti∣ons and impediments, and the Lord of the Ascendant so likewise, if the moon be infortunate, he loseth which first began the Quarrel. 18. For him that intends an inva∣sion for the West, let the Lord of the Ascendant and the Moon be O∣riental, if to the South, let them be placed in the Northern Angle. 19. In the siege of a City, Town, or Castle, assault the East part, when ♂ is in the Oriental part of Hea∣ven, from the 10th. degree of ♉ to the 10th. of ♌, and from the 10th. of ♏ to the 10th. of ♐, but assault the Westpart, ♂ being in the Occident from the 10th. degree of ♒ to the 10th of ♉. 20. Begin no fight nor Battel the
moon being Combust of the Sun, i. e. in her change. 21. Sol, ♃ and ☊, in the Ascen∣dant, promise to him that first be∣gins the Battel Victory, safty and a happy return. 22. Let no man approach to fight, the Sun being joyned to the Lord of the Ascendant, and for your freind, be sure you Elect no such hour. 23. Saturn in the East (although his Dispositer be well dispos'd) for∣bids to ingage in Battel for he shall be precipitated by the wiles of the Enemies horse, but if Saturns Dispo∣siter shall be Malignantly dispos'd, the Commander shall be wounded, or worse. 24. Mars with Cauda Draconis in the Ascendant or with his Disposi∣ter, ill disposed; predicts the inceptor of the Quarel to be Mortally woun∣ded, but he being Dignified his wounds shall not be unto death. 25. Infortunes in the 8th. in the hour of Battel makes many Cowards. 26. the ☉ in the 8th. House, or
with the Lord of the 8th. forbids Battel. 27. Infortunes in the 10th. for∣bids any approach to Battel. 28. Mars and ♄ in the Ascendant, afflicts both partys with prejudice, if not death. 29. At the time of the Hoast go∣ing forth to fight, provide that the Lords of the 7th. and 8th. be in the first or second, and the Lords of the first and second well placed or dig∣nified, and Debillitate the Signi∣ficators of the Adversarys, and let the Ascendant be a Sign relating to some of the Superiour Planets, and for the Houses of Mars, Scorpio is better then Aries, make ♂ most strong and fortunate, and let Iupiter be with him, or freindly behold him, in or from the First or second, 10th. or 11th. Houses, and Debillitate ♀ if she be Lady of the 7th. and ☿ like∣wise, for the recruites of the Adverse party, because ♊ will then be in the 8th, and posite ♀ and ☿ in the Ascen∣dant or second Retrograde, Com∣bust, or Cadent if possible, and in no good Aspect of the 7th. or 8th. Houses.
30. When you would fortunate your freind, and unfortunate his Adversary, let the Lord of the As∣cendant, at leastwise of the second, be for him, whom thou wouldest help. 13. in the beginning of Battel, see that ♂ be not in the Ascendant, unless he be Lord thereof, but let him behold the Ascendant with a favourable aspect. 32. At your entring be sure that you posite not the Lord of the first or second, in the 7th. or 8th. Houses. 33. And note, that if the Nativity of the principal Commander may be known, (as I have before observed) it is a safe way to dignify the Lord of the Radical Ascendant, and that he be aspected or joyned with good Stars, and for certaine that Officer or Captain in any Fight, hath the best success, whose fare it is to come neerest this Position. 34. The first twelve hours suc∣ceeding the Conjunction of the Sun and Moon, are evil for him that be∣gins
a Battel, but from those 12 houres to 72. hours, are good for the beginner. 35. If ♌ be in the Ascendant in the houre of Battel fortify the ☉, and if the time of the year will bear it, posite the ☉ in the Ascendant, and Debillitate ♄ by Combustion, Re∣trogation, or posite him in ♌, ♋, or ♈, & aptate ♂ for the Victors part, and see the Enemy hath not ♂ in the 7th. or 8th. Houses. 36. At the setting up a Princes Standard, hanging out a Flag, the Ensigne of Battel, or receiving the Colours as Ensigne, Standerd-bearer or the like; you may know the success by observing the position of the Heavens at that time, for which if you Elect a time, fortify the 10th House and his Lord, posite the Moon in ♏ with ♂ if posible, or in a good aspect of him, as also aspecting ♃ or ♀, and Mars free from all impediments, and if the Moon may not conveniently be in ♏, posite her in Aries free from affliction, and impediments, and the neerer the change the better, ♏ is most adjua∣tious.
37. And farther Note, that if the Standard, or Colours be given by the King to any person, it is best that ♏ be placed in the 10th. House and the ☉ and Moon there if it may be. 38. In receiving the Colours or command from a free City or Com∣mon-wealth, that the receiver may undergoe the same with success and honour, let the Moon be in one of the houses of ♃, fortunate and free from afflictions, not in Cancer; In like manner fortunate Iupiter, and let neither ♃ nor the Moon be in a∣ny the Houses of the Infortunes; unless he hath a minde to be taken Prisoner and his Colours. 39. To Advance your Honour in the Conquest of him against whom you strive, posite the ☽ in the Houses of ♂, free from infortunes, or in ♌ beholding the ☉ with a good aspect, and let the part of fortune and his Lord be in the Ascendant. 40. To choose a Fortunate time for the Besieging of any place, let the moon be diminished in Light, with Meridional Latitude, joyn'd to for∣tunate
Stars, or in in some Ami∣able manner beholding them, and Mars and Trine with the Moon out of a Feminine Signe, and the Ascen∣dant a Sign of right Ascention, and Fortunes in, or beholding the As∣cendant, ♄ beholding the Moon with a Trine is very good, but be sure to shun the Malignant aspects of ♄ and the Moon, and Saturn not Cadent, for then he intimates dela∣tory proceedings, and prolixity of time in the Siege, to the great detri∣ment of the Besiegers; this hath been experienced oft, and is sup∣posed to be verified in the Siege of Try by the Greeks: Therefore I propound these Rules for the beni∣fit of all Honourable, Fortunate, and Ingenious Commanders and Soul∣diers.
Of choosing a fit Time to Eject Evil Spirits from persons and places, and the Dissipation of all Phantasmatical De∣ceptious foolerys. 41. TO Eject or expel Phan∣tasmes, delusive Visions, and Representations, any hurtful or nocible Spirit, from any possessed person or place, or any Demoniacal terrible appearance infesting any place, disturbing the Inhabitants, and vexing any particular person, a∣ny person coming to an Artist to E∣lect him a fit and apt time for these purposes, aptate the Ascendant and his Lord, and beware that Cancer, Leo, Scorpio, nor Aquary be in the Ascendant nor the Moon in any of those Signs, let the Ascendant be a∣ny other Sign which you conceive most proper for your business, being not afflicted, and the Lord thereof free from Infortunes, and the Moon well placed and joyned to, or a∣spected
by a Fortune, free from all impediments; but in the destructi∣on and ruinating any Idols, or Ido∣latrous places it sufficeth, that you Debillitate, and unfortunate Ve∣nus. 42. When a man would buy Seed to sow that should prosper well, and yeild good increase (which is the desire of all) be it grain for the field of any sort, or Seeds for the Gar∣dens of any kinde, and would Elect a fit and convenient time to this pur∣pose, aptate the Ascendant and his Lord, and the Moon in the first quar∣ter increasing in motion if posible, and in Signs of oblique Ascentions, and in one of the Masculine quarters of Heaven, which are from the 10th. House, or Meridian to the Ascen∣dant, and from the 4th. House, or Imum Coeli to the 7th. and the Lord of the Ascendant in one of these quarters, and the 10th. House and Lord there of be free from all impe∣diments of the Malevolents, it is a good Position if the Moon be joyn∣ed too, or well aspected by ☿, and he Oriental, free from impediments, &
swift in motion: These things are ne∣cessary to be all observed, but if your occasion will not give you leasure to observe them all, at leastwise be sure you apt ate and fortify the Moon. 43. When any one would Elect a time for Play at Dice, or any other Game, for Lucre sake and desire of gain, which I suppose is the end e∣very man proposeth to himself, ac∣cording to the minds of the Anti∣ents, let the Ascendant be a move∣able Sign, because fixed Signes are not so proper nor profitable com∣mon Signes are between both, i. e. neither much profitable, nor much prejudicial, as if the Ascendant be a common Signe, and the Lord there∣of of good qualification, it signifies good, but if of evil Signification it signifys evil; its very behoveful that the Lord of the Ascendant be of good Signification and well disposed, and the Lord of the 7th. Debilliated, weak, and impedited, and if posible let the Lord of the 8th. House be in the second, or in the first House, re∣ceiv'd by the Lord of the second, or first Houses, but let not the Lord of
the 8th dispose of the Lord of the 2d. especially when you begin to play, & let the Moon be seperating her self from one Fortune, and joyning her self to another fortune, and above the Earth fortunate and strong, and let a strong Courrage with hopeful expectation possess the heart & fan∣cy of him, that thus would win, and his breast always towards the Moon, for if she be unfortunate usu∣ally its contrary to him, who hath his breast contrary, whosoever he be that desires to win let him sit with his face & brest towards the Moon, if you cannot make all these obser∣vations, (as seldome it falls out you can altogether) however let the As∣cendant be a moveable Sign, when you begin to play, and the Moon in his brest that plays, and if no more may be, yet let the Moon be in the face and brest of him that plays, and it shall avail. To know the secrets and whispring of any party. 44. IF you see certain persons seperate themselves from the company and whisper together,
and you suspect some evil meaning of them towards you, or desire to know their intents and secrets, posite a Schen of Heaven, and consider the first, the 7th. and their Lords, be∣cause the first and his Lord, and the Planet from whom the ☽ seperated are the Significators of him that first began to move this secresy, and the 7th. House Lord thereof, and the Planet to whom the ☽ applys, are Significators of him to whom he first began to speak, and if many be in company he that stands with his face towards the Meridian shall be understood to be the first beginner, and he that holds his face towards the East or North, may be consider∣ed to be the second person consult∣ing, the 10th. House and his Lord have signification of him or them that discourse amongst themselves and of the secret matter discoursed, if there shall be litigious contention, or War amongst them, the 10th. and Lord thereof shall signify the victory, of the business in hand, for he shall be victor whom the Lord of the 10th. best aspects, the 4th. House
and his Lord, and the Dispositer of the ☽, shall signify the end of the business, but the Moons Dispositer shall be of more effectual Significati∣on, than the Lord of the 4th. House. Farthermore aspect the Lord of the 10th. and see how he is qualifi∣ed, and relateth to the Significators, namely the Lord of the first or 7th, for if he behold the Lord of the first with a more favourable aspect then the Lord of the 7th. he which begins shall obtaine and have the better, if to the Lord of the 7th. then he which opposeth shall prevaile. Farther observe if the Lord of the first be a Planet Signifying truth and reallity, if he be then he that begins shall proceed Legally in truth without fallacy, but if he be of a de∣ceptious quality, there will be lying and falsehood in the business, In like manner may be said of the Lord of the 7th, also if the Lord of the 10th. be a Planet signifying verity, he to whom this is most favourable, shall use truth and just dealing in his Actings, but if false, then he useth fraud, & deceipt, in likemanner if the
Lord of the 4th. or the Planet joyn∣ed to the Moon, have true and real signification, then shall the end be without fallacy, fraud, or deception, but if otherwise, the end will be an∣swerable, and thus are you to con∣sider in reference to the end of any thing. To Inquire after a Theif and Fu∣gitive. 45. VVHen any one would follow, or finde out a Theif or Fugitive, any sorded vile person, or a false Servant or the like, it behoveth that the Moon be impe∣dited and afflicted, in the very de∣gree with the Sun, or within 16 mi∣nutes, but not in ♈ or ♌, or in the last half of ♎, nor the first half of ♏, nor within 12. degrees of the ☊ or ☋ of the Dragon before, or 7. de∣grees behinde, but if you cannot thus posite her, let her be posited in the Ascendant, in Conjunction Oppo∣sition, or Quartile aspect, of the Sun or in △ or ✶, without reception, and afflicted from the Planet beholding her, or let it be three days before the Lunar Ecclipse, or one day after it,
and let the Sun be free from all viti∣ating impediments of the Malevo∣lents, and let some one of the For∣tunes (if possible) be in the 10. House or within 5. Degrees of the Cusp of the 10th, before, or 3. degrees after, and of this be sure, that the more you impedite and afflict the Moon, by so much the more is the Theif, or Fugitive afflicted. Elections of Time proper for the Significations of the Eight House. 1. IN acquiring Inheritances, let the 8th. House be well fortified. 2. The Portion and Dowry of a Wife shall be easily acquired if you choose an apt hour for Contraction, or Matrimony, that is, that there be benevolent Stars in the 8th. House 3. For acquiring the Substance of your Adversarys, and Enemies, po∣site the Lord of the 8th. in the first
or second, or at least infortunated by the Lord of the first or se∣cond. 4. Any one being desirous to ordain or make his last Will and Testament, or so to settle his Estate that it may continue to his minde, and would Elect a convenient and apt time to this purpose: First let the Moon be slow in motion, and in∣creasing in Light, for this signifies the Act or Deed shall continue and stand firme, without change or al∣teration, its very convenient that the Moon and the Lord of the As∣cendant, or either of them behold Saturn with an Amiable aspect, or joyn'd to him, for this shall signify the perfect complement of the thing without change, but shall abide per∣fect, and continue, while the Testa∣tor or Donor lives, and also after his Death, Zael is of Opinion that it Signifys a prolongation of the Testators life if the Moon be joynd or behold Iu∣piter or Venus (as is before said of Sa∣turn,) the Ascendant of time a fixed Sign, and the Moon likewise fixed,
this intimates duration, as mova∣ble Signs intimates mutability, its much to be heeded that the Moon be not aspected by, or joyned to a∣ny Planet under the Suns Rays cal∣led Combustion, or joyned to Mars nor aspecting him by Opposition or Quartile aspect, nor Mars in the Ascendant, or beholding it with a∣ny aspect of enmity, nor the Lord thereof, all these signify a change of the Act, the shortness of the Testa∣tors life, & the non-accomplishment of the Testators Will, and finally confusion of the Estate, and quarels and contentions amongst those that survive. Elections of and concerning the Significations of the 9th. House. 1. IN Journeys fixed Signs are to be avoided and moveable Signs chosen. 2. You ought not to Elect a time
for a Prince to take a Journey in, the Lord of the Ascendant being in the 8th. House nor in his exalta∣tion. viz. the Lord of the 8th. 3. In Embassyes, Messages, and all Maritine affaires, the Moon is principally to be Elected. 4. Mars disturbeth and impediteth Land-Journeys, & Saturn Sea-Voy∣ages and affaires; therefore the pre∣sence of either of them in the 9th. House is not to be wished. 5. In the beginning of a Journey, see an Infortune be not in the 9th. and in your teturne beware the like in the second. 6. Being to undertake a Journey, beware the Moon be not in via Com∣busta, because then the Traveller will be afflicted with Sickness, or other impediments answerable. 7. In Electing of time referring to Discipline and the Mathematicks, cheifly aptate Mereury, in things re∣lating to Religion the ☉ the Moon the Ascendant and their Lords are to be fortified and one of the Houses of Iupiter upon the Cusp of the 9th.
House, and the Moon irradiating the third House. 8. In sending and transmitting Embassys to Kings and Princes, see the Moon be not in ♒ or ♓, but ra∣ther aspecting the Sun or Lord of the Tenth with favourable As∣pects. 9. Would you send a Child to School, and desire him to learn well, and to delight in his Learning, Elect the Horoscope to be Virgo or Gemi∣ni, Mercury fortunate and strong, the Moon not afflicted by the Male∣volents, but free from Combustion, and increasing in Light and Num∣ber. 10. In Journeys by Land aptate the Ascendant to be an Earthly Sign, in voyages by Water the As∣cendant to be an Aquatique Signe, the Moon in the 12th. House going towards the 10th. and not under the Earth, if this may not be done, posite her in the 9th. or third Houses, free from the infortunes and in like man∣ner see that the Lord of the Ascen∣dant, the ☽ & their Dispositers be not afflicted.
11. In Journeys in which you expect gaine and profit, aptate and fortify the Lord of the hour, at your going out. 12. In general for Electing times for Journeys observe that you aptate the Ascendant and his Lord for your person, the second and his Lord for the goods, and conveniencies you carry with you, the 7th. House for the place to which you go, the 8th. and his Lord for the benefit and good expected by your Journey, the 10th and his Lord, for the accidents which shall hap in the way, the 4th. and Lord thereof, for the end of the Journey. 13. Aptate the Moon with the Planet Signifying the thing for which you make your Journey, as if you apply to the Prince or a Great person let the Moon be joyned to the Sun, or Lord of the Tenth, or in good aspect with either of them, let her not be in Aquary, nor in the 4th. nor 7th. House, nor in Pisces, because the twelfth from Aries wherein the Sun is exalted. 14. If the Lord of the 7th. be
with the first, and the Moon joyned to a Retrograde Planet, the Travel∣ler meeteth the thing or the Person in the way, for which, or to whom he goeth. 15. In Electing a time for any one to begin a Journey in, forbeare and shun the Moon existing and be∣ing in the second, or third face of Libra. 16, In all Journeys beware the moon be not with the infortunes, or their Aspects. 17. For speed and Celerity in Journeys and quick returne, let the Sun be in Opposition to some Bene∣volent Stars, for if he be in opposi∣tion to any Malevolent Stars, the signification is Impediments, Delays, and a slow Returne. 18. In like manner as to a speedy returne, see the moon be not in the first, second, or fourth House, any of which pronounce delay, and a tedi∣ous stay in the place to which you goe. 19. In Sea voyages be sure you posite not the moon in Scorpio.
20, Antiquity hath not been wanting to informe us, that Electi∣ons conduce to the great Utillity of those who Learn and Practice Mu∣sick, it being a Laudable Human Action, (according to that true Maxime, Negotia Humana Astris indigent) which properly relateth both to the 9th. and 10th. Houses, but may more firly be comprehend∣ed under the 9th. because the 9th. house hath Signification of Ecclesia∣stick Songs & Divine hymes (which ought to be preferred,) & are used in the divine Worship of God in Tem∣ples and Churches, and Religious excercises, this is the first accepta∣tion of Musick, and properly be∣longs to this place, the other hath relation to the 10th. House, which comprehends all Lay-musick, and Songs that are used for mirth a∣mongst Lay-people, as if you would Eelect a convenient and fit time to teach any one in Song or Ma∣sick, begin when a rational and hu∣man Sign is in the Ascendant or 10th House which Signs are ♊, ♍, ♎ and ♒, in singing shun the mute Signes
are ♋, ♏, and ♓, for Prick song and Divine Musick aptate principally ☿, for secular Song or Musick, cheifly aptate ♀, and ☿ in the second place, but in choice of Musical Instru∣ments, aptate or fortify both ☿ and ♀, or either of them which you may, and let the Ascendant be ♎ or ♉, or at least Pisces, and in either kind of Musick let the Moon be in ♋, ♉, or ♓ seperate from ☿, and going to a Conjunction or good aspect of ♀ if po∣sible, it is the better if ♀, or ☿, or both be in any of their Dignitys or ☿ beholding ♀ with any Amiable Aspect or in Conjunction; and would you have your Scholler superlatively excel in singing, that no one should exceed, then let him or her begin under the Ascendants beforesaid, and let Mercury be direct and joyn∣ed to Venus Retrograde in House or exaltation, or some other the Dig∣nitys of either of them, but it is ne∣cessary to this that the parties Nati∣vity before hand be considered, for never any one excells in any thing unless there be a Natural aptitude, and fitness thereunto, and one spe∣cial
observation is that the Lord of the Ascendant be fortified in the 9th. or 10th. Houses. The Antients give Rules like∣wise in reference to Musical Instru∣ments, making several nice distincti∣ons, which have more in them of curiosity then profit; Therefore its convenient to forbear the farther prosecution. 21. The Marchants Calling prin∣cipally belongs to this 9th. House, as cheifly consisting in Forraigne Negotiations, and the like: In refer∣ence to which not only the practice of our fore-Fathers of famous me∣mory, but also dayly experience, convinceth us of this truth, that the good or bad Position of the Hea∣vens at the setting forth of the Ship, conduceth much to the good or bad success in the Voyage, As Storms, Rocks, Fires, Pirates, and Cross-winds are professed Enemies to the Mer∣chants profit, and meer productions of ill Positions, so his indeavours should be most conversant in and a∣bout the mean by which these dis∣asters may be prevented, which pre∣vention
the Antient Sages re∣solve us, consists in two things; First in a Reverend and devout im∣ploration of the Divine Majesty for a blessing and success: Secondly in the due and proper choice and Ele∣ction of time to that purpose, which is done by observing the Position of the Heavens, and entring your Ship, and setting sayle, at such a time when the Heavens answer these Rules. First, know therefore it is best to begin your Voyage when a watry Sign ascends the Horizon, in which you are (except Scorpio) or the Moon existing in a moist Signe, in Conjunction, or within the Trine, or Sextil Rays of Iupiter or Venus, but you ought to debillitate Saturne and Mars, but if they be strong in any fortitudes, be sure that they As∣pect not the Ascendant, or the Moon. Secondly, The Malevolents do prejudice by being ni the Ascendant, or with the Sun or Moon or casting their Squares, or Oppositions to any of them. Thirdly, The next Rock of pre∣judice
is, when with the moon, or in the Ascendant, there is any of these Malevolent stars, of violent, Turbulent nature, as the Pleiades, Hyades, Orion, Arcturus, Aldeba∣ran, Delphinus, Argonavis, Hercules, Canis Major or Minor Hoedi, or Ca∣pella. Fourthly, The infortunes may not Aspect the Ascendant or Moon, unless they be asisted with the bene∣volent aspects of Iupiter. Fiftly, The Malevolents in An∣gles are to be avoided, but be sure they praeside not over the Moon or the Ascendant. Sixthly, Mars is most noxtious being posited in the 10th. or 11th. Houses. Seventhly, You are heedfully to avoid the Moons passing, or transit∣ing either of the Nodes, common∣ly called the Head and Taile of the Dragon, and it is good she be in the Dignitys of the fortunes, or in Ami∣able Aspect or Conjunction with them, and above the Earth, but if she be under the Earth (as some∣times it cannot be avoided) then
posite her in the third, or fifth Hou∣ses, 8. Lastly, the Lords and Disposi∣ters of the Moon and Ascendant, must be strong, and benevolent in Angles, Oriental, and free from be∣ing afflicted by the Malevolents, and strengthened by the Radiant Aspects of the Benevolents, and in their Dignitys, not peregrine, Com∣bust, nor Cadent, weak, nor in the abject-houses of Heaven, which are the 6th. 8th. and 12th. nor with Retrograde Planets, nor Retro∣grade themselves. Thus briefly, yet sufficient to make every Sea-man and Merchant wise and happy.
Elections for several Matters and Things relating to the 10th. House. 1. THe fortitude of the Sun is much to be considred, in the obtaining of Dignitys and Princely preferment. 2. In Princely Dignitys, if you Elect a time, the 10th. House, the Lord thereof and his Dispositer must be aptated, the Moon and her receiver, let all these be in good Aspect with the fortunes. 3. In obtaining Courtly Dignitys and preferments, the First House, the second, their Lords and their dis∣positers, merrit your choice, and if you Elect for a Counsellor, Se∣cretary, or Clarck, aptate Mercury with the aforesaid, if posible posite Iupiter in the first joyn'd to the Lord of the 10th. or in a good aspect of him, or in a Square with reception. 4. If you Elect for Dignity, let not infortunes be in Angles, nor
the Moon Combust, or otherwise impedited, nor with Cauda Dra∣conis. 5. For a time for a man to recon∣cile himself to his superiour at dif∣ference with him, of what conditi∣tion soever he be, afflict the Ascen∣dant and impedite the Lord there∣of, and in like manner deale by the Moon, and the Planet from whom she seperated, and that she decrease in Light and Number, and make the 7th. House and Lord thereof fortunate & strong; and in like man∣ner the Planet to whom the Moon is joyn'd, and let the Lord of the 4th. House be well posited in a good House from the Ascendant, and free from the Malevolents. 6. In undertaking, beginning, or returning to any Art or Calling, aptate the first House, the 10th. and their Lords, the Moon also and the Planet, Significator of the Mistery, Trade, or Science, and fortify them. As for Martial affaires and Armes, Mars, for Learning Mercury, for Musick Venus, for the study and practice of Law and Divinity Iupiter
for Honour the Sun, for Tillage and Husbandry Saturne, and the like. 7. oftimes it haps that he that hath been the means of anothers preferment, may have a desire to remove the party again from the same, either upon the account of ingratitude, as walking unworthy of his former favour which is an Epide∣mical Disease in these days, or upon the account of benefit and advantage to the party promoting him to high∣er Digninitys, if it be upon the ac∣count of ill will, and disfavour, Debil∣litate the ☽ let her be unfortunate, weak, or Combust, and afflicted with any other the infortunes, and decreasing in Light and Number, and posited in the 6th. or 12th. Houses, in a fixed Sign, and either the exaltation or Dignitys of Iupiter, Venus, the Sun, or Mercury, they likewise weak and unfortunate, and let the Ascendant and his Lord be fortunate, and well fortified; if the intention be to remove him in love to greater Honour, profit and Dignity, let the Moon bein Virgo,
Sagitary, or Pisces, or at least in Gemini, which is inferiour to the former, let the Lord of the Ascen∣dant be increasing in Light and Number, and the Ascendant a Nor∣thern Sign, and let the Moon be fortunated in the House or Dignitys of any fortune, that fortune being fortified and strong, well aspecting the Lord of the 10th. House, if the the Preferment be of Layical, and Temporal Signification, but aspect∣ing the Lord of the 9th, if the Ho∣nour be Ecclesiastick and Spiritual, neither is this position contrary to that else where affirmed, that the Moon is Significatrix of the business or matter in action, because here is understood the Ascendant free from impediments and safe, the Lord thereof strong and fortunately fortified, and for this, the Lord of the Ascendant shall be the Signifi∣cator, so far as the signification per∣tains to the Ascendant and Lord thereof, but the Moon shall be Sig∣nificatrix of the thing, and business for which you Elect your time, and hath her proper Signification differ∣ent,
and seperate from the Lord of the Ascendant, and so un∣derstand in all like cases. 8. If any one desires instruction, so as to be taught in Phylosophy and morral Sciences, and would have a convenient time to begin his studys, let him choose for his Ascendant Geminy, Virgo, Libra, or the first half of Sagitary, or Aquary, free from infortunes & the Moon in any of those Signs, the Lord of the 10th in the 10th, or of the Nature or Freindship of the Lord of the Ascen∣dant, and let the Moon be joyn'd to Mercury by body; or by Sextile or Trine and let Mercury be safe, and free from impediments, fortunate and strong, and if posible that Mer∣cury behold the Lord of the Ascen∣dant with some Amiable Aspect, which will be very good, as also if the Moon be in her Apogeon, or ap∣plying thereunto, not declining, the 9th. House and Lord thereof is to be sortified in like manner if possi∣ble, &c. 9. Would any one be expert in Armes and would choose and Elect
a fit & convenient time to begin, that thereby he might the better profit, and mannage the same with honour safty & credit, let him choose for his Ascendant Aries, Leo, or Sagitary, and Mars fortunate and strong, and the Moon fortified, and in Taurus if possible, for she is best there, un∣less she be otherwise fortified, but beware she be not in Scorpio nor Ca∣pricorn, and cheifly in Learning, Military affaires, posite also the Lord of the Ascendant in his exaltation or other Dignitys, and be careful that neither he nor the Moon, be Cadent from any Angle, especially from the Ascendant, if these cannot be in yourtime, yet be sure at the least to posite the Moon and the Lord of the Ascendant, or either of them in the 10th House, or applying there∣unto. 10. If any one desire to be In∣structed in the Art of swiming, that he might proceed with ease, and saf∣ty, and be excellent therein, and to the same end would consult a good time to begin, make choice of Cau∣cer, Scorpio or Pisces, for the Ascen∣dant,
and let the Lord of the Ascen∣dant be either in Angle of the 10th. or applying thereunto, not distant there from, more then 15. Degrees, and strong and fortunate, and the Moon strong and in some of her Dignitys, amongst which Cancer is cheif, Taurus next, the other infe∣riour, and ascending in Septentrio∣nal Signs and neer her Auge or Apo∣geum. 11, If an Artist be desired in a general way to make Elections of Time, according to the variety of mens Callings, and Practises; As first in reference to Forging, Smiths craft or the like, what ever Ascen∣dant you take, be sure you aptate the 10th. House and Lord thereof, and the Moon likewise, and the Planet that properly signifys the work or business that any one intends to be∣gin, see that he be fortunate and strong; as for instance, if it be a busi∣ness of strong, & tedious labour dull and heavy in the dispatch, as the Cul∣ture of the Earth, sinking of Wells, or Fountains, Coale-pits, or Quarys for stone, or Mines, or any thing
about these, as Gins for the Evacu∣ate water, Water-mills or the like, aptate Saturne principally, and if it be a business that may admit of much serious cosideration and judg∣ment, and much business pro and con may be about it as to Arbitrati∣on and the like, then aptate Iupiter and if your business be any thing of Smiths work, Fire, butchery, or cru∣elty, aptate Mars, if it be any thing conversant about Money or Gold∣smiths work or the like, then ap∣tate the Sun, and if it be about mat∣ter of Ornament especially of or concerning Women, aptate Venus, but let Mercury in all these conside∣rations be joyned with the Signifi∣cant Planet either by body or aspect and Fortunate and strong, because he hath participation in all things wherein Ingenuity is requisite, and if the work be in reference to Draughts, to Pictures, Imagery, the forming of Stamps for Coyn, Ma∣thematical Instruments, or any thing wherein the subtilty of Wit is re∣quired, in these aptate Mercury, that he be strong and Fortunate, and
(if possible) joyned to the Moon, or friendly aspecting her, and both well disposed, and if the matter be in re∣ference to Navigation or Maritine affaires, aptate the Moon, and let her be increasing in Light and Num∣ber not descending from her Auge, and in every particular determinati∣on, let the Moon be joyned to, or a∣spect the Planet with an aspect of Amity, that signifys the work or business you intend to begin, and would have good come thereof, or else see she be in the House signify∣ing the thing you intend, in some dignitys or well aspecting the same; and lastly take this general Rule that you take your Ascendant answerable to the Nature of your business as be∣ing most proper and convenient to the thing or work you intend to be∣gin, as in Terrene things that partici∣pate of the signification of the earth, choose Terrene & Earthly Signs, in watry significations choose Aquatick Signs in firy, fiery Signs, in Aethereal and Airy, choose Airy Signs, & the more neerer you come to a perfect Election, or the more you fall short
of it, answerable will be your suc∣cess in the Degrees of good or bad. Elections concerning the Signi∣fication of the Eleaventh House. 1. IN making Pacts, Covenants, concluding peace, and en∣tring into Amity for durance; the following Position of Heaven is best, i. e. that the Moon be in the 11th. with the Lord of the 11th. House and (if possible) let the Lord of the first be there likewise, and all joyned to Venus, or Vinus joyn'd to the Moon, or the Lord of the 11th or in an aspect of Amity or Venus in Taurus, Pisces, or Libra, receiv∣ing some of them, existing strong, and the Moon received by Iupiter, or posite the Moon strong and fortu∣nate in some of the Dignitys of Ve∣nus, neer unto this was the Positi∣ons of the Heavens, when the French and Scots concluded their National
durable League, the effects of which (to her sorrow) England hath often felt. 2. In entring Covenants, Con∣tracts, or Leagues of Freindship where gain is to be expected, posite the Moon in the Ascendant, or in a Sign of the same triplicity, fortunate and strong, in some of the assential Dignitys of the Planet that recei∣veth her, and the part of Fortune there likewise. 3. With confidence expect the accomplishment of that thing you desire by, or through friendship; if these Positions of the Heavens are, namely, the Moon and her Disposi∣ter, the Lords of the Second and 11th. and their Dispositers, behold∣ing or aspecting the Ascendant or Lord thereof, and the Moon or ei∣ther of them in any good aspect with reception; These being, the thing will be facile and easy in the obtain∣ing thereof.
Treating of those things wherein we have hope and confidence to gain Fame and good report. 4. THis Subject seems rather to be comprehended un∣der the 10th. House because it con∣sults of Honour, Credit, and fame, which are the consequents of a fore∣going hope, but for several conside∣rations it seems more conveniently comprehended under this head. A good name and Fame is gotten by honest ingenious study which that you may accomplish with con∣veniency; Let your Ascendant be Sagitary or Pisces, or at least Cancer, but Cancer is not so proper as the o∣ther two, you must be careful also to aptate Iupiter as much as may be, as also the 11th. House, and the Lord thereof, and if you can posite Iupiter in the 11th. House, it will much advantage your desire, and advance your design; if you cannot
posite love in the 11th, indeavour to place him in the first House, and if you can do neither of these, at least∣wise cause that ♃ behold either the first or 11th. House with some freind∣ly aspect, and be sure that Iupiter be fortunate and strong and free from impediments, and if you can possible posite the Lord of the first House in the 11th. or the Lord of the 11th. in the first, this is very efficatious and proper, its good the Sun be in the 10th House if it may be, or in the first free from impediments, so that he impediate not Iove, neither the Lord of the first nor 11th. Hou∣ses, let the moon also aspect the Sun with a freindly aspect, as Trine, or Sextile, at least with a Quartile a∣spect with reception, and the moon free from all impediments, and for∣tunate and strong, and let the moon seperate from Iupiter, or the Lord of the first or 11th. House, when she applys to the Sun: This much Dig∣nifies your indeavours, and causeth that your land and fame shall be far spread and divulged abroad, to your great benifit, and you shall be prais∣ed
of the best and generality of people, to your great good and beni∣fit, and the more of these Significa∣tors you can aptate, and thus fortify, it is the better; But however its ne∣cessary that the Luminarys aspect each other, or the Lord of the first or 11th, Houses with a Sextile or Trine aspect, at least in a Quartile with reception, but if they behold each other, its the better, and doth the more fortunate your designs. 5. If any one should desire the love and freindship of any person, up on the principles of honest real affection and not upon the account of any uncivillity, and should desire to consult a fit time for his applica∣tion to such person, whose freind∣ship and favour he desires; It mat∣ters not much what the Ascendant be, but what suits best with the con∣veniency of the time, so that other things considerable be heeded, as first posite the moon in the 11th. House, and if you can, there also place the Lord of the Ascendant, it is the better, and if possible, and both joyn'd too, or aspecting Venus, but
at leastwise let Venus aspect the moon, or the Lord of the 11th. House, which if time cannot allow of this do what you can that the moon, or the Lord of the Ascendant, be joyned with the Lord of the 10th. or behold him with a Trine, or Sextil aspect, or with reception, or aspect Venus, or that the Lord of the As∣cendant behold either of them, from Taurus, Libra, or Pisces, and be free fortunate and strong, and well dis∣posed, and if none of these can agree with the time, cause that Venus be received by the moon in Taurus, or Cancer, and the moon in reception with Iupiter, or the Lord of the se∣cond House but furthermore if none of these can be, posite the moon in Taurus, or in the first half of Libra, or Pisces, in some of the Dignitys of Venus, free, Fortunate, and strong. 6. If any one desire the freind∣ship of another upon the account of gain and that he may benefit his fortune thereby by the means of such love and freindship, then posite the moon in the first House, or at
least in the triplicity of the first, free from impediments, fortunate and strong, and the part of Fortune re∣ceived from the Lord of the House, or the Lord of the exaltation of that Signe, in which the Moon is. 7. If any party desire the Love, freindship and familiarity of ano∣ther, that thereby he might gaine an Inheritance, or acquire thereby House, Land, Goods or the like, posite the Moon in the 8th House in reception with part of Fortune. 8. And if it be upon the account of gaining small Cattel, let the Moon be in the 6th. House, in re∣ception with the part of Fortune. 9. And if it be with desire of ob∣taining any great Cattel or Beasts of considerable price and vallue, posite the moon in the 12th. House, in re∣ception with part of Fortune like∣wise, and so understand of every House, according to the substantial and proper signification thereof, and always let the moon have reception with part of Fortune, or the Lord thereof. 10. If none of these particulars
can with conveniency (in reference to your urging time) be observed, consider another method, that is, if any one would desire of another that he would be Liberal unto him, and confer gifts by way of Donation up∣on him, take your Ascendant what Sign you will that is not afflicted, so it be a fixed Sign, at leastwise a com∣mon Sign, and let the Lord of the Ascendant be therein or in his tri∣plicity, aspecting the Ascendant with a favourable aspect, viz. Trine or Sextile, and take great heed that the moon be not joyned, or afflicted by any the Malevolent Planets, nor any other way impedited, and it is necessary that she behold the Lord of the House in which she is, because if she aspect not him, it hinders the effecting, and accomplishment of your business; let the moon be in∣creasing in Number, and Light, in such beginnings, and joyned too, or aspecting fortunes, the Lord of the Ascendant, also fortunate and strong, and free from impediments, if it be a fortune to whom the moon is joyned direct and increasing in
Number it is better by far for your business, for it signifies the prosperi∣ty and good success of your under∣takings, and have a special care to Mercury that he be not impedited and afflicted, for if he be, it signifies obstruction, and oftimes the loss of your business, but if there be recep∣tion between the Planet that afflicts and Mercury, it is the better, and prevents the absolute frustration of your business, so that it may be ac∣complished and brought to an end, with Petition, importunity, hard labour, and much difficulty, yet hard∣ly durable and lasting, always have a care that you posite the Significatrix which is the Moon joyn'd, or aspect∣ed to the Planet Significator of the thing quesited; as the Sun in all splendid Acts, and the business of great persons, Mars in the mat∣ters of War, and souldiers, Iupiter in matters of Counsel, Law, and Ecclesiastical affaires, and persons, and so understand of all other Signi∣ficators. Lastly, If you would Elect a time for any one to enter into Amity and
freindship with another, posite the Moon free from Malignants, and especially from their Quadrats, and Oppositions, and let her be joyned in freindly aspect with the Planet-sig-fying the thing, person or business, which you intend, as is above said, as Venus in the Acts, Relations, and signification of Women, Mercury, in writings, Scribes, and the like, and so understand of all other Significa∣tors, and if the Lord of the 11th. House behold the moon or her Dis∣positer with a laudable aspect it is the better. For the obtaining of any thing Mate∣rial promised to you, or other∣wise; by Petition. VVHen any person desires to obtaine a benefit from a∣nother, whether by promise, or by Petition, and would consult a fit, apt, and opertune time to that pur∣pose, that he might with the more facillity, and certainly obtain his de∣sire,
take what Ascendant you can free from affliction, and fortify the same, and the Lord thereof, the Moon also, and Lord of the House in which she is, aptate also the second House and his Lord, the 11th. House and Lord thereof, and let the Lord of the Ascendant behold the Moon or some of the forenamed Significators, with a laudable and freindly aspect, or receive them, or some one of them, and let the Lord of the House signifying the thing desired, receive the Lord of the 7th. House, and the Moon, or at least∣wise one of them; as for example, should you make your request to a Brother, then its proper the Lord of the third House should receive the Lord of the first, or the moon, if of a Father, then the Lord of the 4th. ought to receive the Lord of the first or the Moon, if from a Son, let the Lord of the 5th. House re∣ceive the Lord of the first, or the Moon, if from a Servant or inferi∣our person, let the Lord of the 6th. receive the Lord of the Ascendant, the moon or either of them, if from
a Wife, a Husband or Associate, let the Lord of the 7th. House receive the Lord of the first, the Moon, or either of them, if you would Peti∣tion a Bishop, or Ecclesiastical person let the Lord of the 9th. receive the Lord of the first, the moon or either of them, if from the King, then let the Lord of the 10th. receive the Lord of the Ascendant, the moon, or either of them; if your expecta∣tion be from a freind, then let the Lord or the 11th House receive the Lord of the first, the moon, or ei∣ther of them; Farther, it you Peti∣tion, or seek to any person signified by Saturne, as Antient men, Iews, or persons of mean condition or the like, let the Cusp of the 11th House be in Capricorn, Aquary, or Libra, or at leastwise in some of the Digni∣ties of Saturn. If you Petition or seek to a Scribe, a Merchant or young person Signifi∣ed by Mercury, let the Lord of the 11th House be in some of the Dig∣nities of Mercury, omitting the Dig∣ties of face, which is the weakest of all Dignities, Atabarus an antient
Author adviseth that Mercury be joyned to Iupiter or Venus, and ap∣plying to the Lord of the Ascendant, in all Petitions or requests from any person, and this is taken as a general fortitude, as also if posible aptate the proper Significator of the thing, which you would obtaine, or things which you Petition for; the first House always signifies the party petitioning, and the 7th. House the party Petiti∣oned, therefore let the Ascendant be free from any affliction of the Malevolents, and the 7th. House free from their Malignant aspects, & if you cannot do this, nor observe the former directions in Electing your time, your business then shall be destroyed your expectation, frustra∣ted & brought to nothing, and that af∣ter it seems probable to be effected. Now if your request shall be for money to beg or borrow, or to re∣ceive it upon due or the like, then aptate or fortify the Lord of the As∣cendant, and his Lord, with the a∣foresaid Significators, and if it may with conveniency, let the Lord of the Ascendant behold the Lord of
the second, at least let there be no Hostile aspect between them, nor af∣flicted by the Malevolents, and last∣ly, let the Lord of the 11th. House, and the Dispositer of the part of fortune, both or either of them if posible, behold the second House with any freindly aspect. Haly adviseth, if it be to Wo∣men that you Petition, or seek, or in the way of love, or in reference to Marriage or the like, have the same consideration to the 7th. house & his Lord, as you had to the second, and so of all others; Thus con∣cludes the Significations of the 11th. House.
Of those perticular Significations, that referr to the 12th. House. 1. THe first observation we shall make shall be in refference to the reconciliation of E∣nemies; Therefore when you would reconcile persons that are at discord and enmity, aptate and fortify the Ascendant and his Lord, Debillitate the 7th. House and Lord thereof, let the Lord of the Ascendant have some Amiable aspect to some For∣tune, if posible, and Debillitate the Lord of the 12th. House, causing him to be Cadent, and if the 12th. House be unfortunate it is the bet∣ter, and fortify Mercury. 2. In Expelling Malignant Spirits or any Diabollical possession, aptate the Ascendant, Lord thereof, and the Moon, let not the Ascendant be Cancer, Lee, nor Aquary, nor the moon in any of them, but in what
Sign else you posite the Moon in, let her be strong, free, and Fortu∣nate, 3. For Fishing, if you Elect a time good and convenient for that purpose, let the Ascendant be a common Sign, fortify and aptate the Lord thereof, or let the Sign be of the watry triplicity, the Moon and the Lord of the 7th. unfortunate, and their Dispositers afflicted by Saturne or Mars. 4. If you would Elect a time for Dice-play that you might win, let not a fixed Sign be in the Ascendant but let the Lord of the first be strong and well fortified, the Lord of the 7th. House weak and afflicted, and posite the Lord of the 8th. House in the second or first Houses, or recei∣ved in some Dignities, or aspect with the Lords of the first or second, but let not the Lord of the 7th. or 8th. receive the Lord of the second, and always see the Moon, seperate from one fortune and apply to another fortune, and its best the moon be above the Earth Fortunate and strong, and let him that will win al∣ways
have her in his minde. 5. In Hunting aptate the Moon, but cheifly the Lord of the hour, and let the Moon be Cadent from the Ascendant, and not behold it. 6. When any person would wa∣ger on a Race to be run by any Crea∣ture, either Rational or irrational, and desiring to win, and conquer the other party, and to that end would choose and Elect an fit and prosper∣ous hour to bring his ends to pass, to this purpose aptate the Ascendant and Lord thereof, the moon also, and Lord of the House in which she is, and the Planet to which she joyns her self by aspect; In like manner fortify the part of fortune, and Dispositer thereof, and its ne∣cessary that the Lord of the first and the moon, or one of them behold the part of fortune, and after you have aptated these, put the Lord of the houre in the Ascendant, at that instant the Beast, or Party that is to run first sets his foot out of doors, upon the first remove towards the Race. 7. In the next place as to the
Number of them that Run, from one to twelve, if a number run toge∣ther, to know which shall from the first to the twelfth, first come to the Mark or end of the Race; observe this Method viz. If you posite the Lord of the hour in the first House (as is aforesaid) then the first shall come first to the end of the Race, if the Lord of the hour be posited in the 10th. House, the second shall win, if in the 11th. House, the third, if in the 7th. the 4th. if in the 5th. House the 5th, shall first attaine the end of the Race, if in the 9th. the 6th. if in the third the 7th. if in the second the 8th. if in the 8th. house the Lord of the hour be posited the 9th. shall win, if in the 6th. the 10th if the Lord of the hour be in the 12th. or fourth houses, that Beast or Man shall come last to the end of the Race, or Equivolent to the last. 8. But if in Election of time you cannot aptate and fortify all Signifi∣cators according to these Rules, aptate the Lord of the hour, the Lord of the Ascendant, and the
Moon, and if your Time will not permit you to do this, be sure to aptate the Lord of the hour, by po∣siting him in the first, and aptate the Moon likewise: Alkindus is of o∣pinion, that the Moon is best apta∣ted in Sagitary, or the first half of Libra, and you must take great heed that the Lord of the Ascendant, or Lord of the hour, or the Moon, be not in any of their falls, for then it is to be feared that the Horse, his Rider, or both, will fall and sustaine prejudice. 9. When any person would Elect a time to buy a good Horse, or other serviceable Beast, or to Back him & came him, first aptate the Ascendant and his Lord, and the Moon, and it is good that she be joyned to a for∣tune that is direct, Oriental, and ascending in the Circle of his Auge, but if not all this, at least let the for∣tune be direct, and be careful, that the ☽ nor that fortune be not joyned to any infortune, either by body or aspect, for that possesseth the Beast with timidity and fears, if this evil position should be at the buying
of the Beast, it threatens loss, and a bad market, if it shall be at the Backing or taming of him, the issue will not answer your intention, but that the Beast will be abused, and by so much the worse is the Significati∣on if any impediment shall be in the 12th, House, but take notice of this necessary observation, if the Horse you buy be already Backt, or the Beast already tamed, then let the Ascendant at the purchase there∣of be a Common Sign, and the Moon in Taurus or Lee, and let her be joyned to a Planet direct, which is Septentrional ascending, or at least Meridional ascending, these shall signify that the Horse or Beast shall augment, and increase both in body and price, but if the Planet to whom the ☽ is joyned, or aspected, be Re∣trograde, this signifies that the Beast shall augment somewhat in price, but not much, but shall be dimini∣shed in body, and if the Planet shall be direct, and descending, or either Septentrional or Meridional, this signifys that the Beast shall be in∣creased in body, but diminished in
price and vallue; In like manner if it shall be Meridional and descending, the Beast shall be diminishing both in body and price, and so much the more as it shall be the more Meridi∣onal: This concerns Tame Beasts that are broke for the masters use; the next consideration reffers to un∣tamed Beasts that are wild, for these aptate your Ascendant a Common Sign, and let the moon be in a moveable Sign, joyned too, or a∣specting any of the Fortunes, consi∣dering the conditions as to assention and descention, to Direction and Retrogradation, as is before said. 10. This general Consideration offereth it self worth our Noting; That is, would any one buy a Horse, Ox, or any other Animal with in∣tent to gaine and profit thereby, the moon existing from the beginning of Cancer, to the end of Sagitary, he shall not gaine, but lose thereby, for he shall buy dear and sell cheap but if he buy the moon existing from the beginning of Capricorne to the end of Gemini, he will experience the contrary, for he will buy cheap and
sell deer, and it is the opinion of good Authors, that this Rule holds not only in Beasts and Cattel, but in all things that any one can buy or sell whatsoever, always, not preter∣mitting or forgetting that Fortunes meliorate, and augment the good, and diminish the evil of a thing, and contrary the infortunes, always augment the evil, and dimish the good, every one both good and bad, according to his nature, and accord∣ing to the vertue and power they have, to help, or hurt, to augment, or diminish. 11. The next consideration is to shew how to Elect a fit & conveni∣ent time & hour, wherein the King, or any person may with the more facillity, take or Debilitate his Ene∣my, and this is best done when the 12th House is unfortunated, and weak, and the Lord thereof unfor∣tunated also, and this affliction to the 12th House and Lord thereof, shall be the better if it be caused by the Lord of the Ascendant, but if this may not be, choose a time to prosecute a Theif, or Enemy, when
the ☽ is afflicted by the Sun, and the Sun strong & free from affliction, and if the moon be afflicted from any o∣ther, and not from the Sun it is as well: It is the Judgement of Ata∣barus, that when a Prince would take and suprise an Enemy of less force then himself, let him state the moon in ☍, or ☌, or in via Combusta, or with the ☊ or ☋ of the Dragon, or in the Ascendant because the Ascendant is inimiced by reason of Opposition, or let the moon be aspect∣ed by the Infortunes, or before her Eclipse three days, & let the Sun be safe & free from the Malevolency of Infortunes, & a fortune, or fortunes, aspect or possess the mid-heaven, this is for a certaine Rule, that the more the moon is infortunated, and afflicted, the more and the grea∣ter prejudice, befalleth the Enemy, by reason the moon hath populer sig∣nification, and is Significatrix of vulgar, inferiour Relations, and Ser∣vants: Thus have we finished with according to Brevity as premised, the Judgement of the best Authors and our own experience, the Elections of
the Twelve Houses; For which, Laudatus, & Benedictus, sit deus, in sacula seculorum. Here followeth the Significa∣tion of the hours of the Planets, very useful in their proper Significa∣tions. THe Signification of the Planetary Hours, we have taken from the Iudicials of Abablez the Son of Zàéd, and from the Book of Albumazar, his Book of Natural things, confirmed by the Iudgement of Haly and others, which here we thought good to affix least our work might seem Lame, and defirient in any of those Rules, and grounds, which the wise Antient Sages have dictated to us. After these Planatary Hours, we have also in like manner sub∣jeyned, Elections of the Moon,
according to her Mansions, because a great part of the Arabians, use and op∣perate by them, and are accounted ac∣ceptable Radixes for business, by the Indians, as appears in the Books of Dorotheus and others, but observe, we esteem not these Elections of Pla∣netary Houres, nor the Mansions of the Moon of so great virtue, force and efficacy, as the Elections before hand∣led, which are taken from the present true Position of the Planets, and their accidents, yet these in their Noti∣ons, may be useful to us, and those Significations they have, ought not to be despised. Of the Hours of the Sun. THe Hour of the Sun is Infortu∣nate in every thing, unless in Addresses to the King, or Gover∣nour, and not always good in this neither, for all Accesses, and Ad∣dresses about business, are to be shun'd at, and neer the Suns setting; This hour of the Sun is not good to
put on new Garments, because, the sickness of the party usually, or some uncomfortable accident causeth them to last to long; Not good to bleed, or breath a Vein; Nor good to Deposite in any mane hands Mo∣ney, or any part of your Substance, by way of Partnership or Trade, not good to begin any Building, nor to buy any Beasts; not good to accom∣pany Naturally with any Woman, yet in this hour good to apply our selves to Wisdome, & Learning & to receive instruction, good to buy, and make provision of Armes, to Ride and Hunt, let any one especially ill Husbands being from home, not enter their Houses in this hour for fear of disquietness; This Hour is good to receive Dignity & Honour, to apply to the Prince, or to manage affaires with great persons, as also to take security from any person, on the behalf of Money, or any goods or substance, by which profit and gain is expected, and if you give any sume or goods to any one in this hour, usually the party to whom it is giv∣en dyes, before he receives it; If
any one be taken with a Disease or Distemper in the same, it usually converts to a strong Fevour, and oft∣times falls into sounding Fits, which greatly afflicts the spirits and causeth great Detriment. Of the Hour of Venus. IN the Hour of Venus it is good to take Horse, to begin a Jour∣ney, but not to enter a Ship to be∣gin a Voyage, in the hour of Venus, and when she Rules, its very good & the firest time for all Jocosity and Mirth for Play, for Womens com∣pany, for Marriage and Contracts with Women, good to goe from home, but if abroad not good to enter your house in this hour, good to take Medicines, but not good to let blood, nor to use Cupping-glasses, or Scarrification, not good to plant Trees, nor to sow any Seed, not good to give Cor∣rection to any Servant, Male or Fe∣male, nor to begin to make a New
Garment, nor sleep in that hour if you can avoid it; Its good to un∣dertake or begin a Journey, upon Womens occasions or in reference to such ends, this hour is good to act in all things that relate too, or concerne Women, boldness and Confidence is good to be excercised in that hour, as also Concumbere Cum Muliere licite, he which re∣ceiveth money on debt, or gift, or otherwise in that hour, usually di∣spendeth it on Women, or foolish∣ly in vitious Delights, and Idle Company, a Disease invading at that time, its to be feared, hath its Original from some Malevolent hu∣more afflicting, caused by the Illi∣cite, and too frequent Company of VVomen or the like. Of the Hour of Mercury. IN the hour of Mercury, break any Beast for the Saddle, good to write Letters, to send Messengers, and Messages, to buy, sell, and
deale in Merchandize, to lend, and to receive what is due, to take Phy∣sick, to Graft and Plant, to make Addresses to Princes, not good to Contract Matrimony, to buy either Land or goods, or to re-enter your house being out, not to buy or hire Servants, nor to change or remove from one house to another, neither to take any one out of Prison, for he may quickly return thither again, good to begin any Building, to dig Wells, and to sink Mines and the like, good to begin a journey, the par∣ty shall receive gain & profit thereby, set Children to School to writing and in this hour let them begin to be Disciplined in every Science, to put a Child Prentice to a Merchant, to act in Merchandize, mutually to give, to pay, or receive is good, he which in this hour borrows any sume, shall well performe the pay∣ment thereof, and he which lend∣eth, or giveth shall be well content, and they shall mutually be satisfied each in other.
Of the Hour of the Moon. IN the Hour of the Moon not good to begin any Building, or lay Foundations, nor provide any Medicine to take, nor make New Cloaths, nor buy Cattel especi∣ally small Cattel, as Sheep or Swine, or the like; Good to sell Timber, to cut and prune Hedges, to buy Fruits, or fruit Trees, to dig Wells, Pits, and Quarrys, to Ride and back Horses, good to Complement and proffer respect to the Feminine Sex, put Children to School to Read and write, prosecute and pursue an Enemy, good to depart and leave your own Country but not good to re-enter it again, its good to begin a Journey in this hour upon the death of any freind or Kindred for he shall accomplish good thereby, but if the Moon be in the Terrene Triplicity its contrary, he which lends Money in this hour, shall have great labour, cost, and pain to reco∣ver
it again, and after he de∣spaires of the recovery, it shall be Recovered, but not the whole sume. The Significations of the Hour of Saturne. IN this hour take no Medicine, neither make or put on any new Cloaths, neither cut your hair, or endeavour any Ornament about the Head, not good to enter into a Ship to begin a Voyage, good to goe out of your own house, if it be no far∣ther but that you return the same day, enquire after Enemies, Theives and Fugitives, buy Armes, but pur∣chase neither Man nor Maid Ser∣vants for they will be Lazy, Nasty, sullen, self-will'd and dogged, con∣sult with good Company, write Let∣ters, good to mount some Beasts, as Asses or Mules, but not Horses, or Mares for usually the Beast flings the Rider, or is slow or uncomso ta∣ble in the Journey, or grows lame
by some mischance, not good to contend with Armes against an Ene∣my, or to begin to pursue any Mur∣derer, neither act in any Arbitra∣tion, or where peace is to be made, in that hour open no vein, nor use any Cupping-glasses, good to buy Leases, or to take Leases, and to buy Grain or any sort of food, or Grain for Seed, not good to begin a long Journey, for the Travellor sustains great peril and danger, or imprisonment, and suffers many anexieties, and finds much Tartdi∣ty and delay, and he that in this hour begins a Voyage to Sea shall be tost with Waves, crost with con∣trary winds, which will cast him up∣on contrary shores, it is good to let Leases, to open the Earth by digging, and to Plow, he which borrows, or receives the Substance of anothers in his hand this hour, will be in danger of losing it, and perchance dye, or lose his life, within a short time after, and he which takes a Disease in this hour, it will long a∣bide him, and become a Chronical distemper, and at last probably dye under it.
Of the Hour of Jupiter. IN this Hour give honour to Prin∣ces, to Ecclesiastical persons, and contract Matrimony, use no Rigor towards Servants, neither Male nor Female, provide Riding Apparrel, and put them on in this hour, take no unpleasant posion, good to de∣part out of house, or Country, buy no Armes, beware of fire, and all igneal operations, not good to digg Wells or Pits, but very good to sow all kinds of Seeds, and to plant all manner of Plants, very good to be∣gin any Building, good to Court the favour of Princes, not good to buy Beasts but good to buy Birds, and Fowle, you may not safely and pros∣perously enter your Ship, not good to let blood, or to scarrify, he which beginneth a Journey may expect good success, gaine and profit, with comfort and benefit from some per∣sons, or parts that he expected not, good to apply to the Judges, and
principal Magistrates, he which lends or borrows shall have good success herein, and whosoever falls into a∣ny Disease or Infirmity shall quick∣ly be cured and helped. Of the Hour of Mars. THe Hour of Mars is to be avoi∣ded and hath Ill Signification, in the beginning of every Action, as also not good in the prosecution, un∣less it be to them to whom Mars is Benevolent in their Nativities, yet to these also is fear of Rashness, and over much hast, in their Actions begun, or continued in this hour: Therefore its our wise∣dom to forbear inception in this hour, where necessity doth not com∣pel.
Of the Mansion of the Moon. THese Mansions are judged by the Antients, to be of great efficacy as to the variation, and state of the weather, as also to general contingent Actions. And not without ground, by rea∣son of those Eminent fixed Stars, which have their Positions, accord-to their different Natures, in those different Divisions of the Zodiack; Three things are necessarily herein observed. As, First the Number. Secondly, the Limmitation. And Thirdly, the Nature of these Mansions. The Indian Authors according to Iaphar divided the Zodiack into 27. parts, and accounted 27. Mansions of the Moon, allowing 13. Degrees 20. Minutes to every Mansion, which orderly and accurately divides the whole Zodiack being 360. Degrees, into 27. equal parts. But the general Currapt of Anti∣quity,
and all moderne Authors do constitute 28. Mansions of the Moon and so divide the Zodiack into 28. parts. 2. The first of these Mansions hath its beginning accounted from the first Star in the Right horn of Aries, which in the beginning of time was in the first Degree of Aries, but now is divolv'd by reason of the preces∣sion of the Aequinox, (according to our best and latest Authors Mori∣nus, and Mr. Wing,) to the 28. de∣greend 28 minutes of Aries, where the first Mansion takes beginning, & hath its Limitation, to the 11. De∣gree 11. minutes of Taurus, as shall be observed in the following Table, with each perticular Demention, and Limitation of every Mansion. 3. These are observed to be effi∣catious in the Moon and all the other Planets, passing through them, by reason of the different Nature of the fixed Stars in their several Asterisms posited in them, as for Example, when the Sun passeth the 10th. Mansion in Leo his proximity to the Dog-star, angments his heat, Et sie de Aliis.
Behold the Table of the Moons Mansions according to Astronomy. 1 Somwhat dryer then the Temperament. gr. 28. 28. ♈ 2 Temperate 11. 11. ♉ 3 very Moist. 24. 3. ♉ 4 Cold and moist. 6. 55. ♊ 5 Dry. 19. 47. ♊ 6 Temperate. 2. 39. ♋ 7 Moist. 15. 31. ♋ 8 Cloudy and inclining to moisture. 28. 23. ♋ 9 Dry. 11. 15. ♌ 10 Moist. 24. 7. ♌ 11 Somwhat more cold then the Temperament 7. 0. ♍ 12 Moist. 19. 50. ♍
13 Temperate. 2. 43. ♎ 14 Temperate inclining to moisture. 15. 35. ♎ 15 Moist. 28. 27. ♎ 16 Cold and moist. 11. 11. ♏ 17 Moist. 24. 3. ♏ 18 Dry. 6. 55. ♐ 19 Moist. 19. 47. ♐ 20 Temperate. 2. 39. ♑ 21 Moist. 15. 31. ♑ 22 Temperate. 28. 23 ♑ 23 Moist. 11. 15. ♒ 24 Somwhat Cold. 24. 7. ♒ 25 Dry. 7. 0. ♓ 26 Somwhat Dry. 19. 50. ♓ 27 Moist. 2. 43. ♈ 28 Temperate 15. 35. ♈
THe Astronomical Signification of the Mansions, being menti∣oned in the foregoing Table; Its necessary to add the Astrological Significations, which according to the minds of the best Authors are as followeth. The Moon being in the first Man∣sion, which appears by the foregoing Table, begins in 28. Degrees of Aries, and ends in 11. Degrees old minutes of Taurus, its generally good in Merchandize, to vindicate himself against his Enemies, indiffe∣rent good for Journey, Dorothius is of opinion that its not good to mar∣ry, or contract Marriage in that time that the moon passeth those degrees, good to buy tame beasts, its not good to undertake a voyage by wa∣ter by reason of sudden fear and dan∣ger, neither contract any Society, or bargain with a Superiour for fear of vexation and trouble to follow thereupon; nor enter into Bond, for the issue will be very bad; that per∣son which is imprisoned in that hour, is like to sustaine a long and charge∣able Imprisonment; this time is
good for all operations wrought by Fire, good to Hunt, good to take Physick especially Laxatives, good to buy Sheep or Oxen, to plant Trees to sow Seed, and to put on new Cloths, 2. The second Mansion begins at the 11th. Degree of Taurus and ends at the 24th. degree of the same Sign; Its good for Women to deck themselves with new Apparrel and Ornaments, good to sow Seed, to ruine old Edifices and to build new; because what building you then be∣gin shall be firme and durable, indif∣ferent good for Journey, not good to contract Matrimony, by reason the Bride will be apt to love and fancy others; Its good to hire Servants, or buy Captives because they will be diligent, trusty and faithful, good to buy labouring and domestick Cattel, not good to Journey by water by reason of Wind and Waves, not good to joyn friendship, or to en∣ter society with one greater then your self in power, he which is impri∣soned in this time suffers a long and chargeable Captivity, very good
for all building, for digging of Wells and making conveyances for Water, to hire Servants Male and Female, to apply to Princes and great men, on the behalf of dignity and honour, in the expectation of reward very good, not good to Purge or Vo∣mit. 3. The Moon transiting her third Mansion as appears by the Table foregoing; Its good to Marry and contract Marriage, good to set children to School to write and read, to make up Medicines, and to Tra∣vel, the moon being free from in∣fortunes and from Combustion, good to hire Servants to have them true and honest, for Building, Bath∣ing, & washing; not good to contract friendship, nor to be Imprisoned because of long durance, yet he shall at last pay and come off well. 4. The moon in the fourth Man∣sion, the Indian Phylosophers say, its very good for a Prince to give Battel, to mannage and marshal his Army for advantages, good for the besieging the Enemies Camp, and
Cities, and to prosecute and pursue an Enemy, and Malefactor, its not good to sow, nor to lend, nor to demand Money lent, good to Jour∣ney by Water and Sea, in reference to the success, yet no quick return, good to contract friendship, and Partnership, because they will one be faithful to the other, that party that is commanded to Prison, is in hopes of liberty within three days, if not he suffers long detainment, good to hunt, not good for any kind of Physick, nor to open any dange∣rous wound; that party that puts on New Apparrel will quickly have the same torne, rent, or spoyled, not good for marriage. 5. The Moon existing in this Mansion, its good to Plough and sow all manner of seed in its due season, also good for the adornment of the body with new Cloaths, and other Ornaments, to Ride and the like; he which journeys by Water shall go to his journeys end accord∣ing to his desire but shall but slowly returne, friendship or Partnership contracted in this time shall be com∣mendable,
convenient & profitable to the Parties he which is imprisoned in this time unless he have delive∣rance in three days, is in danger to dye in Prison. Good to wash, Bath, & deck the haire, to put on new Appar∣rel, to buy Beasts, to hire Servants, to prosecute an Enemy, and to com∣pound Enmity, but its evil in pur∣chase of Land, or bargains for Hou∣ses, and to take Physical Potions, as also to begin or attempt that thing of which he feareth the event, or hath lately had ill success therein, because he shall fall in the same in∣convenience again. 6. The Moon being in this Man∣sion, good to take Physick, for Wo∣men to deck themselves with Orna∣ments, and new Attire; its affirmed that the Raine that salls when the Moon is in this Mansion, doth more good then ordinary, yet not good for travel by Land: Dorothius af∣firmes that Marriages that are con∣tracted in this time, shall a while continue in concord and unity and afterwards Discord and disagree, the Servant that is bought or hired
in this time shall be a Deceiver, a Fugitive and a deceiver of his Ma∣ster, he which enters a Ship to voyage therein, he shall safely and quickly arive at his Port and very speedily returne, but for Partnership and contracts to be made herein, not good, for fraud and deceit shall be practised on both hands, he which is cast into Prison a long time con∣tinues therein &c. 7. The Eastern Phylosophers tells us the Moon being in this Mansion, its not good to sow any seed, neither to travel, nor to lend any thing to another, neither to attempt any thing against an other person of pre∣judice; other Authors tells us its good for him that sets saile at this time for he shall quickly go to his own liking, and speedily returne; Parties that joyn society at this time shall be deceptious and false the one to the other; the Party imprisoned stays long by it, not good to cut haire, or to make or put on New cloaths, because he is in danger to be drowned or to dye with them, good for all things of strength and fortifi∣cation,
good to change seed, Wheat and the like, good to furnish a house with Bedding and the like, that one may peaceably injoy and quietly sleep in the same. 8. The Antients say its good herein to contract Matrimony, & any part or League of friendship because the parties shall be helpful to each other, not good for travel nor for new Cloaths, nor bravery, good to lay the foundation of a Building, because of durabillity, and continu∣ance, not good to trust or lend any thing, any person imprisoned by the command of his superiours, will suf∣fer long durance, and his release ve∣ry difficult. 9. Not good for releasing a Pri∣soner, or dismissing Captives, good for sowing and Planting, good to besiege any place, Town, or Castle, indifferent for Journey and travel, as also for Merchandizing, for buying, and selling those Buildings whose foundations are then laid shall long endure, those Parties that then contract society and friendship shall be profitable and helpful each to o∣ther,
Partners will much advance each others gain, good to cut haire or wooll, not good for new Cloaths nor for Imprisonment. 10. The Moon passing this Mansion its good to begin any Building, to let out Land, and Gardens, for sowing and Planting, for Marriage, for putting on new Cloaths, for Ornaments of Women, and for Travel, but not good to lend, for Dorothius saith, he which lends at this time shall either never receive his Mony again, or else with great loss, and tedious vexation; and he which enters a Ship in this time shall have a Laborius, dangerous, and troublesome Voyage, and be long before he obtains his Port, Its good for buying or hiring of Servants, and Beasts they will be strong and of good Stomacks; But the moon pas∣sing the latter part of this Mansion, which is the beginning of Virgo, al∣though they will eat much, yet will be subject to some impediment in the stomack, will be stubborn and disobedient. 11. The moon in this Mansion
its good to Plough to sow, to Tra∣vel, to marry both Widdows and Virgins, to dismiss Captives and to set Servants free, and to hire or buy Servants for they will be honest and just; he which enters his Ship to be∣gin his Voyage shall experience a slow voyage; he will suffer much dammage which shall then be cast into Prison, yet at last shall obtain a good end, good to take Physick, to put on new Apparrel, to lay foun∣dations for Building, to Solicite, and Petition the Prince, Magistrate or Noble person, good for mirth and Recreations, and to cut haire, and deck the head and body. 12. The moon passing this Man∣sion, its good to marry Widdows or the like, but not good in the Marriage of Virgins, by reason Dis∣contents will arise which may cause seperation, they will not long abide together. Good for Physick, to Plant and sow, but not to travel, neither depose any goods or money in the trust of any one; the Servant that you take will be trusty and faithful, and love well his Master; Fortunate
to him which then enters his Ship, and to them that contract associa∣tion and Partnership, for they shall much benefit each other, he which shall be taken as Prisoner, shall quickly escape and be delivered. 13. In this Mansion its good to dig Wells, Pits and Quaries, bad for Travel, good to cure Infirmities of body proceeding from Ventosity and Windy causes, and not otherwise; Dorothius is of opinion that those who then marry shall not long con∣tinue in unity and concord but disa∣gree, he which lends money at this time shall be in danger of losing it; unfortunate to all that begin Travel by Land or Sea, if any enter into so∣ciety of friendship or Partnership, they will defraud each other and disagree, good to remove from House to House to neer habitations, if you aptate the second House his Lord, and the Planet signifying the Place to which you remove, good to buy and sell all but beasts, & to make requests of good turns to any one, as also to hire Servants, but not good to cut haire or any thing you
would have grow again. 14. Its not good for travel, nor Physick the moon passing this Man∣sion, nor for any mercenary business, neither for sowing, nor for new Cloaths, nor the Ornaments of Wo∣men, its unhappy for Marriage be∣cause discord will quickly grow, Its a good time to buy or hire Servants, because then they will be faithful, diligent and just, but they which contract partnership shall discord between themselves, and have a suspicious jealousy each of other, he which is cast into Prison, there is hope of a speedy deliverance. 15. The moon residing in this mansion, its very good to buy beasts, and such Cattle as are kept in Flocks, and to put them to pasture, good to be cloathed with new apparel, and to lay siedge to any strong place, he which supposeth he marrieth a Vir∣gin, is apt to be deceived and mista∣ken, a building begun shall be firm and durable, he which enters his Ship shall experience much anxitey and sorrow before he come out, bad to contract general friendship,
for they shall have continual dis∣cord, good to compose differences, and Law controversies between par∣ties, and to concilliate love, in a special manner which shall alwaies remaine firme and durable, good for all manner of Physick, not to cut hair nor to hite Servants. 16. The Moon in this mansion is fortunate, to all manner of buil∣ding, for Letting, Setting, buying and hiring of Lands, for receiving dignity, place, and honour, if it be∣gin to rain, usually it is much or con∣tinues long, eithèr Mars, Venus, the Moon, or Sun passing this Mansion towards the latter end, commonly produce much rain, good and profi∣table for travel, and most succesful to him that travels towards the East, he that marries a Wife, the moon in this mansion with Mars, its almost as rare as a black Swan if he find her a maid: Its bad to buy and hire ser∣vants, those buildings raised at this time, shall be durable, he which en∣ters his Ship, shall safely come forth, like Noah out of the Arck, friend∣ship herein contracted will not hold,
its good to Plant, and bad to cut hair and for new cloaths, good to take Physick, and to compose Medi∣cines. 17. Its good and fortunate to be∣siege Castles and strong holds, and to Skirmish, and Pikeer with the E∣nemy, and to march, and journey; not good to trust, but good to sowe and Plant Trees: its hard to marry a Virgin at this time, its ill for hiring of servants, and to enter a Ship, be∣cause the ship will hardly scape foundering and dashing in pieces; friendship contracted, converts into enmity and very ill, for a Captive and Prisoner. 18. Its good to buy Cattel great and small, and for travel indifferent, if it rain it is good, and not ill, but ve∣ry bad for society and captives. 19. The Moon in this Mansion, its good to begin any building, to buy seed, to buy beasts great and small, to buy or hire Lands, to buy and make all manner of vestments for women and Ornaments, its but indifferent good for travel, Dorothius an antient Author, concludes, that a
woman parted from her husband, or becoming a widdow, the Moon in this Mansion, she shall never be mar∣ried again, but remain single to her dying day, for buying or hiring ser∣vants, this time is but indifferent, for the servant will be prodigal, self-conceited, stubborn, self-wild, and of a refractory condition, and will not humble himself to his bet∣ters. 20. This time is good for Phy∣sick, and travel, (to begin either) unless in the latter part of the day, towards night, which is not good; good to put on new garments, for the party will enjoy health in the wearing of them, and the foremen∣tioned Author saith, that he which marries a wife in this time, shall quickly be parted or else he dies within six months, or else such dis∣cord will arise, and she will be so pe∣tulant, that it were better be dead; bad to take servants, for they will be false, lazy and idle, and run away; good to enter a ship, but that per∣turbations of mind will possess him about returning back, good to con∣tract
society and Partnership, for thereby shall much gain and profit arise, he which is imprisoned shall quickly escape, or bee delive∣red. 21. The Moon in this Mansion its good to administer Physick, to deck and beautify the body with new Cloaths, not good to depose money or any thing in trust with another, good for a long journey, not good for Marriage, for the wo∣man will abuse her Husband, and they will not long abide together, bad to hire Servants, to enter a Ship, or begin a short Journey, but good for friendship, and the party impri∣soned, shall quickly be delivered. 22. This time is not good, for Merchandizing and bargains, nor for Ornaments, nor New Apparel, neither good for Marriage, but good for Physick, and for all things belong∣ing to Souldiers Affaires, and Mar∣tiall imployment, good to hire Ser∣vants for they will prove healthful, willing and honest, not good to en∣ter a Ship, and very bad for freind∣ship and Partnership, because it sig∣nifies
great prejudice, loss, dam∣mage and discord in the end, he which is imprisoned shall quickly be delivered. 23. The moon in this mansion its held good to lay siedge to any City, Town or Castle, to manage En∣gines, and to devise and use Strata∣gems against the Adversary, oppose and pursue them, and to put any thing in execution that may tend to their prejudice, its not good for mar∣riage for they will not live long toge∣ther, for sowing seeds, nor for Mer∣chandizing, nether for buying Beasts great nor small, its good for to re∣ceive Embassies, good to entertaine Servants, for they will be able, and willing to go through with their work, that Building which is then begun shall be firme and durable, good to go on Shipboard, it is not good for friendship or Partnership, because an evil end is signified, with loss, &c. 24. The moon passing this man∣sion, its good to set out on Travel in the morning till ten a clock, and not after, to begin any new business
is not good, not good to Marry un∣less you would quickly be rid each of other, good to hire and entertain Servants, to lay new Foundations, to enter on Shipboard, only to him which then imbraques himself it signifies delay, bad to enter Part∣nership, and he which is imprisoned shall long induce hardship. 25. The Moon in this Mansion it is good to sow, and profitable to deale in Merchandize, but not good to trust or lend, good for Marriage, indifferent for Travel, not good to begin a Sea-voyage, for loss labour, danger and trouble attends him, he which contracts friendship, or Part∣nership shall have in the beginning good, but in the end dammage and discord, he which is made Prisoner hardly ever escapes, not good to Hire a Servant, for fear of evil quali∣ties. 26. The Moon in this Mansion, its good for Merchandizing, Semi∣nating, and medicating, but neither good to trust nor lend, good for Mar∣riage, and indifferent for Travel, but that Servant, you buy, take, or hire
at this time, will be evil disposed, dogged, surly, and insufferable proud, partnership in the beginning will be good, but the end evil; A Prisoner now committed, scarce e∣ver departs Prison. 27. The Moon in this Mansion it is good to take Physick, to put beast to Pasture, to travail, but not good to marry, or contract Matrimony, not only whiles the Moon is in this Man∣sion, but whiles she passeth thorough the whole signe of Aries, not good to hire Servants the Moon in this Mansion, for they will be of evil Condition, Disobedient, and will run away: Good to buy domistick Beasts, and to set sail, because the signification argues a good voyage, and good successe, not good to en∣ter partnership, because they will fall out, wrangle, and part in passion, he which is imprisoned at this, time shall have strong, long, and hard Im∣prisonment, good to make and pre∣pare Arms, to plant trees, to cut hair, and wooll, to cut nails, or hoofs of cattel, to put on new cloaths, and any thing that tends to ornament,
the Moon passing thorough the whole signe of Aries not afflicted by any Malignant position. 28. The Moon in this last Man∣sion, it is good to sow, to travel, but not good for Marriage, and for Ser∣vants, and Captives, the same as in the former, very bad. ERRATA. PAge 1. l. 17. dele a. p. 9. l. 16. r. from. p. 42. l. 2. r. 5th. p. 43. l. 4. r impertinent vide p. 71. l. ult. r. thing.
An Alphabetical Table of the Principal Matters Contained in this second part being the Do∣ctrine of Elections. ACquaintance vid. friendship. Amity. Fol. 180. Aphorismes from Fol. 42. to 60. Apparrel, vide Garments. Art or Mystery. Fol. 164. Armes. Fol. 167. Artists in general. Fol. 169. Arguments against Elections an∣swered. Fol. 30. Assendents the best. Fol. 63. Astrology useful, &c. Fol. 13. B. Bathing. Fol. 116. 212. 214. Battle, vide. fighting. Bargaines. Fol. 116. Benefit desired. Fol. 181. Beseigeing. Fol. 141. 212, 216. 222. 225.
Beginning any work. Fol. 62. 71. Bleeding. Fol. 118. Borrowing goods, Fol. 203. 205. Bonds not to be entred into. Fol. 210. Building. Fol. 71. 90. 92. 94. 204. 211, 212, 216. 221. 225. Buying cattel or other comodities. Fol. 75. 220, 221. Buying and selling, 76. good for buyer, 77. good for seller, ibid. Buying in a mnrket. Fol. 78. Buying hidden comodities. Fol. 79. Buying a good horse. Fol. 190, 191, 192. Buisiness done by a mans self, or to which help of others is re∣quired. Fol. 47. Business suddain and requiring speed. Fol. 56. 64. C. Children to Nurse. Fol. 68. Children weaned. Fol. 68. Children to learn arts. Fol. 100. 154. 200.
Children to School. Fol. 200. 201. 212. Church-wardens, &c. Fol. 69. Chymistry. Fol. 82. Cloaths, vide, garments. Complexions predominant. Fol. 111. Commands from Cities. Fol. 141. Conception. Fol. 99, 100. Conquest with Honour. Fol. 141. Controversy. Fol. 53. 221. Covenants. Fol. 172. Country to leave. Fol. 201. Credit, vide, fame. Crisis. Fol. 118. Crops of corn sold on ground. Fol. 79. Cupping glasses. Fol. 113. D. Dead child in the womb. Fol. 108. Decoys of doves and ducks. Fol. 109. Desires accomplished. Fol. 67. 173. Dice. Fol. 145. 187. Diet in feasts. Fol. 106. Dignities. Fol. 163. Disease. Fol. 199. 203. 205.
Dispatch desired. Fol. 49. Disquietness to prevent. Fol. 197. Distemper general of the body. Fol. 113. Diurnal election. Fol. 49. 54. Dowry. Fol. 150. Dwelling. Fol. 134. Durable. Fol. 49. 72. E. Elections about what conversant. Fol. 1. Elections to what house of the fi∣gure belonging. Fol. 44. Embassies. Fol. 154. End of a thing. Fol. 149. Enemies to debillitate. Fol. 193. Enmity to compound. Fol. 214. Events false. Fol. 71. Eyes to cure. Fol. 116. 130. F. Fame. Fol. 174. Feasting. Fol. 106. Fighting. Fol. 135. 136, 137. 212. Fishing. Fol. 187.
Fixed starrs. Fol. 59. 67. Fortification. Fol. 216. Friend-ship desired. Fol. 176, 177, 178. 213. 215, 216. 220. Fugitive to pursue. Fol. 113. 149. 202. Furnishing a house Fol. 215. G. Garments new when to put on. Fol. 70. 102. 202. 204. 213. 215. 217, 218. 222. 224. 227. Gain desired. Fol. 75. Generation. Fol. 98. General of Armies. Fol. 8. General Observations. Fol. 4. Gifts, Presents, or rewards. Fol. 103. H. Hair when to cut. Fol. 72. 202. 214, 215. 217, 218, 219. 227. Honour. Fol. 75. Horroscope. Fol. 45. Horses to break. Fol. 199. 201. Houses taking and letting. Fol. 80. 210.
Houses first entred into. Fol. 90. House signifying the thing for which the election is made. Fol. 44. 46. Hour of ♂ to be avoided. Fol. 205. Hours of the Planets. Fol. 195. Hunting. Fol. 134. 188. 213. Husbandry. Fol. 75. 213. 217. 220. I. Inception. Fol. 62. 71. Intention of the querent to be free. Fol. 63. Invasion of enemies. Fol. 134. Impossibillities not to be attempted. Fol. 61. Imprisonment Fol. 200. 210, 211. 212, 213, 214, 215, 216, 224. 226, 227. Iournies. Fol. 75. 86. 152. 154. 155, 156. 198, 199. 201. 204. Iron instruments. Fol. 113, 114. K. King of China his practice. Fol. 13.
King of Sweden slain. Fol. 19. L. Lands to purchase. Fol. 214. Latitude of the place, &c. Fol. 63. Law-suits. Fol. 53. 221. Leases to buy. Fol. 203. Love Affairs. Fol. 134 M. Malevolents to be heeded, Fol. 58. 62. Merchants. Fol. 159, 200. 210. 226 Marriage. Fol. 8. 132. 198. 211, 212. 214. 217, 218. 220, 221. Marriage dangerous. Fol. 223, 224. 226, 227. Mathematicks. Fol. 153. Medecines. Fol. 115. 198. 222. 211. 214. 218, 219. 222. Messengers. Fol. 100. 105. 199. Mills building. Fol. 94. Mirth. Fol. 198. Money lent and borrowed. Fol. 74. 200, 201. 219.
Money matters. Fol. 75. 213. Money to keep from dammage. Fol. 76. Money to be obtained formerly lent. Fol. 84. Moones signification. Fol. 51. Morinus opinion. Fol. 14. Musick. Fol. 157. Murderer to pursue. Fol. 203. Mines to dig. Fol. 200. N. Nails cutting. Fol. 69. 227. Nativity to be inspected. Fol. 43. Natural Elections. Fol. 49. 54. O. Officers. Fol. 65. Opparation by fire. Fol. 211. P. Partner-ship. Fol. 197. 215. 217. 219, 220. 224. 227. Petitions. Fol. 50. 64. 183, 197. 200. 204. Philosophy. Fol. 167. Phisicians. Fol. 117. Physick, vide medicine.
Purges vide Medicines. Fol. Phlebotomy. Fol. 113. to 118. Planting trees. Fol. 93. 200. 204. 211. Play vide Dice. Popular Affairs. Fol. 75. Preferment, ibid. Presents, vide gifts. Purchasing Inheritance, goodness of the wood and crop. Fol. 90, 91. R. Races. Fol. 188. Raine. Fol. 214. 221. Reconcilliation of enemies. 186. of Kindred 88. of Father and Son. 91. to Superiours. Fol. 164. Removing from one house to an∣other. Fol. 80. 219. Removing one out of his place. Fol. 165. Rewards, vide gifts. Riches. Fol. 74. Rivers conveying. Fol. 92. Rules necessary relating to E∣lections. Fol. 42.
S. Seasons considered. Fol. 72. Secrecy in councel. Fol. 69. Seed sowing. Fol. 93. 144. 204. 211. 228. Servants hyring. Fol. 116. 202. 211, 212. 214. 217, 218. 220. 224. 225. Ships building. Fol. 93. Significations congruent. Fol. 66. Society. Fol. 211. 215, 216, 219. Spirits evil to eject. Fol. 143. 186. Speed required. Fol. 56, 57. Standard of Kings. Fol. 144. Study of Arts. Fol. 167. Substance of enemies. Fol. 150. Sweating. Fol. 129. Swimming. Fol. 168. T. Testament. Fol. 151. Thief. Fol. 149. Tillage. Fol. 89. Timber to fell. Fol. 201. Time of Accidents. Fol. 70. V.
Virgins, vide Marriage. Vomits. Fol. 115. Voyage at Sea. Fol. 156. 160. 202. 203. 212. 215. 217, 218, 219, 220. Utillity of Election. Fol. 10. 12. W. War-like affairs. Fol. 75. Weighty affairs. Fol. 64. Whispering of any party. Fol. 146. Wives portion. Fol. 150. Will, vide Testament. Women love to seek. Fol. 185 198, 199. 201. Women not to be medled with. Fol. 197. 199. 221, 222. Writing. Fol. 75. 105. 199. FINIS.
