W2867 R31819 12264193 57924
Infant-Baptism ASSERTED & VINDICATED By SCRIPTURE And ANTIQUITY: IN ANSWER To a Treatise of Baptism lately published by Mr. HENRY DANVERS: Together with a full Detection of his Misrepresentations of divers Councils and Authors, both Ancient and Modern. WITH A Just Censure of his Essay to Palliate the horrid Actings of the Anabaptists in Germany. AS ALSO A Perswasive to Unity among all Christians, though of Different Judgments about Baptism. By OBED WILLS, M. A. Ʋt Christus Infantes ad se venire jussit, ità nec Apostoli eos excluserunt à Baptismo, & quidem dum Baptismus Cir∣cumcicisioni aequiparat, Paul. Col. 2. apertè indicat, etiam Infantes per Baptismum Ecclesiae Dei esse inserendos, &c. Magdib. Cent. 1. l. 2. c. 4. p. 354. LONDON, Printed for Jonathan Robinson at the Golden Lyon in St. Paul's Church-yard, 1674.
THE PREFACE. THere is a New Treatise come forth con∣cerning Baptism; the Design where∣of is to prove the Baptism of Believ∣ers, and to disprove that of Infants. There is great Cracking about it, and some cry it up for a None-such; that it is unanswerable, and as I hear the Author himself, Ixion-like, falls in love with his own shadow, and being Philautia nimis inflatus, puff∣ed up with the excellency of his performance, glories much, and pretends that he hath not only proselyted many of the Vulgar sort, but some also of the Ministry. And it is very certain, that at its first appearance last Summer, divers persons were Dipped in these parts, and as I have been informed, 7 or 8 in a day in the City of Bri∣stol; and in all likelyhood we may hear of many more this Summer: for those who are inclinable to the Way, are now grown so politick as not to profess their Faith till warm Weather. This I do assure the Reader, that the Book (as to any thing material in it) hath been many times answered before ever it came forth, and that's the reason belike we have heard of no Reply since it hath seen the light, which is now about twelve Months. All the Mediums he useth to maintain his O∣pinion, are such trite and out-worn things, that they have been in effect trampled upon, and confuted again and again. Nevertheless such is the Clamorousness of some men, that they affect to have the last word, when in
modesty they ought to be silent, and consider, that it is their duty to unlearn a darling Errour, and no dis∣honour to strike sail to convincing Reason. Great Endeavours have been used to undeceive the Antipaedo∣baptists; and 'tis the unhappiness of many Godly and Learned Divines, instead of meeting with answerable success, to have their Pains contemned, and their Per∣sons loaded with Aspersions. The Author of the Treatise I am to examine, hath only affixt H. D. to the Title-page, that is, as appears by a Second Edition lately come forth. Henry Danvers; although in regard of the principal Materials, the Book hath more reason to pre∣tend to J. T. that is, John Tombes, for its Author. For although H D. hath for some years lived a solitary contemplative Life, and hath had opportunity for stu∣dy, yet owneth he not so much Scholarship (if they say true that know him) as to compose such a Piece; nor is he so well acquainted with Fathers, Councils, Schoolmen, had not most of it been prepared to his hand. Indeed I find he is somewhat vers'd in the Magdiburgensian History, though he hath made very ill use of it; But for the Argumentative part, especially the Opposition made against Infant-Baptism, both the Method and Matter of his Treatise declares where he hath been fishing; for I find very little in it, besides what is borrowed from Mr. Tombes his Exercitation and Examen, long since answered by M. Marshal, Dr. Homes, Mr. Gerce, Mr. Blake, Mr. Baxter. But forasmuch as the Contest hath taken a Nap for about 20 years, it was thought fit to give it one lusty jog more, and awaken it again. And in regard those Polemical Discourses are rarely found in Vulgar hands, but are thrown aside into Corners, and lie solitary, as neglected things, in Studies, and Booksellers Shops; the Author, and his Coniederates (out of their dear love to their Darling Opinion) thought meet to make some good improve∣ment of the late Liberty granted by his Majesty's gra∣cious Declaration, and to take up the Gantlet again, and fall to the old Trade of Wrangling. For some men are of a restless Spirit, and if their Hands be tied up from fighting, they will do it with their Tongues and Pens.
The Preface is made up of Invectives against the Asser∣tors of Infant Baptism, but mostly against Mr. Baxter, by reason of some Passages of his in a late Book called The Christian Directory, against which he seems to have a very great zeal, but I fear his envy against his Person doth exceed it. For do but compare the Preface, with the Epilogue of our Authors Treatise,, and you will find he seems to entertain a better opinion of John of Leyden, then of him. I understand Mr. Baxter will speedily write something for his own Vindication, and I long to see it, that so nothing that he hath said in his Chri∣stian Directory may prove a Stumbling-block to the Weak, and more confirm the Antipaedobaptists in their Errour. The truth is, those people are very sensible how much he hath wounded their Cause, and are glad with an occasion of wounding his Reputation. But I profess, I could not but smile, to observe how he seems to bewail the Indiscretion of Mr. Baxter, and re∣bukes him for Printing his Judgement in some Points that refer to Baptism, and other things, at such an unsea∣sonable time; as if he had hit upon the , or the fittest opportunity to declaim against Infant Bap∣tism. But doth he take this to be a fit time of the day (to use his own Phrase) to widen Differences, and set us at farther distances, when we are almost sinking under fears and daily expectations of troubles? Is it a fit season for us to be wrangling, when Gods Rod is shaking over all our Heads? Must he at such a time en∣ter upon the old Obfolete Controversie, and inveigh against Childrens Baptism, which evermore hath oc∣casioned heart-burnings and fruitless contendings, espe∣cially when 'tis disputed against with a lofty, bitter and disdainful Spirit, of which we perceive too much in this last attempt. Ah! what a restless Genius is there attending some Opinions, and how careless of the Churches Peace are the Abettors of them? What the Author himself speaks, pag. 308. from Clopenburg's Epistle, of the Anabaptists, heretofore in Germany is too true of some of those in England, viz. That they suffer not the pure Reformed Churches to be edified without daily conflicts. For not only heretofore in times of Liberty, but even now
under restraint, some hot-spirited Persons, publish their Tenents, with such a rigid and condemning Spi∣rit, that it proves the greatest hinderance of Union and Conjunction amongst us in this Nation. The Opinion of Antipaedobaptism, having been (as Mr. Sydenham ob∣serves) always Ominous, and of a wonderous strange influence to destroy Ʋnity, and Peace amongst Christi∣ans, accompanied also with the most Retinue of Er∣rors, since the first Embrio of it was brought forth; Whether by a secret Judgement of God, or from the natural and secret Connexion with other Princi∣ples of Darkness, I will not, saith he, determine: On∣ly God hath shewed some black Characters of it in every Nation where it hath prevailed; though we cannot but say many Saints are under the power of it. Yea, and I do also farther attest, that there are some very worthy Persons, and eminent Christians of that way, whom I exceedingly honour for their Gifts and Graces, Moderation and sweetness of Spirit, and Liberality towards all Christians; such as these I prize as much as any Christians in England that are Paedobaptists, and could as willingly imbrace them and entertain Chri∣stian Fellowship with them, as with any that are of my own Judgement in the point of Baptism. We ought to put a difference between humble and heady Men, between factious Persons that affect Singularity, and decline Communion with us, because we differ from them in some Circumstances about an External Admi∣nistration; and such as disown Infant-baptism out of simple Perswasion, looking on it as a Cor∣ruption, and without Scripture ground,Mr. Gerce Vind. Paedobaptismi. and so cannot submit unto it, lest thereby they defile their Consciences (as they conceive) with Will-worship: when notwithstanding, if other Christians be of another mind, they can own them as Brethren, and not divide in regard of Christi∣an Affection and Communion. Some such there are, though few: and such a frame of spirit was there in that Man of God (Mr. Jessey) as may be seen in his Book intituled A Store-house of Provision in sundry Cases of Conscience. He, to my knowledge, was an Antipae∣dobaptist
of long standing, as holy, I conceive, as any of that Judgement, of good Learning, and of a very tender Conscience, and of so healing and uniting a Spirit, that he esteemed it his Duty (and press'd others to it) to keep up Christian Communion with those that feared God though they differed about Baptism: We have his Arguments for the same published in Print, and grounded upon Rom. 14.1. which are so clear, and have in them such strength of Evidence, that I never yet could hear them answered, nor do ever expect it. I wish there were more such Antipaedobaptis as he, and have good ground to believe many of them would come off from their Rigidness (were they not afraid of offending their weak Brethren, and fettered with some engagements at first entrance into their Churches) and would readily afford us the right hand of Fello∣ship. I know what a dangerous thing it is to be , an accuser of the Brethren, and whence that Spirit comes, and can appeal to Heaven that I now appear in the defence of what I conceive to be the Truth, without a malevolent mind against any of our Dissenters. I have had an intimate and friendly Correspondency with many Antipaedobaptists, both in this place where I now inhabit and elsewhere; by reason of which some have thought I comported with them in their Opinions: But this is a mistake: I own what I see of God in them, and in all Professors of Religion whatsoever, and would have none to en∣gross Religion to themselves. And if I know my own heart, where ever I see aliquid Christi, any thing of Christ, it attracts my Affection; God's People being all alike equally dear to me, as they are his, and have a Con∣versation becoming the Gospel. My Love is not con∣fined to a Party, but extensive to all Saints. And though some may count me an enemy for telling them the truth, and withdraw their Affection, it is no more than I expect, and shall encourage my self with what I long since learned from a Heathen, viz. Amicus Plato, amicus Socrates; sed magis amica Veritas. I fore∣see how likely I am to purchase the displeasure and dispraise of those that cannot endure to have their O∣pinion
spoken against; at which I hope to be no more dejected, than elated, if others shall own my poor per∣formance under the Notion of Approbation: well know∣ing that all Polemical and Controversial Discourses car∣ry a face like that of a Picture, suitable to the situa∣tion and light the Beholders stand in, or are guided by. Nor do I so much as hope to reduce any of our Op∣posites: for the men of their Way are inflexible, and seem to be as much assured the Truth is on their side, as they are of the divine Athority of the Scriptures. I have heard of some Quakers that have been turned, but could never yet hear of one of them that chan∣ged his Opinion, unless he happened to fall into some worse Errour. And certainly it is a strange Presumption, no less Ʋnchristian than Prodigious, for men to assume a Pre∣rogative of judging those to be in the dark (as is the common humour of our Opposites) that differ from them in this point of Baptism, when they cannot but confess, that in other things they are of more clari∣fied Intellectuals than themselves, and have a deeper inspection into Scripture: And yet their Ʋnderstand¦ings at least must be condemned, whilst they impose the scanty Measure of their own, as an unquestionable Standard, for others to submit to. Forgetting in the mean while, that many who were of their own Judg∣ment, have (at the long run) espoused some gross Er∣rors, and renounced Water-baptism, as a low, contem∣ptible Ceremony, and owned no other Baptism but that of the Spirit. It was long since observed that some of the hottest Zealots against Infant-baptism, have grown so cold, as to turn Seekers, and to deny the lawful Administration of Ordinances. So common is it for men to run from one Extreme to another. But though I despair of gaining over to us any of those who are so rivetted in their Opinions (consider∣ing withal how succesless politer Pens have been) yet do I hope, by what shall follow, to put some Remora and stop to weak and wavering Souls, that they be not over-hasty in coming over to the Tents of our Oppo∣sites:
and to establish and confirm others that are at present satisfied in the practice of Infant Bap∣tism. And because some of both Parties may take offence at what I have done; for as Aristotle saith, . It is difficult, if not impossi∣ble, to please all, I am obliged to signifie some Reasons amongst others that moved me to enter the Lists of a publick Dispute. 1. Because the Pompous Treatise of my Antagonist being put into my hand, by one of his Judgment, and cried up for an incomparable and unanswerable Piece. I read some part of it cursorily, and confess I was a∣muzed at the Multitude of Quotations, from Fathers, Councils, ancient Doctors of the Church, School-men, be∣sides Modern Writers; together with the Testimonies of Waldenses and Old Britains; and all against Infant-baptism, and being shortly after upon some occasion at Oxford, I took the opportunity to examine his Quotati∣tions in the Publick Library, and upon searching found it so fallacious a Piece, that I thought my self bound in Conscience, for the honour of Truth, and Love to my Country, to make discovery thereof, that the Credulity of illiterate and well-meaning Persons might not be imposed upon by such Forgery. 2. I have been somewhat provoked to bear Testimo∣mony to the Lawfulness of Baptizing the Children of Believers, by the Audacity of one, that sometimes preacheth amongst the Antipedobaptists who told me to my Face, that I could say nothing for Infant Baptism, to whom I said but little, as judging him uncapable of understanding the strength of an Argument. 3. After I had communicated a few Sheets to some Learned Men, they did album calculum addere, and inci∣red me to proceed. 4. Because no body else had published any thing to confront this daring Champion; and I see no cause to repent of my Undertaking, unless it be that I have not defended the Truth as it ought to be. I was never before engaged in these Olympian Games, nor do I delight in such Exercises, and do find by ex∣perience
that these Polemical Contests are but barren things, and cannot but much approve of the Saying of Zuarez, who (though a Jesuite) professed he found more benefit in that time which he did every day set apart for the examining the State of his Soul, than in all the Voluminous Books of Controversies which he had written. I would now advertise the Reader, that my Answer refers to Mr. Danvers his First Book, it being in the Press before his 2d. Edition came to hand; in which I find no Retracting or Rectifying Mistakes, but in stead thereof a numerous Addition of more: some of which, I have taken notice of in the Recapitulation of the Magdeburgensian History, concerning Infant Baptism, affixt to my Answer. There are many egregious Faults I charge Mr. Dan∣vers with, which are made good in the Answer. For I quote the Chapter and Page of the Authors that he abuseth; that so those who are Scholars, if they please, may see whether I wrong him. The Books are ex∣tant, and we have no Index Expurgatorius here in Eng∣land to relieve him. 1. He hath much injured that famous History of the Magdiburgenses in very many places, by misrepresent∣ing what they say; as that they tell us that in the first Century, the Apostles baptized Only the Aged, which is false; for he hath himself added the Word [Only] as is shewn Capt. 7. Part. 1. pag. 2. of our Answer. Then he saith they tell us that the Custom of Dipping the whole Body into water was changed into Sprinkling in the 3. Cent. See this pag. 113. and cites the Magde∣burgenses for it, Cent. 3. pag. 125, 126. where they say no such thing, but the contrary, and gives Cyprian's Testi∣mony for it (who is calculated to live in the days of those that saw the Apostles) that Baptism is valid whe∣ther it be by Immersion or Sprinkling Cent. 3. c. 4. and Chap. 7. part. 1. pag. 8. of the Answer. Look the Exami∣nation of the Magdiburgensiam History and there you have the rest of his Misrepresentations. 2. After the same manner hath he serv'd the Fathers both of the Greek and Latino Churches; Quoting some
Passages out of them as if they had been for Believers Baptism, in opposition to that of Infants, when not one of them was so, no not Tertullian or Nazianzen absolutely, but both for it in case of danger of death; yea, the latter without respect to that. See Chap. 7. Part. 1. pag. 13. of the Answer, and the 3. Century in the Recapitulation at the end of the Answer. There be two ways he takes to blind the Reader with respect to the Fathers. 1. By Traducing that which is spoken in reference to Pagans, and misapplying of it against Infant Bap∣tism: thus he serves Chrysostom and Austin, p. 76. of his Treatise, whom he brings for his eminent Witnesses for Believers Baptism; and then again the same men to be for Infant Baptism, pag. 121. of his Treatise. See how this Contradiction is reconciled in our An∣swer to his 2d. Chap. part. 2. About Infants Baptism. 2. By curtailing and leaving out part of the Sentence, as pag. 65. where he cites these words of Bazil; Must the faithful be sealed with Baptism?— Faith must pre∣cede and go before. There Mr Danvers stops whereas he should have gone on with what follows, Quid de in∣fantibus ais?—num & illos baptizemus? Maximè — These are the next Lines to what we have above. —What say you to Infants which know nor good nor evil, must we baptize them? Yea, &c. See Chap. 7. part. 1. p. 13. of the Answer. 3. The Councils have no better measure from him; for he quotes those 3. the Bracaren, that of Constanti∣nople, (he writes it Constance) and that of Toletan. All which, he produceth for Believers Baptism in opposi∣tion to that of Infants, p. 78. of his Treatise, and quotes the Magdiburgenses for it, Cent. 7. p. 146. Whereas they give us to understand that they were for Infant Bap∣tism, Chap. 7. part. 1 pag. 29, 30. of our Answer. See this more fully in the Recapitulation affixt to the Answer, under Century 7. 4. He brings in the Doctors of the Romish Church very ridiculously, as eminent Witnesses for Believers baptism, that is, in opposition to Infant Baptism, or else he says nothing; As for Instance, Haimo, Rabanus,
an Abbot, Remigius a Monk, Smarugdus, &c. See how little truth there is in this, Chap. 7. part. 1. p. 33. of the Answer, and much more fully in the Recapitulation at the end of the Answer, under Century 8, 9, 10. Here our Author hath used his wonted subtilty in quoting some passages out of these Popish Doctors for Believers Baptism, meant by them only in respect of Pagans. 5. By the same Artifice are ignorant persons deluded with the sayings of the Schoolmen, which were so great and stiff assertors of Infant-baptism, that they ascrib'd too much to it. See how we have discovered the Authors Sophistry, Chap. 7. part. 1. pag. 34. of our Answer: But more fully this is spoken to, in the Recapitulation under the 12th Cent. 6. His great Witnesses against Infant-baptism, name∣ly Waldenses, Novatians, and Donatists, and Ancient Bri∣tains fail him. 1. For the Waldenses, he hath brought 4 Confessions, as against it, when they have not a word of that im∣port, as any ordinary Reader may perceive. See pag. 282, 283. of his Treatise; and how fully we have made it appear by other Confessions that they were expresly for it: See Chap. 7. part. 2. of the Answer. 2. Neither were the Novatians for it, though they denyed Original Sin, and were for Rebaptization of such as were baptized by Hereticks (though there were few greater than themselves;) and therefore Novatus the Head of them was condemned by 66. wishops, in the year 255. Fox, Act. Monum. vol. 1. So the Magdiburgenses speak of his being condemned by a Council at Rome for his Heresies, Cent. 3. c. 9. p. 193. They write of his Here∣sies, and among others, that he did de Deo prophanissimam doctrinam subintroducere, introduce most prophane Doctrines concerning God; but not a word of his denying Infant Baptism, Cent. 3. cap. 5. p. 99. De Haeress Novatiorum. Nei∣ther doth Danaeus, in Austin's Catalogue of Heresies, make mention of any such thing, Danaei Opusc. p. 678. Nor did the Donatists deny Infant Baptism, as appears from the Magdiburgs, Cent. 4. cap. 5. p. 375. De Donati∣starum haerefi; though they were for Rebaptization of such as were baptized by Hereticks, yet there is not the
least hint of their being against Infant-baptism. 3. The Ancient Britains were not against it; and the Mistake of the Author is grounded upon Fabian's para∣phrastical Translation of Bede, as is shewn in our Exami∣nation of the History of the Britains. 7. He hath manifest Contradictions to himself; first shewing such persons to be for Believers Baptism, and then afterward citing the same men for Infant-baptism: thus we have him mentioning Bede Pro and Con p. 7. and p. 78. of the first part of of his Treatise compared with p. 130. Thus he serv'd Austin and Chrysostom, as was noted before. And so he leaves them to clash, and his Reader, in the dark; whereas the Distinction of Ecclesia Collecta and Colligenda would reconcile all very well. In the same manner hath he dealt with many of our Modern Divines, as Calvin, Piscator, Perkins, Pa∣raeus, &c. as we have shewn Chap. 1. part. 1. p. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. of the Answer. 8. Notorious Plagiarism; for I have noted him bor∣rowing from Mr. Tombes his 2 Books, Exercitation and Examen in no less than 49 places, and all the while con∣cealing his Name, contrary to the Laws of Ingenuity. But that which is most prodigious, and for which he de∣serves to carry away the Bell from all Plagiaries, is (as we have noted, p. 154. of the 2. Part. of our Answer Chap. 2. beginning at his Exceptions against our Argument from Federal Holiness) that for 43 pages together he hath ta∣ken the Substance of it all out of Mr. Tombes his Exercita∣tion and Examen, excepting what he quotes from Dr. Owen and Dr. Taylor. And I must acquaint thee, Reader, that he hath serv'd others in the same manner, transcri∣bing out of their Books very la6rgely, without taking the least notice of their names: for I have met lately with a Terra incognita, since part of my Answer was printed; one Book put out by William Allen called Some Baptismal Abuses newly discovered, and the other by Henry Haggar, named The Foundation of the Font: but I must spare him for the present, or my Preface will be too large. I see if every Bird had his own Feathers, Mr. Danvers would be left naked. 9. Shameful Oscitancy, such I think as the like was
never known: We have it p. 209. of his Treatise, where he brings Calvin, upon Gen. 17.7. interpreting the Seed to whom the Promise was made, to be the Spiritual, and not Carnal; when he speaks no such word, but all along to the contrary; as, Clara est Pau∣li doctrina de naturalibus Abrahae filiis — St. Paul's doctrine, Rom. 11.16. is evidently to be understood of the Natural sons of Abraham: and again; Nihil certius est, quàm Deus foedus suum pacisci cum filiis Abrahae, qui naturaliter ex eo gignendi, Nothing is more sertain, than that God's Covenant was made with the Natural Off-spring of Abraham. And indeed the words which he fathers upon Calvin, are Estius the Jesuite's, spoken against the Interpretation of Calvin upon Gen. I have shewed how Mr. Danvers came to be guilty of the mistake, pag. 196. of the 2d part of my Answer. 10. He doth vilifie and contemn all that stand in his way, Episcoparians, Presbyterians and Independents, yea fearfully reproaching those who are Antipaedobaptists that are come off from their former Rigidness, and for a large Communion with all Believers as Believers. As appears by his dealing with Mr. Bunion, Mr. Allen and Mr. Lamb in his Postscript. Notwithstanding all these Piacula, and more that may be named, the Credulous Party will believe no∣thing against the supposed Incomparable and most Au∣thentick Piece of Mr. Danvers: I must prepare for their Censures, and begin to hear already the insult∣ings of some of them over me, that I should dare pre∣sume to encounter such a Goliah; they are many of them illiterate, and incapable of examining the things written in the Latin Tongue, and it cannot be ex∣pected they should believe me before such an Antesigna∣nus. But since it cannot be remedied, I shall leave them to their Credulity, to be edified by his Melody. I know the Learned, upon search; will acquit me from Slander, and for the rest I am of Austin's Mind, Non curo Ceusores, qui vel non intelligendo reprehendunt, vel reprehendendo non intelligunt. Reader, I have only two things more to advise thee of. 1. That having received some Sheets, I find the
Printers Errata are many, which I hope thou wilt  charity correct, some of which thou wilt find taken notice of. I hope thou art not of Mr. Danvers is mind, who taking the Printers Errata to be Mr. Baxter's, and not taking notice that Mr. Baxter desired the Reader to correct them, reflects odium up∣on him, and makes this ingenious Apology for himself being told of it, viz. That no man is bound by any Law that he knows, to read and study Errata's; you have it n his 2d. Edition, pag. 383. I shall therefore be be∣forehand with him; (for I hope he will read my Pre∣face if he makes a Reply) and do hereby signifie that here is a great Error pag. 7. of the first Chapter of my Answer, where the word [only] is wanting; for it hould be thus—It can never be proved that this was the Only manner of the Jews Baptizing. This by the way o prevent Carping. Likewise the Sheets are not right∣ly paged, ocasioned by being Printed at two Houses. 2. That notwithstanding all the Flourishes Mr. Dan∣ers makes, and the numerous Quotations he hath etched from the Magdiburgensian History, Chapt. 7. From the first Century to the end of the 12th, there are but two Persons to be found against Infant-baptism, Adrianus and Hincmarus; the latter appears to have recanted, and was again restored to his Bishoprick: nd for the understanding of Church-history about infant-baptism, I refer thee to the Recapitulation at e end of the Answer, which contains some things at were omitted in the Answer, and I assure thee is ithfully collected. Farewell. O. W. vizes, June 20. 1674.
Mr. BAXTER'S EPISTLE. Christian Reader, THough thou art entertained with these Contoversies, which are unpleasing to many good and peaceable men, it must be considered, 1. How far they are Ne∣cessary; 2. And who makes them so. This kind of work is more costly and bitter to peaceable Authors that are forced to it, than it is to the Readers. And it's pity that the Ministers of Christ should, for 1500 years be taken up so much with a work that is so unpleasant to almost all. It is unpleasant to the Adversary, to have his Ignorance, Er∣rors, Falshoods and Injuries to the Truth and Church, made known to his disgrace; and to have that proved an odious Error which he taketh to be a Beam from Heaven, and of a Divine Off-spring, and perhaps necessary to Salvation, or at least some excellent thing which the Church cannot spare. It is unpleasant to the sober pious Writer, to think that he must thus displease and exasperate his Brother, and all that are of the way which he oppugneth: and that thereby he must provoke so many to esteem and defame him as an enemy to the Truth. And it is not pleasant to think, what hard study and labour it must cost us to procure this bitter fruit, when by Ignorance, Sloth or treacherous Silence, we could have kept our peace, and such mens Love. And it is un∣pleasant
to the best of Readers, to find mens Minds thus manifesting their dissensions, and to think of the Exaspera∣tions and wrath that will ensue, and to see such Wars kept up among those who should be notified to the World by an Eminency of Love: But it will be pleasant to those Hy∣pocrites, whose Religion consisteth in Opinions, Parties and Disputes, if they be of his mind whose Works they read; and it will be bittersweet to those wise and pious men that find it Necessary. For Necessary it may be, and too oft is: It's hard keeping our own or the Churches Peace, unless both Parties will consent: As much as in us lieth, and if it be possible, we must live peaceably with all men: But when it is not pos∣sible, we must lament the want of what we are not able to obtain. For all Christ's Ministers to stand by and see well-meaning ignorant people, called as in God's name, to sin against him, and flattered or frightned from Truth, Duty and Privileges, and to let such work go on to the danger of Souls, and distracting of Christ's Churches without contra∣diction, will hardly consist with our Ministerial Fidelity. Therefore as unnecessary Wars, are the greatest complicate sins in the World, and yet necessary Wars are the means of Peace; so it is in these Theological Wars: And as the vali∣ant Defenders of their Country in necessary Wars, have right to the praises given them by all; so those that neces∣sarily defend God's Truth and his Churches Rights, deserve acceptance. Among whom I judge the Reverend Author of this Treatise to be worthy of the Churches thanks, on several accounts. It is no contemptible Privilege which he vindica∣teth. The Interest of all Christians Children in the World, in the Covenant and Visible Church of Christ, is a matter of greater moment, than most that acknowledge it do duly lay to heart, much more than the unthankful Rejecters of it understand. The Title given to the Pelagians was In∣grati, the Unthankful, because they disputed against God's Grace, which they themselves did need as well as others: Such Cicero thought those Philosophers that disputed against the Immortality of Mans Soul: And Mr. Tombes was long ago angry with me, for giving that Title to them that so vehemently dispute all Infants out of the visible Church and Covenant. But let the Evidence of the Cause well consider∣ed
inform us, and it will be too sure, that Publick Repen∣tance would far better beseem such Writers as Mr. Danvers, than stiff persisting in this unthankful Error. I have written somewhat my self, upon Mr. Danvers vehement instigation, once more on this Subject, partly in answer to Mr. Tombes and partly to himself. But let not the notice of that hinder you from reading this Treatise: For I have dealt with Mr. Danvers only on the account of his pretended Witnesses for a thousand years after Christ, and his quarrels with my self; having neither leisure, nor will, nor patience (all things considered) to meddle with his Ar∣guments (or the rest of his History) while I know how suf∣ficiently they stand confuted in my own and many other mens Writings long ago.) But this Reverend Author hath dealt with him more particularly, and answered his Arguments sa∣tisfactorily, and search'd into those and all the rest of his pre∣tended Antiquities, and not only done that which I have passed by, but the same also, in a full Confutation. And it is so sad a Case, that after all our dreadful Warn∣ings, we should still be haunted with this unquiet Spirit which hath been exorcised or laid so oft; and that under all our other Trials, we should have the addition of these vexatious dividing Wranglings, to turn mens hearts against each other, that we owe the more thanks to such as the Author, for bring∣ing so much water to quench these flames: especially in a time when so many disaffected Persons are ready, to impute to Presbyterians, Independents or any such other, that they desire to defame, the Errors of all about them, whom they do not confute; yea too oft also those that they do con∣fute; while some others betray the Cause by silence, or silly unsatisfactory Arguings. Pardon (or chuse) a man that offendeth all Sects by plain dealing, for telling the World, That if the Anabaptists had been no better confuted, than the Papists and the Silencers have confuted them, I verily think that so great a part of the conscientious (though inju∣dicious) Vulgar would have followed them, as would have made work and trouble for us all. Farewell. At the door of Eternity, Rich. Baxter. June 24. 1674.
CHAP. I. The Authors first Argument, That Be∣lievers Baptisme is the only true Baptism, drawn from Christs positive Institution and Commission. Mat. 28.18, 19. Mark 16.16. Examined and Confuted. THese are the prime Texts, upon which Antipaedobaptists lay the greatest stress, as conceiving they have sure warrant from hence, for their practice, and that from the same places Ours is condemnable. Out of this Armory do they fetch their keenest Weapons and most triumphant Arguments; And indeed all that they say besides is, vox & praeterea nihil, a great sound of words to little purpose. This is the Palmarium argumentum, their victorious and unanswerable Argument, as they imagine so; None are to be Babtized, but those who are first taught, but Infants are not teachable, Ergo they ought not to be baptized; and again, he that Believeth and is Baptized, Infants cannot believe, therefore must not be Baptized. We (say they) follow the Rule of Institution,
you who are Paedobaptists cross it, and cannot ac∣quit our selves of Will-worship. And I confess this is a plausible way of arguing and very taking with Vulgar capacities, and I wonder, no more of weak understanding and tender consciences are proselyted to their way. They have the advan∣tage of us, to gain upon such. Yet notwith∣standing their great confidence, that they have both Scripture and Reason on their side, I hope, to make it appear to those who are not over∣grown with Partiality and Prejudice that their Arguments weigh light in the Ballance of the Sanctuary. For as Mr. Sy∣denham observes the words of Christ in both these places of Matthew and Mark,Sydenhams Christian sober and plain Ex∣ercitation on Infant Baptism. do not hold forth the proper Sub∣jects of Baptism, or the form or manner of bap∣tizing, being delivered in general, and indefi∣nite terms — As all Nations, every creature by transitive words, Teach them, Preach the Gos∣pel. Wherefore if these be the prime Institution of Baptising, from which they exclude Infants, when Christ useth such universal and compre∣hensive expressions, we shall desire (saith he) but to deal with them, on their ground, and the same Text will serve to prove our positions more de∣monstratively then theirs. But that we may the better understand the import of both places, I shall a little explicate them by way of Para∣phrase, premising only this, that neither of them do contain the first institution of Baptism, but only an inlargement of the Commission in re∣ference to the Gentiles, upon the Resurrection of Christ.
First for that in Matthew — Go ye therefore and teach all Nations. Beza observes that in the antient Copies [therefore] is wanting and in∣stead of it he finds the particle [] now, in one of most Antient date, which Circumstance of time is of great remark. For now the Com∣mission of baptizing the Gentiles was to be bro∣ken up, now Christ was risen, Circumcision, which was the old seal of the Covenant of grace, under the former Administration, was broken and abolished, and the Lord ordains a new one, viz. Baptisme, to take place instead thereof, under the Gospel-Administration [go now] Now I am risen, before which time neither Gospel nor Bap∣tism was to be offered them; For the command was, Go not into the way of the Gentiles. [And teach all Nations] . Discipulos fa∣cite, Disciple them as Antipedobaptists will have it, and we own it as the right Translation of the word, for it is not , which properly signifies Teach ye; and so the Participle, , is rightly rendred in the following words added to the charge [Teaching them to observe] Let us now come to see what improvement our opposits do make from hence to exclude the Infants of believers out of Christs Commission to be Baptized, and that the Baptisme of Believers is the only true Baptisme. Their Argument in form runs thus, viz, Ministers ought to follow their Commission: But to make Disciples be∣fore Baptizing, is the Ministers Commission. Ergo. To this we answer, That the Assumption is Ambiguous; for making Disciples may be taken two ways.
First, For an immediate present making only; and so it is not Christs Commission, If you take it exclusively, as if none must be baptized but those who immediately in their own persons are made Disciples. Secondly, For a Mediate remote making also; and thus must the Commission be understood. The meaning is, Baptize those whom you find to be in a State of Disciples, whether presently by you, or formerly by some body else, whe∣ther personally by themselves, or Seminally by and in their Parents. Let them be in State of Disciples, and then, if not baptiz'd before, bap∣tize them. It is the State of a Disciple, not the time when, nor manner how, which the Bap∣tizer is to look on. Ananias finding Saul in the State of a Disciple must baptize him, though neither he, nor any Minister else before did make him so; however he being a Disciple, though not made by man, must be baptized. Thus then take the Assumption, as it ought to be taken, and we grant the Argument; for it concludes not against Infant-Baptism, for they are Disciples not of mans, but Gods making, vouchsafing gra∣tiously in their believing Parents to accept them also into his Covenant, and so into the State of Disciples, and consequently by Christs own Com∣mission they are to be baptized. That infants of Believers are Disciples is evi∣dent. 1. Because they were so under the old Testa∣ment-Administration, and why not then under the new? The Proselytes in the Jewish Church coming in, brought their Infants into the same
capacity or state of Proselytes; therefore believ∣ers coming in to be Disciples, bring in their children to the same state too, or else the state of the Gospel is worse in regard of outward privi∣ledges then the Law. 2. By conferring that of Mat. 10.42. with that of Mark 9.41. it appears, that to belong to Christ, is in Christs dialect the same with being a Disciple, but Infants of Believers do belong to Christ. 3. To put all beyond doubt, we have an ex∣press word for it, Act. 15.10. Where the Phari∣sees pressing that it was needful to Circumcise the Gentiles after the manner of Moses, (that is, to be Proselyted by Circumcision) is called a putting a Yoke upon the Neck of the Disciples. And since the manner of Moses was to circum∣cise Proselytes, both Fathers and Children, and the pressing the continuance thereof among all Gentiles Proselyted to Christianity, is termed the putting a Yoke upon the Neck of the Disci∣ples, the children as well as the Fathers must be meant by the Disciples. There is no evasion of this, though I find Mr. Tombes keeps a great stir about it; for as Mr. Sydenham argues, if they say it was meant of the Fathers, and of the Doctrine of Circumcision, yet they must grant the Yoke was on their Children as to the Act, and if the Doctrine was so burthensome, much more the Practice, which the poor Infants are under; And they are called Disciples indefinitely, ei∣ther by themselves or with their Parents; if a∣ny distinction be made, it must be in the man∣ner of laying on the Yoke, viz. on the Parents
Doctrinally, on the Children actually, but there can be no Restriction of the word Disciple from these, on whom that Yoak was laid, as is exprest in that Chapter. But it may farther be objected, The Com∣mission it self shews what kind of Disciples Christ means in these words [Teaching them to observe] so as Infants are not concern'd as Disciples in it, being in no capacity to be taught or to observe. But let it be withall considered, That Christ adds those words to his charge in regard of the con∣dition of the persons, to whom he was sending his Apostles, viz. to Nations, All Nations, that is, the Gentiles who were Aliens; All Nations here, being put in immediate Opposition to that one Nation of the Jews. They were sent to them that were not in a State of Disciples, and therefore they were to be made so, by present a∣ctual teaching. As the Nation of the Jews and the Proselytes that came into them were first taught and then Circumcised, but their children were circumcised before they were taught. So then in this commission we must distinguish the substance from variable circumstances. The sub∣stance is to baptize Disciples, but whether by Precedent, Teaching, or not, depends on varia∣ble circumstances of the State of the Persons, to whom Christs Ministers are sent, be they such as the Apostles were then sent to, they must be Dis∣cipuli facti, made Disciples by Preaching, and then be Baptized: But be they the seed of Dis∣ciples, they are Discipuli nati, born Disciples by the Relation of the covenant, and so may have the seal set on them, without any preceding teach∣ing.
4. Lastly, not to insist upon that, that Infants are Christs Disciples, because all Nations must be Discipled, and Infants are included in those Nations; we conceive we have no obscure ground for the Baptizing the Children of Be∣lievers, because as Mr. Ains∣worth on Gen. 17.Mr. Tombes saith in his Examen, pag. 89. That it is well known, Baptisme was in use among the Jews in the ini∣tiating Proselytes for many years to∣gether, with Cir∣cumcision; & quotes Selden and Ains∣worth for it. and Mr. God∣wyn in his Moses and Aaron, lib. 1. cap. 3. pag. 10. do in∣form us, Baptism was in use as a kind of Initiation among the Jews, though it was not a Sacrament till Christ his Institution, and therefore this Rite seemed no strange thing unto them, as appeareth by their coming to John, que∣stioning not so much his Baptisme as his Autho∣rity, by what authority he Baptized, John 1. 25. For (as the Learned Dr. Hammond observes) the Institutions of Christ (who came first Messias to that people, was born of that Nation, lived re∣gularly under their law, and observed their cu∣stomes) were by him drawn from their former practices in the old Testament, and so were lightly changed and accomodated to his own purposes; he instanceth in divers things, and at length comes to this of Baptisme, or Washing; a known right for initiating the Jews and Prose∣lytes into the Covenant of the Lord. For he doth abundantly shew out of the Talmud and Rabbies, that the way of entring into the Cove∣nant, was by Circumcision and Baptism: so says Mr. Godwyn also in the place before mentioned. And
as the Natural Jews were thus entred, so were the Proselytes, and as the Proselytes of age, so also were their Infant-Children Baptized. So the Gemara Babyl. tit, Chetub. c. 1. They baptize the little, or young stranger, or Proselyte, as the Hebrew hath it: And Maimonides in tit. Isuri bia. c. 13. They Baptize the Infant or little Stran∣ger, upon the knowledge of the house of judgement. i.e. on their desire in behalf of their Children. From all which it appears that the Jewish Cere∣mony of Baptizing, was accomodated by Christ to the Right of our initiation of the Profession of Christ; whereof (saith he) we have as little reason to doubt, as that a Picture was taken from that Face, which it resembleth to the life. And from hence we have (as he conceives, and that very rationally) a clear foundation for our practice, namely, to baptize, not only those who make a profession of their Faith in Christ, but likewise their Children with them. And though some men of late years have denyed the warrant∣ableness thereof, and darkned the truth by their arguings against it; yet one may well suppose it was clear and obvious enough to the Apostles (from the knowledge they had of the former ad∣ministration, which took-in the Children with the Parents into Covenant) for if it had not been Christs mind, believers Children should be seal∣ed with Baptism under the new administration, he would certainly have given some intimation thereof, and given his Apostles some such cauti∣on as this (when he sent them to Disciple all Na∣tions, and Baptize them) See that you do not bap∣tize Children. Lastly, we may from hence also
gain light, that the Essence of Baptism doth not lye in being immerst or plunged under water, for it can never be proved that this was the manner of the Jewes Baptizing persons or things. I shall shut up this with a passage of the Learned and Godly Bucer, upon these words,Sane dum non habent locum quo praecipi∣tur tantum doctos baptizari nihil, robo∣ris suae sententia hinc adferent; etenim nos docemus antequam baptizemus. Ne quid vel his, vel iospiam alibi Scripturarum habetur neminem bap∣tizari debere, nisi ille Doctrinam Christi per se quoque perceperit. Bucer in locum. Go teach all Nations Baptizing them. Since the Anabaptists (saith he) have no place of Scripture that com∣mands us to Baptize none but those that are taught, they cannot strengthen their opinion from this Text: For we our selves do teach [i.e. Adult-Aliens] before we do baptize, neither can we from hence or any other Scripture prove, that no one ought to be Baptized, unless he shall understand or learn the Doctrine or Christ. The Evangelist Mark varies the words of the Commission thus; Go ye into all the World and Preach the Gospel to every Creature: The one hath it Nations, the other World, and the terms are equipollent, signifying the same, Rom. 11.15. But what must they do in all the World? preach the Gospel, i.e. publish abroad to all without exception, the freeness and fulness of Gods rich Grace in the New Covenant, even that same Gos∣pel that was preached long before to Abraham, Gal. 3.8. And this blessing of Abraham is come upon the Gentiles, ver. 14. And this is to be Preacht, , to every Creature, i.e.
with a distinction to every humane creature, which the opposers of Infant-Baptisme may do well to consider, since they stand so rigidly upon the Syllabical Letters of every word in the Com∣mission, so as they will not allow us liberty to draw out the sence of some places that relate to Infant-Baptism, from the Letter, by rational de∣duction and consequence, and according to the Harmony of Scripture, but we must superstitiously adhere to the very Syllables of the Text, where∣as whatsoever appears truth, from the Analogy of Faith, or by just consequence is as practicable and obliging, as if it were written with a Sun∣beam, in so many Capital Letters. It would be a senseless undertaking indeed to Preach the Gos∣pel to every individual creature in the World; and therefore it is to the understood restrictively of mankind, poor lost man for whom Christ dyed. Lastly, the Connection too, he, he that be∣lieveth and is Baptized, shall be saved; hath some difficulty in it, and the sence is not so obvious to every capacity: for if it had, many of those con∣troversies between us and the Papists had never been, as, Whether Baptism be of absolute ne∣cessity to salvation; which Protestants deny, and many Papists affirm. And let the Antipaedobaptists well consider that this Evangelist doth as closely conjoyn believing and being Baptized, to Salvati∣on as the other doth, teaching and being baptiz∣ed; and if we must so exactly stand upon the Or∣der of words to prove the Institution. We may (saith Sydenham) argue from Mark, as well as they from Matthew, as none must be baptized but they who are taught, so none but those who
believe and are Baptized shall be saved; and consequently our Children cannot be saved, be∣cause they cannot believe. The same condition being required to precede Baptism, that is re∣quired to precede Salvation. You see whether the Argument may be carried, and what little ground of comfort such doctrine affords in the death of our children. To conclude then, whereas they argue from this place of Mark, we must believe and be baptized, but Infants can∣not believe, therefore may not be Baptized; will it not as directly follow, that since they can't believe, they must be damned; let them frame an answer to the one, and then they have an∣swered both; for look (saith Mr. Marshall) by what distinction they will maintain the Salvati∣on of Infants against this Argument, by the same will I more clearly justifie the Baptism of Infants against this Argument. Having thus cleared the Texts from the false glosses, Antipaedobaptists put upon them, we shall next examine the passages out of Authors, which my Antagonist quotes for his opinion. The first he brings is Mr. Baxter, who having so notably wounded their cause in his plain Scrip∣ture proof, for Infant Church-Membership and Baptisme, is become the man of their indignati∣on; and Indeed I fear the Author, with whom I have to do, is possest with a malevolent spirit a∣gainst that Learned and Godly Divine, and is glad of any occasion to wound his reputation, as appears by his dealing with him in his Preface, and divers other places in the Treatise. Mr. Baxter (saith he) doth fully acknowledge in his
Book called, the second Disputation of Right to Sacraments, pag. 149, 150. Where he saith, This (speaking of the Commission of Christ to his Disciples) is not like some occasional mentioning of Baptisme; but it is the very Commission it self of Christ to his Disciples, and purposely expresseth their several works in their several places and orders. Their first Task is to make Disciples, which are by Mark called Believers. The second work is to bap∣tize them, whereto is annext the promise of their Salvation. The third work is to teach them all o∣ther things, which are after to be Learned in the School of Christ; to contemn this order (saith he) is to contemn all Rules of Order, for where can we expect to find it, if not here. I profess my Consci∣ence is fully satisfyed, that the Minister must expect a profession of Faith before Baptism. To discover the Craft, and Sinister dealing of our Opponent, I must first acquaint the Reader that Mr. Baxter disputing with Mr. Blake, who was for a large Admission to the Sacraments, ex∣plains the Thesis in his second disputation thus, viz. That Ministers must not Baptize the Children of those that profess not saving faith, upon profes∣sion of any Faith that is short of it; these are his very words, pag. 53. And after it, nine lines lower, that he might not be mistaken, hath this by way of caution, viz. That he would have the Reader to understand that all along in the discourse of the whole Book, the dispute is about the aged them∣selves, whether they may be baptized; so that it is none of our work at this time (saith he) to defend the Subjects [as to their age] against the Anabap∣tists, but our present business is to enquire what that
faith is, that quallifieth persons to be just subjects of Baptism, or to be such whose children may receive it upon the account of their faith or profession; Disp. 2. p. 4. Moreover in his fourth Disputation he hath this passage; We take it for granted that the Right of Infants is upon the account of their Parents Faith, therefore we manage this discourse with respect to the Adult. P. 351. What could any man in the World say more, to prevent the Ca∣vils of unworthy persons? And certainly he had not said so much unless he had known how our opposites lye at the Catch, and yet we see this would not do, for we have found a man of so much dis-ingenuity as to traduce and pervert the sayings of this worthy person to countenance his errour. I have been the larger in setting down Mr. Baxters words, that it may leave some im∣pression on the Readers Memory, when he finds any thing quoted out of Mr. Baxters Disputa∣tions, about the Right to Sacraments, that so it might be as a Key to open his meaning, in all those numerous passages the Author hath pikt up out of that Dispute, which indeed fills up many pages of his Book. Next we have Mr. Calvin, introduced as speaking some∣thing in favour of their opin∣ion,Ergò ut se ritè ad Bap∣tismum offerant ho∣mines, peccatorum con∣fessio ab illis requiri∣tur; alioqui, nihil quam inane esset lu∣dicrum tota actio. No∣tandum est de A∣dultis his verba fi∣eri, Calv. in Mat. 3.6. Verùm quia docere prius jubet Christus, quam baptizare & tantum credentes ad Baptismum vult reci∣pi, videtur non ritè administrari baptis∣mus, nisi fides praeces∣serit, &c. Eos qui fide in Ec∣clesiam Dei ingressi sunt videmus, cum sua sobole censeri in Christi membris, & in salutis haereditatem si∣mul vocari. Nec mo∣dò seperatur hoc modo Baptismus a fide & Doctrina, quia licet pueri Infantes non∣dum per aetatem fidem babent, Deus tamen eorum parentes com∣pellans. &c. whereas few ever wrote so smartly against them; it is from that same passage of his, on Mat. 6. &c. There∣fore that men may rightly offer themselves to Baptisme, Confession of sin is requi∣red,
otherwise the whole action would be but Sport. The words indeed are Mr. Calvins, so that I confess my Antagonist speaks truth, but he should have done well to have spoken the whole truth, For Mr. Calvin also caute∣ously adds, — It is to be Noted, that these words are spoken of Adult persons. And that we may see his judge∣ment, fully take notice of his Paraphrase upon the 28. of Mat. 19. and that other Text, Mark 16.16. But be∣cause (saith he) Christ com∣mandeth us to teach before he commands us to Baptize, and he would have believers only admitted to Baptism; it seems Baptism is not rightly admini∣stred, unless faith goeth before. From this place (saith Calvin) the Anabaptists oppose Infant Baptism. To which he pre∣sently answers, That those whom we see by a Profession of their Faith, to be admitted in∣to the Church, we are to look upon them (together with their off-spring) as the members of Christ, and to be jointly called to the inheritance of the Saints, nei∣ther is Baptism hereby separated from Faith, and Teaching; because though children have not yet faith by reason of their Age. Nevertheless God ta∣king
their Parents into Covenant, they themselves are also to be imbraced in the same Covenant. After Calvin, comes Piscator, to as little pur∣pose, whose words on Mark 1.4. are these; It is called the Baptisme of Repentance, because John Preached remission of sins to the penitent Believers. But why should this worthy Author be thus cur∣tail'd, whenas he farther expresseth himself thus, Baptismus nulli adulto conferendus est, nisi prius ediderit confessionem peocatorum, i.e. We must not Baptize any person that is grown up, unless he first make a Profession of his Faith, &c. If we would know his mind more fully, we may see it in his Comment upon the 28. of Mat. 19. It was (saith he) the Duty of the Apostles to Preach the Gospel all abroad through∣out the World, to all Nati∣ons,Apostolorum officium fuit Evangelium-prae∣dicare passim in orbe terrarum, &c. Verō pastorum illis sucee∣dentium est Evangeli∣um praedicare apud certam Ecclesiam a quae peculiaritèr sunt vo∣cati; & praterea In∣fantes qui in illa Ec∣clesia noscuntur, per Baptismum Deo conse∣crare. Piscat. Observ. in Mat. 28. p. 746. Edit. 2. Herbornae Nassoviorum Porrò ad Ecclesiam pertinent non solum a∣dulti Credentes ac fidem profitentes, sed etiam ipsorum liberi, ut patet ex verbis Apost. 1 Cor. . Quare dubium videri non debet quin illi quoque (liberi inquam & Infantes fidelium) baptizandi sint, etsi fidei non sunt capaces. and by Baptism to in∣corporate them into the Church, who make Profes∣sion of their Faith, &c. And it is the duty of all Pastors that succeed them, to preach the Gospel to that particular Church, whereunto they are called, and farthermore to consecrate to God by Bap∣tism, those Infants which are born in that Church; And
then adds — Not only Adult persons, that do believe and profess their Faith, belong to the Church, but also their Children as appears from the words of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7. else were your Children unclean, but now are they holy, where (saith he) the Apostle calls their children holy that were born, though but one of the Pa∣rents were a Believer, forasmuch as they belong to Gods Covenant made with his Church, and by consequence they belong to the Church; wherefore we need not doubt, but they also, (I say the Children or Infants of Believers) are to be Baptized, although they are not capable of Faith, even as the Infants of the Jews were cir∣cumcised, belonging likewise to the Covenant and to the Church. And as if all our eminent Divines had heed∣lesly spoken something in favour of their way, he hath the confidence to bring in more still. Mr. Perkins (saith he) in concurrence here with these words, Teaching all Nations, Baptizing them, saith, I explain the terms thus; Mark, first of all it is said, Teach them, (1.) make them my Disci∣ples by calling them to believe, & repent. Here we are to consider the Order which God observes in making with men a Covenant in Baptism. First of all he calls them by his word, and commands them to be∣lieve, and to repent. Then in the second place, God makes his promise of mercy and forgiveness. And thirdly be seals his promise by Baptism. They that know not, nor consider this Order which God used in Covenanting with them in Baptism, deal preposte∣rously, over-slipping the Commandment of Repenting and Believing.
Who would not think by this, that the Re∣nowned Perkins were of his side, a down right Antipaedobaptist; whereas not a word of what he saith is intended against Infant-Baptisme, but only to shew in what order Baptisme is to be Administred to Aliens and Pagans, as appears by what he saith upon the same Text. Mat. 28.29. Which is disingeniously conceal'd by the Author, Go teach all Nations, Baptizing them, &c. In these words (saith Mr. Perkins,) the Baptism of Infants is prescribed, and the Apo∣stles by vertue of this Commission Baptized whole Families, Act. 16.15, 33. As knowing Gods former Administration to his people, the Children were taken into Covenant with the Fathers, as the Israelites, both Old and Young, were baptized into Moses in the Cloud, 1 Cor. 10.4. As the Nation of the Jews were first taught, and then they and their Infants, being confederates, were circumcised; so saith our Sa∣viour, Do you go Teach and Disciple the Nati∣ons, and then Baptize them. The last quoted in this Chapter is the famous Paraeus: and what saith he? he tells us (saith the Author) in his Comment on Mat. 3.5. That the Order was, That confession as a testimony of true repentance go first,Hoc enim damus Ana∣baptistis in Ecclesiam fuscipiendos non esse nisi praeviâ confessione fidei & paenitentiae, quem morem, & vetus servavit ecclesia, & nostrae hodie observant si vel Judaeus, vel Turca Adultus, &c. Paraeus in Mat. 3.5. and then Baptism for Re∣mission of sins afterward. Ve∣ry good, but is this all? No certainly, for he present∣ly
adds, this we grant to the Anabaptists, that persons are not to be taken into the Church, and be Baptized (speaking of Aliens, or those that are without as the Apostle phraseth it,) un∣less a Profession of Faith and Repentance hath gone before; which custome (saith he) the An∣tient Primitive Church kept, and ours at this day still observe, when a Turk or a Jew that is grown, is to be initiated by Baptism. Thus Reader, I have given thee a taste of the ingenuity of my Antagonist, and I leave thee to judge of it. CHAP. II. Containing his second Argument to prove the Bap∣tisme of Believers the only true Baptism, and that is (if we will believe him) from the Apo∣stles Doctrine teaching the same. Reply. ALthough what we have before said to in∣validate his main Argument drawn from the Institution of Christ, be sufficient to overthrow whatsoever is brought in the two following Chapters; yet we shall further add, that it is not to be denyed, that the Apostles assert Believers Baptisme to be a true Baptism, but that they teach us that it is the only true Baptisme is ut∣terly false, and we have only the Authors word for it. The Texts cited out of Act. 2.37. Act. 8.36, 37. Act. 10.42. Act. 16.29. prove, that
grown persons unbaptized ought to be required to believe before their Baptism, which we grant; but to inferr thence, that the Children of Bapti∣zed Believers are not to be Baptized, is more then these Texts (or any else that I know) can yeild. We read of none de facto that the Apostles Bapti∣zed,A non dicto ad non fa∣ctum, non valet conse∣quentia: Because it is not exprest in so many words therefore it was not done, is not Logi∣cal. but Believers; therefore none but such, de jure ought to be Baptized, is a sorry way of arguing. The words of Dr. Taylor in his Discourse of Baptisme, part 2. pag. 34. are very weighty, viz. A Negative argument for matters of fact in Scripture, cannot conclude, &c. And therefore supposing that it be not intimated that the Apostles did Baptize Infants, it follows not (saith the Dr.) that they did not: and if they did not, it does not follow that they might not, or that the Church may not. The Scripture speaks nothing of the Baptisme of the Virgin Mary, and of many of the Apostles; therefore they were not baptized, is a weak arguing. The words and deeds of Christ are infinite which are not recorded, Joh. 20.30. and 21.25. Many things Christ did, that were not written; and of the Acts of the Apostles we may suppose the same in their proportion; and therefore what they did not, is no rule to us, unless they did it not, because they were forbideen: So that it can be no good Argument to say, The Apostles are not read to have Baptized Infants, therefore Infants are not to be baptized; but thus, We do not find they are excluded from this Sacrament and Ceremony of
Christian Institution; therefore we may not presume to exclude them. Now since all contradiction against Infant-Bap∣tism, depends wholly upon these two grounds; The Negative Argument in matter of fact, and the pre∣tences, that faith and repentance are required to Baptisme; since the first is wholly nothing and infirm, upon an infinite account; and the second may con∣clude that Infants can no more be saved then be bap∣tized, because faith is more necessary to Salvation then to Baptisme; it being said, he that believeth not shall be damned; and it is not said, he that be∣lieveth not shall be excluded from Baptism; it fol∣lows, that the Doctrine of those that refuse to Baptize their Infants is upon both its legs weak and broken, and insufficient. Thus far the Lear∣ned Doctor. To conclude this, whereas the Apo∣stles Preached up faith and Repentance before Baptism, it was requisite they should do so, ac∣cording to their Commission, having to do with Aliens grown up, (as not only the Gentiles, but the Jews were; in reference to the new Admini∣stration;) for these being the first subjects of Bap∣tisme, it was necessary they should make pro∣fession of their faith before they were admitted to it, but not so in their Children to be Bapti∣zed, no more then in Isaac and the Children of the Proselytes to be Circumcised. Abraham be∣lieved first, and afterward was Circumcised; Gen. 17.24. And why so? Because he was the first subject of that Ordinance, and therefore could not be admitted to it, but by his own faith. But as for Isaac his Son, he was Circumcised be∣fore believing, and so was it with the Proselytes
and their Children; when any Gentile was con∣verted to the Jewish Faith, he had a personal Right to be circumcised, and his Child likewise was Circumcised at eight days old, as was the custome of the Jewish Church, by virtue of Gods Covenant, giving it a parental Right. The Author is very unhappy at Citations, for usually they serve not his purpose. He acquaints us out of Bede, that men were instructed into the knowledge of the Truth, then to be Bapti∣zed as Christ hath taught, because without Faith it is impossible to please God. Magdeburg. Cent. 8. pag. 220. But this, Bede himself tells us was the method used amongst the Inhabitants of this Island, when Paganish — In initio nas∣centis Ecclesiae apud Britannos, Beda lib. 2. Angl. Hist. cap. 14. When a Church first of all began to be planted amongst the Britains; and he tells us it was at that time when Gregory sent from Rome, Austin, and forty other Preachers, and afterward Paulinus, who converted Ethelbert the Saxon King; but of this we shall speak more hereaf∣ter, when we shall shew how Bede himself was for Infant-Baptisme, notwithstanding the Author so perverts his words. His other Citation is Erasmus, who in his Paraphrase upon Mat. Observeth (and tis a great Observation indeed,) That the Apostles were com∣manded first to teach, and then to baptize, &c. Every Child that can read observes the same;Probabile est tingere Infantes institutum fuisse ab Apostolis, &c. but if you would know his judgment a∣bout Infant-Baptism, you may read it in his Ratio con∣cionandi,
lib. 4. where he conceives it probable, that the Apostles ordain'd and practised it. And truly amongst other probable reasons this seems to be one, if it be not a Demonstrati∣on; namely, because we do not read of any chil∣dren of believing Parents who were Baptized when they came to years of discretion. That they were Baptized I presume (saith Brinsley) our Ad∣versaries will not deny; and if so,Note, No Children of Believing Parents Baptized afterwards to be found from John the Baptist to John the Evangelist ending his Ministry, which was about 60. years. An Argu∣ment sufficient, if not to convince the Ad∣versary that they were Baptized in In∣fancy, yet to stop their mouths: Brin∣sley Doctrine and Practice of Paedo∣baptisme, pag. 75. let them shew where, and when. For this let all the Sacred Register be search∣ed, from the time that John the Baptist began his Mini∣stry, to the time that John the Evangelist ended his, (which was about 60 years, during which time thousands of Children of Believing Pa∣rents were grown up to ma∣turity;) and if in all that time they can but shew any one instance of any child born of a believing Parent, whose Baptism was defer∣red till he came to years of discretion, and that then he was Baptized, we will then acknow∣ledge there is some strength in their Negative Allegation, viz. We read of no children Baptized, therefore There were none.
CHAP. III. Containing his Argument, that Believers Baptisme is the only true Baptisme, from the example of Primitive Saints. Reply. TO this there needs no more then what we have before said.Sydenhams Christian Exercitation, pag. 7. For as Mr. Sy∣denham says, all that they urge as to Examples of a∣ctual Believers, being baptized all along the new Testament, especially the Acts, (and that if thou believest thou mayst,) We can freely grant without any damage to Infant-Baptism: For, 1. We say as they, Professing Believers, grown men were first Baptized, and so they ought to be who are to be the first subjects of the Administration of an Ordinance; instancing as before in Abraham, &c. he was 99. years old when circumcised, and he must be first Circumcised before he could con∣vey a right to his seed; now you may as well argue, Abraham was first circumcised, when so old, therefore old persons are to be Circumcised and none else; as because grown persons were Baptized, therefore not Infants, when they must be first Baptized themselves; for children are Baptized by the promise first to them, and in them to their seed.
Now, for as much as all the Examples brought by the Author out of Act. 8.12. & 18.8. & 22.14. Speak of grown persons that were the first sub∣jects of Baptism, and Jews that were Aliens too, as well as the Gentiles, in regard of the new Administration; it makes nothing against Infant-Baptism, that being of another circumstance, and the disagreeing of it from them, argues not the unlawfulness of it, and as the same Author far∣ther argues. 2. An Affirmative Position is not exclusive of subordinates; because Believers were said to be Baptized; Ergo, not their Seed, is not true rea∣soning; for their seed were comprehended with them in the same promise as before, and as we shall more fully shew hereafter. Let us now see what his Quotations of Authors or Testimonies will amount unto in this Chapter. His first Testimony is from Luther, de Sacra∣ment. Tom. 3. fol. 168. where he saith Luther hath these words, viz. That in times past it was thus, that the Sacrament of Baptism was Admi∣nistred to none, except it were to those that acknow∣ledged and confessed their faith, &c. The which when I read, I was not well assured, but that my Antagonist might be guilty of Forgery, knowing Luther to be a most fierce and zealous opposer of their way, wherefore I did very care∣fully examine the third Tome of Luther concer∣ning Sacraments. I read the 168. pag. and read it again with a friend, and do profess that there is not one syllable to the purpose, for which the Author brings him, no nor in any page thereabout.
The next that he Cites, is Bullinger, who (it ns) hath such words as these in his house∣k: 48 Sermon. Baptism hath no prescribed e by the Lord, and therefore it is left to the  choice of the Faithful. I have not the book by me to examine the th of this, but however I am certain there othing in that passage against Infant-Baptism, hat this testimony can do us no hurt; and we w very well how large a book Bullinger hath , Contra Anabaptistas, against the Anabaptists. hat I wonder the Author should bring him  The Reader may observe how zealous an rtor of Infant-Baptisme this Learned and ly Divine was, by that one passage of his in  Compendium of the Christian Religion. de cto Baptismo, ac de Infan∣s Baptizandis, lib. 8. pag.  viz.Quoniam autem Chri∣stianorum liberi, in faedere Dei suni, & Christus etiam Infan∣tium salvator est; cum{que} ad ipsos pertine∣at ut, veteris ac novi Testamenti literae te∣stentur-Baptismus (Fae∣peris figillum) iis ne∣gari non debet. That because the dren of Believers are in nant with God, and  is their Saviour, and romise also belongs to  (as both the Old and  Testament do wit∣ Baptisme (which is the  of the Covenant) is not to be denyed them,  And after this, concludes, Hortor autem & omnes pios ac verè Christianos, ut studiose ter{que} sibi, a contentiosa & venenata Ana∣ arum sectâ caveant, quae externa specie qui∣ & Hypocrisi splendet, reverà autem paestilen∣ est haeresis, at{que} plurimas baereses quibus o∣te aliquot secula Ecclesia Chrsti turbata, &
lacerata fuit, in se complectitur, illisque plurimos homines inficit; I forbear to English it, out of respect to some which I believe are Godly, and yet opposite to the Baptisme of believers Chil∣dren. Lastly, The Author quotes a great deal out of Mr. Baxters Disputations with Mr. Blake, a∣bout Right to the Sacraments; but we have be∣fore spoil'd his Market, by giving the Reader a Key out of the same Book, by which he may un∣derstand him. So that all those Examples from John, the Samritans, the Eunuch, Paul, Lydia the Jaylor, Crispus, &c. doth but mind us a∣gain of the Authors dis-ingenuity in traducing that Worthy Divine.
CHAP. IV. Wherein he labours to prove Believers the only Subjects of Baptisme, from the Spiritual ends of the Ordinance; where he gives us an In∣duction of the particular ends of Baptisme, as follows. 1. THe first end of Baptisme (saith he) is, that the Baptized might have that represen∣ted in a Sign or Figure, and Preached to his Eye, in the Ordinance, which had been Preacht to his Ear and Heart by the word and Spirit; re∣specting the whole Mystery of the Gospel, and his duty and obligation therein. A Sign being (as Pa∣raeus observeth) some outward thing appearing to the sence, through which some inward thing is at the same time apprehended by the understan∣ding. Repl. I. I deny this to be the primary end of Baptism. For not to insist upon that which hath given too great advantage to Antipaedobaptists, That the first end of Baptisme is to give a solemn entrance or admission into the Church, I conceive it to be more true to affirm, That the first and chief end of Baptisme is to be the Initiatory sign or seal of Gods Covenant and favour to us in Christ. For as Dr. Ames observes in his Bellarminus
enervatus, Tom. 2. lib. 2. un∣less persons are to be repu∣ted Members of the Church,Nisi habendi tales es∣sent (viz. fidelium in∣fantes) pro membris ecclesiae, non deberent Baptizari: Baptismus enìm suâ naturâ est sigillum insitionis jam factae in Christum, at{que} adeò in Ecclesiam. Act. 10.47, 48. they ought not to be Bapti∣zed; for Baptism in its own nature is the seal of our be∣ing already ingrafted into Christ, and so consequently into the Church, Acts 10.47, 48. He speaks concer∣ning the Baptism of the Children of Believers, and affirms they ought not to be Baptized but under this consideration, that they are members of the Church, which we shall hereafter make good in its proper place. 2. I acknowledge that to Adult persons Bap∣tisme reprefents (in a sign) that to the eye which is Preacht to the eare, respecting the Mysteries of the Gospel, &c. Although I see not how it can be so in the way of Dipping, for how can persons under water see, apprehend, or hear any thing during that time, when, and whereby the Sences and Understandings of men are so confounded, that they have no power to exercise their faith, or reason as they should; and since plunging over head and ears puts people in∣to such an amazing condition, not without frights (especially in the more tender Sex) some being neer throtled or drown'd, it is to be sus∣spected to be none of Christs appointments; for one would think, that at such a juncture of time, especially, when an Ordinance is celebrated, re∣presenting so many Gospel Mysteries, it is requi∣site the mind should be in a more omposed po∣sture
then theirs are like to be in, whose heads are under Water. We grant Baptism to be a sign of spiritual Mysteries represented to the eye of such as are grown up, and rightly Bap∣tized. As Circumcision was a sign of the same import to Abraham, and it is of present and im∣mediate use to the aged, Rom. 4. Abraham re∣eived the sign of Circumcision, as the Seal of the righteousness of Faith, and we acknowledge also both the Sacraments are of immediate and present use to the aged, and in this sence we are to understand Paraeus, speaking of Sacramental Signes: but let it be considered that the children of Abraham received the sign of Circumcision as well as Abrabam, and yet they were void of un∣derstanding and judgment, and knew no more of the spiritual Mysteries represented therein, then our Infants do in the Ordinance of Baptism. Circumcision represented the same Mysteries that Baptism doth, and yet those poor Israelitish Babes that were Circumcised, knew not that the cutting-off the fore-skin, shadowed out the cor∣ruption of nature, and the nature of Mortifica∣tion, the blood shed in the act also held out the mystery of Redemption by Christs blood, of all which Baptisme is as proper a sign, when given to our Infants, as Circumcision was to theirs. 3. What though Infants are uncapable of un∣derstanding Gospel Mysteries figured in Baptism, as they were heretofore of the same shadowed forth in Circumcision, yet their Baptisme is a Signe of what God will do for the future (to as many of them as belong to his Election,)
if they shall arrive to years of discretion. 4. Though it be no Teaching sign at the pre∣sent, yet if the Infant live, and be instructed in the use and ends of his Baptisme, it may prove as Operative and Beneficial to him, as if it had been delayed till he came to full age. Thus David, who though Circumcised in Infancy, yet strengthned his faith by it, when he came to years of discretion, 1 Samuel 17.26. 5. Though Baptisme be not for the present a Teaching sign to Infants, neverthelses it is a di∣stinguishing fign to distinguish those that are Within, from those that are Without, as the A∣postle phraseth it, 1 Cor. 5.12, 13. And it is even to Infants a sign of Gods Covenant as be∣fore is hinted (as Circumcision was to Infants under the Law, and for this reason it is by a Me∣tonimy called by the name of the Covenant, and did distinguish the Jewish Infants from Gentile ones, that were without the Covenant, or strangers to the same, Gen. 17.20. Act. 7.8. 5. It is also an Engaging sign (as Circumci∣sion was to the Jewish Infants, though they un∣dertood it not when they were the Subjects of that Ordinance) whereby our children are ob∣liged to the Profession of Christ, into whose name they have been Baptized. I shall shut up this with those weighty words which I find in Mr. Baxters Scripture proof for Infants Church-Membership and Baptism. pag. 112. Tell me (saith he) what operation Circumcision had on all the Infants of Church-Members formerly. It
was a sign of the Seal of the Righteousness of Faith, &c. and yet they had no more Faith, nor Knowledge of the Significancy, than ours have now—Christ himself was circumcised in Infancy, when by the course of nature he was uncapable of understanding it's Ends and Uses. Not (saith he) that I am now arguing for Bap∣tism from Circumcision; but this fully answe∣reth their Objection [that Infants should not be baptized, because they are not capable of understanding its Use, and so being wrought on by it.] They are as capable of Baptism, as they were of Circumcision, and its Ends: They therefore that will yet say, It were better let it alone till they are more capable, do but exalt their own reason against Scripture, and speak as men that would teach God. The Second End, hinted by the Author, is, That the party baptized might thereby witness his Re∣pentanee, Matth. 3.11. called therefore the baptism of Repentance, Mark. 1. Repl. 1. It cannot be proved from these places, that all those whom John Baptized, did manifest their Repentance; and we do not find those Pharisees and Sadduces that are branded with the name of Vipers, gave the least indica∣tions thereof, which if they had the Baptists would not have spoken so harshly of them, and yet these (for ought we can learn to the contrary from the Text,) were baptized.
2. Grotius in his Annotations upon the nine∣teenth of Matthew 14. Speaketh well to this, whose Words are these— Neither ought that to be any hinderance to the Baptism of Infants,Neque obstare debet quod non omnia quae itidem per baptismum significari solent, in istam aetatem propriè congruerint, &c. that all things which in like manner are fignified by Baptism cannot agree properly to that Age; for Repentance also (which we know is signified by Baptism, &c.) had no place at all in Christ, when John baptized him; who as Tertullian notes, was not baptized as a Debtor to Repen∣tance, because he never sinned. 3. The End of Baptism nominated by the Au∣thor, is, to evidence present Regeneration, whereof Baptism is a Sign, Titus 3.4. John 3. Repl. If this Argument were good, it would have overthrown the Circumcision of Infants; for that also was a lively Sign, or Symbole of Re∣generation, and it might have been objected (according to our Antagonists phanfie,) Infants are not regenerated, or shew no signs thereof; and (Regeneration being the end of Circumcisi∣on) therefore They ought not to be circum∣cised. 2. According to such arguing, none ought to be admitted to Baptism; for none know by a judgment of certainty and infallibility, who are regenerated; for Simon Magus made a great shew, and yet was in the Gall of bitterness
and no doubt many come up out of the water as rotten hypocrites as they went in. Thirdly, Mr. Tombes him∣self grants that Infants may be regenerated (as John was in the Womb;) and faith,Pet. Martyr. loc. com∣mun. cl. 4. c. 8. pag. 821, 823. Non excludimus eos (Infantes) ab eccle siâ, Sed ut ejus partes am∣plectimur, benè Spe∣rantes, quòd ut sunt secundùm carnem se∣men sanctorum, ità e∣tiam sint Electionis di∣vinae participes & spi∣ritum sanctum habent. Ne{que} audiendi sunt qui hâc de re mo∣vent scrupulum, ac dicunt, quid si Minister fallatur? quia idem cavillus esse po∣terit de adultis. that if he knew such or such an Infant were regenerated, he would not scruple to Bap∣tize it, according to which arguing, he must also forbear Baptizing grown persons up∣on profession, for he knows not that they are regenera∣ted. 4. If the whole Species of Infants be excluded from Regeneration, then are all Infants (so dy∣ing) certainly damned; for all Infants are born in Original sin, and by nature unclean, and no unclean thing shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, But I suppose our opposites dare not exclude all Infants from Salvation: Well then, I conclude some Infants are elected, Regenera∣ted, and in Covenant with God, or else they are saved without Election, Regeneration, Christ or Covenant; which is most absurd. 5. And whereas nothing can be said against us but this, de occultis non judicat Ecclesia, the Church cannot judge of secret things, but is to act ac∣cording to appearance, and it is unknown whe∣ther
such particular Infants are regenerated, they cannot make any profession, and Baptisme is to be given upon that. I answer, we have as much reason if not more, to look upon the Infants of Believers to be sanctified, then we have to e∣steem grown Christians to be such; because our owning of these, as such depends upon their own testimony only in a visible profession, which may be counterfeit. But such Infants are to be accounted Saints upon a Divine Testimony, for we have the word for it, 1 Cor. 7.14. else were your children unclean, but now , they are Saints or holy, it being the same word the Apostle useth in his Dedications and directions of his Epistles to the Churches of Rome, Corinth, &c. where he stiles them Saints, and our Savi∣our tells us that of such is the Kingdom of Heaven, and they are to be no other then Saints, and we are warranted by a Divine Testimony to look upon them as such, which in their pre∣sent Infant-state they cannot be liable to any suspicion of defeating by Hypocrisie, as grown persons may. The Author brings in Dr. Taylor (whom he looks upon as his dear friend, and he hath rea∣son for it, having helpt him to a great part of his Book;) The said Dr. (saith he) tells us very elegantly in his Lib. of Prophecy, pag. 242. That this is truly to be Baptized, whatsoever is less then this, is but the Symbole only, a meer Ce∣re mony, an opus operatum, a dead Letter, an emp∣ty shadow, an Instrument without an Agent to ma∣nage, or force to actuate it.
Repl. The Dr. wants not words, but this signifies nothing against Infant-Baptism, for all this may be as truly said of those that are Baptized when grown up, that have not truth of grace. But be∣cause I observe with what Reverence this Doctor is mentioned (as if all were Canonical which he saith in their behalf, and I find the Authors Book to swell with his Sesquipedalia verba,) I shall (for prevention of delusion) inform the Reader with some news which may be worth his hearing. Know therefore that the said Doctor put forth a Book about 20. years since, entituled, The Ly∣berty of Prophecy, in which he pleads for a Tole∣ration, as for others, so also for those that dis∣sent from Infant-Baptisme. There he personates an Anabaptist, and tells us he will draw up a Scheme or Plea for them, and (saith he) though they be deceived, yet they have so great excuse of their side, that their Error is not impudent, lib. of Proph. p. 223. and therefore may be tolerated. Then doth he shew what they may say for them∣selves — and concludes, Thus far the Anabap∣tists may argue, and they have been incouraged in their Error, more by the accidental Advanta∣ges we have given them by our weak arguings, then by any Truth of their cause, or excellency of their wit. The Doctor therefore having a mind (it seems) to shew the excellen∣cy of his own wit,A worthy Testimony to be brought against Infant-Baptisme. hath said more for them then ever they
could before or since say for themselves: so that his strong arguings for them, hath eventually proved a greater encouragement to them then ever any of our weak arguings did before. And yet after all the goodly Harrangue he makes in their behalf, he at last shuts up with this, viz. The use I make of it (never dreaming what use H.D. would make of it) is, That since there is no direct impiety in their opinion, they are by all means Christian, fair, and humane, to be con∣vinced and instructed; but if they cannot be perswaded, they must be left to God, (and I am of his mind.) And lastly adds, for his own part he believes Infant-Baptism to be a truth; but because some have thought the Doctor had spoke more in their behalf, then he himself could well answer (as Conjurers sometimes raise spi∣rits they cannot lay,) he hath since put forth an Excellent piece, stiled, A Consideration of the practice of the Church in Baptizing Infants of Believing Parents, and the Practise justified:Printed by J. Elesher, for R. Royston, at the Angel in Ivy-lane, M. DC. L. II. in the Pre∣face to which we have this account, That as for those Arguments which in The Li∣berty of Prophecying, Sect. 18. are alleadged against Paedobaptisme; and in the opinion of some, do seem to stand in need of answering, he had it once in thought to have answered them: but upon these considerations he forbore. 1. Because those Arguments are not good in themselves, or to the question precisely consider∣ed, but only by relation to the preceeding Ar∣guments there brought for Paedobaptisme, they
may seem good one against another, but those in the Plea for the Anabaptists, have no strength but what is accidental (as he con∣ceives.) 2. Because in this Discourse (for Infant-Bap∣tisme) he hath really laid such grounds and pro∣ved them, that upon their supposition, all those arguments in the Liberty of Prophecy, and all o∣ther which he ever heard of, will fall of them∣selves. 3. Because those Arguments to his sense are so weak, and so relying upon failing and de∣ceitful Principles, that he was loath to do them so much reputation as to account them worthy the answering, 4. Because he hath understood that his very worthy friend Dr. Ham∣mond,Dr. Hammonds Let∣ter of Resolution to 6 Quaeties, Printed by J. Elesher for R. Royston at the An∣gel in Ivy-lane, 1653. hath in his Charity and Humility descended to answer that Collection. I have transcribed all this, that the Reader may mind this Information when e∣ver he meets with any thing quoted out of Dr. Taylor, as he shall at least eighteen times, and sometimes very largely whole pages, nay two pages and more at a time by our Antagonist in his Treatise of Baptisme. And truly a man would wonder at his weakness, that since the Doctor in his Lib. of Proph. doth profess himself for In∣fant-Baptisme, notwithstanding all that he says against it, personating an Anabaptist as he con∣fesseth, and since he doth so villifie them for their error and weakness, the Author should un∣dervalue
his cause so much as to make use of such fallacious reasonings, as the Dr. himself calls them. Next, we have him again at Mr. Baxter, wronging both him and his Reader in what he citeth out of his Disputation with Mr. Blake as formerly; Mr. Baxter (saith the Author) in his [10 Argument, pag. 117, 118. speaks to the same purpose, viz. Christ hath instituted no Baptisme, but what is to be a sign of present Regeneration, &c. Here he curtailes Mr. Baxters words on purpose to blind the Reader, for Mr. Baxter adds [at least to men of age.] The 4. End is signally to represent the Covenant and promise that the Believer enters into here∣by, viz. to dye to sin, and live to Christ, for which he cites Mr. Perkins, Baxter, and Dr. Tay∣lor; the two former we have spoken enough of, in the first Chapter, where we find them most professedly for Infant-Baptisme, and have condemned the Author for wresting their sence, they speaking of Adult persons or Aliens, and not in opposition to the Baptisme of Believers children, and for that of Dr. Taylor, That Bap∣tisme is called the answer of a good conscience towards God, 1 Pet, 3.21. which saith he, can by no means be applyed to the Infant, since they are not capable thereof, till they know to refuse the evil, and choose the good. Repl. I. To this Dr. Hammond answers, namely, This is as true of that Baptisme which belongs to chil∣dren
as to any other, only the duty of it is not required till they come to years and ability to perform it, and then if they keep not a good con∣science it will be little available. And if this be of any force against Baptizing Infants, it will be of the same force against Circumcising them, since S. Paul, Rom. 2.28. doth as much invalidate the exter∣nal part of Circumcision, as St. Peter here doth that of Baptisme. 2. 'Tis therefore a meer Parologisme so to ar∣gue; for the Apostle Peter speaks of the Adult that could give a reason of their faith, and not of Infants; for the Apostle had then to deal with such, who upon their being Baptized were to make profestion of a good Conscience. And this (as we shall hereafter shew out of the Mag∣deburgenses) was the practice of the Primitive Church in this Case; for having to deal with In∣fidels, they first Catechised and Taught them the first Elements and Principles of the Christian Religion, whereupon they were called Catechu∣meni (i.e. persons that were to be Catechised;) that being done, and they brought to some compe∣tency of knowledge, they then openly declared and testified their Repentance and Faith, before the Congregation where they were to be bap∣tized: And this they did by answering to some questions proposed by the Minister. To this the Apostle seems to allude when he calls Baptism, , i.e. The an∣swer of a good Conscience towards God, so our Translation renders it, though (as Beza notes upon the place) not so fully expressing the force of the word, , which proper∣ly
signifies an Interrogation or questioning; so the vulgar Latin renders it, Interrogatio bonae consci∣entiae, The Interrogation of a good Conscience. Be∣za translates it, Stipulatio bonae conscientiae, The Stipulation of a good Conscience. Now Stipulati∣on is properly an Answer to a Question, when one being demanded concerning a thing, he re∣turns Answer, and by his answer engageth him∣self to do somewhat that is required. Now this practice of giving an account of ones faith, by way of answering to questions (as Beza notes upon this place of Peter) was drawn from the Primitive use in after ages, out of a ,Beza Annotat. in 2. Pet. 3.21. a per∣verse imitation, and apply∣ed to the Baptisme of In∣fants, not so fitly (as he conceives,) they being not able to answer for themselves. 3. Nevertheless though children cannot per∣sonally and actually answer for themselves, I see no reason to the contrary why they may not be said to Stipulate passively in and by their parents who accept the Covenant, not only for them∣selves, but for their little ones. The people of Israel did by Gods appointment enter their chil∣dren into Covenant with God, as appears from Deut. 20.10, 11, 12. and doubtless the interest of Believing Parents in their Children,Dr. Taylorr considera∣tion of the Church in Baptizing Infants. is as great now as then, and God as gracious to accept such co∣venanting under the Gos∣pel, as he was under the Law. 4. In Civil Contracts it is usual with Parents
to Covenant and engage for and in behalf of their Children, and they are obliged to the per∣formance of the Agreement when they come to years of discretion, though they did not give their actual consent whilst in their Minority, when the Agreement was made. The very law of Nature teacheth Parents to Covenant for their Children, when 'tis for their good.Mr. Eaxter. 5. Let Dr. Taylor in his latter discourse, wherein he justifies the practise of Baptizing In∣fants of Believing Parents, confute what himself says in his Liberty of Prophecy. He speaks his judgement concerning the point, page 53, 54. thus. It were well saith he, speaking of the engagement or promise made for Infants in Bap∣tism,) if men would rather humbly and modest∣ly observe that constitution of the Church, then like scorners deride it, in which they shew their own folly, as well as immodesty; for what un∣decency or incongruity is it, that our Parents should stipulate for us when 'tis agreeable to the practise of all the Laws and Transactions of the World, an effect of the Communion of Saints, and of Christian Oeconomy: For why may not Infants Stipulate as well as we? All were in∣cluded in the Stipulation made with Adam, he made a losing bargain for himself, and we smarted for his folly: And if the faults of Pa∣rents, and Kings and Relatives, do bring evil upon their Children, and Subjects, and Corre∣latives, it is but equal that our children may have benefit also by our Charity and Pi∣ety.
But concerning making of an agreement for them, we find that God was confident concern∣ing Abraham, that he would teach his Chil∣dren. Further Joshua did expresly undertake for his houshold, I and my house will serve the Lord. And for children we may the better do it, because till they be of perfect choice, no Go∣vernment in the world is so great as that of Pa∣rents over their children, in that which concerns the parts of this Question. And it is a rare art of the Spirit to engage Parents to bring them up in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord; They are persons obliged by a superinduced bond, they are to give them instructions, and holy Principles as they give them meat, &c. The 5 End of Baptisme, is to be a Sign of the Co∣venant of Gods part of washing away a Believers sin, by the Blood of Christ, and to give spiritual Life and Salvation, Act. 2.38, 39. Act. 22.16. 1 Pet. 3.21. This also is as true of that Baptism which be∣longs to the Children of Believers, as that which is given to Believers themselves. Repent and be Baptized every one of you, for the Remission of sins, for the promise is to you and to your seed, &c. And Baptism (even to Infants) is a seal of Gods par∣doning grace in doing away the guilt of Origi∣nal sin, in regard of those that belong to Gods Election (if not also actual, which afterward shall be committed if they live to age.) The 6. End mentioned by the Author is, That it might be a signal Representation of a Believers Ʋ∣nion with Christ, called therefore, a being Baptized
into Christ, and a putting on of Christ; for which we have Dr. Taylor quoted, Which cannot be, (says he) of those who remain in their incapacities, &c. Which he saith, is the case of Children. But we shall see by and by the said Dr. confuting himself in his latter discourse of Baptism. 1. To this I reply in the words of Wendeline,Wendelin Christ. Theo. lib. 1. c. 12. p. 166. upon the Text, viz. Apostolus lo∣quitur tantùm de Baptizatis fidelibus tùm enim Adulti, ex Judaismo; & Gen∣tilismo recèns conversi baptizabantur; i.e. The A∣postle speaks this of Believers that were Baptized; for then Adult persons, newly converted from Ju∣daism and Paganisme were Baptized. 2. Though children cannot put on Christ by an external Act, yet they may be an infused seed of grace, and we have good ground to be∣lieve all elect Infants dying, have in their infant-State, done so. And farther, if Adams sin be imputed to them for sin, why may not Christs Righteousness be also imputed to them for Righ∣teousness? Surely it must be so, or else there is no way how Infants can be saved. 3. Dr. Taylor in his last discourse of Baptism, gives a good Rule for the understanding Scrip∣tures of this sort, which if attended to, would bring us and Antipaedobaptists a little neerer to∣gether: which is this, viz. That when the Scrip∣ture speaks of the effects of, or dispositions to Baptisme, it speaks in general expressions, as being most apt to signifie a common duty, or general effect, or a more Universal event, or the proper order of things: but those general ex∣pressions
do not supponere universalitèr; that is, they are not to be understood exclusively to all suscipients, or of all the subjects of the propositi∣on. And he makes it clear by divers passages of Scripture. There are many Synecdoches in the word, where many only are to be understood, when it speaks of all. The secret effects of Ele∣ction, and of the spirit are in Scripture attri∣buted to all that are of the outward Communi∣on.1 Pet. 1.2. So Peter calls all the Christian strangers of the Ea∣stern dispersion, Elect, accor∣ding to the fore-knowledge of God the Father. And Paul saith of all the Roman Christians, and the same of the Thessalonians, that their Faith was spoken of in all the world, and yet among them it is not to be supposed, that all the Professors had an unreproveable faith, or that every one of the Church of Thessalonica was an excellent and charitable person; and yet, saith he,2 Thes. 1.2. your faith groweth ex∣ceedingly, and the charity of every one of you all towards each other aboun∣deth. So to the question before us. As many of you as are baptized into Christ, have put on Christ. That is, so it is regularly, and this is the designed event: but from hence we cannot conclude of every person, and in every period of time, This man hath been baptized, therefore, now he is clothed with Christ, he hath put on Christ; nor thus, This person cannot in a spiritual sense, as yet put on Christ, therefore he hath not been baptized; that is, he hath not put him on in a Sacramental sense.
To conclude, We cannot understand the A∣postle in those words of putting on Christ, to intend a saving union to Christ, or a putting on of Christ spiritually and effectually, in regard of all that are Baptized; for all these Galathians did not so put him on, and innumerable persons that are Hypocrites (when baptized at age,) do not so put him on. Wherefore the words are to be understood Sacramentally, as 1 Cor. 10.4, 5. Heb. 10.29. And thus Infants put on Christ as well as grown persons. 7th. End of Baptism (saith he) is, that the Bap∣tized person may orderly thereby have an entrance into the visible Church, &c. For as Circumcision heretofore was the visible door of entrance into the old Testament-Church— So also was Baptisme such a door, and visible entrance into the New Te∣stament-Church, &c. Act. 2.41, 42. They who gladly received the word were baptized, and the same day there was added to them about 3000. souls; and they continued stedfastly in the Apostles doctrine and fellowship, and in breaking of Bread, and in Prayers. So that after baptisme, not be∣fore, the believers were said to partake of all the Church-priviledges. Posito uno absurdo mille sequuntur. Upon this false Hypothesis do our Opposites build their di∣viding Practices. Wherefore we deny that Bap∣tisme doth give formality, or make a man a member of a Visible-Church; it is not that which gives entrance into it, as the Author would have it: so, as if only by its Administra∣tion, and in their own way too, persons must be Baptized, or else they are not to be reputed
Church-Members, or to be admitted into the participation of Church-priviledges. But for this we have divers of our Divines quoted; as Ʋr∣sinus, The Assembly in their Catechisme. And lastly, Mr. Baxter, with whom he is again at Hocus Pocus. Mr. Baxter (saith he) in his plain Scripture proof, pag. 24. As a Soldier before li∣sting, and a King before Corwning, and taking his Oath, so are we Church-Members before Baptisme. But as every one that must be admitted solemnly in∣to the Army, must be admitted by listing, as the so∣lemn ingaging sign; so every one that hath right to be solemnly admitted into the visible Church, must ordinarily be admitted by Baptism. But mark (Reader) the Authors ingenuity. Baxters words are, So are we and Infants Church-Members; But being quite out of charity with those Innocent Babes, this man leaves out Infants, and one would think by the partial Citation, that Mr. Baxter also did shut the Church-door against them. It cannot be denyed that Orthodox Di∣vines have frequently termed Baptism, the Sacra∣ment of our initiation into the Church, and have ascribed our Admission or entrance into it thereunto, and hereby have given the Antipaedo∣baptists some seeming ground for their rigidity. And yet I find that they are not agreed among themselves about the point; for Mr. Paul a great Zealot against Communion with any that are not Baptized in their way, doth in his serious re∣flections disown the Position, That Baptism is an initiating Ordinance, and tells us in that Di∣minitive Volume of his, p. 3. That he knows none that asserts it to be the in-let into praticular
Churches, though it prepares them for Recepti∣on. Mr. Kiffin it seems is of the same judge∣ment, for he bestows an Epistle upon the piece. Of the same judgment is John Bunyan a more moderate Antipaedobaptist, that is, for Ʋnion and Communion with Saints, as Saints, and condemnes the Rigidity of his Brethren, and maintains in his Answer to the scurrilous (not serious) Reflecti∣ons of Paul, That differences in judgement about Water-Baptisme, ought to be no Bar to Communion,Printed for John Wilkins in Exchange Alley. which is the Title of his Book, and sees no cause to repent after severe checks from his Brethren, to call them Babes and Carnal, that at∣tempt to break the peace and communion of Chur∣ches, though upon better pretences than Water, and declares God never made Water-Baptism a Wall of Division between us. And whereas Paul denies Baptisme to be an initiating Ordinance, he re∣torts very rationally upon him, that if it be not that, but another, and if visible Saints may en∣ter into Fellowship by that other, and are no where forbidden so to do, because they have not light into Water-Baptisme, it is of weight to be considered by all unprejudiced persons. Mr. Tull also, a moderate and very ingenious Antipaedo∣baptist, is of Mr. Bunyans judgment; But Mr. Henry Jessey (of precious Memory) hath publi∣shed his judgment to the same purpose, ground∣ing it upon Rom. 14. v. 1.3.7. such as are weak in the faith, receive you, &c. From whence he argues most strongly and convincingly, that it was the duty not only of
the then present Church at Rome, to whom the Epistle was writ, as also to all beloved of God, called to be Saints at that time, ver. 7. But also of all Churches and Saints, Beloved and called, throughout the world in succeeding ages, to re∣ceive into Church-communion and Fellowship, such whom we have ground to believe God hath received into Communion with himself. For that's the Argument or Motive verse 3. God hath received him, and saith he, if it be a good Argument to receive such as are weak in any thing whom the Lord hath received; Then there can be no good Argument to reject for any thing for which the Lord will not reject them. The like argument we have chap. 15. ver. 7. of Christs Receiving, Receive you one another as Christ hath received us, &c. Then that holy man breaks out into pathe∣tical strains, Oh! how is the heart of God the Father and the Son set upon this to have his children in one anothers hearts as they are in his, &c. and 'tis the work of the Devil (saith he) to divide them: Thus much to shew how they differ amongst themselves about this Position, that Baptism gives formality, or makes a mem∣ber of a visible Church, which the moderate party amongst them utterly deny; now that it gives neither essence or being, either to a Church or Membership, further appears by these Arguments. 1. If there be a Church,That dividing Principle, That Baptism formes a Church or makes Church-Members, refuted. and so Members be∣fore
Baptism, then Baptism cannot give the for∣mality or essence, because forma is causal, and so is in nature before formatum. But the Church considered as totum essentiale, is before Baptism, for Ministers are before baptism. And there must be a Church of Believers to chose a Minister lawfully; for none but a Church can give him a call, and without a call he can∣not administer, as Mr. Hooker argues in his sur∣vey of the sum of Church-discipline, cap. 5. part. 1. pag. 55. adding moreover, that if Baptism can∣not be without a Ministerial Church, nor that before a Church Congregational, which must make choice of a ministry, then such a Church is much before Baptism. Besides let it be sup∣posed (saith he) that at the coming of some God∣ly Zealous Christian and Scholar into the Coun∣try, and a company of Pagans (many) are con∣verted to the Faith, I ask whether these may not joyn in Church-Fellowship, and choose that man Pastor, and whether that choice was not lawful according to God? Therefore here is a Church before a Minister, and so before Baptism. The demand which Mr. Jessey makes upon the same arugments is somewhat like this; if Bap∣tism (saith he) be the manner of forming Chur∣ches, how would it suit a Country, where ma∣ny are converted and willing to be Baptized? but there being no Church to be baptized into, how shall such a Church-State begin? The first must be baptized into no Church [that is parti∣cular] and the rest into him as the Church, or the work stand still for want of a Church. 2. A Church may be without Baptism, and
yet as real a Church as the Israelites were so long in the Wilderness without Circumci∣sion, which without dispute was the initia∣ting Ordinance, according to Divine Instituti∣on, Gen. 17.13. 3. One Argument I shall borrow more from Mr. Hooker, and that is, If Baptism give the form to visible-membership, then while that remains valid, the party is a visible Member; for where the form is, the formatum must needs be, if the prin∣ciples of reason may take place. But there is true Baptism resting in the party who hath no visible Membership: as in an Excommuni∣cate, in him that renounceth the fellowship of the Church, or when the Church is utterly dis∣solved, then all Church-Membership ceaseth; for Relata mutuò se ponunt & tellunt; And yet Baptism is valid. And as it is an undeniable position, That, that which gives the form or being to a Church, must cease when the Church ceaseth, or when a member ceaseth to be a member, it must cease with it; so it follows that that must be renewed, namely Baptism, as often as Membership is renewed, so shall we have a multiplication of Baptisms, as often as the per∣son is cast out of the Church and taken in again upon his repentance. As for those two Scriptures which the Author brings for his opinion, they will hardly be found to serve his turn. 1. The main place stood upon is, Act. 2.41, As many as received the word gladly, were bapti∣zed,
and there was added that day about 3000. souls. Hence they conclude they were added by Baptism, and that they were only added this way. Sol. 1. It is more then the Text affords for to conclude that they were added by Baptism, much less can it be argued from thence, that they were only added this way, the words say not, they were added by Baptism, but puts a full point or stop after that sentence, As many as glad∣ly received the word, were baptized. There that sentence ends, as Mr. Sydenham notes upon the place: And the Apostle goes on a new account, and saith, There were added that day 3000. souls, but doth not at all shew the manner of their ad∣ding; so that these words are rather a recapi∣tulation and summing up the number of Church-Members added that day, then any description of the way of their taking into the Church, and the former reasons prove it cannot be interpre∣ted as our Author would have it. The other place that he urgeth for his o∣pinion is, 1 Cor. 12.13. We are all baptized into one body; hence 'tis concluded Bap∣tism imbodies Members. 1. In answer to this, let it be considered what those of their one party say, that are for Dip∣ping. The Text (saith Mr. Bunyan, that treat∣eth of our being baptized into one body) tells us expresly it is done by the spirit. For by one Spirit we are all baptized into one body. Here is the Church presented as under the tion of a
Body; here is Baptism mentioned, by which they are brought or initiated into this body; Now that this is the Baptisme of Water, is utterly a∣gainst the words of the Text; For by one Spirit are we all Baptized into one body. So Mr. Jesse, The Baptism intended in the Text is the Spi∣rits-Baptism, and not Water-Baptism, and the Body the Text intends is not principally the Church of Corinth, but all believers, both Jews and Gentiles, being Baptized into one Mystical Body, and the reason why it cannot be meant of Water-Baptism, is, because all the Body of Christ, Jews and Gentiles, bond and free, par∣took not thereof. Thus here we see how they clash amongst themselves as touching the sense of the place. 2. We add, That, (as we conceive) the Apostle speaks there primarily of the Baptism of the Spi∣rit, not of Water; so by one spirit we are bapti∣zed into one body, is not so much of Baptism by Water; and yet supposing it to be meant of Baptism by Water. Yet (as Mr. Sydenham ob∣serves)it proves nothing that Baptism is the form of that body,Sydenhams Christian Exercitation, cap. 20. pag. 168, 169. which hath its matter and form, holiness and uni∣on before Baptism; baptized into one body, doth not here shew the essential constitution of a Church, but the confirmed union, and the argu∣ment is inserted more to prevent Schism, then to express the way of first imbodying or consti∣tution of Churches, as the whole context de∣monstrates.
CHAP. V. Containing his fifth Argument; That Believers Baptism is the only Baptism, from the New Testament-dispensation, so differing from that of the old. THe Argument is taken from the New-Te∣stament-Dispensation, so different from the Old. The Old Testament-Church (saith the Author was National, consisting of the Natural and Fleshly seed of Abraham, therefore were In∣fants by Circumcision added thereto; but the new Testament-Church was by Christs appointment to be a separated people out of all Nations, consisting on∣ly of the spiritual seed of Abraham, and therefore Believers upon profession of Faith by the Ordinance of Baptism were added thereto. Repl. 1. What of all this? If there any ground from hence that Believers Baptism is the only true Bap∣tism? 'Tis true, the Church Dispensation is altered,Mr. Baxters plain proof for Infants Church-Membership and Baptism. but the Covenant of Grace is not altered. The Dispen∣sation differs under the new Testament, only in regard of Ceremonial acci∣dents, as Temple, Priesthood, Sacrifice; but the Essentials of the Covenant still remain, viz. I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed, and
this is the grand Charter of Church-Member∣ship, which takes in the Child with the Parent, and consequently entitles it to Baptism, as shall be hereafter shewn; for if their Church relati∣on can be made good, their Baptism will fol∣low upon it. If therefore the Author could have proved that the covenant had been altered as to its essentials, he had said something worth a hearing. 2. Whereas he says the old Testament Church was National, it is a Truth; and yet the Na∣tion of the Jews was not the Church of God, as they descended from the Loyns of Abraham by Natural Generation, according to the Flesh, but only with reference to Gods gracious Co∣venant, made with Abraham and his seed, (which I wish the Opposers of Infant-Baptisme would consider:) and as this Covenant was made with Abraham and his seed after the flesh, so likewise is it still the same with Believers, and their na∣tural seed under the Gospel-Dispensation, by vir∣tue of the same gracious covenant made to them and their seed, Act. 2.39. For the promise is un∣to you, and to your children, and to all that are afar off: [the Gentiles.] 3. Antipaedobaptists may do well to consider yet farther, what Mr. Baxter makes good in his plain proof, viz. That Infant Church-Member∣ship did take place as an Ordainance of God, be∣fore Cirscumcision was enjoyned, or the Ceremo∣nial law Instituted, and why then it should cease with it, is more then ever yet could be shewn. He makes it appear it was no part of the Typical Administration of the old Testament;
but a moral Institution of God, even from the beginning of the World. God ever made a di∣stinction between the seed of the faithful, and the seed of the wicked, as visibly belonging to two several Kingdoms, the Kingdom of God, and the Kingdom of Sathan, Mal. 2.15. therefore are they called a Holy Seed, and a Holy Seed are Members of the Church, and so consequent∣ly the Subjects of Baptism, the Seal of Admission thereunto. 4. Notwithstanding the Dictates of H. D. that the Baptism of Believers is the only true Bap∣tism; we shall retain our practice in Baptizing our children, and thankfully own and acknow∣ledge it as a Gospel-priviledge, till the opposers thereof can produce some clear proof out of Scripture, that the Old Ordinance of the Church-Membership of Believers is repealed. We see how imperiously another sort of people do im∣pose their conceits, and how confidently they call for our subscription to their Light as they term it, as if it were a duty to deliver up our Reason captive to their absurd imaginations. We respect Antipaedobaptists as a more sober people, yet strangely over-grown with self-conceited∣ness, as if the word of God came out from them, and it came to them only in regard of the true knowledge of the spirits mind in it.— Let them produce but one plain Scripture that. God hath made void the Antient Charter and Grant, and we will readily yield up the cause. But we have Scripture and reason, as well as they, and are the more confirmed in what we hold by observing how weakly they dispute a∣gainst it.
All the Reason the Author brings to make good his Assertion is,— Because under the New Testament dispensation, Christ hath appointed the Church to be a separated people out of the Na∣tions, consisting only of the spiritual seed of Abra∣ham, and therefore believers only upon profession of faith are to be admitted to Baptism, and so ad∣ded to the Church. To which I answer, First, That under the New Testament-Dispensation, Christ hath ap∣pointed the Church to be a separated people out of the Nations, is a certain truth; but that this Church consists only of the spiritual seed of A∣braham is false. Qui benè distinguit, benè docet, He that distinguisheth well, teacheth well. What our Antagonist says is true, in regard of the In∣visible Mystical Church of Christ, which is a com∣pany of real Saints, that have spiritual Union and Communion with Christ, and with one a∣nother, but not so with respect to the outward visible Church, which is the Society of those that profess true faith, for the exercise of Church∣union and Communion among themselves, and ma∣ny of these are Hypocrits and shall perish. Dr. Ames (an excellent person that understood what the New Testament-Church was, a little better then our Author) Med. lib. 1. c. 32. art. 9. tells us the same. And such, saith he, was the Church of Corinth and Ephesus, wherein all held not Communion for life, and of such Christ spèaks, Joh. 15.2. Every branch in me that beareth not fruit. And hath these words in Opposition to what Bellarmine falsely chargeth on Protestants, viz. Falsum est internas virtutes recuiri a nobis
ut aliquis sit in Ecclesia, quoad visibilem ejus sta∣tum; It is false that inward vertues [Grace] are required of us to put a man into the Church, ac∣cording to the visible state of it. The Lord Du∣pless is in his Excellent Treatise of the Church distinguisheth aright — The Invisible Church, containeth none but good [or in the Authors Dialect, the Spiritual seed of Abraham] The Visible both good and bad; that only the Elect, this all those indifferently that are brought into her by the Preaching of the Gospel. By all which it is evident that the Author stragles out of the Road of Protestant Divines, and is fal∣len upon the confines of Thomas Colliers General Epistles. or the wild Notion of Mr. Dell, who in his Book intituled, The way of Peace, pag. 6. gives this definition of the Church, viz. The New Testament-Church is a spiritual Invisible Fellowship gathered up into the Unity of Faith, Hope, and Love, and saith, it is no outward vi∣sible society gathered together into the consent and use of outward Forms and Worship. Now although both are out, yet I acknowledge the Author is more sober then Dell, for he is for an External Visible Church under the New Testa∣ment-Dispensation; for he tells us, Believers up∣on the profession of faith are to be Baptized, and added thereunto, and yet take him in his own sence he cannot be excused from error and con∣fusion, for by Believers, he means the Spiritual seed before mentioned, not such as are Believers Equivocally, or Analogically, by profession on∣ly, but in reality, or truth, as appears by the fol∣lowing words [upon Profession of Faith, by the
Ordinance of Baptism were added to the Church] As if when mention is made in the Acts of so many thousands that believed, it did imply they were all of the Spiritual Seed Regenerated per∣sons, Annanias, Saphira, Symon magus, [who is said to believe;] whereas it denotes no more then a visible profession of faith, which is all that the Apostles and Primitive Churches had cog∣nizance of, and this is seen in Hypocrits who are not the Spiritual Seed of Abraham. And this H. D. might have learnt as well as other things from Mr. Tombes, who in his Examen, pag 159. tells us, Profession of Faith and holyness is a suffi∣cient warrant to Baptism. And in good earnest one would think (by observing the lives and con∣versations of some of their Proselytes) they took them in upon easier terms. 2.Sydenhams Exercita∣on, c.3.p.25. We further argue, That if none but the spiritual seed of Abraham be the subjects of Baptism, then visible be∣lievers, or such as make a profession of Faith are not the Subjects of Baptism; for they may not be more the spiritual seed; i.e. Godly, then infants. 3. Nay according to this Reasoning none must be Baptized at all, for who can tell who are the spiritual seed, who belong to Christ according to Election and saving Faith. Nor will that eva∣sion serve their turn, we have charitable ground to believe they are such, because of their profes∣sion, which is enough to satisfie the Church; for if according to the Author the New Testa∣ment-Church is made up only of a spiritual seed,
it is necessary the Church should not only have a judgement of charity, but infallibility to deter∣mine who are the spiritual seed. 4. And since the Author and those of his way disclaim all pretence to Infallibility, and are con∣tented with the judgment of charity, to distin∣guish of the spiritual seed, knowing nothing to the contrary, Hanc veniam petimus, pray give us leave to act a like charity towards the children of Believers. For first, they may be capable sub∣jects of Election, Jacob was such a one in his Mothers Womb, Rom. 9, 11, Neither was it his singular priviledge, but what is common to all that are Objects of Election, which is free without respect to any thing wrought or to be wrought. 2. They may be capable of sanctifi∣cation; Christ himself whilst in the Womb is termed [The Holy thing] which proves the non∣age of Infants makes them not incapable of grace, supposing Gods will, and it shews God would have it so, that some of them should be sanctified because Christ passed through each age to sanctifie it to us.Ideo per omnem venit aetatem, & infantibus infans factus sanctifi∣cans Infantes, in par∣vulis parvulus sancti∣ficans hanc ipsam ha∣bentes aetatem, simnl & exemplum illis pie∣atis effectus, & justitiae, & s bjectionis. As Irenaeus that lives neer the Apostles, speaks; John was filled with the Holy Ghost, and what is that but the graces of the spirit, although he was no more enabled to exert or put forth any act of Grace, then he was able to put forth an act of reason, nevertheless his soul wanted not the faculty of reason, from his Mothers Womb; and what
though we may not say all Infants of Believers are a like filled with the Holy Ghost, as John was, yet may we truly say that are all as capa∣ble thereof as John. 3. They are also capable of Glory, of Salvation, or else it would be sad, but Christ hath told us of such is the Kingdom of Heaven; that is, Specifically as you shall see proved hereafter. 4. God calls them holy, 1 Cor. 7.14. and so may we. By what hath been said I suppose it is evident to the impartial Reader, that the Infants of Believers are as much the spiritual seed of Abraham, as visible profes∣sing believers, and we have as much ground if not more, to look upon them as such, as we have for grown Christians, untill they manifest the contrary; for as for the former we own them as Godly, and admit them into the Church up∣on their own Testimony only in a visible profes∣sion, which may be deceitful; but the Infants of Believers are taken into Covenant with their Parents, and are visible Church-Members, and hereby come to have right to Baptism. For the two former, we have an express Di∣vine Testimony, and that they were once ac∣counted such, and the Covenant being the same as to the essential spiritual priviledges of it, none of which can be made appear to be repealed; It will follow that Believers Children must not be denyed the sign and seal of the Covenant, they having altogether as warrantable a Right there∣unto as grown Christians or Believers. This is Bu∣cers arguing on Mat. 19.13, 14.Si jam ad Ecclesiam pertinent, &c. Cur eis signum Baptismi, quo in Ecclesiam Christi, qui ad eam pertinent, recipi solent, negaremus? Bucer an Mat. 19.13, 14.
Let us now hear what is said to the con∣trary, in what follows. He conceives the seed of Believers have no right to Bap∣tism; Why? Because, (saith he) Though the Jews had right to circumcision, as Abrahams natural seed under the old Testament, yet this would not serve the turn under the new, Mat. 3.9. John Baptist dis∣chargeth them of that priviledge (of Abrahams Natural Seed) that admitted into the Old Church, from any such right in the new. Think not to say that ye have Abraham to your Father, that ye are the Children of a Godly Parent, That which serv'd their turn under Moses, would not avail under Christ. Nothing now but the fruits of Repen∣tance give right to the Bapisme of repentance, &c. And must we take all this for Gospel? We shall upon examination find no weight in it, and nothing prejudicial to the Baptizing the children of Believers. For 1. Let it be considered, that these Jews to whom John spake were to come under a New Administration of the Covenant, and the first subjects of this Administration must be persons able to give an account of their faith and repen∣tance, and Christ the Messiah was now come who was the chief blessing of the Covenant, yea the substance of it; and therefore 'twas necessary that as these Jews relyed on the Covenant of Abraham, so they should hold forth their rely∣ance on Christ in whom the Covenant was con∣firmed
to them and their seed.Cottons Dialogue of Childrens Baptism. p. 130. For as Mr. Cotton ob∣serves, The Axe was laid to the Root of the Tree, even to the stock of Abraham, and all the Branches that grew upon it, and were ingrafted into it, so that now if they brought not forth this good fruit, to believe in Christ who was then come (whom the Jews generally reje∣cted as an Impostor) they and their children were cut off from the Covenant of Abraham, and must say no more, We have Abraham to our Fa∣ther, but if they held forth Repentance and Faith in Christ, then the Covenant that was made to them and to their Children before, did still continue to them and to their children; and thats the ground and meaning of Peters exhor∣tation, Act. 2.38, 39. Repent and be Baptized e∣very one of you in the Name of the Lord, for the pro∣mise is to you, &c. Now what prejudice can this be to the Baptisme of Believers Infants, who are admitted in the right of their Parents, laying hold on the Covenant for themselves and their seed, now under the new Administration, as Members of the Church of Christ and in Cove∣nant with God. 2. Neither will we take the Authors word, for what follows, — Nothing now but fruit meet for Repentance gives right to Baptisme, without some qualification. For first, I de∣mand what fruit of Repentance John saw in that great multitude which he then Baptized, viz. Je∣rusalem, Judea, and all the Regions round a∣bout Jordan, ver. 5. which could not be less
then some thousands of whom he could have no cognizance, as to their fruits of repentance. 2. I farther demand whether he could judge this great multitude which were strangers to him to be all the Spiritual seed of Abraham? And since the Author observes from Johns words, they had no right to Baptism from being Abrahams natu∣ral seed, neither could he look upon them all as the spiritual seed; let him tell us on what ac∣count he baptized them? 3. It is like he will tell us they confessed their sins, ver. 6. and so were Baptized. But will any man think they did all do so, or is it said he baptized no other but such? It will be hard for any man to prove that John did impose this upon them. We find, as Mr. Marshal notes, that he Baptized them, , to Repentance, not , as state in Actual Repentance, and his calling upon them for Repentance, and Preaching the Baptism of Repentance, shews, that this was the lesson which they were all to learn, not that they all manifested it before he Baptized them. For ought we can find from the Text, the Pharisees and Sadduces were Baptized by him, and had they been such Penitents, it had been great un∣charitableness to call them Vipers. We have the Author over-lashing again in the next words, for he lies open every where. No∣thing (saith he) short of the spirits birth can or∣derly admit to Water-birth, and Spiritual ordi∣nances. But since you are not Infallible, let it be sup∣posed you have been mistaken in your judgment, and have baptized a person, which afterward ap∣pears
to be unregenerate. Did you admit him orderly or no? you will say you did, because he was Baptized under the apprehension of being regenerate: The Church lookt upon him as such, and saw nothing to the contrary. Very good, now you are come about to what I would have; and indeed if the New Testament-Church did consist only of the spiritual seed [real God∣ly ones] how abominably is the Ordinance pro∣phaned, when it so happens (as it often doth) that any Hypocrites are Baptized, and when it appears that the Title which they had to Bap∣tisme was but seeming, will it not follow that all that was done in reference to them was a Male-Administration, and Null ab initio;Mr. Blakes Covenant sealed. and as God looks upon them as unbap∣tized (though they have been dipt) so ought the Church to look upon them, and if these Hypocrits shall repent and be converted, are they not bound to offer them∣selves a-fresh to Baptism, and can the Church re∣fuse them, and thus according to the Authors principle there will be need of a Multiplicati∣on of Baptisms. He concludes this Chapter with the sayings of two Doctors as wide in judgement from each other as the two Poles, yet it seems he can make them meet to serve his purpose. The first is Dr. Owen who is much engaged for his Elo∣gy, but nothing at all for wresting his sentences from his intention. 'Tis well known the lear∣ned Dr. (like to the rest of his Brethren of the Congregational way) is a zealous Assertor of In∣fant-Baptism,
and the import of what he says in his Catechisme, is no more then what all Congregational men hold; namely, That the matter of the Church is a Society or Fellowship of visible Saints, and this, according to the sin∣gular dexterity of this Antagonist, (who beats us still with our own Weapons) is found to be point blank against Infant-Baptism. But we shall clear this point in the next Chapter, under which it falls properly to be spoken of. The other Gen∣tleman is Dr. Taylor: we have said enough of him before, how much he was for Infant-Bap∣tism, notwithstanding he plays the Orator, and tells us he will act the part of an Anabaptist, and shew what may be said for them though they are in an Errour; but let us hear what he says, for according to the Author he doth rarely accomo∣date that which he thinks is truth, when as it is only by bestowing a few complements upon an error; we shall seldom meet with such a par∣cel of affected words, delivered in such a strain as did notably fuit with the Genius of the times when he writ them; that is, before the turn of times, when men were high flown, and above Ordinances. The Baptism of Children (saith he) is an outward duty, a work of the Law, a Carnal Ordinance; it makes us adhere to the Letter with∣out regard to the spirit, to be satisfied with sha∣dows, to return to Bondage, to relinquish the my∣steriousness, the substance, the spirituality of the Gospel, &c. This is brave stuff indeed, high towring language; I never met with the like, un∣less it were in Mr. Saltmarsh his shadows flying away, and beams of Glory. And is not the
Baptism of Believers think you bravely acco∣modated with these Rhetorical Flowers? Is there one grain of Logick or Reason in all he saith? And then at last the Doctor doth so well accommodate that which H.D. calls the truth, that he attempts to maintain it by two gross errors delivered in one breath; for, saith he, if the My∣stery goes not before the Symbol, yet it always accompanies it, but never follows it in order of time. But first I would fain know who told the Doctor that Grace always accompanies Bap∣tisme? (for that I take to be the plain English of Mystery and Symbol without the help of a Dictionary.) No doubt he learnt this good Do∣ctrine from the Schoolmen, who maintain, that Baptism conferrs grace: We may know the mind of them all by that pas∣sage of Suarez,Suarez in tertiam par∣tem Thom Tom. 3. quest. 68. Disp. 24. Art. 4. sect. 2. pag. 250. Per Baptis∣mum datur gratia, si aliquis est rectè dispositus ad effectum Baptismi consequendum, in in∣stanti quo receperit Baptismum recipiet gratiam. By Baptisme grace is given, if any man be rightly disposed to receive the effect of Baptisme, in the in∣stant that he receives Baptism he shall receive grace. These men speak as if they were acquainted with the Cabinet Councel of Heaven. They can tell (if you will believe them) the Punctum temporis, the very moment when the spirit will breathe, and quicken a soul. And then again the Doctor is as peremptory in that which fol∣lows — Grace, (saith he) never follows Baptism, which at first found is enough to scare tender souls from medling with it; for if the Doctor
says true, you that are for Dipping upon the pro∣fession of Faith, look well to your selves: for, if you have not grace when you are baptized, you are never like to have it afterward; grace, saith he, never follows it, you are like to live and die graceless. This we deny not but God may (if he please) make use of Baptism to confer grace; but look upon it as a Popish errour, that grace is in sepa∣rably annext to it, and a grosser one that Bap∣tisme confers grace ex opere operato. The An∣cients themselves as highly as they speak of it, did not hold that grace was an inseperable com∣panion of it. Austin lib. 4. contra Donatistas, hath this saying — Quid prodest Baptismum, &c. What profits Baptism to them that receive it, unless they be inwardly changed? And yet though it may not profit at the present, yet it may for the future, and not only the Adult, but Infants too may receive good by it. To conclude this, I shall oppose to what the Doctor speaks in derogation of Infant-Baptism, the judgement of a more Orthodox Divine, viz. Mr. Daniel Rogers, who speaks more wa∣rily thus — I see no cause to deny that even in, and at, and by the Act of Baptisme the Spi∣rit may imprint grace on the soul of an In∣fant.
CHAP. VI. Containing his sixth Argument, That Believers Bap∣tism is the only true Baptism, from the constitu∣tion of the Primitive Churches, which were not (saith he) formed of ignorant Babes, but professing men and women, with an answer there∣unto. LEst we should contend in the dark, it is ne∣cessary we agree upon the terms. By [Con∣stitution] must be meant the essential nature of the primitive Church, and in this I suppose we are one; and whereas he saith these Churches were not formed of ignorant Babes, that is, of those alone; for so we must understand him, in regard of the Antithesis which follows, viz. [but of Men and Women] it is very true, the pri∣mitive Churches were not of this make, that is, formed only of ignorant Babes; for if they had, they would have been but sorry Churches. But whatever sence his words may bear, we know his meaning is, that Children are not included as Church-Members in the Constitution of the New Testament-Churches, these being formed (as he imagines) altogether of professing men and women; which he attempts to prove by Christs Commission, where Teaching goes before Baptizing: By the practice of the Apostles in planting Chur∣ches, and by the Dedications and Contents of the Epistles, &c. To which I reply. 1. That we must mind the Author with what
is before said in the first chapter, namely, That the import of Christs Commission to his Apo∣stles was, de Ecclesia colligendâ, to direct them how, and in what manner they should gather Churches; they being at first sent out to preach only to such as were Aliens in respect of the New Administration: And we acknowledge all persons under such a Circumstance, are to be Taught before they are to be Baptized, or ad∣mitted into the Church. But in Ecclesia col∣lectâ, a Church actually gathered, wherein there are Infants, the Case alters; for such are to be esteemed as Portions of their Parents, as being one with them in a moral account, and belong∣ing to the Church, of which their Parents are Members. And to avoid repetition, the same answer may serve for what is urged from the example and practice of the Apostles, in planting the New Testament-Churches at Jerusalem, Acts 2.41. Samaria, Act. 8.12. Caesarea, Act. 10.47, 48. Philippi, Acts. 16.14. and elsewhere. But I must follow him, having to deal with a sort of people, who take all of theirs, which is not particularly answered, for unanswera∣ble. By which Scriptures (saith he) it manifestly appears, that the New Testament-Churches were formed only of Baptized Believers, wherein we neither find one ignorant Babe, &c. But what demonstration doth he bring to make this good? The Argument (if he had us'd any) must have run in form thus, viz. If we have no examples of any other that were Members of Churches, under the New Testa∣ment-Dispensation,
but professing believers, then no others are to be accounted Church-Members but such: But we have no examples of any other, &c. Ergo. The consequence of the Major proposition is unsound, and the Minor proposition is false. 1. The consequence is not sound; for, sup∣pose it be granted under the Gospel, the Scrip∣ture makes no mention of any childrens being Church-Members: Yet to conclude from thence there were none, is no good argumentation. Be∣cause mention is made of the Apostles taking in professing men and women into the Church, Act. 8.12. to argue thence that therefore the chil∣dren of such belonged not to the Church, is childish arguing. But this is a more Masculine, or Logical way of argumentation, namely, The children of the faithful were Members of the Church before Moses time, before the law, and why not after Moses, now under the Gospel? God took them into his Covenant with their Parents, and for the space of 2000 years, from Abraham to Christ, they were Church-Members, and since Christ is come in the flesh, we find not this gracious Ordinance repealed. There is not the least hint of any such thing in the New Testament, therefore it is not repealed, and the children of Believers continue Members still. 2. The Minor also is false; for we have intima∣tion given us, that the children of Believers are Church-Members, and the Apostle writes to them as such, as appears Eph. 6.1, 2, 3. Col. 3.20. And to make this yet more evident, I shall
produce an Argument or two. The first shall be that of Mr. Baxter, in his plain Scripture-proof of Infant Church-Membership, and Baptism, viz. If God have repealed the ordinance, and revoked this merciful gift of Infants Church-Membership, then it is either in mercy or in justice, either for their good, or for their hurt. But he hath nei∣ther repealed it in mercy for their good, nor in justice for their hurt, Therefore he hath not at all repealed it. The sufficiency of the enumeration in the major Proposition, even Mr. Tombs himself could not deny in that famous dispute at Ke∣derminster; for it must needs be for the good or hurt of Infants that they are put out; and so must needs be in mercy, or justice; for God maketh not such great alterations in his Church and Laws to no end, and of no mo∣ment, but in meer indifferency. The minor, Mr. Baxter proves in both parts: 1. That God hath not repealed this to their hurt in justice: for, if God never revoke his Mercies, nor repeal his Ordinances in justice to the parties hurt, till they first break Covenant with him, and so procure it by their own desert; then he hath not in justice revoked his mercy, to the hurt of those that never broke Covenant with him. But it is certain God never revoketh a mercy in justice to the hurt of any that never broke Covenant with him: Therefore to such he hath not revoked it. 1. That Church-Membership is a mercy, and of the Covenant, is plain: Deut. 29.10, 11, 12. 2. That God doth not in justice revoke such to
any, but Covenant-breakers, may be proved. 1. From the merciful nature, and constant deal∣ing of God, who never casteth off those that cast not off him. 2. From his truth and faith∣fulness, for else we should make God the Cove∣nant-breaker, and not man, which is horrid blasphemy. 3. His Immutability and Constan∣cy, his gifts and calling being without repen∣tance. Now this is also certain that many Jews did believe and not forsake the Covenant of God, even most of the Apostles themselves, and many thousands more: and how then can these or their Infants be put out of the Church in justice to their hurt, who did not first break Co∣venant with God. Mr. Tombs was hard put to it, how to extricate himself from the difficulties of this Argument, although a man of great Dexterity, and a very Oedipus in the contro∣versy, yet it is said he was near to a nè plus ul∣trà, but at length took Sanctuary in this An∣swer; and mark it well, Reader, viz. [That the Ordinance was in mercy repealed for their good.] To which Mr. Baxter gives a neat reply — It can be no mercy, to take away a mercy, except it be to give a greater instead of it: But here is no greater mercy given to Infants instead of Church-membership: Therefore it can be no mercy to them that it is revoked. Other Arguments besides this, that are in∣vincible, may be drawn from that place, Rom. 11.17. A Scripture, which I perceive was too hot for the Authors fingers to meddle with, and therefore he gives not one touch upon it, through∣out all this Treatise of Baptism; whereas he
knows very well, that this is the principal Text that gives clear evidence that Children are yet Church-members with their parents; and if they have a Church-relation, they must not be denyed Baptism: because the same thing which qualifies any persons for Church-membership, qualifies them also for Baptism. But to the Text be∣fore us. There are three things which the words do plainly hold forth. 1. That though the Collective body of the Jews or the generality of that people were bro∣ken off from the Church through unbelief, yet all of them were not broken off; for it is said, [If some of them were broken off] not all of them: for as was said before, most of the Apo∣stles and thousands of Jews believed. 2. The Believing Gentiles are ingrafted in their place — , in amongst them, so Grotius hath it, positus es inter ramos illius arbo∣ris, thou art set amongst the branches of the Tree, referring to those words, if some be broken off. implying that some remained still, and the be∣lieving Gentiles were inoculated amongst them, or  according to Beza and Piscator, pro ipsis, instead of them, or in their place and room, in ramorum defractorum locum, into the place of the branches broken off. 3. The Jews shall be restored again to the Church at the latter end of the world, they shall be in statu quo priùs, become the Church and peo∣ple of God again, as formerly, but in a more glorious manner. From all which issueth three unanswerable Arguments for the Church-mem∣bership
of believers Infants still continued. The first we have already insisted upon, namely, That the same Jewish children which were visibly of the Church immediately before their Parents became Christians at the first, continued to be so after. And the reason is, be∣cause they were not under the dis-churching Cause of as many of the Jews as were discharged, and that was unbelief, of which they could not be guilty by any Act of their own,More of this may be seen in a late Book called A Perswasive to Peace and Ʋnity among Christians. Sold at the Three Pi∣geons in Cornhil. or of their Parents, as imputed to them. Be∣cause of Ʋnbelief, saith S. Paul, they were broken off. If it be said (saith the Author of that ingenious and pious piece, intituled A Perswasive to Peace and Ʋnity) they were dis-church'd in the disso∣lution of the Jewish Church-State in general: it is but an evasion which will not help them: for the fore-cited Text is flatly against them. For all that were not broken off by unbelief, did continue unbroken off; that is, they still kept their place and standing in the Church of God. And therefore to assign any other cause of dis-churching any, than the Scripture hath assigned; or at least, any other without this here assigned, and determined by the Apostle, is too great presumption, and such as will not satisfie an impartial mind; and, as Mr. Baxter enforceth the Argument very strongly, They who kept their Station, kept also their priviledges for themselves, and their children, if they were not broken off, their children were not broken off;
for, as the Infants came in with their Parents, so they are not cast out whilst their Parents conti∣nue, except when they are grown up they cast out themselves by their own personal unbelief. It is not to be conceived, that God should cast out the child that came in for his fathers sake, while the Parents remain in the same Church. 2. Those Jews who were broken off from the Church, their children also being before Mem∣bers, were likewise broken off; therefore it fol∣lows, Believing Gentiles and their children are ingrafted in: for the ingrafting must be propor∣tionable to the breaking off; they succeeding in the place of the former, must enjoy the priviledge they lost. 3. If after the fulness of the Gentiles be come in, the Jews shall be grafted in again, not with a diminution, but addition to their glory, and one part of their glory was, that they and their seed were Gods visible Church, then so shall it be with them when they are called. This we have ver. 26. All Israel shall be saved. Which cannot be understood but from their broken off State, they shall be grafted into the Church again as before; for as Mr. Marshall notes in his Defence of Infant Baptism, pag. 134. At their first grafting in, they and their children were grafted in: at their casting out, they and their children were broken off; and when they shall be taken in again, they and their children shall be taken in. This Mr. Tombs himself grants, that the Jews and their seed were rejected together, yea, and that they shall be taken in together, pag. 66. of his answer. Thus then we argue, if it must be so with them,
it must be so with believing Gentiles now, or else there will be a Schisme between Jew and Gentile in point of priviledges; else there will be too distinct estates in the Christian Churches; one of the Jews, holy Fathers and children; ano∣ther of the Gentiles, who have only personal pri∣viledges, none for their seed, which is an absurd conceit (as Mr. Geree speaks) and would set up or keep up a partition-wall still, contrary to that, Eph. 2. I shall say nothing of other absurdities, which are very numerous, which come from the denying the Church-Membership of the In∣fant seed of believers. The Author adds; It is incongruous to reason and sense to imagine, that little Children are any way concerned as Church Members, either in the Dedications of the Epistles sent to the Churches, or the Epistles themselves, for they were dedicated to those who were called to be Saints, &c. I answer, First, that this is a meer Paralogism; for what if we confess the Apostle directed his Epistles to such as were profest Believers and Saints by calling, were none other but those, or such like them, concern'd in the Epistles? What shall we think of carnal persons and unbelievers, are they unconcerned in them? This minds me with a passage in Mr. Paul's serious Reflections, such another rigid Antipaedobaptist as our Anta∣gonist. He tells us pag. 9. That the Epistles were writ to particular Churches, and that it will be difficult to prove they were also directed to par∣ticular Saints; but saith Bunian, a more moderate man (although an Antipaedobaptist) If this be true, there is vertue indeed, and more then e∣ver
I dreamed of in partaking of Water-Bap∣tisme. For if that shall take away the Epistles, and consequently the whole Bible, from all that are not Baptized (he means, after their mode of dipping, being grown Christians) then are the other Churches and also particular Saints in a ve∣ry deplorable condition. Would to God (saith he of his Brethren) they had learnt more modesty then thus to take from all others,Nè autem existiment Corinthii, hanc Episto∣lam, ita ipsis propriam esse, ut ad alios non per∣tineat; addit, Cumomni∣bus qui invocant nomen Domini nostri Jesus Christi in quovis lo∣co tum ipsorum tum no∣stri. Piscator in locum. and appropriate to themselves, and that for ob∣serving a circumstance, &c. But he better instructs Mr. Paul, and turns him to St. Paul, Rom. 16.5. and to the first Epistle written to Co∣rinth, and shews that the first Epistle of John was wrote to some who at that time were out of Fellowship, that they might have fellowship with the Church, Joh. 1.1, 2, 3, 4. Secondly, we grant the Epistles were directed (some of them) to professing Believers joyn'd in Fellowship, directly and immediately, and to their children (if they had any) and the children of all Believers in succeeding ages, remotely; and the contents of the Epistles concern both the Parents at present, and the children when come to years of discretion. A Father that hath se∣veral children, some grown up to understand∣ing, others Minors or Babes, may direct a Book or Epistle to them all. Whatsoever was writ, was written as much for our instruction as the Primitive Christians, We know Moses and
the Prophets directed what they writ to the Church under that Administration, whereof their Children were a part, and yet they were ignorant Babes, and could not understand any thing or perform any duties. But let it be con∣sidered, that though they understood nothing of those divine Exhortations, yet being within Gods Nursery and School, they were in a near∣er capacity to be taught their duty, than Aliens; and their Parents were injoyned to teach them the Ordinances of God, and God gave this Testi∣mony concerning Abraham, that he knew he would teach his children: and in the New Te∣stament it was the commendation of Lois, that she had instructed Timothy , ab In∣fantia, when he was an Infant or little Child. 3. Whereas the Epistles are inscribed with those Titles [To the Saints, Saints by calling, san∣ctified in Christ Jesus, chosen, adopted] which can∣not (saith our Author) be spoken of Infants. To this it may be thus replyed, 1. Some of those titles may be predicated of children, some not. 2. The Apostle calls the Churches Saints, ei∣ther as looking upon them all as such. i.e. true∣ly regenerate; for this is the famosius significatum of the word Saint: but this could not be, for he pointed at some that were sad Saints in the Church of Corinth and Galatia, or else he calls them Saints Synechdochically, because he jud∣ged
the most of them to be such, and so the whole Communion were judged Saints à Potiori, from the better part. 3. He calls them Saints by calling, i.e. by the preaching of the word, and so we acknowledge Infants are not, and yet the same Apostle calls the Infants of Believers Saints. 1. Cor. 7.14. Else were your Children unclean, but now  they are Saints, or holy: and 'tis the same word the Apostle useth in his inscriptions of the Epi∣stles to the Churches [] [to the Saints:] and being he maketh use of the same word applying it to the children of believers, it hints thus much to us, that in Saint Pauls ac∣count (who was guided by the Spirit of God in what he speaks) the Infant seed of Believers are as much Saints as any who are such by calling. Nor are they only foederally holy, but they may be also inherently sanctified, saith Mr. Tombs in his Examen. They may receive the new birth, and we say more, they must receive it, if saved, Job. 3.5. It is much controverted concerning the Text, whether it intends grown persons, or any persons of whatsoever age or sex; but the Original, if heeded, would put an end to it. , Except one be born, including all ages, all sexes. Children are so polluted in their first birth, that they can never get to Heaven by that, and therefore what the first birth cannot, a second must, saith Dr. Taylor. And if it be obje∣cted, that to the new birth is required dispositi∣ons of our own, which are to be wrought by,
and in them that have the use of Reason: besides that this (as the Learned Doctor speaks) is wholly against the Analogy of à New-birth, in which the person to be born is wholly pas∣sive, and hath put into him the Principle that in time will produce its proper Actions. It is cer∣tain that they can receive the new birth, and are capable of it. The effect of it is salvation, if in∣fants can receive this effect, then also the new∣birth, without which they cannot receive the effect; and he illustrates the point by a Similitude thus. As the reasonable soul and all its faculties are in children, Will and Ʋnderstanding, Passions and Powers of Attraction and Propulasion, yet these fa∣culties do not operate, or come abroad, till time and art, observation and experience have drawn them forth into action. So may the spirit of grace, the principle of Christian life be infused, and yet lie without action, till in its own day it is drawn forth — and then he goes on — Who is he that understands the Spirit so well as to know how or when it is infused, and how it o∣perates in all its periods, and what it is in its Being and proper Nature, or how, or to what purpose God in all varieties does dispense it? Then again, if Nature, saith he, hath in In∣fants an evil principle, which operates when the child can choose, but is all the while within the soul; Why cannot Infants have a good prin∣ciple
through Grace, though it works not till its own season, as well as an evill princi∣ple? 4. Though Infants are uncapable of perform∣ing such duties as are incumbent upon profes∣sing men and women, yet this hinders not but that they may be Church-Members. Pray tell us what duties could those Israelitish Babes per∣form, who notwithstanding their incapacity, were, asis before, Members of the Church with their Parents. And though they answer not all the Characters Christ gives his Adult Disciples (which the Author objects against them) yet they are capable of union to the Church, and Fel∣lowship in the priviledges thereof. They are capable of her prayers and other pious offices, and for whom the Church hath a more special care and obligation of tenderness for their souls, than for others that are Without; and why should this seem strange? since they are Members of the Common-wealth, and of the family, and are capable of union with both estates, and the pri∣viledges thereof, and yet cannot perform obe∣dience to the State and Orders of either. In like sort, Infants are admitted Tenants, but the Fealty or Homage is respited till they are of age. 5. Lastly, Christ himself (as Mr. Baxter notes) was head of the Church, according to his humane nature in his infancy, and this proves that the nonage of Infants makes them
not uncapable of being Members. And let a∣ny judge whether it be his will that no Infants should be Members. For my part, saith he, when I consider that Infant State of Christ our head, and the honour done to him therein, it strongly perswades me that they know not his will, who say they will not have Infants to be visible Members. He farther Objects the Church of England, who in their 19th. Artiele do acknowledge that the visible Church is a number of Christians by profession. This is down right Mr. Tombs's Examen, part. 3. pag. 41. only Tombes hath more charity for the Infants of Believers, though not without some contradiction. For he there acknowledg∣eth that in facie Ecclesiae visibilis, Infants of be∣lievers are to be accounted Gods, to belong to his Family and Church, and not the Devils; And what do any of us say more? But mark Reader how Mr. Tombs doth esteem them such; why, saith he, it is so, as being in a near possibility of being Members of the Church of God, by an act of opinion grounded on probable hopes for the fu∣ture. But to make them actual members of the visible Church is to overthrow the definitions of the visible Church, that Protestant writers give, particularly the Church of England, Art. 19. To which Mr. Marshall answers, If overthrows it not at all for they all include the Infants of such Professors; as Infants Male and Female
too (least you say that Circumcision made them Members:) I add also saith he, Baptisme now (as well as Circumcision of old) is a real, though implicite profession of the Christian Faith. Next we have Dr. Owen (whom he cites no less than four times in what follows in this Chapter) whose judgement is sufficiently known to be against our Opposites. And notwithstan∣ding the misinterpretation the Author puts upon some passages in the Doctors Catechisme, we have a particular account of his judgment in Print, in a Book called, A Declaration of the Faith and Order owned and practised in the Con∣gregational Churches agreed upon and consented un∣to by their Elders and Messengers in their meeting at the Savoy, Octob. 12. 1658. where to my knowledge he was present, and the principal man of that Assembly, and concerning the point be∣fore us, we have it chap, 29. Art. 4. thus ex∣prest, viz. Not only those that do actually profess Faith in and obedience unto Christ, but also the Infants of one or both believing Parents are to be Baptized, and those only. And in complyance herewith, we have the judgment of the Synod of Elders Assembled at Boston in New-England, appointed by the Court, 1662. who strongly maintain by several Arguments in that printed piece, That the Insant Seed of Believers are Church-Members, and that being according to Scripture, Members of the visible Church, they are consequently the Subjects of Baptism.
See also the Presbyterian judgement upon the point in the larger Catechisme of the Assembly of Divines. Baptisme, say they, is not to be ad∣ministred to any that are out of the visible Church, and so strangers to the Covenant of pro∣mise, till they profess their Faith in Christ, and obdeience to him. But Infants descending from Parents, either both or but one of them professing Faith in Christ and obedience to him, are in that respect within the Covenant, and to be Baptized. we see here who they take to be of the vi∣sible Church, and within the Covenant, and to be baptized. As for the Authority of particular Authors we have them on our side in great abundance. Piscator hath it thus on the 28. of Matthew; Porrò ad Ecclesiam pertinent non solùm adulti, fidem profitentes, sed etiam ipsorum liberi; Not only grown persons who profess the Faith ap∣pertain to the Church, but also their In∣fants. Theodore Beza in his Absters, Cat. Heshuii pag. 333. hath this passage — Meritò arbi∣tramur Infantes fidelium in peculio domini cen∣seri; We rightly judge the Infants of the faithful to be of the Lords Flock; and he speaks of them there before Baptisme. And in our Margent Bible we have this Note upon the first of Corinthians 7.14. They that are born of either of the Parents faithful, are also
counted Members of Christs Church, because of the Promise, Act. 2.39. Peter Martyr. loc Commun. cl. 4. c. 8. p. 821, 823. Non excludimus eos [Infantes] ab Ecclesia, sed ut ejus partes amplectimur, &c. We exclude not Infants from the Church, but imbrace them as parts. John Calvin, (to whom we should have gi∣ven precedency) upon Acts 22.16. [Eos qui fi∣de in Ecclesiam Dei ingressi sunt videmus, cum sua sobole in Christi Membris, &c.] The Episcopal Divines fall in with the rest, I will name but one, instàr omnium, and that is the famous Doctor Ʋsher in his Body of Divini∣ty, pag. 415. The outward Elements (saith he) are dispensed to all who make an outward profes∣sion of the Gospel; for Infants, their being born in the Church is instead of an outward profession, &c. Lastly, the Author is at Mr. Baxter again, quoting something out of his tenth Argument to Mr. Blake, as if he had intended those words against Infants Church-Membership, when he clears himself so fully in the point, as when he stated the Thesis in the said Book of Dis∣putations, and hath written particularly a large piece whose Title is Plain Scripture-proof of In∣fants Church-Membership and Baptism.
To conclude this, I cannot but pitty the Au∣thor, because of that self-conceited scornful Ge∣nius that appears in what follows, altogether unbecoming a Christian; and I think all modest and sober spirits, cannot but be extreamly scandalized to see a man (pretending to be for the truth of Christ) so proudly to trample upon all that differ from him. Surely he must needs be furnisht with more than an ordina∣ry measure of self-conceit, that doth so Magi∣sterially condemn not only the Ancients, but those of the Protestant Reformation of latter days, sparing none, neither Prelate, Presbyter, nor Independent. Have patience Reader, and thou shalt hear a little of it. How childishly ridiculous it was in those first Inventors of Baptism, for six hundred years, &c. Have a care Sir, since you swell at this rate least you burst. Austin tells you Ecclesia sem∣per habuit semper tenuit, The Church always had it, always held Infant Baptisme. And Doctor Taylor, a person whom you seem to honour much, says there is no Record extant of any Church in the World, that from the Apostles days in∣clusively to this very day, ever refused to bap∣tize children, excepting of late amongst your selves.
So well to observe the Order, [viz. first to Baptize, and then to Com∣municate] and yet so miserably to miss it in the Subjects, apply∣ing the Spiritual Ordinances to ignorant Babes. This of the six hundred years giving the Communion to Infants, he hath taken from Master Tombes his sixth Argument against Infant-Baptisme, Exercitation, pag. 29. for there it is, and Tombes as is conceived took it up from Maldonate the Jesuite, who reports that the giving of the Com∣munion to Infants continued six hun∣dred years in the Church. But Master Geree well òbserves, that is not, nor ought to be taken of the first six hundred years, for it appears. by Maldonate's expression, calling it Sententiam, the opinion of Augustin and Pope Innocent, that it had, if not its rise, yet its force to become common from them. Not only Pro∣testants but Papists themselves con∣demn that of communicating Infants
as an errour, yea (as I remember) the Councel of Trent it self. And yet Doctor Taylor doth profess in his discourse of Baptizing the Infants of Believers; that, page 59. certainly there is infinitely more reason why Infants may be communicated then why they may not be Baptized. The Protestant Reformers are more blind, and do worse in his opinion then those who gave Infants the Lords Supper — And how much worse, saith he, in the Protestant Reformers, that so lamentalby miss it, both in the due Order and right Sub∣jects also, which the Prelate and Presbyter doe in admitting chil∣dren to Baptism and Membership, but not to the Supper? A little more modestly would do the Author no hurt, and let him know, that neither their Baptism or Church-Membership, are inconsistent with the Word, but so is Infant-Com∣munion
, not only because God re∣quires a particular qualification to the Ordinance which Infants are not capable of, namely, the exercise of actual grace in examination, discern∣ing the Lords Body, and remembring the death of Christ; but because they are not capable in any certain way of the Elements used in that Sacra∣ment, as to take and eat the Bread, and drink Wine. Lastly, this Hagio-Mastix lasheth the Independents, which do worse than all the rest, and doth more grosly erre in point of Order, in admitting them to Baptism, but neither to Membership nor the Supper. But I find the Proverb is true, Bernardus non videt omnia, even that great Doctor called Saint Bernard, is ignorant of some things. Wherefore I crave leave of the Au∣thor tó tell him he is ignorant of the grounds or principles by which the Independents walk. And for his
better information I refer him to Doctor Nathaniel Holmes his Answer to Mr. Tombes his Exercitation and Examen, where he shall find the In∣dependents Judgment jump with Master Jesseys, in his discourse upon Romans 14.1. you have it reprin∣ted at the end of Master Bunians last piece in answer to a Book entituled, Some serious Reflections on that part of Master Bunyans Confession of Faith, touching Church-Communion with unbap∣tized Believers. Consider saith Master Jessey, whe∣ther such a practice hath a command, or example, that persons must be joyned into Church-Fellowship by Water-Baptism; For John Baptized many, yet he did not Baptize some into one Church and some into ano∣ther, nor all into one [particular] Church. And then afterward into what Church did Philip Baptize the Eunuch, or the Apostle, the Jay∣lor and his house? This he speaks in opposition to those who hold that a particular Church is consti∣tuted
by Baptism, and formally u∣nited as Master K. did many years since in his answer to Doctor B. and is no changeling, as appears by his Epistle to Master Pauls sorry Refle∣ctions, lately Printed. So Master Tombes of old in his sixth Argu∣ment, Exercitat. where he inveighs against the Independents, as the Au∣thor doth here; and saith, That by Baptism a person is exhibited a Mem∣ber of Christ and that Church. To which Doctor Holmes an Indepen∣dent Pastor makes this reply, — viz. But what Church doth Master Tombes mean? If he means of the U∣niversal Church I yield, that he is ex∣hibited a visible Christian. But if he means a Member of any particular rightly constituted Church, according to the platform of those in the New Testament and ancient antiquity, I altogether deny it, for these rea∣sons. 1. Those Baptized, Matthew 3. were in no particular Christian Church, there being none gather∣ed
till a good while after that Christ had given the Holy Spirit to the Dis∣ciples. 2. Cornelius his, and the Jaylors Families, after the gathering of Churches were not by that num∣bred to any particular Churches, or thereby made particular Churches that we read. Now that which ex∣ists afore, or after a thing without that thing, cannot be the form of that thing. 3. That which is common cannot be proper and peculiar: But Baptism is common, to make men only visible Christians in General; Therefore it is not proper and peculiar to make them of this or that particular Church, And then he farther adds, therefore though Godly men or Infants have been Baptized, yet the Churches think according to Scripture, there must be somewhat more expressed to make such to own this or that Preaching Officer, to be their Pastor or Teacher, Whom they must obey in
the Lord, and have in singular respect for the works sake, Heb. 13. And to cause the Minister to own them as his Flock, Acts 20. if he mean not to take upon him a power Apostolical for Latitude, to ex∣tend to all Bapti∣zed one.Doctor Homes's answer to Ma∣ster Tombes. So page 193. The same Au∣thor saith, several Churches of us do hold, that we may Baptize them [the Infants of the Godly] though neither of their Parents be of our particular Churches, Baptism being but as we conceive an Admission into the Universal visible Church. We shall add for a con∣clusion, That as Baptism is no actual admission into the Communion of a particular Church, as before appears in the examples of the Eunuch, Corne∣lius, &c. who were Baptized without any relation to a particular Church. 2. It is into Christ, and so into the priviledges of the Body of Christ in general. No mention being made in Baptism of any restraint to this or that particular Church. 3. One act
of Communion in the Lords Supper, doth not state a person admitted as a Member of that particular Church; no more doth Baptism, which is but one act of Communion. 4. By Baptism a person being ex∣hibited a Member of Christ, and of the Church in general, and so conse∣quently to all the priviledges of Christ, whereof Church-Communion is one: it follows that when a Child is Baptized, he is thereby acknow∣ledged or declared to have a right to Church Communion in particular, [that is, in breaking bread with a par∣ticular Church] when he becomes capable thereof. For, Omne Ʋniver∣sale continet particulare, Every general includes all the particulars. Nor can any particular Church deny it, when such a one actually desires admittance into her, and undertakes to walk in it in performance of all duties, as a Member thereof, provided he be free from scandal, and visible crimes com∣mitted since his Baptism to the time of his desired admittance: for what∣soever
may be just ground to cast out of Church-Fellowship and Communi∣on, is also sufficient to keep him out that was never in.
CHAP. VII. The Authors Quotations out of the Mag∣deburgensian History corrected and re∣ctified, wherein is farther shewn his Prae∣varication, in relating some things par∣tially, others falsly, and for the most part contrary to the intention of the Writers. HE begins thus; The Magdeburgen∣ses in their Excellent History, do tell us, that as to the Business of Baptism in the first Century, they find only the Adult or Aged whether Jews or Gentiles that were Bapti∣zed, and give instances in the 2d, 8th, 10th, 16th, 19th, Chapters of the Acts, and have no Examples of Infants being Baptized. Cent. 1 Lib. 2. Pag. 496. 1 first In examining this Cen∣tury,Ʋt Christus Infan∣tes ad se venre jussit, ita nec Apostoli eos excluserunt a Baptis∣mo & quidem dum Baptismus circum∣cisioni aequiparat Paulus, Colos. 2. a∣perte indicat, etiam Infantes per Baptis∣mum Ecclesiae Dei esse inserendos sicut in veteri Testamen∣to Infantes circum∣cidi oportebat, ut in Dei faedere essent. Cent. 1 L. 2. C. 4. P. 354. Baptizatos esse aedultos, tum Judae∣os tum Gentes, Ex∣emplae probant. Infantibus Bap∣tizatis Exempla quidem annotata non leguntur, sed Origenes, & Cypri∣anus, & alii Patres autores sunt Aposto∣lorum etiam tempo∣re Infantes Bapti∣zatos esse, Cen. 1. L. 2. C. 9. P. 496. I find Lib. 2. Chap. 4. Pag. 354. that touching Baptism they say, that as Christ com∣manded Infants to come unto him, so the Apostles after∣ward did not exclude them from Baptism: and truly since Baptism is compared by Paul
to Circumcision, Col. 2. it plainly shews that Infants are to be admitted to the Church by Baptism, as in the Old Testament they were by Circumcision. 2 In Century the first Lib. 2. Cap. 6. Pag. 496. which is the place the Author refers un∣to, they do not say, that the Apostles Baptized only the A∣dult or Aged, but only this; We have Examples of Adult persons both Jews and Genti∣les that were Baptized-Farther they say concerning Infants, we have no particular notice given us, or Examples that they were Baptized; yet pre∣sently add, that Origen and Cy∣prian and others of the Fathers that lived near the Apostles, do affirm that even in the Apostles times Infants were Baptized. But let it be sup∣posed that they did not Baptize any Infant, yet it follows not that it is unlawful for us to Baptize them, because they did not; for (as Dr. Taylor says, whom the Author so much admires,) a Ne∣gative Argument as to matter of fact cannot con∣clude; and therefore supposing that it be not inti∣mated that the Apostles did Baptize Infants, it fol∣lows not that they might not, or that the Church may not. The words and deeds of Christ are infi∣nite; and the Acts of the Apostles we may sup∣pose the same in their proportion: And therefore
what they did not is no rule to us, unless they did it not because they were forbidden. 3. Moreover the Magdeburgenses speaking of the subject of Baptism, answer an Objection which might be made against Infant-Baptism, Cent. 1. Lib. 1. Cap. 4. Pag. 154. Whereas it is said they were Baptized in Jordan confessing their Sins, Mat. 3. and Iohn Preached the Baptism of Repentance, Mark. 1. and Luk. 3. therefore only they that repent are to be Baptized (which is the sum of all our adversaries can say;) To this Objection they thus reply; such Confession was necessary from those Adult Persons (being as be∣fore the first Subjects of the Ordinances.) And then they come to state the Question; An sint Infantes quo{que} Baptizandi, are Infants also to be Baptized? Which they hold affirmatively, gi∣ving several Arguments for it, one of which is grounded upon Matt. 19 viz. They to whom the Promise of the Kingdom of Heaven doth be∣long, to them belongs the Ceremony or Seal of the Promise. And then they roundly tell us, that although the Apostles (before they were rectius edocti, better learned) would have kept Infants from Christs Benediction; yet being so severely rebuked by Christ, and guided or directed by his Spirit, they did (say they sine dubio) without all doubt Baptize them: informing us again, that the Fathers who lived near to the Apostles, do witness that the Practice of Infant-Baptism was derived from the Apostles, and transmitted to Posterity. Cent 1. Lib. 1. Cap. 4. Pag. 153. 4. The Author fathers that upon the Century-Writers, which they speak not. They (saith he)
tell us, that the Custom of Dipping the whole Body in Water was changed into Sprinkling a little Water in the face, whereas there is not the least hint of this matter in this Century, nor the following; but they tell us that the word [] signifies abluo, luo, i.e. to Wash, and that the Christian Baptism was taken a judaica lotione, from the Jewish Baptism, of which the Apostle speaks Heb. 9, 10.  i.e. Divers Baptisms, it is rendred Washings, and these Bap∣tisms we know, were not Dippings. Moses in the Ceremonial Law did not prescribe different kind of Dippings, though he did several kind of Washings, or Baptisms as it is in the Original. CENT. II. HE saith, the Magdeburgenses tell us, that they find nothing in this Century different from the former, that is in reference to Baptism: And that they make mention of Justin Martyr's words, in his Apology to Antoninus Pius the Emperour, which are repeated as we have it translated by Mr. Baxter in his Saints Rest. The import of which is only to shew what order they took with Pagans, upon their conversion to the Christian Faith, before they were admitted to the Sacraments. And although this be wide of the matter, and insignificant to the Question under debate, which is about Baptizing the In∣fants of Believers, yet this will serve well enough to blind an ignorant Reader. And as it this were some great matter, he glories in it, and concludes
with a jeer. They (saith he) that shall consider the manner that Christians, (he should have said Heathens) were admitted into the Churches in those dayes can hardly, I presume pick out any good, warranties for Infant Church-Membership or Baptism, out of the same; to which there needs no more to say, than this even just as much as he can pick out from thence against it. Nor do I see any reason he hath to pick a quarrel with our Practice, from any thing in that Fathers Apologie, who, (as Mr. Baxter notes) giveth such hints, by which his Judgment and the Practice of the Church in those days may be discerned to be for it, though we cannot expect that he should speak expresly to the point, both because he is brief, and treateth on other Theams, to which this did not belong, and because the Church then living among Heathens, had so much to do in convert∣ing and Baptizing the Aged, that they had little occasion to treat about Children; especially it being a point not controverted, but taken for granted by the Christians, who knew God's dea∣ling with the Jewish Church, that Children were Members with the Converted Parents; especially when the very Gentiles Children were members before Christ: With more to this purpose. Plain Scripture-proof, Pag. 155.
CENT. III. IN this Century (saith the Author) they tell us the Rites of Baptism in the Asiatick Churches con∣tinue the same as before, but concerning the Afri∣can Churches they give some account of great Corrup∣tion, creeping into the Church, as to Subject, Time, Manner and Ceremonies. Cent. 3. Cap. 6. Pag. 123, 124, 125. They do indeed charge this Age with corrup∣tion as to the Time and Manner of administring Baptism; but not a word in derogation of In∣fants being the Subject of it; and 'tis strange they should have reckoned that a corrupt innova∣tion, which they had a little before so well main∣tained for a Truth. They tell us indeed that Ter∣tullian in this Age, opposed himself to some that Asserted Infant-Baptism, affirming that the Adult were the only proper Subjects: But how weakly he doth it may be seen afterward, when we come to examine the witnesses, of which Tertullian is the Van; and as Estius and Junius conceive with others, the said Father intends only those Infants [quorum Parentes] whose Parents were Infidels, or if he meant the Children of Christians, he speaks nothing absolutely against their Baptizing: For his Words are [Cunctatio utilior] it is more profi∣table to defer their Baptism, as it was also best in his opinion for young men that were [Innupti] unmarried,Quin & innuptie Baptismum procra∣stinandum art esse, quia eis praeparata est tentatio. Magde burg. Cent. 3. so to do; and it was his advice
to young Widows to forbear Baptism, until the lust of con∣cupiscence was quite extin∣guished. Is not this good Doctrine think you? yet this is the man (as the Author saith) who op∣posed Infant-Baptism, affirming that the Adult were the only proper Subjects; yet it seems not all they neither: for he advised all unmarried per∣sons to delay Baptism, not sparing young-Maids, and that upon a very corrupt ground. What sport would my Antagonist have made with this man, and how much would he have disparaged him had we brought him in for a witness on our side. One would think the more temptation any state is Subject to, the more doth it stand in need of helps, especially such as lay engagements on us to holiness, and may be a means to convey it. But Tertullian was very corrupt and superstiti∣ous, and turned Montanist, when he wrote his Book of Baptism; and shews himself to be some∣what neer the judgment of the Clinici, who, as Dr. Hammond notes, would not be Baptized till their Death-Beds; and the reason was, because being to be Baptized but once, and attributing so extream∣ly much to that Ceremony, and hoping so little for pardon of sin from any other instrument, they durst not be Baptized too early, lest they should sin again, and have no remedy. And the defer∣ring Baptism till thirty or fourty years old, was a spice of this fancy; but then they that did so, were the most impatient of any to miss Baptism, when they thought they were near their last and would let no Christian Infant die without that Viand; and so doing what they did upon a score
so contrary to the Anabaptists, it is strange  should be producible in favour of them, as he tells Dr. Taylor. But to return to the Magdeburgenses, who do indeed inform us, that in this Age the Doctrine of Baptism began to be defiled with Ceremonies, without any reflection upon Infant-Baptism, and 'tis very well known that Tertullian himself was the man that introduced that filthy greasy one, of anointing the Baptized, which he borrowed from the Montanists. They also tell us that in this Age [Baptismus Infantibus datur] Infants were Bapti∣zed, and cite Origen in his 8th. Homily upon Le∣viticus affirming that Baptism is to be given to In∣fants, [secundum Ecclesiae Observantiam] accor∣ding to the custom of the Church; adding also another passage of his upon the 14th of Luke, to the same purpose. Cent. 3. Cap. 4. Pag. 57. Moreover they give us the Testimony of Cyprian in his 4th Book,Cyprianus L. 4. E∣pist. 7. Recte dispu∣tat, Baptismum va∣lere sive aqua per∣fundantur, sive to∣ti immergantur qui Baptizantur. and 7th Epistle, and approve his arguing, that Bap∣tism is valid, whether it be by Immersion or Sprinkling, for these two Reasons: First, Because they signify one and the same thing: idem sit aspersio quod Lavacrum. Sprink∣ling holding forth the Mystery, as well as Dipping according to that in Ezek. 36. I will Sprinkle you with Water. Secondly, Because they that were sprinkled in their Beds, (as sick Persons were in those days) ought not to be rebaptized: It seems by the way Sprinkling is of ancient date. They tell us farther
that Cyprian in his 3d Book, 8th. Epistle, hath this Argument for Infant-Baptism, viz Infantes Circumcidebantur, ergo Baptizandi, Infants were Circumcised, therefore they may be Baptized. Cent. 3. Cap. 4. P. 57. Which passage may shame the Author and his party, who usually object that Tradition is the main Argument, which we take up in defect of others, to justify our Practice, and that this is all the ancient Fa∣thers say for it, in want of Scripture-ground. Lastly, The Magdeburgenses wonder at Ter∣tullian's Simplicity, for he held (say they) Miram Opini∣onem,Se ntit Tertullia∣nus mirâ Opinione. &c. a strange Opinion, that Children should not suddenly be Baptized; and then set down his reasons in opposition to those words, Math. 19.Veniant dum Ado∣lescunt veniant dum discunt, dum quo ve∣niunt, docentur. Fiant Christiani cum Christum nosse potuerint. Quid festinat innocens ae∣tas ad remissionem peccatorum. &c. Suffer little Chil∣dren to come to me, and forbid them not. viz. Let them come (saith Tertullian) when they grow elder, when they learn, when they are taught, when they come; according to which Dotage the Disciples did wise∣ly in forbidding Children to come, and Christ did weakly in rebuking them for so doing, and inviting them to come. What follows is fetcht from Mr. Baxter concerning O∣rigen and Cyprian, that in the Primitive times none were Baptized without express covenan∣ting, &c. is still meant of Aliens, so is that of Origen's being a Teacher of the Disciples at Alex∣andria, and others that succeeded him in that
work: so that to bring instances of this Nature is but trifling, and not to the question before us; yet we cannot but observe the Author's humor, who, when we quote any thing for In∣fants Baptism out of the works of those Fathers, he brands it for spurious, but when he pleaseth to make use of any of their sayings, which he would have interpreted against the same, then they are authentique, and must pass for current. CENT. IV. HIS discourse upon this Century is veryin∣jurious to the Magdeburgenses, who have not a word of very many things which he fa∣thers on them; as First, That it was the universal Practice of this Age, to Baptize the Adult upon Profession of Faith; as if Infants had been excluded, for so we are to understand him, or else he speaks nothing: where∣fore I desire the Reader to observe what the Cen∣tury-Writers speak concerning the matter, and I shall give him a just account thereof. We have before shewn (say they) out of Cy∣prian and Origen,Infantum Bap∣tismum in Ecclesiis Africanis in usu fu∣isse supra ex Cypriano & Origene demon∣stratum est, hoc vero seculo eundem du∣rasse ex Athanasii questione 124. Con∣stat. that Bapti∣zing of Children was in use in the African Churches, and that the same continued in this Age is evident from the 124th Question of Athanasius. Be∣sides Nazianzen (speaking of the Churches of Asia) saith, that Infants ought to be Bap∣tized
in case of danger of death,De Asianis Eccle∣siis Nazianzenus loquens Infantes Baptizandes esse ait. and the said Father al∣so grounds it upon Circumci∣sion; but if they were not in eminent danger of death, he advised they should delay Baptism for three years or there-about, till they could be taught some of the Mysteries of Religion. We must look upon this (say the Magdeburgenses) as his peculiar Opi∣nion. Nazian. Orat. 3. in S. Lavacrum. Cent. 4. Cap. 6. Pag. 417. And verily Nazianzen's de∣lay for three years, that they may be taught Mysteries, is a weak conceit; for what can a Child be capable of at that Age? or if he be taught to say something, it is like that of a Parrot with∣out understanding. But the same Gregory Nazi∣anzen in his 40th Oration is for Baptizing Children,. not only in case of danger but ab∣solutely. Hast thou a Young-Child, — let it be Baptized from an Infant, let it be early Consecrated by, or to the Spi∣rit. Secondly, He puts a gross abuse upon the Mag∣deburgenses, in representing them to affirm that all the Eastern Churches did only Baptize the A∣dult, or Aged. We may judge what credit to give him by these following instances. First, he perverts the saying of Athanasius, as if it were directed against Infant-Baptism, when meant only of Infidels, who according to Christs Commission must first be taught, then Baptized.
Athanasius was for Infant-Baptism and it was Pra∣ctised in his days,Athan, ad Antioch. qu. 114. as appears by that passage of his to Antio∣chus 114th Question; Where he resolves a doubt that might arise from the death of Infants, whether they go to Heaven or no. — seeing, saith he, the Lord said, Suffer little Children to come to me, for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven: And the Apo∣stle saith, Now your Children are Holy, it is ma∣nifest, that the Infants of Believers which are Bap∣tized, do as unspotted and faithful enter into the Kingdom. Where mark again how unworthily Antipaedobaptists abuse the Fathers, in saying their strongest Argument for Childrens Baptism is from Tradition, which they fly to for want of Scrip∣ture. Next he cites Hilary, and we are of his mind, that confession and profession is requisite to pre∣cede the Baptizing-Aliens, but what is this to exclude the Infants of Believers from that Ordi∣nance? And whereas he saith the Eastern Churches did only Baptize the Adult, this is abominably false. His first instance is of a saying of Basil contra Eu∣nomium, Lip. 3. Must the Faithful be fealed with Baptism-Faith must needs precede, and go before. And in his Exbortation to Baptism, he saith, that none were to be Baptized but the Ca∣techumens, and those that were duly instructed in the Faith. Now this is sufficient to impose a fallacy u∣pon any Ordinany Reader, that hath no acquain∣tance with that Father, and understands not in
what sense he speaks, who would hot think that this Antient Dr. was against Infant-Baptism, and that no such thing was owned in the Church in his days? Whereas the same Father, in the very next lines to what the Author hath above cited, speaks thus, — What then say you of Infants,Quid vero de In∣fant ibus ais? qui ne{que}, quid gratea quidve sit paend dog∣norunt? num & illos Baptizeious? max∣ime quidem, id{que} no∣bis designat post octa∣vum diem Circum∣cisio illa, &c. which neither know good, nor evil, may we Baptize them? Yea, (saith he) For so we are taught by the Circumcising of Children &c. Hence forward, have a care Reader, how you trust the Authors Quotations, for the palpable abuse done to this Father. The next is Nazianzen, that the Baptized in his time used in the first place to confess their Sins; but I am before hand with them in respect of this Ancient Dr. of the Church, and love not to re∣peat. Nazianzen (saith he) advised that the Baptism of Infants be deferred, quoting it out of Dr. Taylors Liberty of Prophesy. Besides what we have said of Nazianzens judgment, that he dis∣swaded not Infant Baptism as unlawful, but as conceiving delay for three or four Years more ex∣pedient; but if there were Aliquid periouli, any fear of death, then he allowed of it: I shall mind the Reader that when the Learned Dr. Taylor brought in Nazianzen against Infant-Bap∣tism, he personated an Anabaptist; but in his latter discourse you have his Judgment very fully for In∣fant-Baptism confuting his former piece; & parti∣cularly he quotes the following passage out of Na∣zianzen
for Infant-Baptism, viz. What wilt thou say of Children which neither are sensible of the loss nor the grace? shall we Baptize them? yes, by all means in case of urgent danger, for it is better to be Sanctified [i e Baptized] without their knowledg, than to dye without it; for so it hap∣pened to the Circumcised Babes of Israel &c. I conclude this with what Vossius saith of him in his Thesis de Baptismo—non igitur Nazianzenus &c. Nazianzen was not against Infant-Baptism. After him comes Ambrose, who in his 3d Book de Sacramentis. Cap. 2. hath this saying, That the Baptized did not only make confession of his Faith, but was to desire the same. I perceive he is still sick of the old disease, for that this Father speaks of the Pagans, in what order they were taken into the Church, and not in Opposition to the Baptizing Infants needs no other proof, than that he himself was for it. Quia omnis aetas peccato obnoxia, ideo omnis aetas Sacra∣mento idonea. (i.e) Because every Age is Obnoxious to sin, therefore every Age is fit for the Sacra∣ment. There is one or two more, but I will leave them for we have enough of it. After this small Shot, the Author lets fly Ca∣nons and Decrees of Councils, for Baptizing such as were of years of discretion, and were able to rehearse the Articles of the Creed; as also we have an Enumeration of several persons born of Christian Parents, that were not Baptized till they were of Age and able to give account of their Faith.
To which I Reply, first Grant that some Councils were against Infant-Baptism which we shall not yeild) yet if we must go by number of Councils, we shall carry it. He names three which he would have thought to be against Infant-Baptism, and I think I shall not exceed in saying we may name ten times three for it: and mark Reader, he takes the priviledge of citing Councils, but if we do it, they are slighted and condemned for Popish and Superstitious. 2. We conceive those Coun∣cils he names, had also respect to Pagans in their Decrees, and we have good reason for it: because the Canon of Neocaesaria speaks plainly of the Children of such Women as come out from amongst Infidels, being proselyted to the Christi∣an Religion in their Pregnan∣cy, as Mr. Marshal tells Mr. Tombes,This is taken out of Mr. Tombes Exercitation and Examen. when he Objected the same thing. The Author hath taken the whole Story out of him and all the rest upon the matter, which follows in this Century is fetcht from his Exerci∣tation and Examen printed 27. years since, and Answered by that Reverend Divine Mr. Steven Marshal, in his Defence of Infant-Baptism. I would make a parallel betwixt the Author I have to deal with and Tombes, but that it would be tedious, wherefore instead of that I will transcribe the same things out of Tombes, which the Author hath brought again upon the Stage: If the Reader compare them he will find, never two Eggs more alike. Mr. Tombes in his Examen Pag. 10. hath it thus: Grotius (saith he) in his Annotation on Matt.
19.14. adds, That the Canon of the Synod of Neo∣caesaria held in the year 315. determins that a Wo∣man with Child might be Baptized, because the Baptism reached not the fruit of her womb, because in the Confession made in Baptism each ones free choyce is shewed. From which Canon Balsomon and Zonaras do infer, that an Infant cannot be Bapti∣zed, because it hath no power to chase the Confession of Divine Baptism. This is according to what we have in H. D. to a tittle: what impudence then is it to trouble us with this filly and ridiculous Story, when Mr. Marshal proved to Tombes that the inference brought from hence against the Bap∣tism of Believers Children was altogether inva∣lid. For the Canon there speaks of the Chil∣dren of Women come out from among Infidels, and come over to the Christian Faith, during the time they were with Child. For Balsomon saith, such Women as were with Child and come from the Infidels, and what is this to our Question? (saith Mr. Marshal) which is about Children born in the Church of believing Parents; and Balso∣mon the Glossator distinguisheth of Children, some in the womb and some born, for the first (faith he) no man can undertake (he means in Baptism;) and for the other, they answer by such as under∣take for them: which words (as Mr. Marshal ob∣serves) are not mentioned by Mr, Tombes, (for he says no more than what he found in Grotius,) and for the partial relation, he is sharply rebuked for wronging the Truth, and labouring to decei∣ve people, and yet the Author I conflict with persists in the same course.
Next the Author speaks big words, telling us, That in farther Assurance and Confirmation of this great Truth, we have most remarkable Instances of several of the most Eminent persons of this Century, that were not Baptized till Aged, though the Of∣spring of Believing Parents, viz. Bazil, Gregory, Nazianzen, Ambrose, Chrysostom, Austin, Con∣stantine. This also is Mr. Tombes again, Examen p. 9. And that People may not be startled with these great names,Reply Tombes his Examen, P. 9. and be made to think, that Childrens Baptism, was not practised in the Church in those days, wherein they lived, I shall acquaint the Reader out of Mr. Marshal, upon what grounds Christians hereto∣fore deferred their Baptism; namely, sometimes they would do it in imitation of Christ who was not Baptized till about thirty years of Age. Con∣stantine the Great put off his Baptism till he came to the River Jordan, in which Christ was Bap∣tized, some deferred it, till they had contracted a great deal of sin, out of an erroneous conceit, that by Baptism it would be all washed away: Much more we have of this in Marshal's Defence of Infant-Baptism, Pag. 27. Now for the Instances, I find Tombes begins with Constantine, and then comes on Nazianzen, but the Author here ends with Constantine. This argues nevertheless it was taken thence: I shall
trouble my self no further to seek after any other reason why the Baptism of these men was delayed than what Mr. Marshal gives Tombes. For Constantine the Great (though the Son of Helena, who is reported to have been a zealous Christian) not Baptized till he was Aged: it doth not appear that his Mother was a Christian when he was born, and for his Father Constantine, every one knows he was none, though he favoured the Christians. Furthermore, Mr. Marshal conceives the reason why he received not Baptism in his Infancy was thus as follows; viz. Constantine his Fa∣ther, albeit a man of a sweet temper, and tender of his Subjects: first out of the mildness of his nature favoured the Christians (seeing their unblameable Conversation and Faithfulness in all their imploy∣ments) therefore he did not in a hostile way pursue their Religion, as other Emperours did: yea at length he grew to a good esteem of it, especially to∣wards the end of his life: in this time his Son Con∣stantine the Great, lived in Dioclesian his Court, from whence (his life being twice in danger) he sud∣denly escaping, came to his Father then sick, and pre∣sently upon his death was saluted Emperour. These things considered it is no marvel if he were not Baptized in his Infancy, when for ought we read neither of his Parents had then imbraced the Christian Religion: When he was returned at his Father's Death he was thirty years of Age, and whether ever his Father was Baptized, the Story is silent. Neither is Helena her affection to Re∣ligion
in his Infancy related in the Story, though afterward it is often mentioned. Tombes. Nazianzen (saith Tombes for we have to deal with him almost every-where in H. D.  Trea∣tise) was the Son of a Christian Bishop. But how doth that appear (faith Mr. Marshal)? there was a time when he was a Heathen, whether he was Converted before his Son was born, is not ex∣prest: whilst he was young he went with Basil to Athens to be bred in humane Literature, and from thence to Antioch, but not a word is menti∣oned of his being addicted to Christianity: Ha∣ving spent thirty years in the Study of Humane Literature, he returns to his Father; and if his Parents were Christian when he was born, they shewed no good sign of it in sending him to A∣thens to be trained up among Idolatrous Heathens: so it is aquestion whether Bazil's Father was achri∣stian when he sent him likewise to Athens, to be there bred in humane Literature, though after∣ward he became Bishop of Nisen. Tombes. Then for the Story of Chrysostom, 'tis verba∣tim out of Tombes his Examen pag. 9. who saith (out of Grotius upon Matt. 19.) That he was born of Christian Parents and educated by Meletius a Bishop, yet was he not Baptized till past 21 years of age.
It is well replyed by Marshal, That this is taken up purely upon the credit of Grotius, who gives no account from whence he fetcheth the relation; which is the more to be suspected, because the Magdeburgenses speak not a word of it: And the Ecclesiastical Historians, that set forth the place of his Birth and Parentage, and likewise his Call to his Ecclesiastical Dignity, are silent in this, and give not the least hint of his Religion or Bap∣tism. Others speaking of him and of his Parents, say they were both Heathens, and his Father dyed within a very short time of his birth. It appears (saith Mr. Marshal) from his own Writings, that when he was twenty years of Age his Mother was a Christian; but whether Father or Mother were so at his birth is uncertain; and not likely, be∣cause his Education in his younger-time was un∣der Libanius, a great Enemy of the Christians; by which it appears, that it is falsly suggested, that he was Educated by Meletius. Lastly for Austin, (for he is the last we will speak of, and we may judge of the rest by these) he was not Baptized saith Tombes,Tombes Exa∣men, Pag. 14. Examen Pag. till about 30. though Educated as a Christian by his Mother Monica: To which Mr. Marshal thus replys, viz. I will not take upon me to determine what the particular reason was of his not being Baptized in his Infancy, but from hence there is no cause to say that Children of Christi∣ans by profession in that Age were not Baptized in Infancy. For first it must be proved that Austin's Parents were Christians at his Birth; otherwise whatsoever is said of him, is not to the Question.
Austin himself tells us in his Confessons: That when he was [Puer] a Child, he was extream sick like to dye, and he and his Mother were both troubled for not being Baptized, and for his Father, he sayes at that time, he was an Infidel &c. But enough if not too much of this, they that would know the full Story of his Fathers Conversion, may find it in Au∣stin's Confessions Lib. 2. c. 6. And Austin him∣self confesseth he put off his Baptism till about the 30th year of his Age, being poysoned with the Manichean Heresie, in which he continued nine years, Confess. Lib. 3. c. 11. and during which time he saith, he derided Baptism. Reader, I am not willing to make Ostentation of greater skill in History than I have, and therefore know I am beholding to Mr. Marshal who hath made these Relations ready to my hand. After this we have a plausible Story of one Walfridus Strabo an Ecclesiastical Historian, and what is brought from him the Author borrows from his good friend Mr. Tombes: you shall have it in his very words, that you may know where the Author hath been fishing. Tombes in his Ex∣ercitation Printed 1646. Pag. 27. hath it thus.Tombes his Ex∣ercitation, Pag. 27. The words of Walfridus Strabo who lived a∣bout the year 840. in his Book De Rebus Ecclesiasticis Chap. 26. are these: We are also to note, that in the first times the grace of Baptism was wont only to be given to them, who by integrity of body and mind were come to this, that they could know and understand what profit is to be obtained in Baptism, what is to be Confessed and Believed, what lastly is to be observed of them
that are born again in Christ, and confirms it by Au∣stin's own Confession of himself, continuing a Catechu∣menus long afore Baptized: but afterwards Christi∣ans understanding Original Sin ne perirent parvuli [Tombes hath it in Latin, but the Author in En∣glish] and lest Children should perish without any means of Grace, had them Baptized by the Decrees of the Council of Africa, and then adds how God-fathers and God-mothers were invented. To this I Answer, That Strabo is condemned by many Learned men, for a false and heedless Writer, and they have shewn his errors in diverse things. Vossius chargeth him with no small faults in relating matters of Fact. As, First, he said, Austin in his Confessions tells us, he continued a Catechumenus till he was 25 years old. [Tombes mentions not this as knowing Strabo was out in his reckoning:) Now Austin himself tells us in his Confessions, that he was not converted till about the 30th year of his Age; and after that continued a Catechized Person two years, and in the 34th year of his Age, he was Baptized at Mil∣lain by Ambrose. Secondly, whereas he makes as if Infant-Baptism were an Innovation, & not in use in the first times, he goes about to prove it very simply, from Au∣stin's being Baptized at full years: as if Austin's times had been the first times, whereas we have shewn before it was in practice many hundred years before he was born; and Austin himself (that lived many hundred years before Strabo was born), af∣firms, That the Church always had it; always held it. It was a solid Observation of Mr. Geree in his Vin∣diciae paedobaptismi, That if the Antiquity of In∣fant-Baptism
had been dubious amongst the Anci∣ents, surely some of the Latin or Greek Churches that held the delay of Baptism more convenient, and perswaded it, would have been the more per∣swaded against the use of it, from its Novelty, and given at least some hint of that in their Ar∣guings. Thirdly, I observe a pittiful escape in Walfridus Strabo, who saith Infant-Baptism took its rise and foundation afterwards, when Christians came to understand Original Sin; and when was that I pray, doth he think never till Austin's days? I suppose Christians understood this as soon as ever Baptism was enjoyned; the Scripture is so ex∣press touching Original corruption: Nay the very Heathens by the light of Nature knew, that we were Originally depraved, although they could not tell which way it came about, as Du∣plessis largely shews in his Verity of Christian Reli∣gion. This also was shadowed forth to the Jews in Circumcision: In sin was I conceived saith Da∣vid, &c. What a strange imagination then is it in this Writer, That the Baptism of Infants was an Invention found out in Austin's time, to wash away Original Sin, of which Christians till then had been ignorant! It is very true the Fathers were of opinion that it was of use for that, and that long before Austin. They knew Infants were defiled, although they had lived but one day upon Earth as Origen speaks, Hom. 8. in Luk. although Origen mistakes as to the manner how they came to be defiled. For this fancy of Strabo, minds me with another of Origen's, a little more extravagant, who thought Baptism served to wash
away those sins which the Soul was guilty of, whilst it was in some other Body (a Pythagorean fancy,) before it entered into the body of the Child; whence it appears that Origen was not for the Traduction of Original Sin from our Pa∣rents, but a patron of the Pelagian heresy, (after∣ward so called.) Fourthly, Strabo is much out too about his God-fathers and God-mothers, which were in use in the Church many hundred years before Austin was born, even in the 3d Century in Tertullian's days and yet he tells us, they were first invented in Austin's days. Fifthly; Lastly this Srabo doth at last kick down the good pail of Milk, which he before gave our Adversaries; for declaring his own O∣pinion upon the matter he saith, that it was a sign of the growth of Religion after a diligent search) to take up the practice of Infant-Baptism, and amongst other Testimonies citeth the Fathers in general for it, in opposition to the prolonging of Austin's Baptism, till he was Adult: And concludes at last thus — Wise Christians Bap∣tized their Infants, being not as some heretical per∣sons, opposing the Grace of God, and contend that Infants are not to be Baptized. Some others my Antagonist brings, and quotes Authors for persons not Baptized till grown up; which whether true or no, I shall not enquire nor undertake to determine of the reasons why their Baptism was delayed, which very likely may be the same with those before-mentioned, or or o∣ther causes which shake not the Basis, upon which
Infant-Baptism is setled, nor strike at the general Practice of the Church. CENT. V. HE tells us again, That in this Age, Believers Baptism was Asserted, and the grounds thereof by many learned Writers: and here take notice Reader how egregiously he Faulters, for he in∣stanceth only in two, Chrysostom and Austin: the former saying, That the time of Grace and Conver∣sion was the only fit time for Baptism; which was the season the three-thousand were Baptized in the 2d. of the Acts, and the five-thousand afterwards, Acts 4. The latter, that is Austin, in his Book de fide & bonis Operibus, Cap. 6. saith, That none with∣out due Examination, both as to Doctrine and Con∣versation ough to be admitted to Baptism. In these Quotations the Author seems to have forgotten himself; for see what he says in his Treatise Pag. 121. there he gives an account of the Doctors of this Age [Cent. 5.] that approv'd Infant-Baptism, the first is Chrysostom, the words cited by him are these: That Infants ought to be Baptized, as universally received by the Catholick-Church: And again, That which the Church through∣out the World unanimously teacheth and practiseth a∣bout the Baptizing of Children, ought not carelesly to be slighted. Magdeburg. Cent. 5. Pag. 375. Then he instanceth in Austin, who (saith he) was as a great Patron, so a great Defender of In∣fant-Baptism,
in his Contests both against the Donatists and the Pelagians, and the Celestians; and then sets down some passages out of his works for it: so that here we have these Fathers (accor∣ding to the account he gives of them) diametri∣cally opposite to themselves, and how shall we reconcile them? very easily, (even as we may do with the sayings of the rest:) for when they speak of the Baptizing persons after examination as to Doctrine and Conversation, they mean Pagans: and when they Assert Infant-Baptism,The Fathers Re∣conciled. it is in the behalf of the Children of Believers born in the Church. And just as the Author hath served these Fathers, so hath he con∣stantly dealt with Mr. Baxter, in all the Quota∣tions taken from him, concerning a profession of Faith which he maintained as necessary before Baptism, in his Disputation with Mr. Blake; al∣though Mr. Baxter did so cautelously advertise the Reader, that a Profession which he so much insi∣sted upon, was to be understood only in reference to Adult Persons; and that the dispute had no reference at all to the Children of visible Belie∣vers. Let us now for a Conclusion of this Century, hear what the Magdeburgenses say, concerning this Age — Baptisati sunt porrô tum Adulti tum Infantes. that is, both grown Persons and In∣fants were Baptized, Cent. 5. Cap. 6. Pag. 654. And they tell us how they dealt with the Adult in this Age;Ae Adultorum quidem fuit ea con∣ditio, ut prius in Catecheseos parti-bus recte & solidè instituerentur, un∣de ipsis nomen Ca∣techumenorum fuit. namely, First they were rightly and solidly instructed in
the parts of the Catechism, and from hence they were named Catechumenists, of which we have such frequent mention in Ecclesiastical Writers. CENT. VI. IN this Age (saith the Author) The Adult upon Profession of Faith, were Baptized. This is no news: and yet 'tis observable he gives no instance of any such that were Baptized; which if he had, it had been nothing to the purpose; unless he could have proved that in this Age the judgment of the Church had been against Infant-Baptism, which is quite otherwise: for the Magdeburgenses cite this saying of Maxentius, Propterea recentes ab utero parvulos credimus Baptizari, that is: We believe Infants newly born are to be Baptized. The Author is so streightned in this Century, that he knows not well what to say, at length he pitch∣eth upon a speech of Gregory, and would have that interpreted against us. Gregory saith, Lib. 4. c. 26. That a Sermon was used to be preached to those that were to be Baptized to renounce the Pomps &c. This argues something, but it is only that our Antagonist is not yet recovered of his old disease. For this of Gregory is certainly meant of the method the Church then used in Baptizing the newly converted Pagans: for the Magdebur∣genses signify in the same Century Pag. 228. how
Gregory was for Infant-Baptism, by the doubt which he resolved about Abortives. The question there put is this, what becomes of Abortives,Nunquid Abor∣tivi aeternâ requie perfruuntur? do they go to Heaven? they are not born again of Water &c. and so have the guilt of Original Sin lying upon them, (this was the general opinion of those times, that Baptism took away Original Sin): now Gregory he answers it thus, That the Faith alone of others, may be as helpful to them, as Water is to others. Truly Gregory seems to be no very good Testimony, either for or against Infant-Baptism, only we have this advantage, that as to matter of fact it was in use in his days: 'tis strange the Author should pitch upon such a man for a Testimony, but any body will serve the turn, if any thing drops from his pen, that may be wrested against Infant-Baptism. The Magdeburgenses take notice of several un∣sound and ridiculous passages of Gregory; as par∣ticularly what he saith in Cantica Canticorum, viz. — A peccatis omnibus in Baptismo abluimur, that is, The guilt of all our Sins is washed away in Baptism; for certainly (saith he) The Mare Ru∣brum, the Red Sea, was a figure of Baptism: and as Pharaoh and his Host was drowned therein, so are all our sins drowned in Baptism. And 'tis a very sweet saying which the Author cites out of the same place, Cent. 6. Pag. 226. That Bap∣tism is the Divine Fountain. wherein the Faithful have the new Creature brought forth. The Author helps him a little in the Translation, for it is in novam Creaturam regenerantur, are regenerated
into a new Creature; and yet they were accor∣ding to this nonsensical sentence the Faithful be∣fore they were new Creatures. CENT. VII. THe Author begins this Century with the Bra∣carens Council held in Spain, which decreed, That no Adult person but such who had been well in∣structed, and catechised, and duly examined should be Baptized. Cent. 7. Pag. 146. At the reading of which I could not but smile; for it minded me with what I have heard related concerning a certain Thief, who having secretly gotten into a Room, and being by himself, was observed by one not far from him, how earnestly he looked about for something to fasten on, but finding nothing of worth, stoopsdown, and fil∣led his Pookets with Rushes: the Observer come∣ing in upon him unexpectedly, demanded, what he meant; why saith he, only to keep my hand in action. If the Author could have found that it had been decreed in that Council that none should be Baptized without being Catechised &c. this had been ad rem. No body denys but the Adult, or Persons grown up, ought to be duly examined before Baptism. The Magdeburgenses say, it was determined in this Council, that none should be admitted to Baptism (ex Adultis) of Persons grown up; where note, that this Decree hath nothing to do with Children: but is still to be understood of Aliens, newly come over to
Christianity; for it was decreed that for twenty days before Baptism, the Catechumenists should be convened before the Clergy, and learn the Creed. And after the Magdeburgenses have said this, they presently add — Item in sexto Constantinop. C. 2 do. it is ordained, that none shall be Baptized, un∣less he can say the Creed, and Lords-Prayer, (Ex∣ceptis his, qui propter aetatem loqui nondum possunt;) except those who by reason of Age are not able to speak: See here again, Reader, what little integrity there is in this Authors Quotations. He concludes this Century with the relation of one Paulinus, that Baptized in the River, Trent here in England, a great number both of Men and Women at noon-days. Bede L. 2. c. 16. Cent. 7. p. 145. This will be found as little to the purpose as the rest, for nothing can be hence inferred against the Baptism of Believers Children; for Bede him∣self tells us, that at that time the inhabitants of this Island were Pagans; for 'twas when Gregory sent Austin with fourty others from Rome (whereof Paulinus was one) to preach the Gospel;Sic in initio Ec∣clesiae apud Brit∣tannos, ubi jam cito templa non potue∣runt extrui, passim ad Flumina turba Baptizata est. Beda L. 2. Ang. Hist. Cap. 14. & he saith it was when first of all a Christian Church was planted among the Brittains, and be∣fore any Temples were erected, so that they were necessitated to Baptize in Rivers. The Author pretermits all this in silence; if our ad∣versaries did or would but understand, the im∣port of that distinction of Ecclesia Constituenda &
Ecclesia Constituta, that is a Church to be planted, and a Church already planted, we should have no more trouble about this Controversy. CENT. VIII. HE hath not yet done with venerable Bede, for he quotes other passages out of him, but I have no mind to repeat; only reader know, that Bede and we are of one mind about the order of Bap∣tism, in reference to Pagans. Teaching before Baptism (saith he) is rectissimus Ordo, a most right Order, which is intended by him with respect to Pagans; for he declares himself for the Baptism of Believers Children, else what interpretation shall we put upon those words of his cited by the Magdeburgenses, Pag. 223, of this 8th Cent. na∣mely, Christi corpori per Baptismum tota Credentium Soboles adunatur, By Baptism the whole Of-spring of Believers are united to the body of Christ: & sup∣pose Bede had been against Infant-Baptism, yet no body hath any great cause to glory in his Testi∣mony, who in many things was very corrupt: and the Magdeburgenses also take notice of several gross passages of his about Baptism. Cent. 8. Pag. 221. As that in his comment upon the 14th Exod. Pag. 221. Diabolus in Spirituali lavacro, id est, Baptismo, suffocatus est. In Baptism the Devil is choaked, which is not likely unless also his head could be got under water, and kept there long e∣nough; with much more such pittiful stuff there mentioned.
CENT. IX. THe Magdeburgenses acquaint us that in this Century the Baptism of Infants was Asserted, and grounded upon that Text Matth. 19. Suffer little Children to come unto me, and forbid them not; and they tell us of one Hincmarus a Bishop, how sharply he reproved one that was against it: for the Bishop said, that in denying it, he did that Quod nullus unquam Christianorum facere ausus est; Which no Christian ever durst to do. Cent. 9, cap. 4. pag. 140. CENT. X. UNder this Century, in their 6th Chapter Circa ritus Baptismi, about the Rites of Baptism, they have this passage that in this Age tam Insantes quam Adultos Baptizabant, They Baptized both grown Persons and In∣fants.atrini adhibiti etiam sunt. Magd. Cent. 10. p. 293. Cent. 10. pag. 293. Besides, they give instances of several Infants Baptized, and tell us, that God-fathers were in use in this Age, & that they strictly enjoyned, that they look to it, that the Children that were Baptized be instructed in the Christian Faith, when they come (ad sustain et atem) to ripeness of years, Cap. 6. Pag. 292. yet is not the Author ashamed to insinuate as if they had been against Infant-Baptism, even in this Age also. For first, he brings in Auslbertus (the Mag∣deburgenses call him Ausbertus,) and what of him?
Why he hath this expression (which the Author quotes out of the Magdeburgenses) namely, That the Faithful are born, not of Blood, but of God; viz. of the Word of God preached, and of the Baptism of God duly administred, by which Sacraments God's Children are begotten, Cent. 10. pag. 189. Good Doctrine indeed, and much to the pur∣pose; Baptism is one of the Sacraments, and the Word preached another. The next is Smaragdus on Mat. 28.Ordo Baptizandi in Adultis a Smaragdo traditur, say the Magdeburgs. What, saith he? why first, Men are to be taught, (that is, Heathens) after∣ward baptized; That this is his mean∣ing, take his own word for it, pag. 188. where he thus expresseth himself, Little Children are to be baptized, because it is said, Suffer little Children to come unto me, &c. Last of all the Author cites Theophylact, from the Magde∣burgenses, and would fain have it also believed that he was against Infant-Baptism, because of that saying of his, Who∣soever is truly baptized, hath put on Christ, pag. 189. I cannot but think the Author doth wilfully mistake, and sets himself on purpose to blind the Reader; for he cannot but observe the Magdeburgenses quoting that passage of his, on the 15th of Luke, Cent. 10. pag. 190. where Theophylact lays down this Position, That an Infidel or Pagan must needs die in his sins; Why? because he hath not put off the old∣man sacramentally; that is, he hath not been baptized. This Ancient Doctor speaks in that place only of such, and what is this to the Baptism of Believers Children? CENT. XI. HEre Anselm is introduced by him, as if he were against us, because he saith Believers are baptized into the Death of Christ, Cent. 10. pag. 186. I perceive the Author's pulse begins now to beat very low: For the Mag∣deburgenses do in this Century bring in a passage most ex∣press for Infant-Baptism, in the Comment on the third of Matthew, Octavus dies in quo Circumciditur Infans dies est Baptismatis, in quo Neophytus quisque exuitur labe prae generationis. The eighth day, in which the Infant was cir∣cumcised, is the day of Baptism. Also on Rom. 6 Anselm
hath this saying; Profecto & parvuli qui Baptizantur in Christo, &c. pag. 260. They tell us farther, that in this Age they did baptize not only Adult persons, but such as were newly born, pag. 260. and also give instances of divers Chil∣dren baptized in this Age, citing a passage out of Meginhar∣dus de fide, That in this Age Sureties were in use, which an∣swered for the Children. CENT. XII. RƲpert, Lombard, Aquinas, and the rest of the Popish Schoolmen were zealous Asserters of Infant-Baptism; and whatever they speak of Confession or Profession, before it be administred, is meant, as before, of Pagans; and the Magdeburgenses cite divers passages of Lombard, how that Children, although they have no Faith of their own, may be baptized in the right of others Faith that present them to the Ordinance. Johannes Boemus, [the Author mistakes and calls him Bohemius] is indeed of Strabo's mind, and be∣sides these two I may truly say, that from the beginning of the Centuries hitherto, this unfaithful man hath perverted the sayings of all the Authors which he hath quoted; and upon consideration of his carriage herein, I am confident of these two things: First, That never did any Writer more prevaricate, and shew more fashood than he hath done. Secondly, That he would certainly have forborn it, if he had thought any man would have been at the trouble to ex∣amine and search whether he spake truth or not.
PART II. We now come to the Second Part of his Treatise, which is to disprove Infant-Bap∣tism, under this Head, That the Baptizing of Infants is no Ordinance of Jesus Christ. CHAP. I. Containing his first Argument against Infant-Baptism, because there is no Scripture for it; which is in form as followeth. If (saith he) Infant-Baptism had been any Appoint∣ment or Ordinance of Jesus Christ, there would have been some Precept, Command or Example in Scripture to warrant the same; but inasmuch as the Scripture is so wholly silent, there being not one syllable to be found in all the New-Testament about any such Practice, it may well be concluded to be no Ordinance of Jesus Christ. THe Argument consisting of two Branches, must ac∣cordingly be answered in Parts. First then, to that which hath ever been objected by them, there is no Precept or Command; We answer: 1. A thing may be said to be commanded in Scripture two wayes. First, Expresly, or Liter thy and Syllabically, that is, to∣tidem verbis, in to many plain term, or words. Thus we
acknowledg Infant-Baptism is not commanded; it is no∣where said, Go, baptize Infants: if it had, there would have been no controversie. Secondly, A thing may be commanded in Scripture Im∣plicitly, and by good consequence; and what is thus com∣manded, is as valid and obliging, as if it were in so many letters and syllables; and thus we affirm Infant-Baptism is commanded. There are in Scripture clear Grounds and Principles. from whence by just and warrantable Consequen∣ces it may be deducted, that the Children of Believers have right to Baptism; for, if they belong to the Covenant, and are Holy, if they are Members of the visible Church, &c. then they ought to be baptized. So then the Argument a∣gainst our Practice drawn from a want of express Precept, is built upon a false Hypothesis; That no direct Consequences from Scripture are mandatory and obliging, contrary to the Judgment of all Orthodox Divines, and the Method of Christ and his Apostles in their Arguings. Christ proved the Re∣surrection of the Body against the Sadducees not by any ex∣press Text, but by Consequence, Mat. 22.31, 32. So Paul proved the Resurrection of Christ by Consequence, Act. 13.33, 34. 2. There needed no express Command in the New-Testa∣ment that Infants should be signed and sealed by Baptism, when the Covenant is not abolished that took in the Seed with the Parent: as there needs no express Command for the Lord's-Day, or First-Day Sabbath in the New-Testament, because the fourth Commandment for substance is still in force: So there needs no new Command for Baptizing the Infant-seed of Believers, because the Command for sealing such, is for substance still in force. It is also well noted by Mr. Gerce, that there is a great difference between an Ordi∣nance it self, and some particular Circumstance, or Subject to which that Ordinance is to be applied. As for the Ordi∣nance it self the setting up of Baptism as a Sacrament of the Gospel-Covenant renewed by Christ, this requires express warrant in the Word of God; but when we have such warrant for the Ordinance it self, to whomsoever we find by grounds and principles in Scripture that it doth of right belong, there we may apply it, though we want express Command for it, if we have none against it.
3. We farther add what is well argued by some Divines: That if the Children of Believers have a right to be Baptized by the word of Pro∣mise,Mr. Stephens, and Mr. Sydenham. then they have a right to be Bapti∣zed by the word of Command; but the Children of Believers, have a right to be Baptized by the word of Promise: therefore they have a right to be Baptized by the word of Command. Now that Children have a right to be Baptized by the word of Promise, appears from Act. 2.39. For the Promise is made to you and to your Children, &c. The exceptions which the Antipaedobaptists make against this Text shall be removed in its proper place. Now for the other Branch, there is no Example of Infants being baptized; therefore it is no Ordinance of Christ. The Consequence stands upon a lame Leg: for, as is be∣fore shewn, a negative Argument in matters of Fact is not valid. For Christ did many things that were not recorded, and so did the Apostles, whereof this was one for ought we know, the Baptizing Infants: and it is the more probable upon a twofold account; First, because we find such frequent mention of their Baptizing whole Families, as Stephanus and his houshold, Lydia and her houshold, and divers others, as soon as we read of the head of the Family to believe, the whole houshold was baptized. As when Abraham believed, he and his whole Family were circumcised; and so when the Head of a Family became a Proselyte, ordinarily He and His were Circumcised. Now in so many Families. as were baptized, it cannot rationally be supposed that there were no Children, and if there were any, they were baptized; for they are a part of the Family or Hous∣hold. And secondly, Because we never read in Scripture of any Children of Believing Parents who were Baptized af∣terwards. Our Opposits will not believe the Apostles bap∣tized Children, because we can give no particular instan∣ces of it; but this Negative Argument may be thus retorted against themselves. The Children of Believing Parents were baptized in their Infancy, for they cannot find in Scrip∣ture, any of them that were baptized when they came to
years of discretion, and not before. I urge not this as a concluding, though probable Argument, that in the Apostle's days Children were Baptized; however I am certain, that to say Infant-Bap∣tism is no Ordinance of Christ, because we have no examples in the Scripture of any that were Baptized, is a pittiful Argument. Next, saith he, That there is neither Precept nor Example for any such thing, as Infant-Baptism in the Scripture, we have the ingenuous Confession of the parties themselves. The Magdeburgen∣ses do say, That concerning the Baptising the A∣dult both Jews and Gentiles, we have sufficient proof; but as to the Baptizing of Infants, they can meet with no Example in the Scriptures. Very good Sr. now you have learnt to set down things right, but why did you say in the 56 page of your Treatise referring to the same place Cent. 1. L. 2. pag. 496. That the Magdebur∣genses as to the Subjects of Baptism tell us, that in this Age they only Baptized the Adult; was that lapsus calami or mentis? And do you not know that in the same place they tell us, notwithstand∣ing particular instances cannot be found, (as all the Paedobaptists confess); yet 'tis evident from the Writings of the Apostles, that they did not ex∣clude Infants from Baptism, and then bring Argu∣ments for the lawfulness of it, as before? For that of Luther in his Epistle of Anabaptism, I have not the Book by me to Examine it, yet I am sure by what the Author cites it hurts us not. The Scriptures (saith he) do no where clearly
and plainly with these, or the like words say, Bap∣tize your Children for they believe: and we must needs yield to those that drive us to the Letter. This is still no more than what we all say: we all acknowledg it is no-where written, Chil∣dren do believe (as Lutherans hold they do); and again we say as Luther did, it is no-where written clearly and plainly, with these words, Baptize your Children for they Believe. Nor have Antipaedobap∣tists any command in so many words, Go and Baptize actual and visible Believers. If they say such were Baptized, we may reply with Mr. Sy∣denbam, that is not to the purpose: for it is a verbal command, which they require to give warrant to an Ordinance, and for ought we can learn from Christ's Commission, Matt. 28.19. Whosoever are taught (be the parties never so wicked) they must be Baptized (if they will) for there is no mention made of their entertainment of the Gospel. Next he Fathers that upon Erasmus, which was never spoken by him in his Comment upon Rom. 6. Namely, That Baptizing of infants was not in use in St. Paul's time. There is no such word, I assure thee, Reader, there. Again, in his 4th Book de Ratione Concionandi, he saith, That they are not to be condemned that doubt whether Childrens Baptism were Ordained by the Apostles. But why, Sir, did you not speak out all? You know Erasmus his words are these: Probabile est tingere Infantes institutum fuisse ab Apostolis, non damnaretur tamen qui de hoc dubitaret. It is pro∣bable the Baptism of Infants was instituted by the
Apostles, nevertheless if one doubt thereof he should not be condemned. In this Erasmus speaks like an honest, moderat-Spirited man, that would not have weak Christians Anathematized (as the Papists use to do) for their dissent in Circumstan∣tial and Disputable points. Calvin in his 4th Book of Institutes, Chap. 16. con∣fesseth, that it is no-where expresly mentioned by the Evangelists, that any one Child was by the Apostles Baptized: to the same purpose are Staphilus, Me∣lancthon, Zwinglius quoted; to which I only say, That whereas they all tell us, there is no express Command or express Example, an Implicite one is sufficient; so that in this long train of Authors which our Antagonist quotes, he doth but magno conatu nugas agere, take a great deal of pains in trifling. But that which he cites from Mr. Daniel Rogers seems to have more weight, who in his Treatise about Baptism, Part 29. Confesseth himself to be unconvinced by demonstration of Scripture for it. This is taken from Mr. Tombe's Examen,Tombes Exa∣men p. 2. pag. 2. To which I answer, one man may be fully convinced by Scripture-demon∣stration, when another is not: but 'tis fit the Reader should know all that Mr. Rogers saith there upon the point; for it is unhandsome to bring in scraps out of Authors. He tells us, he no less doubts of the warrantableness of Infant-Bap∣tism, than he doth of the Creed, saying that sun∣dry learned men have undertaken to stop their Schismatical mouths that oppose it, and to answer their peevish Arguments; and though he saith his scope tends another way, yet gives his rea∣sons for it.
1. Because Circumcision was applyed to the Infants on the 8th day in the Old-Testament, 2. There is no word in the New-Testament to infringe the liberty of the Church in it: nor spe∣cial reason why we should bereave her of it. 3. Sundry Scriptures afford friendly proofs by Consequence. 4. The holiness of the Child (External and Visible) is from their Parents, therefore the seed being holy, and belonging to the Govenant, the Lord graciously admits them to the Seal of it by Baptism. Farther he brings a passage out of Mr. Baxters plain Scripture-proof for Infants Church-member∣ship and Baptism, Where he confesseth, pag. 3. That Infant-Baptism is not plainly determined in Scripture. Hear what he saith Reader, and then judge what he gains from Mr. Baxter: all that he saith is as follows viz. The Scripture speaks fully of those particular controversies that were on foot in those times, but more sparingly of those, not then questioned, and then names divers questions, which the Scripture fully and plainly determines. But (saith he) many others as difficult, which then were no Controversies, have no such deter∣mination: and yet [mark it] the Scripture is sufficient to direct for the determination of these too; if we have wisdom to discern the Scope of the Spirit, to apply general rules to particular cases: Such is the Case of Infant-Baptism, Af∣terward in the 9th page we have this, The grounds (saith he) upon which Infants are Baptized are very easy, and plain, though to many it be diffi∣cult
to discern how it is from those grounds infer∣red: and therefore though some few learned, and Godly and humble Men, do doubt of it, yet in the whole known Christian part of the World there is but few. After this we have something brought out of Dr. Taylor's Lib. of Proph p. 239. concerning Previous dispositions that are requisite to Baptism, of which Infants are not capable. But to prevent transcribing I refer the Reader to his latter Piece of the Consideration of the Practice of the Church in Baptizing Infants; where he himself confutes what he had said in his Liberty of Proph. you have it pag. 25, 26. Here also we have a parcel of Authors introdu∣ced, who do all, are rolundo, express fully their judgments: That nothing must be done in Gods Worship without Scripture-Warrant. Mr. Ball is one of them whose saying our Antagonist fetch∣eth out of Mr. Tombes. Exerc. pag. 9.M. Tombes Ex∣ercit. pag. 9. so it is also in his Ex∣am. p. 2.Tombes Examen p. 2. joyned to that of Mr. Rogers before-mentioned. Mr. Balls words are, We must look to the Institution, and nei∣ther stretch it wider, nor draw it narrower than the Lord hath made it: For he is the Institutor of the Sacraments according to his own good plea∣sure; and it is our part to learn of him, both to whom, how, and for what end, the Sacraments are to be administred &c. But why doth he not set down all that Mr. Ball hath in that place— Circumcision, and Baptism (saith he) are both Sacraments of Divine Institution, and so they
agree in the substance of the thign signified, the persons to whom they are to be administred, and the order of Administration, if the right pro∣portion be observed: as Circumcision sealed the entrance into Covenant, the Righteousness of Faith and Circumcision of the heart, so doth Baptism much more clearly. As Abraham and his Houshold, and the Infants of Believing-Jews, were to be Circumcised, so the Faithful their Families, and their Seed are to be Baptized. At last he thinks to rout us quite with a say∣ing of Bellarmin's, whose very name gives us an Allarm and sounds Bellum & Arma, War & Arms. The Anabaptists, saith Bellarmine, call for plain Scrip∣ture-proof for the Baptizing of Infants, and their Argument from defect of Command or Exam∣ple, have great force against the Lutherans, for∣as much as they use that Principle every where viz. That the Rite which is not in Scripture, having no Command or Example there, is to be re∣jected. Yet it is of no force against Catholicks, who conclude that Apostolical Tradition is of no less Authority with us, than the Scripture; but that this of Baptizing Infants is an Apostolical Tradi∣tion &c. To which I Reply, that the Author might well have omitted this of Bellarmin, since it is but acun∣ning insinuation of that Jesuitical Sophister, to set. Protestants at greater distances amongst themselves & to advance the esteem of their adored Tradition. And yet he himself speaking elsewhere of Infant-Baptism saith, satis aperte ex Scripturis colligitur, &c. Infant-Baptism is plainly enough gathered out of Scripture.
CHAP. II. The Historical Account which the Author gives of Iafant-Brptism in its Rise and Establishment, Examined and Condem∣ned. In this Chapter he presents us with the History of Infant-Baptism, and tells strange news, if you will credit him of its Original since the Apostle's days. Thus he begins: 1. From the learned Authorities before given, we have gained thus much; that as there was no Precept in Scripture, for the Baptizing of Infants, so neither was there the least Practice to be found there∣of in the Apostles days, as was so ingeni∣ously before Confessed by the Magdebur∣genses, Luther, Calvin, Erasmus, Rogers. 1. BUt we have made it appear, Sr. that you rec∣kon your gains too fast, and have much erred in casting up the Sum, as the Reader may find in the preceding Chapter. I question not if he be impartial he will conclude you have not gained a
farthing, but are rather a loser hitherto. For a∣mong all those Learned Authorities before given, there is no passage (although never so much strai∣ned) that saith any more than this: There is no Express precept in Scripture for the Baptizing of Infants, and this every Child knows, but in saying there is no Express one, they intimate thereby, there is an Implicite one. I love not to repeat, the Reader may, if he please, reflect upon what they say. And in asmuch as the point re∣lates to matter of Fact, notwithstanding the con∣fidence of the adverse party, unless they can pro∣duce one Express place of Scripture, where it is said, No Infant was Baptized, or some Express Command not to Baptize them, their calling for an Express Command, concludes nothing a∣gainst our Practice. 2. Moreover we affirm against their Practice, that there is no Express Command in all the Book of God, to plunge persons Head and Ears under water: nor can they by any convincing Circumstance about the manner of Baptizing, make it appear (though thousands were Baptized in a day) that any one was so severely dealt with in the primitive times: we shall shew, when we come to it, that the word [] among Heathen and Ecclesiastical Writers doth promiscu∣ously signify to dip into, or wash with Water by pouring on of it; and in the Scripture it is more frequently taken for Washing, than dipping. 3. They have no Express Command or Ex∣ample to Baptize, or plunge themselves as they do with their Cloaths on; which is rather a Bapti∣zing Garments, than Bodies. Since they are so
much for Express Command and Example, let them first justify their own Practice by it, before they condemn us for want of it. 2. He tells us, That the approved Practice and known custom of the Primitive Church was to Baptize the Adult, as all Ages acknowledg, and only they, at least for the first, as is so fully attested by Eusobius, Beatus Rhenanus, Lud. Vives, Bul∣linger, Haimo, the Neocaesarian Council. Look back Reader to that saithful Account I have given from the Magdeburgensian Century-Writers, and thou shalt be able to judg of the truth of what he speaks. I am necessitated to touch upon it again, what Eusebius speaks of Origens being a Teacher before Baptism, refers to the Pagans; what that Old Popish St. Beatus Rhenanus saith of the Ancient custom which was to Baptize those that were come to full growth, with the Bath of Regeneration, if it relates to Heathens it is no more to purpose than the for∣mer out of Eusebius; but if we are to understand him so, as if no Children were anciently admit∣ted to Baptism, no, not those of Believers, then we plead an older custom, even as old as Origen and Tertullian, that Children were Baptized in the Church: and as Mr. Calvin hath it in his Instru∣ction against the Anabaptists; The Holy Ordi∣nance of Infant Baptism hath been perpetually observed in the Christian Church, for there is no ancient Writer that doth not acknowledg its Original, even from the Apostles; which
was the Reason why Austin hath that Expression concern∣ing it, namely,Nullus est Scrip∣tor tam vetustus, qui non ejus Ori∣ginem ad Aposto∣lorum saculum pro certo referat. Cal∣vini Instit. cap. 17. part. 8. pag. 227. Ecclesia semper habuit, semper tenuit. The Church always had it, always held it. And for Lud. Vives his saying: That they Baptized the Adult in some Cities of Italy, his Testimony hath been always looked upon as very incompe∣tent, because he was but of yester-day, and we have nothing but his bare word for it, and not to be compared with Austin's, a man of great integrity, and that lived above thousand years nearer the Apostles, who affirms it was not only Practised in his day, but before, and quotes Testimonies for it. Then for Haim, all that he sais upon Matt. 28, will not prejudice us, his words are, Here is set down a rule how to Baptize, that is, that Teaching should go before Baptizing &c. which we confess ought to be so, when we have to deal with Pagans, and he speaks of such. And as none of the Popish School-men are for the Au∣thors turn, though we have many passages quo∣ted out of them, to no other end but to blind the Reader, and make the Book swell; so I am mistaken if that which he quotes out of Albertus Magnus the Conjurer, be much for his turn: you have it in the 12th Cent. p. 85. of his Treatise. And lastly for the Neocaesarian Council, that bu∣siness is of a very ridiculous nature, and imper∣tinent to the question; for the matter under debate in that Council, was about a Woman that was pregnant, who being an Infidel came to be Bap∣tized, and the Canon speaks of such a one, and
not of a Woman that was within the Church, & of a Child born of a believing Parent, as is fully shewn before in Cent. 4. 3, Whereas, he saith, not only the Children of, Pagans were to be Instructed, and taught in the Faith, in order to Baptism; but the Children of Christians also: as those famous instances given from the 4th Century. We have shewn in our discourse upon that Century, the corrupt and silly grounds upon which they deferred Baptism till they were grown up, in those days, and some of the instances there given had Parents that were Heathens, when they were born, and so conti∣nued till they were come to Maturity, and that was the reason they were Baptized, though 'tis true, their Parents were at last converted to the Christian Faith. 4. He farther saith, that as there was no Scrip∣ture-Authority for it, so no Human Authority, till above 400 years after Christ; though to justify that injunction, Apostolical-Tradition, to supply the want of Scripture-Institution, was pretended. I may almost say truly of this Quot dicta, tot maledicta; so many words, so many foul reproa∣ches, Calumniare fortiter & aliquid adhaerebit, said Machiavel, and our Author follows the Rule exactly, he thinks he can never throw dirt e∣nough upon Infant-Baptism, hoping some will at last stick. I shall Reply to this, First, To say there is no Scripture-Authority for Infant-Baptism, and that Apostolical Tradition was on purpose brought in to supply the want of it, are presumptuous, weak, and false dictates: Since the same Men, viz. The Fathers, that call
it an Apostolical Tradition, do upon the matter all of them, plead for it upon Scripture-grounds as Cyprian, Nazianzen, Chrysostom, Ambros, Epi∣phartius, who argue for Infant-Baptism, because it came in the room of Circumcision, and from the right the Infants of the Jews had to Circum∣cision; and of latter days Protestants own no∣thing for truth that comes un∣der the notion of Apostolical-Tradition,Proinde necessa∣rio veniendum erat ad argumenta ex Scripturis: quae si rem non evincant, frustrà traditionem ad vocabimus Riv. Animad. in annot-Grotii in Cassan∣drum. Art. 9. p. 71. unless they see ground for it in Scripture; they are of Rivets mind, that Tra∣dition is in most points uncer∣tain, and thereforē if we will be certain of a thing we must see the foot-steps of it in the word. And Mr. Calvin speaks to the same purpose in his Instructions against the Anabaptists. Caeterum minime peto ut in eo probando nos Antiquitas ullo modo juvet &c. I do not in the least desire to borrow help from Antiquity for the proof of this point, any whit farther than the judgment of the Ancients shall be found to be grounded on the Word of God. For I well know that as the custom of men, doth not give Authority to the Sacrament, so the use of the Sacrament cannot be said to be right, because regulated by Custom. 2. What though there was no Human-Autho∣rity for it till above 400 years after Christ, is this any Argument against it? The Author bor∣rows this from Dr. Taylors Lib. of Proph. p. 237. for he learns how to speak from him: the Drs. Words are — as there was no Command
in Scripture to oblige Children to the susception of it; so the necessity of Paedobaptism was not de∣termined in the Church, till the Canon that was made in the Milevitan Council. This Milevitan African Council was Ann. Ch. 418. and belike the reason why it was not established sooner by Councils under an Anathema, was because it was rarely, if at all questioned or opposed till then, by any person of note, as to its lawfulness. Hear what Dr. Hammond says in answer to Dr Taylor, about this matter: It being granted by the Ob∣jecter, saith he, that Paedobaptism was by Canon Established in the Milevitan African Council, Ann. Ch. 418. yet, as long as it is also confessed, that it was practised in Africa before, there will be little concluded against us. For what stood by Apostolical Practice and known Custom, need∣ed not to be prescribed by Canon, as that which prevails by force of a greater, need not be assisted by a weaker Authority. And indeed while the foot-steps of so Authentique a Tradition were so lively and no Adversary, or Disputer started up∣no question or opposition yet made against a Com∣mon usage, 'twere ridiculous for Councils to convene, and fortify it by Canons: and so the only thing reasonably deducible from the lateness of those Canons, is, that all that while it was universally received without Opposition: I mean not, saith the Dr, that no Infant, or any Christian was unbaptized through the space of those first (4) Centuries, but that the extending of the Institu∣tion to Infants, was not Opposed in the Church till about Pelagius's days, whose opinion of Ori∣ginal Sin (utterly denying the guilt of it on
Adam's posterity) was such, as might consequen∣tily produce some change in his opinion of Paedo∣baptism: for in the 219 page he quotes out of the 5th Hom. of Eusebius Emissenus, de Pasch, a passage intimating that Pelagius himself asserted the Baptizing of Infants, though not propter vitam, for life, yet propter regnum coelorum for the King∣dom of God (i. e.) entrance into the Church, as is conceived. 3. Whereas he saith Apostolical Tradition was pretended. Let not the Reader be afrighted with this word Tradition, or because Origen, and Au∣stin calls it a Tradition of the Church; for when the Fathers so call it, they do not intend it in such a sence, as if the Church were the Author, but the Subject of it, Magdeburg. Cent. 1. L. 2. Cap. 6. p. 496. Origines & Cyprianus & alia Patres Authores sunt Apostolorum etiam tempore In∣fantes Baptizatos esse—both Origen and Cyprian and other Fathers hold that Infants were Bapti∣zed in the Apostles days: and Austin's Rule is a reason for, it little less than a demonstration, quod universa tenet Ecclesia &c. that which is univer∣sally received and practised by the Church, and had not its first Institution from some Council, but hath been ever retained, may well be believ∣ed to be an Apostolical Tradi∣tion.August. contrae Donat. L. 4. C. 24. Moreover when the Fa∣thers call thi n Apostolical Tradition ( do other O∣pinions) it is (as our Divines usually answer the Papists) in regard points of this nature are not expresly in terminis in the word, but may be fairly gathered thence by consequence. Chemnit.
Exam. Concil. Triden. par. 1. p. 68, 69. To the same purpose we have Dr. Field of the Church Lib. 4. Cap. 20. The 4th head of Tra∣dition is the continued Practice of such things as are neither contained in Scripture Expresly, nor the Examples of such Practice Expresly there de∣livered, Though the grounds, reasons, and causes of the necessity of such practice, be there contained: of this sort is the Baptism of Infants, which is there∣fore called a Tradition because it is not expresly de∣livered in Scripture, that the Aposties did Baptize Infants &c. nor any Express Precept there found, they should do so, yet is not this so received by bare & naked Tradition, but that we find the Scripture to deliver unto us the grounds of it. Thus we see, both the Fathers and Protestant-Writers take Tradition in a quite different sence from that the Romanists usually take it in, who equalize the Au∣thority of Tradition with the Scripture, yea indeed give it the preheminence above it. And now judg Reader, what the confident assertions of our An∣tagonist do amount to, whether dignum tanto tulit hic promissor hiatu; whether the proverb be not verified in him viz. a great cry, and a little Wooll. Now follows the Historical Account he gives us of the Apostolical Tradition pretended to (as he speaks it) for Infant Baptism. IT is not worth while to search into so many musty Authors as are quoted by him; and in∣deed I thought to have taken my leave of him, and
to have met him again in the 3d Chapter, because there we shall encounter the exceptions he brings against those Authentick Testimonies we alledg from Antiquity for our Practice; nevertheless having run over his History, us{que} ad nauseam, I shall pass a few Remarks thereupon. 1. The multitude of Authors quoted, argues great ostentation of much Reading, though much of it is prepared to his hand, and for certain, the most is rather ad Pompam than ad Pugnum, rather for shew than service. 2. Yet hath he manifested some Artifice, and cunning; 1. In raking out of the Dung-hil, all the filthy Rites used by the Romish Church in the Admini∣stration of Baptism, as Exorcism, Chrism, Salt, Albes, or White-Garments, Milk, Honey &c. And his design herein is to dazle the eyes of the weaker sort, and to make them believe even In∣fant-Baptism it self is also a corrupt Innovation. But this will not take with the judicious who are able to distinguish between the accidental Corrup∣tions of an Ordinance and the Ordinance it self. We know Antichrist hath defiled most of the Or∣dinances of Christ and annexed thereto many Superstitious Ceremonies: as in the other Sa∣crament of the Communion, Adoration of the Ele∣ments is enjoyned, and yet these do not disparage the Ordinance it self, in the Institution and Sub∣stance of it, but only defile the Communicants that so superstitiously use that Sacred Appoint∣ment. Besides the Papists have affixt these cor∣rupt Rites, not only to the Baptism of Infants, but of those also who are grown up: and so the
force of arguing from them, if Infant-Baptism were removed, wil ly against Baptism it self. We ought not therefore to impute these corruptions to God's Ordinance of Baptizing Infants, and on that account deride and cashier it, but rather as the Magdeburgenses do Cent. 2. p. 111. to the Mystery of Ini∣quity,Mr. Geree of vind. Paedobapt. which so works in the Church of Rome in their cor∣rupting and contaminating the simple forme of Baptism. Indeed, saith Mr. Philpot the Martyr. (to his fellow-sufferer that scrupled Infant-Bap∣tism, and afterward was satisfied by the strength of his Arguments) if you look upon the Papisti∣cal Synagogue only which have corrupted God's Word by false interpretation, and hath pervert∣ed the true use of Christs Sacraments, you may seem to have good handfast of your opinion a∣gainst the Baptism of Infants; but for as much as it is of more Antiquity, and hath its begin∣ing from God's Word, and from the use of the Primitive Church, it must not in respect of the abuse in the Popish Church be neglected, or thought inexpedient. Nor hath the Baptism of Adult Persons in former times been free from many corrupt, and ridiculous Human inventi∣ons, as Dr. Homes out of Binius and Epiphanius shews at large. The Council of Carthage tells us,Bin. Ca. 34 de rebus. Eccles. Cap. 26. that sick men lying speechless might be Baptized, upon the witness of men touching their former condition. The 4th Council of Carthage, orders, That those
of ripe years to be Baptized must be dyered,Bin. Cap. 85. and kept from Fesh and Wine a long time, and after that, having been examined several times must be Baptized. Epiphanius declares that the Eunomians (called Anabaptists) do Rebaptize all that come to them,Epiphan Ana∣cephal. pag. 108. Edit. lat. Bazil. turning their Heads downward, and their Heels upward. Some of the Anabaptists called Hemerabaptists thought, that none could be saved, unless they were daily-Baptized, whence they were called ,Gerard. Joh. Voffus de Anaebap∣tismo, Thes. 17. Gastius de Anae∣bap. Exod. p. 50. daily Baptists, and so were cleansed from their Sins. Singulis diebus mergerentur, ita ut Abluantur & Sanctificentur ab omni culpa. Secondly, Another small plot or piece of tun∣ning lyes in linking some spurious Authors with those which are Authentick, to render also their Authority Suspicious. There are some Ancient Writers which are very express for Infant-Bap∣tism, & of great Authority in the Church of Rome, which are rejected as spurious, or interpolate, by the Protestants; such is that of Dimysius the A∣reopagite, and the Decretal Epistles, who not∣withstanding have in high account the Testimo∣nies of those Ancients viz. Justin Martyr, Ire∣naus, Origen, Cyprian, &c. which are reputed as Authentick and of undoubted truth. 3. There is much Impertinency in his Histori∣cal Account, that is not concerned in the Questi∣on.
As the Story of Constantine, Dedication, Con∣secration or Baptizing of Churches and Bells, Ex∣posure of the Reliques of Saints for adoration, Pro∣hibiting Priests Marriages, with much more ejus∣dem farinae, But what is all this to Infant-Bap∣tism? 4. There are some errors or falsities in it. As Tertullian's standing up against. Infant-Baptism in the 3d Century; when he stood up no more against it, than he did against the Baptizing of Young-men that were unmarried, and Young-Widows also, whose Baptism he would have delayed. 'Tis certain he argues for the delay of Baptism in some cases (prae∣cipue circa paroulos,Tertul. de Bapt. C. 8. especially that of little ones) meaning the Children of unbelievers as is conceived by Estius, Pamelins, and divers o∣thers. A Second Error respecting this Century, is, That the Magdeburgenses tell us, they altered the form of Baptism, from dipping to sprinkling: referring us to Cent. 3. pag. 129. where they speak no such thing nor any-where else in the whole Hi∣story of Baptism. A Third Escape, is, That Infant-Baptism was not in use in the greatest part of the 4th Century ei∣ther in the Latin or Greek Church. Now this is very false, nor will that help him which he adds afterward, Scil. It is true (saith he) towards the latter end of this Century, it is said, that in some parts of Africa they did Baptize Children as Mag∣deburg Cent. 4. p. 415. but they say no such thing; it is only the Authors own saying: and
really it troubles me to see so much prevarication every-where. Take Reader the true account of what the Magdeburgenses say de Ritibus circa Bap∣tismum, about Baptismal Rites. They are large in this Chapter, and begin it thus, That the power of Baptizing was in this Age in the Priests, and principally in the Bishops, and then in Presby∣ters and Deacons, and then a few lines after they tell us, Baptizabantur autem publice in templis cujus∣cun{que} sexus, aetatis, & conditionis homines. Per∣sons of each Sex, and of all Ages and Condi∣tions were publickly Baptized in the Temples. Nor hath this Chapter any such passage at the beginning, middle, or latter end; that in some parts of Africa they did Baptize Children. 5. I will not say, there is a Tincture of pro∣phaneness, but am sure of something like it, in that saying of the Authors pag. 128. of his Treatise viz. In this [6th] Century (saith he) we meet with a dreadful piece of Infant-Baptism viz. The Heads of 6000 Infants that had been murdered & buried in a Warren near a Monastery, as testified by Ʋldricus to P. Nicolas, Cent. 6. p. 338. But the Magdeburgenses are not so bold as the Author, to call such horrid murder Infant-Baptism. A tender conscience me thinks should be afraid thus to play with Holy things. 6. This History of his affords some contradiction to himself, I mean to what he hath before written: for in the first part of his Book Cap, 2. pag. 7. he quotes Bede for a Testimony, that the Baptiz∣ing of Believers is the only true Baptism — Bede saith, That Men were first to be instructed unto the Knowledg of the Truth, then to be Baptized, as Christ
hath taught &c. Cent. 8. p. 220. Whereas in this his Second part of the Treatise, which is for disproving Infant-Baptism, pag. 130. Bede also concludes for the Baptizing of Infants, Cent. 8. p. 218. 7. We observe too great a boldness in those scandalous Reflections which he casts upon the Churches of the Reformed Religion, sparing none, neither Lutherans, nor Calvinists, nor: Episcopa∣rians, nor Presbyterians. But me thinks 'tis a piece of great indiscretion to fly out so much a∣gainst the Church of England, for if she be con∣tented to give the Antipaedobaptists indifferent good quarter although they do not conform to her, why should any of them vilify her in this manner? As for the Kirk of Scotland the Author may more securely mock at it, and there is no danger in having a fling at the Directory, or at the old Parliament's Ordinance of May 2d. 1648. which made it imprisonment to affirm Infant-Baptism is unlawful.
CHAP. III. Containing his Exceptions against Infant-Baptism, because built (as he says) u∣pon, 1. Fabulous Traditions. 2. Mistaken Scriptures, with an Answer thereto. 1. The first and Principal ground (saith he) that hath been asserted for this Practice is Ecclesiastical and Apostolical Tradition. THis is a false suggestion, and exceeds all modesty: for although the Church of Rome ascribes too much to Tradition, as in many other things; yet the Ancient Fathers, as Cypri∣an, Nazianzen, Chrysostom, with divers others, as is before shewn, plead Baptism to come in the room of Circumcision, and that Infants have right thereto, from the Infants of the Jews hav∣ing right to Circumcision, whereby 'tis evident that Tradition hath not been primarily asserted to be the ground of Infant-Baptism. 2. He farther saith, The Protestants since the Re∣formation, have chose to fly to some consequential Arguments deducted, as they suppose, from the Scriptures, to prove the same: both which in this Chapter are brought forth, and duely weighed in the Ballance of Truth.
We doubt not in the Process of the discourse to shew, that after we have weighed what she saith, we shall find it too light, and to be but chaff in stead of Truth. The Protestants, he saith, have chose to fly to consequential Arguments, deduced as they suppose from Scripture. But the Antipaedobaptists are of another mind, and suppose themselves to be Men of deeper Reason, and more piercing inspection into the sence of the Scriptures, than all the Godly and Learned Pro∣testants since the Reformation. They see the mistaken conceits they have of Scripture, and how ungroundedly they draw their consequences from thence. An Argument indeed it is of much modesty, for the Author to speak at this rate: I would ask any of these Men, who are so highly conceited of their Scripture-Knowledg, why Pae∣dobaptists, that are humble, searching, praying Christians, may not understand so much of God's mind in Scripture as they? Doth the Word of God come out from them? or doth it come to them only?John 17.14. 1 Cor. 14.37. or have they only the Spirit of Illumination? or are they the only Masters of right Reasons? Or dare they say 'tis unlawful to make use of Consequences? Or may not we be permitted to use them for Infant-Baptism aswel as they against it? Do not they argue from Matt. 28.18, 19. and Mark 16.16. None ought to be Baptized but such who are first taught, and consequently that no Children ought to be Bap∣tized, because they be not capa∣ble of teaching.Vide Tombes. Is not this. their constant way of Arguing?
Now how unreasonable is it for men to practise that themselves, which they will not allow of in o∣thers. I remember Mr. Staltmarsh in his sha∣dows flying away, doth much condemn Consequen∣ces, and saith Prudence and Consequence are the two great Engins of Will-Worship: good Do∣ctrine indeed, and a fine preparative to an Impli∣cit Faith! But Mr. Baxter chastiseth the folly of these men in his Plain Scripture-Proof &c. Position 10. pag. 8. Evident Conse∣quences,Quae colliguntur ex Scripturi sacris, perinde habenda sunt ac si in illis scripta essent. Geg Nazanzen. L. 5. Thelog. or Arguments drawn by reason from Scripture, are as true Proof, as the very words of a Text — would it not make a man pity such senseless, ignorant wretches (saith he) that will call for express words of Scripture, when they have the Evident Conse∣quences or Sence? Is Scripture-Reason no Scripture? If I prove that all Church-Mem∣bers must be admitted by Baptism, and then prove that Infants of Believers are Church-Mem∣bers, is not this asmuch as to prove that they must be Baptized? I suppose no man of sound judgment will deny that the sence, or meaning of Scripture, is Scripture as well as the Letters, and Syllables in the Bible: For the sence, and meaning of the Letter of the Word must be drawn out by rational Consequence, as the conclusion from a Proposition by a fit medium; and if this were not so, the searching and studying of the Scriptures were a needless undertaking, and so would all Preaching and Expounding be. It is a good observation of Dr. Sclater in his Comment
upon the 5th verse of the 4th Chapter of the Ro∣mans; That God's Spirit in Scripture speaks as well what he implyeth, as what he expresseth; as well what by Consequence is deduced, as what in summe of Words he uttereth: And instan∣ceth in that of James, 4.5. saith the Scripture in vain? &c. It is usual for our Adversaries to cavil against this Theological Axiom. Say the Pa∣pists, and Anabaptists (for in this like Sampson's foxes they are joyned together by the tayls, whilst their heads look several ways) where have we it taught, that Infants should be Baptized in all the Scripture? To which we answer, we have it not in Express terms, but by just Conse∣quence. Where find we that Christ's Righteous∣ness is imputed to us for Justification? saith Bel∣larmine. Why, in Express terms we have it not, but Virtually and by just Consequence we have it; 2 Cor. 5.21. In the Equivalent we have it, Rom. 5.17, 18, 19. You are wont to boast, saith Bellarmine, of the Word of God, and to reduce all your Opinions to this one head, but in the Case of Justification by Faith only, that help fails you; for you were never able to shew in the Scripture that particle [only]. To this we Reply, that if we have it by Consequence from Scripture, and if we have it in the Equivalency, we have it in the Scripture. That Tradition hath been the first and principal ground of Infant-Baptism, he would prove from Austin, and Chrysostom's sayings. But how, and in what sense do they call it a Tradition of the Church? why certainly not as if the Church had been the Author, but the Sub∣ject
of it as before, as continued therein all along down from the Apostles. And if any of the Fathers speak too hyperbolically of Tradition, what is that to us who plead Scripture as its pri∣mary ground for it? Besides Anciently the great∣est points of Faith were called by the name of  (i. e.) Divine Doctrines or Ordinan∣ces, for so it is rendred 1 Cor. 11.2. and the same word is rendred Traditions, 2 Thes. 2.15. So that Austin's Intendment by that expression of Apostolical Tradition, is nothing else but Apo∣stolical Ordinance, or Doctrine, as appears from his own words; saying, The Custom of our Mo∣ther the Church in Baptizing little Infants is not to be despised, nor to be judged Superfluous, nor to be Believed unless it were an Apostolical Tradition Lib. 10. de Gen. c. 23. (i. e.) an Apostolical Ordinance. What follows from 153 p. to the 155th, is mostly borrowed from Mr. Tombes his Praecursor, Sec. 20. p. 86, 89. As first, The Assertion of the Cardinal Ragusi, in his Oration in the Council of Bazil. Tombes indeed hath it in Latin, but the Author is at the pains to translate it. And since it is so notori∣ous, and intolerable a piece of Plagianism, thus to take and conceal from whence he had it, contrary to the Laws of ingenuity provided in that behalf, we shall make discovery thereof by a Paralel. H. D (i.e.) [The Au∣thor] In the Council of Bazil in the Oration of
of the Cardinal of Ragusi, It is asserted that in the beginning of this Sa∣crament of Baptism, they only were to be Baptized, who could by themselves answer In∣terrogatories concern∣ing their Faith; and that it was no-where read in the Canon of Scripture, that a new-born In∣fant was Baptized, who could neither believe with the heart to Justi∣fication, nor confess with the mouth to Sal∣vation; yet nevertheless, saith he, the Church hath appointed it. H. D. Whereas some Object, that Bellarmine, and others do also bring Scripture for it; Becan. Lib. 1. c. 2. Sec. 24. answers, that some things may be proved out of Scripture, when the Church's sence is first heard about the In∣terpretation (thereof; for so, he saith, it is concern∣ing Infants-Baptism,
which is proved from John 3.5. But the sense whereby to prove it, is only manifest by Tra∣dition. H. D. and it is con∣firmed in the Canon-Law and School-Men, that Infant-Baptism was not reckoned perfect till the Bishop laid on hands which was called Con∣firmation, viz. of the imperfect Baptism in In∣fancy: and therefore saith Caistans secun∣dum Jewel, that an In∣fant wanting instructi∣on in the Faith, hath not perfect Baptism. H. D. Dr. Field. Lib. 4. p. 375. saith, That Infant-Baptism is therefore called a Tra∣dition, because it is not expresly delivered in the Scriptures, that the Apostles did Baptize In∣fants or that they should do so. Here the Au∣thor stops and goes no
farther being afraid of the next lines. H. D. Prideaux con∣trov. Theol. Sec. 392. Infant-Baptism, saith he, rests upon no other Di∣vine right than Episco∣pacy. viz Diocesan E∣piscopacy in use in these Nations. Here he adds as before he substracted from what Mr. Tombes said out of Field.
I. T. (i.e.) John Tom∣bes. In the Council of Bazil, in the Oration
of the Cardinal of Ra∣gusi, it is asserted, Item nusquam legitur in Cano∣ne Scripturae S. quod par∣vulus recenter Baptiza∣tus, qui nec corde cre∣dit ad justitiam, nec ore confitetur adsalutem, in∣ter fideles & credentes computetur; & nibilomi∣nus, Ecclesia ita determi∣navit, & statuit &c. And, in principio hujus Sacramenti Baptizaban∣tur solum illi qui per se sciebant fidem interro∣ganti respondere. I. T. And whereas it is Objected that Bel∣larmine, and others do bring Scripture for it; Becan. Manual. Lib. 1. C. 3. Sec. 24. answers, aliqua possunt probari ex Scriptura, quando con∣stat de vero, & legitimo Scripturae sensu. So he saith, it is concerning Infant-Baptism, which is proved from John 3.5.
but that the sense whereby to prove it, is only manifest by Tra∣dition. I. T. Which is con∣firmed in the Canon-Law and School-Men; an Infants-Baptism, was not reckoned per∣fect, till the Bishop layd on hands, which act was called Confirmati∣on viz. of the imper∣fect Baptism in Infancy. Jewel alledgeth it as Caistans Tenent, that an Infant, for that he want∣eth instruction in Faith, therefore hath not per∣fect Baptism. I. T. Dr. Field, of the Church 4th Book Chap. 20. of this sort is Infant-Baptism, which is therefore called a Tradition, because it is not expresly deliver∣ed in Scripture that the Apostles did Baptize In∣fants, nor any express Precept that they
should do so. [Tombes is so ingenious as to set down the rest] yet is not this so received by bare, and naked Tradition, but that we find the Scripture to deliver un∣to us the grounds of it. I. T. Dr' Prideaux, Fasci. Controv. Theol. Loc. 4. Sec. 3. q. 2. Paedobaptism rests on no other Divine right than Episcopaey. Now to all this we have said enough before, as to the Substance of it, and I love not needless repetitions: only let me mind you with this, That though Papists and others, attribute too much to the custom of the Church, or Tradition, yet all sound Protestants when they use that word they do it in Sensu sano, quite different from the cor∣rupt sense of the Romish Church. And because the Author saith Dr. Taylor doth so fully and strenuously argue against us in his Lib. Proph. p. 237, viz. Tradition, saith he, must by all means supply the place of Scripture, and there is pretended a Tradition Apostolical, That
Infants were Baptized: I think it not amiss to bring in Dr. Hammond to cope with him, in his Letter of Resolution, Quaere 4th of the Baptizing of Infants, Sec. 104. pag. 277. where, having before spoken of what sort of Traditions, have been rejected by the Reformed Churches, he then adds, Having no necessity to descend to any more minute Considerations, the whole matter will be resolved into this one Enquiry, whether the Bap∣tizing of Infants, doth sufficiently appear to be of the Institution of Christ, or Practice Apostolical? And if it do, we have all that we pretend to, upon the score of Tradition; and if it do not, we are obliged to disclaim that means of maintain∣ing our plea, or inferring our conclusion. And because the way of satisfying this enquiry, is but the saying over again all that hath been formerly said on this subject, this whole Discourse having laid the weight of all upon this one Basis, the Institution of Christ, and Practice of the A∣postles, it will be unreasonable to do this any farther, save only upon a brief Recapitulation, to refer it to the judgment of any sober Christian; Whether first, by Christs found∣ing of the Institution of this Sacrament in the Jewish Cu∣stom of Baptizing of Proselytes,Baptism in use in the Jewish Church and applyed to Infants aswel as grown men. The Learned Mr. Selden & Light-foot speak the same. which appears to have belong∣ed to the Infant Children of the Proselytes, as is be∣fore shewn out of Goodwin Ainsworth & others, Chap. 1. and Secondly, by his being so far from excepting against the Age
of Children as a Prejudice, or hinderance to their coming to him (that is to their Prosely∣tism) that he affirms them to be the pattern of those,Though Children are brought to him by others, yet they are sayd to come unto him in Mark 10.14.  the very words of which Proselyte is made. of whom his Kingdom is to be made up; and though he be not affirmed in the Gospel to Baptize such (for he Baptized not at all) Mark 10.16. (Which being the Ceremony usual in the Church, for those that were fitted for Baptism, and distinctly Prepa∣rative to it, they that were by Christ afforded that, cannot be thought by him less capable of (Baptism than of that): And Thirdly, by the ex∣press Words of the Apostle, that their Children are Holy, interpreted by the Context, so as to infer from the Apostles way of Arguing, that it was the Custom of those Apostolick times to Baptize the Children of the Christian Parents, and so interpreted by the Christian Writers of the First and Purest Ages; And Fourthly by the Testimonies of all the Ancients, that are found to speak of this matter, without any one pretend∣ed to dissent, that this was the Practice of the Apostles; Whether I say, these four things being put together (the truth of each of which, hath been before more largely evinced) it be not sufficiently Evident, That the Baptizing of Children is of the Institution of Christ, and Pra∣ctice Apostolical. Thus far Dr. Hammond. Next the Author saith, he will give us some ac∣count of the insufficiency and Weakness, if not
wickedness of those first Authorities, that have been leaned upon to prove this Practice to be an Apostolical Tradition &c. and he reduceth it to these following. Dionysius the Areopagite, the Decretal Institutions, or Epistles of several Popes (as he calleth them) Justin Martyr, Ori∣gen, and Cyprian. Concerning the two first of these we look u∣pon them as broken Reeds and we lean not on them at all: and to produce an Argument for the Apostolicalness of Paedobaptism from these is (as Dr. Hammond speaks of some which he likes not) to be look upon of the number of the Blind and the Lame, that are of more use to betray and lose, than defend and secure that Fort in which they are placed. Know then, Sir, that we except against them as much as your self, and you know you have taken all your exceptions against these Romish Forge∣ries, from the learned Pens of Paedobaptists. 'Tis by the elaborate pains of the Magdebur∣genses, Osiander, Perkins, Reynolds, Rivet &c. that they are detected, who (as you observe) have laid open the Bastardy both of the one and of the other. From these Mr. Tombes gleans what he hath to say upon this point in his Praecursor,Mr. Tombes his Praecursor. where you have them collected to your hand, and from whence you fetch what you present us with: and here I am tempted again to draw another Paralel, you do so exactly tread in his
steps, as first, beginning as he doth, with Osi∣ander, then follows Rivet, afterward Perkins, then the Decretal-Epistles, which pass under the name of Clement, Hyginus &c. All which are condemned as Spurious by Mr. Perkins, and he gives undeniable Arguments for it. But I observe your little design, to render In∣fant Baptism the more odious by that appel∣lation you give Clement, Hyginus, with the rest of them; namely, Pope say you, the Decretals and Institutions of several Popes in this Second Century, as that of Pope Clement, Pope Hygi∣nus: and is it not strange hat the Pope should appear so early? 'Tis not handsome thus to impose upon the weaker sort, that are not read in Church-History: As for others that are more learned they know that Hyginus, (the Verus or true one of that name) is numbred amongst the first good Bishops that succeeded the Apostles; for so we find him in Dr. Pride∣aux his Catologue, and to be the man that set Justin Martyr at work to frame his Apology for the Christians, and was no Pope in the sence it is usually taken, viz. An Oeconomical Bishop challenging unto himself, and usurping Authority over the whole Church.Euseb. Lib. 4. c. 9. He is calculated to be the 8th Bishop of Rome, liv∣ing in the dayes of Antoninus Pius about a hundred and fourty years after Christ and very near to the Apostles.
Having thus discarded the feigned Dionysius, and the Personatus Hyginus (as Mr. Tombes observes he is called by Ostander) with the rest of the cheating Tribe; laying no stress at all upon what they say, as touching the Apostolicalness of Infant-Baptism, we shall notwithstanding, by the Author's good leave, still retain a Vene∣rable esteem of the other three that follow. For honest Men are nevertheless honest, for being rankt with cheats, though I confess, they are the more lyable to suspicion, by such as do not examine things. First for Justin Martyr, we shall not alto∣gether quit our claim to him, though there be so litle left of him, as Mr. Baxter notes, that we cannot expect that he should speak expresly to the point,Justin Martyr, is supposed to have li∣ved in St. John's days. Scultetus saith he flourished Anno 140. both because he is brief, and treat∣eth on other (Theams, to which this did not belong, and because the Church then living amongst Heathens had so much to do in converting, and Baptizing the Aged that they had little occasion to treat about Children, especially it being a point not Controverted, but taken for granted by the Christians, who knew God's dealing with the Jews Church; yet nevertheless, saith Mr. Baxter, Justin Martyr gives such hints, by which his Judgment and the Pra∣ctice of the Church,Baxter, plaint Scripture-Proof. p. 155. even in those dayes may be discerned.
Touching what is said in Justin Martyr's Responses (against which the Author levels his discourse) and especially what is said in his 56th Question ad Orthodoxos, the Author sayes right, that many of the afore-said Learned Writers that are Paedobaptists do disown it as spurious — And Mr. Baxter himself Acknow∣ledgeth the same that though the Book be Ancient, yet it was either Spurious or Interpolate: True, but withal gives divers passages for our turn out of other Works of his, as that in his Dia∣logue with Tryphon, Part 2. Propos. 3. Nos certe qui hujus ope ad Deum accessimus, non carnalem istam Circumcisionem, fed Spiritualem — Hanc, nos per Baptisma, ut pote peccatores nati, a Deo miserante accepimus; eam licet omnibus simi∣liter accipere. (i. e.) It was Lawful for all to receive the Spiritual Circumcision, which he saith was done by Baptism, and if all might receive it, even so Infants (who were the sub∣jects of the Legal Circumcision) for they must be a part of the All and not excluded. Another touch we have in that Passage of Justin, importing Baptism to be the only way to Re∣mission of Sins and Salvation; and he judged that Infants are forgiven, and saved; there∣fore he judged that they might be Baptized. As for the places, I refer the Reader to Mr. Baxter's Plain Scripture-Proof, where we have them quot∣ed, pag. 155.
2. For Origen we shall with greater confi∣dence adhere to him, notwithstanding the fri∣volous Cavils of the Author which are redu∣cible to these 6 Heads. 1. His First is, That Origen is but one single Testimony for the practice of Infant-Baptism to be Apostolical. Reply. This will not pass for a Truth, because we have also the Testimony of Irenaeus,Irenaeus lived in the 2d. Century with Justin Mar∣tyr, in the Age of those that saw the Apostles, and there∣fore could not be ignorant of their Practice. who lived in the Second Century with Justin, even in the Age of those that saw the Apostles; within the first Century after them. Dr. Hammond in his Letter of Re∣solution Sec. 40. pag. 212. where also we have quoted that Common, though Famous passage of his Extant in Lib. 2 Adv. Hae∣res. C. 39. Omnem aetatem Sanctificans per illam quae ad ipsam erat similitudinem. Omnes enim ve∣nit per semet ipsum salvare, Infantes, & Parvulos & Pueros — Omnes inquam qui per eum renascuntur in Deum. (i. e.) Christ did Sanctify every Age, by his own susception of it, and Similitude to it — All I say, who by him are born again to God: where the Infants being Regenerate, and born again into God, must needs be interpreted after the Scripture-Notion of , being born
again, or Regenerate by that laver of Regeneration.'Tit. 3.5. The Apostle ealls Baptism : and Mr. Mede in his Diatribe saith, none will deny but that he means by the Washing of Re∣generation, Bap∣tism. And as Vossius upon the place, saith, to call Baptism Renasceia, is usitata veteribus loquendi forma. By being born again all the Ancient Church-Writ∣ers understand Baptism, and that they took it in this sence, is evinced from that of Justin Martyr (noted by Mr. Mar∣shal) who speaking of the manner of the Administration of Baptism useth it in this sence. The Baptized party, (saith he) is brought to the place where the water is, and Regene∣rated in the same manner, wherein we were Regenerated; And that he is there speaking of Baptism under the name of Regeneration,Justin Mart. Ap. , &c. appears by what is added — They are then Washed in Water in the Name of our Lord God Creator of all things, and of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, & the Holy Ghost. This is taken out of Justin Martyr's Apology, which no man ever questioned for Authentick. 2. A Second exception, is, That Origen's Writings are very Corrupt as the Magdeburgen∣ses do affirm.
And is there not much Corruption in the Writings of all the Fathers? and do not the Magdeburgenses set down the Naevi or Errors of the rest of the Eathers? and particularly is not Tertullian (one of the Authors Witnesses whom he cryes up as Opposite to Infant-Bap∣tism, when 'tis no such matter) branded by them, for abominable foul errors concerning God and Christ? and do they not charge him to be infected with Montanism, and to be the first inventor of that filthy Ceremony of Chrysm? And notwithstanding Origen's errors, there are very precious and Golden Truths in some of his Works, particularly in his Comment upon the Galathians, which seem not to be coined in a Popish Mint: So that what hath been long spoken of him is very true, — Ʋbi bene nemo melius, ubi male nemo pejus. Where he speaks right, none better, where wrong, none worse. 3. A Third charge against Origen (which the Author borrows from his old friend Mr. Tombes) is that of Erasmus who passeth this Censure on him, That he that reads his Homilies,Mr. Tombe's Exercit. p. 28. knows not when he reads Origen or Ruffinus: and Perkins puts his Homilies u∣pon the Romans among his con∣terfeit Works,Mr. Tombe's Examen, p. 7. as Erasmus Cen∣sureth those on Leviticus.
To which we Reply, 1. It is to be noted that neither the Author, nor any one else hath any thing to say against Origen's Homilies upon Luke, where he is ex∣presly for Infant-Baptism, even Mr. Perkins lets this pass without the Censure of being spu∣rious. 2. All that Mr. Perkins saith of his Homilies upon the Romans is, That they were not fide∣liter redditi a Ruffino (i.e.) not faithfully Tran∣slated by Ruffinus, which comes not up to a con∣cluding them spurious. It was then in his account Origen's own work, but errors were committed in the Translation, of which that of foisting in Infant-Baptism is but a weak conjecture; for why should that be thought? since it was so universally practised, and owned in those dayes. 3. He saith, They may well be rejected as spu∣rious if we consider the Story the Magdebur∣genses tell of this Ruffinus, Cent. 4.De illis quae ex Origine aeb Hie∣ronimo translata,  videantur E∣rasmo, Magd. Cent. 4. C. 10. de E∣pisc. & Doct. p. 1218. c. 10. p. 1218, 1219. and I find there is something add∣ed to the Story in the carriage. The Sum of all is that Ruffi∣nus was a naughty man, whose wickedness (saith the Author) was discovered by Jerom, espe∣cially his abusing Origen's
Works, many of which he translated out of Greek into Latin, Sophisticating them at his pleasure, and for which Jerom. writes several pieces to de∣tect and reprove him. Reply. This is something more than the Magdebur∣genses speak of him, and they have only Je∣rom's word for what they say; who was his mortal enemy, and they report none of the best neither concerning Jerom, as they have it from the Pen of Ruffinus. No doubt Ruffinus was no better than he should be; but for certain the Author is too partial for an Historian, laying all the blame upon Ruffinus, when the Magdebur∣genses do condemn them both for their Enmity and unchristian-like carriage to each other, and in some things do vindicate Ruffinus and blame Jerom. I shall therefore take the freedom partly for diversion, and to rectify the Story, to give a brief account of the matter. In the first place the Magdeburgenses do inform us, That there was at first a more than ordinary friendship, and familiarity between these two, how they were as Brethren and Companions in Study; but at length there happened to be vehemens dissidi∣um, a great breach between them, in so much that they became great enemies. But what was the cause hereof cannot be found in any of Je∣rom's Writings: after this they became friends again, at least in appearance.
But the wound was not thorowly healed, but only skinned over, for a while after there arose a new quarrel, and they were set at a farther distance than ever; they fall to calumniating and writing bitter invectives against each other, and they are both accused by the Magdebur∣genses for the virulency of their Pens. First Ruffinus chargeth Jerom to be infected with Origen's Heresies, and put him to the trouble of an Apology; and besides he accuseth him that he had not rightly translated the Scrip∣tures, instancing in several places. Then Je∣rom recriminats and accuseth him for translat∣ing Origen's Works with his Naevi or Errors, to the blemish of Origen, and danger of infecting the World thereby. And here let me tell you the Magdeburgenses interpose and speak their sence of the matter, that though Jerom charg∣ed him so highly, yet it was nimis languida ut videtur ratione, without sufficient ground for ought that they could find: For say they, Ruf∣finus, neither defended nor asserted Origen's er∣rors, nor was the first that translated his Works; nor did he undertake it arbitrio suo by his own inclination, but ad Fratrum preces at the desire of his Brethren, as he fully shews in the Apology which he made to Anastasius for his Faith, a confession whereof they also set down, which is very Orthodox. Cent. 4. Cap. 10. p. 1202, 1203.
4. The Author is again out in saying, There is only a corrupt Translation of Origen by Ruffinus, who ingeniously confesseth that he took so much li∣berty in his translation as to add and alter at his pleasure &c. It is a great mistake to say there is only a corrupt Translation of Origen by Ruffinus, and he might have learned the contrary from the Magdeburgenses Cent. 4. cap. 10. p. 1218, 1219. where they say — extant inter Ori∣genis opera Latina facta quaedam, quorum inter∣pres fuit Hieronimus, Erasmi judicio; Divers of Origen's Works are Translated by Jerom. This is the judgment of Erasmus, as his Homi∣lies upon Jeremy, Ezechiel, his Homilies upon Luke and the Romans, to both which Jerom affixeth his own Preface as Erasmus observes, and in both these, have we the point of Infant-Baptism asserted; and so we see the Author might have spared the pains of telling such a Story of Ruffinus, for we give the places which are for our turn out of Origen according to Je∣rom's version, and if Ruffinus hath no credit with him, I hope he will allow a little to Je∣rom.
3. Lastly, for that other ancient Father Cy∣prian, he cannot let him pass without some ex∣ceptions such as they are, though me thinks that of Vossius should silence all Cavils viz, That the Testimony of Cyprian for Infant-Baptism, both in his time and before, is beyond all ex∣ceptions. And Grotius likewise tells us that the Epistle of Cyprian to Fidus, makes the matter plain that there was then no doubt of Infant-Baptism, for Fidus did not deny their Bap∣tism, but only denyed they ought to be Bap∣tized before the eight day. But let us hear what he hath to except against Cyprian, which is; 1. Because he doth not urge the Practice from any Apostolical Tradition or Precept, but from his own and the Council of sixty six Bishops Arguments. Reply. But what though no men∣tion be made here of Aposto∣lical-Tradition,Origenes & Cy∣prianus Authores sunt Apostolorum etiam tempore In∣fantes Baptizatos esse. Magdeburg. Cent. 1. Lib. 2. c. 6. p. 496. yet it follows not that he held it not as such, and the Magdeburgen∣ses have before told us that both Origen and Cyprian that lived near the Apostles affirm that even in the Apostles time Infants were Baptized. But to see how inflexible and stiff this Anta∣gonist is — if saith he, he had Asserted it
for an Apostolical Tradition, his word would have been no sooner taken than when he tells us that Chrysm was so. To which I Reply, And why then shall Tertullian's supposed Word against Infant-Baptism be taken, and pass for currant, who was as the Magdebur∣genses inform us the first inventer of Chrysm; and Cyprian 'tis like learned it of him who was as the Author calls him his great Master. Judg Reader whether this be fair and equal deal∣ing. 2. His other Exception, which he never learned from his great Master Mr. Tombes, (who was too wise to urge it when he opposed the Testimony of Cyprian. Examen, Sec. 7. pag. 10.) is, because there is good ground to question whether this was Cyprian's and sixty-six Bishops Conclusion. And why so? 1. Because we meet with no such Council, (and that is strange for one that hath launched as he hath done into the vast Ocean of Antiquity) neither yet can it appear where it was held.
Something must be sayd, though it be but meer wrangling; Well I perceive the Anci∣ent Fathers that lived next after Cyprian were dim-sighted, and could not see what good ground there was to question, whether ever Cyprian had such a Council. Had they had the perspicacity of this Author, they would never have retained so venerable an esteem of it, as is evident they had in their frequent and respective quotations of it. As Nazianzen O∣rat. 3. in S. Lavacrum. Chrysost. Hom. ad Neophit. Ambros in Luc. and Hieronimus Lib. 3. Dialog. Contr. Pelag. and Austin in very many places; and no less weakness is there in what follows, viz. And if Austin's Argument before mentioned be good to prove an Apostolical Tradition, because no Council had determined it, it concludes against any such Council. Reply. A pittiful mistake, or misunderstanding Au∣stin's Words, which are, Quod universa tenet Ecclesia &c. That which is universally receiv∣ed, and practised in the Church, and had not its first Institution from some Council: (The Au∣thor should have markt that) but hath been ever retained, may be believed to be an Aposto∣lical Tradition: which indeed is an undenia∣ble Position, and being applyed by Austin to the point in hand seems to be a Demonstration
of the Apostolicalness of Infant-Baptism: Au∣stin therefore calls it an Apostolical Tradition, because it was alwayes practised in the Church, and had not its first Institution from Councils, neither in Cyprian's Council nor any one else, being of greater Antiquity than any of them. Neither can any man name when it began since the Apostles: and for that reason we cannot o∣therwise conceive rationally of it, than that it had its first Original from them. I shall only add those remarkable Words of Mr. Philpot, the Martyr, in his Letter to his fellow-sufferer that scrupled Infant-Baptism; which with the Scripture-Arguments he used, proved so effectual, that (as Mr. Fox in his Book of Martyrs tells us) the dissatisfied Person came thereby to be established in the doctrine of In∣fant-Baptism, and dyed in the Belief of its war∣rantableness. I can declare (saith Mr. Philpot) out of Ancient Writers, that the Baptism of In∣fants hath continued from the Apostles time unto ours; and then cites Origen and Cyprian out of Austins 28th Epistle to Jerom: where are these words viz, Cyprian did not make any new De∣cree but firmly observing the Faith of the Church, judged with his own fellow-Bishops, that as soon as one was born, he might be law∣fully Baptized — These Authorities (saith that famous Martyr a little before his death) I do alledg not to ty the Baptism of Children unto the Testimonies of Men, but to shew how Mens
Testimonies do agree with God's Word, and that the verity of Antiquity is on our side, and that the Anabaptists have nothing but lies for them, and new-Imaginations, which feign the Baptism of Children to be the Pope's Command∣ment. And so I shall leave the Author to his Boasting in what follows, and the impartial Reader to judg whether our Testimonies from Antiquity be forged and fabulous as he would render them; only I must not let pass an Ob∣jection which he starts, and which is usually made by us, which he had better have left Dor∣mant than to give so slight an Answer to it. Objection. It is sayd, That by Tertullian's opposing it, it may seem that there were some that practised it in the 3d Century, and can it be supposed that any did so, except it had been warranted by such A∣postolical Tradition. Observe, Reader, the an∣swer which he gives. Answer. It is granted, Tertullian did oppose it. But who it was that did assert it, and whether upon any such account as supposed, is not mentioned, it will be on their part to prove the one and the other. Reply.
1. We gather from this Answer that the Author cannot have the face to deny it was practis∣ed in the 3d Century, for if Tertullian did Op∣pose it, it must be supposed it was Practised, else how could he oppose it. 2. But we must give the names of those that were for it, as before he must know where Cyprian's Council was held, or else he could not assent to the being of it: But how many names will suffice him I know not. What if I say Origen was one, for I hope by this time he may stand rectus in curia and not be excepted against for a Witness, he speaks point blank to the Case. Ecclesia ab Apostolis Traditionem accepit parvulis dare Baptismum. The Church hath received a Tradition from the Apostles, to give Baptism to little Children; as we have it in his Comment upon the sixth Chapter of the Romans. And though Ruffinus riffled his works as is said, yet Jerom Translated that out of Greek, and so also his other Comment upon Luke, where he is express to the same purpose; and this is at∣tested by Erasmus, and Jerom's Prefaces to both Books puts it beyond doubt. Let me add what I find in Mr. Baxter for farth∣er satifaction. You, saith he,Baxter plain Scripture-proof. p. 157. to Mr. Tombes think the worse of it, because it is pleaded by Origen as a Tradition, from the Apostles; I think very much the better for it, both because it the more fully resolveth the que∣stion
concerning the matter of fact, and A∣postolical Custom, and shews that it was no late invention, or Innovation. And the Fa∣thers (as is hinted before) took not the word Tradition in the Popish Sence, for that which hath been delivered in Doctrine from Age to Age, above what is delivered in Scripture, as to supply the supposed defect of Scripture. But for the very written word it self, by which the Apostles delivered the Truth, and for their Ex∣amples and the report of it, and of some other passages, especially in matter of Fact, tending only to the explication of their Doctrines, and not to the adding of new-Doctrines, as if the former were defective. What if I name once more Irenaeus; Qui proximus fuit temporibus Apostolorum, S. Basil de S. Sto. Cap. 25. That was next to the Apostles; who is calculated to live within some fourty-three years of St. John. I find the Author hath passed him by, and yet as hath been before shewn he was for In∣fant-Baptism, otherwise what sence shall we put upon those Words of his, Lib. 2. C. 39. which are before spoken to; and which occasioned Dr. Taylor to say, The Tradition of Infant-Baptism passed through his hands, in his Con∣sideration of the Practice of the Church in Baptiz∣ing Infants. Sec. 29. pag. 55.
3. We shall by no means grant that Tertul∣lian was against Infant-Baptism, we have given some hints why already. But shall reserve our discourse about that till we come to its proper place, that is, the Examination of the Witness produced against Paedobaptism, whereof Tertullian is the first. The AUTHOR's Exceptions against Scripture-grounds for Infant-Baptism, Examined. NExt he falls upon Scripture-grounds u∣sually produced for Infant-Baptism, which he is pleased to select for us (leaving out that in Rom. 11.17. which is the most principal place of all) and so to encounter them in that way and manner as he sees best. And herein he hath shewed cunning, not much unlike to that before, in conjoyning the condemned Ecclesiastical Autho∣rities for Infant-Baptism, with those which Protestants own for Authentick. Reply. 1. Had I been to choose my own Weapons, I would have let alone some of those the Author pitcht upon.
Secondly, Neither would I have ordered the the Proofs from some of the Texts in so flight a manner, as he doth; for if a Weapon be sharp and keen, yet if an Enemy have the handling of it how can we expect, unless he be the more ingenious, but that he will blunt the edg of it. And that Adversary shews but sorry valour, which knocks in the head some Arguments of straw, which he hath framed to shew his skill on. In my Opinion it had been more ingenui∣ty in the Author, (1) To have chosen for usonly the perti∣nent places that carry the clearest evidence, and to have pretermitted the rest: For if the chiefest places will hold good, the rest which are dark and disputable whether they belong to the point, may well be let alone; and if the chiefest will not carry it; much less will the other: yet this is certain that if the strength of every one of those Texts which he produceth for us, were eluded, save one, yet that one would carry it; for though two Wit∣nesses be needful for men, yet one single one is as valid for God, as if there were many thou∣sands.
2. To have pitcht only upon those Texts, wherein all Protestants both Lutherans and Calvinists (i.e. Paedobaptists) concurr in, as per∣tinent to the point; whereas he knows it is controverted among them, whether some of the Scriptures produced have any thing to do with Infant-Baptisme, as both the second and third Texts instanced in: Nay the third which contains Christs Commission for Baptism, is that which the Author and his party judge to be the main ground for Baptizing Believers, and excluding Infants. And we know that this is their main Argument, that Infants are not to be baptized, because they cannot believe, and truly we were very sparing of places to prove childrens Baptism, if we should pitch upon Mark 16.16. for it. And here I profess my self to be of Mr. Baxters mind, Pos. 7. pag, 7. of his plain proof — I cannot deny, saith he, but that some Divines have brought some mis-ap∣plyed Scriptures for Infant-Baptism: Now it is easie to write against these and seem to triumph, and yet the cause be no way shaken: some silly people think, when they hear an impertinent Text put by, that all is done: when it may be all the most plain Scriptures and best arguments have never been answered with sense or reason. Having said thus much, I come now to his ex∣ceptions. 1. The first is against that place, Mat. 19.15. Suffer little children to come unto me, and forbid them not, &c. To this our Author Objects — May we not
say, How doth Baptism come to be concerned in this Text, &c. To which I reply, First, I conceive none did ever bring this place as of it self, a full and di∣rect proof for Infants-Baptism. But secondly it doth prove two points, which lay a good ground work for the same. First, That the Kingdom of God is made up as well of Infants as of grown persons: if any by Kingdom of Heaven, will needs understand it of the Kingdom of Glory; let him consider that none are of that Kingdom, who were not first of the Church, first of the Kingdom of grace here, and so it comes all to one, under∣stand it, of which you please. The Kingdom of God is made up as well of Infants as Adult persons:Quùm jubet Infantes ad se accedere, nihil cla∣riùs quàm veram In∣fantiam notari. Instit. Christ. Relig. Calv. compend. per Launeum, cap. 17. p. 325. for Christ saith, it is of such (i.e.) Children: not of grown men resembling Children. For first, That had been no good reason why such should come to him and be blessed of him. 2. That had been no reason why Christ should manifest so great displeasure against his Disciples, for going about to hinder them. The word is [] rendred in the New Translation, much displeased; The vulgar hath it indignè tulit. he took it ill at their hands, in∣dignatus est, saith Beza, be lookt upon it with in∣dignation. Second, The second point which it proves,
which is also a good ground-work; for the same, is, That Infancy is no bar or exclusion of any from coming to Christ, and receiving a Blessing. Infants are capable of benefit by Christ, although they do not actually believe; though they can∣not lay hold on Christ, yet Christ can lay hold on them. Obj. But Baptism is not concerned in the Text, except it can be made out that, that bles∣sing was Baptizing. Ans. 1. It is certain that Blessing is not Bapti∣zing, but tis something more, and Christ in blessing them vouchsafed that to them, which usually was an Ordinance administred after Baptism, and which is of a higher nature,Acts 8.17, 18, 19. & 19.6. and so we may argue from this to Baptism Inclusively, or a majori, from the greater. 2. Though Blessing be not Baptism, yet in as much as they were of the Kingdom of Heaven whom he blest, it follows they were qualified Subjects for Baptism, for grant to Infants a Church relation, and their Baptism will follow upon it; if one stands good the other will, and this is all we plead for, from the Text. For that which follows out of Dr. Taylor; Christ Blessed Children, and so dismissed them, therefore Infants aré not to be Baptized. It is a very idle one. For, First, from a par∣ticular Omission to conclude an universal un∣lawfulness, is most unreasonable, as Dr. Ham∣mond speaks. It is as if one should thus argue, [Christ when he Preached in the Mount, did
not then pray, but only preach, therefore 'tis not lawful to pray. Secondly Christ did not that we know baptize any, John 4.2. And if an Argument drawn from his Example Nega∣tive, be pressing, it would conclude as well a∣gainst Baptizing those of riper years, as chil∣dren. 3. Since Christ did that for them which did transcend Baptism, we may rather con∣clude; that certainly, if he had Baptized any he would those children, since he shews more respect to them then any grown persons.Mr. Sydenbam in his Christian and sober Exercitation. Fourthly, Christs Blessing them holds forth as much as if he had baptized them: for in that outward rite the Holy Ghost was convey'd, and by laying on of hands, others received it, as appears from Acts 8.17, 18, 19. & 19.6. And why not in this Act of Christ, upon the Infants (as Mr. Sydenham argues) And if this Act of Christ were not a complement only, but an outward sign of the receiving the Holy Ghost, Who should hinder Water that Infants should not be Baptized, seeing they have received the Holy Ghost as well as we? Act. 10.47. And the same Author farther adds— What can be more then for Christ to take up Infants in his Arms, lay his hands on them, as an outward sign to consecrate them to himself, and to shew their capacity of receiving the Holy Ghost, and then to bless them? And yet we must with scorn deny them a little water, and think it too much to have them named among the lowest sort of visible Saints, and when Christ owns
them publickly, and saith, that of such is the Kingdom of God. But I shall rather believe Christs Testimony, then any mans forward o∣pinion. And to what intent should Christ do all this, but to confirm their old state in the Church, and not to cast them out of it, and from the participation of all outward signes of falvation? Let mens consciences, not gulph'd in prejudice, judge: This Text, if there were no more, will fly, (saith he) in the consciences one day of the most confident contemners of In∣fants, and their Baptism. A Second Scripture in∣stanced and excepted against is, that John 3.5.Second Scripture. in∣stanced and excepted a∣gainst. Except a man be born of Water, and the Spirit, he can in no wise enter into the Kingdom of God. From whence (saith the Author) 'tis concluded, That there is no other way to Regenerate and save Infants, and add them to the Church, but by Baptism. But who are they that conclude thus from that Text? The Papists, as himself confesseth: And what I pray is that to us? who disclaim such inferences, as he also acknowledgeth we do, and for very good reasons, and he might have done well to have set them down for the benefit of his Reader, some of them I shall name as, First, Because as Calvin speaks in his Institutions,Instit. Christ. Relig. Calv. Compend. p. 322. per Launeum edit. 2d. Salus consistit in promissione, Salvation depends upon Gods Covenant, Gen. 17.7. which
he cites, adding in the same place, Infants may be capable of Salvation without Baptism, as the Israelites who dyed without Circumcision. Though there be an absolute necessity that who∣ever are saved, they must be saved by the Cove∣nant, yet there is not an absolute necessity of the Seal. Before the law the Covenant was made, for our comfort, in respect of our In∣fants. The seed of the Woman shall break the Serpents head, Gen. 3.15. yet there was no seal to it for 2000. years, nor was there such absolute necessity afterward in the days of cir∣cumcision, for those that dyed before the eighth day. The necessity of Salvation by the Cove∣nant was absolute, but the necessity of the seal only Conditional, so far forth as it may be had. 2. If Baptism be of absolute necessity to Sal∣vation, that regeneration is affixt to it, and none can be saved without it, then it is in mans power to save, and to destroy, if they will bap∣tize their children they may save them, if they neglect it, damn them, which is a horrible ab∣surdity to conceive. Secondly, Now to the Text it self, we shall next enquire what it affords, with great respect to the Learned, which may judge otherwise of it. Either this Scripture is to be understood of Baptism or not? if of Baptism, then either ge∣nerally belonging to all men,Dr. Sclater on the 4. Rom. ver. 9. or limitedly to Infants only: If of Infants only, then saith Dr. Solater, 1.
What meant Christ to propound it to Nicode∣mus an old man? Was it his purpose to teach him; that in as much as he was not Baptized in his infancy, he could not enter into the King∣dom of God? then sure, I shall not wonder, if Nicodemus conceited a necessity, for an old man desiring to come to Heaven, to return back into his Mothers Womb, and be born again. 2. Will they say, it must have this gloss by limitation; if a man want Baptism by contempt and not o∣therwise? why then should it stand in force a∣gainst Infants in their own persons not capable of contemning, and whose Parents desire it, but are prevented by necessity? Alas! poor infants, that you, free from contempt in your selves, and your Parents also, must yet away to Hell for bare want of Baptism; and yet grown persons [as Papists themselves acknowledge] in the same want, have access to Heaven, so they be free from contempt: Can we imagine bare want to be more prejudicial to Infants, then to grown men. But what Reader, if it appear that the place cannot be understood of Baptism at all? I must leave it to thee to judge of what is offered, to shew, that 'tis only Regeneration and not Bap∣tism that is concerned in the Text, for Water and the Spirit here by an Exegesis are one, or if you will according to the judgement of Dr. Taylor, by Water is meant the effect of the Spi∣rit: Nor is this the single judgment of Dr. Tay∣lor, but very many others, who in their time were the Magna Ecclesiae lumina, who so inter∣pret it, amongst whom are Calvin, Beza, Pis∣cator;
Calvin indeed acknowledgeth the ancient Expositors followed Chrysostome, that the Text was to be understood of Baptism, yet professeth himself of another mind. Beza in his Annota∣tions of the place declares himself to the same purpose, that he understood by Water in that place is meant rather the effect of the spirit then the Sacrament of Baptism — sin verò malimus Christum cum Pharisaeo disserentem Aquae nomine, ad externas ablutiones allusisse, &c. I rather con∣ceive Christ reasoning with this Pharisee under the name of Water, doth allude to those external wa∣shing, which were useless without the cleansing of the Spirit. Et Spiritus nomen sit exegesis [that is, a figure which signifies a dark speech made clear by another word, which here is the Spirit] nominis aquae, sicut alibi spiritus & ignis in bap∣tismo conjunguntur, By the name of Water we are to understand by an Exegesis the Spirit, as elsewhere the Spirit and Fire are joyned, Though the Or∣der be inverted there, and he gives the reason of it. So Piscator, except a man be born of Water, that is, ex spiritu sancto, exserente quasi vim a∣quae — Of the holy Spirit, which operates in the soul as Water doth in the body, and he also referrs to the same place, Mat. 3.5. Of being Baptized with the Spirit, and with Fire. We have also the great Chamier arguing the same, seeing in this sense the words bear an absolute truth without any limitation. The Author concludes this with sporting himself at the different grounds upon which the Assertors of Infant-Baptism hold it out; as the Fathers upon one ground, the Lutherans upon
another, the Calvinist differing from them, the Episcoparians one way, the Presbyterians another, and the Independents have a peculiar ground va∣rying from them all. Now thanks be to Mr. Tombes his eleventh Argument against Infant-Baptism, for all this, Exercitation pag. 33. The Assertors of Infant-Baptism little agree amongst themselves, saith he, upon what ground they may build it. Cy∣prian and others draw it from the Universality of grace, and the necessity of Baptism to Salva∣tion. Austin brings the faith of the Church, o∣thers (the Church of England) substitute the promised surety in the place of the Faith, and Repentance of the Baptized: The Lutherans the faith of the Infant, others the faith of the next Parent in Covenant in a gathered Church. Reply. This, saith Mr. Geree unto him, hath art, I will not say Sophistry in it; and what though divers men have let fall different grounds, yet none of those are the main upon which they ground it (for that's the Covenant of Gods grace, that takes in the Child with the Parent) if, (saith he) I should from several ways or Argu∣ments used by the Antipaedobaptists, say, they did oppose. Infant-Baptism on several grounds, therefore their opposition were invalid, you would think my answer unsolid, and so do I your Argument. Father I desire the Author to reflect upon his own party who oppose chil∣drens Baptism, by denying that Covenant made
to Abraham was a Covenant of Grace; some say it was Temporary, some Typical, some mixt, and I know not what; So they much differ in the foundation of their practice. Some build it on a bare confession of sin, whatever the man be, as to grace, some on profession of Faith, some on signs of grace, &c. Mr. Geree saith well — weakness in mens sight, variety of fancy and principles, carry men into dif∣ferent ways of defending the same truth. The Author now frames his exceptions against those Scriptures which hold forth a Covenant-Right to the Children of Believeers,4. Argument from federal holiness ex∣cepted against. and from whence we inferr their baptizing, and thus he begins — Paedobaptists being loth to part with the Tradition, and yet seeing the rottenness of the ancient ground upon which 'twas built, found out this new foundation for it of Covenant-Holi∣ness, of which Zwinglius about 120 years, for aught that he can learn, was the first Founder and singular from all that went before him. All this is from Master Tombes,The Author a notori∣ous Plagiary having taken all in his 43. pages following from Mr. Tombes his two Books of Exerc. and Examen, I mean as to the substance of it, and most in his words and method, only in∣deed he hath two quotations out of Dr. Taylor, and one out of Dr. Owen. Mr. Tombes Exercit. p. 11. and so throughout to the endc of this Chapter, both Arguments Authori∣ties, Scriptures, and Cryti∣cismes, with this difference, that he varies a little in some things, and doth not speak
so warily as he. Mr. Tombes in his Examen part 3. pag. 35. begins the Argument (as framed by us) from the connexion between the Cove∣nant and the Seal, but this man ends it with that, and the Scriptures are in both one, viz. Gen. 17.7. Acts 2.39. I need not therefore much trouble my self for an Answer to the Au∣thor, for the same, which Mr. Marshall gave Tombes, doth the work to a hair. The Author tells us that for ought he could learn Zwinglius was the first Founder of the Ar∣gument for Baptism from federal Holiness, and this indeed he learnt from Mr. Tombes his Exer∣citation, pag. 11. whose words are — Whether any in the Ages before the last past expounded it of federal holiness, I am not yet certain; and in the two last lines of page the 79. of his Exa∣men, he hath it thus, viz. None that ever I met with expounded it of federal Holiness till the controversie of the Anabaptists in Ger∣many. To this I will seek for no other answer then what Mr. Marshal gives him, the cause (saith he) I confess depends not upon this [whether such an interpretation was then first put] But it discovers some defect in your reading, and then shews Athanasius one of the most Ancient Greek Fathers, and Tertullian one of the most Ancient of the Lattin Fathers, bring this Text to prove the Prerogative of the In∣fants of Believers in such a sense as they could not have done, if to their understanding it had not related to the Covenant of grace. But to
the Argument, and let us see what is excepted a∣gainst it. The Argument is this, viz. They who are holy with a federal or Covenant holiness ought to be baptized, But the Infants of Believers are holy, with such a holiness, Ergo, This is groun∣ded on the Text, which saith [else were your Children unclean, but now are they ho∣ly.] Against which it is excepted, that there are two things in the Argument asserted, but not at all proved. First, that the holiness in the Text is a Federal, or Covenant-holiness. Secondly, that federal holiness qualifies Infants for Baptism, both which the Author positively denies upon the fol∣lowing grounds. First, because the Holiness in the Text be it what it will be, whether Moral, Federal, or Matrimoni∣al, is neither here nor elsewhere, assigned to be a ground of Baptizing Children upon; it being on∣ly the ground laid down in the institution that can warrant the same. To which I reply, That in the first part of the Book, chapter the first, is shewed, how the Infant Seed of Believers are included in the in∣stitution, or comprehended in the Commission as baptizable, and being not willing actum age∣re, I must referr the Reader thither. We have also proved that they are of the Church of Christ. chap. 6. of the first part, upon which ac∣count they are likewise subjects of Baptisme. Farther, if their holiness be a Covenant-holiness, that is, a holiness of special separation to God; and he owneth them as his peculiar ones, by
virtue of his Cove nant-Relation, this is virtual ly and implicitly a word of command for the Baptizing such In fants, Antipaedobaptists are e∣ver up with this note, where is your command? What word of Institution have you to bear you out? To this we have spoken enough before, in telling them we have an implicit command for what we do; and farther we offer this Syllo∣gisme — They to whom God is a God in Covenant, have a command to receive the seale of the Covenant, Gen. 17.10, 11. If then the same Covenant be given to Believers and their Seed, and if Baptism be given to Christi∣ans, instead of Circumcision, as shall be pro∣ved in its proper place, then the same command which obliged Abraham to be Circumcised, and his seed, doth in like manner, the faithful and their seed also. Secondly, Because, saith he, if it should be granted that Faederal holiness were a ground to baptize Children upon, under the Gospel, as it was to Circumcise them under the law — yet it will appear from substantial Arguments that no such holiness is intended here. Let us hear what they are; namely, 1. Because there is no such Holiness in the new-Testament, as Federal, belonging to Chil∣dren. Well argued! this seems to be neer of kin to idem per idem, it is not, because it is not. So there is no such holiness intended in the Text; Why? Because there is no such holiness in the New Testament, and the Text is in the New Testament. The matter is well mended in what
follows — It is no where to be found. This is only a Dictate, for he addeth no reason; It is no where to be found; But you must understand he means by himself and his party that have made such inquisition and search into Scripture, that they only have found what is there; what they judge to be the fence of Scripture is so, and we must all come and learn of them what the Scripture contains, what it implyes and what may be inferred from it, what not. Away with this Popery. But what if I say the Covenant holyness of Children may be found in this Text? I see no reason but my word may be be credi∣ted as well as his. Nay, if we must go by an implicit faith, we shall carry it, for allmost all the Godly and Learned Divines in Europe have found Covenant-holiness in the New-Testament, not only in the 2 Cor. 7.14. But in Rom. 11.15, 16, 17. where it is said, if the first fruits are boly, so is the lump: if the root be holy, so are the Branches, which demonstrates the Covenant-holiness of the children of believing Gentiles, now under the Gospel, as much as of the Jew∣ish children, that descended naturally from A∣braham, under the Law, but this must not be admitted, and why? 1. Because it contradicts the Gospel-Dispen∣sation as before, that is, I suppose in the first part of his Book, chap. 5. and I referr the Reader to our Answer of that Chapter, to which I adde this by way of surplusage, that if our Children be not federally holy, how could the Apostle press the Jews to imbrace Christianity, by tel∣ling them, The Promise is made to you and to your
seed, and to all that are afar off, even as many as our Lord God shall call. So that to say the Do∣ctrine of Federal holiness contradicts the Gospel-dispensation, is to contradict the Gospel which expresly says the contrary, Act. 2.38, 39. Where [mark the words are not the promise] [Was] to you, and to your Children, but [is] intimating, that the Covenant is not repealed, but in force still, under the Gospel-Dispensati∣on, as much as ever it was anciently to the Jews and their posterity, and to them that are afar off, the Gentiles, and then to their Children too. even their Infant Children, otherwise these two absurdities would follow. 1. The grace of Christ under the Gos∣pel-dispensation would be less then what it was under the Law, for then the believing Parent with his Children were federally holy, and if it were not so now, then should we be in a worse condition under Christ, then under Moses. 2. It will render the Children of the Jews also in a worse condition, upon their co∣ming in to Christ, then they were in under the legal Administration, contrary to that, Jer, 30.20. Ezek. 37.25, 26. 2. His second Reason is, Because such appre∣hensions intails Grace to Nature, Regeneration to Generation, contrary to John, 3. That which is born of the flesh is flesh, and Eph. 2. We are all the Children of wrath by Nature. This hath been before answered, and I shall only now say, that this is a false and fraudulent insinuation to beget a prejudice in the weak a∣gainst our assertion of federal holiness, for he knows very well,
1. That our Divines hold that gratia non transfunditur per carnem, and that grace is not extraduce, Grace is not hereditary, that is inhe∣rent Grace: We all ways affirm that all Chil∣dren are alike depraved, and all the posterity of Adam are alike conceiv'd in sin, and brought forth in iniquity, all are Carnal and unclean by nature. 2. We farther affirm that though all the Children of Believers are not holy with an in∣herent personal holyness that accompanies Re∣generation, yet the Children of either believing Parent, are holy with a holiness-relation put upon them, and separartion to God, as his pecu∣liar people, by virtue of which, they have a right to the external privileges of the Covenant, whereof they are as capable as the children of the faithful Israelites. 3. It is acknowledged even by Mr. Tombs him∣self, that the Children of the Jews were fede∣rally holy, for the whole body of that people (Parents and Children) were called a Holy Seed, a Holy Nation, a peculiar people, and Jews by Nature, distinguished from the Sinners of the Gentiles, Gal. 2.15. And yet this did not intail Grace to Nature, or Regeneration to Generation under the Old Testament, and how doth it then do it under the New? 3. His third Reason is, Because it contradicts experience both of former and later times, wherein Godly men have had wicked Children, and wicked men good Children. Although this be true, yet the Doctrine of federal holiness remains unshaken: for chil∣dren
are not therefore holy, because born of be∣lieving Parents [for so they are no better then others] but because they are taken with their Parents into Gods gracious Covenant, and have therefore a right as proper subjects, to the Seal thereof. Even as the Children of the Godly under the Law; Ishmael and Esau, during their Infant-state, were comprehended in the Cove∣nant, and did partake of the external privilege thereof, Circumcision, the sign and Seal of the Covenant, although afterward they degene∣rated, proving wicked, and so discovenanted themselves. 4. He tells us, The Tenet of Federal holiness necessitates the owning the Docirine of falling from grace; but this is his mistake: for the Doctrine of Covenant-holiness in regard of the Children of Believers, consists very well with perseverance in Grace. For we must consider Grace is either Common or saving: The Elect and faithful Seed are only in a State of saving Grace, and can never totally fall away, nevertheless persons may fall away from Common-grace, (1.) From the External privileges of the Gospel and Covenant of Grace. And though we assert this latter, yet cannot any man form thence infer, that it neces∣sitates the owning the Doctrine of falling from grace in the sense of the Arminians. We read of some who are said to be false in Gods Cove∣nant, and to Apostatize from it, Psalm 44.17. Daniel 11.30, 31. And the Apostle bewailes the Jewes upon this account Kom. 9. Rom. 11.
2. His second Argu∣ment is,Mr. Tomb's Exerc. fourth Arg. on 1 Cor. 7.14. p. 10. Because the Text, he saith, intends another, viz. a Civil or Matrimonial Ho∣liness, in Opposition to For∣nication, Ʋncleanness, Bastardy, This is Mr. Tombes again. In answer to which, I might first except a∣gainst the impropriety of phrase, the Anthor u∣seth, of Civil and Matrimonial holiness, I have read of Civil honesty, but never of Civil holiness in any Orthodox writer. And Mr. Tombes him∣self rejects it, I do not like saith he, the calling it Civil holiness, for it is not from the laws of men, but the institution of God, and therefore I rather call it Matrimonial holiness; But nei∣ther of them are good. It cannot possibly be meant of Matrimonial holiness, as if the sense were this, your children are holy that is Legitimate, 1. Because, Holy, is no where so taken in all the Scripture. 2. Because it is such a Holiness as that Children could not have, if neither of the Parents were a Believer, or had a sanctified use of the other, which cannot be legitimacie, for that may be as well without that, as with it. 3. It is such a holiness as argues the unbe∣lieving party to be sanctifyed in, or to the o∣ther, but meer Legitimacy doth not so. 4. It must be such a holiness as may answer the Corinthians doubt, which was not whether when one party came to be a believer, the Marriage with the Unbeliever were dissolv'd [as the Author
falsly supposeth, when he saith the Question was, Whether their Spiritual Relation to Christ, did not dissolve their Carnal Relation entered into in Unbelief] But the doubt was, whether they might still persist in so neer a Communion with an Unbeliever as Marriage is? Now it had been satisfaction to tell them they might, for their Children were not bastards. They might displease God by such a Communion, though their children were not Bastards. But says he, your Believing gives you a holy use of your Wife, though an Unbeliever, as appears, because your children born of such are holy, and owned by Christ as within his Covenant. 5. I might add. The Holiness in the Text is not put in Opposition to Bastardy; for, that cannot be the sense of the Apostle which implies untruth, because then, if one of the Parents had not been a Believer, and so by being a Believer had Sanctified the Unbeliever, their children must have been Bastards, whereas though both the Parents had been Infidels, yet the children were not Bastards, that were begotten in lawful Wedlock. His second Argument to prove it a Holiness of that kind as he supposeth, and not federal is, Because the Holiness of the Children is of no o∣ther Nature, then that spoke of the Ʋnbelieving Pa∣rent in the Text, and if one will intitle to the Ordinance, so the other. This the Author dictates, and since he brings no proof, for what he says, I may as well deny it, and say no more. Nevertheless I shall give a reason to prove the holiness of the children is
other then that spoken of the unbelieving Pa∣rent. Namely, because the children here are said to be holy in themselves, But the unbe∣lieving [Whether Husband or Wife] is only said to be sanctified in, or to the believing Yoak-fellow, as all other creatures; the meat he eats, the cloaths he wears are sanctified; None of which are holy in themselves, but only in reference to the believer — quoad ejus usum, to his use and service, and therefore cannot be called holy, but the children in the Text are said to be holy in themselves and not sanctified or made holy to another. Mr. Cotton of New England is full to the same purpose in his Dia∣logue about Baptism. Though the word San∣ctifyed and holy come of the same Root, saith he, which is , yet the Apostle useth them here in such a different phrase or manner of speech, as putteth a manifest difference in the sense or signification of them. For when he saith, the Unbelieving Yoak-fellow is sanctifi∣ed, he doth not leave it so, without a limitation or restriction, but joyneth the Preposition  to the Verb , (i.e.) Sanctified in or to the believer, and that limiteth the sence to the Be∣lievers use, But when he speaketh of Children he doth it not with such limitation, they are holy to the Believer, but Positively they are holy. The Author shuts up this with another mi∣stake. The Holiness spoken of the unbelieving Parent, and the Child being of the same Nature, then if one will intitle to the Ordinance, so the o∣ther.
Posito uno absurdo mille sequuntur. One absur∣dity laid down, draws an innumerable train af∣ter it. The Holiness is not one and the same as before, and therefore cannot entitle to the same privileges. And besides, I add, the Cove∣nant was not made with the Believer and his Yoak-fellow, but with him, and his Seed, and therefore the one hath a right to the Ordinance of Baptism, the other not. The third Argument, (such as it is) is from the consideration that children in the Text is not to be limited to Infants,Mr. Tombes again, Examen p. 73. or such children that they might have since the Religious difference happened, but of grown children, for a mans Child is his Child, though thirty, forty, or fifty years old, &c. 'Tis wonderful to behold the shifts of er∣rour, This is old Tombes again, Exam. pag. 73. He saith, Your children indiscriminatim, with∣out difference, as well those you had before, one when of you was a Believer. But this Muse is soon stop∣ped by these considerations.Quòd enim nonnulli ad liheros ex utroque infideli susceptos exten∣dunt, qui non sint spu∣rii sed legitimi, falso dici apparet ex hypothe∣si pauli. Quor sum e∣nim vel de spuriis, vel dc infidelis utriusque naptiis dissereret? Be∣zae Annot. in locum. First, That the Corinthians could not possibly be so fil∣ly as to doubt whether those children which were begotten in their Infidel state were Bastards, before this Religious difference happened; nor can we con∣ceive the Apostle would have suggested such a false thing unto them, as if those Children had
been to be so reputed, had not one of them turned Believer. Secondly, The Chil∣dren then born after one of them was turned Christian is unquestionably that which the A∣postle intends, and if so, then Children is most rationally to be limited to Infant Children, such as should be or had been newly born upon their Parents Believing, for we may well sup∣pose the scruple arose presently after conversion, about cohabitation and converse with their In∣fidel-Yoak-fellows, and whether it were not ir∣religious (not Fornication as Antipaedobaptists ve∣ry weakly suppose) for the Believer to procre∣ate with the Infidel. His fourth Argument why it cannot be a new Cove∣nant-Holiness that quali∣fies and intitles to Baptism is — First because that cannot be known;The fourth Argnment taken from Mr. Tombes vide Mr. Baxters plain proof for Infants Church-Membership and Baptism. p. 92. for if the Parent pro∣fessing faith, be a Hypocrite, and not in Covenant themselves, then may you Baptize a wrong subject, as well as a right. I perceive the Authors strength is almost spent. His reason runs low, and is near come to the dreggs; for what doth this his arguing amount to? shall we not find those who are for Baptizing grown persons, upon the pro∣fession of Faith in the same praedicament? may not these be Hypocrits also, and not in Covenant, and if so, do they not Baptize a wrong subject? When therefore they have cleared this difficul∣ty for themselves they have done it for us, Far∣ther if it be the reality of Faith and Holiness
in grown persons that qualifies for Baptism, then none must be Baptized, because this cannot be known; but if it be said a serious profession is sufficient [for, De occultis non judicat Ecclesia, The Church judgeth not of secret or hidden things] Then the same also is sufficient for the Infants of such so professing. The distinction which is used by Divines may give light in this point, namely, there is an external being in Covenant, in facie visibilis Ecclesiae, in the esteem and judgement of the Church, and that is visible Profession or Holyness, and this gives right to visible priviledges, 2. There is an internal be∣ing in Covenant, in regard of the spiritual fa∣ving benefits of it; and it is out of the reach of the Church to judge of this latter. I shall shut up this with the words of Mr. Marshal in his Defence of Infant-Baptism, pag. 108. viz. When therefore I say they [Infants] are visibly to be reckoned to belong to the Covenant with their Parents. I mean look what right a visible Professor hath to be received and reputed to be∣long to the Visible Church, Quà visibilis Profes∣sor, as a visible Professor, that right his child hath so to be esteemed. Now I conceive the Author himself will confess that the spiritual part and privileges of the Covenant of Grace belongs not to visible Professors, as visible, but only to such among them who are inwardly such as their external profession holds out, but yet there are outward Church privileges,Mr. Blakes Covenant Sealed. which belong to them, as they are visible Professors, As to to be re∣puted
the Children of the Kingdom, Mat. 8.42. Act. 3.25. And in this sense St. Paul speak∣ing of the Body of the Jewish people saith,Rom. 9.4. To them per∣taineth the Adoption, [Not the spiritual adoption, but the honour of be∣ing separated, and reputed Gods Children, Deut. 14] and the Glory, and the Covenants, &c. Secondly he saith, such an absurdity would follow, that no Ʋnbelievers Child is in Covenant or Elect, &c. To this I answer, that no Unbelievers child is in Covenant in the sence before mentioned, that is, in facie Ecclesiae, in the face of the Church, until he make a Profession of his Faith. Never∣theless he may belong to the Election of Gods Grace, but thats not to the point in hand, for Election is not a Covenant, nor any in Cove∣nant because elected. Thirdly he adds the concurrent Testimony and Confession of many Learned Commentators and parties themselves upon the place, that the Text is to be understood of matrimonial, and not federal holiness. As Austin, Jerom, Ambrose, Melancton, Musculus, Camerarius, Erasmus, to which saith he, we may adde many more, as if these were collected by his own pains. Where∣as he hath only added the last, the rest were all gathered and published by Mr. Tombs neer thirty years since. And that the Reader may not think I injure him, I shall parallel them once more.
H. D. Jerom, saith, be∣cause of Gods appoint∣ment, Marriage is holy. H. D. Ambrose thus, The Children are Ho∣ly, because they are born of Lawful Mar∣riage. H. D. Melancthon, in his Commentary on the place thus. There∣fore Paul answers, that the Marriages are not to be pulled asunder, for their unlike opini∣ons of God; if the im∣pious person do not cast away the other: and for comfort he adds as a reason, The unbelieving Husband is Sanctified by the believing Wife; Meat is sanctified, for that which is holy in use, that is, granted to Believers from God; so here he speaks the use of Marriage to be
holy, and to be gran∣ted of God. H. D. Musculus in his Comment upon the place confesseth, That he had abused formerly that place against the Anabaptists. H. D. Camerarius in his Commentary upon the place, saith, (for the unbelieving Hus∣band hath been sanctifi∣ed) an usual change of the Tense; that is, Sanctified in the lawful use of Marriage, for without this he saith, it would be, that their Children should be un∣clean, that is infamous and not Legitimate, who so are holy, that
is during the Marriage, are without all blot of ignominy.
J. T. Hierome, saith, be∣cause by Gods appoint∣ment Marriage is ho∣ly, Exerc. p. 12. J. T. Ambrose, hath it thus, the Children are holy, because they are born of lawful Marriage Exercit. p. 12. J. T. Melancthon, in his Commentary on the place, Therefore Paul answers, that the Marriages are not to be pulled asunder, for their unlike opinions of God, if the impious person do not cast away the o∣ther: and for comfort he adds as a reason, The Ʋnbelieving Hus∣band is Sanctified by the believing Wife. And elsewhere he saith, Meat is Sanctified, for that which is holy in use, so here, he speaks the use of Marriage to be holy, and to be
granted of God, Exer. p. 11. J. T. Musculus on the 1 Cor. 7.14. hath those words — I have sometimes abused the present place against the Error of the Anabap∣tists Exercit. p. 1. H. D. leaves out Error, be∣cause that sounds ill and an ignorant Rea∣der upon the leaving that out, may judge Musculus was Proselyted to them. J. T. Joachimus Ca∣merarius, about this matter in his Coment [for the Ʋnbelieving Husband hath been Sanctified] an usual change of the Tense, that is, sanctified in the lawful use of Marriage, for without this, he saith, it would be, that their Children should be unclean that is, infa∣mous and not legitimat, who so are holy, that is,
during the Marriage, are without all blot of ignominy, Exercit. pag. 11. By this the Reader may see that our Antago∣nist hath little reason to keep such a vaunting with things made ready to his hand. And in Answer to all the Testimony of these Commen∣tators, that it is to be understood of Legitima∣cy, in opposition to uncleanness and Bastardy, besides the aforementioned Reasons against it, I am of Mr. Marshals mind (as he told Mr. Tombes) that though some Ancient and Modern do interpret this Text as he did, yet it is easie to bring 10 for one that interpret it for federal holiness, and this saith he to Mr. Tombes, you will confess although I forbear to bumbast my Book with them, no ways desiring that this cause should be carried by number of voices — only because Camerarius is named as against us in the interpretation, and he is joyned and bound up at the end of Beza, I mean that which was Printed at Cambridge, I shall acquaint the Rea∣der how positive Beza is who carries the Text for federal holiness; Sed quid si quis hoc negassot? Imo verò nemo id potuit negare, cum constaret do promissione in qua semen quo{que} comprehenditur. No man may interpret it otherwise, it being ac∣cording to the Covenant which comprehends the seed. Nec alia causa est cur sanctorum liberos ad Baptismum admittamas, quàm quia sancti sunt (id est in faedere comprehensi) ab ipso utero. This is
the only reason why we Baptize the Children of the Godly, because they are holy, (that is comprehended in the Covenant) from their Mo∣thers Womb. Now the Author is for answering our Objections against their interpretation of the Text. Object. You give another sense of the word [Holy] then is to be found in Scripture, for no where is holy, the same with Legitimat, but throughout the Bible in many hundred places Holiness is taken for a Se∣paration to God, saith Mr. Sydenham and Mr. Baxter. And besides them, all know, holiness is ta∣ken for a special separation of things, or persons to God and his use. Mr. Marshall, Geree, Blake, and all latter writers as well as former, so take it in the present point, [and the word ] in the Text rendred holy is most used to express the Hebrew word, , which ever signifies what is usui Divino accommodatum, that which is appropriated to a Divine use, which is the pro∣per notion of the word in the old and new Te∣stament, as Sydenham notes, and never taken o∣therwise; and for the proof of it, tells us, he had compared above 300 places (The Author speaks of 600) in the old Testament according to the Septuagint, and all the New Testament places where the word is used. Well, How doth our Antagonist answer
the Objection which he bring? — Why thus — First suppose it be so [He is no farther yet then a suppose] that the word signifies, that, in all those places but this, viz. 1 Cor. 7.14. [But now are they holy) it follows not but it may have this sense properly enough here, the scope of the place leading to it? as  signifies au∣thority or power in all other places,This is also borrow'd from Mr Tombes. yet in the 1 Corin. 11 15. is rendered a Vail, &c. No wonder that Hereticks are so inflexible when even good men, (such as I hope both Mr. Tombes and this Author are) will wrangle at this rate, & somnem movere lapidem, try every way rather then be thought to erre in their con∣ceits: and where this humour is predominant, men were better be silent, and not dispute at all, for it puts an abuse upon the Scripture, and renders Religion not only ridiculous but turns it into a Fire brand of contention. Thus our Author being unwilling to part with his fond notion of the word, Holy, in the Text, doth I fear prophanely abuse the Scripture, by flying to this old shift of Mr. Tombes grounded upon a mistake of the scope of the Text as is before shewn, for the Corinthians doubt was whether it was sinful to cohabit with their Infidel Yoak-fellows, and not whither is was fornication to live with them. It will not be amiss to give you the reply that Mr. Baxter made to Tombes, when he urged that though the word  doth in all other places signifie authority or
power, yet in the 1 Cor. 11.15. it is rendred a Vail. To which saith Mr. Baxter, if God do no where in all Scripture call the meer making a thing lawful (the sanctifying it) but many hundred times use the word in another sense; then we must not call it, nor so interpret him here, but God doth no where in Scripture call the meer making a thing lawful (the Sanctify∣ing of it) therefore we must not do so, nor here so interpret it. Mr. Tombes granted the Antecedent, but denying the consequence, said, that though God did not so use the word, yet we might, and though he use it five hundred times otherwise, yet we must so interpret him here To which, saith Mr. Baxter, I am resolv'd to learn of God how to speak rather then you, and to follow Scripture phrase as near as I can, &c. But I must follow the Author — And secondly, saith he, Neither are we to seek of some Parallel place, where the word holy signifies this sort of Holiness,Mr. Tombes Exercit. p. 13, 14. viz. Matrimonial holiness, Mal. 2.15. A holy seed, viz. a Legitimat seed, as Calvin and Camer, and others inlarge upon it, in opposi∣tion to Bastardy, for so were Bastards to be esteem∣ed, Deut. 23.17. and so 1 Thes. 4.3, 4, 5. This is the will of God even your Sanctification, and that you abstain from Fornication. &c. Still Mr. Tombes word by word, both Scrip∣tures and Authors, so that the Book might have well born the Title of Tombes redivivns, but,
First, For that in Malachy it hath no neer∣ness to it; for Godly or of God is not the same with Holy: nor doth he say that all Seed be∣gotten in lawful Marriage of one to one, is a Godly Seed: But that he might seek a seed of God; that so he might have a Church proceed∣ing from orderly and chaste marriage. Mr. Gerre hath cleared this very well in his Vindi∣ciae Paedobaptismi. The place in Malachy, saith he, to Mr. Tombes doth not any thing counte∣nance your conceit, that Holy is taken for Legi∣timate: not only because that place is capable of another sense then to import a Legitimate Seed, but if it be taken for Legitimate, it fol∣lows not that Holy and Legitimate are one; Holy is a higher state then Legitimate, both are from Gods Ordination; Seed in both sen∣ses may be termed a Seed of God, as the Ori∣ginal is there, and yet they be different, and so though a Seed of God be translated Legitimate, yet it follows not that holy is taken for Legiti∣mate. Then for that place in Deuteronomy 23.17. This makes it more unlikely, saith the afore∣mentioned Author, for though Bastards were once Legally unclean, yet that was a Ceremoni∣al thing, that was abrogated when the Apostle wrote to the Corinthians, and for the Apostle then in that sense to say Bastards were unclean, was neither true, nor safe, for it were a reviving again the Ceremonial Law. And for the other Text, 1 Thes. 4.3, 4, 5. where  Sancti∣fication is the same with Chastity, Mr. Marshal did not fly to a shift, when he told Tombes, that
Chastity among the Heathens is never called Sanctification, but among Believers it is, being a part of the New-Creation, and one branch and part of their Sanctification wrought by the spi∣rit of God; for the Apostle here writes to the Saints to take heed of that sin to which, whilst they were in their Infidel State, they were much given up to. Chastity indeed amongst Infidels we call a moral virtue, but cannot properly be called a part of Sanctification. Thirdly (which is the last reason the Author brings, I should have said Mr. Tombes) Neither can Matrimonial holiness be said not to be a Separation to God;Mr. Tombes Examen. pag. 77. for it is no other then setting a part according to Gods Ordinance, and which is called honourable (or in this sense holy) &c. The Author had been ingenious if he had gi∣ven us all that Mr. Tombes saith upon this — for he flyes to the English Liturgy for help; I may adde, saith he, that Marriage hath had the reputation of a holy estate, as the Liturgy calls it. In answer to which this may suffice, it is a chaste estate, but for the term holiness to be given to it, it is to be sus∣spected to be the Issue of a supposed Sacrament,Mr Geree Vinditiae Paedollapt. so e∣steemed by the Papists, and this may occasion some Epethites given to it, which are yet retained, that ought to be laid aside. There are two other petty objections which
I let pass as not thinking them worthy of any more answers,Vide Marshalls defence p, 146. and Gerees Vindiciae Paedobapt. p. 25. when both Mr. Marshal and Mr. Geree hath done it so well, to whom I refer the Reader. Exceptions against our Arguments for In∣fant Baptism, from Gen. 17. Acts 2.39. removed. In the next place he attempts to invalidate our great Argument for Infant-Baptism drawn from the connexion, that is, between the Cove∣nant and the seal, so that if the Infant seed of Believers are found to be within the Covenant of Gods Grace, they ought therefore to partake of the Seal; The Author sights most furiously against this Argument, but all the Weapons he makes use of in this engagement, are fetch'd out of Mr. Tombes his Armory, whose edges were long since blunted in an encounter with Mr. Marshall and Mr. Geree, yet hath he thought fit to whet and furbish them over again, and to make a great flourish, as if he would do some notable execution. But thou wilt find Reader, that he tenders nothings to the end of the Chap∣ter, but a nauseous Crambe, a Repetition of the old routed Arguments; and indeed the contro∣versie hath been so much bandied too and fro, that without a miraculous invention, it is im∣possible to find out any thing New, either Pro or Con, and the utmost that can be done, is but to improve the Old Arguments.
The foundation upon which we ground our practice, is Gods Covenant, Gen. 17.7. from whence (saith he) it is thus argu∣ed. Those to whom the Gospel-Covenant belonged to them, the Seal thereof appertained: But to Belie∣vers and their seed the Gospel Covenant belonged, as Gen. 17.7. I'le be a God to thee and thy seed, Acts 2.39. The promise is to you and to your chil∣dren. Therefore to them the seal thereof, Circumcision so called, Rom. 4.11. did appertain, Gen. 17.10. For the Faederati were to be Signati, those in the Covenant were to have the Seal thereof; And therefore by consequence it naturally follows, That if Circumcision, the seal of the Gospel-Covenant be∣longed to the seed of Believers under the Law, then doth the Gospel Seal, Baptism much more appertain to the seed of Believers under the Gospel, which comes in the place, room, and use of Circumcision, otherwise the priviledge under the Gospel, would be less then that of the law, should Children be deny∣ed such a benefit. Repl. I do not find, but the Author hath done us right in forming the Argument, and do there∣fore own it as sound and good, notwith∣standing this quick-sighted man (or rather he with Mr. Tombes his eyes) hath espied many faults in it, for, First in general, he tells us, 'tis fallacious and false reasoning, and that there is no natural conse∣quence
at all from Scripture, to inferr the Baptism of Infants, nor any ground to build it on Circum∣cision, and that divers things in the Argument are pre-supposed, but cannot be proved. Secondly, He puts in his particular excepti∣ons against it, as, Except. 1. First, because Circumcision was not the seal of the Gospel-Covenant, to all Believers for 1.Mr. Tombes Examon. pag. 36. some under the Gospel-Covenant were not sealed therewith, as all Believers from Adam to Abraham, neither do we find any of the Believers out of Abrahams family, as Lot, Melchesideck, Job, received any such Seal. Well said Mr. Tombes, They are his very words in his Answer pag. 36. and in his Exercit. pag. 4. and therefore to this there needs no o∣ther answer then what Mr. Geree gives him, which is short and full, viz. All Believers that had it not, were either those that were before the Administration begun with Abraham, and so before the Institution, or such of them that were with or after him, either they joyned not them∣selves to that Administration, and so were not to be sealed no more then the Proselytes of the Gate. Or if they did unite to the Church in Abrahams family, then it is apparent they might have laid claim to Circumcision, as other Pro∣selytes did. 2. There were (saith he) some to whom the
Covenant did not belong, that received,Mr. Tomber Exercit. pag. 4. that called the seal of Circumcision, as Ishmael; for of him God had said, that this Covenant was not to be established with him, but with Isaac,, and yet he was Circumcised, Gen. 17.20, 21, 25. Gal. 4.29.30. And the same may be said of Esau, Rom. 9.10, 11, 12, 13. And as to all the Strangers in Abrahams house, or bought with mony in Israel, that were Circumcised, it may well be doubted, whether the new-Covenant-promises did belong to them. All this is Mr. Tombes again without giving the least hint, Ne  quidem, whence he had it, and that I may not be thought to wrong the Author, I will transcribe what I find in Mr. Tombes his Exercitation, pag. 4. and let it be compared — some (saith he) were Circum∣cised to whom to promise in the Covenant made with Abraham did belong; of Ishmael God had said, that his Covenant was not to be established with him, but with Isaac, and yet he was circumcised, Gen. 17.20, 21, 25. Rom. 9.7, 8, 9, Gal. 4.29.30. The same may be said of Esau: All that were in Abrahams house, whe∣ther Strangers, or born in his house were Cir∣cumcised, Gen. 17.12, 13. Of whom neverthe∣less it may be doubted, whether any promises of the Covenant made with Abraham, did be∣long to them.
Repl. To this then we reply, First, That the Covenant appertained to all the Infant seed of Abraham, without exception, and to all the Infants of Believing Jews, and consequently the Seal of the Covenant, Circum∣cision, was in like manner dispensed to them all indefinitely, to Ishmael as well as to Isaac, to Esau, as well as to Jacob; for neither Ishmael nor Esau were cast out of the Covenant till they degenerated, and discovenanted them∣selves by their own wickedness. Secondly, Whereas 'tis said, My Covenant will I establish with Isaac Gen. 17. 27. We are not (as Mr. Geree says truly) to understand in that place the Covenant we stand in to God, in re∣gard of persons, for our own personal benefit, but the Covenant of special prerogative to Isaac, That Christ should come of, and the Church re∣main in his posterity. Except. 3. His next exception is, Because Abrahams Covenant was a mixt Covenant,Mr. Tombes Exercit. pag. 39. as the seed was. Repl. I observe Antipaedobaptists are extreamly divi∣ded in their opinions about the Covenant that
God made with Abraham (as much as the Au∣thor saith we are about the grounds upon which we assert Infant Baptism, and who shall bring in the Verdict for them I know not) but they all unite in this, to make the Covenant of no effect to us and to our Children; some of them say (and they speak roundly) that it was meerly a Covenant of temporal blessings, as the inheri∣tance of Canaan, and that it hath nothing to do with spi∣rituals;The Anabaptists of Germany heretofore called it a carnal thing that had nothing to do with eternal life. these will make sure work of it, and leave no ground at all from thence for our seed to be comprized in it. Others are contented it should be a Co∣venant of Grace to Abraham and his faithful Seed, yet say they, it was a Covenant of works, at least to his carnal seed; the most subtle of them (as Mt. Tombes) tells us, it was a mixt Covenant, you carry (saith Mr. Tombes) the Narration of the Covenant made with Abraham in Gen. 17, as if it did only contain the Cove∣nant of Grace in Christ, whereas it is apparent out of the Text, that the Covenant was a mixt Covenant, consisting of Temporal benefits, to wit, the multiplying of his seed, ver. 6. the pos∣session of Canaan, ver. 8. The birth of Isaac ver. 16. and the spiritual blessings; the Author treads in his steps, and Ecchceth to him most exactly. — As the birth of Isaac, the possessing the land of Canaan, &c. he might have sav'd himself the labour of writing his Treatise, and only re∣printed Mr. Tombes Exercitation. But to the point. We shall prove the Covenant made with
Abraham, & his Natural Seed, no mixt Covenant, but a pure Covenant of Grace, the same in sub∣stance with ours under the New Testment, For, First, We have the express Testimony of Scripture for it, Gal. 3.8. 2. It is evident from that phrase, Gen. 17.7. I will establish my Covenant between me and thee, and thy Seed after thee, in their Generations for an everlasting Covenant, &c. In faedus seculi, as the Hebrew hath it, for a Covenant of perpetuity, which denotes the quality of it, that it is not Temporary, but Everlasting, respecting spiritual good things. 3. The Tenor of it speaks it a Covenant of Grace, I will be thy God, &c. In which words God engageth himself, all that he is, and all that he hath, and all that he can do in the behalf of poor dust and ashes, and this virtually compre∣hends all sorts of spiritual blessings, Christ, Grace, & Glory; and that Christ was by promise intended in this Covenant is clearly evident from Luke 1.54, 55. and verse 69, 72, 73. And the Apostle giving us the substance of the Cove∣nant of Grace, doth it in the words of Abrahams Covenant, Heb. 8.10. I will be to them a God, & they shall be to me a people. And whereas, he saith, it appears to be mixt in regard it contained many Temporal Blessings, as the Birth of Isaac, Canaan, &c. I answer those temporal Blessings, were but annext to the Covenant, (tis his own Phrase) They were not the substance or essence, but only an accidental Appendix to it: there was no more mixture in that Covenant then in ours, under the New Administration, for as our
Divines still tell them, Godliness under the Gos∣pel also hath the promises of this life as well as of that to come.1 Tim. 4.8. Earthly things were indeed dispensed to them more distinctly, and fully, suitable to their Paedagogical EsTate, to al∣lure them to the service of God, and Heavenly things more generally and sparingly; on the con∣trary, spiritual blessings are more fully and clear∣ly, and earthly things more generally and sparing∣ly held forth and promised to us under the Gospel.Mr. Marshalls defence. pag. 97. The abundance of their Temporal blessings were fi∣gures, Signs, and Types of spiritual blessings, to be enjoyed by them and us. As their delive∣rance our of Egypt, was a Figure of our freedom from spiritual captivity; The promise of Ca∣naan was a Type of Heaven, and an Explana∣tion of the primary grand promise to be their God, giving intimation that he would as cet∣rainly bring them to the Heavenly, as to the Earthly, and to the spiritual, everlasting glori∣ous rest, as well as to that Temporal or Corpo∣real rest, upon which Reve∣rend Mr. Cotton hath an ex∣cellent observation,Mr. Cottons grounds and ends of Baptism of children p. 40. viz. That it was from hence that Jacob gave such solemn charge by Oath unto Jo∣seph, and Joseph to his Brethren, the one to bury his dead body in Canaan, the other for the Transportation of his bones to Canaan, which they would never have done for an earthly in∣heritance, but to nourish in the hearts of their
posterity Faith and desire of Communion in the Church,Joshua Heb. Salvator Dominus Salvator, The Saviour or Lord Savionr. and of their rest in Heaven, whereof Canaans rest was a Type, whereunto, not Mo∣ses but Joshua must bring them; that is, not the Law, but Jesus. Except. 3. A third Exception, is, Because the Seed in the se∣venth verse to whom the Co∣venant belonged,This is Tomb'ss again. Exerc. pag. 48. was not the Carnal, but Spihitual seed only, which he at∣tempts to prove by Scripture and Authority; the Scriptures are, Gaol. 3.16. and 24. and Rom. 9.7, 8. Before I shall shew how grosly these Scriptures are mistaken, and wrested to a quite different sense from what the Apostle intends, as shall be made appear by the context and de∣sign of the Apostle in this Chapter, I shall pre∣mise a few things, as, 1. The Covenant of Grace contains in it on∣ly spiritual good things, Temporals are more properly, Additionals, then of the Essence of it. 2. The Covenant of Grace is but One, the Identity or sameness of the Covenant Mr. Tombes confesseth to be one and the same, both to Jews and Gentiles, Exercit. p. 39. 3. Though this Covenant be but one, yet all are not in it after one and the same manner, some are in it only by participation of external Church
priviledges, others by being interessed in the in∣ternal saving benefits thereof, by means of those priviledges. 4. The whole body of the Jews, as they descended from the Loyns of Abraham, by pro∣pagation, and before they were Regenerated, were according to Scripture Testimony taken by God into Covenant, and were so esteemed by God himself in one respect or other: Hence God saith he, made his Covenant with them all, Deut. 29. speaking there, of the renewing of the Covenant of Grace, verse 10.12, 13, 14, 15. And the Apostle is express, Rom. 9.6. To them appertained the Covenant, and they are said not to be strangers to the Covenant of promise (as the Gentiles) but in the same Eph. 2.11, 12. And such as Apostatized from God, are said to break the everlasting Covenant, Isa. 24.5. And in the new Testament to count the blood of the Co∣venant an unholy thing, Heb. 10.29. Which ex∣pressions argue, that in some sense they must be in and under the Covenant; that is, in regard of external privileges only; for it is certain, they were never in it efficaciously, and savingly as the Elect, choice seed of Abraham, for then they could never have fallen away; they were in it in regard of external Covenant-privileges, and common graces, which Hypocrites and Repro∣bates may partake of; and in this very sense Christ speaking of the Jews collectively, calls them, The Children of the Kingdom, Matthew 8. and the Apostle, the Children of the Cove∣nant.
5. And as it was under the old Testament, so is it under the new, the Covenant is the same norwithsTanding the difference of Administrati∣on: And as it was then, so is it now, Gal. 4.24, 29. Some are born of A∣gar, and some of Sarah,Mr. Cottons grounds and ends of Infant Baptism. some the spiritual seed, Secundum propositium Electionis, chosen according to Gods will and gracious intention from all Eternity, God principally intending the Coventant for them, these may be said to be spi∣ritually & savingly (in regard of powerful efficacy & operation of the Covenant upon them) within e Covenant. Others are in it, quoad externam Oeco∣nomiam,Hypocrites in Cove∣nant, quoad externam Oeconomiam. in regard of exter∣nal priviledges. They are in Christ only by profession, Branches in ap∣pearance not spiritually and savingly engraffed: Joh. 15. There profession speaks them within the Covenant, in facie visibilis Ecclesiae, as Mr. Marshal speaks, by virtue whereof they derive a right to the Seals and Sacraments of the New Testament. 6. There are two sorts which may be reputed in Covenant under the New Testament, as well as under the Old, in regard of external and vi∣sible Oeconomy, or external Church priviledges. 1. Such as stand by their own visible profes∣sion, as all first Covenanters do; so te Prose∣lytes under the Old Testament, and all visible Saints: or else 2. Such as stand in a Political, Moral consi∣deration, as in the right of another, through a
free promise. The distinction is common a∣mongst our Divines, but I quote it from Mr. Sydenham, cap. 4. p. 31. Of his Christian Ex∣ercitation. And he illustrates it by a Princes giving a Title of Honour, or a piece of land to one, and his Heirs, they are all interested in it, yet some prove fools, or traitors, and are after∣wards incapable, and this distinction he shews, holds in the New Testament: for if men deny a being in Covenant, in regard of external privi∣ledges, as well as special grace, or as he speaks, if they deny an external, as well as an internal being in Covenant. Then 1. None can administer an external Ordi∣nance, an outward sign to any; for we must go by external rules in these actings. 2. We set a Seal to a blank to all grown per∣sons who are baptized, without we know them certainly in the Covenant, and that who knows? for our Judgment will no more hin∣der the Seal from being a blanck to grown Pro∣fessors, than to Infants, without they prove real at last, much more he speaks there, which I o∣mit. Having premised these Propositions, we shall now examine what force there is in the Scriptures, for to prove what he would have, referring what is said to the judgment of the impartial Reader. The first Text is that in the 3. Gal. 16, Now to Abraham and his Seed were the promises made, he saith not to Seeds as of many, but as of one, and to thy Seed which is Christ. And if ye be Christs, then are you Abrahams Seed; v. 29. The other is Rom. 9.7, 8. Neither because they are the Seed of Abraham, are they
all children, but in Isaac shall thy Seed be called, that is, they which are the children of the flesh these are not the children of God, but the children of the promise are connted for the Seed. And Rom. 4.13. For the promise that he should be Heir of the World, was not to Abraham, or to his Seed through the Law, but through the righteous∣ness of Faith, &c. Hence Mr. Tombs, the Author, and all the party conclude, that, the Seed to whom the Covenant belongs, is the Spiritual, and not the Carnal. Not being born after the flesh, but believing that makes us children of the promise. To this exception of his in which their great∣est confidence lies, I reply Repl. 1. It is built on a most gross corrupting, and abusing the Scriptures. Let us then dili∣gently consider those two places in the Gala∣tians? And afterwards that in the Romans. First, touching that in the former place, the words are verse 16. He saith not to Seeds, as of many, but of one which is Christ. Beza upon the Text saith, obscurus locus est, it is a place not easily understood: a dark Scripture, and indeed too dark, and intricate for Antipaedobaptists so boldly to ground their opinion upon, so directly contrary to the sence of many plain places. The question is what doth the Apostle mean here, by Christ? By Christ cannot be meant Christ solely personal, for then no Believer should be accounted for the Seed but only Christ (who as concerning the flesh came of Abraham) And
he and none else should be concerned in the promises: But it is to be understood of Christ mystical, as Beza there notes, Apostolus eo nomine non solum caput, sed membra cum suo capite de∣signans, the Apostle by the word Christ, de∣noting both Head, and Members. Capnt, & Corpus unus est Christus, the Head and the Body make up one mystical Christ: the word Christ being to be taken collectively in this place, so we have it 1 Cor. 12.12. to which Beza refers. And if this be the sence of it, as what else can rationally? then as Mr. Sydenbam notes, this Text will make rather for us, than against us, for if we exclude all Infants from being of the Body of Christ; we must in so doing unavoid∣ably exclude them from Salvation, for he is Sa∣viour to no more than he is head of, which is his Body. As for the words in the nine and twentieth verse, that will afford the Antipe∣dobaptists little relief: the words are, If ye be Christs, then are ye Abrahams Seed, and Heirs according to promise, from whence, saith the a∣foresaid Author, they argue, the Apostle here describes who are the Seed, so that now no children born of believing parents can be the Seed, for they must be Christs according to that v. 16. We are all the children of God through Faith in Christ Jesus. But let such understand what Beza saith on the place, namely that the Claramontanus Bible hath the words thus, and he thinks more right  If you be one in Christ, then are ye Abrahams Seed: which comports well with the former verse There is neither Jew nor Greek, neither bond nor
free, &c. but ye are all one in Christ Jesus, and if ye be all one, then Abrahams Seed. From which 1. It is clear that the Design of the Apostle is to take away all difference between Jew and Gentile, and to hodl forth their unity in Christ, and that this is the very scope of the place Beza shews fully in his Annotations upon it, and that now there is no distinction betwivt them as for∣merly: But the Gentiles are become Abrahams Seed, as well as the natural and believing Jews. Quod unius Seminis nomine collectivo significatur, as before in the sixteenth verse, which is pointed out to us by the collective name of one Seed. 2. The Apostle here hath no intent to shew the distinction of Abrahams Seed as the Subject of the outward priviledges and administrations of Ordinances, but to shew that none are spi∣ritually and really Abrahams Seed, and Heirs of promise, but such as are Christs, one in him with Abraham: for if this should be the di∣stinction of Seed as the subject of outward Or∣dinances, it would be as much against profes∣sing Believers as Infants: for the proposition from this Text, as our Opposites draw it, is thus: none but those who are Christs are Abra∣hams Seed, and none are Christs but real Be∣lievers, and therefore none but they must be baptized. But how weak is this? 1. Because if none but such are Abrahams Seed, and con∣sequently none but such the subjects of Baptism, then visible Believers are not the subjects of Ba∣ptism, for they may not be Christs, no more than Infants. 2. None must be baptized at all
upon this account, for who knows who is Christs according to Election and saving Faith? To say we have charitable grounds to believe visible professors are Christs, till we see the con∣trary, is not to the question as stated, nor as it lies in the Text: the Text saith, If ye be Christs, then ye are Abrahams Seed: they say none are in Christ but real Believers,See Chapter the fifth of the first part of the Authors Treatise. and none must be baptized but the spiritual Seed, and that will require not only a judgment of charity, but infallibility to deter∣mine. And besides the Apostle is describing here what the real and spiritual Seed are, as having an inward right to Christ, and not what the apparent Seed of Abraham was, for he speaks to the Galathians who were visible pro∣fessors, and Believers then in appearance, and he puts them upon a trial of themselves, whe∣ther they were Christs or no. I have been the larger in quoting something from Beza, but more from Mr. Sydenham, who speaks abun∣dance of reason, that you may see how wretch∣edly this Text is abused by our Opposites. And how far wide it is from the purpose, for which they usually bring it. Now for that other place, Ram. 9.7, 8. They that are the children of the flesh, these are not the children of God, but the children of the promise are counted for the Seed. What do they gather from hence? Why, that Infants because children of the flesh, are not under the promise: this in∣deed is well argued. for this is to make the A∣postle contradict himself in the same breath,
for the Text saith, In Isaac shall thy Seed be called. Now that was a child of Abrahams flesh, and yet a child of promise too. And from hence issueth three undeniable Propositions, as Mr. Sydenham noteth. 1. That Abrahams spiritual Seed were as much his fleshly Seed also, Isaac, as Ishmael, ex∣cept Proselytes and Servants. 2. The Covenant was administred to all A∣brahams natural and fleshly children, as if they had been his spiritual, and before they knew what faith was, or could actually professs Abra∣hams faith. 3. When there is mention of Abrahams car∣nal Seed in opposition to his spiritual Seed, it cannot be meant primarily, or solely of those that descended from his flesh, for then Isaac, and Jacob were the carnal Seed, yea Christ him∣self, who as concerning the flesh came of Abra∣ham. It must be therefore understood. 1. Of those of Abrahams Seed which degener∣ated and slighted the Covenant of the Gospel, such as Ishmael, and such of whom the Apostle speaks of, Rom. 9.1.2.3. his Brethren and Kins∣men after the flesh, whose condition he bewails, which was the generality of the body of the Jews; or 2. Some conceive by children of the flesh, he meaneth not in this place children by natu∣ral generation, but such as trusted in outward fleshly priviledges, and by children of the pro∣mise put in opposition to them, is meant true Believers, which are indeed the true Seed, in whom the word takes effect, and who were
figured forth by Isaac.Si sensum mysticum spectes, non ii qni ex lege justitiam quaerunt, sed fideles, sed quod pro∣missionis filius intelli∣gantur is quos dixi∣mus secundum literam ingelligi apparet ex vers. 9. This is a truth, saith Beza, but not apposite to this place, for Paul doth not here di∣stinguish Ahrahams children from others by their Faith as in the fourth of Romans,Quia vero promissionis filios interpretantur eos qui fidei ample∣ctuntur promissionem, dicunt quidem quod res est, sed non satis appo∣sitè loquuntur Neque e∣nim Paulus boc loco fi∣lios Abrahami a caeteris distinguit ex fidei nota ut supsa. c. 4. sed de primariâ cansa id est de ipsius fidei fonte gra∣tuitae videlicet electionis aeterno proposito disserit. Beza in Locum. but disputes of the primary cause, even of Faith it self, which is the eternal purpose of God according to his E∣lection of Grace: verse 11. So that the Apostles express Doctrine is, that Election and Salvation is not from works, but free Grace. But the Opposerss of In∣fant Baptism, have always perverted the scope of Paul in this place, as if he in∣tended it, of outward Church priviledges, not to be had by being born of believing Parents, which the Text has nothing to do with, as every unpartial and judicious Reader will apprehend. Nay this very place proves the quite contrary, for the Apostle makes two sorts to be within the visible Church, viz. Some are of Israel, that is in mans cyc: these partake of the outward priviledges, v. 4.5. Others are Israel, that is the true spiri∣tual Seed, that belongs to Gods Election, and obtain the saving Promise. So Gal. 3.8. The Gospel was preached to Abraham, and the Co∣venant made with him, is the same for substance
with that we live under, and as persons were under it then, so is it now: it is not streighter now, and larger then, but the same. And the like appears, verse 14. and 17. the Identity of the Covenant is there manifest, which is a truth destructive to the Opinion of Antipaedobaptists, and therefore they so strike at it. Having thus examined the Expositions, which according to his Imagination, the Scri∣pture it self puts upon the [Seed] spoken of, Gen. 17.7. and discovered his great mistake. I could do it too very fully as to most of the Au∣thors following, which he saith, do give in their concurrent sence with his, upon the Text. The first named is Calvin upon: Gen. 17.7. who saith, that it is manifest that the promise un∣derstood of spiritual Blessing, pertaineth not to the Carnal Seed of Abraham, but to the Spiritual as the Apostle himself saith, Rom. 4.9. &c. In this I find the Author guilty of shameful Oscitancie, and it is intollerable for any man thus to impose his mistakes upon the Reader. The words are not Calvins, but Estius his Answer to Calvin; who again and again in his Comment upon Gen. 17.7. asserts the promise to be made to Abrahams natural and fleshly Seed, and to all of them—for thus he saith, Nunc videndum est quem populum designet. Falluntur autem qui pu∣tant solos hic electos notari—They are de∣ceived who think it to be meant only of the E∣lect. Again, clara est Pauli Doctrina de naturali∣bus Abrahoe filiis, quod sint Sancti rami, quia ex sancta radice prodierint, Rom. 11.16. the Do∣ctrine of Paul shews clearly 'tis understood of
the natural children of Abraham, for if the root be holy, so are the branches. Then afterward: Quare nihil certius est, quàm Deum foedus suum pacisci cum filiis Abrahae, qui naturaliter ex eo gignendi erant. Wherefore no∣thing is more certain than that God made his Covenant with the children, which were natu∣rally to be begotten of him. And then answers the Objections that may be made against it from Rom. 9.8. Neque repugnat quod dicit Paulus. The cause of this mistake in our Author is meer carelesness, for he never examined Calvin, but finds in Mr. Tombes his Examen: pag. 50. This passage quoted by him, viz. Estius annot. ad Gen. 17.7. Colligit hìnc Calvinus eo ipso quo quis est semen Abrahae, ad eum pertinere promis∣stonem Abrahae factam: that is, hence Calvin gathers, that the promise—belonged to the children of Abraham as they were his natural or carnal Seed. To which Estius replies—thus —Responsio manifesta; promissionem illam de bene∣dictione spirituali intellectam non ad carnale semen Abrahami pertinere, sed ad spirituale quemadmo∣dum eam ipse Apostolus interpretatus est Rom. 4.9. —Which is according to the Authors Tran∣slation — It is manifest that the promise under∣dood of spiritual blessings, pertaineth not to the carnal Seed, &c. here I might pass some obser∣vations upon this mistake of the Author. 1. That he is very careless in quoting Authors, and taking one for another, and that the testimony he cites for himself is against him. 2. That he and his party, and the Jesuites and Papists a∣gree very well in the interpretation of those
Scriptures that relate to the Covenant. The Author lies open to the lash also in what he quotes out of Amesius, de praedest. For Amesius speaks but just half of what he sets down, in one and the same character, and the promise that he disputes of there against the Remon∣strants, is that in the ninth of Romans 8. So that it is not ad idem, for we are speaking of that, Gen. 17.7. God said indeed he would not establish his Covenant with Ishmael, but with Isaac, Gen. 17.27. but by Covenant there is not meant the Covenant we stand in to God in re∣gard of our persons, for our own personal be∣nefit, but the Covenant of special Prerogative to Isaac, that Christ should come of, and the Church remain in his posterity. Next folows the dismal Consequences, which, as he saith, the Doctrine of Infant-Ba∣ptism is attended with. But they are only i∣maginary, not real ones. Quicquid recipitur recipitur ad modum recipientis; as the man think∣eth, so the Bell, &c. But let us hear what they are. 1. If God made his Covenant with the Posterity of Believers, as this Doctrine asserts, then saith he, all the Posterity of Believers should certainly have grace bestowed upon them. Reply. No such matter, for we have proved they may be said to be in Covenant, in regard of ex∣ternal prividledges only; and not partake of the spiritual grace, or saving benefits of the Co∣venant. Which, saith he, Mr. Blake doth confidently affirm, p. 6. saying, that Christianity is hereditary,
that as the child of a Noble man is noble, the child of a Free man free, a Turk a Turk and of a Jew, a Jew, so the child of a Christian, is a Christian. But I pray Sir, who told you this of Mr. Blake, was it not your old friend Mr. Tombes Exercit. p. 53. your words differ very little. If this be true saith Tombs, that the Covenant of grace is a Birth-right priviledge, then the children of Believers are children of Grace by nature, for that which is a Birth-right privilege is a priviledge by nature, and if as Mr. Blake saith, p. 6. to [but neither of them names the Book] Christianity is hereditary, that as the child of a Noble man is noble, the child of a Turk is a Turk, of a Jew a Jew, the child of a Christian is a Christian, then saith Tombes [just as my Antagonist] Christians are born Christians. O wonderful, that men should so agree! And how are they then, saith he, the children of wrath by nature? and saith our Author this is in contradiction [thats some alteration] to the Scripture which saith we are children of wrath. One would think these men did very well agree, they do so often meet and kiss each other, but tis in aliquo tertio, that is, in the point of Baptism, for I hear from those that knows them both intùs & in cute, that they are at a great, if not irreconcile∣able distance in some other matter: But I would have the reader to understand that those words are not Blakes, though charg'd upon him by Mr. Tombs to render him odious, which is very sad: And that learned godly man being very sen∣sible of the injury, signifies to Tombes that he disowns it, and adviseth him to forbear such de∣vice.
I believe, saith he, no such thing that Parents conveigh to their children, as by Birth-priviledge, a being in Christ Jesus, but if you understand by Christianity the bare name or title of Christian, together with a right to Church priviledges, then I shall own the thing, but dis∣claim the expression: A sufficient vindication from so sordid a Calumny, and if this were so unworthily done in Mr. Tombes, what shall we think of the Author. who hath lick'd up that vomit again, and cast it upon Mr. Blake, after he had so well cleared himself, which he could not but know. Nor doth our Doctrine contradict those Scri∣ptures which saywe are children of wrath by nature, and except a man be born again, &c. Joh, 3.3. for even all the Elect are born sons of Adam, children of wrath, and yet they are the children of promise, Isaac himself was visibly the child of promise in his infancy, he was born by promise, Rom. 9.7.8, 9. and yet in respect of natural generation, he was a son of Adam, a child of wrath. Another Absurdity he fancies,Mr. Tombes again. is, That then all the posterity of Believers must bsaved, without, saith he, you will necessitate the Doctrine of falling from grace. Down right Mr. Tombes Exerc. p. 52. if God keeps his Covenant, it follows that all the posterity of Believers are saved, or if some are not saved, though they be in the Covenant of grace, there may be Apostacy of persons, &c. This is a non sequitur, for the Covenant of Grace is not absolute, and saving to all that are once within it; it is absolute & saving to the Elect
Seed, but not to those who partake of the out ward priviledges of it, but take not hold of it by faith. It may truly be said of all Elect In∣fants born of believing Parents, that they are absolutely under the Covenant: (as Isaac in his Infancy) even before they believe,Mr. Cotton's Grounds and Ends of childrens Baptism. Dr. Proston of the Covenant. yea their believing in Gods time is given to them as the effect, and not the cause of the Covenant; But as for others who only partake of the outward priviledges of it, and no more, that do not believe, it is not saving to them. As for the other dismal Consequence of Falling from Grace, which they say we must hold, if In∣fants of Believers be in Covenant, and not all saved. This is like the rest; the fear is more than the hurt; for as Mr. Cotton saith, whom soever God taketh into Covenant are in a State of Grace, but what Grace? either common or saving Grace. The Elect are in a state of saving Grace, and they shall never totally fall away, but per∣sons may fall away from a state of common Grace, and from the external priviledges of the Gospel, & Covenant of Grace quatenus it respects outward spiritual priviledges. Those that stick at this, and will not own it for Truth may do well to give us the sence of those Scriptures, psal. 44.17. Dan. 11.30, 31. Where they are said to be false in Gods Covenant, and to apostatize from it. Another dismal consequence, which is only
the result of an idle and erroneous conceit is, That we tie up the Groce of Gods Covenant to the children of Believers only, and then what hope for the children of unbelievers. No fear of that, for the children of unbe∣lievers may belong to the Election of Gods Grace, but have no right to be baptized, but upon their own personal profession, nor are the children of those who are called Christians to be ranck'd with the children of Pagans (for they are in a nearer capacity of Salvation, being born in a nation where the Gospel is preached) of whom the Apostle speaks, who being strangers to the Covenant, are said to be without hope: Lastly, he saith our Doctrine overthrows the Covenant of Grace it self, concluding an in∣terest without faith, and deriving a Title by Ge∣neration. Not so. Whatsoever both they, and Papists would fasten upon us (for in this they are a∣greed) for we say, that the Infant Seed of Be∣lievers are Confederates with their Parents, and God excepts of the Parents Faith, and em∣braceth the children into the same Covenant with them. Licet pueri Infantes, fidem non ha∣bent, Deus tamen eorum parentes compellans, ipsos etiam complectitur. God taking the believing Parents into Covenant, takes the children in with them, as we have before more fully shewn out of Calvin on Mat. 28.19. Mark 16. according to the Tenor of the Covenant, I will be thy God, and the God of thy Seed. Nor do we hold, we derive a Title to the Covenant by Generation, for Foedus non transfunditur per carnem, saith
Peter Martyr, the Covenant is not propagated or transmitted by way of natural Generation, [that which is born of the flesh is flesh] the Parent commu∣nicates his nature and the corruption of it,Mr. Prinsley of the Doctrine & practice of Pedobaptism. unto his child but nothing of Grace. That is the free gift of God, and this it is that brings the child of the Believer into Covenant as well as the Pa∣rent, even the free and gracious promise of God made to both. Now Reader see some of the dismal conse∣quences of their Doctrine, who deny the chil∣dren of Believers to be taken into Covenant with them. 1. It puts a sacrilegious restraint upon the Co∣venant, and makes an essential variation in it without warrant. 2. It excludes them from the ordinary way of Salvation, for if they have no visible interest in the Covenant, (no not so much as externally in regard of Gods visible dispensation,) then they have no visible interest in Christ, the Me∣diator of the New Covenant. 3. It exempts and shuts them out from a participation of the Spirit, and sanctification of their natures, whereby they may be made meet for the inheritance of the Saints: for all the in∣fluences of the Spirit, is by virtue of the Cove∣nant: 2 Pet. 1. Now Mr. Tombes himself ac∣knowledgeth that Infants may be sancti∣fied. 4. They have no ground of comfort in the death of their children, no more than they have con∣cerning
a Turk, or unconverted Indians child, for that which affords a visible ground of hope of the salvation of another, is his visible in∣terest in the Covenant of Grace; to be an A∣liene to the Covenant of promise, is to be with∣out hope, in the Apostles Account, Eph. 2.12. So that we may say (with Mr. Ford, concerning all the children of Heathens, dying in Infancy, They are taken into the hands of God, who indeed may (for any thing we know) save them by Pre∣rogative, and an undiscovered depth of mercy; but he hath afforded us no ground, so much as to hope, that any of them are saved, because the Statute-Law of the Kingdom doth not extend Sal∣vation beyond the Covenant. Now an Anabaptists Faith concerning the Infants of believing Pa∣rents, even his own, puts them into the same irrelative condition (as to God and the Cove∣nant) with the children of Infidels and (by consequendce) under the same hopelessness of Salvation. Now let tender Parents consider, who undoubtedly would think it a sad thing to bring forth children to the destroyer, what sad prin∣ciples theirs are, by, and according to which, they must kiss their beloved Babes, when they are a dying with that sad Farewel, which the dying Heathen gave his departing soul; Animula vagula blandula, &c. And truly one of their Opinion in this town, and supposed godly, said in my hearing, they had no ground of it. 5. And consequently they have no ground of
hope ever to see them again with comfort at Christs appearance, for there is no foundation of hope of a glorious resurrection unto life, but by virtue of the Covenant. Luke 20.36, 37, 38. Heb. 11.16. Act. 26.7, 8. The other Scripture that he encounters with, is that Act. 2.38. A parallel place to that in Gen. 17. The Argument which we bring for Infant Baptism from hence is this, Those to whom the promise doth belong, to them belongs Baptism, but to those that re∣pent and their children the promise belongs, therefore to them and their children belongs Baptism. Against this he hath a double Exception. 1. By the promise there, is not meant the Cove∣nant of grace but the giving of the Spirit, called the promise of the Father, prophecied of by Joel 2.28. To which we answer, That though in the fourth and seventeenth verse. Whereis men∣tion of the extraordinary gifts of the Spirit, which refers to Joels Prophecy, yet the promise in the eight and thirtieth verse is of another na∣ture, and not meant of those extraordinary Gifts; for 1. Because it is such a promise as is still a ful∣filling, and shall be throughout all the times of the New Testament, paralled to that Isa. 44.3. I will pour out my Spirit on thy Seed, and my bles∣sing on thy Off-spring. It is such a promise as ap∣pertains to Parents, and to their children, and all that shall be called to the end of the world, whereas the promise of extraordinary Gifts,
was but pro tempore, for a certain time, and re∣lating to that season. 2. It cannot be understood of extraordinary Gifts, because Peters hearers had no such Gifts nor had the Jews or Gentiles, who were afar off, and afterward called such miraculous Gifts; and as Mr. Stephens notes, if the promise (to you, and to your children) be meant of extraordinary Gifts, how will the parts of the Text agree with each other? The Apostle exhorts them, be baptized every one of you in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins: and then gives this reason, For the promise is to you and to your children. If therefore the promise be meant of extraordinary Gifts, then the com∣mand, be baptized every one of you, will stand in immediate relation to such a promise. And so the matter will come to this Issue, that all that are baptized: and particularly they that re∣nounce their old, to take up a new Baptism, they will have a promise made to them, and to their children to speak with diverse kinds of languages. [Which promise I never understood-was made good amongst them, for few of them have any more than their Mother Tongue.] On the o∣ther side, if the promise be taken for the promise of Christ, and for remission of sin by his blood, in this case it will be easie to shew the connexion of the words; for what can be more aptly spoken than this? Be baptized every one of you in the name of the Lord Jesus, for the remission of your particular sin? for the promise of the pardon of sin, by the blood of Christ doth belong to you and to your children?
3. The promise here mentioned was to give hope to those poor creatures, and to prevent the despair, which they were ready to fall into up∣on conviction, that they had crucified the Lord of Life, and what comfort could this bring to their wounded consciences, to tell them they should have the miraculous gifts of tongues? 2. 'Tis farther objected, by children are no o∣ther meant than the posterity of the Jews. To which we reply, with Mr. Sydenham. 1. The word  signifies off-sping, though never so young. Joh. 16.21. Luk. 1.31. Mat. 1.26. Luk. 1.57. 2. 'Tis an indefinite word, therefore must not be restrained to grown children, except God had exprest it in a peculiar phrase. 3. It must be understood of their Infants, be∣cause he useth the phrase of speech to these Jews, (which they had been trained up in from their fathers) I'll be the God of thee, and thy Seed, and the Jews must needs understand him speak∣ing in this Dialect of their children included in the promise. 4. Why should the Apostle name children, if he had not meant Infant Seed? otherwise it had been sufficient to have said, the promise is to you, and as many as the Lord shall call: but therefore names children, because it had relation to the Covenant. It is true what the Author saith concerning Dr. Hamond, that he conceives children to be there really the posterity of the Jews, and not particularly their Infant children, but that is but one Doctors Opinion in opposition to an in∣numerable
company of our judgment, and that not without sufficient ground, if the forementi∣oned reasons be well weighed. The other is, Dr. Taylor who speaks not his own sence upon the Text, but personates (as he tells us) an Ana∣baptist; we may see his own proper judgment in his last piece, viz. The consideration of the practice of the Church in baptizing Infants of be∣lieving Parents, pag. 48.49. It is, saith he, in our case as it was with the Jews children, our children are a holy Seed: for if it were not so with Christianity, how could S. Peter move the Jews to Christianity, by telling them the pro∣mise was to them and their children? For if our children be not capable of the Spirit of promise, and holiness, and yet their children were holy; it had been a better Argument to have kept them in the Synagogue, than to have called them to the Christian Church — And indeed if the Chri∣stian Jews, whose children are circumcised, and made partakers of the same promises, title, and inheritance, and Sacrament, which themselves had at their first conversion to the faith of Christ, had seen their children shut out from the new Sacrament [of Baptism] it is not to be doubted but they would have raised a storm, greater than could easily be suppressed: since about their cir∣cumcision they had raised such tragedies, and im∣placable disputations; and there had been great reason to look for a storm; for their children were circumcised, and if not baptized; then they were left under a burthen, which their fathers were quit of, for S. Paul said unto you, whosoever is circumcised is a debtor to keep the
whole Law, these children therefore that were circumcised, stood obliged for want of Baptism to perform the Laws of ceremonies, to be pre∣sented to the Temple, to pay their price, to be redeemed with silver and gold; to be bound by the Law of pollutions, and carnal ordinances: ad therefore if they had been thus left, it would be no wonder if the Jews had complained, and made a tumult; they used to do it for less mat∣ters, and this may serve to ballance what the Au∣thor quotes form the Doctors lib. of Proph. p. 233. Except. 4. Because, saith he, Circumcision was only a Seal to Abraham, not to believers, and their Seed, a Seal of the Faith that Abraham had long before he was circumcised, but so could it not be said of any Infant that had no faith. Repl. In this the Author doth quadrare with the Pa∣pists. So say the Jesuites, and so say the An∣tipaedobaptists. Bellarmin and after him others object that Circumcision in Rom. 4.Bellarmin lib. 1. de Sacramentis. is not said to be a Seal vniversally to any faith, but only a Seal of the individual faith of Abraham, which is clear, saith he, in that it is expresly said, it was a Seal of the righteousness of the faith that he had, being yet nncircumcised, that he might be the father of all that believe: but only
Abraham could be such a father, &c. your collection, saith he, is naught, when you say Circumcision was a Seal of Abrahams faith, that therefore it is so to others, for you conclude a general from a particular. So he and his fol∣lowers limits the use of Circumcision as a Seal of the righteousness of faith to Abraham only. Paraeus gives an acute reply to this,Paraus ad locum. Quod omni Speciei in∣est, toti generi recte tribuitur: sicut igi∣tur valet: Homo, E∣quus, & quodvis ani∣mal sentit, movetur: & sensus, motus, dif∣ferentia Systatica ge∣neris recte dicitur. Sic. valet circumcisio est  addita foederi obsignationis causâ, ergo. Dr. Sclater on the fonrth of Romans. thus—That which belongs in common to all the Species, may well e∣nough be attributed to the general, for that which all the Species have in com∣mon, they have from their general. But why, saith Dr. Sclater, should circum∣cision be a Seal to Abraham only, and not to others as well as him? was the Co∣venant made with him on∣ly, or with his Seed also? or was Circumcision a sign of the Covenant to Abraham only, or else to his Seed also? if the Covenant belong to [all] if Circumcision was to [all] a sign of their being in the Co∣venant, why not to [all] also a Seal of righte∣ousness? Forsooth, say the Papists, one end of Abrahams Circumcision was peculiar to Abra∣ham, as that he should be the father of all Be∣lievers, therefore this also of being a Seal of the righteousness of faith. Answ. And I wonder why we may not conclude by like reason, that to Abraham only it was a Sin of the Cove∣nant,
because this end they mention had place in Abraham only? But let us more nearly view the reasons; it was Abrahams privilege only to be the father of all Believers, both circumcised, and uncircumcised, ergo his privilege only to have circumcision a Seal of righteousness: how prove they that consequence? Because Paul joins both together, and therefore they are of like privilege: Answ. Why may we not say (ut su∣pra) that the necessity of the sign of Circum∣cision was also Abrahams privilege, because it also is joined to the rest? But for fuller satis∣faction, view the scope of the Text, which is this; to shew that justification belongs to Be∣lievers of both people: the proof is from a sign: Abraham had righteousness in uncircumcision, therefore righteousness belongs to the uncircum∣cised; for this was that the Lord mystically in∣tended to signifie in justifying of Abraham be∣fore Circumcision, and in commending Circum∣cision to him justifyed: but why doth he men∣tion that end of Circumcision as sealing up the righteousness of faith? Answ. To obviate an objection which might be made in this manner: if Abraham was justified before Circumcision, what profit received he by that Sacrament? Answ. It sealed unto him the righteousness of faith: and shall we say now it was Abrahams privilege to be confirmed in perswasion of righteousness? belike then his posterity, either needed not such confirmation, and so Abrahams privilege shall be to be the only weakling in faith, that needs means of confirmation, or else his Seed shall lack that help that Abraham had for e∣stablishment;
though the Covenant was equal∣ly made to them. Thus far Dr. Sclater, and I repent not may pains, he hath so cleared the point that I know not what either Papist, or Antipaedobaptist can say against it. I shall add that which every one will subscribe to, that the children of Abraham stood in much more need of a Seal to confirm their faith, then he himself with whom the Covenant was originally made, and for that reason was called the father of the faithful, as well as for the eminency of his faith. It could not be, saith the Author, a Seal to an Infant that had no faith. Repl. I perceive he hath read Bellarmin, for he jumps in with him: his words are these—If it be a Seal of Faith (in that Baptism comes in the place of Circumcision) it is in vain to baptize Infants: and why? because they have not Faith. Farther, saith he, Isaac received not the sign of Circumcision, as a Seal of the righteousness of the Faith which he had, being yet uncircumcised, seeing he was not in the faith, till after Circumcision: to which there needs no other answer than this, viz. Isaac was con∣federate with his Father Abraham, and upon that account to be circumcised, which en∣gaged to actual Faith, and upon actual believ∣ing, it sealed this righteousness of Faith to him.
[It was a Sign put into his flesh only] Repl. We must take heed of extremes: The Pa∣pists hold that Sacraments do justify, and confer grace modo non ponamus obicem peccati mortalis, provided that we put no bar of mortal sin, which because Infants cannot do, they are all discharg'd by Baptism from the guilt of original sin. A∣gainst this Mr. Calvin in his Institutions doth vehemently inveigh, terming it, Doctrina dia∣bolica a devilish Doctrine, because men hereby are taught to rest in a corporeal Element, more than in God himself: and with as much zeal doth he condemn the Doctrine of [nuda Signa] which makes the Sacraments to be only bare and naked Signs. Caveamus saith he,Calvin Instit. de Sa∣cram. ne vim Sacramen∣torum enervemus, usumque prorsùs evertamus: We must take heed we do not lessen the virtue of the Sacraments, and quite subvert their use. So Chamier (as Mr. Blake observes) is no less zealous against the Papists and Anabaptists.Chamier lib. 1. de Sa∣cram. in Gen cap. 10. Sect. 11. For he having mentioned the use of Sacraments as di∣stinguishing Signs, addeth—Hic tamen nec solus est finis, nec praecipuus Sacramentorum; ita{que} Anabaptistas aeque cum Bellarmino improbamus —quibus Sacramenta nihil sunt quam Signa instituta, ad discernendum Christianos a Judaeis,
& Paganis, ut Romanis olim toga erat signum quo discernebantur a Graecis palliatis. This is not the only or chief end of Sacraments, therefore we oppose the Anabaptists as well as Bellarmin, who esteem Sacraments nothing more than signs, distinguishing Christians from Jews and Pa∣gans, as heretofore a Gown was a sign whereby the Romans were known from the Grecians: so that upon consideration, how apt men are to flye into extremes; we may conclúde that in medio consistit veritas, the truth lies betwixt both, as in this, so in very many other points. As touching the business of Circumcision, it it was a sign indeed or mark of distinction, to distinguish the people of God from Aliens, to separate betwixt Jews by nature, and sinners of the Gentiles; and it was also a Seal to ratifie and confirm what the Covenant did hold forth and promise. For God having entered Covenant with Abraham and his Seed, Gen. 17.10. This is my Covenant, which ye shall keep between me, and you, and thy Seed after thee; every man∣child among you shall be circumcised. And where∣as the Author and Bellarmin before him saith, it was a sign and a Seal to put into the flesh of the Infant, only it was a sign and a Seal to A∣braham, Mr. Cobbet enervates this Argument in his Vindication, p. 54. by shewing 1. That the initiatory Seal is not primarily and properly the Seal of a mans faith, or o∣bedience, but of Gods Covenant, rather. The Seal is to the Covenant, even Abrahams Circum∣cision was not primarily a Seal to Abrahams faith of righteousness, but to the righteousness
Faith, exhibited and effected in the Covenant, yea to the Covenant it self, which he had be∣lieved unto righteousness; hence the Covenant of Grace is called the righteousness of Faith. Rom. 10.1. 2. I farther answer, that 'tis granted, Infants have not actually the use of Faith, but to that end was Circumcision administred to the chil∣dren of the Jews (as Baptism is now to our Infants) that when in time to come they should believe to righteousness (as all the Elect, who live to age do) their Faith might receive con∣firmation by their Circumcision in Infancy, and this was that which heightned David's confi∣dence in his encounter with Goliah, reflecting upon Gods Covenant, of which the Circum∣cision which he received in his Infancy, was a sign and a Seal. He goes on, Neither is Baptism more than Circumcision called a Seal, it is sign proper only to men of understanding, representing spiritual Mysteries. Repl. And why not as proper to Infants, as to men of understanding? because they represent spiritual Mysteries; and if this be all the reason he can give, he might better have said nothing: for what thinks he of Circumcision, did not that represent and shadow out diverse spiritual Mysteries, scilicet, our corrruption by nature, and the nature of mortification [by cutting of the foreskin.] Was not the glorious mystery of our Redemption by the blood of Christ signified by the blood-shed in Circumcision, and yet this Ordinance was applyed to poor ignorant Babes, to use the Authors Dia∣lect,
and how slightly so ever he speaks of an Or∣dinance of like resemblance for signification yet the wisdom of God thought fit to have those circumcised that were void of understand∣standing. I find the Author and his party too bold in censuring of things, that do any way cross their idol-opinion; and the wisdom of God himself shall suffer, rather than they will recede from the errour they have suck'd in, yea, 'its observable that some of them are as perti∣nacious, and inflexible in their principle of op∣position to Infant-Baptism, and lay out as much zeal in this matter, as if their Salvation were concern'd in it. And not as Circumcision which was a Sign not im∣proper for Infants,Mr. Tombes Examen page 84. line 12. because it left a signal impression in their flesh to be remem∣bred all their days, but so cannot Baptism be to any Infants, and some carry it farther, how shall Infants know they have been baptized? Repl. It is true, Circumcision left a signal mark upon the Jewish Infants, but what of that? had they any other way to know this mark was given them for any such religious end, and purpose, as a sign or seal of the Co∣venant betwixt God and them, but by the testi∣mony of others? For instance, suppose an In∣fant born blind (as we read of such a one in the Gospel) was circumcised, who could never see that signal mark, he must be beholding to o∣thers, both to be taught the religous end of Circumcision, as well as to have intimation of the character he received in Circumeision. It is
well known that the same Ceremony is used by other nations (though not as a Sacrament) as the Inhabitants of Colchis, the Ethiopians, the E∣gyptians. The Israelites therefore when grown up, had no other way to know that signal mark was given to a religious purpose (which was the principal end that Ordinance pointed at) than by the information of their Parents, or other witnesses. And the Jewish Doctors tell us there was one appointed for that purpose, whose name they called Baal Berith, and San∣dak, that is the Master of the Covenant, and to this sence Junius and Tremelius interprets that in Isaiah chap. 8.2. where 'tis said that he took unto him faithful witnesses, viz. Ʋzziah the Priest, and Zacheriah: Faithful witnesses, to what? why to the Circum∣cision of his Son,Mr. Brinsley: and from hence it is conceived ariseth that aneient custom of witnesses (grown now into a meer formali∣ty) in baptizing children. Concerning which Reverend Mr. Cotton hath these remarkable passages,Mr. Cottons Grounds and Ends of Infant-Baptism. that when children are ba∣ptized upon the profession of their God-fathers and God-mothers (for so they call it) it is not the intendment, or Do∣ctrine of the Church, to baptize them upon the Covenant or profession of them (which is one of the mistakes of our Author p. 184. of his Treatise) but to bind the sureties that when the child groweth up to years of discretion, they shall assist the Parents in the Christian education of the child, that he may learn and practice those
good things which at his Baptism they promised, or undertook for his, as appeareth by the charge given to the Sureties. I shall add that the same Office may be much mere needful in case the childs Parents dye, before it comes to years of discretion. 5. Except. Circumcision was not administred to Believers, as Believers, and to their Seed, but according to the Institution, to all the natural li∣neage and Posterity of Abraham, good or bad. Repl. In which passage, there are two mi∣stkes, for. 1. Abraham was a Believer, and was not Circumcision administred to him, as a Believer, and to his Seed? The whole body of the Israelites, professing the worship of the true God wer accounted Believers, and all the world besides, Infidels, without God, and afar off, Eph. 2.12, 17. But as for the Jews, they have the name of Gods people, his peculiar people, they are said to be near unto him, Psal. 148.14. A people called by his name. 2. Chron. 7.14. And God owns them as his. Eph. 3.15. And all upon account of the Covenant God made with Abraham, and his Seed, and 'tis upon the account of the Cove∣nat of free-grace that any among the sons of men are the people of God. 'Tis true indeed, the Apostle says, Rom. 9. All were not Israel that were of Israel, all were not godly, by virtue of Election, and Regeneration; there were many of them his people, nay, most (for though Israel be as the Sea-sand, yet a remnant only shall be saved.) By Covenant relation, or external
profession only, as there are Believers only by profession now under the Gospel, by virtue of which they are esteemed within the Covenant, and admitted to the privileges annexed. 2. That confident assertion too is spoken without book, namely, That Circumcision belonged to all the lineage of Abraham, good and bad. For 1. His Female-posterity were not circumcised personally: this he himself objecteth against us, and that right enough, for the command was only for the Males, not Females, by reason of their incapacity. 2. If any credit may be given to the Jewish Doctors: (as who is so silly as to deny it them, in a matter of Fact of this nature) they tell us that the Male-children of an excomunicated per∣son that remained impenitent were not circum∣cised, and that this was one of the ways, by which they punished impenitent excommuni∣cated persons; Buxtorf hath it out of the E∣pistles of the Rabbins,Godwin's Moses and Aaron. lib. 5. cap. 2. pag. 181. and we have the same attested in Godwin's Jewish Antiqui∣ties. 3. Moreover during so long a time as the Is∣raelites were in the wilderness, there was not one Infant of all that were born there circum∣cised, and so they wanted the signal mark. We see in some cases the Ordinance was suspended, (as Christ allows us a dispensation in respect of the Sabbath) and we may say of Circumcision, as he did of the Sabbath, Circumcision was made for man, and not man for Circumcision. Circumcision belonged to all the posterity of A∣braham,
good and bad (as he says before) without any such limitation as is put upon Baptism, if thou believest with thy heart thou mayst. Repl. And why was that? But because not only the Eunuch there, but the rest of the adult persons, that we read of in the Acts, who were baptzed, were the first Subjects of the Ordi∣nance, and that requires personal profession of Faith; (was in Abraham who was circum∣cised; but it was not so with his children) and they were all of them Aliens, (for not only the Gentiles, but Jews also were to be look'd upon as such, in reference to the new ad∣ministrantion of Baptism) and therefore it was necessary they should make a profession of their Faith,Mr. Geree. Vind. Pae∣doboptist. and acceptance of the Govenant-under the new administration, before they were admitted to the Seal thereof, Baptism: so if any Minister of the Gospel should preach to Jews and Pagans, they are to have some account of their Faith, before they ought to baptize them; but upon their believing, and being baptized, the promise takes in their chil∣dren also to a participation of the same Ordi∣nance. For as we have before hinted, Abra∣ham believed first, and afterward was circum∣cised, but he having a Covenant made with him and his Seed; Isaac his Son was circum∣cised before Faith. So was it with the Prose∣lytes, and their children; so that here lyes the fallacy, when that shall be taken for a rule ab∣solutely necessary in the administration of Ba∣ptism, which is only so in some respect. Far∣ther
to what he saith, of no such qualification mentioned, that the Parent should be a Believer to capacitate the Infant for Baptism. It may suf∣fice to tell him, there was no need thereof, for the Apostles knew well enough, the Covenant in the former administration to extend to visible Believers and their Seed: which was never re∣pealed by the coming of Christ. But will you deny Abraham to be a believing Parent? was not he a Father to them all? what then? he was a publick common Father which reaches not the case in hand, neither have they any other in his stead, therefore the Analogy holds not. Repl. This is a poor shift, for that Abraham was a publick Father we all hold, according to that of the Apostle. Rom. 4.11. He received the Sign of Circumcision, a Seal of the righteousness of Faith, which he had, yet being uncircumcised, that he might be the Father of them all that be∣lieve, though they be not circumcised, that is, the uncircumcised Gentiles that believe, as well as of the Jews. But why is he termed the father of Believers in both people? I suppose no better reason can be given than what I find in Doctor Sclater upon the fourth of Romans: namely, because from him the Blessing of the Covenant is derived as an inheritance passeth from the Fa∣ther to the Son, or because in him the Covenant is made with all Believers, and their Seed. But what is this to the children of Believers, what benefit redounds to them that do not actually believe, nor profess the Faith of Abraham, ha∣ving not the use of reason? the same Learned
Doctor gives this answer, although Infants have not actually the use of reason (nor can actually believe) yet to that end (as Circumcision here∣tofore) Baptism is ministred to Infants, that when in time to cime, they shall believe to righteousness, their Faith may receive confir∣mation, by Baptism in infancy received; as Da∣vids Faith did against Goliah, he reflecting upon his Circumcision, (the sign and Seal of Gods Covenant with him) when he went out against Goliah, that uncircumcised Philistine. To this purpose saith Augustin, In Abraham praecessit fidei justitia, & accessit Circumcisio signaculum justitiae fidei, &c. In some justification goes before the Seal, as in Abraham, and Cornelius, in others the Seal is before righteousness—Sicut in Isaac, qui octavo suoe nativitatis die circumcisus est, praecessit Signaculum justitiae fidei, &c. As in Isaac who was circumcised the eighth day, the Seal preceded Faith — Ita in Baptizatis infantibus &c. So in infants that are baptized — August. de Bapt. contra Donat. l. 4. c. 24. Excep. 6. Because Baptism came not in the room, place, and use of Circumcision, and the reasons he brings to prove it, are diverse; we shall now examine them. First, he saith, It must not be look'd upon to come in the room, and stead of it by any means: and why 1. Because then Males,Mr. Tombes Examen p. 4. not Females would be ba∣ptized. Reader, we must now give thee notice, that we are to renew our combat with Mr. Tombes,
for this first reason is his, Examen, pag. 4. And the old Answers will do well euough. 1. The reason why Females were excluded from an actual participation of Circumcision was their incapacity. 2. They were virtually circumcised,Mr. Marshal Defence of Infant Baptism. and reputed among the circumcised ones in that they were admitted to the Passeover, when the express command of the Law was that no uncircumcised parson must eat of it. Exod. 12.48. And farther it appears, they were reputatively circumcised, by that passage, where 'tis said, the whole house of Israel was circum∣cised, and by that of Sampsons Parents, who were displeased that he took a wife of the uncir∣cumcised Philistins. Judg. 14.3. for if the Is∣raelitish women had not been accounted circum∣cised in the Males, Circumcision could have made no difference between Wife and Wife. 2. His next reason is, Because all Believers out of Abrahams Family were not circumcised.Mr. Tombes Exer p. 4 Mr Tombes Exercit. p. 4. He gives instances of those out of Abrahams Family that were not circumcised. Repl. I have answered this before, that some of them lived before the ordinance of Circum∣cision was instituted, and others for other rea∣sons were not circumcised, as I have shewn but I love not to repeat. 3. His third reason is, because then the circum∣cised needed not to have been baptized, if they had beem already sealed with the new Covenant Seal, but Christ himself and all his Apostles, &c. were
circumcised, yet nevertheless were baptized. Repl. If this deserves an Answer, take this, The Covenant of Grace both under the Law and Gospel is one and the same for substance, though as to the external administration thereof, there is a difference, and accordingly the Seals are different. The Landlord if he please, may break the old Seal, and set on a new one to the grant, he makes to his, Tenant. 2. He saith, it comes not in its room and stead as to the ends and uses. Repl. Though as to some circumstances, there be a difference between Circumcision and Baptism in regard of their ends and uses, yet there is no material difference, as to substance. But let us see his reasons why Baptism suc∣ceeds not Circumcision as to the ends and uses: which are these. 1. Because Circumcision was a sign of Christ to come in the flesh, but Baptism that he was already come, Tombes exerc. pag. 4. Answ. There is a very good harmony notwithstanding that, quoad substantiam, as to the substance, they both look at Christ, and agree in the main. The one signifies and seals the remission of sins, by and through the blood of Christ to be shed, the other through that blood already shed. There is an agreement in the signification, though not in the manner of signification. 2. He saith, Circumcision was to be a partition∣wall between Jew and Gentile, but Baptism testi∣fyed the contrary. Mr. Tombes again, quoting Cameron for it, Exerc. pag. 4. and then p, 6, Cir∣cumcision separated the Israelited from all
nations, but Baptism signifieth that all are one in Christ. Repl. Though Baptism be no partition-wall between nation and nation, yet the end and use of Baptism is to distinguish Christians from Pagans, Turks and Infidels. One of the ends of Baptism is to be a badge of distinction betwixt those who are within, and those who are with∣out, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 5.12.13. 3. The Author farther tells us, Circumcision initiated the carnal Seed into the carnal Church, and gave them right to carnal Ordinances, but Baptism was to give the spiritual Seed, an orderly entrance into the spiritual Church, and a right to partake of the spiritual Ordinances. Repl. Although I have ground to hope my Antagonist is a spiritual or godly man, yet he talks here at a carnal rate; for what thinks he of Isaac and Jacob, and Christ himself, they were the spiritual Seed, as well as the carnal or fleshly Seed of Abraham, for as concerning the flesh Christ came of him. As for his expression of carnal Ordinances, it is Scripture language Heb. 9, 10. And the Apostle means those Levi∣tical outward Ceremonies, which were placed in terrene and earthly matters that reached only the flesh, or did sanctify only to the purifying of the flesh. But sure the circumcised had right to all the other Ordinances of a spiritual nature as well as those, and the Author is to rash in call∣ing the—Church of God under the Old Testa∣ment a carnal Church, I scruple not to say it is a carnal speech of him. But 'tis observable, all is carnal with some men that doth not suit with
their Genius, when in the mean time the car∣nality lieth unseen by them in their own proud, censorious, self-conceited, contentious spirits. And did indeed Circumcision initiate into the carnal Church? (that is the Church of God un∣der the old Testament) was Jesus Christ the head of a carnal Church? he was the head of the Church under the Law, as much as of the Church now in the days of the Gospel: and will any sober man say, he was the head of a carnal Church? This were heterogenous indeed that a spiritual head should be joined to a carnal Church: But I pray what singular virtue do these men see, and find in Baptism, that they so much advance it above Circumcision? what is there in it of it self (since they keep such ado about it) more than in Circumcision? It is al∣together in it self as carnal as Circumcision, and the people that submit to it as carnal as others; and as carnal, and perverse an use do some of them make of it, as the Jews did of Circum∣cision. Some I know are more wise and sober than the rest; but too too many make an idol of their Baptism, they make it a fire-brand of contention, and the beginning and end of all Religion. When as to speak plainly, the Ba∣ptism of water of it self (due reverence being still had to all Gods Ordinances in their places) is as low and carnal a thing, as poor a Ceremo∣ny, as empty a sign and shadow as Circumeision. Baptism and Circumcision as to the letter, are just alike as to any intrinsecal worth, the one relates to the letting out of a little blood, the other to the washing of the filth of the flesh.
The cleansing of ones hands and feet from dirt is the same with it,Mr. Sydenham's sober Exercit. and as efficacious, and acceptable as this of it self. In a word there is a Circumcision in the flesh, and a Cir∣cumcision in the heart, the former carnal, the later spiritual, and so there is a Baptism of the flesh, and a Baptism of the spirit. The Apostle derides Circumcision in the flesh, where that of the heart was wanting by giving it the con∣temptible name of Concision.Blakes Covenant seal∣ed. And as Circumcision was Uncircumcision; so Dipping is Non-Baptism where that of the spirit is want∣ing. 4. Lastly, he saith Circumcision was to be a Bond to keep the whole Law. Repl. The place is Rom. 2.25. Circumcision verily profiteth, if thou keep the whole Law. The A∣postle intends both ceremonial and moral Law; as else where he speaks, He that is circumcised is a Debtor to the whole Law; the meaning is, he that is circumcised with an opinion that he shall be justified thereby, that same man is fallen from Grace, that is, from the way of justification by a Covenant of Grace,Mr. Blakes Covenant sealed, and puts himself under a Cove∣nant of works, and so is bound to keep the Law in every punctilio; ne∣vertheless Circumcision in it self was properly a Bond binding the faithful to Evangelical Obe∣dience
[walk before me, and be upright, or sin∣cere] Gen. 17.1. Circumcision which was the Seal of the righteousness of Faith, did oblige Abraham to walk perfectly, or sincerely before God, and hereunto also Baptism obligeth us. 5. He adds, Circumcision was administred to all Abrahams natural Seed, without any profession of Faith, whereas Baptisim is to be administred to the spiritual Seed of Abraham only upon profession. Repl. Heres a double mistake, for first, we have shewed before that the children of excommuni∣cated persons, that were impenitent were denyed Circumcision: Godwin's Moses and Aaron, lib. 5. cap. 2. pag. 181. So Buxtorf. Secondly, we find some baptized in the fourth of Matthew, and Lydias house, when none that we hear of pro∣fessed Faith, but her self. 6. Lastly He draws low, & is come to the Dregs,Note here Mr. Tombs and he differs, for Tombs grants they are both the same Sacra∣ments, for the spiri∣tual part, viz. Sancti∣fication by the Spirit, and juslification by the Blood of Christ, Examen. p. 83. & tells us, Circumcision was a sign of Temporal Blessings, and Be∣nefits to be enjoyed in the land of Canaan, whereas Baptism was to be a sign of spiritual Be∣nefits. Repl. But I pray what Temporal Blessings and Be∣nefits in the land of Canaan, did they enjoy,
who never entred into it? But this is but an e∣vasion learn'd from the Jesuites, as before: For Canaan or temporal Blessings were not the only things which Circumcision sealed, neither yet the main thing; for Gen. 17.7. God pro∣mised Abraham to be his God, and the God of his Seed, this was the grand promise, the main of the Covenant which Circumcision sealed up, temporal Blessings were but an Additament. The Text saith Circumcision was a Seal of the righteousness of Faith, and so of all spiritual mercies, as much as Baptism. Nor is Baptism only a seal of spiritual blessings (this will not be owned for a true position in Divinity) for Baptism sealeth our deliverance out of afflicti∣ons, as well as out of corruption, yea, it sealeth to us the raising our bo∣dies from death out of the grave,Cottons Grounds and Ends of Infant-Ba∣ptism. as well as our souls out of the death in sin. Ba∣ptism sealeth a much temporal as spiritual bles∣sings; for he that gives Christ, how shall he not with him give us all things else? and in∣deed Mr. Tombes like a Divine acknowledgeth that both Circumcision and Baptism signifie the righteousness of Faith, and sanctification of the heart. Exerc. p. 6. and Exam. p. 83. After all this unsound stuff, the Author is pleased to grant there is some Analogy (little without doubt) betwixt the one and the other, and since he toucheth it only with a light finger, I shall give you the Analogy between them more fully.
The Analogy betwixt Circumcision and Baptism. 1. Circumcision was a Seal of the Covenant made with Believers and their Seed. 2. By Circumcision Believers and their Seed had entrance into the Church of the Jews. 3. Circumcision sha∣dowed forth the cor∣ruption of our nature, by cutting off the fore∣skin of the flesh. 4. Circumcision sha∣dowed out also mor∣tification to sin, or re∣generation by cutting of the fore-skin, and casting it away. 5. In Circumcision there was blood-shed, which pointed at our Redemption by Christ. 6. Circumcision was a Bond to Evangelical Obedience. Gen. 17.1. Walk before me and be upright. So is Baptism. 1 Pet. 3.21. So are Believers and their Seed by Ba∣ptism into particular Gospel Churches. Baptismal washing points at the same. 1. Pet. 3.21. The same is signi∣fied by Baptism, Rom. 6.3, 4. called by Peter the laver of Regener∣ation. The water in Ba∣ptism represents the same, viz. the doing away the guilt of sin by his blood. So also is Baptism. 1. Pet. 3.21.
Notwithstanding all this, if we will follow the Authors advice, we must not by any means conclude that Baptism comes in the room of Circumcision, and for this reason which lies at the bottom, because then he must renounce his opinion, for it will thence follow, that In∣fant-Baptism is an Ordinance of Jesus Christ. But he hath learn'd from Mr. Tombes to give a ponderous reason why (though there be some A∣nalogy) we must not own it to come in the room and stead of Circum∣cision,Tombes again Exerci∣tation p. 7. viz. Because there is an Analogy between other things and Baptism; and we may on the same account say it comes in the room and stead of them, As the—Ark, Manna, Rock and from such like Arguments drawn from Analogies, what Jew∣ish Rites may by our wits be introduced to the countenancing the Papists in their High-Priest-Hood, Tythes. But will he never have done with Mr. Tombes? we find this in his Exercit. pag. 7. —Where he saith,—By like manner of Ar∣gumentation it will be lawful to bring in the whole burden of the Jewish Rites, — and who shall put a bound to mens wits—and this manner of arguing will countenance the Ar∣guments of the Papists, for an universal Bishop, because there was such an High-Priest among the Jews, &c. And that Tythes are due to Mi∣nisters, Jure Divino, form Analogy of Melchi∣sedec and Aaron, &c. Exam. p. 86. Well, since we have this Crambe bis cocta, that is enough to turn ones stomach, being tainted with long standing; I think Mr. Gerees
stomachical medicines may be proper—We bring in,M. Gere. Vind. Pade∣baptismi. saith he, no new Rite by A∣nalogy, but only apply that which God hath brought, unto those, to whom by Analogy it doth appear to belong. And again Baptism is not instituted or bronght in as a new Rite by us; but being appointed of God, is applied by us, by proportion to Infants. And for that of countenancing the Papists in their High-Priest-Hood: neither doth that fol∣low; for this Argument proceeds, as though we set up Circumcision it self: whereas we nei∣ther set up Circumcision, nor Baptism: but ap∣ply Baptism instituted of God to Infants. And therefore for you (saith he to Tombes) to infer the bringing in of things not in their kind men∣tioned, or appointed in the New Testament; is an apparent non sequitur: your instances being far unparallel to ours of applying an instituted Ordinance to children by way of proportion. I shall expect a good answer to this from the Au∣thor, or Mr. Tombes, ad Graecas Calendas. He next applauds my Lord Brooks (who gives not them a very good character) for that saying of his, viz. That the Analogy which Ba∣ptism now hath with Circumcision in the Old Law, is a fine rational Argument to illustrate a point well proved before; but he somewhat doubts whether it be proof enough for that which some would prove by it (besides the vast difference in the Ordinance) the persons to be circumcised are stated by a positive Law, so ex∣press that it leaves no place for scruple, but it is
far otherwise in Baptism, where all the designa∣tion of persons fit to be partakers, for ought I know, saith he, is only such as believe: for this is the qualification which with exactest search I find the Scripture requires in persons to be babtized, and this it seems to require in all such persons; now how Infants can be properly said to believe, I am not yet fully resolved. This is very true which he relates of my Lord Brooks, who speaks not positively, but modestly, that he somewhat doubts, and is not fully sa∣tisfied as to the way of Argumentation from Circumcision to Baptism, and withal doth yet commend it for a fine rational Argument to il∣lustrate a point well proved before: that's some∣thing, and more than our Author would have had him spoke, but I must acquaint the Reader with more which he speaks, little to their ad∣vantage. I will not, I cannot, saith he, take upon me to defend that, men usually call Ana∣baptism: yet I conceive that Sect is twofold. Some of them hold free will, community of all things, deny Magistracy, and refuse to baptize chilren. These truly are such Hereticks (or Athe∣ists) that I question whether any Divine should honour them so much as to dispute with them. There is another sort of them who only deny Ba∣ptism to their children, till they come to years of discretion, and then they baptize them, but in o∣ther things they agree with the Church of Eng∣land. Truly these men are much to be pitied. And I could heartily wish before they be stigmatized with that opprobrious brand of Schismaticks, the truth might be cleared to them. For I con∣ceive
to those that hold we may go no farther than Scripture [that is the express word] for Doctrine and Discipline, it may be very easie to erre in this point in hand; since the Scripture seems not to have clearly determined this par∣ticular; but for his part, he saith, many things prevail with him in this point, as First, for ought he could ever learn, it was the constant custom of the purest and most pri∣mitive Church to baptize Infants of believing Parents. For, saith he, I could never find the beginning and first rise of this practise; where∣as tis very easie to track Heresies to their first rising up, and setting foot in the Church. Again I find all Churches (even the most strict) have generally been of this judgment and practice: yea though there have been in all ages some, that much affected novelty, and had parts enough to discuss and clear what they thought good to preach, yet was this scarce ever questioned by men of note, till within these last ages: and sure the constant judgment of the Churches of Christ, is much to be honoured, and heard in all things that contradict not Scri∣pture. Nor can I clear that of S. Paul, 1 Cor. 7.14. Else were your children—I know some inter∣pret it illegitimate, and holy, legitimate— but saith he, I believe the Apostle means that Relative Church-Holiness, which makes a man capable of admission to holy Ordinances, and to Baptism.
Except. Lastly, the Author excepts against the Argu∣ment we usually bring for the Baptism of chil∣dren; Else our priviledge under the Gospel, will be less than theirs under the Law, for theirs were circumcised, they were taken into the Covenant with the Parent, and were sealed, whereby they were distinguished from the world, and this was a great priviledge, and to deny Baptism to children, which succeeds Circumcision, is to restrain Gods Grace, and make us loosers by Christs coming. To which he answers not at all. 1. Because they were not circumcised, because they were children of Believers or sealed with a New Covenant Seal, as being in the New Cove∣nant thereby, as before proved, &c. But what an absurd conceit and idle dream this is we have shewn before to which I refer the Reader. 2. Because it ought to be esteemed no more loss of a priviledge, than our not enjoying literally a Holy Land, City, Temple, Succession of High-Priest, &c. for all those Types are spiritualiz'd to us under the Gospel— and so far we are better,Tombes again Eramen. p. 101. and not worse. Answ. But take heed of disparaging the Grace of God in vouchsafing them the Seal of his Cove∣nant, now under the Gospel. For as Mr. Marshal
says in answer to such cavilling as this. None of those, City, Temple, Succession of High∣Priest, &c. were of the substance of the Cove∣nant of Grace, for though Circumcision was a part of their administration, yet it did belong to the fubstance, it belonged to it, saith he, not as a part of it, but as a means of applying it; and though it be a priviledge to have no∣thing succeed Circumcision, as it bound to that manner of administration; yet it is a privilege to have somewhat succeed it as a Seal of the Co∣venant, in as much as a Covenant with a Seal, is a greater benefit than to have a Covenant without it. Thirdly, He saith if it should be granted, that Circumcision was a Seal of the New Covenant, belonging to all the children of Israel, then would not the baptizing children of Believers answer it. Neither amount to so great a priviledge. And why? 1. There were all the Familes and Tribes of Israel (and all proselyted strangers) with their children without distinction of good and bad to be circumcised: But here only one of a City, or two of a Tribe: for Believers are but thin sown, and the children of unbelievers, and wicked men are to receive no such benefit in the Judgment of so many. Answ. I repent the losing of so much time as I am put upon in answering such frivolous objections,
but such wrangling will never advantage their cause. First, Then it is not true that all their chil∣dren were circumcised, for in the case of Ex∣communication, if a person persisted in impeni∣tency amongst other punishments, this was one, his Male-children were not circumcised. God∣win's Moses and Aaron, l. 4. c. 2. 2. Let it be considered, that the Church of God is now of Greater extent under the Gospel, that it was then, Isaiah 54.12. The desolate hath more children than the married: enlarge the place of thy Tents, and let them spread the Cur∣tains of thy habitation, &c. So chap. 60.6. The multitude of the Sea shall be converted unto thee, and the riches of the Gentiles shall come unto thee —who are these that fly like clouds, and as the Doves to the Windows? v. 8. And when these come in, their children come in with them, and so the number of the baptized do infinitely exceed the circumcised, the extent of the Gentile Church so much exceeding that of the Jews, we find three thousand came in a day, and five thousand at another time in the Acts. 3. Whereas he saith wicked men are to re∣ceive no such Benefit, that is, for their children in the judgment of so many; It is the judgment of many more that they ought, if they profess the Christian faith: although I conceive not the priviledge of ignorant, and scandalous persons. Secondly, He adds another reason which is exceeding weak; and that is, Because we are at an utter uncertainty when we have a right Subject;
for if the Parent be an Hypocrite, or no elect per∣son, which is beyond our reach to understand, we cannot know whether the child be fit for Baptism. Answ. And how can those of his way tell when they have a fit Subject for Baptism, are they sure all whom they baptize are elect persons and sincere, we have told him before, de occul∣tis non judicat Ecclesia. A serious profession is sufficient, and we are to judge such professors, in probability Believers, and may on that ground admit their children to Baptism. We have a rule for baptizing, and that we are to follow, and a rule to know, those that are baptizable, but none, for an infallible judgment of mens sincerity, we are not called to judge of this matter, nor is it in our power, and 'tis not our sin if we be deceived. Mr. Baxter says well to this, in his Answer to Mr. Tombes, how do you know, (saith he to him) whom you should baptize? whom doth the Scripture command you to baptize? If you say as Apol. p. 94. that it is those that make free, serious, understand∣ing profession: I would know whether it be the profession it self, the bare profession which God bestoweth this privilege on? or whether it be the faith professed? if it be real faith, then without that, there is no Baptism; if it be bare profes∣sion, or if we may call it false faith, then false faith (or profession without faith) is the con∣dition of baptizing, And if it be real faith, the Baptizer cannot know that, if it be said that in common estimation they are Believers, then common estimation renders one capable of Baptism. When these men have answered the
point for themselves, they have answered it for us. Thirdly and Lastly he saith, Neither can the child (when he is grown up) have any certain knowledge that such a Ceremony hath past upon him in Infancy, he having no infallible mark thereof; whereas the circumcised Infant had an indelible character and mark in his flesh, to assure him that he had received that Rite. Answ. That they had a sensible mark to mind them of their. Circumcision is true, though some of them had an art to make it invisible, as Beza notes upon that place, 1 Cor. 7.18. Let him not gather his Circum∣cision,We have the note in our Margent Bible. which was done (as he quotes it out of Celsus, and Epiphanius) when the Surgeon by art draw∣eth out the skin to cover the part circumcised. Godwin hath the same in his Moses and Aaron, and puts the question how it is possible for a man, after once he hath been marked with the sign of Circumcision, to blot out that character, and become uncircumcised? For thus some Jews, for fear of Antiochus made themselves uncircum∣cised. 1 Mac. 1.16. Others for shame, after they were gained to the Christian Faith, uncir∣cumcised themselves, and then tells us what is before. This by the way: But the Author saith, he that was circumcised had a character or mark, to assure himself that he had received that Rite. To this I reply in the words of Mr. Brinsley. True; such a sensible mark they had. But how did they know that that mark was given them for any such religious end and pur∣pose?
That they received it as a Sacrament, a Seal of the Covenant betwixt God and them. O∣ther nations there were (and that many) who used Circumcision (even as the Turks do at this day) and I find in Mr. Godwin the same, in his sixth Book of Miscellaneous Rites. It was used, saith he, (though not as a Sacrament) by many other nations, by the inhabitants of Colchis, the Ethiopians, the Trogloditae and the Egyptians. Now then how did the Israelites know it was given them to such a religious intent? why herein they were to give credit unto the testi∣mony of others, viz. the Parents and other wit∣nesses, and Mr. Godwin in the aforesaid Book tells us from the Jewish Doctors, that when a little child was to be circumcised, one who sup∣plied the place of a witness (whom they called by the name of Baal Berith and Sandak, that is, the Master of the Covenant, held the child in his arms, whilest it was circumcised, that so he might bear witness to the Circumcision, and of the name given the child at that time. Such was the use of the later Jews; and it seemeth that the practice was ancient, even as ancient as I∣saiah's time. So those two learned expositors Junius and Tremelius interpret that place. Isa. 8.2. He took unto him faithful Witnesses. Witnes∣ses to what? saith Mr. Brinsly; why to the Cir∣cumcision of his Son, of whom he speaketh in the verse before; such as might witness that he gave him that name in his Circumcision, as the Lord appointed, viz. Maher-shalal-hash-baz. Which whether, saith he, it was a thing really done, or only represented to the Prophet in a
vision, is not material: for it seemeth however it was a practice then in use in those times. And from hence it is conceived that ancient custom [as ancient indeed as Tertullians days] of having God-fathers, and God-mothers, (as we call them) in Baptism. Some persons specially appointed to witness the Baptism of such a per∣son; which use is still continued amongst us, with this injunction that they mind the child of that faith into which it was baptized, and that they take care that it be instructed and brought up in the knowledge of Christ, yet now it is in most places become a mere formality, and an occasion only of feasting. But we return to the matter, From those Witnesses or their Parents did the children of the Jews receive the Testimony of their Circumcision; and they might give the more credit to it, because they saw the same practised upon others dayly. And even such a Testimony have children now from Pa∣rents, or Sureties, besides the Testimony of the whole congregation, and the Records that are kept thereof in a Book kept for that purpose, ac∣cording to the custom of the Church of England.
CHAP. IV. Wherein the Author attempts to prove that the Ceremony of Baptism, is Immersion, and not Sprinkling; which is an other Rite, he saith) introduced contrary to the signification of the Word, and Nature of the Ordinance, &c. SInce the Author hath thought meet to appear thus as a Witness against Infant-Baptism, it had been well if he had followed the good old Rule injoyned Witnesses, that is, to speak the Truth, the whole Truth, and nothing but the Truth; and for want of which he hath given such a partial and lame account hitherto. We are now come to a main point, upon which they place very much confidence, viz. the signi∣fication of the Word Baptism, and the Author undertakes to prove, that the Manner and Cere∣mony thereof ought to be by Dipping or Plung∣ing the whole Body, and not by Sprinkling or pouring Water on the Face or Head. 1. From the proper and genuine signification of the Word, which according to the Greek Lexicons, and the most eminent Criticks, he saith, imports
nothing less than to Dip, Plung, or cover all over. And that Scapula and Stephens, two as great Masters of the Greek tongue as we have any, tell us in their Lexicons, that  from  signifies mergo, immergo, obruo, Item tingo, quod fit immergendo, that is, to dip plunge; overwhelm, put-under, cover-over, to dye in Colour, which is done by plunging. Answer. To this we Oppose Dr. Featly in his  pag. 37. who saith, that Hesychius and Stephanus, and Scapula, and Bu∣daeus, the great Masters of the Greek Tongue, make good by many instances and allegations out of Classick Writers, that the Word [] importeth no more than Ablution, or Washing, which may be done without Dipping. Now what a case is the illiterate Reader in? who shall he believe, the Author or the Learned Dr.? For my part being not willing to take up the matter upon trust, I was the more curious to examine the Criticks. First, I consulted with Stephanus, and he saith the Word , signifies not only mergo, im∣mergo, (to dip, or plung) but also abluo, lavo, (to wet, or wash) and in the same place in his Lexicon he brings in Cyprian (who flourished a∣bout 1500 years since) translating the Word , Tingentes, following therein his Master Tertullian;Corpus tingere sparsâ aquâ Ovid. 4. Fast. p. 558. and saith Stephens, Tingere apud prophanos Autho∣res, idem est quod aspergere, the Word tingere, among Hea∣then-Writers
signifies Sprinkling, as he shews out of Ovid and Cicero. For Passor the Author tells us,Nec enim Hercu∣li nocere Deianira voluit, quum ei tu∣nicam sanguine Centauri tinctam dedit, Cic. de Nat. Deor. p. 98. he Translates the Word by Immersion, Dipping, Sub∣mersion, but he hath left out Ablution, or Washing, which Passor there adds, , saith he, is Immergo, Abluo, either to dip, or to Wash. After him comes Vossius, who is most expresly against the Author's Opinion. The Word, saith Vossius, signifies to Wash, and Washing is not only by dipping as he hints, but by pouring out of Water, or sprinkling it on the Body, and re∣presents the washing of the Soul, according to that in Ezek. 36. I will Sprinkle clean Water upon you; and therefore it seems Baptism may be celebrated either way, by Dipping or Sprink∣ling. Then for our own Country-men Mr. Leigh, Rogers, Taylor, Mede, Hammond: 'tis tedious to examine them all. We will only bring one of them to the test which is Mr. Leigh, who is instar omnium, for profound knowledg in the Greek and Hebrew. This Man the Author glo∣ries in: Mr. Leigh, saith he, in his Critica Sacra, tells us, its proper and native signification is to Dip into Water, or to plung under Water, and that the proper signification was such a Dipping or Plung∣ing as Dyers use for dying of Cloathes.
True Mr. Leigh says this, but he saith more, and 'tis disingenuously done of the Author thus to pick out what serves his turn, and leave the Reader in the dark as to the rest. When-as Mr. Leigh saith in the very beginning, as soon as he names the Word , that although it be derived from , to Dip, or Plung, and sig∣nifies primarily such a kind of Washing as is used in Buks, where linnen is Plunged and Dipt; yet it is taken more largely for any kind of Washing or Cleansing, even where there is no Dipping at all: and he quotes these Scriptures for it, Matth. 3.20, 22. Mark. 7.4. , They Baptized themselves, it is rendred Washed themselves; and so did eat. So Mark. 10.38. Luke 3.16. Act. 1.5. and 11.16. 1 Cor. 10.2. It is put generally for Washing saith Mr. Leigh, as Luke 11.38. Heb. 9.10. Christ no-where requireth Dipping, but only Baptizing, as he quotes out of Dr. Featly. Thou seeest, Reader, how little he hath gotten by these Authors. I shall add a few more of great renown in the Church, who are opposite to the conceit of Baptizing to signify only Dipping. The first is Cyprian,Baptizare etiam morbis laborantes in lectis solitos. Cyp. in Epist. ad Magnum. L. 4. Epist. 7. indicat, & pro Baptismo probat. & sic Bap∣tizatum Corneli∣us Novatum scri∣bit apud Euseb. L. 6. Cap. 43. qui sic autem Baptiz a∣blantur, inquit Vo∣ssius, non immerge∣bantur nec perfun∣debantur, sed aquâ solâ aspergebantur, &c. Vossius de Baptismo. p. 358. who in his E∣pistle ad Magnum L. 4. Epist. 7. acquaints us that it was u∣sual in those dayes to Baptize sick Persons in their Beds, and the said Father proves by di∣vers reasons the warrantable∣ness of such Baptism; and that persons are rightly Baptized although only Sprinkled, and
he grounds it upon Ezek. 36. I will Sprinkle clean Water upon you &c. In like manner Vossius cites out of Eusebius, L. 6. C. 43. That it was the Custom of those times to Baptize sick Persons in their Beds. Cornelius writes that No∣vatus was so Baptized, upon which the Learned Vossius makes this Observa∣tion; That those who were thus Baptized were not doused or dipt under Water, but only Sprin∣kled. This is Vossius whom the Author brings to be for Dipping, according to the signification of the Word, as if that were the only way of Baptizing; but you see what a false Suggestion it is. Estius another very Learned Man, and great Critick, declares his Judgment,Probat Estius modum ablutionis, scilicet aspersionis exemplo Apostolo∣rum, Act. 2. Sane interalios Thomae Aquinati verist∣mile est aquâ persu∣disse, ob Baptizan∣dorum multitudi∣nem, Vossius de Bap. p. 359. grounding it on Act. 2.4. which is this, That the Apo∣stles did Baptize by Washing or Sprinkling, for, saith he, it is altogether improbable that the Apostles Dipt 3000 Per∣sons in one day, and 5000 at another time. Non est verisi∣mile propter Multitudinem im∣mergi omnes potuisse, sed vel perfusos, vel aspersos fuisse a∣quâ. He conceived that they were rather wa∣shed, or had Water Sprinkled on them.
Walfridus Strabo, (an Ancient Ecclesiastical Writer, though since Austin many hundred years) saith in his 26th Chapter, It is to be noted that many heretofore were Baptized, not only by Dip∣ping, but also by pouring Water on them; and that the same way of Baptizing may be still re∣tained. This is he whom the Author quotes to be for the Baptizing of grown Persons only. Lastly, the Magdeburgenses (whose History of the Church the Author much applauds, and that justly being a rare work indeed) tell us that Bap∣tism signifies Tinging, or Washing, and for this they bring Mark. 7. when the Pharisees come to the Market except they Wash [the Word is Baptize] they eat not, and yet it was but a part, their hands only, and not the whole Body that was so Baptized or Washed. They also quote that place Luke, 11.38. That Baptiz∣ing is meerly Washing, and not only Dipping, The Pharisees wondered at Jesus , that he was not Bap∣tized before Dinner, that is, that he did not Wash. Now this must be by all means (accord∣ing to some men's fancy) by Dipping and not pouring Water upon the hands; yet what more common than to Wash ones hands this way, or by holding them under a Cock or Spout or Youre, 2 Kings 3.11. Here is Elisha the Son of Saphat, which poured Water on the hands of Elijah: that is, who was his Servant as 'tis noted in the Margent. It is a very poor Supposition that Washing of hands must only be by Dipping; what if the Pha∣risees had had a mind to have Washed their
Faces when they did their Hands, as is common; must that have been by Dipping? But the afore∣said Text in the Kings puts the matter beyond exception, where by good hap we have found a place, to prove that a Man may Wash his Hands without Dipping. In a Metaphorical sense the Word (Baptize) is used for Pouring out the Spirit. But to go on with the Magdeburgenses, they tell us that the Baptism of Christians was taken a judaica lotione, from the Jewish Custom of Washings: which the Apostle speaks of Heb. 9.10. Their service stood in divers Washings. The Greek is Baptisms. Now those Baptisms or Washings were not all of them Dippings; although some 'tis confest were. Mr. Goodwin in his Jewish Antiquities shews, that the Jews had (amongst other Baptisms or Washings) a three-fold Baptization for the Dead; one of which was named , that is, Baptization or Washing the Dead Corps: 'tis like this was done with some Odoriserous Water, to keep off ill scents. Thus likewise the Graecians had their Ablutio mortuorum,Homer saith, Jupiter: bid them do so to Sarpe∣don.  Il. 11. they Washed the Corps with Oyntment, and poured Am∣brosia upon the Head and Face. 'Tis said of Tabitha, that she dyed and when they had Washed her, they laid her up in an upper Chamber, Act. 9.37. I hope when they washed her, they did not Dip her under water.
2. It appears to be so, saith he, from the Practice and usage we find thereof in Scripture. 1. In the Story of Christ's Baptism, Mat. 3.5. Jesus came from Galilee to Jordan unto John to be Baptized of him; and verse 16. when he was Baptized he went up straight way out of the Wa∣ter. Answer. We may be said to come up out of the water, when we have not been under it. Men usually go down into the water to bath themselves, and and yet keep their Heads above water; but the Words in the Text which are , as Mr. Sydenham notes, may be better translated, went up from the water;  sig∣nifies more properly; ab from, than ex out; be∣cause Rivers for the most part lye low, and in Vallies, in coming to which usually there is a descent, and coming from them some ascent. 2. A Second Scripture, which he urgeth for his Opinion is that of John 3. verse. 23. And John was Baptizing in Aenon near Salem, and the reason why he pitcheth on this place, is given to be, is this, because there was much Water. Reply. The aforesaid Author gives a sufficient Answer to this, viz. John's Baptizing at Aenon, name∣ly because there was much water, is a good reason why he chose that place, for the Coun∣try to come in and be Baptized, because they might go many Miles in those hot Countries, and not meet with a drop of water, and it was a
great priviledg to those places that banked on Jordan, that they had much water, but this is no Argument to prove that John plunged all he Baptized, The Argument, saith Mr. Syden∣ham, must be this, John Baptized in Aenon be∣cause there was much water: ergo Baptizing is by Dipping all the whole Body. This is a dan∣gerous and ominous way of arguing, to those who deny Consequences and Deductions for to warrant duties, without express syllabical Pre∣cept — None of our Consequences for In∣fant-Baptism are so strained and far-fetcht. It was necessary for them, that had so many of several parts to Baptize, to go where there may be much water, when they could get hardly a drop many miles. You may in England go twenty miles in some Countries, and not find a River to plunge a man's whole body under water, what would it be in Spain and other hot Countries, where Water is sold as Wine and beere with us, how far might they go ere they could get a River to plunge themselves in? &c. A third Scripture is that, Act. 8.36.38. — And they went both down into the Water, both Phi∣lip and the Eunuch, and he Baptized him, and when they came up both out of the Water. &c. Answer. I see not how this Text can serve their turn, for there is nothing in it to prove that Philip plunged him over head & ears; if they will prove it from any thing it must be from their going down into the Water, or coming up out of it; but that will not do, for I may go down into the
Water, and come up again out of it, and yet not be up to my Ankles: and how can it be proved hence they went any farther, or whether Philip did not flash water into his Face, or cast it over his Head, or whether he dipt only his Head, or his whole Body under water; the Scripture is silent as to this, and Men may conjecture what they please, but must not impose upon others. The Text faith, they both went down into the Water, but their going down into water was no part of the Baptism, for then they had both been Baptized: for they went both together down into the water, but it is said that Philip Bap∣tized him after they went down into the water. That the Eunuch was Baptized is clear, but after what manner we are yet to seek. We cannot from hence learn the management of this business, whether Philip took up this great corpulent Per∣son (for such Eunuchs use to be) quite out of the water by the strength of his Arms, and so Dip∣ped down again or no, or whether so much of him only as was above the water was Dipt, & that of him under the water left alone. And besides, as for this Eunuch, if his whole body were Dipt whether it were in puris naturalibus, altogether naked, or in his wearing cloaths, this latter can∣not be conceived for they went presently up in the Chariot, nor could he have any conveniency of shift for such a purpose, for their meeting was accidental as to the Eunuch's part: so that we conclude, nothing for plunging the whole body under water can be pretended to from this Text.
The last Scripture the Author mentions is tha Rom. 6.4. Buried with him in Baptism, &c. This is a Metaphorical expression signifying partaking of Christ's Death by vertue of Union, but Plunging the whole body doth not hold similitude neither with Christ's burial, nor the manner of burials in the most part of the World: for as Mr. Sydenham notes, Christ's bu∣rial, and the manner of it was not by throw∣ing under the Earth, for his Body was wrapt up in a linnen-cloth by Joseph, and laid in a Tomb or Sepulchre, hewen out of a Rock, and this was the custom of the Jews, Matt. 27.60. to cut out a place like a Cave, out of a Rock to lay their dead Bodies in; and besides, Christ is said to stay three days so buried, and so must they under the water, if they are for an exact resem∣blance to his Burial; but of this we may have occasion to speak more in our Answer to the 6th Chapter. After this the Author brings divers Learned Authors, who affirm that the ancient way of Baptizing was by Dipping, as Cajetan &c. And amongst the rest he hath a passage out of Mr. Fox his Acts and Monuments who takes it out of Fa∣bian viz. That Austin and Paulinus did in the 7th Century Baptize here in England great multi∣tudes in the River Trent, and the River Swall, where note by the way (saith Mr. Fox) it fol∣lowed there was no use of Fonts. To this I Answer, there could not well be any use of Fonts, because as Bede says, it was in initio Ecclesiae ubi jam cito templa [non potuerunt
extrui, it was before Temples were built, and therefore saith he, passim ad Flumina turba Bap∣tizata est, Beda Lib. 2. Angl. Hist. cap. 14. And I shall mind the Reader with a pretty Observa∣tion of Mr. Fuller upon this occasion; we have it in his Church-History, p. 66. That (saith he) which they bring for Dipping, because they were Baptized in the River Swall, makes against it. For Cambden in his Preface of Britain pag. 136. cites a certain Author who reports how in the River Swall near Richmond in York-shire, Austin in one day Baptized above ten∣thousand Saxons— Though Bede ascribes this numerous Baptizing to Paulinus Arch-Bishop of York. Now, faith he, if so many were Baptized it may be well urged against the Anabaptists and Papists; against the former, that all these could not be dipt in a day; and for the latter it appears that in that Age the Administration of the Sa∣crament was not loaded with those Superstitious Ceremonies, as essential thereunto, of Crossing, Spittle, Oyl, Cream, Salt, &c. Lastly, the Author frames an Objection or two on our behalf, which he undertakes to Answer thus. Objection. But the Word  signifies if not to Sprin∣kle, yet not only to Dip, and overwhelm, but also to Wash. Mark, 7.4. where there is mention of Washing of Hands, Cups, Pots, Vessels, which may be done without Dipping or Plunging under Water.
Answer. That Baptism in a sence is Washing, saith he, I no ways doubt, for you can not dip a thing with∣out you wash it: But may not Cups and Vessels be washed though not dipt? True (saith he) they may though not from this Scripture, the Word being ; for though all Dipping be Washing, yet all Washing is not Dipping in a proper sense. Well argued Sr. I perceive you are very inge∣nious and logical, you are now at your termini convertibiles, where shall we have you next? No wonder that (as some boast) you convert many to your Judgment. But by your leave I will lay a Rub in your way: What think you of that place Luk. 3.16. I Baptize you [with Water] if by Baptism had been meant Dipping, must it not have been said I Baptize you [in Water]? Once more Act. 1.5. John Baptized [with Water] is not this a very improper speech if it be meant of dipping, for 'tis as much as to say John Dipt with Water— The same may be said of Christ's coming after John, whom, he saith, shall Baptize with the Spirit; is this to be understood of Dipping, or is it not rather of the pouring out of the Spirit which was pro∣mised? If this will not satisfy, I shall offer one Text more, and that I think is beyond exception; it is concerning Nebuchadnezzar; Dan. 4.30. of whom it is said he did eat grass as the Oxen and his Body was wet with the dew of Heaven,  as the Septuagint hath it:  is here rendred
Wet, and that with the Dew of Heaven: It is the second Aorist of , from whence comes . So now we have found that which the Author said he could never do, namely, that the word is simply taken for Washing, by pouring on Water, or Sprinkling; for if the Root signifies so, then doth the Branch also. And thus my Antagonist having shewn so much of his Acumen in the Greek, he will also give us a tast of his skill in the Mystery of Huswifry. I presume, saith he, you will account her but a Slut, and give her no thanks for her pains, that having unclean Hands, Vessels, or Cloaths to Wash, doth only Sprinkle, or pour a little Water upon them as though that would serve. 'Tis a commendable thing to be cleanly, and let all Maids take special notice of this item, and as they would not willingly incur the brand of Sluts, let them be mindful of this that when ever they set about that necessary work of Washing Dishes to look well to their business, and let them be sure they dip them quite under water, or they will never be clean: and I question whether this will do without some rinsing and rubbing, for I have observed your cleanly Huswifes to fetch off the filth that way, and then they will shine like Chrystal, if afterward they scoure them with Sand. But we must be more ferious in a business of this nature, and I hope to be excused, being temp∣ted thus 10 Answer our Author in his own kind. I will leave that word of Mr. Baxter to the con∣sideration of the Judicious viz. It would be but
folly for any to think Men must needs fill them∣selves full of Bread and Wine, because it best sig∣nifies the fulness of Christ; so it is no better to say, that we must needs be washed all over be∣cause it best signifies the fulness of Christ. Christ told Peter that the Washing of his Feet was e∣nough to cleanse all. Eight Argument against the Administration of Baptism by Dipping. 1. BEcause we are not to presume to do that which is not written, that is, that is not founded upon Scripture-precept, either Thetice, in so many express words, or Dianoetice, by clear consequence: They will not allow us the privi∣ledg of deducting Consequences from Scripture, although never so clear, yet they presume to make use of Consequences, and think they can demonstrate that which is impossible to be done, from Scripture. There is a positive saying in Mr. Leigh's Critica Sacra upon the Word [] Christ nowhere requireth Dipping but only Bap∣tizing, and as for the manner and method how this should be done, there is altum Silentium in the Scripture, a deep silence: and therefore 'tis I very great boldness, (to say no worse,) for any to lay the whole essence of Baptism in Dipping. 2. As there is no express Command for it, so there is no President in the New-Testament;
they cannot instance in any one Person that ever was so severely dealt with as to be Plunged over Head and Ears. Nor is there any convincing Circumstances to be collected thence, that any was so served. And is it not strange that upon search of all the Sacred Register, from the time that John the Baptist began his Ministery, to the time that John the Evangelist ended his, which was above sixty years, during which time thou∣sands and ten thousands were Baptized; that if Plunging over head and ears had been the way, then no error ever should be committed, no faint∣ing, or drowning of persons under water, or some accident or another happen, to demonstra∣te that Baptizing was after that manner. Me thinks there should fall out something, either of Omission or Commission, that might argue the thing. But we have not so much as one Cir∣cumstance of that nature. 3. Because as the Word  signifies both to Plunge and to Wash, so it is mostly used in Scripture for Washing. It is a good Rule to be observed that when we find a word in Scrip∣ture of a double sence, and it hangs as it were in Equilibrio, so that we know not which to take, our safest course is then to observe which way the Scale doth most incline, that is we are to im∣brace that sence which is most common in Scrip∣ture. But in the matter before us I think we need not be much at a loss, for we shall not easily find any explicite place in all the Bible, where the Word Baptize is used positively for Plunging.
4. Let it be granted that in Scripture the word can be found to signify Dipping, yet for asmuch as it is also in Scripture used simply for Washing, we are also to observe and follow another Theo∣logical Rule, that where a word is of doubtful in∣terpretation, admitting a double sense, that sense is to be taken for right, which agrees best with the Mind of God in other places; and the general Anatogy of Faith, and Evangelical Do∣ctrine. Hence then we conclude that Baptizing is not Dipping, because this Practice runs direct∣ly cross to a Vital Maxime of Religion, which is self-preservation, required not only in the Mo∣ral-Law, but Charactered in us by Nature: and under the Evangelical Dispensation, we find our Lord Jesus so tender of Man's health and life, that rather than it should be endangered, even the Sab∣bath it self must be dispensed with; and the Reason Christ gives is, because Man was not made for the Sabbath, but the Sabbath for Man; so may it be said Man was not made for Baptism, but Baptism Instituted for Man, for his good, not hurt; and therefore Dipping which we know hath not been only to the damage of some Mens health, but the loss of some lives, is to be suspected to be none of Christ's Ordinances. And for this Reason Mr Cradock (a great Independent as they call them) in his Treatise of Gospel-Liberty, saith, the Practice is to be restrained by the Ma∣gistrate, for the preservation of the lives of his Subjects. Let us a little dive into this Dipping-Principle, and we shall see how inconsistent it may in some cases be to the Life of Man.
1. We know the Command of Baptizing takes place immediatly upon Believing; for this is cer∣tain, every one that Believeth ought presently to be Baptized (if he can have it) for so it was without delay, as appears by several Instances in the Acts of the Apostles. If then only Dipping be Baptizing, what shall become of them that are weak and sickly, that have Catarrhs, Consump∣tions, Palsies; These, if they Believe, although it be in Winter, in frost and snow, must to the work without any delay, they must I say be co∣vered all over with water: and if so, may not this hasten their end, which may endanger the lives of the soundest Bodies? Is this think you suitable to the mercy & tender Bowels of Christ, whose Yoke is easy and Burden light? Certainly such a pe∣nance as this to some Persons and to those that live in extream cold Countries, is more unsuppor∣table than the burthen of the Ceremonial-Law, and more dangerous than what ever the Cere∣monial Law requited. And what though our bodies may endure it better than theirs who live under a more severe Climat, yet we must know Christ's Ordinances are calculated for all Meridi∣ans, and all are bound to submit unto them. That therefore cannot be Christ's Ordinance, which must needs compel some to self-cruelty and destruction. To those therefore who are such stubborn asserters of the Doctrine of Dipping, that of Peter may be well applyed, Why tempt ye God, to put such a Yoke upon the necks of Christians, not able to bear it, when nothing else but your mistaken expounding of the Text hath brought it on them? what then Mr. Baxter
speaks in respect of weak Constitutions, is (for ought I know) a truth, viz. The way of Dipping is good for nothing but to dispatch Men out of the World, that are burdensome to it, and to ranken Church-yards. Secondly, Baptism cannot be by way of Dip∣ping, because Christ hath Instituted no Ordi∣nance, to thwart and cross the pure and chast Rules of the Gospel, which prohibits all appear∣ances of evil, and the unclean glances of the Eye. Can we therefore imagine that Christ's Baptism should intrench so much upon the laws of Civi∣lity, Chastity, and Modesty; as to require Wo∣men and Maids, to appear openly, in the light o the Sun, out of their wonted habit, in trans∣parent and thin Garments next to nakedness, and in that posture to be Plunged, in the face of the whole Congregation, before Men and Boys? for my part I cannot bring my self to believe that Christ owneth any Practice of so uncomely an aspect, and that is seemingly so scandalous and ignominious to the honour of Christianity. 5. Christ's Ordinances are calculated for the Universal World, for the Inhabitants of all Coun∣tries, and on that consideration, I see not how Dipping can be one of them: for how can Per∣sons be strictly obliged to that in all places, which cannot be practised but in some, and that too at certain times; for some Countries are so hot and dry, that People must travel many miles before they can find any River up to their Knees, and in other places at Winter the water is frozen up,
that the Ice cannot be perforated or broken up. 6. I cannot think that by Baptizing we are to understand Dipping under water: for the prime end of Baptism (as the Author saith Chap. 4th of his first Part, pag. 15.) is, that the Baptized might have the Mysteries of the Gospel repre∣sented in a sign, and preacht to his Eye in the Ordinance, which hath been Preacht to his Ear. But what of that can be seen or apprehended at that time when the Ordinance is celebrated? how can any one, especially such as are timor∣ous, and of the weaker Sex, be free to exercise their Minds or Faith upon Divine Mysteries? What can such think of, but their danger, and how they shall escape being throtled or drowned? And I cannot conceive (if there were no∣thing but this) that Christ hath instituted an Or∣dinance, that shall so confound the senses, and put tender folks into such an afright and amaze for the present, and at such a time when they had need have their minds most serene to contemplat of the glorious Mysteries represented in the Or∣dinance. 7. Baptizing cannot be by Dipping, for if so, then the Body must be either naked, or cloathed: if cloated, then certainly the person is not Bap∣tized but his Cloathes; for Vossius says true, de Baptismo pag. 357. Baptismus non vestium est, sed humani corporis: Baptism is not that of the Cloaths, but of the body of Man: for if one be Dipt in his Cloaths, the Flesh cannot be said to be washed primarily, but secundarily, and by
consequence, and 'tis the Gar∣ment that is properly Baptized,Mr. Syden∣ham's Exercita∣tion on Baptism. or Washed; and yet that part that is to be Baptized ought doubtless to be naked, that the Water may fall immediatly upon the flesh that hath been the instrument and subject of sinning: and therefore anciently, for above six-hundred years, Vossius shews that (through an erroneous mistake) Men, Women, and Infants,Vossius de Bapt. p. 357. Eo etiam, posito pudore toto penitûs corpore nu∣dabantur, adeo ut ne fasciâ quidem (qualem pictores honestatis causâ ap∣pingere solent) ob∣duxisse videantur partibus pudendis. were Baptized naked, and the Christians gloried in it, that for the sake of Christ they could expose themselves to shame, un∣til afterward they came to more light, and had regard to modesty; which taught Chri∣stians that the washing of one part may suffice, and may well enough signify the purifying the whole Man, as Christ told Peter as before, in a case of like resemblance, John 13.10. And this is the reason, as Mr. Sydenham well observes, why we only pour Water on the Face, because it is the principallest part wherein the Image of God most appears, and the Soul shines forth most eminently, on which all the workings of mens humors and affections leave the visi∣blest impression and symptoms. And 'tis obser∣vable that the same Word in the Greek [] signifies both the Face and the Person, be∣cause the whole Person is represented by the Face; and thus we Baptize the Person when we Bap∣tize
his Face, which we can look upon without shame. 8. Baptizing is not by Dipping, but some other way, for 'tis said of John that he Baptized all Jerusalem and Judea, and the Regions round∣about, and three-thousand were Baptized in one day, and five thousand another, which is hinted brawny Arms, to go through such work as to Dip them all; and how all these could be Dipt Men and Women promiscuously in their Cloaths, or how they could get Garments to render the act comely, is not easily to be conjecture, and therefore it is more likely Water was flasht, or cast upon or over them.
CHAP. V. Wherein we have an account given of some pretended Mischiefs, Absurdities, and Contradictions chargeable upon the Pra∣ctice of Infant-Baptism. WE were once resolved to have pretermitted this Chapter, being a Recapitulation of the Author's former Arguments against us, and containing nothing that is material and pertinent to the Question, that hath not been already either Actually or Virtually resolved: but had I per∣sisted in that resolution, and said nothing, it would have been imputed by some to be, by reason of some difficulties that I found therein, which made me unwilling to meddle with it. I have, to pre∣vent all such imaginations, encountered it with assurance, that the ingenious Reader will approve my Husbanding time better, than to make a large repetition of what hath been already said; when in truth it is sufficient only to point to such places in my Book, where the same things are pressed as we find here, and to which answer hath been given. Nevertheless I shall superadd a few things. He begins with Mischiefs. 1. The first Mischief is, by altering Christ's Order in the Commission, Matt. 28.19. wherein
Teaching, Repentance & Faith; are required alwayes to precede Baptism, which this makes to follow after. Reply. Notwithstanding what is said to this in the first Chapter of my Book, I add, That I deny the Proposition to be Universally true, that Teaching, Faith, Repentance, ought alwayes to precede Baptism. For Persons to be Baptized are, either; 1. Original, which have no precedent title. To such, Teaching, Repentance, Faith, must precede their Baptism; for such having not precedent Evidences of being in Covenant, must put forth some acts of Faith & Repentance of their own, that so they may have evidence of right. 2. Secondary, and derived, viz. Infants of for∣mer Believers, and 'tis not requisite, that Teach∣ing, Faith, Repentance, should precede their Baptism. This distinction of Primary, Original, or Secondary and Derived Persons in the Title to the Sacrament of Baptism, would answer most of the Author's Arguments for him, if he would please to consider it. We call the Believing Pa∣rents Original, and their Infants Secondary and Derived Persons for distinction sake: Not as if the Father were the Original of his Son's right to the Covenant or Seal; No, God's meer Grace in Christ, who at the first Institution of the Cove∣nant was pleased to take in both the Believer and his Seed, is the Original of both their Rights; The Seed Deriving it immediatly from the Te∣nour of the Covenant, as well as the Father: But because the Relation of that Infant to that Be∣liever
as his Seed, is a determining Mean, bringing him within the Covenant, from which his Right proceedeth. If you say, How prove you this di∣stinction of First and Original Persons, and Se∣condary and Derived, out of the Word? I prove it, 1 From the Tenour of the Covenant it self: I will be a God to thee, and to thy Seed after thee; where there is this distinction of persons in the Covenant, 1 To thee, Abraham, actually believing. 2. To thy Seed after thee, brought within the Covenant, by being thy Seed, and by thy actual Believing, though they for the present are not actual Believers; and so the Seal was to be put on them in that Right even before their actual Believing. 2. So is there ground for it in apply∣ing and holding out the Covenant in the same Tenour under the Gospel, as is before shewn from Act. 2.39. There are the same two states of per∣sons. 1. You, and others, as many as shall be actually called. 2. The Seed of them and others, so actually called. 3. In the constant Practice according to this warrant, in the taking in of the Proselytes: He who came in, and took hold of the Covenant, was Circumcised on his actual taking hold of it, but then the Original-Persons actually professing, they stayed not for such actual profession in the Seed of such a one, but gave them the Seal, as persons in Covenant, even be∣fore actual Profession. I have been the larger, because this is the Key which must open the way to be satisfied in the lawfulness of Infant-Baptism; and to repel all Arguments against it.
2. Those places in the Commission, Go teach all Nations, Baptizing &c. to which he should have added the other, Mark 16.16. He that believeth, and is Baptized, shall be saved, must be taken in the Latitude of Original Persons, not of Derived, for of such alone doth Christ speak there, giving Commission of the planting and first-gathering of Churches, for that the Whosoever in Mark must not be taken in a full Latitude of necessity, is plain from the other clause to which it is convertibly prefixed, viz. Shall be saved: for if the Ʋniversality of the speech reach Infants to exclude them ab∣solutely from Baptism; it must also reach them in the same manner to exclude as full from being Saved, as is before noted in the first Chapter of this Book. 2. By changing the Subjects of Christ's appoint∣ment, viz. Men and Women of knowledg and un∣derstanding, capable to Evidence Faith and Repen∣tance, for ignorant unconverted Babes that know neither good nor evil. This was answered just now, in what was said to the altering Christ's Order in the Com∣mission: and there is more in the first Chapter of my Book, Part 1. 3. By frustrating the Holy and Spiritual Ends of the Ordinance. See what a full answer we have given to this, and how short he comes of making good this charge, Chap. 4. Part 1. 4. By inverting the order and manner from Dip∣ping to Sprinkling. Which is answered Chapt. 2. Part 2.
5. By introducing much Error and false Doctrine, as 1. That it was to take away Original Sin. Answer. Although some of the Fathers have spoken too highly of Baptism, and our Authors own Theo∣philact, whom he quotes Chap. 7. pag 82. for one of his eminent witnesses for Believers Bap∣tism, speaks very Hyperbolically of it, as that all our Sins are drowned in Baptism, as Pharaoh and the Egyptians were in the Red Sea; that Infidels dye in their Sins, because unbaptized, for which extravagancies and others, (as that Christ by Baptism had open'd Heavens door, which was shut against us by Adam's Sin) he is censu∣red by the Magdeburgenses, Cent. 10. p. 190. And likewise Bellarmine, and the Popish School-men, speak magnificently of it: as Baptismo reipsa tolli peccata, ita ut non solum non imputetur, sed nec sit quod imputari posset ad culpam: which he intends not only of Original Sin in Infants, but Original and Actual in grown Persons; but notwith∣standing this error, Infant-Baptism, as to its war∣rantableness, receives no prejudice, no more than the Baptism of grown persons. 2. It is also acknowledged that very many Episcopal Divines, and others, who are Pro∣testants, hold that Original Sin is done away by Baptism, but in a way quite different from the Papists; for they assert Original Sin to be removed by Baptism ex opere operato, from the Work done; and that it is so done away as that there is an utter abolishment of it, so as not to
render the Baptized person obnoxious to God's Wrath and Condemnation: for not only the reatus peccati Originalis, the guilt of Original Sin, but in Baptismate tollitur id quod veram & propriam rationem peccati habet: the very essence or being of Sin is taken away [it is with them annihilated],Concil. Tri∣dent. Sess. 5. for so speaks the Council of Trent, with a si quis neget Anathema sit; if any one denies it, let him be Anathematized. On the con∣trary, Protestants ascribe the doing away only of the guilt of Sin by the Blood of Christ, & applyed by the Spirit in that Ordinance; but they assert the inherence of Original Sin in Infants after Bap∣tism, which shews it self early in the fruits thereof, when they are capable of acting Electively. And all that I apprehend they say upon the point, is, that there is a possibility and probability, as some say; o∣thers go higher, to a certainty, that in elect Infants, those that dye in Infancy, the Season of God's doing that, which all acknowledg to be done at one time or other before death, viz. the doing away the guilt of Original Sin, is at the time of Baptism; and that Text Act 22.17. Arise and be Baptized, and wash away thy Sins, hath a favorable aspect upon Gods designing and blessing that Ordinance, for the sealing of pardon in reference to grown Persons. 2. To work Grace and Rege∣neration,This is Mr. Tombes his 7th Argument a∣gainst Infant-Baptism. Exer. pag. 30. and to effect Salva∣tion by the work done. Although the Author knows all Protestants disclaim this, and condemn it for a damnable
Error, yet he seems indirectly at least to charge it upon the Church of England, which for my part I look upon it as very unjustly done. What means else those reflections of his pag. 148. upon that passage in the Service-Book in the Rubrick before the Catechism, viz. That Children being Baptized, have all things necessary for their Sal∣vation, and be undoubtedly saved; and then after Baptism the Priest must say, We yield thee hearty thanks that it hath pleased thee to Regene∣rate this Infant with thy Holy Spirit; just com∣porting (saith he) length and breadth with Pope Innocent's first Canons. Answer. 'Tis fit the Church of England should be believ∣ed in what sence she intends those words,Baptism by the Ancients was commonly called Regeneration, or a new-Birth, so 'tis by the Scrip∣ture, Tit. 3.5.  Wash∣ing of the new-Birth or Regene∣ration. and we may learn it in her Articles, which speaks her at an infinit distance from the absurd and irrational Er∣ror of Salvation by merit, or ex opere operato: and 'tis not for others to put what inter∣pretation they think meet, es∣pecially, such as are Obnoxious to her Lash. Will you hear what Mr. Cotton of New-Eng∣land (an Independant as they call them) speaks in Vindication of the Church of England in this particular matter, and at a place where he needed not her favour; and as I take it at a time, when she could not help him: which are circumstances that will not suffer us to suspect him of flattering
or fawning. We have it in his grounds and ends of Children's Baptism. Notwithstanding (saith he) those expressions in the Service-Book, yet the Church of England doth professedly teach the contrary Doctrine, not only in their Pulpits, but in Books allowed by publique Authority: She doth assert that the Scraments do not beget Faith, nor Regeneration ex opere operato; but they are signs and seals thereof: Nor do I find that the publique Prayers of the Church are con∣trary hereunto, but as in judgment they do be∣lieve that God by Covenant promiseth to pour clean Water upon us and our Seed, Ezek. 26.25 Is. 48.3. and that he Sealeth the Covenant and Promise by Baptism. 3. That it was an Apostolical Tradition. And for that we have the Testimonies of Origen and Cy∣prian as before,Mr. Tombes his 4th Argu∣ment against In∣fant-Baptism; Exerc. p. 28. Chap. 3. Part 2. who lived near the Apostles days; and in which Chapter we have also shewn how Tra∣dition is, both by the Fathers of old and Reform∣ed Churches, taken in a safe sence different from that corrupt one of the Papists, and not deroga∣tory to the authority of the Scripture. 4. That Children have Faith, and are the Disci∣ples of Christ. Answer. No Paedobaptists ever held Children had perso∣nally actual Faith, for their condition is insuffici∣ent for the production of Intellectual Acts, but as for the habit and grace of Faith, the inherent infused power of believing, it is more than any
Antipaedobaptist in the World can prove they have not; for 1. Their condition makes them not uncapable of Sin and Corruption in the Roots and Principles of it, (most of them confess it,Anabaptistae ut Paedobaptismum prorsus tollerent, peccatum negârunt Originale, ut non sub esset causa cur Infantes Baptiza∣rentur Dr. Prideaux Lect. 22. pag. 331. though some of them deny Original Sin) and there∣fore not of the Roots and Prin∣ciples of grace of which Faith is one, for the acts of both are Moral and Intellectual: But whether Infants Baptized have any such thing as a distinct ha∣bit of Faith or no, this question of their Baptism depends not upon it: It is a hidden thing. The ground on which we give them Baptism must be visible; and so it is, viz. their being the Seed of Believers, and hereby visibly entitled to the Co∣venant, and so to the Seal of it. We look not to what they have, but to whom they pertain, viz. to God, as being the Seed of his Servants. That they are Disciples is sufficiently proved, Chap. 1. Part. 1. 5. That all Children of Believers are in the Co∣venant and federally Holy.] That's abundantly made good Chap. 3. Part 2. 6. By defiling and polluting the Church, viz. 1. By bringing false matter therein, who are no Saints by calling, being neither capable to perform duties nor enjoy priviledges.] Notwithstanding their inability to perform Duty, yet they are capable of enjoying Privi∣ledges as we have abundantly made good, Chap. 6. Part 1. and are as true matter for the Church
now under the Gospel, as formerly under the Law, as is there made out. 2. By laying a foundation of much Ignorance and Profaness.] Cujus contrarium est verissimum. The contrary is most true: for, 1. Infant-Baptism layes a singular good foun∣dation for knowledg; for in that Children are taken into Christs School, they are in a near capa∣city to be taught, and those who recommend them to that Ordinance are obliged to promote their knowledg, and to see them brought up , in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord. And we know the Liturgy of the Church of England,But the neglect hereof is much to be lamented, the Chil∣dren are not lookt after as they should be, nor do Ministers mind them of their duty. gives charge— You must remember that it is your part and duty to see that this In∣fant be taught so soon as he shall be able to learn—And that he may know these things the bet∣ter, ye shall call upon him to hear Sermons, and chiefly you shall provide that he may learn the Creed, the Lords-Prayer and the ten-Commandments in the English Tongue, and all other things that a Christi∣an man ought to know and believe to his Souls health, &c. Secondly, it laies a good foundation for Holi∣ness: They are minded by their Baptism to cast of the Devil's service, as soon as they are able to reflect, that they were from their very Cradles dedicated to God, whose Livery they have worn. And some have repelled great temptations, by
virtue of their engagement to God by Baptism in their Infancy; hence saith Mr. Ford in his 2d Dia∣logue concerning the Practical use of Infant-Baptism, pag. 87. There is a very Prophane Spirit fo∣mented under the Wings of Anabaptism; for how can it be otherwise than such which endeavours to extirpate so considerable a means for the ad∣vance of Conversion and Sanctification, as he shews Infant-Baptism to be? Hence, saith he, a∣rise grievous prejudices against those Ministers, Societies, and Ordinances, in which God hath been wont to scatter saving Grace in this Nation, which are if not raised, yet fomented by Ana∣baptism. And their Principle he conceives, hath been very prejudicial to the Conversion of young∣ones (amongst whom usually the stream of con∣verting Grace runs) because it speaks an actual disingagement from all relation to God, his Co∣venant, Church, and Ordinances, till of their own choice they take them up at years of discretion: Now whilst persons live loose from such engage∣ments, as in their proper nature and tendency further Conversion, no wonder if the work goes slowly on among them. 3. By confounding the World and the Church to∣gether, which Christ hath separated.] Not so, For Baptism is God's Sheep-mark (as Mr. Ford calls it) to distinguish those that are of his Fold from such as graze in the wild Com¦mon of the World; what confounding is there in this Principle? — That not only they who do actually profess Faith in, and Obedience to Christ, but also the Infants of one or both Be∣lieving Parents are to be Baptized, and they only.
7. By introducing and establishing many Humane Traditions and Inventions of Antichrist.]This is Mr. Tombe's his 6th Arg. Exercit. p. 1. Many of which, and some of the worst attend the Bap∣tism of grown Persons in the Church of Rome, as Chrism, Exorcism, &c. And when Mr. Tombes urged this very Ar∣gument against Infant-Baptism, Mr. Geree tells him, it was rather a Motive than a Reason a∣gainst it to move peoples affections against the in∣conveniences following it, rather than to con∣vince the unlawfulness of it — But that which is lawful in it self, cannot reflect any scrûple of un∣lawfulness upon that which occasions it. And if any corruption occasioned accidentally and se∣parable from an act of Worship, could cashier it; then farewel Baptism it self, Prayer, Lords Sup∣per, and all that is Sacred: for what a world of superstitious devices have the wanton and su∣perstitious Heads and Hearts of Men, taken oc∣casion from them all, to devise and practise, it is so clear there needs no instances to be given. 8. By being (saith he) such a Make-mate, such a Bone of Contention, and that among themselves too that own it, as well as with those that oppose it. The Lord open the eyes of those who are so zealous against Infant-Baptism that they may see their own nakedness, & consider the beam that is in their own eyes; certainly whilst they judg our principle, condemnation is written in their own foreheads. First, how furiously do they con∣tend
among themselves? What a heat is there between Mr. Bunyan and Mr. Paul, both of them for Baptizing Believers? the former (having pub∣lished a little Book whose Title is, Differences in Judgment about Water-Baptism no Bar to Commu∣nion, or to Communicate with Saints as Saints proved Lawful; of which I have before hinted, complains in the Epistle to the Reader, That the Bre∣thren of the Baptized way would not suffer them to be quiet in their Christian Communion, but did assault them for more than 16 years, and (as they had opportunity) sought to break them in pieces, meerly because they were not in their way all Baptized. First, He professeth that he denyed not the Ordinance of Baptism (though they feigned it); but all that he asserted was, That the Church of Christ hath no warrant to keep out of their Commu∣nion the Christian, that is discovered to be a visible Saint, and walketh according to his light with God. And for this Orthodox position, they charge him to be a Machivelian, a Man Devilish, Proud, Insolent, Presumptuous; words, saith the poor Man, fitter to be spoken to the Devil than a Brother. He puts out his Confession of Faith upon which Mr. Paul makes reflections, and tells him, he defies all the Brethren of the Baptized way, and Blasphemes them that dwell in heaven, p. 3. That he belyes all Expositors, p. 13. and calls upon the Heavens to blush at his insolency, p. 35. that his Inferences are ridiculous, top∣ful of ignorance or prejudice, and deserve no o∣ther answer than contempt, p. 43. and then falls to prayer, the Lord judg between us and this accuser, to whom we shall say no more but
the Lord rebuke thee. And what sayes Bunyan to this, in his Book of Differences in Judgment about Water-Baptism? First, that in his simple Opini∣on, their rigid, and Church-dividing, disquiet∣ing Principles are not fit for any Age and State of the Church, pag. 1. and I wish there were not too much truth in what he saith: he accuseth them for endeavouring and perswading him to break Communion with his Brethren, tamper∣ing with others that their Seeds of division might take, and prevailed so far as to rent and dismem∣ber some from them, and that the judgment of God so followed their design, that the presons which then they prevail'd upon became after∣ward a stink and reproach to Religion. I find our Author falling upon this good Man, (two to one is odds) and lashing him to the purpose, for his last Book, you have it at the end of his Trea∣tise of Baptism: He chargeth Mr. Bunyan with absurdities, contradictions, traducing the Wis∣dom of Christ, hainous Errors and fundamen∣tal mistakes; whose Principles, saith he, are pre∣sumptuous, savouring of ignorance and folly, contradicting the Wisdom & Authority of Christ, ridiculous man of egregious ignorance and self∣condemned: and at last, that he is one that plea∣seth not God, and is contrary to all Men, which last must be understood with a limitation, (of all Men like himself). But why should Professors of Religion throw so much dirt in the Faces of their Brethren that dissent from them? Tantaene animis caelestibus irae? Sure such language be∣comes not Christians: Let it be supposed that they have truth on their side; this is no good way to
propagate it, it needs not tali auxilio, nec defen∣soribus istis. The Wisdom which is from above is first pure, then peaceable. The Servant of the Lord must not strive, but must be gentle towards all — In meekness instructing those that oppose, if God peradventure will give them re∣pentance to the acknowledgment of the Truth.2 Tim. 2.24, 25. But haughty and uncharitable Spirits follow not this Rule, if they be set upon a point (though controvertible) they have such a fire of zeal within, that it breaks out into a flame that consumes the good name and credit of any that dare oppose it. Your Opini∣onists if they have Faith, they will not follow Paul's advice and keep it to themselves; but are infinitely desirous to propagate it, and are the severest Censurers in the World. Two other Antipaedobaptists, viz. Mr. Allen, and Mr. Lamb (being come off from that hide∣bound Spirit of having Communion with none but those of our own Judgment) are also lasht in the Authors Postscript. They have (saith he) both declined the Truth; and their Books, which were pen'd with great Judgment, strength of Argu∣ment, and Authority of Scripture in his Opini∣on shall rise up in Judgment against them (with∣out Repentance) for declining the Truth; so con∣fident is the Author that he speaks by way of Prophesy, that what they have writ shall not only live as a Witness for God, and his reproach∣ed Truths, but as a living Testimony against themselves, in their unreasonable and unrighte∣ous departure from the same (except they repent) to all generations: if these Man cannot appeal to
Heaven touching their own integrity, so thundring a Sentence must needs trouble their Consciences. Moreover, if I mistake not they are divided amongst themselves about the Admini∣strator of Baptism (as unwholsome word because unscriptural, Pastors, Teachers, Ministers we read, of but no Administrators) some holding none but men in Office may give Baptism, others that a private Man may do it, especially in case of necessity; and Mr. Tombes favours this Opini∣on, Praecursor pag. 72. and he gives his reason for it, viz. because all, or most of the Ministers ordained in England are against Baptizing of Per∣sons of years Sprinkled in Infancy: and there ly∣ing upon them that see Infant-Baptism a cor∣ruption, a necessity to be Baptized upon Profession of Faith; there is a necessity that they be Baptiz∣ed by Persons not Ordained. I like a man that will speak plainly his mind: & I will be as plain in opening mine; and I think I have hit upon the truth, namely that the Opposers of In∣fant-Baptism must hold that unbaptized Per∣sons ☞ may Baptize, and a Church with true Ordinances may be of unbaptized persons; or else they must disown their new Baptism, and all their Ordinances, and turn Seekers: For the first of their Administrators must either Baptize himself, or else was Baptized by some Person Baptized in Infancy, that is with them, by an unhaptized Person. Lastly, I want not Instances to shew how impatient they are of having their adored Opinion contradicted, and must prepare my self for the hard Censures of my Antagonist and his Party; and had it not been for the ho∣nour
of truth, and love that I bear unto it, they should have gone on till Dooms-day (though I believe God will shortly break the neck of their ridged Principle) before I would have disturb'd their quiet, and exposed my self to their ill-will. It is sufficiently observed and deplored by sober Christians that are unaddicted to faction, how turbulent this fort of men have alwayes been, as in forreign parts, so in our own Country, in the propagation of their Opinion, and how distast∣ful it is to them to have any thing said against their way. There is a sad passage quoted by the Author himself, pag. 308. of his Treatise, out of Cloppenburg's Gangrene, viz. The Troops of Anabaptists that dwell in Friestand, although they trouble not the Commonwealth, they suffer not the pure Reformed Churches to be edified without daily conflicts; and what a stir they kept in Gemany with those Godly Ministers Luther, Zwinglius, Musculus, contesting with them, disturbing their Churches, you shall hear shortly in our Animadversions upon the Authors historical part at the latter end of this discourse. 9. By being an occasion (saith he) to stir up much bitter hatred, wrath, strife, emnity, perse∣cution against those that oppose it. How have they been followed with Stripes, Imprisonments, Con∣fiscation, yea Death it self.] Something of this may be layd at their own door, as before hath been manifested in the per∣secution of the Tongue, to which they are so much addicted; but as for those Martyrs he
speaks of, that have suffered stripes, imprison∣ment, death, we find very few of them in Fox his Martyrologie, and none of them punished pu∣rely for opposing Infant-Baptism, but the Anti∣christian Tenets of Rome, Transubstantiation, the Mass, &c. for which other Protestants suffer∣ed, and some of them, were put to death for asserting dangerous errors, and for sedition here in England, and multitudes for horrid acts beyond the Seas, as shall appear in the Histo∣rical Narrative. 10. By confirming hereby the whole Antichristian Interest as made good by the Preface. An unworthy calumny, and spoken without the least ground of reason; only because Mr. Bax∣ter hath declared his single Judgment in some things in reference to Baptism, in some of which he speaks not positively and dogmatically, but as I remember he qualifies it with such expressions, as I think so, or suppose so; and how doth the delivery of his private Opinion about it, render Infant-Baptism it self, a point that confirms the whole Antichristian Interest, that is not derived thence, and hath no reference to, or favour for it, and when many Paedobaptists differ from Mr. Baxter, and are unsatisfied at those pas∣sages in his Christian Directory? Absurdities. 11. By ushering in great Absurdities, viz. 1. That Persons may have Regeneration and Grace before calling. This is no Paradox to those who have heard of John Baptists being Sanctified in the Womb.
I could here turn the Author to several places in Mr. Tombes his Works, where he dares not deny but Infan̄ts may have the seed of Grace, but I have spoken to this before: only take notice of that is his Praecursor pag. 13. It is not doubted, but Infants belong to the invisible Kingdom of the Elect, but how they attain Salvation is not so certain: if by a Seed of Faith and Holiness without actual exercise, the thing is more easie to conceive &c. And again he saith, There are Believers of two sorts, either in the Seed or Fruit, either by Ordinary or Extraordinary Operation, in one of which wayes Infants are, or may be Believers. 2. That Persons may be visible Church-members before Conversion.] And is that such a wonder? We have proved that Chapter 6. Part 1. They were Church-members under the Law, why not under the Gospel? when were they excluded? 3. That Persons may Repent, Believe, and be Saved by the Faith of another.] We own no such thing. 4. That Types and Shadows profit after the An∣titype and substance is come, introducing thereby the Birth-priviledge.] The weakness of this is discovered before, pro∣ving the Covenant made with Abraham still to continue to Believers, and their natural Seed, as you may see towards the end of the 3d Chapter, Part. 2. 5. That the better to exclude Believers-Baptism, new Church-Covenants are invented.] &c.
This is directed only against one sort of Paedo∣baptists called Independents, whom he saith in point of order, do err more than Prelate or Pres∣byter, owning Infant-Baptism and yet denying them the right of Church-membership: this is answered Chap. 6. Part 1. by shewing that they own the Infant Seed of Believers to be Church-members, that is, of the Universal Visible Church before Baptism, and the reasons for it; as also why they admit them not into their particular Churches when grown up, till they make a seri∣ous Profession of that Faith into which they were Baptized, and claim the priviledg of Commu∣nion. Contradictions. 12. By the manifold Contradictions that attend the Practice.] 1. By asserting, that Baptism is a Symbol of present Regeneration wrought, and yet apply it to ignorant unconverted Babes, so uncapable of Regene∣ration.] This is a crambe bis cocta, answered again and again, but especially in Chap. 4. Part 1. a∣bout the ends of Baptism, of which this is named for the third. 2. That it truly figures and represents a Death, Burial, & Resurrection, and yet do nothing but sprin∣kle or pour a little Water on the Face.] This is another repetition, being brought by the Author for the 4th End of Baptism, and answered Chap. 4. Part 1. likewise again, Chap. 4. Part 2. 3. That Faith and Repentance are required in Persons to be Baptized, and that it is ridiculous,
yea impious and prophane to do it without, and yet confess that Children, to whom they apply it have neither.] Say no more of this for your honours sake, which hath already suffered much for abusing Authors; you know Baxter, Piscator, Perkins, Paraeus, Calvin, all speak of grown Persons, and the last with an Asterisk — Notandum haec verba fieri de Adultis. Therefore, saith he, that Men offer themselves rightly to Baptism, Con∣fession of sin is required, otherwise the whole action would be but sport. But you must note, saith he, that these words are spoken of Adult Persons, but as for the Infant Seed of Believers the case alters there; for they being taken into Covenant with their Parent, it is instead of Pro∣fession; Calv. upon Mat. 19.28. and Mark 16.16. look to the first Chap. Part 1. There you have a Vindication of our Divines from the Infa∣my cast upon men, as to their sayings about Bap∣tism in contradiction, as he would have people believe, to their own Practices. 5. That the Baptismal Covenant enters into the visible Church, and yet deny Church-members the priviledg thereof.] This is co-incident with what we have before, and spoken to already. 6. That separate from Rome as a false Church, and yet own their Baptism the foundation thereof. A little before he hath this Odious Reflection upon infant-Baptism, that it confirms the whole Antichristian Interest] and now the Assertors of it are condemned for owning their Baptism. I
conceive it therefore fit that something be briefly said for our Vindication. First then, I take this to be the common Judgment of Divines: That Parents ought not to tender their Children to be Baptized by Hereticks, or by Romish Priests in a Superstitious way; yet being done, Baptism so Administred, ought not to be reiterated. For even Austin himself, as zealous as he was for Baptism,Danaeus ex lib. 1 August de Bapt. contra Donatistas. is express upon the Case in his first Book de Bap∣tismo against the Donatists — Non damnari Baptismum Christi ab Haereticis Pastoribus, ut nullus censeatur, sed damnamus illos qui scientes illic accipiunt; That Baptism is not to be condemned for a Nullity, which hath been received from Hereticks, but such are to be condemned, who knowing them to be such, do yet receive it of them. Bucan states the Case in his 16 Question de Baptismo,Bucan: Institu∣tiones Theolog. Loc. 47. Quest. 16. p. 614. thus, Anne qui vere Christianam Religionem edocti sunt, parvulos suos sacrificulis pontificiis Baptizandos bonâ con∣scientiâ offerre possunt? Whether they who are truly taught the Christian Religion may with a good conscience tender their Children, to Mass-Priests to be Baptized? he holds it negatively for divers weighty reasons. As, 1. Because by that Act we own their false and Antichri∣stian Ministry,Quia corruptelis tum Doctrinae, tum Sacramentorum & superstitiosis Cultibus, falsae item & illegittimae vocatni Antichristi Ministrorum, exemplo nostro probandis & con∣firmandis, nullam occasionem praebere debemus &c. and confirm
them in their Superstitions. Whereas we are bound to abstain from all appearance of evil, and not to partake with them in their sins. 2. Because we are not to do evil, that good may come thereof. 3. Because we are to depart and go out from a∣mongst them, and touch no unclean thing, Is. 52. 11. and to abstain from Idols, 1. Joh. 5.21. 4. Because if our Infants dye unbaptized (we refusing to have them Baptized in a Superstitious manner, which is best) they are not thereby de∣prived of their interest in the Covenant of God's Grace [and Salvation is from the Covenant and not the Seal] for it is not the want, but the con∣tempt of Baptism that is damnable. It was on this account that the Waldenses kept their Children from Baptism; for Perin in his History of that people tells us,Paul Perin, Hist. Walden. Cap. 4. p. 15. That they delayed the Baptism of their Children until their Pastors came home who were imployed abroad in the service of the Church; because they had in detestation those human inventions, which were added to that Holy Sacrament, which they held to be but pollutions thereof: which the Popish Priests observing, stigmatized them with that calumny that they were against the Baptism of Children, [and from their Mouths the Author hath taken up that false report, and published it to the World; but God will not bless such unjust courses.] On the other hand the Rule holds true in many Cases: Fieri quod non licet, factum valet; A
thing which ought not to be done, yet being done, it may be of force and valid; as in other Cases, so likewise in this of Baptism: though none should tender their Children to be Baptized by Romish Priests in a superstitious way; yet being done, Baptism so Administred ought not to be reiterated. Austin gives divers Reasons in his first Book of Baptism against the Donatists that were for Rebaptization; shewing most con∣vincingly, that because Baptismus ex personarum & Ministrorum dignitate non pendet, ne{que} dantis aut accipientis Baptismum error delet & mutat id quod a domino constitutum est. Because Baptism depends not upon the dignity of Persons or Ministers,Danaeus ex L. August. contra Donatist. p. 674. the Er∣ror of him that gives or receives it doth not nullify the Ordi∣nance of Christ; yet this is al∣wayes to be remembred, that if the essential form of Baptism hath been corrupted in the Admini∣stration thereof, the Baptism becomes invalid, and is a meer nullity, and persons taking up the Ordinance de novo, in a right way, cannot be said to be rebaptized, because the former was not Christ's Baptism but a Nullity: for as Zanchy speaks, he that Baptizeth, but not in the name of the Father, Son, and the Holy Spirit, but is corrupt in the Doctrine of the Trinity, as the Arrians and Manichaeans were] such a Baptism is none of Christ's Baptism. Decst enim vera Bap∣tismi forma: the right forme of Baptism is want∣ing. I shall conclude this with the Judgment of two Divines of the Congregational way: The
first is Mr. Cotton of New-England in his Grounds and Ends of Infant-Baptism, where he answers this Objection: How can we think that Baptism Valid, and not Null, which is Administred by Dumb-dogs &c? viz. Answer. Though God delighteth not to make use of such instruments, yet I dare not say that their Administration of the Seals, which are given not for Conversion, but Confirmation of Grace are meer Nullities, or that the Baptism Administred by them is to be reiterated. Take an instance in the Circumcision of the 10 Tribes after Jero∣boam's Apostacy, and the casting out of the Priests and Levites, 2 Chron. 11.14, 15. It was gene∣rally Administred by wicked Priests, and Men that had no regular call thereunto: when the Priests and Levites were cast out of Office in the 10 Tribes, Jeroboams Priests came in their room, which were as ignorant and unskilful to expound the Law, as those ye call Dumb-Dogs; 1 Kings 13.33. 2 Cor. 15.3. 2. We must put a difference betwixt the Essen∣tials of an Ordinance, and some Circumstantial Additions, and Corruptions: if there be a Cor∣ruption in the Essenee, or substance of the Ordi∣nance, as for Instance, if Persons be not Baptized in the Name of God the Father, Son, and Holy-Ghost, but into the Name of a Creature, then such Baptism is void and null, and the party ought to be Baptized again: But if there be a Corruption only in the External Administration
of the Ordinance, though every Christian should labour to avoid such Corruption, and if he hath been intangled therewith, humble himself deep∣ly before God for it; yet such Baptism is valid for the substance of it, and should not be reite∣rated. At this day the Protestant Reformed Churches do hold it unwarrantable to Rebaptize those Persons who were Baptized in the Church of Rome, which being administred in the Name of the Father, Son and Holy-Ghost, is held for true Baptism, for the substance of it. The other is Mr. Bartlet in his Model of the Congregational way, pag. 70. Those Christians, saith he, which of late days (calling into questi∣on the Truth and Lawfulness of their Baptism) have fallen upon the Practice of Rebaptizing, and taking up the Ordinance of Baptism de novo, are utterly void, and altogether to seek of a true and just ground from the Scripture, for their Pra∣ctice herein; and so this latter Baptism of theirs, will be found as unlawful, because unlawfully Administred. For if the Administration of the Seals be now tyed to ordinary Officers, and those to a particular Church, since the Apostles times, that give them their lawful and right Call to Administer the Ordinances; then it will follow that there is no Lawful Baptism, but by him that is an Officer of some particular Church, and he that is an Officer of some particular Church, must have a Lawful Calling from the Church to which he is an Officer; for all extraordinary Offi∣cers that had their Call and Commission immedi∣ately from Heaven are ceased. Now those that Rebaptize cannot prove the taking up of that
Ordinance again after this manner; but are en∣forced to hold that a Disciple in Common, that by the exercise of his gifts doth convert a Sinner from the evil of his ways, may also Baptize him: [which Doctrine Mr. Hooker calls a Frenzy of the Anabap∣tists,Mr. Hooker of new-England, in his Survey of Church-Discipline, C. 2. part 3. p. 9. which begins to labour with the loathsomness of itself]; For if that were true what need of Christ's Ordaining Officers in his Church for these purposes? or why may not a Godly Woman (by her good exhortations and chast conversation, Converting her Hus∣band) Baptize him? CHAP. VI. Wherein the Author endeavours to shew the Nullity, and utter insignificancy of Infant-Baptism. THus he proceeds — That it is no-way safe for any to rest contented with that Baptism, which they received in their Infancy, may appear, because such their Bap∣tism is a meer Nullity. How doth he make this out? Why thus: Because, saith he, as the right matter, so the true Form is wanting; for the External Form, as before is shewed is not Sprinkling, or pouring a little Water upon the Head or Face, but a Dipping the whole Person under Water, and raising him up again, to figure out Death, Burial, and Resurrection, as before: if then Matter and Form be wanting which is so essential to its Being, it must needs be a Nullity. Although enough hath been said already to confute this in the 6th Chap. of the first Part of our Book, to prove In∣fants of Believers fit Matter for the Church, and consequent∣ly Subjects of Baptism, besides what hath been said in the
4th Chap. Part 2. concerning the Ceremony of Baptism: yet being willing to give the Author full measure, pressed down and running over; We shall say something more to evince the weakness of his Assertion in this Chapter. First 'tis observable, that he who hath undertaken to write a Treatise of Baptism, [mark well], should mistake both the Matter and Form of it; for certainly he is out in both. 1. First for the Matter of Baptism, all Divines hold it is Water, meer, pure Water without mixture. Take the Judg∣ment of two very eminent Divines: The first is the Learned Zanchy, Tom. 1. Lib. 1. pag. 404. Materia Externa Baptismi est Aqua, Interna, Sanguis & Spiritus, Christi; The External Matter of Baptism is Water; the Internal, the Blood and Spirit of Christ: The other is Bucan, Professor of Divinity in Academia Lausanensi: He in his Theological Institutions or Common places, answereth several Questions concerning Baptism, & this is the 18th, Quae est Materia Bap∣tismi? What is the Matter of Baptism? To which he gives this answer; it is two-fold, Externa & Interna, External and Internal; the External is, Aqua pura, munda & natu∣ralis sine discrimine, simplex, vulgaris, non prius peculiari∣bus Consecrata, non mixta, non Oleum, &c. That is, it is pure, clean, simple, common Water without mixture of Oyl, Spittle, and such kind of things as the Papists add to it: de Baptismo, locus 47. p. 616. The Materia Interna, the Inter∣nal Matter of Baptism, is Sanguis & Spiritus Jesu Christi, the Blood & Spirit of Jesus Christ; de Bapt. loc 47. Quest. 22. 2. For the Form of Baptism they agree in this, that it is those Words of Institution, I Baptize thee in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. So saith Zanchy in the afore∣mentioned place, and he brings the Words of the Apostle for both Matter and Form, Ephes. 5.26. That he might Sancti∣fy and cleanse it by the Washing of Water through the Word; citing that famous speech of Austin, Accedit verbum ad Ele∣mentum & fit Sacramentum; The word joyned to the Ele∣ment [(i.e.) the Word of Institution] makes the Sacrament. So Bucan Quest. 22. Quae est igitur forma Baptismi [scil. Externa?] what is therefore the External Form of Baptism? Ans. The rehearsing the words of Institution, by a Mi∣nister of the Word of God, viz. I Baptize thee in the Name of the Father, &c. which he cals aspersio aquae, and then Intern Baptismi Forma est Interna illa actio, quae Jesu Christi ipsius per Spiritum Sanctum agentis propria est; The
Internal Form is that Internal action of Christ working by his Spirit, &c. Take notice, Reader, what a pittiful mistake it is in the Author to call Dipping the Form of Baptism, for if that were it, then any man may Baptize himself, and every Boy that baths, and dives under Water may be said to be Baptized: But one would think he were conscious to him∣self of a wilful mistake, by the Objection he frames for us. Object. But 'tis said, there was the right words of Bap∣tism, it was done in the Name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy-Spirit. Answer. So there was, saith he, in Baptizing Bells, Churches. But doth he take this for a sufficient Answer? Are Bells Subjectum capax, a Subject capable of a Sacrament?Quia in ipso ini∣tio Regenerationis, cujus sigilium est Baptismus, homo se habet merè passive; undè etiam homines vel Circumcindendi vel Baptizandi nul∣la actio Externa re∣quiritur — sed tan∣tum receptio passa Infantes igitur sunt capaces hujus Sa∣cramenti respectu praecipui ejus usus at{que} Adulti. Children were heretofore, and so they are still, as Dr. Ames in his Medulla Theologiae Lib. 1. c. 11. p. 186. Baptism, saith he, comes in the room of Cir∣cumcision, Col. 2.11, 12. and belongs as much to Chil∣dren of Believers, as Circum∣cision did formerly; for at our first Regeneration, saith he, of which Baptism is a Seal, Man is meerly passive. As it was in Circumcision so is it in Bap∣tism, he is not Active, but Passive; and there∣fore Infants in respect of its chief use (of being a Seal) are as capable of the Sacrament of Bap∣tism as the Adult. Now though this may suffice, yet having pro∣mised to be liberal; We will suppose Dipping to be of use in the Apostles days, yet it will not fol∣low
that it is essential to the Sacrament of Bap∣tism, so that in the want of it, Baptism is a Nul∣lity. For the clearing of which we must know: 1. That in every Ordinance there are some things essential, which failing, the very being of the Ordinance is destroyed. 2. Some things requisite because enjoyned, but yet not essential; but only needful to the compleat and well-being of an Ordinance. 3. Some things meerly in∣different, as being the determination of some Circumstances (left undetermined in the Institu∣tion of it) As in the Lords Supper, the hour when, the kinds of Bread and Wine, the posture, and number of the Partakers, either sitting or standing or the like. So in Baptism, whether the Person be Baptized by day or by night, in Rivers or Pools, or Vessels (so he be able to bear it), whether the Water pass on all his Body or some parts, & the rest unwashed. And so for this of Dipping, it comes under the nature of an indiffe∣rent Circumstance, although some place Super∣stitiously such necessity in it. I say it may be accounted an indifferent Circumstance; so that Baptism in other things right, is true Sacramen∣tal Baptism, whether done by way of Sprinkling or Dipping, which is thus proved. 1. That which equally represents the grace signi∣fied, is of indifferent use, but the Baptism either by Dipping or Sprinkling, doth equally represent the grace signified. The first Proposition is clear; for in a Sacrament are but two things necessary, viz. (1) The matter or Element. (2) The use for representation of the Grace. The Minor, or Assumption is evident,
by considering the Grace of Baptism, which is principally two-fold, viz. First our putting on of Christ, our Ʋnion to, and Communion with him, in which respect we are said to put him on there∣in, and to be Baptized into him, Gal. 3.27. into his death, Rom. 6.3. that is, by Baptism we are Sacramentally enrighted into him and his death, and the fruits of it, in which respects we are in the same place v. 4. said to be buried with him by Baptism into death. Now this putting on of Christ is as fully signified, by putting on of water on us, as by putting us into water. Application of Water to the Person, either in one way or other is a Sign of our Union to him: and so of our putting him on, our burying and rising with him, and Communion with him, in all the effects of his death, which flow from the Union. But it is Objected, that Sprinkling doth not represent our burying with him, as Dipping doth. Ans. It is a fancy to imagine that every Metapho∣rical ☞ expression used in Scripture signifying our Communion with Christ, should be punctu∣ally expressed in the Sacrament; for the expressi∣ons are various, putting him on, burying with him, Sprinkling with his Blood: one sign cannot repre∣sent our Communion with him in all these Me∣taphors. A partaking a Communion with Christ, and his death is the Sacramental Grace intended by those various expressions, & that being repre∣sented, as well by Sprinkling as Dipping, it fol∣lows that water in either way of application, is Sa∣cramental. 2dly, Our washing or cleansing from Sin by the Blood of Christ, this is the principal effect of Christ's death represented, and Sealed in the Sa∣crament,
which is equally set out by Sprinkling as by dipping. First in asmuch as washing may be done by both, and indeed it is the application of Water under the formality of Washing, not ei∣ther of Dipping or Sprinkling, which is the ☜ Sacramental use of it; so that were Washing with Water, though neither by Dipping nor Sprink∣ling, yet it were a Sacrament as well as either: for the Sacramental consideration in the use, is the Washing. 2.Numb. 19.18. Heb. 9.13. Under the Law the Sacramental cleansing was done by Sprinkling in some cases, and by Dipping in other; and the purifying by Christ's Blood equally repre∣sented by both. 3. The Blood of Christ in respect of this purifying and washing virtue and use of it, is called the Blood of Sprinkling, Heb. 12.24. and the Sprinkling of his Blood, 1. Pet. 1.2. All which are abundant proof, that the Grace of the Sacra∣ment is as well, and as fully represented in the use of Water by Sprinkling, as by Dipping. 2dly. Those Ʋses of Water which are equally includ∣ed in the Scripture-acceptation of the Word under the word Baptizing, are of equal and indifferent use; but both these, Dipping and Sprinkling are so: ergo. The Major proposition is undoubted: the Assumption is confirmed from Texts of Scripture, where the Word is used to signify Washing, by Sprinking, as Mar. 10.38. where is a washing by Blood, which could not be by Dipping, but by Aspersion. 1 Cor. 10.2. Is a Baptism by Sprink∣ling, but not by dipping. So Mark. 7.48. Heb. 9.10, where all the Ceremonial Washings under the Law are called Baptisms; now we know
some of them were done by Sprinkling, and some by Dipping. 3. That which in all the examples and instances of Baptism, we find not restrained or defined, that is in this Sacrament of indifferent and arbitrary Ʋse; But this manner of Baptizing in Scripture-examples and practice, we do not find restrained, or defined either to Dipping or Sprinkling. We read of many Baptized, but no-where spe∣cified by which of these ways; whereby we may gather that the H. Ghost hath no in∣tent ☜ to bind, and determine our Practice to this or that; for seeing the word he useth, is indiffe∣rent for both, he would have left us some light ei∣ther from precept, or example which way he would have Sacramental. This Assumption is confirm'd by this, that no-where is it expressed, that it was done by Dipping: yea in some, it is more than probable that it was not, viz. Act. 2.41. there being in one day 3000 Baptized; which might well be done by Sprinkling but not by Dipping. So Act. 10.47. there be many Baptized at a time and place when there could not be accom∣modation of water and other conveniences for total Dipping. Yea Peters phrase, can any Man forbid Water? imports a bringing in of Water to the place for the use which might well be done for Sprinkling, but not for Dipping. Also Act. 16.33. There is a Man & all his Family straight-way Baptized in a Prison, and in the night, at which time and place Water for Dipping so many could not be had, but easily for Sprinkling.
CHAP. VII. Wherein there is a pretence to some eminent Wit∣ness, that hath been born against Infant-Baptism from first to last. THe first that we shall mention (saith the Author) is that Excellent Testimony Tertullian bore against it upon the first appearance of it in the 3d Century. Reply, 1. It is acknowledged that Tertullian who was the first Writer of note in the Latin Church, hath divers passages seemingly against Infant-Baptism; but yet withal it must be considered, that his Testimony (such as it is) is but the Testimony of one single Dr. in opposition to the ge∣neral custom of the Church, and even from this instance we may learn the great Antiquity of Infant-Baptism, that it hath been in use above 15 hundred years, as it appears upon record; for Tertullian according to Helvicus wrote his Book of Prescriptions about the year 195. which was about 97 years after St. John's Death; and 'tis probable,Mr. Baxter, of Infant-Baptism. when he wrote his Book, he had arrived to the years of thirty or fourty; so that according to this cal∣culation he lived about sixty or seventy years after St. John, and yet as early days as these were, Children were then Bap∣tized; for else why should Tertullian be so earnest in disswa∣ding them not to be over-hasty in the doing it: Cunctatio utilior praecipue circa parvulos; he would have them defer the Baptizing of Infants, aswel as those of riper years; which shews that it was then the custom of the Church to Baptize Children aswell as grown Persons. Reply 2. Whereas the Author saith, Tertullian lived in the 3d Century,Irenaeus contra Haeretic. Lib. 2. c. 39. this is true, but that the first appearance of Infant-Baptism was in this Age is certainly false; for Irenaeus (who lived in the second Cen∣tury) makes mention of it.
Reply 3. Tertullian's Testimony in this case, is so far from being excellent, that it is contemp∣tible, and not to be regarded, as may appear by two Reasons. First, Because he was very corrupt, and un∣sound in his judgment.P. Martyr loc. com. Clas. 4. Loc. 8. Sect. 5. It is observed by Peter Martyr in his Common places, that when Ter∣tullian wrote his book de Bap∣tismo, he was fallen from the Church, and from the Orthodox-Faith into the foul error of Monta∣nism. Had he been sound in the Faith in all other points, it had not been enough to scruple any one touching the point of Infant-Baptism, because of his dissent; because he only was the man we read of that seems to be against it, how much less is this authority to be valued, when so corrupt, that Jerom counted him little less than a Heretick? The Magdeburg Divines, (whom the Author makes so much use of) give us a Catalogue of his Naevi, or errors. As 1. That he did Deo corpulentiam tribuere, ascribe unto God, Grosseness, or Fleshiness. 2. That he did speak concerning Christ incom∣mode & periculose, unsafely and dangerously. 3. That he condemned second marriages, ut stupra, as Whoredoms. 4. That he brought in and augmented, many filthy Ceremonies in the Church, which he bor∣rowed from the Montanists, as anointing the body after Baptism. &c. 5. And lastly (though they mention many o∣ther gross errors) he affirms in his Book de Bap∣tismo,
that it is the peculiar pre∣rogative of the Bishop to Bap∣tize,Dandi Baptis∣mum jus habet summus sacerdos, qui est Episcopus. and none must do it but by his leave: Presbyters and Deacons he allows to Baptize but not without his Authority, and in case of extremity (that is when one is like to dye, and in the want of a Minister) it may be lawful for a layman to Bap∣tize, not excepting Women provided they did it privately and not in the Church, by which passage it is more than probable he was for Bapti∣zing Infants, rather than that they should dye without it); now let any indifferent Reader judge what a precious witness the Author hath singled out to lead the Van against Infant-Baptism. A second Reason why Tertullian's Testimony deserves not to be stiled excellent, is this; because his arguments are so poor and weak, that they will sooner administer occasion of laughter than conviction. I acknowledg the Author hath drest them up very handsomly, and shewed so much artifice herein (leaving out somethings that are most gross) that some (who have weak heads, and no very charitable thoughts towards the way of Infant-Baptism) will think Tertullian and he were of one mind, both against it, and that on very good grounds. 1. Because saith the Author out of Tertullian, The practice of Baptizing Children was built upon the mistake of that Scripture Matt. 19.14. Suffer little Children to come unto me, and forbid them not &c. It is true (saith Tertullian) the Lord saith do not forbid them to come unto me: let them come when they grow elder, when they learn, when they are taught why they come &c. upon
which the Magdeburgenses have this sentence seutit Tertullianus Mira opinione Cap. 3. Cap. 4. &c. Ter∣tullian was of a strange opinion, & then they re∣peate those weak passages before mentioned;As before inti∣mated in Chap. 7. according to which Dotage, the Disciples did wisely in forbidding Chil∣dren to come, and Christ did weakely in rebuking them for it, & inviting them to come Let them come (saith Christ) though , little Children; the wise men found  the young-Child, or Infant with Mary.  (according to Luke the exact∣est Historian) new-born Babes, or sucking Chil∣dren that are carried in Arms, and such wore those whom Christ invites to come unto him, brought in all likelyhood, by their Parents that did believe or made some profession of their Faith, as appears by this, because they brought their Children for a Spiritual end, to receive some special favour or blessing from Christ; and for this, Christ would have them come, but saith Tertullian, let them come when they grow elder, when they learn, when they are taught why they come: &c. What pittiful stuff is this? what ingeni∣ous person would not be ashamed to introduce such a witness that paraphraseth at such a rate upon this Scripture? Christ had a mind they should come presently as the words plainly shew, but Tertullian would have them stay longer, till they were elder. It seems by the Argument that this Father, and the Disciples were much of a mind, and it must arise from some such mistake as this, which is still retained by the Antipaedobap∣tists, that Children are not capable of any good by the Ordinance, and must first be taught; and
that only grown Christians and Professors of Faith, are fit and capable subjects of Christ's Kingdom. But what resentment had Christ of the morose carriage of his Disciples, the Evan∣gelist tells us , he was much displeased; the word signifies to have the Spirit moved with indignation against a base unworthy action; and Christ would have them know how meanly soe∣ver they might think of them, yet they had a right to the Kingdom of Heaven aswell as grown persons who can profess their Faith: For let us take the Kingdom of Heaven either for that of Glory, or for the visible Church, it amounts to the same thing; for if they have a right to the for∣mer, much more to the latter, for what is it to be a member of the visible Church, but to be one that in appearance belongs to the invisible Church,Mr. Baxter of Infant-Baptism. or the Kingdom of Glory; for the Church is but one, and the difference only Respe∣ctive. As for the Cavils that are made against our improving this Text for Infant-Baptism, we have before refuted them. 2. A second Argument which the Author ci∣tes out of Tertullian is, because they that under∣stand the weight of Baptism will rather fear the attaining of it than the deferring it. Reply 1. If this were a good reason against infant-Baptism, it lyes as full against infant-Cir∣cumcision, as a sign of God's covenant, which they did not understand, and it may be never would. 2. Nor do I see how this can have any reference at all to Infants, who are void of un∣derstanding; and the Argument is asmuch levied
against the Baptizing grown persons, who upon consideration of the weight of the Ordinance, may rather fear to attain it, than defer it; for it is well known that ancient Father was so shy of Bap∣tism (as I said in C. 7.) that he disswaded young-men as were innupti unmarried, & those that were new¦ly married & young-widows, from being Baptized, until the lust of concupiscence was quite extinct, and then to take up the Ordinance, Risum teneatis amici! For verily if persons in this capacity must forbear Baptism till then, for ought that I know it will be long enough before they will meddle with it, and one would think they should have less need of it when freed from lustful appetite, than before. 3. A third Reason brought out of Tertullian is; because we must not give Holy things to Dogs, and Pearls to Swine, which sure must be under∣stood of grown Persons that were Pagans or their Children; for this is too gross to be spoken of the Children of believers, and Tertullian himself speaks more charitably in his Book de Anima Cap. 39, 40. upon those words, else were your Chil∣dren unclean, but now are they Holy, 2. Cor 14. from whence he thus infers, hinc enim Apostolus ex sanctificato alterutro sexum sanctum procreari ait, tum ex seminis praerogativa,Vossius in his Thes. 11. de Pdo∣baptismo. Pars 2. quam ex Institutionis disciplinâ &c. i.e. from hence also the A∣postle affirms that of either sex sanctified, are procreated those that are holy, a by the prerogative of the Seed, so by the Disci∣pline, or Rule of institution: so that Tertullian could not without self-contradiction call Believers Children Dogs.
4. A fourth Reason (which is a sorry one too) is, Because we commit not earthly or secular things to Children, by reason of their incapacity, and therefore should not commit Heavenly things; Which is also as strong an Argument against Gods Ordinance to Circumcise Children, as to Baptize them: And we need not look farther than the Text before us, to confute this Argument; for 'tis said (notwithstanding their incapacity) Christ laid his hands upon them and blessed them; to denote unto us, that though Children are unca∣pable of laying hold on Christ, yet they are ca∣pable of being laid hold on by Christ, and of par∣ticipating Spiritual blessings, whereof, as imposi∣tion of the hands, so Baptism is a sign. 5. A fifth Reason hath respect to the promises which the Sureties made in Baptism in the behalf of the Infants that were Baptized; for if it should so happen that they should dye before the Infant was grown up, they should then frustrate their pro∣mises. Now this speaks nothing against Infant-Baptism, but only of the inconveniency of ma∣king such promises. 6. Lastly the Author would have us take it for granted that the Adult were the only proper Sub∣jects of Baptism, because Tertullian saith Fasting, Confession, Prayer, Profession &c. is called for from them. Reply. We have shewn before out of the Mag∣deburgenses, That though the Infants of Believers were Baptized, of which we have instances given by them, in several Centuries, yet they required Fasting,Cent. 4. c. 6. p. 417. Confession, of Aliens &c. before they were admit∣ted
to Baptism; & therefore having spoken so much to this before, I shall only add one passage out of Athanasius in Lib. de passione Imaginis Domini, where he speaks concerning-some Jews, who prostrated themselves at the feet of the Bishop, and desired Baptism; so after they had been instructed several days in the Doctrine of Christianity, and had Fasted three days, they were Baptized. I shall add one Reason more of Tertullian's against the Baptism of Infants, and it is inserted between his fourth and fifth, and therefore the Author could not be ignorant of it, but hath purposely omitted it, and it is this; Quid festinat innocens aetas ad remissionem peccatorum? &c. Why should innocent Children hasten to be Baptized, for the remission of sins? 'Twas his error (as of other of the Fathers) that Baptism did away the guilt of sin; and either he owned not Original Sin, as his words seem to imply, or else he thought it more prudential to defer Baptism, till the Child had contracted, or heaped up more, that so it might be washed away altogether. This the Author took notice of, but was so subtle, as not to give the least hint of it, for that would have quite spoiled his excellent Testimony. And besides what we have said to invalidate what is brought from Tertullian, let the Reader know that though he would have Infant-Baptism delayed, yet it was not because he judged it unlawful, but inexpedi∣ent as before: for even this Father himself allow∣ed of their Baptism rather than they should dye unbaptized. And thus we see the Author hath made a great cry of a little Wooll.
Concerning the Witness pretended to be born by the Waldenses against Infant Bap∣tism. 4 Waldenses. IT is a miserable cause indeed, whose Advoca∣tes must still have recourse to lies for its defence, and an Argument of the want of honesty, and conscience for men to persist in this course, when more than enough hath been said to convince them of the evil thereof. It was a solemn rebuke which Job gave to his mistaken friends when they put such false interpretations upon God's dealings with him, Will ye lie (said he) for God? surely he hath no need of, nor doth he require us by any sinister and sinful way, to justify him in his At∣tributes, providences, cause, or truth. As tou∣ching the matter in hand before us, if the Anti∣paedobaptists have the truth on their side, yet cer∣tainly it is little beholding to some of them, who have attempted to defend it by so many unwar∣rantable ways. In particular I shall make it ap∣pear that the present Author with whom I have to deal, is foully criminal in laying out the ut∣most of his skill in traducing those famous ancient Christians, the Waldenses, as if in their several generations they had witnessed against Infant-Baptism, when he cannot but know (being so well read in the Histories of that people written by Perin, and Dr. Ʋsher): that they were falsly, and malitiously charged here with by their cruel Antichristian enemies. Besides the Author (whose
Treatise about Baptism is a Compendium of what Mr. Tombes hath long since written upon that subject) knows well enough, (and is therefore the more inexcusable) how much Mr. Tombes was rebuked, by two Reve∣rend Divines,Mr. Marshal & Mr. Baxter. for endeavouring to defend his opinion by po∣pish Frgeries and Slanders. I find by the Authors discourse that he is well read in Mr. Baxter's Plain-Proof for Infant-Bap∣tism, who in his Apologetical Preface Pag. the 10th tells us, That the lying Papists do accuse the Albigenses and Waldenses (our first Reformers) to be Witcher, Buggerers, Sorcerers and to deny the Baptism of Infants. Hereupon they raise war a∣gainst them, put them to the Sword, and burn their Citys to ashes. These Godly men deny their Accusations, and shew that their Ministers being much abroad to spread the Gospel, they kept their Children unbaptized, till they came home, because they would not have them Bap∣tized by the Priests in the Popish fashion. Upon this (mark it) the Slander was raised that they would not have Infants Baptized, which they purge themselves of, and profess their judgment for Infant-Baptism; all which being so well known to the Author, (as appears by his often quoting of Perin, who treats of these things) it is a strange boldness (to say no worse) that he should dare affirm, that the Waldenses amongst other Or∣dinances of Christ, that they defended and wit∣nessed to, to death & banishment, and bonds, that of Baptizing Believers, in opposition to that of In∣fants, was not the least: Which he attempts to prove,
1. By their publick Confessions of Faith. 2. By some particular Witness, that some of their principal Men bare thereto. 3. In the more general Witness born by the body of the people as appears by the decrees of Councils, decretal Epistles, and general Edicts given forth against the whole party for the same. 4. In the foot-steps that we find thereof in the several Countries, whre they have heretofore imprinted the same. Reply, There are two sorts of People that 'tis like will be imposed upon by the flourishes which this Champion makes, those who are Ignorant, and those who are prejudiced against Infant-Bap∣tism: no doubt but all this will pass for Gospel amongst such. But I may say of the Author, mul∣ta loquitur, sed nihil dicit, or rather probat, and that what he says is but Vox & praeterea nihil, a great sound of words, but no proof: And this I shall make appear in order. First, for the Witness born in their Publick Con∣fessions, he cites Perin, and if he can find any thing in that Author to serve his purpose I am much mistaken: I shall shortly produce the same Author verbis rotundis, most expresly against him. But my Adversary hath a notable dexte∣rity to prove quidlibet ex quolibet, let us now hear what he quotes out of Perin, and then judge Reader, whether it be answerable to what he af∣firms under this first Head. First of all the Author tells us out of Perin, That in their ancient Confession of Faith bearing date 1120, Article 13. they say We acknowledg no other Sacraments but Baptism and the Supper
of the Lord. P. Perin, 87. Reader thou hast here every Syllable of the Article, and is not this a knocking Argument against Infant-Baptism, that they acknowledged two Sacraments, Bap∣tism and the Supper of the Lord? This is a Wit∣ness indeed, but 'tis of the Authors weakness to produce it. The next is Article the 28. of an other Con∣fession, viz. God hath Ordained certain Sacra∣ments to be joyned with the Word, as a means to unite us unto, and to make us partakers of his Be∣nefits, and that there be only Two of them: this is a Witness with a witness, here is alsO altum Silentium, a deep Silence, as to Infant-Baptism, not a word pro or con, and he that sees any thing against it in this Article wears Antipaedobaptistical Spectacles. And in another Ancient Confession of Faith Ar∣ticle 7. saith the Author, we have this, viz. We do believe that in the Sacrament of Baptism water is the visible and external sign, which represents to us that which is within, viz. Renovation of the Spirit, and mortification of our Members in Jesus Christ, Perin 89. There is a Harmony between all the Protestant Churches in the World, and the Waldenses in this Article, we all who are for Infant-Baptism believe the same. After this we have a passage out of Vigniers Ecclesiastical History, namely, That they do ex∣presly-declare to receive the Canon of the Old and New-Testament, to reject all Doctrines which have not their foundation in it; therefore all the Traditions and Ceremonies of the Church of Rome the condemn, and abominate, saying she
is a Den of Thieves, and the Apocalyptical Harlot. This is all very good, but what have we in all this against Infant-Baptism? but the Author would put their words upon the Tenter-hooks, it may be, and strain them farther than their intention, and would have us think doubtless, that they judged infant-Baptism to be a Romish Tradition, and to have no foundation in the Word of God; and is it not strang that it should be a Romish Tradition when it was in use in Tertullian's days, as the Author himself intimates a little before: But the Waldenses themselves have declared their judgment otherwise, and seconded it with their Practice, as shall be shewn by and by. They were indeed against the Romish Ceremonies used in Baptism, as Exorcism, Chrysm, &c. but not a∣gainst Infant-Baptism itself. Another Citation is out of an Ancient Confession, Artic. 11. The words are —We esteem for an Abomination and as Antichristian all Humane In∣ventions, as a trouble and prejudice to the liberty of the Spirit. And in their Ancient Catechism. Perin. de Doct. de Vaud. Liv. 1.168, 169. When Humane Traditions are approved for Gods Ordi∣nances, then is he Worshipped in vain. Is. 19. Matt. 15. Which is done when grace is attributed to the external Ceremonies and persons enjoyned to partake of Sacraments without Faith and Truth. This also is insignificant to the purpose for which the Author quotes it, and doth not in the least touch Infant-Baptism. It is a good Testimony against Humane Traditions, and they tell us what they mean; which is done (say they) when Grace is attributed to the External Ceremonies, and
'tis one of the Popish Errors we know, that Bap∣tism confers grace ex opere operato; it is also a good Testimony against Compulsion to the Sacraments, and that wicked practice of the Spaniards in for∣cing the Indians to be Baptized, and whoever shall compel ignorant, and scandalous persons to receive the Lords Supper. Lastly we have something brought out of their ancient Treatise concerning Antichrist, writ 1120. And if we can find nothing there against our Practice, then may we say of this Antagonist, Promisit montes, nascitur ridieulus mus. The words of that Treatise are, That Anti∣christ attributes the Regeneration of the Holy Spirit unto the dead outward work of Baptizing Children, and teacheth that thereby Regenerati∣on must be had. And here at last by good hap we have the word Children named, but not a jot serving the Author's design, for they do not hereby except against Childrens Baptism, but only against the corrupt ends that Antichrist hath in it; for whether it be in Children or grown Persons, it is an Antichristian, or Popish Tenent to ascribe Regeneration to the dead outward work of Baptism, and this is that before mentioned that Baptism confers grace ex opere operato. By what hath been said any unprejudiced Rea∣der may see how meanly the Author hath acquit∣ted himself in the beginning of his underta∣king to prove the Waldenses against Infant-Bap∣tism, from their publick Confessions of Faith; and 'tis not unlikely we shall find him as defective in what follows. We have seen much confidence in the man, but not a grain of proof, and 'tis im∣possible
any mans belief should be shaken by what he hath hitherto faid touching the Lawfulness of Infant-Baptism. 2. His second proof is the Witness of the emi∣nent and leading Men. The first he begins with, is the Famous Beringarius of Turain in Anjou, and he quotes the Magdeburgenses Cent. 11. c. 5. p. 240. That Beringarius did in the time of Leo the 9th a∣bout the year 1049. publickly maintain his Heresies, which they set down to be denying Transubstantiation, and Baptism to little ones. Now we must have to do with Mr. Tombes again,Mr. Tombe's Praecursor, Exa∣men p. 20. Reply, 1. That Beringarius was a famous Cham∣pion for the Truth against Popish Errors and Su∣perstitions is beyond all dispute, but still 'tis questionable whether he was against Infant-Bap∣tism; Why, saith the Author, the Magdeburgenses tell us so, that is 4 Protestant Divines that drew up the History of the Church. Here the incautelous Reader is in danger of a snare; for those Di∣vines accuse him not of this, but only tell us what the Popish records speak of him; Beringarius, say the Magdeburgenses, maintained his Heresies, which they (that is the Papists) set down to be denying Transubstantiation, and Infant-Baptism, who being such false accusers may very well be excepted against as insufficient evidence. We know what Calumnies they have cast upon those eminent Reformers, Luther, Calvin, Beza, that lived nearer our times; what errors they charge them with both Intellectual and Moral, as if they had been very Heretical in judgment, and
men of debaucht lives: they have their witnesses too more than a Iury, to justify all their malici∣ous charges, Books written by divers Authors, enough to make up a considerable Library: If we must credit them against one, why not against all? the Testimony is the same. 2. Since this instance of Beringarius is taken out of Tombe's, let us hear what answer Mr. Mar∣shal gave him pag. 65. of his defence of Infant-Baptism; It is true (saith he) that Deoduinus Leo∣dienses took it up as a common fame, & upon his cre∣dit Guitmond a Popish Bishop relates it, that Berin∣garius opposed the Corporal presence in the Eu∣charist, and the Baptism of little ones;Usher de Success. Cap. 7. Sect. 37. but (saith Bishop Ʋ∣sher in his Succession of the Church) in so many Synods beld against Beringa∣rius we never find any thing of this nature laidto his charge; and Bishop Ʋsher farther adds, that to him it appears, that they who in those days were charged to hold that Baptism did not parvulis pro∣ficere ad salutem, held nothing but this, that Bap∣tism doth not confer Grace ex opere operato. And indeed, in those Popish times to deny the greasy Ceremony of Chrism was ground enough, for a charge of denying Infant-Baptism, as you shall hear suddenly. Next we have an impertinent citation out of Clark's Martyrology, where it is said, that God raised up Beringarius, who did boldly and faith∣fully preach and witness against Popish errors, whereupon the Gospellers were called Beringa∣rians for above an hundred years after, but Clark gives no hint that any of these Gospellers were
against Infant-Baptism, but relates the quite con∣trary, for (saith he) (in the same place, and in the words following what is before quoted by the Author) They Baptized their Children, taught them the Belief, and ten Commandements, and carefully kept the Sabbath day; upon which Lewis the 12th of France, (that had been otherwise informed, but now satisfied of the truth of their faith, and practice by his commissioners, and Confessors,) said (and bound it with an Oath) that they were honester than he, and his Catholick Subjects. To as little purpose as the former is that he quotes out of Dr. Ʋsher in his Succession of the Church out of Thuanus;Dr. Usher. That Bruno Archbishop of Tryers did expel several Beringarians that had spread his Do∣ctrine in several of those Belgick Countries, and that several of them upon examination did say, that Bap∣tism did not profit Children unto Salvation. And well might they say so, all Protestants are of the same judgment, and in the same we have Dr. Ʋsher's Paraphrase on it — nec a∣liud videntur negavisse, &c. They seemed (saith he) to deny nothing else but this, that Baptism doth not confer Grace by the work done; and so we have done with his first witness. 2. The next he brings are Pe∣ter Bruis,P. Bruis. Arnoldus, and Hen∣ricus, three famous Waldenses; they were of their Barbes, that is, Teachers. I shall speak of the first and last being joyned toge∣ther in History, as the two first great Preachers of the Albigenses and Waldenses: the first was a Priest, the last a Monk, hated and persecuted very
much by the Romish-Church. These being dri∣ven out of several places, where they stoutly op∣posed the Popish errors, were at last received at Tholouse in Provence, and they that followed their Doctrine were called Petro-Brusians and Henri∣cians. Now to prove these to be against Infant-Baptism, the Author in conformity to his old friend Mr. Tombes, betakes himself to the Eccle∣siastical Historians that have written of the State of the Church in the several Centuries since Christ, for from them must we fetch our light touching matters of Fact in the Countries where they lived; or from such who have made it their peculiar work to write the History of the Waldenses as Perin &c. The Protestant Century-writers, are either the Magdeburgensian Divines, or Lucas Osiander. I shall give a brief account of what they say of the Waldenses, concerning the point under debate, and so leave the Reader to judge on which side the truth lyeth, whether on ours or our Opposites; and shall premise this caution, that the Reader do not mistake, and take that to be the judgment of those Writers concerning Peter Bruis and Henri∣cus, which they transcribe out of the Popish Re∣cords, Councils, Edicts &c. And what they re∣late of them they have it from two Popish Abbots viz. Bernard, and Cluniacensis. 1. Concerning Bernard the Magdeburgenses tell us Cent. 12. c. 5. that he in his 66th Ser∣mon in Cantica, flyes out against these men accu∣sing them to be Hereticks: he chargeth them, 1. To be Manicheans. 2. To deny the Lawfulness of Oaths.
3. That 'tis unlawful to Baptize Children. 4. That it is unlawful to eat any thing quod ex coitu generatur, and accordingly (saith Bernard) they denyed the lawfulness of eating Flesh and Milk. These were then a terrible sort of Fellows, if we may believe that old Superstitious (though otherwise devout, and some think Pious) Abbot, who is commonly known by the name of St. Ber∣nard. And certainly if these Petro-brusians were guilty in these things, they were even Monsters in nature. What to deny our little ones both Milk and Water too, O Cruelty! But as these good men cleared themselves, from these false im∣putations and calumnies; so also do the Magde∣burgenses in their History speak highly of them, and that which is sufficient for their Vindica∣tion. The other cited by the Author, is Lucas Osi∣ander, Cent. 12, 262. And I doubt some prejudice to his cause,Osiander. may arise from citing him. Whatsoever Osiander saith (concerning Peter Bruis. and Henricus, of their being against Infant-Baptism) he taketh it out of the Works of Peter Cluniacensis, another Popish Abbot; and he doth Calumniari fortiter, lay very many abomina∣ble errors to their charge; and among others he accuseth them of this Venial one of denying In∣fant-Baptism. Now if any credit may be given to this Abbot, it must be per totum, throughout, in all, or else in nothing: And verily if his Te∣stimony be valid (as Mr. Tombes would have it accounted, and the Author from him) our oppo∣sites
need not glory in such Waldenses, that they comported with their opinion, nor we be trou∣bled at their dissenting from us. Let us now look into the wicked and false Te∣stimony or Account, this lying Abbot gives of those two precious Ministers, Peter Bruis, and Henricus, as Osiander takes it out of his own Writings. Exorta est, & progressu temporis vires acquisivit haeresis Albigensium. Ea Ro∣mae primo caepisse putant, postea verò in comitatu To∣losato (etiam intra viros Illustres) longe late{que} spar∣sa dicitur; quin etiam in Angliam penetrasse scribi∣tur. Dogmata haec illis attri∣buuntur, (inquit Osiander). 1. Baptismum abjiciunt. 2. Corporum resurrecti∣onem negant. 3. Carnem comedi pro∣hibent. 4. Christum non esse Deum, nec assumpsisse de Virgine, sed de Caelo car∣nem duxisse.
5. Ecclesiam non posse a∣liquid possidere, nisi in com∣muni, &c.
There arose and in progress of time gathered strength the heresy of the Albigenses, that is said to take its rise at Rome, then dispersed far and wide over the Country of Tholouse, (& that amongst men of quality;) & more∣over they say that it got into England. They are charged to hold these Opinions, saith Osiander. They cast of Baptism, meaning that of Infants. They deny the resur∣rection. They forbid eating Flesh (as Bernard before.) They say Christ is not God, neither took he flesh of the Virgin, but brought it down from Heaven.
That the Church should possess all things in com∣mon. By this time I suppose we may conclude, that these Waldenses were vile persons, or Cluniacen∣sis a lying Abbot; and this latter we do not in the least question. Furthermore (as if the Au∣thor had never enough of him) he tells us, that the Magdeburgenses set down the Assertions of Peter Bruis against Infant-Baptism, Transubstantiation,Tombe's Exa∣men pag. 25. Worshipping of Images, Purgatory, which are distinctly, and at large answe∣red by Peter Cluniacensis: But you must know he had never any personal conference, or dispute with him. But that I may not remain in the Author's debt, for what he quotes out of the Magdeburgenses, I shall requite him with what I find in Osiander, who tells us that the said Cluniacensis doth profess twice in his Writings, that he would not accuse the Waldenses upon uncertain report, but from their own Writings; nay farther, he chargeth them that they denied the Divine Au∣thority of the Old-Testament, and all the New, except the Gospels: Evangelium creditis, Episto∣las Fauli cur non Suscipitis? Respondetis, quia non adeo certa nobis autoritas est earum. i. e. You believe the Gospel, why not also the Epistles of Paul? your answer is, because the Divine Au∣thority of them doth not so certainly appear to us. And upon that account (saith Osiander) Clunia∣censis spends two whole Chapters to prove the Divine Authority of the Scriptures against them.
I shall conclude this with Mr. Marshal's words to Mr. Tombes upon his quoting Cluniacensis, to the same end as my Antagonist doth. He (saith that Reverend Minister) that reads that railing Book of Petrus Cluniacensis, will find that he acknowledg∣eth most of what he layes to their charge to be upon the report of others. Now me thinks the Author should blush at his indiscretion for introducing such a Popish Calumniator for an evidence in this matter; and if he believe this Abbot slandred Pe∣ter Bruis and his followers in these things, I hope he will excuse the Reader if he believe he did noless, when he chargeth them to be against Infant-Bap∣tism, & that Children who dyed before they could actually believe, were damned; which is another Article Cluniacensis brings in against them, & one as true as the other. I see by this that when men are engaged in a cause, and wedded to an opi∣nion, they will not refuse the most sordid and shameful ways to promote it. They will fall in with slanderous Papists, and take up what they say to defend their Opinions. Witness my Anta∣gonist, and his Predesessour and Tutor Mr. Tombes, who was checkt by Mr. Baxter for his evil carriage in this very thing, he boldly justifies him∣self, and tells us in his Precursor, pag. 29. That Petrus Cluniacensis was (though a zealous Papist) yet thought fit by Illyricus to be reckoned among Witnesses of truth in his Catalogue; and if such as he (and especially Bernard) be not taken for Wit∣nesses of things in their times, I know not how Protestants will make up their Catalogue of Wit∣nesses for them in all Ages: I think these are
dangerous words, somewhat derogating from the honour of the Protestant Religion. The other eminent Person which is joyned in History with Peter Bruis, is Henricus. These two, as is said, were the first and most famous Prea∣chers of the Albigenses and Waldenses. This Hen∣ricus (saith the Author) witnessed to this great Truth, being a Friend and Collegue of P. Bruis; whose Doctrines and Positions are also recorded by the Magdeburgenses under eleven Heads; the first whereof was denying Baptism to Children. Cent. 12. p. 843, We have observed before that Bernard is so in∣genious, as to acknowledg that he takes up these things by hear-say, and upon report; ab iis qui ad Pontificiam ecclesiam redierunt, of such as were returned again to the Church of Rome, and who is such an infidel as not to believe what they say? Furthermore the Magdeburgs tell us, that when the Henricians, or Disciples of Henricus were exami∣ned, Bernard himself confesseth, they denyed the things that were Objected against them, and that haply (say the Magde∣burgs) because they Obje∣cted such things as they never taught.Ait porr in Ex∣amine eos Objecta negasse. Haec ille, sc. Bernardus. Quia forte alia is Objecta fuerunt, quam docuerunt. Magd. Cent. 12. p. 845. Mr. Tombes told his Tale about Henricus a little handsomer than the Author, in his Praecursor. pag. 29. And is not ashamed to say, it seems ut∣terly unlikely to him that be, and his followers should
be belyed, and tells us what Bernard said of them in 204th Epistle: the same also he hath in his Ex∣ercitation p. 31. and let us compare the Author with him, and we shall see he hath the Story from him; for thus he concludes this Section. The Author. The same Bernard in his Epistle to Heldefon∣sus Earl of St. Gyles, saith, The Henerici did deny Holy-days, Sacra∣craments, Churches and Priests, complaining that the Children of Christi∣ans were excluded the life of Christ, whilst they denyed them the grace of Baptism, and not suffered them to partake of Salva∣tion. Mr. Tombes Exerc. p. 31. and Examen. pag. 21. The same Bernard in his first Epistle to Helde∣fonsus Earl of St. Gyles, complains of Henricus, that he took away Holy-days, Sacraments, Chur∣ches, Priests, that the life of Christ is stopped to the little ones of Christians, while the grace of Bap∣tism is denyed, and they not suffered to draw near to Salvation. Thus far we find the Author exactly following Tombes, having little else but what is transcribed out of him; only he omits that ingenious passage of Mr. Tombes Praecursor pag. 30. As for the Albigenses and Waldenses it might be (saith he) that some might be against infant-Baptism, yet o∣thers not; or it may be in the beginning beld so, but after left it. But this Author makes as if the whole Body of the people had been against it which followes next to be examined.
Thirdly (saith he) in the Witness, born not only by some particular Men, but by the body of the People;3. By the People themselves, suffer∣ing for the same. as appea∣reth by decrees of Councils, De∣cretal Epistles, and Edicts given forth against them aswell as the Testimony of many Learned Writers. Reply. There is no convincing Proof to be fetcht from hence, of their being against Infant-Baptism; because they were their Enemies, calumniating malicious Papists, that loaded them with all man∣ner of reproaches, to render them Odious: And no marvel (saith Mr. Mar∣shal) such Opinions should be charged upon them,Marshal's De∣fence. p. 66. though they held them not; seeing we find this particular charged upon Luther, Calvin, and Beza, who did all in a special manner oppose this error; so that (saith the same Author) unless some one doth out of their own Confession give better evidence,Ies. Vicecom. Obser. Eccl. Vol. Lib. 2. c. 1. p. 103. I shall believe that this Doctrine of opposing the Baptizing of the Infants of Believers, is an Innovation no ancienter than the Anabaptists in Germany. And whereas the Author cites two Canons of Alexander the 3d, one made in the Gallican, and the other in the Lateran Council, against the Wal∣densian, or Catharian Heresy, the latter Anathe∣matizing them as for other Heresies, so particu∣larly for denying Infant-Baptism, and for their Contempt of all the Sacraments.
We are informed by Perin (the French Historian,) that these Canons were discharged against the Waldenses as soon upon the matter, as they were known by this name. For (saith he) in the year 1160 Peter Waldo Citizen of Lyons couragiou∣sly opposed Transubstantiation, with divers other corruptions crept into the Church of Rome, blam∣ing the Vice, Luxury, Excess and Avarice, of the Pope and his Clergy, and he was the more hark∣ened to, being held in great esteem for his learn∣ing, piety and great charity. Now the Pope con∣sidering that at Lyons, there were so many per∣sons (by reason of Waldo's teaching) that questio∣ned his Soveraign Authority over the whole Church, fearing what this might come to, being chased out of Lyons, they spread themselves in divers companies and places; and from this Waldo, they were called Waldenses, Perin Hist. Lib. 1. p. 2, 3. The Monks, Inquisitors and others, (saith the Historian) being their Mortal Enemies, poured out Reproaches, and laid Opprobrious Imputations on them, affirming they were the Authors of all Heresies in the World, and that they were Confederates with the ancient Hereticks. Because they made profession of Purity, they called them Cathares i. e. Puritans. Because they denied the Bread which the Priest shewed in the Mass to be God, they called them Arrians, as if they denied the Divinity of Christ; and be∣cause they maintained that the Authority of Em∣perours and Kings depended not on the Pope, Ma∣nicheans; and for other causes which they fained, they called them Gnosticks and Apostoliques. This
Protestant Historian is large in these things, but I must contract, among others laid to their charge he mentioneth these 3 following. 1. That they held Community of Goods. 2. That it was unlawful to swear at all. 3. That they rejected the Baptism of Infants. This Bernard and Cluniacensis, charged them with as before. They acquit themselves (faith Perin) from these Calumnies by putting forth a Book called the Spi∣ritual Almanack, Fol. 45. They assert and main∣tain Propriety of Estate, the Lawfulness of Oaths grounded on Heb. 6.6. and alledgeth 'twas God's Ordinance, that the people of Israel should swear by his Name. Deut. 16.53. And lastly for Infant-Baptism (the matter in dispute) Perin gives this account pag. 15. [which I desire the Reader to observe it, because we have so ancient a declaration of their faith in this particular.] That they being constrained for some hundred years to suffer their Children to be Baptized by the Priests of the Church of Rome, they deferred the doing there∣of, as long as they could, having in detestation those Humane inventions which were added to the Sa∣crament, which they held to be but pollution thereof. And forasmuch as their Pastors were many times abroad, imployed in the service of the Chur∣ches, they could not have Baptism Administred to their Infants by their own Ministers. For this cause they kept them long from Baptism, which the Priests perceiving, charged them thereupon with this imposture viz. That they were against Infant-Baptism. Which, saith Perin, not only their
Adversaries have believed, that is, the Papists: and from hence came all that Bedrole of Decrees, Coun∣cils, Decretal Epistles, and Edicts against them, but also others (saith he) who have well approved of their Life and Faith in all other points; amongst the number of which we must reckon Mr. Tombes, and the Author of this late Treatise of Baptism now under examination. This ample account, given by such an excel∣lent impartial Historian; so many years since, be∣fore the World was so troubled with disputes a∣bout Baptism, and from one of their own Coun∣try-men, a man unconcerned, as to interest, or dissenting parties in this controversy, and being so faithful in his relations of the Faith, and suffe∣rings of the Waldenses, that he was never (that I could hear of) questioned or suspected, will undoubtedly be credited by all ingenious Persons, and is sufficient to dismount thousands of those Canons, Edicts, &c. the Author brings. Besides this, that I may (if possible) unde∣ceive the Antipaedobaptists, who are hardly brought to believe any thing that is against them; I will add two other Testimonies, from whence we may conclude the Body of the Waldenses were not against Infant-Baptism; one of them is Luther, the other Bullinger, both of which have written smartly against Anabaptists, and would never have given such a large Encomium of the Waldenses, had they apprehended them to be touched with the error of denying Baptism to the Children of Believers. Luther professeth that he hated the Waldenses (whilst a Monk) as desperate men, until he knew
their piety and truth of their Belief by their own Con∣fessions and Writings, whereby be perceived that those good men were much wronged, and that the Pope had condemned them for Hereticks, being rather worthy of the praise that is due to the Mar∣tyrs. And Bullinger that wrote a Book against the Anabaptists, saith in his Preface to his Sermons u∣pon the Revelations, That above 400 years since the Waldenses have made Profession of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, throughout France, Italy, Germany, Poland, Bohemiah, and other Kingdoms. 4. If this be not enough to cleer the Waldenses from what the Author would have us believe from the Testimony of their Enemies the Papists, we are willing to give him full measure, pressed down and running over; and that is by the Testi∣mony which they give of themselves in their Pub∣lick General Confessions of Faith. We have before shewn the Author could find nothing in any of their Confessions against Infant-Baptism, let us now see whether we can find any thing for it. First they purge themselves from the imputa∣tion of denying Infant-Baptism,Hist. Wald. Lib. 1. c. 4. p. 15. So Lib. 1. c. 6. p. 43. and shew the reason why for some hundred years they for∣bore it, as before; he that writes the History, professedly sets down in his 3d part of it, the Doctrine of the Waldenses and Albigenses, and particularly what their Faith was, touching Baptism in these words of their own, viz. And whereas Baptism is Ad∣ministred in a full Congregation — And for this cause it is that we present our Children in Baptism,
which they ought to do, to whom the Children are nearest, as Parents, &c. In the year of our Lord 1535, an Assembly of the Waldenses from all their Valleys met at Angrongne,Perin. Hist. Wald. L. 2. Cap. 4. pag. 57. and there was signified what they understood of their Brethren of Provence and Daughine, name∣ly, that they had sent into Germany their Pastors, George Morell, and Peter Mason to confer with Oe∣colampadius, Bucer, and Capito, touching the be∣lief which they had time out of mind: [Mark hereby the way how unworthily the Author Pre∣varicates and endeavours to blind the Reader, pag. 329. of his Book, as if all the Waldenses were declining, or Apostatizing, towards the Antichristian Abomination of being present at Mass: if some of them of Provence were faulty; yet this Assembly at Angrongne stood fast in the Truth] where (saith Perin) when they had read certain Letters of encouragement sent from Oecolam∣padius, both to those of Provence, Dhugtony and to themselves. Afterward concluded on certain Propositions and Articles of Faith, which were read and ap∣proved, signed and sworn to by all the Heads of the Families and their Pastors, with one mind and consent, to Conserve, Observe, Believe, and retain amongst them inviolably without any con∣tradiction, as being conformable to the Doctrine which hath been taught them, (mark it) from the Father to the Son, for these many hundred years out of the Word of God. If therefore among any of these Articles we
can find Infant-Baptism owned, what becomes then of all the Crack that the Author makes, as if they had been of his judgment. The Articles there agreed on were in number 17, too long to be inserted, the last is about Bap∣tism, and thus it is to a Syllable. Article 17. Touching the matter of the Sacrament, it hath been coneluded by the H. Scriptures, that we have but two Sacramental signs, the which Christ Jesus hath left unto as, the one is Baptism, the other the Eu∣charist, which we receive to shew what our perseve∣rance in the faith is, as we have promised when we were Baptized being little Infants. This is the Confession of the Faith of the Assembly at Angrongne, where a letter was read from Oecolam∣padius to those of Provence, who (it seems out of fear) were sometimes present at Mass with the Papists, or at least some of them, who did in heart doubtless abhor it: but how doth this prove they were not heartily for Infant-Baptism? And be∣cause the Letter is so Excellent a Disswasive from any Complyance with Superstitious and Idola∣trous Worship, I shall here insert it.
Oecolampadius his Letter to the Walden∣ses of Provence, 1530. WE understand that the fear of Persecution hath made you to Dissemble in your Faith, and that you bide it. Now we believe with the heart to Righteousness, and confess with the mouth to Salvation. But they that fear to Confess Christ before the World, shall not be received of God the Father. For our God is Truth, without any dissi∣mulation, and as he is a jealous God, he cannot en∣dure that they that zare his, should joyn together under the Yoke of Antichrist: For there is no Com∣munion of Christ with Belial. And if you Com∣municate with the Infidels in going to their Abomi∣nable Masses, you cannot but perceive their Blasphe∣mies against the Death and Passion of Christ. For when they glory in themselves, that by the means of such Sacrifice they satisfy God for the sins of the Living and the Dead, what can follow, but that Jesus Christ hath not sufficiently Satisfied by the Sacrifice of his Death and Passion, and consequently that Christ is not Jesus (i. e.) a Saviour, and that he dyed for you in vain. If then we have Communion at this impure table, we do declare our selves to be One Body with the Wicked, how irkesome soever it be to us. And when we say Amen to their Pray∣ers, do we not deny Christ? What death should we not rather chuse? What Pain and Torment should we not rather suffer? Nay into what Hell ought we not rather to plunge our selves, than to wit∣ness by our presence, that we consent unto the Blas∣phemies
of the wicked. I know that your weakness is great, but it is necessary that they that have learn∣ed that they are bought by the Blood of Christ, should be more Couragious, and alwayes fear him that can cast both Body and Soul into Hell. And what shall it suffice us to have a care of this life only? Shall that be more precious to us than that of Christ? And are we contented to have tasted the delights of this World only? Crowns are prepared for us, and shall we turn back again? And who will believe that our Faith hath been true, if it fail and faint in the heat of Persecution? Let us therefore pray unto God to increase our Faith. For certainly it shall be better for us to dye, than to be overcome by tempta∣tions. And therefore Brethren we exhort you to dive into the bottom of this business; for if it be lawful to hide our faith under Antichrist, it shall be likewise lawful to hide it under the Empire of the Turk, and with Dioclesian to adore Jupiter and Venus; nay it had been lawful for Tobit to adore the Calf in Bethel. And what then shall our faith towards God be? If we honour not God as we should, and our life be nothing but Hypocrisy and dissimulation, he will speue us out of his mouth, as being neither Hot nor Cold. And how do we glorify our God in the midst of our Tribulations if we deny him? Bre∣thren, it is not lawful for us to look back when our hand is at the Plough: neither is it lawful to give ear to our Wives enticing us to evill, nor to our Flesh which, notwithstanding it endureth many things in this World, yet in the Haven it suffereth Ship∣wrack. These Godly Admonitions confirmed the weak, and came seasonably, for the persecution immedia∣tely began, and was more cruel than ever.
4. Lastly the Author attempts to make good what he hath said of the Waldenses. From the Footsteps, saith he, we find of this truth in the several Countries and places where the Waldenses had here∣tofore imprinted it, as appeareth by the following instances. Reply. The Rise of Error like the Head of Nilus; is not easily found out: and as Diseases do not al∣wayes come of Infection, but owe their Original to the pravity of the humours, as the Principal Cause, and Seminary of them; so is it with Errors there being a weakness, and corrupt disposition in the mind of man to fall into the same without the Ministry and Teaching of Impostors. That the Waldenses (by reason of the sore persecution under Alexander the 3d, and his Successors) wege dispersed through Germany and France, (as the Au∣thor tells us out of Du-plessis) is not to be doubt∣ed, yea throughout all Italy, Poland, Bohemia and other Kingdoms, some hundred years before they had spread themselves, as Bullinger hath told us. But that the Opposers of Infant-Baptism in upper and lower Germany were the remains and Off-spring of those the Waldenses had afore in∣structed, is a conceit forreign to all History, and hath no foundation in Reason or Truth: his ipfe dixit, or saying so, is no ground for us to believe it. And he affirms it only upon conjecture, and this waek Conjecture, ariseth from his will, that it should be so, according to that saying, quod ∣lumus facile credimus. We have before shewn that in the year 1535. the Waldenses in a general Assembly of all the Val∣lies
met at Angtongne, and declared their Faith, as touching other Articles of Religion, so in parti∣cular that of Infant-Baptism, which they pro∣fessed to own; declaring farther that it was a Do∣ctrine taught them from Father to Son many hun∣dred years before. These were the legitimate Off∣spring of the Ancient Waldenses inheriting the Patrimony and Faith of their Ancestors. It was near upon the time of that Assembly that the Ger∣man Anabaptists did appear upon the stage; I am sure it was not above 10 or 12 years before: for the Waldenses, as was said, sent to Oecolampa∣dius for advice, and he, as the Author hath it pag. 307. disputed with the Anabaptists at Bazil, Ʋlme, Ausburg 1527, & 1529. I will not say, but in some points the German Anabaptists might a∣gree with the Waldenses, as the worst of Hereticks do in some things with the Orthodox, but 'tis the Authors private fancy, that the Fathers of those Germans, had been the Disciples of the Ancient Waldenses, which if true, their Children did hor∣ribly degenerate. For if any credit may be given to the Histories of divers Religious, sober Pro∣testants, besides the Testimonies of those glori∣ous Lights, Luther, Melanchton, Zuinglius, Bul∣linger and others, concerning the men of the A∣nabaptist Judgment in those Countries; we shall hardly meet with the like execrable persons, in in any of the Records of time, since Christianity was profest. Let not those who are against In∣fant-Baptism in these dayes (many of whom, are not only sound in their judgments in other points of Religion, but holy in their conversation) be condemned for the miscarriages of those in for∣reign
parts, more in former times, than of late: Nor let those Godly men, who are dissatisfied with the practice of Infant-Baptism, be offended at the Zeal of Gods holy Ministers, against those evil men, who under a pretence of Religion per∣pretrate all manner of villanies. It was long since, and is still the judgment of very wise and holy-Men, that those German Anahaptists were a Facti∣on raised up by Satan, and fomented by the Pope in that juncture, on purpose to retard and hinder the work of Reformation, so hopefully begun, by those burning and shining lights before-mentioned. At that time the learned Coun∣cellor Conradus Heresbachius expresseth the same in an Epi∣stle of his to Erasmus:Satan ejusmon pestes in illum fi∣nem excitavit, ne sel, reformatio or∣bis Christiani, in Doctrina & mori∣bus, per Lutherum, Zuinglium; Me∣lancthonem, Bu∣cerum; dlios{que} Dei viros suscepta, perfi∣ceretur. And Melchior Adamus (in his Histo∣ry of the lives of the German Divines) saith, that at that time the errors of the Anabaptists broke forth, that the Divil might sow his Seed, who first declared against Infant-Baptism, and af∣terward rebaptized themselves, & then followed an inundation of all the Heresies that ever were; Vita Zwing lii, pag. 30. And yet my Antagonist towards the latter end of his Discourse hath the confidence to Apologize for those Mon∣sters, who were the abomination of all Europe, and whose memory is accursed, and stinks to this day in the Netherlands, and who are the Scard and abhorrency of Protestant Churches throughout all the World. By which un∣dertaking,Irrpsit intereae temporis ut Diabv∣lus sua zizania semper interserete consuevit, Catabap∣tistarum haeresis qui primo Infantes Baptizare veta∣int, & seipsorre-baptizabant; postea colluviem omnium, quae unquam fue∣runt, haeresean in∣undabant. I conceive he hath
done dishonour to himself, and his cause, and shall have no thanks from his party. And for his questioning the verity of those Testimonies, (being herein singular) wherewith all the world is satisfied, and en∣deavouring to lessen and mince the Crimes that can admit of no Extenuation, he hath here∣by little advantaged himself, and certainly he that durst Ad∣vocate for such a business is a daring Person in∣deed. He tells us they were disperst all abroad throughout upper and lower Germany, and it is true; but where-ever they came (as he himself quotes out of Cloppenburg) they suffered not the Reformed Reli∣gion to be edified without daily conflicts. We shall speak first of Ʋpper-Germany, and we are necessitated (something against our will) to give an account of the carriage of that People, fearing lest it should reflect upon the Godly Anti∣paedobaptists of these times. There were multitudes of them (saith the Author) in that Countrey, as appears not only by the opposition made against those perswasions by the Popish party, but by the Protestants also, and that from those who were called chief of the Reformation: as Luther, Micarius, Zuinglius, Brentius, Calvin, Junius, Oecolampadius. Here the first thing Ishall observe is, that these Gallant men stood up for Infant-Baptism, in oppo∣sition to those that were against it, who (for that
very reason it seems) are not worthy to be accoun∣ted chief of the Reformation, by him, and his party; for observe, Reader, that he doth disown them as such, in saying those who were called chief of the Reformation. Next let us enquire how the Anabaptists did promote the Reformation, then newly begun in those parts. The life of Junius, (who was Preacher at Limburg) speakes out how much they hindred the progress of the Gospel there: how grievously they disturbed Regius at Ausburg, and afterward Mus∣culus at Augusta,Ʋrbani Regii vita, pag. 73. Muscui vit. p. 373. Melchior A∣damus tells us in their lives. Musculus, although a famous, learned and Godly Divine, (as appears by his Comments upon several parts of the Old and New-Testament) yet was very poor after his Marriage, and seeing that he could not maintain his Wife with that little Money that was remaining, agreed with a certain Weaver for a certain Sum, to learn his trade. The man un∣known before to Musculus, was an Anabaptist, and there dwelt at that time a Teacher of that way in his house, miram Sanctitatem simulans (as the Story hath it) conterfeiting a wonderful deal of Holiness.Melchior Adam. in vit. Mase. p 373. Musculus soon found him out to be a very naughty fellow, and reproved him of his faults, charging him to be a lazy, idle, hypocritical Person; at length his Ma∣ster took offence at him and turned him out of door, contrary to Agreement, of whose perfidious∣ness he very much complains; for it seems the Weaver had gotten poor Musculus his Money and
not fully taught him his Trade, and dismist him because he was opposite to their Opinion. Mus∣culus now being in great want, and not knowing well what to do, was fain at length to work for 4 pence per diem in a Town-ditch, whilst his Wife (during this time) was a servant, or she might have been starv'd. Afterward God pro∣vided better for them, for he was advanced to be Minister at Augusta,Erat autem illo tempore ejus Ecclesiae afflictus & pertur∣batus status, non solum propter Epis∣copi Canonicorum, reliquorum{que} ponti∣ficiae Religionis Ma∣chinas &c. verum etiam ob Anabap∣tistarum furorem &c. where the Anabaptists troubled him very much; for at that time the Church of Christ there, was not only vexed by the Papists on one hand, but by this sort of men on the other hand; who not being contented to Preach in private, did impu∣dently rush into the publick places for God's Worship; and there cause disturbance, and sometimes get up into the Pulpit and preach their errors, as the same Author tells us, pag. 376. in Mus∣culus his life. At which (and by reason of some o∣ther seditious carriage) the Magistrate being of∣fended, put divers of them into Prison. Cum res ad tumultum & seditionem, Populo vehementer commoto spectaret: But it was not till they oc∣casioned a great Tumult and Commotion amongst the people,Ingeniam homi∣nis animum esse do∣cebat, quid uci ma∣gis quam cogi velit. Eo{que} magistratum ad clementiam & longanimitatem co∣hortabatur. &c. Musculus dis∣swades the Magistrate from se∣verity, daily visits and relieves the Prisoners, forbearing to insist upon any matters of diffe∣rence in opinion. At first they
vilified him, called him false Prophet, and Wolf under sheeps Clothing: till at last by his Christian moderation and sweetness of Spi∣rit, he had insinuated himself so much into them, that seposito omnī affectu pravo ipsum patien∣ter audiebant, laying aside all prejudice, they hearkened to his reasonings and forsook their Er∣ror; whereas some a little before professed they would rather undergo any torment than relin∣quish the same, and one of them afterward be∣came a Minister of the Church. In like manner one Thomas Munzer made a great uproar in Saxony: for first he pretended an extraordinary call from Heaven, and that he was raised up by the command of God for the punishment of wicked Princes, and altering of Politick Government; whereupon he stirred up the people to cast off the Yoke of obedience to Civil Magistrates, as they had cast off the Pope, for the one saith he oppresseth us in Civil as the other doth in Religious Rights. Thus he goes on Preaching up Liberty, and that all men were by nature free, and that all things ought to be free and common: and when he could not perswade Luther to comply with him, nor make good his Doctrine by Argument before Luther, with whom he had frequent conference at Wittenberg, but on the contrary was rebuked by him, and earnestly ad∣monished not to disturb the peace, but submit to God's Ordinance: he began to rise up and thun∣der against Luther himself, crying out that Lu∣ther was in as much fault as the Pope of Rome, and as bad as the Pope: and that all the Gospel he
preached was a Carnal Gospel; till at length the common People being stirred up by this Trumpet, and inticed with the seeming sweetness of Liberty, began every where to imbroile themselves in dan∣gerous mutinies and troops, and all reverence to Magistrates was contemned and cast off. Here∣upon the Duke of Saxony cleared his Country of Munzer, who wandered here & there through Ger∣many, and came at length to Mulbuysen, a famous Town in Thuringia; there as before Preached he up the same Doctrine of Liberty from Oppressours, many addicted themselves to him, some of the rich∣er sort having been overprest with Taxes, & others of small and beggarly estates, whom he made sure to himself by telling them, not only the Monaste∣rirs should be prey and spoil to them, but likewile Preached up Community of all things, according to the Example of the primitive Churches. Hav∣ing thus gotten a party of factious Persons fit for his turn, he became at length a Senator; whatsoever he commanded was done: his plea∣sure was a law, and his direction in all thing, as he said, a divine Revelation. His first work was to displace the Magistrates, and to take all power into his own hand. In Zwevia and Fran∣conia, near 40000 Pesants took Arms upon this occasion; who robbed a great part of the Nobi∣lity, and plundered many Towns and Castles, Mun∣zer being their chief Captain. At length the Ger∣man Princes, sensible of the danger prepare, forces set upon them, and kill some Thousands: Mun∣zer himself was apprehended, and brought to the Duke of Saxony and Landgrave; being asked why he had thus abused the miserable Pesants, and
raised these Tumults; his answer was, he had done but his duty, and that such Princes as hinde∣red the Reformation of the Church ought to be opposed. The Landgrave on the contrary proved by Scripture that Governours ought to be had in honour; that all Sedition is forbidden by God, and that by the Laws of the Gospel, no Christian may take arms against their lawful Prince, upon any pretext whatsoever. To this when he reply'd nothing, he was first put upon the Rack to know what his purpose was, and who were his confe∣derates: afterward he was brought on the Stage, and was so extreamly confounded and dejected, that he was not able to give any tolerable account of his Faith; yet in general terms Confessed his Fault and his Error, and his Head being cut off, was carried upon a Spear through the Army. After the same mode, the Anabaptists carried themselves in Switzerland; there they likewise troubled the famous Zwinglius, that eminent Servant of Christ, in the work of the Ministry at Zurith. This Zwinglius was a person of that note, that Bishop Jewel in his Defence of the Church of England, gives this honourable Testi∣mony of him, and of Luther, pag. 360. Mir∣tin Luther (saith he) and Hulderick Zwinglius, are most excellent Men, even sent of God to give light to the whole World. This same Zwinglius, whilst he was busy in carrying on the work of Reformation, (as we are informed by Melchior Adamus) was interrupted by the Anabaptists. First they declaimed against Infant-Baptism, and rebaptized themselves as before was hinted. Zwin∣glius
was very tender of them, and treated them with much gentleness,Quod Autores & a∣noics erant, & docts, & oves, & cives, fa∣miliariter egit. Mel∣chior Adam. in vi∣ta Zwinglii p. 30. for some of them were his friends and of his own Flock; until he found much falshood and un∣truth in what they said, and that they made a grievous rent, broke off communion and erected a new Church. This moved Zwinglius to try his strength with them, and indeed the Anabaptists first made a challenge on the 6th November 1525 to dispute the point with any of the Reformed Divines. Hereupon Zwinglius and some others had the patience to argue with them publickly in the Court before the Senate, three several days; and when (as Spanhemius tells us) they were by strength of argument in full demonstration of Spirit and of power, confuted, they fell to Rai∣ling, and poured out reproachful speeches. Mel∣chior Adamus gives the same account in the Histo∣ry of Zwinglius his Life.Habita sunt dis∣putationes cum ipsis seriae, in quibus erro∣rum convicti, Blas∣phemiis, & convi∣ciis despumarunt in Antagonistas. Mel∣chior Adam. The said Zwinglius so overpowred them with Arguments at that time, that one of them had a pretty conceit beyond the rest, and said Zwinglius was a learn∣ed man, and could prove any thing, but saith he, O Zwing∣lius, I adjure thee by the living God to speak thy Conscience and tell us truth. I will said he: Thou art a seditious Fellow, since milder answers will not serve the turn, I speak plain and home. After which disputation on the 15th November, the Senate made a Decree against them, and
declared that Zwinglius had said enough to con∣vince them; established Infant-Baptism, comman∣ding the Anabaptist Teachers to be silent and quiet. Notwithstanding which the trouble of the place ceased not, for the Anabaptists increased and others adjoyned to them, and they fell to preaching and disputing again, that the Tumult was great and the Citizens fell together by the Ears. The Magistrate once more taking cogni∣zance of the matter, how that by these conten∣tions the City became obnoxious to the forces of the house of Austria, and the Idolatry of Rome; for the prevention here∣of,Tandem carcere, proscriptionibus, morte, contra per∣juros, inabedientes, seditiosos, non jam Catabaptistas, Se∣natus agere coa∣ctus; ut malum intestinum aver∣runcaret. Melchior Adam. passed a severe Edict against them, not as Anabaptists, but as perjured, disobedient, se∣ditious persons, which was done in the year 1530. five years after they first began to dispute with Zwinglius. Vid. Spanhemius & Melch. Adam. 2. In the next place the Author tells us how the Anabaptists spread themselves about this time over all the low Countries, which is very true, both in West∣phalia, Friesland, Holland, to the horrour and confusion of those parts; for the light of the Gospel which brake out but a little before in High-Ger∣many, darted down its beams to the Low-Coun∣tries, and the blessed work of Reformation was carrying on apace, had not the same sort of People broken in again, to distract the Churches then planting, and disturb the Ministers. Take
but one instance, which is instar-omnium: At Munster in Westphalia this troublesom Sect first appeared, there they soared high, pretended Di∣vine Revelations, they insinuated themselves into the esteem of men by an appearance of Sanctity at first, and in a short time gained a great mul∣titude of people over to them. We must know that at this time Popery was the prevailing Reli∣gion here, as in other Towns of the Netherlands, and the people began to relish the sweetness of the Gospel, and Truth did every day triumph over Popish errors. Several Ministers were sent down from Magburg to propagate th Gospel, and the Popish interest lost ground a-pace, and their Doctors durst not dispute with the Reformed Divines from Scripture. Upon this the Senate ordained some of the Churches, for the use of the Reformed; this indeed displeased the Bishop, but it came not to Arms or Blows (as the Author falsly suggests) pag. 324 of his Tretaise. But not∣withstanding the Bishop's dislike, the Senate re∣voked not their former grant, and the work of Christ was hopefully carrying on, when in a few months there came privily into this City of Mun∣ster, certain Anabaptists in the year of our Lord 1533. of whom the principal were John Matthias a Baker of Haerlem, and John Becold a Taylor of Leyden. These begin their Deformation, with a new Catechism, preach down Childrens Bap∣tism, and preach up Community of Goods, and by a notable faculty of language, and shew of piety which they expressed at their first entrance, they ingratiated themselves and their Tenents, with many of the people. In a short time their
party was greatly augmented, many flowing into them especially of the poorer and baser sort, as those that knew not how to live for debt, and such as were inclined to Tumult, and disposed to mischief. Then fell they to the old work of contending with the Reformed Ministers: The Senate perceiving how much the City was di∣vided in their judgment, appointed also here a day for a publick disputation, at which again it was the lot of the Anabaptists to be worsted. The Senate afterward makes a Decree to clear the City of them: some depart for a little space and re-en∣ter secretly, others conceal themselves within the Walls, and not long after assembled them∣selves openly, and appeared with greater Audacity than ever; new Tumults every day arose, and from disputing they came to fighting. The New-Prophets Iohn Matthias and Iohn Be∣cold feigned Raptures, Extasies, and Revelations; and perceiving their own strength, began to rant it to the purpose and to act all manner of Violence and Rapine: They encouraged the people to fall upon the Monasteries and Churches, and in a short time the Suburbs, were burned and the Churches spoiled. They ordained community of Goods on pain of death, destroy Libraries, abolish Schools of Learning, and commanded, all Books except the Bible to be Sacrificed to the flames. Then did these two Impostors send forth hor∣rible crys about the street, exhorting all to repent. They sent to other Towns where any were ad∣dicted to them, invited them to this City as their, common Randevouz, promising a hundred-fold, for what-ever was lost in this cause. The Tu∣mult
mult and Consternation was so dreadful, that the Senators (many of them) forsake the City, and the rest were displaced: forthwith they choose new ones of their own Faction, run armed up and down, and chase out of the Town all that did not favour their Sect, without respect to Age or Sex; so as many Women with Child misear∣ried with the fright. By this time the Bishop brings an Army, besieged the City: Matthias makes a desperate salley and was cut off, and now Iohn of Leyden assumes absolute Dominion, sits upon a Throne of State, and ascribes to himself this Title, I Iohn King of Righteousness over the whole World. During his Reign (which God in mercy shortned) he cut off whom he pleased, the Estates and Lives of men being at his devotion: he perpetrated horrible Villanies, ordained Poly∣gamy to cover his Adulteries and monstrous Lusts, murdered divers persons, stood out so long against the Besiegers, that the Famine in∣creased miserably in the City, and the people perished in great numbers, and those that escaped out were pitied and spared by the Besiegers, being nothing but skin and bones. At length the place was taken by Storm, the prodigious Im∣postor (with two of his chief servants after a great slaughter of others being taken alive) were sent up and down to the Princes of Germany, as Spe∣ctacles of Scorn and Wonder, and many Divines laboured to convince them of their Errors; and in some things the King would seem to yield, which was thought only to save his life, for he promised upon pardon to reduce all the Anabap∣tists in Holland, Brabnt, Friesland (where they
were in great numbers) under the obedience of their Magistrates. Being brought back again to Munster, after the Exhortations of many pious men, that they would confess their Erros; the King relented, the other continued stubborn; being all brought to Execution, the King was fastned to a Post, and the other two in the same manner had their flesh pulled off with hot burning Pincers, and at last run through with a Sword. Their Carcases were inclosed in three several Cages of Iron, & hanged up upon the highest Tower of the City, the King in the middle, and higher than the rest. I shall now proceed to make some remarks u∣pon what the Author acquaints us with in favour of some of the German-Anabaptists. The first is that of Cassander who in his Epistle to the Duke of Cleve, says That the Anabaptists of the Belgick and lower Germany, are followers of Menno Simonis, and concerning whom he gives a good report as of a Godly man. This is Mr. Tombes again,Mr. Tombes. Ex∣am. p. 25. only with this diffe∣rence, Tombes quotes Cassander's words in Latin, which the Author translates, and Tombes is so ingenious as to acknowledg both Munzer, and those at the City of Munster, to have rebelled against Magistracy, for whom my Antagonist doth Apologize. But, saith Mr. Tombes, But since those dayes it cannot be found that the Anabaptists by Writings or Actions have done it. Now to this Mr. Marshal makes Reply, that he doth not hear much of their denying the Ma∣gistrates
Authority, nor will he take upon him to Divine what they would do, if they should increase to much strength, but prays that it may not be so. And as for Cassander, I find indeed he speaks favourably of some of their persons, but doth not in the least excuse their Doctrine or Principles; and for Menno Simonis, as Spanhemins tells us, he de∣clared a dislike of their actings at Munster, never∣theless acknowledged them for Brethren, though weak ones, and professed that notwithstanding their calamity, they might find God merciful unto them. This Menno indeed renounced Popery, and came over to the Anabaptists: but withal is said to embrace and preach up divers Heresies and Blasphemies concerning the Human nature of Christ. and other Errors about the office of the Magistrate: and though 'tis true, (as the Author saith) from Menno, many Anabaptists of the Low-Countries are called Meunonites at this day, yet let him know from Spanhemius (one of their own Country, and lately publick Professor of Divinity at Leyden) that the Anabaptists are not so bad all of them as to follow his opinions.Tombe's Praeeur∣sor. Sect. 82. p. 62. To let pass what he cites out of Cloppenburg, taken out of Tombes Praecursor. p. 62. The next man applanded by the Author, (who was Contemporary with Munzer) is one Baltha∣zar Huebmer, a Dr. in Waldshnot, a great Preach∣er of this way in Bohemia and Moravia, who was taken Prisoner with his Wife by the Emperour's command, who was himself burned at Vienna, and his Wife drowned for Hereticks in the year 1528.
This is Mr. Tombes again,Mr. Tombes. Examen pag. 23. But because we have such an ample Cha∣racter of this man, I have been the more curious in enquiring what account we or him in History: and before I shall enter upon that, I shall tell thee Reader, that the Author minds me with what I lately met with in a Book intituled plus ultra, being an Examination of Dr. Heylins Discourse of the Re∣formation of the Church of England, the Examiner observes that when the said Dr. speaks of Harding the Jesuit (a base Apostate, and grand enemy of the Gospel) it is with terms of honour and reve∣rence as Dr. Iohn Harding, one of the Divines of Lovain, and the most learned of the Colledge, pag. 128. but when he speaks of those Glori∣ous Lights of the Reformation, 'tis barely Luther, Zwinglius, Calvin: in like manner we have here one Balthazar Huebmer a Dr. in Waldshnot a great Preacher of this way in Bohemia &c. when in a leaf or two before we have no venerable Title given to those famous Divines of the Re∣formation, but 'tis plain Luther, Zwinglius, Cal∣vin. I have met with this Huebmer in several Au∣thors, without the Title of Dr. which made me think he was a Dr. of H. D. his Creation, until I found it in Mr. Tombes to be otherwise, in his Examen, pag. 23. who sayes, that Zwinglius gives him that stile in his Epistle, before his answer to his Book about Baptism: be it so, and if he were regularly admitted to that degree, I think he was the first and last Dr. that ever was of the Anabaptist judgment. Concerning this man Mr.
Tombes relates out of one of Zwinglius his Epist∣les, that Huebmer came to Zurich, and there made a Recantation, but it appears he was after∣wards taken by the Emperour and burnt at Vienna, for what cause I know not saith Mr. Tombes. Then farther he relates more of what he finds in Zwinglius his Epistle to Gynoraeus viz. We ap∣prove dexterity and moderation in a man; but in that man (I wish I were deceived saith Zwing∣lius) I never perceived any thing in him but an immoderate thirst after profit and glory. Mr. Tombes concludes modestly, and sayes only this, I leave him to his judge to whom he stands or falls. This Huebmer is called by Melchior Adam, Prin∣ceps Catabaptistarum, the chiefest of the Anabap∣tists, and the head of them that disputed with Zwinglius at Zu∣rich;Alpha eorum fuit Balthazar Hubme∣rus, Apostatà ite∣rum iterum{que} fa∣ctus, qui Zwinglii beneficio liberatus, tantis convictis vt∣rum bene de se meri∣tum onerare nebulo non dubitavit, ut apologiâ satisfacere fratribus habue∣rit necesse. Melch. Adam. pag. 30. and he tells us he was an Apostate several times, who being freed out of Prison by Zwinglius his endeavours, was so ungrateful, as to load him afterward with such reproach∣es, that Zwinglius was fain to write an Apology for himself, to satisty the Brethren. That Learned and Godly man Bul∣linger says of him, that whilst he was pastor at Waldshnot the whole Cit be∣came proselytes to his opinion, and that they ba∣nished out the Citizens, that were men of good conscience and sincere, and drove them from their possessions, by which means the Gospel which did there excellently flourish, was utterly rooted
out. Spanhemius hath this of him, That Bul-Diol. Huldricus, Zwinglius that valiant Cham∣pion of the Truth confuted that Turbulent fellow, who by his words and writings had troubled the consciences of many, and yet at Zurich recanted his Error, and did forswear the Tennents of the Ambaptists.Spanhem c. . But he was burnt at Vienna for an Heretick (saith the Author), whereas his Tutor Mr. Tombes. saith, be knows not what he was burnt for, and this might have been his lot, if he had been for Infant-Baptism: they do not use to distinguish of men that go under the notion of Protestants, all are in their account Hereticks, and deserve burning that are not of the Church of Rome. Sad instan∣ces you shall have by and by, and unless I mistake, we do not find in our Martyrologies very many of the Author's judgment to have suffered death, purely for their opinion of Antipaedobaptism; and in truth, I have not faith to believe ever any one did: as for those which suffered in Henry the 8th his time we shall find it was for some other causes, and usually (as the rest of Protestants) for deny∣ing the Real presence in the Eucharist and the Popes headship. After this he tells us out of Comenius, the di∣stresses that befel the Anabaptists upon the defeat of Frederick, by the Emperour's forces at Prague, how that the Enemy began the year after the victory with the Anabaptists in Moravia, and banished a great company of them, &c. To which I have this to say, that they dealt kind∣ly with them, in comparison of their dealings with the Godly Ministers that were for Infant-Bap∣tism:
for as soon as ever Fredrick Elector Palatine (the Defender of their Faith and Persons) was defeated, the faithful Ministers of Christ (as in the Marian dayes) were the proto-Martyrs. It was the precious blood of those men that was first spilt, and the Antichristian cruelty shewed it self most barbarously against them. Divers of them were shot to death, excruciated, and tortured with new-invented Torments, covering some with hot burning coals, twisting about the fore-head of others knotty Cords, and with a stick straining their heads, till their eyes were ready to start out; cruelly burning one with his Wife, broiling an∣other to death with a fire made under him; cut∣ting another in small pieces; hanging another by the privy members, being 70 years old, with his Books fired under him; and at last shot through the body and slain: another being above 70 years old was brought into the market place, laid upon the fire and burnt to death. Thus the poor Ministers in every place suffered: all banished out of Prague, twenty one out of Cuttenburgh, many Citizen's accompanying them, one of which preached on that Text, They shall cast you out of the Synagogue; all the multitude present bewailing their loss with great lamentations. Thus did they deal with them at Boslavia, Radecium, Zaticum, and in other places, and some were stifled and poysoned with the stink of Prisons:Comenius, Clarks Martyrology. pag. 183, 184. see all this in Comenius his History of those persecutions; which is Translated, and in Clark's Martyrology taken thence.
As for that which follows, That the Anabap∣tists which were banished out of Moravia into the neigbouring Countries of Hungaria and Transilva∣nia, were of the Waldensian stock, he hath nothing for it, but a Conjecture. And whereas he adds, that these were of the Stock that had been instructed by the Waldenses of old, because of their living together in Houses or Colledg∣es, which was the custom of the Waldenses: But forasmuch as we have heard before, that it was their custom to baptize their Children, we have better reason to conclude they were none of their Stock. And if that be true which the Scholar saith (who came from those parts about 5, or 6 years since) that they live together after that manner in Hungaria, Transilvania, I wish them good fellowship and safety. We have two or three impertinent Stories more, viz. 1. Some of the Waldensian Sect were punished at Oxford in Henry the 2d's time, and doth he think this was for denying Infant-Baptism? Nay rather it appears they were no Anabaptists; for if they had, no doubt Holinshhead in his Cron. or Bishop Ʋsher in his History of the state of the Church would have told us so. And 'tis strange the Author should thus impose his groundless Conjecture upon the Reader. Take the Story as it is in Holinshhead and then judg. About the same time came certain Dutch-Men of the sort called Valdoies over into this Realm, to the number of thirty or more, who held Opinions in Reli∣gion, contrary to the Faith of the Roman-Church: Those which at that time came were indifferently
well learned, and their principal or Ring-leader was named Gerard. Now also was a Council assem∣bled at Oxford, whereat the Dogmatists were examined upon certain points of their Profession. The aforesaid Gerard undertaking to answer for them all, protested that they were good Christi∣ans, and had the Doctrine of the Apostles in all reverence. Moreover, being examined what they thought of the Substance of the Godhead, and the merits of Christ, they answered rightly, and to the point. But being farther examined upon other Articles of Religion then received, they swerved from the Church, and namely in the use of the Divine Sacraments, derogating such grace from the same, as the Church by her Authority had then ascribed to them; and what was that think you? but this that they did not confer grace ex opere operato, from the work done; for this Romish Tenent, the Waldenses ever opposed, as before in their Confessions, and can any Man ra∣tionally pick any thing out of this Story against Infant-Baptism. Next we have a Relation of seven Dutch Ana∣baptists indeed, that came over with Anne a Cleve in Henry the 8th's time 1528. near about two years after John of Leyden sent out his 12 Apo∣stles to propagate their Opinions over all the World, and the King might well judg these to be some such that might occasion disturbance in this Nation likewise; so that this instance will appear to signify nothing, for Henry the 8th burnt more Paedobaptists than Anabaptists. And that these were not put to death purely on the account of
Anabaptistry is beyond all doubt, but as Hereticks for disowning the Popes Supremacy, Transub∣stantiation &c. or why might it not be possi∣bly on the same score, for which those suffered in Queen Elizabeth's time? For in her time also, saith he, in the year 1575. a Congregation of Anabaptists were taken at the Meeting within Ald-gate, 27 of whom were imprisoned, and of them four recanted, two were burned and the rest banished; and he quotes Stow's Cron. for it, but very darkly and partially: for he neither tells us out of him (as he ought to have done) what Anabaptists they were, nor what they held, nor for what they were burnt, as Stow, and also Ho∣lingshead doth in their Cronicles, viz. 1. That they were Dutch Anabaptists (coming hither not long after the German Commotions). 2. That they held Vile, Blasphemous, and dangerous Opinions against Christ, and the peace and welfare of the State, for which they were thought worthy of Death. I shall give it to you in the Words of Stow, and Holing shead, which is thus in both verbatim. In Queen Elizabeth's time Anno Domini 1574, on Easter day, which was the third of April, about nine of the Clock in the fore-noon, was discover∣ed a Congregation of Anabaptists Dutch-Men, in a house without the Bar of Aldgate Prison; and four of them bearing faggots recanted as fol∣lows. Whereas I. I. T. R. H. being seduced by the Devil, the spirit of Error, and false Teachers, his Ministers, have fallen into certain most detesta∣ble, and dangerous Errors; namely:
1. That Christ took not Flesh of the Substance of the Blessed Virgin Mary. 2. That Infants of the Faithful ought not to be Baptized. 3. That a Christian may not be a Magistrate, or bear the Sword or Office of Authority. 4. That it is not lawful for a Christian to take an Oath. Now by the Grace of God, and through con∣ference with good and learned Ministers of Christ his Church, I understand and acknowledg the same to be most damnable and detestable Heresies, and do ask God and his Church Mercy for my said former Errors, and do forsake and renounce them. Now let any man judg whether these be not fine fellows to be brought in for a Testimony against Infant-Baptism, & whether the Author hath done well in endeavouring to reflect dishonour upon the Reign of that Famous Queen, as if they had been burnt meerly for not owning Infant-Baptism: To tell such blind Stories is not for the honour of his cause; but 'tis his humour and he cannot leave it. And now at length we are come to the dregs of his Treatise, and there indeed he seems very culpable in his Essay to Palliate those foul and e∣normous Crimes, which were perpetrated by the Anabaptists of Germany, which is such a piece of weakness as will expose him to the just Censure, not only of all judicious Persons besides, but even of his own party. Even Mr. Tombes him∣self acknowled geth the actions of Muncer, and what was done at the City of Munster, and when Mr. Marshal had spoken of the World of mischief that people did, and what dangerous Heresies
& Blasphemies they held, Mr. Tombes ingenuously confesseth; That much of this is true, I make no question, Examen p. 24. Then again in his Prae∣cursor p. 29. he complains (and that upon good ground) of the abuse of charging those Tenents, and practices upon all of the same Profession, which is true of some, as that all Anabaptists are wicked because those of Munster were so. Mr. Tombes is so knowing a Man, and so wise, that he durst not question the verity of those things, and that because, as Mr. Marshal says, the things have been done so lately, and so many agreeing Stories are written of them, and by Men of such undoubted faith and honesty, that it leaves no place for doubting. And, as Mr. Baxter saith on the same occasion, if the Testimony of these holy and precious Men whose service the Lord so gra∣ciously made use of in the Reformation of those Countries from Popish darkness, as Luther, Me∣lanchton, Zwinglius, Bullinger and others, that did, and suffered so much to accomplish it, and lived in the Country and times where, and when these things were acted, may not be credited, then we may call in question the truth of all Hi∣story whatsoever. Add hereunto the Testi∣mony of those famous Men, Peter Martyr, Calvin, Beza, Bucer; who can scarce speak of the Ger∣man-Anabaptists with patience, or give them any other title (what-ever the charitable Author says) than Furies, Blasphemous, Unclean, Seditious, Frantck wretches, &c. Two material Objections he hath a mind to clear.
1. The first is concerning the Miscarriages of these Men. 2. The Second is some of the Waldensian Con∣fessions which seem to own the Baptizing of Infants. But it had been more to his honour to have let those Objections lain dormant, unless he had said more to the purpose. To the first, he saith, That take it for granted, that things were so as to matter of fact, that is, that many Anabaptists did prove so horribly wicked as is report∣ed, yet 'tis both unreasonable & uncharitable, to render all the people either in those times, or since to be such persons also, and to judg an Error in the Principle, from the Error in the Conversation of some that Profess it. Reply. Thus far the Author speaks well, for it is not fair dealing to judg at such a rate, and Mr. Tombes before him argues rightly in the case, in his Prae∣cursor p. 56. I am sure, saith he, it is no Rule to judg a Doctrine false by this that the Professors miscarry, but only to make Men wary and fear∣ful; if it be, we must judg the same Doctrine false by reason of some mens miscarriages; and true because of others godly living. Neverthe∣less we may safely affirm that Doctrine is to be suspected false, which is usually attended with gross miscarriages in the Professors of it, for that speaks the Doctrine Ominous, and looks like a Spiritual Judgment of God upon it. And I hear∣tily wish there were no ground to say, that of such a nature is the Doctrine of Baptizing grown Persons in opposition to that of the Infant-Seed of Believers. For not to insist upon the horrid
Errors and wicked Lives of those in Germany, nor of the Blasphemies and Immoralities of divers Persons here in our own Nation; the very prin∣ciple it self of Anabaptistry is of a dangerous nature, which, in that rigidity as some men hold it, is of such a disquieting tendency, that as Mr. Bunyan speaks before, it is not fit for any Age or State of the Church. I cannot but sigh to consider the ways of some men, whose Spirits are impregnated there-with, so that their very con∣stitution inclines them to nothing more than to rent, and tear, and divide the Church: The Zeal for their Opinion hath and doth still prove the greatest hinderance to the conjunction of Christians here in this Nation. For as soon as they become Baptists as some call them (and our opposites love to appropriate the name to them∣selves they fall off from Godly Ministers, and People differing from them, though never so Holy. But let Men calmly consider whether this be not an effect of ignorance and pride, and more from an erring, than well instructed Cons∣cience, and what a scandal and shame it is to the Christian Religion to make it thus a fomenter of faction and disturbance in the World; and what an injury is hereby done to Christ by contracting, and narrowing his Interest in such a manner. But I see not how it can be otherwise, if men adhere and strictly keep themselves to the Antipaedobap∣tistical Principle; for if our Ministers be no true Ministers, and our Baptism a Nullity, and con∣sequently our Churches no true Churches, how can they hold Communion with us? & though some that are for the Baptism of Believers only,
do, yet it must be imputed to their good nature, and not their Principle, which they cross in so doing. Farther, saith he, if it be granted many Ana∣baptists did prove so horribly wicked in Germany, yet others that owned that Principle, were Men of another Spirit, both in that as well as in former times, for which we have most ample and authentick Testimonie from their greatest enemies. Witness that honourable Character that Raynerius, the bloody Inquisitor gives of them in those days in France, Cassander, Bellarmine, and Baronius of those in Germany, and Mr. Baxter of them in this Na∣tion. But hold, Sir, I doubt your ample and authen∣tick Testimony will fail you: and first I must tell you, Rainerius is not for your turn, for he never gave any honourable Character of Anabaptists. That favourable Character which he gives relates to another sort of People called the Waldenses, which you and I had some discourse of not long since, and found to be none of your kindred; for they were for Infant-Baptism. Verily,Dr. Featly's Roma Ruens. Rainer. contra Wal. C. 4. Inter omnes sectas quae adhuc sunt, & fuerunt non est pe∣riculosior Eccles. Leonistarum, id{que} tribus de causis. Prima; quia est di∣uturnior, aliqui e∣ntm dicunt quod duravit a tempore, Sylvestri alii a tem∣pore Apostolorum. Secunda, quia est generalior, fere enim nulla terra est in qua haec Secta non sit. Tertia, quiae cum omnes aliae Se∣ctae immanitate bla∣sphemiarum in De∣um audientibus hor∣rore m inducant, Haec sc. Leonista∣rum magnam habet speciem pietatis, eo quod coram omni∣bus juste vivant, & bene omnia de Deo credant, & omnes Articulos, qui in Symbolo continen∣tur. Solummodo Ro∣man. Eccles. Blas∣phemant & clerum. saith Dr. Featly, (who wrote a Book against Anabap∣tists) Rainerius the Inquisitor, though entertained against us, [not against the Author's par∣ty] yet speaks he so much for us, that he deserveth a Fee of us. The Sect, saith he, of the Waldenses or Lyonists, is more pernicious to the Church of Rome, than all other Sects.
1. Becanse it hath been of longest continuance, for some say, it hath continued ever since the Apostles time. 2. Be∣cause it is more general than any other, for there is almost no Country into which it doth not creep. 3. For that all o∣ther Sects do bring an hor∣rour with the hainousness of their Blasphemies against God, but this hath a great appea∣rance of Godliness, because they live justly before Men, and be∣lieve all things well concerning God [neither of which could be said of the German-Anabap∣tists] and all the Articles, which are contained in the Creed; only they speak evil of the Roman Church, and the Clergy. And that Rainerius did not look upon the Waldenses as Anabaptists, is demonstrated by this, because he gives not the least hint of it in the Catalogue of their Errors, which follows u∣pon the former words. The Waldenses, saith he, do not receive the Canon of the Mass, they say the Church doth err in forbidding Priest's Mar∣riages, they allow not the Sacraments of Con∣firmation, and extream Unction, they condemn Latin Prayers, and affirm prayers for the Dead do not profit the Souls of the departed: but never a word of denying Infant-Baptism, which is very
strange if he had udderstood any thing thereof. Rainer. contra Wald. C. 5. Canonem Missae non recipiunt, &c. Next for Bellarmine and Baronius, I cannot learn yet where they give any honourable Cha∣racters of the Anabaptists, only they do not so much condemn some of them as others, and do hope their intentions might be good, and that they erred more out of igmorance than malice; if this be honour according to the Author's computa∣tion, why then I see a little honour will serve their turn, who are of his judgment: & I find a singu∣lar faculty in him to make much of a little at every hand. And what though Cassander saith, in two of them, namely Menno Simonis and Theodoricus there were tokens of a Godly mind; yet Spanhe∣mius [whom I shall rather credit than that Papist] tells us (and that out of his own Confession of Faith) that he held Blasphemous Tenents against Christ, and opinions destructive to Magistracy; and therefore saith Mr. Marshal to Mr. Tombes (when he brought this Testimony of Menno out of Cassander) this Menno, saith he, (whom you plead for by Cassander's Pen) his whole Doctrine is as full of blasphemy about our Saviour's taking Flesh of the Virgin Mary, and other Heretical, and abominable stuffe as the rest of his fellows, though I think his spirit was not so seditious as many of theirs; and what Mr. Tombes saith of Menno is not much to his commendation, it is in his Exa∣men p. 25. And from thence the Author fetcheth the honourable Character (such as it is); yet herein Mr. Tombes shews most ingenuity, in that he speaks out all that Cassander saith in this Epistle to
the Duke of Gulick and Cleve; Hujus quem dixi Mennonis cui nunc hic Theodoricus successit, &c. They were, saith he, imperito quodam Zelo inci∣tati, moved by an ignorant Zeal to do what they did, having a fancy that they must destroy the wicked, per vim externam, by force of Arms, and this in order to the setting up the Kingdom of Christ [just of the same strain with those they called 5th Monarchy-Men that put all London into such a fright some years since]: and this Satanical delusion put them on upon such Exorbitancies. But who-ever hath a mind to understand fully, what kind of men the German Anabaptists were,Vide Baxter's Plain-proof. p. 143. let them read Mr. Bullinger's Dialogue against the Anabaptists; he lived in those times when, and near the place where they played their pranks, and gives a large account of their abominable un∣cleanness, treachery, sedition, &c. But some, saith he, may object, many things are charged upon them falsly, and fame addeth some-what. To which he replies, that whatsoever he menti∣ons may be all proved by signed Letters, and by certain Testimonies; and tells us that in judgment he hath silenced many of their crimes, and spoke less than they have committed, for saith he, they far exceed the Nicolaitans and the Valentinians, in wickedness. And then comes home to our Au∣thor's plea, viz. They were not all thus defiled, and if a few among them are such, what is that to the Godly? To which Learned and Holy Bullinger gives this answer, I have long ago known this kind of Men, and am not ignorant
how much by guile, and deceit, Hypocrisie can do; and it is true, that the wickedness of a few should be no disparagement of the innocent, but you cannot shew me one man of them, who is not blemished with some of the foresaid wickednesses; I mean Lying, Treachery, Perjury, Disobedience, Sedition, Filthiness. There is one more whom the Author hath found out that gives an honourable Character of the Anabaptists: And they requite him well for it, do they not? Mr. Baxter (saith he) one of their severest enemies in these Nations, yet hath done himself and his Opposites that Right, as to witness to the innocency of their Conversation, in his De∣fence of the Principle of Love. p. 7. viz That Anabaptists are Godly Men, &c. But what Anabaptists doth he speak of? Not those of Germany but England, and not all here neither. I know, saith he, as good and sober Men of that mind, as of theirs that are most a∣gainst them. And God forbid that he, or I or any one, should be so uncharitable as to think there are no Godly Anabaptists; but that the number of God∣ly sober Men of their mind is small, is the judgment of some Godly, Sober, and observing Christians. Some good and sober Men Mr. Baxter knew a∣mongst them, but the generality of them were bad enough, for so we are to understand him in his Plain-Proof, p. 143. I have had, saith he, too much opportunity to know very many of these called Anabaptists, and to be familiar with them, and having first Examined my Heart, lest I should wrong them, out of any disaffection, through differ∣ence of judgment, as I clearly discover, that I bear
no ill will to any one man of them nor ever did, nor find any passion, but compassion moving me to say what I do; so do I impartially and truly affirm con∣cerning the most of them that I have conversed with, that I have known few of them, [speaking first of their Ministers] so much as labour after the winning of Souls from Sin to God, and bringing them into love with Christ, and Holiness, and Heaven. But the main scope of their endeavours in publick and private is to propagate their Opinions, and if they do preach any plain wholsom Doctrine, it is usually but subservient to their great design. He chargeth them farther to be the greatest hin∣derers of the Work of God in converting Souls, by en∣deavouring to alienate the hearts of the People from Godly and painful Ministers, making it their busi∣ness to disgrace them, &c. Moreover, that in his own experience he never knew the labours of any zealous Anabaptist that ever God blessed to the true Conver∣sion of many Souls: But many they made meer talk∣ers, Censorious Opinionatists, and usually three leave them-yea I desire, saith he, any sober Christian but to look impartially through all the Land, and tell me where ever any such Teachers lived, but the place in general was much the worse for them; where the Gospel before prospered, and Christians spent their time and conference in the edifying of each others Souls, and in Heavenly duties, and mutual assi∣stance, and living together in unity and love, accor∣ding to the great Command of Christ, they ordina∣rily turn all this to vain janglings, and empty, windy, unprofitable disputes: So much for the Teachers. Then after this he shews, Anabaptistry hath been the ordinary inlet to the most horrid Opi∣nions
& that few came to the most monstrous Doctrines but it was by this door, and how negligent many of them are of Family-duties, the Lords-day, &c. We now come to examine the Apology which is made for the German Anabaptist. 1. First, he saith, They were not the Anabap∣tists that first began the Sedition, but it was from a conspiracy of Husbandmen against the Bishops, and Canons, which was called the Rustick League, for which he quotes Baronius, how that it began in the year 1502. which was the Praeludium of that great Sedition, which was in its Vigour 1525. ac∣cording to Osiander's account. But how doth this mend the matter, they were not first in the wick∣edness, in the sedition, but seconded it? A sor∣ry evasion: and besides the Author is gone off from that which he should speak to, and that is of the Ʋproar and Confusion that was made in Swevia in the year 1525. and did not the Ana∣baptists begin and propagate that? Spanhemius tells us in his first Chapter, that Nicolas Storch, Mark Stubner, and Thomas Muncer three Anabap∣tists, were the Persons that began that lamentable Sedition. 2. The Author tells us Persons of all sorts con∣cerned themselves in it. Like enough, for so it is usual in all popular commotinos, persons of all sorts, and interests, joyn in. No Man is so weak as to think those 40000 pesants in Swevia, and Franconia were all Anabaptists; but Sleiden in his Com. L. 5. and also Spanhemius informs us, that the Trumpeter and Ringleader was Thomas
Muncer, who (with other Anabaptist-Teachers) stirred up the discontented people to rebel a∣gainst the Magistrates, and imbodied them into an Army. It was that impostor, who was their General, that set out his Declaration that his de∣sign was to restore Liberty, and to deliver Sub∣jects from the Youke and Tyranny of Princes, which was as much to be cast off, as the Popes of Rome. 3. He makes an odious comparison between the Protestants of Geneva in the recovery of their Civil and Spiritual Liberty, and these Germans, who, if they had miscarried in their attempt, might (he conceives) have fallen under as much Obloquy, as the chiefest of those People did in their defeat. But the actings of Geneva, the Switzers and the Cantons were more justifiable than theirs, and not so barabarous, nor their Tenents so blasphe∣mous as theirs: Notwithstanding the reflections of the Papists, and some others of late, who have in print branded our first Reformations for Re∣bellions, and they are Men too that would be thought obedient Sons of the Church of England, and of great names: but yet one that hath but half an Eye, may easily see that these Theologasters, either wanted discretion, or affection to the Pro∣testant Interest; and 'tis pitty the Virga Censoria is not taken from them, and they turned out of their office, as the Romans used to serve the Cen∣sors, when they abused it. But I hope no  can charge those of Geneva to have robb'd the Nobility, plundred Towns and Castles, and rifled all that is Sacred as those Germans did, but
that they fell off from popery, and sought Refor∣mation in a more regular way. 4. The Author speaks not right concerning the Commotion at Munster, in saying, Spanhemius acquaints us, that the first stir in the City was about the Protestant Reformation, the Synod (he means Senate) siding with Mr. Rotman and other Re∣formed Ministers against the Papists and the Bishop that opposed them to Arms. For though the Se∣nate would not obey the command of the Bishop, (who was then at a distance from the City) in taking away some of the Churches, which a little before they had granted for the use of the Refor∣med Divines, yet this difference was soon compo∣sed and it never came to Arms or Blows, Spanhe∣mius tells us. 5. That which follows is exreamly scandalous, namely, That there is good ground to doubt of the truth of what is reported concerning the Monstrous wickedness, and villanies of John Matthias, and John Becold of Leyden; and what are those grounds of doubt? why, 1. Because, saith he, the things are written either by malicious Papists their mortal enemies, or else by some of their most inveterate enemies the Protestants, who were willing to take up and improve such re∣ports, to blast not only the whole party of the Anabap∣tists, but their Principle also. Reply. I dare say that here are in the latter part of this Sentence, so far forth as it relates to Protestants many untruths, and may sigh over it, that old saying, Quot dicta, tot maledicta. Alas to see whither affection to a cause will carry Men!
1. Then, the Protestants were not inveterate Enemies to the Anabaptists, but very loving Friends to some of the chiefest of them, both be∣fore and after they took up the Opinion, until the Rebellion of Muncer, and that at Munster. Wit∣ness the Friendly and Brotherly conference that was between Luther and Muncer at Wittenberg where they had often Conference, and Luther intreated him to be quiet, and not broach such Doctrines as were against Magistracy and Civil Government. Zwinglius dealt tenderly and gent∣ly with those that fell off from his Church, for they were his intimate Friends, Musculus visited them in Prison, relieves them, and was their Ad∣vocate, and perswaded the Magistrate to be kind, and to use no severity; for that was not the way to reduce Men from their errors. 2. Bullinger (of whom we have before spoken) begins his Book with a Lamentation at God's Judgments on Christians, for their not profiting by the Word; for which God gives them up to delusions and to a reprobate Sense: he professeth that before he did in silence conceal their Crimes, and spoke less than they committed. Luther, hearing of their vile pranks at Munster, was ne∣cessitated (and so were divers other Ministers for the honour of the Reformed Religion which did so much suffer by those Exorbitancies) to put forth a Testimony in print against them; in which he saith, It was plain that Munster was become the habitation of Devils; for so the Justice of God had punished the Sins of Germany, and especially the loose and prophane life of those that professed the Gospel; but in this Tragedy of Munster the
marvelous Mercy of God evidently appeared, that e had not permitted that old subtil Serpent and cunning Satan, to contrive and govern that business, but only had given way to some Silly Blockish Devil, who seemed not well skill'd in Villany, to be their Guide and Conducter; and that though the State was disturbed by it, yet he conceived the Church on that account would re∣ceive the less prejudice by it. 3. Spanhemius, in his History of their Actings, saith, That the Protestant Ministers were ex∣treamly troubled at what happened, and the Pa∣pists vilified the Gospel by reason of it; for the Popish party said this was the fruits of revolting from them; and they were afraid the Magistrate would have an evil eye upon them, and suspect that the liberty which they granted, might tend to the sowing of Sedition, if they did not declare against them, and preach down the Doctrine, and Practices of those Anabaptists. 4. Lastly, What other thoughts can we have then of that uncharitable passage, That the Pro∣testants were willing to take up and improve such reports, to balst not only the party of Anabaptists, but their Principle, but that it is the Ebullition of a Malicious, or at best Prejudicial Spirit? and yet for all that if such tumultuous and rebellious carriages proceed from the distempered brains of some Men, I see not why they should be imputed to those amongst us who are of a better temper. But if from their Opinions and the very Consti∣tution of their Sect, as we have cause to judg much of it doth, it will be something difficult to make it out how it may not be chargeable upon
all. But I think our Antagonist is the only Man that ever Apologized for those Germans: But well-fare a sure friend in a corner! it seems he loves them so well that he would fain save their credit, though by laying an imputation of forge∣ry on the most faithful Historians and grave Di∣vines since the Reformation. Yet these Histori∣ans cannot be so put off; for they are punctual, name Persons, Time Place, Opinions, Con∣demnation, and Punishment, all matters of Fact open to the World: But if all who bear witness against an evil-doer must be held as Enemies, and their Testimonie be rejected under that Plea; and nothing believed but what themselves are pleas∣ed to acknowledge upon record, who will be guilty? 2. His other Plea is as follows: Another thing there was, saith he, by which people in all Ages took occasion to misrepresent this People at Munster, That they were for Community of Goods, casting their Estates into one common Stock, and was the same thing that Osiander tells us Mun∣cer did in Mulhusian in Thuringia 1524. And which the Waldenses did respecting the Example, Act. 4.34. O fearful! And did not John Matthias their chief Prophet (as they called him) take an excel∣lent course to effect it, by setting forth a Procla∣mation to be read through the City, requIring all Persons upon pain of Death to bring forth their Glod and Silver, Silver, and all their Goods, unto a pub∣lick place appointed for that purpose; the seve∣rity of which Edict so astonished the People that they were fain to obey it.
The other Objection which the Author at∣tempts to Answer, is that of the Waldensian Con∣fession in favour of Infant-Baptism. The first is that of Laodislaus King of Bohemia 1508. present∣ed to Ferdinand 1535. Which Confession he looks on as signifying nothing to the point, because they were a mixt People, some for, and some against In∣fant-Baptism, and disowned the name of the Wal∣denses. This indeed is something to invalidate the Authority of that Confession, to which I can say nothing, having not had the opportunity to see it. However if it be so, as he saith, then we understand that those of them that were aginst Infant-Baptism were not Waldenses, no more than they who were for it. The other, saith he, is a passage in the Spiritual Almanack, owning the Baptism of Children, which he conceives was written by George Morel, 1530. one of the Ministers sent by the Waldenses of Pro∣vence to Oecolampadius, Bucer, and Capito, at a time when they were in a declining condition, and for self-preservation were ready to comply with the Mass. I must take the freedom to tell the Author that he doth prevaricate again, and is more than ordinarily at a loss how to come off hand∣somly in this thing: For; 1. He cannot deny the Confession; that's sme∣thing for us: you have the Confession taken from Perin the French-Historian, in pag. 62. of the 2d Part of our Answer, to which I refer you. 2. He supposeth it was put forth by G. Morel about the year 1530. and why so late? others
suppose it of an ancienter date, but however the Church unanimously did assent to Infant-Bap∣tism. 3. Farther; he supposeth the Confession to be made at that juncture when they sent Morel to Oeclampadius for Resolution, whether they might not be present with their bodies at Mass, so they kept their hearts right with God? This is not to the purose, for we gathere hence no more than this, that God's own People are Sub∣ject to sinful fears, and are sometimes tempted to sin rather than to suffer, and that the fear of Man worketh a snare: all which you may ob∣serve from the excellent Letter sent them by Oe∣colampadius, p. 67, 68. of the 2d Part of our Answer. But all this while, what is this to take us off from believing that they were against In∣fant-Baptism, which they say had been owned and practised amongst them for some hundred years. This they scrupled not, nor sent for any Resolutin in the case; nor did they Baptize their Children out of fear of the Papists, who accused them that they were against it, because they had in detestation their humane Inventi∣ons added to the Sacrament, and for that reason delayed the Baptizing their Children until their own Pastors came home, which were often and long abroad in Propagating the Gospel. 4. He saith, Oecolampadius sharply rebuking them [in his Letter] they thereupon promised to suit themselves to the Documents they received from him. What they are, see in the aforesaid Letter, I am sure there is nothing of Baptism in it, but only
good counsel to stand fast in the Truth, and keep themselves from Idolatry: and there was a good effect of it, as appeared by their constant suffering, for persecution came suddenly upon it. He saith, In conformity to those Documents they received from him, it appears there is little or no difference between the French, and German-Prote∣stants, especially those that own Calvin's way, being most shrunk up into little more than a bare form. But why doth he talk in this manner, when all the Documents they then received was to en∣dear Christ, and his Truth to them, and to for∣tify them against suffering? And what an extra∣vagancy is it in the Author to take occasion from this Circumstance to slur the French, and German Protestants, many of whom doubtless have as∣much of the power of Godliness as himself, or as any of the Mennonists, or Anabaptists at this day in Holland, whose Religion we understand by some friends of theirs, is pittifully shrunk up to little more than the Form of Dipping, & which is worse, they say they be very Erroneous in more considerable points. 6. Yet more against them: he accuseth them to have little of the old purity left amongst them. And what need hath the Author to vilify them at this rate, and how impertinent is it to the Pro∣vince he hath undertaken. The Lord enable us to search our own hearts, and we shall see cause enough to judg our selves, and not be forward in Censuring others: and it is to be feared the Author condemns them the more, as having little of purity because they are for Infant-Bap∣tism,
his Zeal is so much carried out about the little things of Religion. 7. But this, saith he, cannot at all weaken or enervate their old Confession, Practice, and Wit∣ness, confirmed with so great authority, and for so many Ages together. The words are good, but being applyed to a cypher, a non-entity, they become a piece of Ridicule; for there is no such Confession to be found, unless it be in Ʋtopia: Nay there is nothing looks like a Confession that excludes Infants from Baptism, as appears after all their endeavours to prodace it. See this, p. 46, 47, 48. of the 2d Part of our Answer. 8. He Professeth ingenuously amongst all his search, that except those two passages, (1) the Confession presented to Laodislaus, the 12th Article of which is for Infant-Baptism, and that in the Spiritual Almanack [which declares the Baptizing of their Children] he can find none. Very good: how∣ever he hath not gained much advantage to his cause; having found two Confessions for Infant-Baptism, but never one against it; for he must reckon the lying accusations of the Papists, that they were against Baptizing Children, when they only abhorred their filthy Ceremonies, and purg∣ed themselves from the calumany, by putting forth their Confessions in which they Profess their judgment for it. 9. Lastly, In may little search I have found an∣other Cnfession, and such a one as may shame the Author for his prevarication, and that is it which we have before mentioned in the 2d part of our Answer p. 65. The Confession made at An∣grongne; where the Heads of every Family, with
the Pastors signed several Articles, and the 17th is for Infant-Baptism as before. Of the Witness pretended to be born by the Novatians and Donatists. THe Novatians and Donatists, saith the Au∣thor, gave Witness against Infant-Baptism, as Austin's 3d and 4th Book against the Donatists doth demonstrate, wherein he manageth the Argument fof Infant-Baptism against them with great Zeal, &c. Reply. 1. In this the Author is guilty of a great mi∣stake, and we have no Authority for this thing but his ipse dixit, his own saying so; neither the Magdeburgenses that write largely of their Opini∣ons, nor any of the Church-Histories; nor Da∣naeus in his Opusculum, nor Zanchy who treats of them in his Volumes, nor Beza, nor Mr. Fox in his Acts and Monuments, nor Clark that hath a large Story of them, nor any other that ever I could meet with, assert this, that the Donatists were against Infant-Baptism. 2. Though the Novatians, Donatists, and Pela∣gius denyed Original Sin, yet all three allowed and practised Infant-Baptism. Dr. Featly in his , pag. 31. 3. Danaeus in his Opusculum, speaks of the Origianl,De Donatistis, & corum Origine, Pro∣gressu, & Doctrina. pag. 673. to 676. Pro∣gress, and Doctrine of the Donatists, from pag. 653. to
676. where though he sets down the Errors of the Donatists, and gives us the sum of all Austin's Disputes with them, speaks not a word of this, but in divers places shews they were for Rebaptization of such as were Baptized by Here∣ticks, or not in their own Churches, which Au∣stin vehemently opposeth; and this I conceive is the ground of the Authors mistake, and which I am the more inclinable to believe, because he hath a particular tract of all the Heresies collected by Austin,Augustinus de Haeresibus Cap. 69. p. 995. Danaeus. and the 69th Chapter is, de Donatistarum Erroribus: The Errors of the Donatists. And in it is no mention made of their being against Baptizing Children, and in the 38. Chap. of the same Tract we have an account of Nova∣tus, from whom they are called Novatians, and of the Errors they held, but not one hint of any such thing as Antipaedobaptism: they were also called , quatenus a reliquo Christia∣norum hominum caetu se tanquam Sanctiores sepa∣rant; pretending that they were more pure than any of the Churches of Christ besides:Posterior aetas ad praegravandam bo∣nam S. Sancti E∣vangelii causam, ho∣mines vere Evange∣licos infami Catha∣rorum nomine ca∣lumniata est —ut Waldenses pauperes de Lugduno, Arnal∣distae ab Arnoldo quodam, &c. which title of Catha∣rists [or Puritans] came in process of time, saith Danaeus, to be used to the reproach of Holy-Men; so, saith he, the Waldenses and poor Men of Lions were branded with the infamous name of Catharists.
4. But let it be taken for granted that the Nova∣tians and Donatists were of kindred to the Author and his party [as indeed the Lineaments of their Faces and Complexion are in many things alike with some that are against Infant-Baptism], ye do not know what honour will redound to then cause from it, for both the Novatians and Donatists were vile persons and always condemned for He∣reticks. We shall therefore give the Reader an account of their Rise, Errors, and Agreement; I dare not say with those called Anabaptists a∣mongst us in every thing, that shall be set down, but most exactly with those in Germany before mentioned. Novatus. Under the Persecution of Deeius the Roman Emperour Anno Christi 250, being the 7th Per∣secution, rose up the first Quarrel and Heresie of Novatus, who in those days made a great distur∣bance in the Church, holding this Opinion, That they who once renounced the Faith, and for fear of torments had offered incense to the Idols, al∣though they repented thereof, yet could not af∣terward be reconciled nor admitted to the Church. This Novatus being first Priest under Cyprian at Carthage, afterward by stirring up discord and faction, began to disturb the Bishoprick of Cy∣prian, to appoint there a Deacon, against the Bishop's mind or knowledg. and also to allure, and separate certain of the Brethren from the Bi∣shop. After this he went to Rome, kept there the like stir with Cornelius, setting himself up as Bishop of Rome against Cornelius [altare contra al∣tare,
as the Magdeburgenses have it] which was the Lawful Bishop of Rome before. The which to bring to pass he used this practice: First, he had allured to him to be his Adherents 3, or 4 good Men, and Holy Confessors, which had suffered before great torments for their Confession. Af∣terward he inticed three simple Bishops about the coast of Italy to repair to Rome, under pretence to make an end of certain Controversies then in hand. This done, he caused them (whether by making them drunk, or by other crafty counsel) to lay their hands upon him and to make him Bishop, and so they did. Fox Acts Monum. 1. Part, p. 84. We have it also for the most part in the Magdeb. Cent. 3. Cap. 7. p. 186. Sub Decio Schisma Novati. He for his wicked Opi∣nions was condemned in a Synod at Rome, Magd. Cent. 3. Cap. 9. p. 293. Donatus. In the year of our Lord 331, or a little more early, there sprang up in Africa the Donatists, taking their name from Dona∣tus. This Man,Initium ejus hae∣reseos Hieronimi Chronicom in An∣num Christi, 331. & Paulo antiquio∣rem Donatum facit. Magd. Cent. 4. C. 5. p. 375. Donatus cumsua parte Schisma il∣lud in Haeresim convertit. Magdeb. ibid. They speak of their cruelty, Cent 4. Cap. 5. p. 379. Clark of the Per∣secution of the Donatists p. 89, 90. in his Martyrology. as the Mag∣deburgenses inform us, Cent. 4. c. 5. p. 375. fell out with Cecilia∣nus Bishop of Carthage, be∣cause he was against his will Ordained Bishop, but when Donatus and his party could
not prove what was Objected against Cecilianus, and they were found lyars; they were not con∣tented to make a Schism only in the Church, but afterward broached Heresies, as the Magdeburgs tell us in the same place, and this Schism ended not there, but came at length to Persecution. For, as Glark in his Martyrology informs us, Austin complains in sundry places, and in his 50th E∣pistle he thus writes; In hoc labore multi Catholici, & maxime Episcopi, & Clerici, horrenda & dura perpessi sunt quae commemorare longum est. In this disturbance the Orthodox, especially the Bishops and Ministers, suffered cruel and horrible things, the particulars whereof are too long to recite. For some had their Eyes put out, some their Tongues cut off, some slain out-right; to speak nothing of their plunderings and outragious burnings, not only of private Habitations, but Churches also. Julian the Apostate favoured these Hereticks, be∣cause he knew they were such a pest to the Church of Christ.
How the Anabaptists of former times did Symbolize with the Novatians and Do∣natists. 1. The Novatians & Donatists denyed Origi∣nal Sin. 2.Ex Novatianorum sontibus Ortum esse hunc Errorem non dubito. Danaeus in Opusculo suo; de Pelag. Errore, p. 678. The Novatians & Donatists confined the Church of Christ to their Sect only. Mag∣deb. Cent. 4. C. 5. p. 376. Ecclesiam dixerunt nullibi, esse quam in Africa & quidem tantum esse in parte Donati. No true Church but of their own party, and all o∣thers esteemed Heathens.
3. If any were Con∣verted, or rather Per∣verted to the Donatists, they Rebaptized them. Magd. Cent. 4. C. 5. p. 376. 4. The Novatians held every man had Free∣will; so did the Dona∣tists, and from the No∣vatians Pelagius suckt in that Error. And say theThe Donatists hold — cum arbitrio libero homo cre∣atus est; & si vult credit in Christum, si non vult, non credit, si vult perseverat, si non vult, non perseverat. Magdeb. Cent. 4. ut supra. Magdeburgenses, the Donatists hold, if a man will believe, he may; if not, he may not be∣lieve; if he will perse∣vere he may, if he will not he may chuse. 5. The Novatians and Donatists both held that upon the commission of a great Sin, a Man was not to be Communicat∣ed with, though he repented. Magdeb. Cent. 4. ut supra.
6.d The Magdeburgenses speak the same of the Donatists. Cent. 4. Ʋt supra. Non sine peccato volunt videri, sed etiam justificatores esse hominum, &c. Zanchy tells us, that the Donatists pu∣tant se esse puros, & ab omni peccatorum labe im∣munes esse, adeo ut nihil necesse habeant veniam peccatorum suorum a Deo postulare. They are so pure and free from Sin, that they have no need to ask pardon of God. And Beza upon John 1.3, 8. says, the Donatists and Anabaptists hold the same—Ita{que}; non homines sed monstra hominum sunt. Pelagiani, Cathari, Donatistae, Anabap∣tistae, qui ex hoc loco perfectionem illam somniant aqua absunt ipsi omnium hominum longissime. The Pelagians, Novatians, Donatists, and Anabaptists, do from this place dream of perfection &c.
1.Dr. Prid. calls the German Anabaptists: Evangelii opprobrium, and saith, isti ut Paedobaptismum prorsus tolle∣rent, peccatum negarunt Originale, ut non subesset causa, cur Insantes Baptizarentur. So did the Anabap∣tists heretofore in Ger∣many, and some still in England. Pontan. Cata∣log. Haeret. Dr. Prid. de Pec. Origin. Lect. 22. p. 331. 2.Dr. Prid. calls the German Anabaptists: Evangelii opprobrium, and saith, isti ut Paedobaptismum prorsus tolle∣rent, peccatum negarunt Originale, ut non subesset causa, cur Insantes Baptizarentur. Anabaptists judg none of the true Church, but those of their way and Practice.
3. So if any be admitted into the Churches of the Anabaptists, they must be Rebaptized; so for∣merly in Germany. Pon∣tan. Catal. Haeret. 4. The Anabaptists in Germany and some in England have held the same, viz. Free-will— thence they are known by the name of Free-Willers. Pontan. Catal. Haeres. 5. As the Novatians heretofore at Rome, so the Anabaptists now, saith Zanchy, hold there is no hope of pardon for him that falleth into a great sin after Baptism, upon a misunderstand∣ing of that place, Heb. 6. It is impossible to renew them again by repen∣tance.
Zanchy Tom. 7. Loc. 8. de Symbolo A∣postolorum p. 756. So Sleidan tells us the same p. 529. denying abso∣lution to Men sinning after Baptism, though they repented. 6. Alsted in his Com∣pendium says, The A∣nabaptists held they were pure, and without Sin. Beza saith the same upon John 1.3, 8. Let not the Reader mistake, as if I designed to represent those who are called Anabaptists a∣mongst us, were all of them tainted with the fore∣mentioned Errors of the Novatians and Donatists,
for I suppose the generality of them here in Eng∣land do abhor the owning of such Tenets; not but that some are tainted with some of them, but others I know to be as Orthodox in judgment (the denying Infant-Baptism excepted) and holy in conversation, as any other Christians that I know. I shall conclude this with this observation of the vain attempt of my Antagonist, in bringing in those Ancient Hereticks for a Testimony against Infant-Baptism, which I perswade my self was never before done by any man; and then I cannot but smile to see how neatly he hath drest them up, and in such a comely habit, that they look just like those called Independents; yet it is certain they have no affinity with them. For: 1. He tells us, They were for purity of Church∣members, and that none ought to be admitted into Churches but visible Saints. This is very good, but Beza (whom I shall be∣lieve before the Author) says otherwise in his Annotat. upon Ephes. 5.27. That he might make unto himself a glorious Church not having spot or wrinkle, &c. From this place, saith he, the Donatists gather, that the Or∣thodox Churches were not worthy of the name of Chur∣ches,Donatistae ex hoc loco colligebant Or∣thodoxorum Ecclesi∣as nomine Ecclesia∣rum indignas esse, & perfectionem ju∣stitiae volebant in hac vita constitu∣ere. Beza in Ephes. 5.27. and that from hence they conclude a perfection of Holi∣ness in this life. In this then the Author hath misrepresent∣ed the Donatists, and abused his Reader.
2. He saith, they were for purity of Church-Discipline, and keeping-out such as apostatized or sinned scandalousty, when we find they were for keeping-out all that so sinned, although they re∣pented. So Novatus and Donatus, and their follow∣ers held, that after Baptism there was no Recon∣ciliation, or readmittance to the Church, though never so penitent. That they both agreed in Asserting the power, rights and priviledges of particular Churches against An∣tichristian Encroachments, of Presbyters, Bishops, Synods: When Novatus from an ordinary Priest was so ambitious to be made a Bishop; opposed Cornelius the lawful Bishop of Rome, and by un∣godly means set up himself Bishop, after he had also disturb'd the Bishoprick of Cyprian; and for his wickedness was at last condemned by a Sy∣nod. And for the other Donatus, he set himself against the lawful Bishop of Carthage, and he, and his adherents were found lyars, and after∣ward turned cruel Persecutors, destroying all Churches that were not of their mind. 4. That they Baptized again those whose first Baptism they had ground to doubt, but not be∣cause they were against Infant-Baptism, but for other reasons. Of the Witness pretended to be born by the Ancient Britains COnfidence is a great matter, but when the groundlesness of it is discovered, it doth
not in the least advantage a cause, but reflect shame upon the owners thereof; and truly our Antagonist hath not wanted it, thoroughout all his Discourse: And there remains yet a high de∣gree of it in this pretence of his, that the Ancient Britains were also against Infant-Baptism; for in all the Volumes of History relating to this Island, he can find but one slender hint to fasten a Conje∣cture (for it is no more) that the Ancient-Britains were of his side, and that is from a passage which he finds in Fabian's Cronicle which you shall hear by and by. Know therefore that in the year Anno 596, Austin was sent from Gregory Bishop of Rome, with near fourty more, to preach the Gospel to the Inhabitants of this Island, who were then Pa∣gans, and as Vestegan saith, without the knowledg of God serving, and Sacrificing unto their Idols of Thor, Woden, Friga: It pleased God to make them in a short time instrumental to convert E∣thelbert then King of Kent; Now after he was Baptized into the Faith of Christ, with an in∣numerable company more, (Regis ad exemplum); The foresaid Austin with the concurrence of some others, as Mellitus and Justus, two sent as Coad∣jutors from Gregory, assembled and gathered to∣gether some of the British Bishops and Doctors who were then dwelling in-Wales, to which place the Britains had long before been driven, and there Professed the Christian Faith, and wor∣shipped God in purity): In this Assembly Austin charged them that they should preach with him the Word of God to the English-men, and also that they should reform certain Rites and usages
in their Church, specially for that of keeping Easter-Day, Baptizing after the manner of Rome, and such other like. To this the Britains would not agree, refusing to leave the custom which they so long had continued without the assent of them all which used the same. After that Au∣stin gathered another Synod, to the which came seven Bishops of Britain with the wisest Men of that famous Abbie of Bangor, who took offence at Austin's Lordly carriage, never rising up out of his Seat, nor giving them that respect they looked for. Fox, Acts and Monuments 1. Book p. 154. But Fabian expresseth himself other∣wise as the Author notes, thus, viz. Then he said to them, since you will not assent to my Hosts generally, assent you to me especially in three things. The first is that you keep Easter in due form and time as is ordained. The second, that you give Christendom to Children. And the third, that you preach to the Saxons, as I have exhorted you; and all the other debate I shall suffer you to amend amongst your selves; but, saith Fabian, they would not. To whom then Austin said, that if they would not take peace with their Brethren, they should receive War with their Enemies, &c. From their de∣nyal to comply with Austin's Propositions, where∣of that was one the giving Christendom to Chil∣dren, the Author doth confidently conclude, they were against Infant. Baptism: But that there is no sufficient ground hence for such a Conclusion will appear. 1. First, Because no such thing is mentioned by other Historians as Beda, Cretensis in Polychron.
Huntingtonensis, which write of this matter, they speak only in general. Mr. Fox relates it, viz. of Baptizing after the manner of Rome, without mentioning Children. Secondly, Because Fabian is nigro carbone nota∣tus, lookt upon as no faithful Historian; and I find Mr. Fox in his Martyrology, refuse to give credit to his Relation in other things, as he doth not observe his words of giving Christendom to Children, in the Story which he gives us. Thirdly, Neither do Fabian's Words import that they were any more against Baptizing Chil∣dren, than Preaching of the Gospel, for they re∣fused to do both to the Saxons; and that possibly because they would confine their labours to their own Diocess, and attend their own Flocks; or rather because they would not Subject themselves to the Bishop of Rome (for they told Austin to his Face they owed him no Subjection) and to the imperious command of such an upstart, proud Pre∣lat, as Austin was, between whom and them there had passed some heat of words, which made them rise in disdain, and departed thence in great dis∣pleasure. Fourthly, Or they might refuse to give Chri∣stendom to Children after Austin's mode with the corrupt Rites and Ceremonies in use by him. For other Historians express the Injunction given that it should be after the Roman Manner. Fiftly, But to put it out of all doubt that the Words of Fabian was not Austin's, but rather Fabian's own Paraphrase upon them, appears by what we find in the Preface to Fabian that what he relates of this matter he hath it from Beda; if
therefore no such passage can be found there, then we are sure the Author is mistaken in his Conjecture, and it is a great presumption to lay such stress upon a doubtful passage that may admit of several interpretations. We shall now give the Reader an account what Beda saith to the thing, viz. Dicebat autem eis, quod in multis quidem nostrae consuetndini, immô universalis ecclesiae con∣traria geritis; & tamen si in tribus his mihi obtem∣perare vultis, ut Pascha suo tempore celebretis, ut Ministerium Baptizandi, quo Deo renascimur juxta morem sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae, & Apostolicae Ec∣clesiae compleatis, ut genti Anglorum una nobiscum praedicetis Verbum Domini, caeteraque agitis quam∣vis moribus nostris contraria, aequanimiter cuncta to∣lerabimus. At illi nihil horum se facturos, neq,Bed. Hist. Ec∣clesiast. Lib. 2. c. 2. illum pro Archi∣episcopo habituros esse responde∣bant. In English thus — But he said unto them, in asmuch as you do contrary to our custom, yea to the custom of the Universal Church, nevertheless, if yee will obey me only in these three things. sc. That you keep Easter in its proper time, Administer Baptism, whereby we are born again to God, after the manner of the Holy Church of Rome, and the Apostolical-Church; and preach the Word of God together with us unto the English Nation, we will pati∣ently bear all other things which you do, al∣though contrary to our customs. But they an∣swered they would do none of these, or own him for Arch-Bishop. What now is become of Fabian, that sandy Foundation, upon which the Author builds his
belief and assertion, that the Ancient Britains were against Infant-Baptism. When therefore Austin perceived that they were so refractory, he told them, if they would not take Peace with their Brethren, they should receive War with their Enemies And if they disdained to preach the way of life to the English Nation, they should suffer by their hands the revenge of Death. And which Austin ac∣complished, faith Fabian, accordingly, by bring∣ing the Saxons upon them to their utter ruine. This also is supposed to be another Paraphase of Fabian's upon Austin's Words, which according toSic{que} completum est praesagium isti pontifici Augustini. Hist. Bed. L. 2. c. 2. Editione whelochi∣anâ. Bede were delivered by way of Pro∣phesie, and not that he had an intention to revenge himself by bringing in Enemies upon them for their destruction. And we find Mr. Fox in his Act. and Mon. put a favourable construction upon the Words of Austin, and layes most of the blame upon the British Bishops, whose Words are; Of both these parties the Reader may judg what he pleaseth, I cannot see but both together were to be blamed, and as I cannot but accuse the one, so I cannot defend the other. First, Austin in this matter can in no wise be excused, who shewed no more hu∣mility in this Assembly to seven Bishop's coming at his commandment to the Council. Again, the Britains were asmuch or more to blame, who so much neglected their Spiritual duty, in re∣venging their Temporal injury, that they denyed to join their helping labour to turn the Idolatrous
Saxons to the way of Life and Salvation, in which respect all private cases ought to give place and be forgotten. For which cause, it is no great marvel that thestroak of God's punishment light upon them, according to Austin's saying, that if they would not take Peace, &c. We shall now leave all to the Reader, and let him consider (if it be worth his while) and weigh the Story with all circumstances, and be∣lieve as he please; I shall add one thing more, and that is, Let it be taken for grant∣ed that these Britains were against Infant-Bap∣tism: Nevertheless about 200 years before, Infant-Baptism was owned by Pelagius himself (although he denyed Original Sin) which was a Britain, and a member of the Monastery of Bangor, as the Au∣thor himself quotes in his History of Christianity pag. 11. And Mr. Tombes himself in pag 20. of his Answer says, the Pelagians did grant the Baptizing of Infants &c. And I have better Au∣thority than he, even Austin himself, that had so much to do with Pelagius in his Book de peccato Originali Cap. 32. hath this saying, Pelagius et∣si Baptisma Infantium verbo concedit, re tamen ipsa tollit & negat. Though Pelagius grants Infant-Baptism in word, yet he takes it away and denyes it in deed. And again Cap. 18. upon the same point of Original Sin Austin hath this passage;— Baptizari parvulos ut in regnum Dei ingrediantur ex Pelagii Sen∣tentia.Danaei Opus. om∣nia Genevae ex Lib. Aug. de peocato O∣rinali. p. 692. 'Twas Pelagius his opi∣nion that Children were to be Baptized, that they may have entrance into the Kingdom of God. So ex Lib.
Aug. Cap. 19. de peccato Originali; there is more. Thus then you see we have a more ancient Testi∣mony for Infant-Baptism by this Britain, than those whom the Author fancies strongly to be a∣gainst it; who lived 200 years nearer the Apo∣stles times than they. I will conclude it in the Words of Mr. Fuller in his Church-History: Pela∣gius, saith he, was bred in the Monastery of Ban∣gor, where he lived with 2000 Monks, whose hands were the only Benefactors for their Bellies, Abby-labourers, not Abby-lubbers, like their Successors in after Ages — Infinit are the deductions and de∣rived consequences of Pelagius his Errors amongst which Mr. Fuller says, there are these two in re∣ference to Infants: 1. That Infants were born without Original sin. 2. That they were Baptized not to be freed from Original sin, but thereby to be Adopted into the Kingdom of God, as was before noted out of Aust. There are yet remaining 4 or 5 trifling Argu∣ments to prove the Ancient Britains did oppose the Baptizing Infants. 1. Because they received the Christian Faith, Doctrine and Discipline from the Apostles and Asiatick-Churches, who hath no such thing as Bap∣tizing Infants amongst them as you have largely heard] When the Magdeburgenses tell us expresly, that it was in use in the Asiatick Churches. Cent. 3. C. 6. p. 124. In this Age they say, Baptismus In∣fantibus datur—Children were Baptized: and this we have abundantly shewn before from the Testi∣mony of Cyprian. 2. Because it appears they so fully prised, and faithfully adhered to the Scriptures, &c. And no
such thing is to be found there] This is the old Objection which we have often answered. See Chap. 1. Part 1 of our Answer. So Chap 5. Part 2. 3. Because they did so vehemently reject Hu∣man-Traditions, in the Worship of God, especial∣ly all Romish-Innovations, Rites, and Ceremoneis] We find no such vehemency of spirit in the Story as the Author speaks of, unless it was against Austin's pride; or beacuse Austin shewed them not that honour which their own proud hearts expected. And whereas he saith, they so rejected Romish Rites, but Infant-Baptism came from Romes Ordination and Imposition] This is pitti∣fully poor, for it was practised as we have shewn in Africa and Asia hundreds of years before this time, e're any Popes as Universal Bishops were in being. It was practised in Tertullian's and Cypri∣an's days, this none denyes. 5. Because Constantine the Great, the Son of Constance and Helena (both Christians) born in Britain in the year 305. was not Baptized till Aged, as before. And we have before given you the reason why his Baptism was put off. I refer the Reader to Chap. 7. Part 1. of my Answer; you have it in Cent. 4. p. 18. 5. Because of the Correspondency and Unity, that was betwixt the French Christians, afterward called Waldenses, and them. And for this very reason if we had none else, we conclude the Bri∣tains were for Infant-Baptism, because the Wal∣denses were, as we have sufficiently made appear. There is one Reason more so weak that I think not meet to say thing to it; and in reference to the confidence of my Antagonist, that the Wal∣denses,
Donatists, Britains were all against Infant-Baptism, when neither of them were. I shall conclude with a Distich, which I think may not improperly be applyed to his whole Discourse; Ridiculus tandem ecce cavis mus prodit ab antris, Quem gravidi Montes parturiere diu.
ANACEPHALAEOSIS, Or, a Recapitulation of the History of the Magde∣burgenses concerning Infant-Baptism, from the first to the thirteenth Century. CENT. I. 1. THey tell us Cent. 1. L. 1. C. 4. p. 152. That Bap∣tism was taken from the Jewish custom of Washing: and foras∣much as Infant-Baptism was in use among the Jews together with Circumcision, as a Rite of Initiation for both the natural Jews, and Proselites of Age, who were with their Infants Circum∣cifed and Baptized, as Ainsworth shews upon Gen. 17. out of the Rabbies. Also Goodwin in his Moses and Aaron, and Mr. Selden the great Antiquarie; and Dr. Hammond in his Resolution a∣bout Infant-Baptism proves, that Christ took up the usage of Bap∣tizing from the Jews, and made it a Sacrament, and accommoda∣ted it, as a Rite of Initiation into the Profession of Christiani∣ty; it follows by proportion, that the Children of them that pro∣fess the Christian Faith are to be Baptized with their Parents, as was the custom of the Jews. 2. There is nothing in Christ's Commission, Mat. 28. that is against it; for the Teaching there
that is required, excludes not the Children of Believers from Bap∣tism, as appears by the conside∣ration of the Condition of the Persons to whom Christ sent his Apostles to Baptize, who were Aliens, and the whole World in regard of the new-Administration were such. Nor is that in Mark 16. exclusive of Infants; though it requires believing to go before baptizing. And the reason is, be∣cause the same condition that is required there, to precede Bap∣tism, is required to precede Sal∣vation: So that if the sence of the place be that Infants must not be Baptized because they cannot Believe, it will as directly fol∣low they must not be saved, be∣cause they cannot Believe. The way of answering one, answers both, and by the same distinction the Salvation of Infants may be maintained, their Baptism may. 3. If the Import of the Com∣mission had not been to take in the Children with the Parents in Baptism, it had been needful for Christ to have given them a Ca∣veat, when be sent them forth to disciple the Nations, to this effect. —See that ye forbear to Baptize the Children of the Nations, and that because the Apostles knew, that Children under the former Administration were reputed dis∣ciples, belonged to the Cove∣nant; and had Crcumcision the Seal thereof applyed to them, and that Baptism succeeded in the place thereof. Col. 2.11, 12. 4. The Magdeburgenses say,
though we have no particular ex∣ample of any Infants Baptized in this Century, yet Origen and Cyprian (that lived in the time of those that saw the Apostles) af∣firm that Infants were Baptized in the Apostles days. Cent. 1. L. 2. C. 6. p. 496. and that the cu∣stom of Baptizing them was transmitted from them to Poste∣rity. Cent. 1. L. 1. C. 4. p. 151. 5. Though we have no express example, yet we have something Equivalent thereto. As, 1. The Baptizing whole Hous∣holds or Families, of which we have such frequent mention in the Acts. As Lydia's Family Act. 16.15. though there be no hint of any one that Believed but her∣self. So Stephana's Houshold, 1 Cor. 1.16. and divers others. When once the Head of the Fa∣mily Professed his Faith, all the Family were by and by Baptized. As under the Law when the Ma∣ster of a Family was Proselyted, he and his were forthwith Cir∣cumcised. And 'tis altogether improbable that in so many hous∣holds that are said to be Baptized there should be no Infants, when we can scarce find one Family without them. 2. No Children of Believing Parents are mentioned to have been Baptized afterwards, du∣ring the space of 60 years, for so long it was from the time that John the Baptist began his Mi∣nistery to the time that John the Evangelist ended his: in which
time there could be no less than thousands and ten thousands of Children born of Christian Pa∣rents, and grown up to Maturi∣ty, and yet we find not one of all these Baptized at years of discre∣tion, and therefore may well con∣clude they were Baptized in In∣fancy.
CENT. I. Nothing in Christ's Commission against it, nor in the Apostles Wri∣tings.
CENT. II. The Ancient Fathers of the Greek-Church for Infant-Bap∣tism. Justin Martyr who lived (by calculation) in St. John's days, must needs know what was done amongst the Apostles, gives se∣veral hints for Infant-Baptism in is unquestionable Works, as in his Dialogue with Triphon, Part 2. Prop. 3. wrote 150 years after Christ. Irenaeus that lived in the same Age, within a hundred years after the Apostles, and was a Bishop in France according to Helvi∣cus in the year 170 of our Lord, within 73 years of St. John: and as noted by Mr. Baxter must live consequently within 43. years of St. John, for he would not be Bishop till about 30 years old; and we have his Testimony for it very plainly, Lib. 2. Advers. Haeres. C. 39. speaking of Infants being born a∣gain, that is, by the Laver of Regeneration viz, Baptism. Dr. Hammond Resolution. Sec. 4. p. 212. CENT. II. Infant-Baptism oppo∣sed by none. Magdeb. Cent 2. Cap. 4. p. 48. de Baptismo. Nec usquam legitur Infantes hoc seculo a Baptismo remotos esse. Infants were not exclud∣ed Baptism in this Age.
CENT. III. Infant-Baptism was in use in this Age as appears from Tertul∣lian, who lived in the first hun∣dred years after the Apostles, and expresseth himself thus in his Book de Anima, viz. That the Children of the Faithful are holy by birth, which is Paralel to that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7.13. And whereas 'tis said he was for the delay of it; the Magdeburgenses tell us, so he was also in respect of the Aged, he had such a supersti∣tious conceit of Baptism that he thought it best for all people to delay it, of all conditions and Ages Cent. 3. C. 6. p. 124. and they say that he held a strange Opinion indeed, that it was not fit for young-men, unmarried, nor young. Widows to be Baptized, & why? because in these the lust of Concupiscence was not extin∣guished. Cent. 3. More Greek Fathers for In∣fant-Baptism. 1. Origen, who lived Anno 226. is most express for it, affirm∣ing that it was transmitted to the Church from the Apostles, as in his Comment upon Levit. C. 12.13. Hom. 8. and in Hom. 14. on Luke, and upon the 6th Rom. And though we have them not extant in Greek, yet being translated by Jerom, as the Mag∣deburgs and Dr. Hammond ob∣serve from his Epistle to Hera∣clius, prefixt to the Comment; we have his Authority to secure us that they are his own.
2. Cyprian, Bishop of Carthage, who besides his own Testimony (who flourished about 248. and according to Bucol nearer Christ, in 222) gives us in his Epistle to Fidus, the Testimony of an A∣frican Council of 66 Bishops. Magd. Cent. 3 C. 9. p. 205. Synod Afric. de Infant. Baptizandis. Opposed by none. CENT. IV. We have in this Age the Testi∣mony of divers other Greek-Fa∣thers for it, as Nazianzen, who lived in the year of Christ 375. and shews it was in use in his time in his Orat. 3. in S. Lavacrum. Magdeb. Cent. 4. C. 6. p. 417. where he is for it in case of death, and in his 40th Oration he owns is absolutely thus — Hast thou a young-Child, saith he, let it be Baptized from an Infant, let it be early Consecrated to the Spirit. Farther, the Magdeburgs say, they have before shewn out of O∣rigen, and Cyprian, that the Bap∣tism of Children was in use in the African Churches; and they also prove it continued in this Age from the 124th Question of A∣thanasius, and from Nazianzen, that it was Practised in the Asia∣tick Churches. Magd. ut supra. Chrysostom, another Greek Fa∣ther, who lived Anno 382 was for it: so was Bazil, that flourished about the same time; he gives Testi∣mony to it, Lib. 3. contra Eu∣nomium —What say you of In∣fants, may we Baptize them?
Yea, for so we are taught by the Circumcision of Children. In Concurrence with them, we have the Testi∣mony of the Latin Fathers who were their Contem∣poraries, as 1. Ambrose, who lived about Anno 381. he speaks for Infant baptism in his Book of Abraham, the Pa∣triarch. 2. Jerome also, contrà Pe∣lag. l. 3. and in his Epistle to Laeta, he is much for it. 3. Austin is for it, none more; he lived about 391. The Church, saith he, alwaies had it, alwaies held it:Aust. Serm. 5. de Verb. Apost. and in lib. cont. Donatist. cap. 24. disputing against the Donatists (who denied Original Sin, but not Infant Baptism any more than Pelagius, whose Disciple he was) saith, That which is universally re∣ceived, and practised, &c. CENT. V. In this Age Children were baptized, say the Magdiburgenses, Cent. 5. C. 6. p. 654. Both the Adult and Infants CENT. V. Not opposed by any, not the Donatists, as H.D. fals∣ly suggests; for though they denied Original Sin, yet not Infant-baptism, and therefore not mentioned in the Catalogue of their Heresies. Magd. Cent. 5. C 5. p. 628. de haeresi Donatista∣tum,
CENT. VI. In this Age Infant-bap∣tism was in use, as appears by the Speech of Maxenti∣us, which the Magdiburgs quote, viz. We believe In∣ants newly born are to be baptized, Magd. Cent. 6. c. 4. p. 227. They inform us also that Gregory the Great was for it, by the doubt he re∣solves about Abortives. CENT. VI. Not opposed by any we find in this Age, but by one Adrianus: though H. D. without any good bottom, confidently affirms, that the Ancient Britains were against Infant-baptism: this Conceit is vain, as we have shewn in the Examination of that History. He doth also very weakly bring Gregory's Testimony against it, and yet tells us (which is true) that Gregory accus∣ed Adrianus to John Bishop of Larissa, that he turned away young Children from Baptism. You have it Chap. 7. of the first Part of his first and second Edition: Chap. 7. Cent. 6. and p. 231. of the 2. Edition. Com∣pare them together, and you have a perfect Contra∣diction. CENT. VII. Adult persons and In∣fants were both baptized in this Age, as we learn from the Magdiburgenses, Cent. 7. C. 6. p. 145.
It should not be Constance but Constantinople.
It should be Constantinople.
CENT. VII. Not opposed by any that we find in the Magdibur∣gensian History, under this Century; yet doth H. D. misrepresent 3. Councils. 1. The Bracarens in Spain, as if they had made a Decree against it, when 'twas only this, That none ex adultis that were grown up, should be baptized,
that were not first indiffer∣ently well instructed in the Doctrine of Christianity, Cont. 7. And in p 146 and 147. they tell us the very manner how this Bracaren Council ordained Infants should be baptized. 2 The Council of Con∣stance decreed, as in the Bracaren, that no Adult persons should be baptized, unless, as before, they were instructed—For, say they, non shall be baptized, that are not instructed, except In∣fants, which by reason of age cannot speak. And then they tell us, this whole Council was invited to the Baptism of the Child of Heraclius, p. 167. 3. Concerning the Tole∣tan Council, the Magdibur∣genses say their Decree was, That the Children of the Jews that were [Bapti∣zati] baptized, should be recommended to some Christians to be taught, Magdiburg. Centur. 7. p. 146. H. D. is a very heedless Writer, and doth overlash again in his Story of Bri∣nius (he is named Berinus by the Magdiburgs) how that he was a great Op∣pugner of Infant-baptism, when 'tis not so; for all that they say of him is— [Eundem morem servat Be∣rinus,]
that is, Berinus fol∣lowed the Manner of the Council of Constance, i.e. to baptize no Adult persons, but upon Profession after Teaching; but this Council shut not out Infants from Baptism, as before, but was for it. And, to make it more plain, the East-Saxons, whom Berinus baptized, with their people (as the Magdiburgs express it out of Bede) were Pagans, as Bede shews in his 3. Book, 7. Chapt. CENT. VIII. From the 4. Book of Bede upon the Canticles, they shew that Infants in this Century were accounted fit subjects of Baptism, Cent. 8. c. 4. p. 218. CENT. VIII. None are found to have opposed Infant-baptism in this Age; and therefore H. D. is to be blamed for wronging Haimo. The Magdiburgs quote two pas∣sages amongst others, which shew he was most express for it, as that in Rom. 5. Item parvuli in Baptismate mundantur — Children are made clean in Baptism, Cent. 4. C. 4. p. 145. And again In fide parentum ait Haimo baptizari In∣fantes. CENT. IX. The Magdiburgenses ac∣quaint us with one of the Grounds upon which In∣ants were Baptized, viz.
Sinite parvulos, &c. Suffer little children to come unto me.
CENT. IX. It was opposed by none in this Age but by one Po∣pish Bishop, named Hinc∣marus, Bishop of Iaudum
in France, who was most severely rebuk'd for it by his Uncle Hincmarus Bishop of Rhemes—Etsi, saith he, tremendum Dei judicium te non terruit, &c. timere debueras nè tu solus hoc a∣geres, quòd nullus Christia∣norum unquam facere ausus est: He had cause to fear he did that which never any Christian did before him. This man was condemned by a Synod sub Carolo Calvo, Anno 870. and put out of his Bishoprick, and writ his Recantation with his own hand, Cent. 9. C. 9. p. 444. And afterward was restored to his Bishoprick, Cent. 9. C. 9. p. 447. sub Ca∣rolo Crasso. H. D. in his Abstract pre∣sents us with divers others in this 9. Century, as Op∣posers of Infant-baptism; as one Gislebert and English Monk of the Order of Be∣nedict (a precious Witness) but though the Magdiburgs recite much of his bad Do∣ctrine, yet not a word of his being against Infant-baptism; and therefore he wrongs his Reader and them too, by referring to Magd. Cent. 10. C. 4. p. 234. of his 2. Edition. This Gislebert was very errone∣ous; he held all sin done way by Baptism ex opere operato; he was for Merit,
and held the Virgin Mary to be without Sin, and to make Intercession; and is not this a pure Witness, think you, against Infant-baptism? Cent. 10. C. 4. p. 188, 189. Under this 9. Cent. H.D. brings in Rabanus, in both his Editions. This Rabanus was an Abbot. He was for Infant-baptism, as appears by that Saying of his, That the Spirit of God enters into the Infant before he comes out of the Font, though we know not how. The Magdib. quote it out of his 10. Chap. of his Book of the Eucharist, Cent. 9. C. 4. p. 143. Again he saith concern∣ing little ones that are un∣capable of teaching, they that offer them up in Bap∣tism, must answer for them. H. D. brings Remigius for Believers Baptism in opposition to Infants, or else he trifles. This Remi∣gius was also a Monk of the Order of Benedict, and was for the Worshipping the Virgin Mary, as the Mag∣diburgs tell us, but not a word against Infant-bap∣tism, Cent. 9. c. 10. p. 533.
CENT. X. They tell us in their 6. Chap. pag. 293. that in this Age they baptized both the Adult and Infants. CENT. X. It was not opposed in this Age that we find from the Magdiburgenses, and Smaragdus is no Witness
for H, D. for he is express for Infant-baptism, as they snew us, he grounding it upon that Passage, Sinite parvulos, &c. Suffer little children to come, &c. Cent. 10. C. 4. p. 138. and who hath also this Expression, Infants are made pure by Baptism, which they quote from his words upon the 2. Chap. of the Epistle of Peter. Ausbertus speaks nothing pro or con, but only of the Virtues of Baptism, and the danger of Mortal Sins. Theophilact is not for H. D. his turn; for he saith, That the Faith of him that offereth the Child in Bap∣tism or baptizeth it, cleans∣eth the Child, quam vis nondum valet corde credere ad justitiam, & ore confiteri ad salutem, i.e. though he be not able to believe unto righteous∣ness, nor confess with the mouth. Cent. 10. c. 4. p. 187. de Doctrina.
CENT. XI. They tell us that in this Age they baptized not on∣ly Adult persons but such as were newly born, Cent. 11. C. 6. p. 260. And then giving divers Instances of Children that were baptiz∣ed, . They quote An∣selm  it, that the Dies Baptism, the Day of Baptism as the 8th day, he
grounding it upon Circum∣cision, Cent. 11. c. 4. p. 169. They quote also his Note upon that place. And her daughter was made whole the self-same hour, how the Mo∣thers Faith stood the Child in good stead, Mat. 15. So the Faith of the Parent, saith he, may avail for the Infant in Baptism, though he be at present uncapable of good or evil, Cent 11. C. 4. p. 171. and not withstanding all this; Anselm is brought by H. D. in opposition to Infant bap∣tism.
CENT. XI. None againsT Infant-bap∣tism that we can find upon good ground in this Age; for as for that which H. D. brings concerning Peter Bruis, Arnoldus and Henricus they are only Popish Calum∣nies, as we have shewn in the Examination of the History of the Waldenses. Durandus also is under
this Century brought in by H. D. as a Witness against Infant-baptism, though most severe against Ana∣baptists. CENT. XII. They baptized, as they tell us, as well Infants, as grown persons, and give instances of Children bap∣tized, Cent. 12. C. 6. p. 872. CENT. XII. None that we find who opposed it in this Age. H. D. misapplies Peter Lumbard, as if he had been for Believers Baptism in opposition to that of In∣fants, when his words are, Children are cleansed from O∣riginal Sin by Baptism, Cent. 12. c. 4. p. 596. H. D. doth abuse the saying of Peter Lombard, viz. The person that is to be baptized, should first believe and confess. We have it in h s 18. Chap on John. Which is spoken of Pagans as ap∣pears by what follows. A∣gain, All that are baptized. saith he, whether little ones or great ones, receive in their foreheads the sign of the Cross, in his 8. Book on the 13. Chap. of the Revelation.
Albertus Magnus, the Conjurer (another of H.D. his Witnesses) hath not, that I can find, a word to his purpose. CENT. XIII. The Magdiburgenses do end with the 12. Cent. and 'tis remarkable, that (ex∣cepting the Waldenses who are calumniated by the Pa∣pists) they mention but one person that was against In∣fant-baptism, viz. Hincma∣rus. They indeed speak of one Peter Apamen a Bishop of Syria, Cent. 6. c. 5. p. 304. de Haeresibus, and Zoaras the Monk that agreed with the Heretick Severus, and was condemned with him in the Synod of Constantino∣ple. They have it out of Nicephorus, lib. 17. c. 9. These they say, were accused of Re-baptization, and other heinous Crimes, but not for oppugning Infant-baptism; and therefore Mr. Henry Danvers needed not to have put these in for Wit∣nesses in his 2. Edition. CENT. XIII. The Waldenses are here falsly pretended to be a∣gainst Infant-baptism. See our Examination of the History before. The Name of Wickliff be∣ing famous, H. D. would fain get something out of him for his turn, but can∣not; for none of the words quoted from him, are a∣gainst Infant-baptism, un∣less he thinks that is Cap. 2. de Trialog. viz. That they are presumptuous and foolish who affirm Children dying unbap∣tized cannot be saved: Or because he rejected the Popish Traditions of Salt, Cyl, Spittle, Chrism; this in H. D. his account renders him an authentique Wit∣ness against us; for he concludes thus: And may we not from as good evidence say that he rejected Infant-ba∣ptism also? Treatise of Bap∣tism, 2. Edition. There he also quotes a Popish Writer, which chargeth Wickliff with denying Infant-bab∣tism, and in the same place saith, it was the Albigensian Heresie; one as true as the other.
From what hath been said, I see no reason why Mr. Tombes and Mr. Danvers should be so much offend∣ed with Mr. Marshal and Mr. Baxter, for saying In∣fant-baptism was but lately opposed by the Anabaptists of Germany; and I appeal to the Reader, whether Mr. Baxter speaks not true in is Plain Scripture-proof, p. 153. who saith, That for his part he cannot find in his small Reading, that any one Divine or Party of Men did certainly oppose or deny Infant baptism, for many hundred years after Christ. And then again, p. 261. The World may see what a Cause you put such a face upon, when you cannot bring the least proof, so much as of one Man (we will allow them one, viz. Hincmarus) much less Socie∣ties, and least of all godly So∣cieties, that did once oppose or deny Infants Baptism, from the Apostles days till about Luther's time.
A Perswasive to UNITY amongst all that fear the Lord, though of different judgments about Baptism, enforced from Scripture-Arguments, and the dangerous Consequences of Divisions. IT is well advised by Jacobus Acontius, in his Book en∣tituled Stratagemata Sathana, that in all disputes a∣bout points of Religion, this should be engraven upon our hearts, That we have not to deal with the man with whom we dispute, but with Satan himself; and that the main quarrel is not that point about which we argue, but something of a greater concern. For the design of that en∣vious One hath been in all Ages to sow tares of Division: He it was that made the first Schism in the glorious Com∣munion, and hath ever since out of an intense hatred to the peace and quiet of mankind stirred up Emulations, Wrath, Strife, and mutual Antipathies in the minds of men; especi∣ally among Christians, hath he laboured to his utmost to foment and cherish Differences, to agitate Schisms, and to rend and tear the Church of Christ into divers Sects and Par∣ties, and by his notable subtilty and influence upon our corrupt nature, to make our very Arguings and Contendings for the Faith once delivered, too often managed with Pride, Prejudice, and carnal Interest, a means rather of widening than healing our Breaches. So that in our Contests of this nature, if we gain but a grain of Truth, we are in danger of losing a pound of Charity. There is (as the Apostle James terms it) a , a bitter Zeal, bitter indeed in its root, issuing from a root of bitterness within, and bitter in its fruits, accursed discords and irreconcilable distances a∣mongst Brethren. The consideration whereof hath made me even jealous of my self, lest in the foregoing Responsatory-discourse, any thing hath dropt from my Pen, which may tend rather to the exasperating than convincing our Oppo∣sites; for 'tis hard in disputes both not to be provoked, and not to provoke. Nevertheless, I hope the Godly, Sobery, and Ingenuous amongst them, will put the best interpreta∣tion upon all; and the rather, because they cannot but per∣ceive
how tender I have been of them, manifesting respect to such throughout all the Discourse: And though I contend with what I conceive is an error in them, yet I cannot but love their persons; for I know there are some of that Per∣swasion who for their eminency in Grace, ought to be had in estimation by us: And I would always distinguish the Humble and Holy from the Heady and High-minded, the Tender and Conscientious from the Turbulent and Factions of that Party. And Oh! how much do I long to see all rigidness on every side remov'd, and a sweet correspondency and complyance between God's People, though of different judgments, as to the Subject of Baptism. I have for more than twenty years considered the point, and weighed what hath been said on both sides, and cannot possibly be brought to judg it a matter of that moment as to break Communion, or to be prosecuted with so much Vehemency, as it is by some of the Dissenters. 1. It being only about a point not so expresly revealed, but that Godly Persons both in Christ visibly, may differ in their light about it. 2. Also it being only about the right or wrong application of an external Ce∣remony, or Solemnity of Christ's Institution (for Baptism in the outward Act of it can be esteemed no more). Where∣fore I could heartily wish there were a reviving of the Primitive Moderation, when Christians did bear one with another, and allow a liberty in matters of an higher nature, without breach of Communion. For I verily believe, the Church of Christ hath received more prejudice by contest∣ing about this thing than is commonly thought of; for it hath always produced heart-burnings amongst Christians, and undermined the Power of Godliness. And it would be more for the honour of Religion, if our Spirits were so at∣tempered and sweetned, as to indulge each other a latitude of practice according to our light and perswasion, without imposing or condemning, according to the Apostolical Rule, Phil. 3.15, 16. Certainly the differences that are amongst us about Baptism, were they put in the Ballance of the Sanctuary, to try whether they bear proportion to the distances and ani∣mosities attending the same, they would be found too light. And if Austin did so much lay to heart the breach which was between two single persons, Jerom and Ruffinus (con∣cerning which we have spoken before in our Answer) that he cryed out, Hei mihi qui vos alicubi simul invenire non
possum, &c. Wo is me that I cannot find you both together, I would even fall down at your feet with much love, and many tears; I would beseech you for your selves, and for one another, and for weak Christians for whom Christ died, that you suffer not these dissentions to spread. Oh! how much more cause have we to lament the breaches of so many thousands of God's People, and to use our utmost en∣deavours to repair the same. I wish there were more of Melancthons Spirit amongst us, who professed that though he had many domestical troubles, yet the publick wounds of the Church (arising much from the difference 'twixt Lu∣therans and Calvinists about the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, which Christ intended for a bond of love, as he did the other of Baptism) did most deeply afflict him. Oh! how sad is it to behold the Staff of Beauty, and the Staff of Bands,Zech. 11.10, 11. Zeph. 3.9. so broken amongst us. And that we cannot call upon the Lord, and serve him with one consent. Those were Halcyon and blessed days when the multitude of Believers were of one heart and one soul; when they held communion in Doctrine, in Fellowship, in breaking of Bread, and Prayer. When the People of God could hear together, and pray together, and receive together, Act. 4.32. When those thousands of Believers were as if they had but one heart and soul to animate and actuate them in God's ser∣vice. What an eminent answer was this of Christ's Prayer, Joh. 17.21. That they all may be One, , the words are very emphatical; it is not said that they may love and agree, though this be intended,Burges on Joh. 17.21. but those words —that they may be One, is, as if the Church of Christ should be but as one person; and, as the Apostle argues, none ever hated his own flesh, Eph. 5.30. and we are members of his Body, and of his Flesh, and of his Bones. On this account there should be no divisions amongst the Members of Christ, for they are one Spirit as it were. They should no more hate one ano∣ther, than a man doth his own flesh; And Dionysius the Arcopagite calls the Godly , that is, persons closely compacted into One, according as the Apostle hath it, Eph. 4.16. where he speaks of the Body's being compacted. For they should be as the Pearl, which is united in it self, and is called Ʋnio. He that is joyned to the Lord, saith St. Paul, is one Spirit, One Spirit in himself, One with God,
and One with all his People. In order to this blessed Un∣on and Accommodation of the Godly, I shall in all humility address my self to both Parties, to them who are for, and to them that are against Infant-Baptism. 1. To the Dissent¦ers in general. 2. To the Antipoedobaptists in particular. 1. Concerning the first of these, the Dissenters in gene∣ral that fear God, I can with great confidence expect to meet with better measure from them, than to be condemn∣ed for an overweening conceit of my own sufficiency to un∣dertake the Work of a Conciliator; I only humbly submit what I have to say to their judicious & godly Consideration, Whether it be not their duty to entertain and keep up Fel∣lowship and Communion in all other Ordinances wherein they are agreed, notwithstanding this their difference about Baptism? which to me seems clear for several Reasons; as, First, Because they are Members of the same Body, of which Christ is the Head. Rom. 12.4, 5. We being many, are one body in Christ, and every one Members of another,— the import of which is, that all Believers stand to Christ in the same relation that the natural Body doth stand to the na∣tural Head, and that they all stand in relation one to ano∣ther, as the Members of the natural Body do stand one to an∣other. To the same purpose is that, 1 Cor. 12.12. where from the 4th to the 7th verse, the Apostle shews, That there are diversities of Gifts, and differences of Administrations, and diversities of Operations; but all come from the same Spirit, Lord and God, and are given for this end, that they may be for the profiting of the whole. And that we might more plainly apprehend him, he further tells us, that as in the natural Body there are divers Members joined, and each Member hath its several office for the good of all; so is Christ, saith he, that is, Christ collectively and mystically, Christ and all his Members: and then he adds, vers. 13. That by one Spirit we are all baptized into one Body,Christum intellige cum Ecclesia suâ conjunctim, et qua∣tenùs est corporis mystici caput. Be∣za in loc. whether Jews or Gen∣tiles, bond or free; which cannot be meant of Water-Baptism, saith Mr. Jesse (an eminent godly Antipaedobap∣tist) in regard all the Body of Christ, Jews and Gentiles, bond and free, par∣took not of that Sacrament of Christ in∣stituted for the Gospel-Administration) and are made to drink into the same Spirit; which is also to be understood metaphorically and spiritually, Potionati sumus, saith Pis∣cator,
and so prove our selves to be of one and the same Cor∣poration of Believers. Like to this is that Eph. 4.16. from whom the whole Body fitly joyned and compacted together, &c. From what hath been said there follow these five Cor∣rollaries. 1. Ʋnity of the Body in the Church floweth from Unity to the Head; first, the Members are united to the Head, and then to one another, and with the Head. 2. This Spiritual Union and Conjunction with the Lord Jesus, is the foundation of all their Communion with one another. 3. As in the Natural Body, all the Members do not only meet in the Head, as the Lines in the Center, but have real Union one with another; so in this Mystical and Spiritual Body, all Believers have not only each for his own part Uni∣on and Conjunction with Christ, but also a real Union and Conjunction with each other, which is the ground of all offices of Love, and reciprocal Fellowship and Communion, wherein they stand obliged amongst themselves. 4. Union to the whole, the Catholick or Universal Church or Body of Christ, gives right to Communion with any par∣ticular Church of Christ in the World; and there is no Be∣liever (as Mr. Marshal observes) in any part of the World, but where-ever he comes, might demand, upon the professi∣on of his Faith, and his voluntary subjection to the Gospel, his right in the Ordinances, to hear, and pray, and receive the Sacrament with them. 5. To deny Communion to any who give evidence that they are of the same Body, is to be guilty of a great Schism in the Body, and most opposit to the design of God's Grace, in compacting all his People into one Body; which was, 1. That there should be no Schism in the Body. 2. That therefore the Members should have the like care of one another. They therefore who in contrariety hereto stand at a distance one from another, and refuse Communion, do that which is not practicable from Scripture: for it is unnatural and destructive to the Body, and not only so, but fouly scanda∣lous to the Christian Religion: for, as the Lord Verulam speaks,Lord Bacon's Essayes. like a Divine as well as a Philosopher, Schism is one of the great∣est Scandals, yea more than corruption of Manners: For, as in the Natural Body, a Wound or Solution
of Continuity is worse than a Corrupt Humour, so in the Spiritual: So that nothing doth so much keep men out of the Church, and drive men out of the Church as breach of Unity. This then is the first Argument, they are both visibly Members of Christ's Body, and therefore should have Communion one with another. 2. Because both parties agree in the main Fundamentals of Religion; and Union in the great things of Religion should oblige them to bear with one another in lesser mat∣ters. Phil. 3.15, 16. If in any things ye be otherwise mind∣ed, God shall reveal even that to you: Nevertheless, whereto we have already attained, let us walk by the same Rule, let us mind the same thing. Here's an excellent direction to preserve Unity amongst God's People, notwithstanding difference in judgment, and for composing and healing of differences when they arise. 1. Christians are to consider whereunto they have alrea∣dy attained, and how far they do agree, Whether there be not a mutual Consent in the Principles and Fundamentals of Religion; for, if this be wanting, all Union is but a daubing with untempeted mortar, and a Conspiracy against Christ: but when there is a Consent in Fundamentals, and the Marks of Godliness upon Persons, Wisdom and Charity should teach us to condescend unto, and forbear one ano∣ther: but alas, how much is this wanting! may we not sigh out that doleful sentence, Heu pro quantillo pacem per∣didimus! for what poor inconsiderable things do we jar and differ! 2. To walk by the same Rule, or to put in practice those Truths wherein they do agree. They agree in Prayer, in Hearing, in the Lord's Supper, let them walk together in these. The best way to attain Unity in Judgment, is to maintain it in Obedience, and jointly to walk together in the Ordinances and Duties wherein Christians do agree. 3. To mind the same thing; that is, I conceive, to pro∣pose the same ends in Religion. Nothing causeth more difference than poor, narrow, selfish-ends. If Professors had all one common end, viz. to be really Godly, and to advance the Glory of God in the World, there would be an end of these bickerings. St. Paul hath an eye to this, Phil. 2.1, 2. There he useth most pathetical Arguments to Love and Union; and for to further it, he presseth the Philippi∣ans to be like-minded, and let nothing, saith he, be done
through strife or vain-glory. v. 2, 3. and in the 4th vers — look not every man at his own things, &c. that is, at his own Interest, Honour, Party, &c. Were we better United in our ends and aims, and did jointly level at God's Glory, and Christ's Interest in the advancement of piety, we should quickly agree in the use of means. 3. Because we are Commanded not to refuse Christian Communion, though the difference be in far greater matters than this of Baptism. Rom. 14.1. Him that is weak in the Faith receive you &c. By Faith is meant the Doctrine of Faith, as Beza notes on the place. Him that is weak, and so weak,Fides hoc in loco declarat Christia∣nam ipsam Doctri∣nam in qua sit ali∣quis rudis, ac pro∣inde discrimen Ci∣borum & Dierum nondum intelligat Christi beneficio fu∣isse sublatum. as not to discern that by Christ's coming the difference of days and meats was taken away. There was it seems a great diffe∣rence amongst them, and some were more thorowly instructed in the doctri∣ne of Christian Liberty, as touching the cessation of legal Ceremonies, who held all days alike, and all meats in themselves indifferent; whereas others being not well informed, observed still a difference both of meats, accounting them clean or unclean, and of days accounting them holy or servile, according as they stood in under the Levitical-Law. This caused no little stir and trouble amongst them—Now the course the Apostle takes to heal these breaches is worth observing: He doth not cast the Ballance to one side, requiring the other to come up to their Practice, but exhorts them to allow a Latitude; and not only for Opinions, but Practices, and to forbear one another in love, and not to censure and condemn those that differ from them. Seeing the Men of contrary Perswasions in lesser matters may yet agree in the main fundamentals; and the reason why the stronger should receive the weaker, is, because God had received him, that is, into Communion with himself. We have the same urged again Chap. 15.6. Whe∣refore, receive ye one another as Christ also hath received us: by all which it appears that no supposed or real error can be a reason why others should not be received to Communion, far∣ther than it is a reason to prove that the Lord hath not re∣ceived them; & the conclusion is that let the Error be where 'twill, either on the Paedobaptist's or Antipaedobaptist's side, it is all one, if God and Christ have received these of both
Perswasions into Communion with himself, they break the Command, if they refuse to receive one another into mu∣tual Communion. 4. Is that Command of the Apostle, to follow after such things as make for Peace, and mutual Edification. Rom. 14.19. The Word is , that is, let us eagerly pur∣sue after it as the Hunter doth his Prey; and it denotes, 1. That we are not barely to desire it, or accept of any reasonable terms that are proposed for accommodation and agreement, but we are to pursue and go after it, if by any means we may overtake it, or apprehend it. The same duty is prest; Eph. 4.3. where the Exhortation is to keep the Ʋnity of the Spirit in the Bound of Peace; the Word is , which signifies a most earnest studying which way it may be effected: Ita alicui rei studere, ut ad eam omni impetu feraris, & approperes; to be so intent upon a thing, as to further it with might and main as we use to say. The Gramarians oppose this Word  to , which signifies Inconsiderate, Perfunctorie, & extempore aliquid agere; to do a thing carelesly; but this in the Text signifies Diligenter, & intent â cogitatione efficere; to be diligent and very thoughtful how to accomplish a thing, and it points out this, that we ought on all hands to use a sedu∣lous endeavour to preserve the Unity of the Spirit. 2. It denotes unwearied patience in the pursuit after it, notwithstanding all disappointments and discouragements met with in our attempts after it. We ought not to give over, but persevere in so good a Work. I like not that speech of Hornbeck Summa Controv. L. 9. de Luther. who saith, The Calvinists had done too much in overtures for a Recon∣ciliation with the Lutherans; much less can I approve of such who by word and writing endeavour to widen breaches, and set Christians at farther distances. Certainly the Pride, Conceit, and Discontent of some spirits have done much mis∣chief this way: and to speak plainly the inconsiderableness of our differences, and inconsiderateness wherewith it is pursued, argues that much of the Zeal of the Dissenters, is not, as one says, that holy fire which is kindled by a Coal from the Altar, but rather an Ignis fatuus that leads men quite out of God's Way; or a Wild Fire that rends and tears where it goes. Now in asmuch as nothing hinders endea∣vours like to despair, and all Essays for Union hitherto have
proved succesless, and there are few to be found of healing, and peaceable Spirits, but much of Pride, humor, and self∣conceitedness appears every-where, even in those that we cannot but think are good Men in them main; we may con∣clude, if we look no farther than our selves, that the differences amongst us will never be composed. But we are to look higher than our selves, and for the erecting of our hopes and quickning our endeavours after it; we should con∣sider, 1. Christ hath prayed that all Believers may be one, John 17.21. and he was heard in all that he prayed for. That they All may be one, (All) of them there is, the Universal Extent of it; One in Affection, and not only so, but also One in Worship, and Communion and Ordinances, although there may be variety of Opinions amongst them. 2. God hath promised to bring this about. Jer. 32.39. I will give them one heart, and one way. And in Zeph. 3.9. They shall call upon the name of the Lord and serve him with one consent, the Word in the Original is one Shoulder. They shall all of them have as it were but one Shoulder, that they shall set to the service of God. And Hosea 1.11. Then shall the Children of Judah, and the Children of Israel be gathered together; Here (saith Mr. Burroughs) we have a Promise both to Israel and Judah together; great was their Enmity, heretofore they Worshipped the same God, though in a diverse manner, Judah keeping close to God's Institu∣tions, but Israel not. There was a great deal of bitterness between them, though Worshipping the same God. But God hath promised they shall be gathered together, upon which he raiseth two Observations. 1. That there shall be Union between Judah and Israel. Here's a mercy, (saith he) a wonderful work of God! Many times between such as profess the same Religion, and seem not to differ much, and yet to differ; their Oppositions are most bitter and irreconcilable, and requires a mighty Work of God to bring them in and Reconcile them. 2. God hath a time, [there is a set time appointed] to gather Judah and Israel both together, that is, to bring Peace to his Church; God hath a time to gather all his Church together in a way of Peace, that there shall be a
Universal Peace amongst his Churches; for though 'tis true it be meant here of Judah and Israel literally, yet Israel and Judah is to set out to us all the Churches of Christ, that shall be afterward amongst the Gentiles So that Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and Judah shall not envy Ephraim. Isa. 11. 13. The envy of Ephraim shall depart. God will take away this Envious, Vexatious Spirit. 3. Let it be considered that we (upon whom the ends of the Earth are come) live nearer the accomplishment of these Promises than the former generations: yea, 4. The day of their fulfilling begins to dawn, the Spirits of many excellent Christians incline, and work towards U∣nion; yea some are actually in Union and Communion in all other Ordinances, though they differ in the point of Bap∣tism: they are come off from their former rigidness, and can hear and pray, and receive together in divers places of this Nation. 5. Light increaseth more and more, whereby they see what is the right Basis, and ground of Communion; That it is for grace-sake and not a Syncretism, or agreement in Opinions, That Christians should love and imbrace one another; and that heart-Religion, and Godliness is to be preferred before Notions and Forms. 6. They do also see the dismal and fatal consequences of their Divisions, and those who are wise and solid, must needs on that account be studious of Accommodation: they do now experimentally find that it is this: 1. That strengthens the hands of the common Enemies of Religion, Divide & impera; Dissolution is the Daughter of Division: It is even Nuts to the common Enemy to see how God's People wrangle and divide: they may well conclude that though they are quiet and let them alone, destruction will arise out of themselves; they may fit still, and laugh and say, Aha so would we have it. And as the Apostle speaks, if ey bite and devoure one another, take heed ye be not consumed one of another. This is like to be the finis operis though not operan∣tis,Gal. 5.15. the Event though not the Intent. Si colligimur frangimur; these Clashings, if not stopt, will prove (horresco scribere) fatal to the interest of Religion, and welfare and safety of Professors in the Nation. 2. This also opens the Mouths of Men to Blaspheme, and speak evil of the good ways of God. Dioclesian (that perse∣cuting
Roman Emperour lookt upon the Christian Religion as a wretched device of wicked Men, and that because of the pride and dissentions he observ'd amongst the Pastors and Bishops; so now adays some Atheists, and time-servers set their Wits on work to vilify the pure Worship of God, and to bring the power of Godliness into contempt, and the main Topic from whence they fetch their Hellish Arguments is the Divisions and Dissentions of Professors. There be some of late have been notable Factors for Hell, and would deride and jeer Men out of strictness and purity; and not a few Books of this kind have been printed whose design have been meerly to discountenance Religion, and the Authors of them have done as much for the Devil this way, that he can hardly tell what to desire more of them; and 'tis to be feared he will pay them their wages shortly: And verily the Divi∣sions of God's People have occasioned much of these mens Blasphemies, it hath been a woful stumbling Block be∣fore them. 7 It is that which in all likelyhood will draw persecution upon all their heads at last; they fear it, and they need it, and it is just with God to bring it upon them.Remarkable is that saying of Cy∣prian, viz. non ve∣nissent Fratribu haec mala, si in u∣num Fraternitas fuisset animata. These evils had not happened to the Brethren, if they had joyned together in Bro∣therly Unamini∣ty. As when there is no quietness in the house but a continual clamour, and brawling among the Children, and they scratch and fight and tear one ano∣ther, the Father comes in, and whips them all: So if Christians will not be quiet, but still go on to persecute one an∣other with their Tongues, and tear one another by Dissentions, Gods way to divert this humour, is, to set the Com∣mon Enemy upon them, if they rend themselves from one another, and for∣sake the Assembling themselves together, God will let loose the Dogs to worry them and drive them together. He will melt them into one piece in the fire of persecution. Common sufferings long since under those persecuting Emperours Constantius and Julian,Zozomen. Lib. 4. C. 20. brought the Christians to agreement who before were at great Enmity. And Bullinger in his Book of the Persecution of the Church, saith more than once, that the dissentions of God's People is that which
gives them up into the hands of their Enemies ad abstergen∣dum aeruginem, to scour off their rust as he phraseth it. And Mr. Burroughs ut supra in his Comment upon Hosea Chap. 3. saith, God may justly give us over into the hands of our Enemies, if we agree not among our selves, and they may Chain us together: perhaps a Prison may make us agree, as it was said of Ridley and Hooper, though Ridley stood much against Hooper in point of Ceremonies, and they could not agree, yet when they came to Prison they did well enough there; the Lord deliver us, saith he, from that Medicine of our dissentions, that we be not made so to agree, yea that we be not sodered together with our own blood. 2dly, There is one thing yet behind, and that is to apply my self more particularly to those who are Antipaedobaptists, that fear the Lord in this Nation, and let it be resented, as offered to them in all love and humility. There are a few things I would leave with them by way of Caution. The Lord knows I desire not to scatter in Israel nor to divide in Jacob. 1. Take heed lest your Zeal for your own way, which you take to be most agreeable to Truth, doth eat up your love to Peace and Ʋnion with the Godly,Cautions to the Antipaedobaptists. who are otherwise minded; The Apostle Exhors us , to speak the Truth in love, to truthify it in love, as Mr. Crook translates it, aiming to reach the fulness of the Greek in one Word. So 'tis your duty (if your opinion be true as we suppose it is not) to manage your Tenents with love, meekness and moderation of Spirit towards those who are otherwise minded, and yet agree with you in other things: For though every Truth be precious, yet every Truth is not necessary to Salvation, nor to be found in all, with whom notwithstanding it may be necessary for you to hold Communion; and that because you cannot but know that many Paedobaptists are as Godly as your selves, San∣ctified in Christ Jesus and called to be Saints. 2. In not doing so, you deprive your selves of the benefit of their Gifts and Graces, and of that help which you might have from many eminent Ministers of Christ; and that assistance for Conversion of Souls and Edification, which in some of your Meetings you very much want; and when those that are able of your way shall be removed by death, you are like to be straitned for want of Men, of competent and
fitting parts for the carrying on the work of the Ministry, as it ought to be done amongst your selves. 2. Beware of Pride; for where this is predominant, it will not suffer men to recede from those rigid Principles and Practices they have taken up. As Pride makes men unwil∣ling to receive the Truth from others, so it will keep them from retracting an Error, though convinced thereof. Luther confessed to Melancthon before his death, that he would have retracted many things, (especially in those Sacramen∣tal Controversies) but that he feared it would lessen the Au∣thority of his Works. So much of Pope hath every man in his own breast, as to affect to be thought infallible, malunt semper errare quam semel errasse videri; they had rather al∣ways err, than seem once to have erred. But what-ever a man may lose in reputation of knowledg, he shall be sure to gain in estimation of candour, ingenuity, and sincerity. Austin got asmuch esteem by his Book of Retractations, as by any other of his works. 3. Take heed of a Censorious judging-Spirit: do not con∣demn those that close not in with you to act against their light. It is a very uncharitable passage which I find in Mr. Tombes his Praecursor pag. 91. Unless, saith he, I speak against my conscience, I must needs say, that it is ignorance or wilfulness, holds Ministers and People in their stiff asserting & Practice of Infant-Baptism. But what it was that kept him so long in the practice of it, in his Parish-Churches before the Assembly of Divines sate, is best known to the searcher of hearts; & yet this very man 17 lines above in the same page, hath that which amounts to self-contradiction, viz. That he reverenceth many Paedobaptists as Godly Ministers of the Gos∣pel far beyond himself. The Lord banish from among you this Censorious spirit, unto which some of you have been too much addicted. How often have we been araigned at your bar for sinning against light, for Obstinacy and Wilfulness? & your Censures have lighted most heavily upon Ministers, sparing none, neither Conformists nor Non-conformists. Heretofore 'twas wordly Interest, Parochial Maintenance, and fear of displeasing the people that blinded and corrupted them (a hard Censure to be past upon the whole body of the Ministry of the Nation) and how could it consist with Godliness for them to persist so many years in the Practice of that which they thought in their own consciences to be but a meer Tradition and Innovation. But you have lived
to see your mistake herein; and tell us now (if you can) what the temptations are that blind the Non-conformists, since their Ejection, and keeps them from coming over to you? They were in number (as they say) about 3000. and I think you cannot shew us a Catalogue of one in a Coun∣ty, no not in ten Counties, that is proselyted to you. God by his inscrutable and wise Providence, hath found out a strange way to clear the innocency of his Servants, that were so often branded for Hirelings, and there hath been an effe∣ctual course taken to clear their eye-sight, had Wordly In∣terest blinded them: They are now out of the reach of Com∣pliances on that account. 4. I would also humbly advise you to take heed of divi∣ding Principles, that are inconsistent with the Word, espe∣cially in this Circumstance of the Church wherein we are in danger to be overwhelmed with other difficulties: if it were tolerable, and venial to divide at other times, yet now the fault is irremissible and irrational. Luther coun∣selled the Synod at Norimberg to silence the Disputes until a fitter oportunity; Meum Consilium est, ut causam hanc sinatis ad tempus sopitam jacere, hoc tempore enim & animis sic affestis, venenum est disputare. I coun∣sel you that in this juncture of time, and when your minds are so much out of tune, you would let this Controversy sleep, and not dispute about it, for it will prove poysonous. 5. Take heed of rejecting those Overtures for Union, which are made by your Brethren. We are commanded to follow after those things that make for Peace, and shall we run away from them? You say they differ from you, and do not you likewise from them? We all see but in part, and know but in part, and therefore should bear with one ano∣ther. Why should you not have the like freedom which your Brethren have? Their Arms are open to receive you. You are straitned in your own Bowels, and not in theirs. O why will you not imbrace where Christ imbraceth? and re∣ceive those whom God receiveth? Or why do you refuse Communion with those here in Ordinances that you have ground to believe you shall have Com∣munion with in Glory.Perswasive to Peace. If you say, because they are not Baptized after Be∣lieving: This can be no more necessary for Church-Com∣munion, than it is unto Salvation; for the means cannot be more necessary to the subordinat end, which is Church-Com∣munion,
than it is to the Principal which is Salvation And Baptism is necessary to Salvation but by way of duty where opportunity concurs, but not by way of means where opportunity is wanting. And if to be Baptized after Faith, were indeed the Paedobaptists duty, the true reason why they do not perform it, is the want of a Moral opportunity, that is, the want of Conviction that it is their duty, they verily believing they were sufficiently Baptized in their Infancy: and that it is not lawful for them to be rebaptized. And all the while they remain under this perswasion, they can no more lawfully receive an after-Baptizing, by a voluntary submission to it, than they can who desire to be Baptiz∣ed, but want the opportunity of health or such an Admini∣strator (as you call it) as is necessary thereto. And if their Right to Salvation under these Circumstances, be not cut off, as doubtless it is not for the reason before given, then no more can their Right to Church-Communion thereby be cut off for the same reason. To conclude, let us all pray for the Peace of Jerusalem, that our Father which is in Heaven, the God of Peace, would look down upon his Divided Chil∣dren, and create Peace among them; That Christ Jesus who is the Peace-maker, and Prince of Peace, that prayed for it, and bequeathed it to his Disciples as his last Legacy, would reconcile our hearts one to another: That the Spirit of Peace whose fruit is Peace would compose our differences and make up our breaches, and give us enlarged hearts to embrace each other: That the Blessed Trinity, which hath nothing so proper to it self as Ʋnity, would pitty Zion, and raise up healing Instruments, and rebuke fiery Spirits, and remember the Promise that is made to the Church to be fulfilled in the times of the Gospel, That all her Chil∣dren shall be taught of the Lord, and great shall be the Peace of her Children. Mat. 5. 7. FINIS
Errata. PART 1. Page 2. line 2. for our read your. P. 9. l. 3. r. only manner. Chapt. 4. P. 51. l. 29. for one r. own. Ch. 7. P. 4. l. 11 for not Dipping r. not only Dipping. PART 2. Chap. 3. P. 152. l. 7. r. on l. 9 dele is meant ibid P. 154. l. 22. r. we. idem P. 165. l. 22. Dele when. Ch. 7. P. 105. l. 23. r. as idem P. 106. r. prejudic'd. Ib. P. 120. l. 7 for this r. the for Kidderminster r. Beaudly, &c. To the Bookbinder. By reason of the Author's remote distance from the Press, some great mistakes have happened, so that several Leaves must be cancelled: the Alphabet is also confused, wherefore observe these directions. The Title is a quarter of a Sheet; after that place the Preface, then B C. [cut off 25. and 26. Pages, and supply them with a leaf printed on the Title sheet] D E F G. Then A a B b C c* a half-sheet: then G g H h I i K k L l M m N n O o P p Q q R r S s T t a half sheet. after T t place C c, but cut of the 2 first leaves of the said C c] D d E e F f, but be sure to cut off the 4 last leaves of the said F f] then G g g H h h I i i K k k a half sheet, and a leaf marked K k k* printed with the Title sheet. lastly L l l.
