13589 99852316 17632
SPIRITVALL PRESERVATIVES against the Pestilence. OR SEVEN LECTVRES ON the 91. Psalme. First Printed in Anno. 1593. And now reuised, corrected, and published, as generally for the instruction of ignorant peo∣ple: so specially for the confirmation of the weake seruants of Iesus Christ; descri∣bing the most diuine and most soueraigne Preseruatiues a∣gainst the pestilence. By H. Holland. Hereunro is added a sweete Prayer of M. R. Greenhams, neuer before published. Leuit. 26. 25. I will send a sword vpon you, that shall auenge the qua∣rell of my couenant, when ye are gathered in your cities, I will send the Pestilence among you. LONDON Printed by T. C. for Iohn Browne and Roger Iackson. 1603.
The Contents of this Booke. 1 Q. What benefit, comfort and rest Gods peop'e receiue by faith against the Pestilence. 2 Q. Wherefore the Lord smiteth his people with the Pestilence. 3 Q. How the wicked spirits are Gods speciall in∣struments in the Pestilence. 4 Q. That a good conscience is a speciall preser∣uatiue against the Pestilence. 5 Q. How graciously the Lord preserues his peo∣ple by his holy Angels in the Pestilence. 6 Q What wonderfull communion there is be∣tweene Christ and his holy members, best knowne to Gods people in afflictions. 7 Of the visitation of the sicke in all diseases.
TO THE RIGHT HONO∣RABLE SYR ROBERT LEE, LORD Maior of the Citie of London, and to the Right Worshipfull Syr Iames Pemberton, and Syr Iohn Swinerton, Knights, and She∣riffes: and to the Right Worshipfull the Aldermer their brethren: H. H wisheth all graces to be mul∣plied by Gods holy spirit, as for the gouernment of the said Citie, so for their owne euerla∣sting saluation in Iesus Christ. THe Almightie God (Right Honourable and Worship∣full) in all ages of the woride, hath euer reclaimed his peo∣ple Psal. 105. 45. Deut. 28. 47. Ps. 78. 10. 17. Ps. 81. 13. from their sinnes, by sun∣dry his most iust indgements, and correstions: and warned them by his ma∣nifold mercies, and blessings, saith the holie psalmist, To walke vprightly in his sta∣tutes, and to obserue his lawes. There is no nation in all Europe, freed from the bondage of Antichrist, and profes∣sing the bolie Gospell of Iesus Christ, so en∣treated
both waies for many yeares as we haue bene. The Lords mercies and blessings cannot be numbred, take a short view of his chastice∣ments and fatherly corrections vppon vs. He hath put vs in minde of our disobedience often by the pestilence, which is one speciall reuenger of his couenant. And for many yeares past he Ann. 1588 Ann. 1589. Psal. 107. 18. Psa. 78. 37 An. 1592 neuer left pleading with vs by warres, famine, or by pestilence: but in all euils, when we cried vnto him, he soone called backe his anger, and did not stir vp all his wrath against vs. Now againe when we thought all our sorrowes to be paft, & that our blessed King should seale vp & conclude our peace with God & man: yet still the Lord proclaimes his wrath against vs, For we be not vpright with him, neither Psa. 78. 37 An. 1593 Anno. 81. An. 188. Ioachim. Camerar. synopsi de peste. pref. Euseb. in chro. An. 254 Act. & M. P. 74. are we faithfull in his couenant. Sundrie stories haue recorded, how in all ages the Lorde hath swept away multitudes with the pestilence. In the yeare of Christ, 81. when Vespasi∣an was Emperour, and againe in the yeare of Christ 188. in the daies of Commodus the Emperour, there dd daily in Rome of the pestilence no lesse then 2000. Againe in Anno. 254. there were fifteene prouinces of the Romane Empire, Incredibi∣liter
exhaustae (saith one) wonderfully wasted Lauathr se de peste. with the pestilence. In the yeare 530. in Iustinians time in Ann. 530. Constantinople and there-abouts, there died 5000. euery day, interdum etiam decem Euseb. lib. 9. cap. 8. & 8. cap. 16. sub fine, & 7. cap. 21. millia, sometimes 10000. And in an other part of Greece it is said, the plague destroied so many, that there were none liuing to bury the dead. The stories of the Church speake often of most greeuous plagues vpon the Pagans for af∣flicting An. 540. Gods people: for this cause Anno. Euagr. lib. 4. c. 24. &. 2. c. 6. An. 1359 540. there was an vniuersall plague 50. yeares togither, which most greeuously consu∣med and tormented (saith Euagrius) all the world. And in Italy, it is said, that An. 1359. the pestilence destroied so many that Anno. 1521. Act. &. M. P. 682. there scarce remained 10. of a thousand. And in Rome where the sonne of perdition sit∣teth as God in the Temple of God, was a plague Ann. 1521. that consumed aboue an Anno. 1576. Anno. 1577. Ioachim. Camerar. insynopsi de pe. hundreth thousand people. And since the Gospel began to shine foorth in Germany and other parts of the world, the Lord hath consumed and wafted diuerse Cities in the Popes dominions in Italy again, as Mil∣lan, Padua, Venice, and many moe, about
the yeare 1576. and 1577. with a most greeuous pestuence, which destroied a hun∣dreth thousand in a Citie. And it is thought the Petrach ex millenis qui busque hom. vix. 10. super essent. Num. 25. 9. Psal. 106. litle kingdome of Bohemia lost no lesse then 300000. of the plague about the same time. In the elder Church of the Iewes, the Lorde often in a short time destroied thou∣sands & millions: as for the sinnes of his peo∣ple with the Moabites, the plague burst in vpon them (saith the psalmist,) and smote There was avehement Pestilence in England. Anno. 348. Act. & M P. 484. and. Anno. 1314. Anno. 1591. Anno. 1592. Odisea∣ses. 8351. An. 1593. 24. thousand. And in Dauids time, in three dates 70000. When we consider this hand of God so mightie in consuming thousandes in great wrath, both in the Church and without, both in elder times and of late yeares, both in forrein nations, & otherwhiles in this land, and in this Honorable Citie: how is it, that we do not extoll the most admirable lenitie, and fatherly forbearing hand of the Lorde vppon vs in these daies? for we shall seldome read or see such gleaning of a few, with such patience and long suffering as the Lord hath done with vs. Manie haue a brutish feare & worldly sorow, & as it seemeth, because of the losse of
their long peace & prosperitie? but some again on the other side, are so foole-hardie, that they Carnal and irreligious feares pre∣sumption and securitie feare nothing, and thinke these louing warnings of the Lord to be but ordinarie and therefore not to be feared: and neither regard as Chri∣stians anie amendment of life, nor as good Citi∣zens good and wise orders appointed for the preseruation of this honorable Citie, and the health of the Lordes people. The greatest sort flie alwaies from the Lord as in the lesser euils, so in this great calamitie to all the naturall helps that can be found, and yet receiue small benefit (as we all see) in the end, because they seeke not in the first place to those most preci∣ous spiritual preseruatiues & helps which the Lord offereth vs against the pestilence. Reason, phisicke, & daily experience can teach vs, that some secret causes worke in this plague more then in any other. For this cause (R. H. & W.) and to satisfie the request of some friendes, I was content this Treatise (containing I trust some comfortable spiritual helpes against the pectilence) should be published for the benefit I hope of some of Gods people. Now my humble request vnto your Honor and Worships is, that as you be wise, prouident and circumspect, and verie care∣full
to remoue all naturall causes which seeme to breede, and do indeede give strength vnto this venemous contagion, by obser∣ation of politicke orders in all the parts of this Honorable citie, so you would also be as vigilant, & striue with strong hand to re∣moue the spiritual causes of the same; I mean that you should pare away all the rotten proud sinnes of this citie (which are cor∣rigible by good lawes) as much as in you lieth with the sword of instice. our will is good, and hath beene (I heare for manye yeares) for to cast downe the diuellish theaters, the nurceries of whoredome and uncleannesse: they are Cupids and Venus temples, they are Bacchus and Sathans pallaces, they corrupt the youth of your citie intollerably: all eies can see, and all chast eares can witnes, & some of the maisters of these euil artes (when the Lord had humbled them by some great ter∣rors) were driuen to confesse the same in ex∣treame passions and pangs of death. In all ages God and his Church hath euer abhorred these wicked abbominations: let one man speake for all. Tertul shewing how Gods people differed from the Pagans in his sweet apologie for the Church against the gentils, he
saith: Nihil est nobis dictu, visu, aud, Abolog. c. 8. cum impudicitia theatri. We cannot abid to speake, to see, or heare anie thing of the shamelesse and vnchast wantonnesse o your theaters. They replied vpon you in t citie often, as elsewhere with authoritie and  censes, euer allowed by the almightie. T idle drones greatly prophaned, as in all the la so specially in this citie, the Lords Saboth, and carried away great flockes, or heards rather of blinde people from the holy worship of Al∣mightie God. But our gratious King seeing the greatnes of this impietie, hath alreadie by Edict reformed this euill: The Lord will not be vn∣mindfull of him, for being thus mindfull of his holy Saboths. Lord open thou his eyes to see the manifolde impieties that as yet re∣maine in Church and Common-wealth, and giuc him a wise heart to reforme thy sanctuarie, according to the diuine rule thy most holy word. As for naturall preser∣uatiues the learned Phisitions can best direct you. Yet giue me leaue onely to put your Honor and Worships in mind of such helpes as some of the learned haue greatly commended, and ma∣ny godly wise men, haue of ten wished for the benefite of this citie.
The first thing to bee desired is, that God would stirre vp your hearts and others to pro∣uide more new burials for the citie, where the dead might better rest from the liuing, and the liuing better auoyd the contagion of the dead. The second thing to be wished is, that many Leu. 13. 46 2. Kin. 15. 5 houses were prouided (as in elder times for the contagious leprosie, and many cities in other countries and kingdomes haue at this day) where the sicke of infected houses (if they de∣sired more libertie) might haue more freedome of aire and benefit of the place for diet keeping, &c. For such as be pind vp in their owne houses in the citie, as birdes in their cages, are often greatly plagued, the rich with want of ayre, the poore with famine. The last thing is this, that the sicke be committed to the custody & cure of such selected & chosen men, mercifull men, men fearing God men of iudge∣ment and knowledge, meete to minister helpes both corporall and spirituall to ease the grie∣uances of Gods people both for their soules and bodies, and that such be well prouided for, and encouraged with a most competent and suffici∣ent salarie. The Lord guide your hearts and spirits by his almightie spirit, and graunt you such spi∣rituall
courage, wisedome and iudgement, as that ye may faithfully execute the Lords iudge∣ments in this Honorable Citie, to the glory of God, the good of his Church, and the euer∣lasting comfort of your owne soules, through Iesus Christ. Anno. 1603. Your H. and W. to com∣maund and to vse in the Lord, Henry Holland.
THE EPISTLE TO the Reader. WE may well say (good Reader) of the men of this age, as Christ & his Pro∣phet spake of the people of their times: their eyes are shut and see not, their eares are heauie Mat. 13. 14. 15. Esa. 6. 9. Fat things want sense and feeling. and heare not, their hearts are fat and feele not. Ignorant people swarm in all places, ha∣uing eyes and cannot see how the Lords iudge∣ments are threatned, and otherwhiles most iust∣ly fall vpon them: They stop their eares from the Gospell, they can at no hand be charmed to any sincere obedience to it, such effeminate, de∣licate, and itching eares, as will not heare the charmer, charm he neuer so wisely. Their harts are fat, they cannot vnderstand how leaue their soules are, & how emptie of all good graces, & how stuffed & farced full of rotten & vnsaue∣rie sinnes in towne & country. What ignorance and blindnesse, what insidelitie and prophane∣nesse, what pride & idlenesse, what gluttony and drunkennesse, what whoredome & vncleannes, what deceit and lying, what blasphemies and all cursed speaking, what riot and all maner of ex∣cesse, do raigne in most places? For these sinnes & the like, many iudgements are fallen, and we haue yet escaped them. The
Lords hand striueth to chasten vs, & not to cō∣sume vs: miserable people cāhear whē their bel∣lies speak, but cānot heare whē God doth speak. Your sinnes cause the pestilence, the pestilence in time wil breed famin, great wants and penu∣rie among you. The Lord giue you eyes to see, eares to heare, and hearts to vnderstand. Make hast to reform your selues first, & then to your families. Teach & correct your vnruly seruants, keepe them frō theaters and other ab∣hominatiōs, bring them to sermons more care∣fully, teach and correct your children for lying, swearing, & blasphemies. Teach al your family the holy grounds of religion, the feare of the Lord, for so ye are bound to do: if ye doubt of Deu. 6. 7. 8. 9. Gen. 18. 19 Exod. 12. 26. Iosh. 24. 15 The godly tremble to heare & see your childrē and seruants in the streets this, aske the Lord and he shall tell you. But a∣lasse, most of you miserable people, neither can teach, nor will learne any good: Nay, it is to be feared, you teach your wiues, children and ser∣uants, all the euill you see, heare, & know, euery where practised in the world. They learn of you to sweare horribly, their wicked mouthes are full of othes: they learne of you to walke inordi∣nately: for their liues are vngodly & prophane. Families are the fountains of al commō-weals, purge the fountaines and the streames shall be clean, Wherfore I warn, such as fear the Lord, loue Gods people, regard their owne welfare in
this life, & euerlasting saluation in that which is to come, teach, instruct, correct, & by all good meanes reform your families: for assuredly our sinnes call for many iudgements from the Lord vpon vs. Purge your families I say, of vnclean persons, Ps. 101. 7. Gen. 35. 2. Ep. to Phil. Deut. 21. 18. 20. as did Dauid & Iacob, not sparing euen your owne children in their disobedience, riotous and luxurious life. And humble your selues (in this and the like calamity) in abstinence and praier: For so haue the people of god euer done in sun∣dry afflictions, when they sought for any great blessings for thēselues, or for the church of God, Hest. 4. 16. Nehem. 1. 4. Act. 10 30. And so did Dauid & his good people in the pestilence, they rested not crying vnto the Lord, and then it is 2. Sam. 24. 25. Sic exoratus est Iehouah terrae. said: The Lord was entreated & appeased toward the land, & the plague ceased from Israel. Here I offer thee christian Reader, some spi∣rituall helpes & cōforts, both against the pesti∣lence and many other euils: if thou shalt receiue any benefit by them, giue God the praise & glo∣ry. Farewell in Christ, the yeare of our salua∣tion. 1603. Thine in the Lord Iesus. Henrie Holland.
SPIRITVALL PRESERVATIVES against the Pestilence. THE 1. LECTVRE. Psal. 91. 1. Who so resteth in the secret of the most high, shall abide in the shadow of the Almightie. THIS Psalme is a very precious Iewell, contai∣ning most sweete doc∣trine, and heauenly con∣solation. It is most like to be written when Yet the Iewes think it to bee a Psalme of Moses. Three daie 2. Sam. 24. 16. . 25. the Angell of God in Da∣uids kingdome slew so many thousands, in that short time through∣out all Iewrie. At which time the Lord mo∣ued to mercie by the instant praiers & con∣tinuall
supplications of David and his peo∣ple, the Angell was commaúnded to holde his hand, as from Ierusalem, so from the whole land. Considering therefore all cir∣cumstances, this Psalme may very well bee referred to that time and people. A short view of the whole Psalme may thus bee giuen thee. They haue a most suffici∣ent protection, as in all euils, so in this of the Pestilence, whom the Lord hideth in his se∣cret place, comforteth in his almightie sha∣dow, and couereth as with his holy wings. And this he doth to all them which assured∣ly rest by faith in him, & hope in him, which haue Gods word and holy veritie for their shield and sword, which do watchfully wait vpon him, in all reuerence, in all their waies, which wholy hang vpon him, as vpon their Almighty Father in loue, in faith, and feare, which call vpon him in all their troubles. These men he protecteth fatherly, hee pre∣serueth mightily by his good Angels, and comforteth sweetly by his holy spirit, as in all troubles, so in the dreadfull time of the Pestilence. The parts of this Psalme may be these. 1. The first part is a proposition: verse 1. The parts.
for this generall doctrine is here first pro∣pounded: that who so resteth by faith in Gods prouidence, reposing himselfe in all afflictions, sweetly as in his fathers bosome, that man hath assuredly an almightie sha∣dow, and protection against all euills of this life. 2 The second part is a confirmation, verse 2. by an argument drawne from the Prophets owne experience: it may be set in this forme. What I finde true touching my faith, by mine owne spiritual experience in my selfe, Gods faith∣full may find true by the like experience in them∣selues. But I finde, and must euer professe it, that the Lords almightie shadow is my best protection a∣gainst all euils, and my soueraigne preseruatiue in the Pestilence. Therfore Gods holy people, if they do by their precious faith repose themselues in Gods bo∣some, they shall finde as an almightie protection against all euils, so a most soueraigne preserua∣tiue against the Pestilence. 3. The third part is an application of this sweete doctrine vnto all belceuers, to stirre them vp to embrace it: from the third
verse to the fourteenth. Where we be to ob∣serue: 1. How with many words, and sweete promises, he desires to cheere and confirme the hearts of the faithfull, that they may rest by a particular, victorious faith on God in the Pestilence. 1. ver. 3. Surely he will deliuer thee. 2. ver. 4. He will couer thee. 3. ver. 5. Thou shalt not be fraide. 4. ver. 7. A thousand shall fall at the sid, and it shall not come neare thee. 5. ver. 13. Thou shalt walke vpon the fierce Lyon. &c. Secondly obserue, how he calleth vpon the beleeuer to cleaue vnto Gods protecti∣on by a speciall faith: and to looke well vnto his waies &c. 1. ver. 4. He wil couer thee vnder his wings when thou shalt hide, or betake thy selfe vnder his featbers. 2. ver. 9. 10. Because thou hast set the Lord (which is mine hope) euen the most high, for thy refuge: there shal none occasion be giuen that euil may touch thee. 3. His Angels shall keepe thee, in all thy wayes.
Thirdly, obserue with what varietie of names and arguments the Prophet setteth forth the nature and qualities of the Pesti∣lence: for he calles it 1. The snare of the hunter. ver. 3. 2. The noysome Pestilence. ver. 3. 3. The feare of the night. ver. 5. 4. The arrow flying by day. ver. 5. 5. The Pestilence that walketh in darknesse. verse. 6. 7. The rewardf the wicked. ver. 8. Fourthly, marke what meanes the Lord vseth for our protection in the Pestilence: for the Prophet assureth vs, that the holy Angels of God are sent with a speciall charge and commission from God to pre∣serue his faithfull people from euill spirits in the Pestilence. ver. 11. He shal giue his Angels charge ouer thee, to keepe thee in all thy waies. ver. 12. They stall beare thee in their hands that thou hurt not thy foote against a stone. And thus farre the application. The fourth part of this Psalme is a con∣clusion, wherein the Lord himselfe speaketh (as it were) to the heart of the beleeuer, fee∣ding him with sweete promises, and instruc∣ting
him what duties hee requireth at his hands. 1. Gods sweet promises are these repeated. 1. I will deliuer him. ver. 14. & 15. 2. I will set him vp on high, that is in a sure place of defence. ver. 14. 3. I will heare his prayers. ver. 15. 4. I will be with him in troubles. ver. 15. 5. I. I will honour him. ver. 15. 6. I. will giue him long life. ver. 16. 7. I will shew him my saluation. ver. 16. 2. God requires in his children. 1. Faith.Because hee dependeth on me, or embraceth me. ver. 14. 2. Loue.Because hee dependeth on me, or embraceth me. ver. 14. 3. Knowledge and profession ver. 14. 4. The spirit of prayer. So soone as he cal∣leth vpon me I will heare him. ver. 15. The 91. Psalme. verse. 1. Who so or dwelleth resteth in the secret of the most high, shall abide in the shadow of the Almightie.
THE first verse containeth the propo∣sition of the whole Psalme, as is before shewed. The sense is this: That he which firmely standeth by faith in the Lords seeret Sense. place, that is, vnder the Lords gracious pro∣uidence and strong protection, when tem∣pestuous calamities fall vpon the world for sin, he shall be graciously preserued as in an almightie shadow. Secret Latibu∣lum. a place of refuge wherevnto a Tremell. man runnes from the violence and rage of his enemies: as wilde beasts when they are in chase before the hunters, make all speede into theyr dennes and holes for their de∣fence. So much doth the word in the origi∣nall Beseter. signific: And so in like manner the prudent man hides himselfe in Gods bosome, when God smites his people with the Pe∣stilence. Pro. 22. 3. shall abide in the shadow: or as the best reade, shall lodge all Iithlouā. night in the shadow. Like as wearied trauellers much spent with the heate of the Sunne and long trauel, greatly reioyce when they come to a couert where they may rest and refresh their wearie bodies: So the spirits of the faithful, much disquieted with the afflictiōs of this life, can find their sweet sleepe, when
they can by a holy faith in Iesus Christ, re∣pose themselues as in the bosome of the Al∣mightie. Where first wee are to learne, how lo∣uingly bserue. 1. the holy Ghost doth warne vs, to cleaue vnto God, and to perseuere in his holy worship in afflictions, in time of triall, wherein the wicked runne to any of the creatures, rather then to God, yea some∣times to Sathan himselfe, before they seeke any refuge or comfort in the Al∣mightie. Such as rest in the ordinary crea∣tures Foure sorts of men in troubles di∣uesly affec∣ed. Ib. 3. 16. only, are meere Atheists; such as seeke to Sathan and his artes, are bewitched Pa∣pists, Idolaters, and such like. Such as when all helpes faile them, are driuen at last by theyr corrections (as Iob speaketh) to come vnto the Lord, are weake in the faith: Such as first seeke reconciliation and peace with God by Iesus Christ, and then desire a blessing in the vse of the creatures, are wise and good Christians. The Prophet saith not, they haue a sure defence in war, which haue many men, many horses, &c. in fa∣mine store of corne and good prouision, in pestilence good naturall preseruatiues and curatiues: but that such as haue a strong
faith in Iesus Christ, are then greatly bles∣sed, and shall be mightily preserued. Some thinke it is a light matter to come to God by faith, and to lye downe as it were in his bosome confidently in afflicti∣ons: But this is one speciall brand and marke of the faithfull, and that which God most desireth, and a point without the gra∣cious assistance of Gods spirit, which is not in the power of flesh and bloud to practise. There is a notable storie 2. Chron. 13. 18. of Abiah and his people of Iudah: of whom it is said, that they preuailed against their ene∣mies, because they stayed vpon the Lord God of their father. And the like we haue 2. Chron. 16. 7. of Asa his falling away in his latter age, in his afflictions: first he is said to haue run from the Lord to Gods professed ene∣mies, the Syrians, and to haue made a coue∣nant with them to helpe him in his warres against the Israelites: at which time Hanni the seer came to the King, and spake these words: Because thou hast rested vpon the King of Aram, and not rested in the Lord thy God, therefore is the host of that King of Aram run away from thee, and thou (verse 9.) shalt haue
warres againe. And then the Prophet confir∣meth his prophesie by the kings former ex∣perience, in the victories the Lord gaue him before by faith, when hee cried to God in feruent prayer, saying: 2. Chron. 14. 11. Helpe Lord, for we rest on thee. The Ethiopians and Lubbims, were they not a greast bost, with charrets and horse exceeding many? yet because thou didst rest vpon the Lord, hee did deliuer them into thine hands: then hee added this notable argument. For the eyes of the Lord behold all the earth, to shewe himselfe strong with them whose hart is sound towards him. In the like maner he is noted in his sicknes not to haue sought the Lorde in the first place, but the Phisition. In all extremities then our first refuge must bee by faith vnto the true God; for he will be, and must be (if we regard but our alleageance only we owe vnto his maiestie) first sought for, and hono∣red before the creatures. I. Question. What benefite, comfort, and rest Gods people may receiue by faith, in the Pestilence.
THe blessed faith of the Saints of God Heb. 11. 6 Rom. 14. Io. 6. 9. is a wonderfull supernaturall grace, by the which we greatly please God, and without it, we displease him in althings, without exception. This great grace and gift of God, as it is most needfull at all seasons and turnes, so most of all in extremities, for if it then faile vs, we shall be carried away as with a maine saile, from the Creator to the creature, and and we shall fixe all our sences vpon them, and confidence in them, & forget the great Lord and gouernour of all the host of hea∣uen and earth. This vertue greatly pleased Iesus Christ in his miraculous cures on earth, and doth no lesse doubtlesse please him now in heauen. The faith of the Gospell, or Euangeli∣call requires; 1. that you beleeue that the Messias is come: 2. that you beleeue that Iesus Christ the sonne of the Virgin Mary is God and Man, or God manifested in the flesh, and that very Messias which was to come. 3. that you beleeue in him, for your perfect redemption. 4. lastly it was requi∣red in these which resorted vnto him for miraculous cures, that they carried with
them a particular faith to be healed, that is a comfortable perswasion of heart, that hee both could and would heale them, and such afflicted persons as they prayed for, might be healed. This holy faith I say, greatly plea∣sed Christ in earth, and shall preuaile with him in heauen also for all mercies and bles∣sings to the worlds end. And the contrary sinne did hinder many graces streaming sweetely from him vnto the Iewes, and so doth still to all vnbelee∣uers among the Gentiles. This the Euan∣gelists tell vs, where they say, that when hee camo to Capernaum his owne Countrey, Hee did not many workes there, for their vn∣beleefes Math. 13. 58. Mat. 6. 5. Mar. 16. 14 Luk 8. 25. sake: And another saith, Hee coul not there do any great workes for their vnbe∣leefe, and that he maruelled at their vnbeleefe, Wee see then how insidelitie may keep backe from vs Iesus Christ with all his ri∣ches. The faithfull euer returned from his Maiestie both sweetely comforted with his blessings, and graciously strengthened with his louing commendations. The Centurion which came vnto him in Caper∣naum, with a good heart and a sound faith, Matt. 8. 10. 13. first he receiued this blessing, Goe thy way
and as thou hast beleeued, so be it vnto thee, and his seruant was healed the same houre. Then followed this comfortable commen∣dation: Uerily I say vnto you, I haue not found so great faith euen in Israel. Againe, the woman with the bloudie Issue, shee re∣ceiued many mercies from Iesus Christ; first this comfort, hee calls her Daughter; secondly this blessing, the issue of her bloud Matth. 9. 22. was stayed and healed; thirdly, this com∣mendation, Daughter bee of good comfort, thy faith hath made thee whole. Againe, two blinde men crie to be healed: hee asked them of their faith, Beleeue ye that I am able Math. 9. verse. 29. to do this? they said, yea Lord: and then hee said vnto them, according to your faith be it vnto you, and they were healed. Of a Cananitish woman it is written, that she was most earnest with Christ: and she is at last gratiously comforted, first with this commendation: O woman great is thy faith, be it vnto thee as thou desirest: second∣ly Matth. 15. verse. 28. Mar. 10. 15 Luk 8. 50 with this blessing, Her daughter was made whole in that instant. The like com∣mendation and comfort receiued the blinde men in Iericho, and Iairus when Christ cu∣red his Daughter: Feare not, beleeue onely
and she shall be made whole. Here I demand whether Gods minister and good people now, may not receiue as great mercies and blessings, as wel corporall as spirituall, by faith, as the people of the Iewes did, when Christ was conucrsant with them on the earth? Wee knowe, his knowledge, his loue, his mercies are not di∣minished or changed, his power and might is the same, and more glorified. Surely then that which letteth the free course of his gra∣ces and mercies from vs, must bee in our selucs, ignorance, hardnes of heart, and great infidelitie. Cyprian saith, in his time, hee and his bre∣thren did wonderfully conuince Idolaters, confound Sathan and all his practises, cast out diuels, and heale the possessed, by faith, praier, and fasting, &c. Et velexiliunt statim, velè vanescunt gradatim, prout fides patien∣tis adiuat, &c. The wicked spirits (saith he) 4. Tractat de Idolorū vanitate. either slye away presently, or vanish away by degrees, as the patients faith helpeth, and as hee which healeth hath grace to preuaile with God. I know that myracles are past, and that the holy word is sufficiently con∣firmed: notwithstanding, the Lord ceaseth
not to blesse his owne ordinances, and to graunt many mercies to the faith of his ho∣ly seruants, as hereafter in an other question shall be shewed. Now, whereas we see often Gods good people in grace to bee smitten with the Pe∣stilence, Leuit. 26. Deut. 28. this hath troubled many, that these great plagues should light alike vpon good and euill without difference: this caused Iobs friends to account him an hypocrite. First I will answere this in Cyprians words. Mouet quosdam, quod aqualiter cum gentibus nostros morbi istius valetudo corripiat, quasi Serm. 2. de mortal. adhec crediderit Christianus, vt & immunis a contactu malorum, noundo & seculo foeliciter fruatur, & non omnia hic aduersa perpessus ad futuram laetitiam reseruetur. Many thinke it straunge that this mortalitie smiteth alike our bretheren with the Gentiles: as if a Christian did beleeue to this end, he may with hearts ase in this present world be free from all euils, and not rather, that after he hath suffered here all sorrowes, hee might be reserued for those toyes which are to ome. Againe I say, Gods best children may fall into proud sinnes, as Lot into drunkennesse and incest, Dauid into murder and adulte∣ries,
Peter into blasphemies: And therefore the curses of Gods lawes as crosses, are of∣ten inflicted vpon them. And as the Lord doth chastice for sinnes past and present, so he doth preuent by great rods great sinnes whereinto we might fall, if wee were no greatly humbled. This may best be demon∣strate by the holy presidents of the Scrip∣ture. It is storied Luke 13. 10. that Christ teaching in a Sinagogue of the Iewes on  Sabboth day, there was there a woman which bad a spirite of infirmitie eighteen yeares, and was bowed together, and could no ift up her selfe in any wise. When Iesus sawe her, he called her to him, and said: Woman thou art loosed from thy disease: and he laid his hands on her, and immediately shee was made straight againe, and glorified God And the ruler of the Sinagogue answered with indignation, because that Iesus ha healed on the Sabboth day, and said vnt the people; there are sixe dayes in which men ought to worke, in them therefore come and be healed, and not on the Sabboth day. Then the Lord answered him, and said, Hy∣pocrite, doeth not each one of you on the Sabboth day, loose his oxe or his asse from
the stall, and leade him away to the water, and ought not this daughter of Abraham, whom Sathan hath bound eighteene yeares, to bee loosed from this bond on the Sabboth day? Heere thou hast a faithfull daughter of A∣braham tormented by Sathan in a most strange malady for many yeares. The like Math. 9. 2 we see in the good man sick of the palsey, in∣deed a most dangerous palsey, commended for his faith, and such as carried him to be healed. In like maner Gods children haue in all ages bene smitten with the Pestilence. Da∣uid hath left vnto the Church a Psalme of remembrance, that Gods people may for euer learne instruction by his chastise∣ments. The best Interpreters are of iudge∣ment, Psal. 28. Dauid smit∣ten with the Pestilenee that he was sore afflicted with the Pe∣stilence: the symptomes and signes of this euill appeare in his mourning: he saith, there is nothing sound in his flesh. 2. His wounds are rotten. 3. Hee is bowed and crooked with the paines. 4. His raines are full of burning. 5. Hee crieth for the paine of his heart, Where this euill flieth (saith Galen) like a Dragon. Lastly hee saith: His louers and friends stand aside from his plague. It is most like also that
Hezekiah was smitten with the Pestilence, 2. Kin. 20. Heb. for he was deadly sicke for the time, & then it is said, the figges healed him of the bile or carbuncle. Most grieuous was the pestilentiall plague which Ioh had, and so noysome was it, that as it befell Dauid, his louers and his friends (which were no counterfeit friends, for they came indeede to minister spiri∣tuall comforts to him) they stood aside from him seuen daies, & partly for sorrow, partly no doubt for feare of contagion, did not approach neare to any familiar commu∣nication as they purposed. Maister Beza that blessed seruant of the In the argu∣ment of this Psalme. Lord, and light of Christs Church, was humbled foure times and his family, as hee confesseth himselfe, with the Pestilence. Againe, the plague of leprosie was no lesse grieuous and noysome then the Pestilence, for that it would in a strange maner, pierce Leuit. 14. 37. Num. 12. into the stone walles, and very contagious was it: yet the good woman Miriam Mo∣ses sister, was grieuously chastened for her sinnes with this plague, seuen dayes toge∣ther. At Alexandria there was a very great
famine and plague at one time, (for famine may breed the pestilence, and pestilence brings famine, and warres bring both). This plague consumed multitudes of people, and many good Christians; for when the Heathens sled, the Christians in a wonder∣full compassion & mercie, buried the dead, which otherwise were deuoured and torne in pecces of dogs, and so were many good people poysoned with that infection and died, as Eusebius writeth. Lib. 7. cap. 11. Thus then wee see Gods good children chastened in this present life, with the same rods with the wicked. For like as the father in the family giuing correction to his ser∣uants, if any of his children more vnto∣ward and disobedient then the rest, bee neare his hand, hee will happily sinite him also with the same rodde, and yet loue him as his childe, and not as a seruant: euen so the Almightie in the pestilence, and in a generall visitation vpon a Citie, Towne, or Countrey, he layes otherwhiles the same rods vpon his deare children wherewith he consumes the wicked. And yet all shall worke together for the good of them which feare him. Rom. 8. 28.
For howsoeuer our Lord and maister in his anger, otherwhiles takes vp against vs the same scourges which he hath prepared for the vngodly, yet assuredly he will giue vs but his fatherly correction, and hee will cause vs to vnderstand, that all the chastice∣ments of this present life, are not worthy the great glory, the sonnes of God shall receiue in the life to come. Heere let vs dayly with Ieremie, in our visitations, crie with open mouth; O Lorde take mee Ier. 15. 15 not away in the continuance of thine anger. The Psalmist saith, hee casts foorth signes of his feare, anger, indignation, and wrath, whē he smites a people with the Pestilence. Psal. 78. 49. And let vs striue mightily to bee com∣forted, and to rest patiently by faith in Ie∣sus Christ. First let vs endeuour to receiue by faith an answere from Gods spirit, that our sinnes are couered and pardoned, and Psal. 32. 5. Luk. 7. this answere shall more reuiue and comfort our hearts, then all the cordials in the world can reuiue the spirits or any partes of the outwarde man. Secondly, let vs mightily call for the confirmation of our faith, that Heb. 10. 35 wee may haue patience, The daughter of
God, Patientia Dei alumna, saith Tertul: for Tertul. de patientia. this is a soueraigne preseruatiue against this euill; for want of this, vnbeleeuers are like birdes in lime or snares, which the more they striue to escape, the more they are li∣med and snared. It is wonderfull what com∣fort and courage, faith by patience may Heb. 11. 3 32. 2. Chron. 14. 16. worke in all true beleeuers. This kept Asa when 20000. Ethiopians came about him to deuour him: he was greatly inuironed & had a strange deliuerance. This comfor∣ted Dauid when he was ready to be stoned, God gaue him great courage, Hee comforted 1. Sam. 30. 6. Hest. 4. 14 himselfe in the Lord his God, and receiued a wonderfull deliuerance. Likewise Hester in her most dangerous attempt, for the pre∣seruation of Gods people. Hannaiah Mi∣shael, Dan. 3. 17 and Azariah, and all the Martyrs of God in the world, were euer encouraged by faith patiently to beare for the truth sake Heb. 11. al the tortures & torments which the world could lay vpon them. So let vs in the like straites whatsoeuer, of warres, famine, and pestilence, cast our selues by faith into Gods bosome, and desire that by patience we may possesse our soules 2. Tim. 1. 12. in peace: and say with P. I know whom I haue trusted.
Faith in Gods prouidence, and faith in the redemption goe togither. We can ne∣uer truly trust him with our bodies, if wee trust him not with our soules. And againe, if we doubt of his fauour in earthly things, we must needs much more doubt of the same in heauenly things. Triall of our faith in Gods Prouidence. 1. If wee do not in the good day and in prosperitie, attend well the meane, of salua∣tion, and store vp on soules with comforts, we shall be emptie in the euill day when it commeth. 2. If we be not sust perswaded that all euil inuentions & corrupt imaginations, ei∣ther bred in vs by our owne corruption or iniected into vs by the malice and craft of men or Angels be grieuous Ge. 56. Pro. 12. 2 Io. 14. sins before the Almightie: 2. if we do not mourne for our secret thoughts, Act. 8. & inward back-sliding & falling from God: 3. if this holy mourning cause not in vs a holy hatred c Ps. 119. 112. & detestation of all vaine shifts, and wicked inuentions of the world, we shall not possibly stand in the euill day.
All professe an asfiance & trust in Gods prouidence, but vnlesse they trust in his word, thier rest is vaine, and will deceiue them in the euill day. A man must therefore with Dauid; Psal. 119. 114. say on this wise: O Lord thou art my refuge and shield; that is, I rest on thy prouidence: but note the euidence of this faith, and my trust is in thy word: for hee that doth not know, be∣leeue, reioyce, & trust in Gods word, he can haue no faith in Gods prouidēce. God pro∣miseth things temporal & 2 miT 4. 7. things eternall: his word containes generall promises, and particular promises for all wants of body and soule: generall, as Ioh. 1. Heb. 13. 56. I will neuer leaue thee, nor for sake thee: The be∣leeuer must answer in hart: ô Lord thou art my refuge, and my trust is in thy word: par∣ticular for wants, Ps. 34. 10. They which seek the Lord shall want nothing that is good: To which Psal. 56. voice answer with a beleeuing heart: O Lord thou art my refuge, & my trust is in thy word. 4. If we haue hope in Gods prouidēce, we must take heed that we indent not with the Lord for any thing, but simply giue vp our selues to him, seeking Gods grace at al tmes and with all our hearts, and let vs aske other
things as pleaseth him: for whē wegiue these outward things to the Lord, thē will he soo∣nest giue them to vs againe. Thus did Dauid in his affliction 2. Sam. 25. 26. If the Lord say, I haue no pleasure in thee, behold, here I am, let him do to me as seemeth good in his eys. 5. Wee may not aske earthly things as signes of his fauour, neither must we esteem the want of these things as tokens of his dis∣pleasure. THE 2. LECTVRE. Verse. 2. I say to the Lord, O my defence and my for∣tresse, my God is he in whom I trust. HEre the Psalmist speaketh of his owne sait and experience, desiring there∣by to teach and confirme others. The The second part, or con∣firmation of the former doctrine by an argumēt of experi∣ence. sense is this: Let the men of this life seeke rest and comfort where they please, I am thus resolued & haue purposed, in all trou∣bles, plagues, &c. first to flie vnto the Al∣mightie shadow of gods most graciou pro∣tection. And as I beleeue, so will I speake in
my heart before God, and with my mouth before men, that the Lord is my fortresse: and the God in whom I will trust. O my defer. e. The word signifieth a place of refuge to shelter our selues in a great tempest, q. a. I will seeke my protection ô Lord vnder thy wings. And my fortresse. The word signifieth a place of defence in warres. Thus by ma∣ny metaphors the Prophet desires to assure vs, what a sure refuge God is vnto his faith∣full people in all their troubles. In whom I trust. On whom I set all my rest: and not on the secondarie causes, or ex∣ternal meanes on which all vnbeleeuers stay themselues, and therefore if these faile them, they dispaire or be at their wits end. Ier. 17. 5. Cursed be the man that trusteth in man, and maketh flesh his arme, and withdraweth his hart from the Lord. And continually. Ps. 40. 5. Blessed is the man that maketh the Lorde his trust. In this verse we may obserue a good mark of a true beleeuer to run to God, when most men run from God, as in all extremities we daily see. It is a most hard point to practise to diuert from the common rode of the wic∣ked
in euils, and to betake our selues to gods helpe and holy ordinance. The men of this world liue daily by examples, but we must liue by faith, we must be resolued as was Io∣fhua, howsoeuer other men make choise for Habak. 2. 4 their gods and religion, yet (saith hee) I and mine house will serue the Lord And as Da∣uid Chap. 24. 15. here saith: let the prophane multitude of vnbeleeuers, run to the creatures in their necessities, forgetting the Lord of life, yea some to the meanes hee vtterly forbiddeth, and others not a few, to the meere professed enemies of God, to Pagans and Idolaters, as often did the Kings of Israel and Iudah; yea to Sathan himselfe, as all such do which run to the diuellish faculties of witchcraft and sorcery: as the Egyptians when they were smitten with sundry plagues, they sought to their wizardly priests and coniurers, so the Chaldees, Babilonians, Saul, Manasses, Ne∣ro, ulian, and such like in all ages. The hy∣pocrites iudgement and practise is cleane contrary to this holy canon here taught vs, for he thinks it neuer safe to walke that way which most men treade not: of the way of the multitude, it is said, Many side it and like it, but the end is destruction. Luk. 1325 Mat 7. 13
The 2. thing to be noted here, is how he laboureth to teach others by his example. Obseru. 2. This is a singular good way for teachers to conuert and confirme soules, by speaking vnto men of their owne sence, and experi∣ence of their faith. I finde saith hee by most comfortable experience, that they be safe which are in the Lords secret cham∣ber, and vnder his almightie shadowe; I meane such as make God their castle and protection, and boldly cry vnto him, that they depend vpon him, trust and rest in his almightie prouidence. This is the best way to teach the ignorant, and to conuert sinners vnto God, by our owne faith, feeling, expe∣rience and practise: of this we haue many sweet presidents in scripture. This Prophet when hee hath receiued any spirituall com∣fort and instruction, hee is euer ready to communicate vnto others, what graces hee hath receceiued, and how to come by them. Hauing receiued inspeakeable cōfort in the free pardon of his sinnes. Ps. 32. v. 5. he saith, v. 8. I will instruct thee and teach thee the way that thou shalt goe. And Psal. 51. he sheweth how greatly God is delighted, that wee Verse. 12. should teach others, what benefits we haue
receiued. I will teach thy wayes vnto the wicked, and sinners shall bee conuerted vnto thee. This manner of teaching the Apostle thinkes most effectuall and profitable, and therefore he vseth often in his owne exam∣ple, to teach others great mysteries of reli∣gion: as of the dangerous conflicts between the flesh and the spirit, Rom 7. and 8. of the vertue and great fficacie of Christs crosse, death, and resurrection, Gal. 6. 14. 15. 16. Rom. 66 How greatly the faithfull esteeme of Iesus Christ and his Gospell, 1. Cor. 2. 2. Phil. 3. 8. 9. And the Apostle thinks also this way best to cōsort others in afflictions, for thus he writeth: Blessed be God, euen the fa∣ther of our Lord Iesus Christ, the fther of all 2. Cor. 1. 3 4. mercies, and the God of all comfort, which com∣forteth vs in all our tribulations, That we may be able to comfort them which are in any afflicti∣on, by the comfort wherewith, we are our selues comforted of the Lord. The vse of this doctrine is this: euery man to stirre vp himselfe to be mindfull of his brethren, to peorm spiritual duties vn∣to them of instruction, admonition, exhor∣tation, &c. as their state and condition shall require. And to this end, to begge of God
as a louing and a mercifull spirit, so special∣ly the spirit of wisedome and iudgement, that wee may know how to speake a good word seasonably vnto him that is wearied with his afflictions. Es. 50. R. v. 4. Pro. 25. 11. Verse. 3. Surely hee will deliuer thee from the snare of the hunter, and from the grieuous Pesti∣lence. or Pesti∣lence of sor∣rowes, or mst noi∣some. The third part of this Psalme or application of the for∣mer doc∣rine here begins. HEere the Psalmist laboureth to ap∣ply the generall doctrine of the first verse, and what hee hath spoken of his owne saith and experience in the second verse, vnto the present calamitie which was vpon the Iewes in his time; and he striueth to perswade euery one of the faithfull, that they shall be deliuered from the flying An∣gell, which like a hunter raunged through∣out all Iurie, destroying so many thousands with the grieuous and deadly pestilence, if they slie by faith, farre aboue the secundarie causes vnto the Lords prouidence, and holy protection. 1. Here learne, how that we must ende∣uour with all our might to strengthen one
an others faith in calamities. Doest thou be∣leeue? canst thou beleeue? All things are possible to him that beleeueth. Wilt thou lie downe in the shadow of the Almightie, surely he will deliuer thee. 2. The Pestilence is heere called the snare of the Hunter, because the Angell which was sent from the Lord, like a Hun∣ter or a fowler, strangled & slew many from Dan to Beersheba throughout all that king∣dome with the Pestilence. And it is not vn∣fitly compared vnto a snare, for that it cat∣cheth sodenly, some walking, some feeding, some sporting, some waking, some slee∣ping, as wee haue seene by our experi∣ence. The Pestilence is here saide to bee noisome, grieuous, and painefull. The word noysome, or grieuous, is in the origi∣nall a word of the pln. & signifieth grieses. So the plur. n. is vsed for the superlatiue de∣gree. q. d. the most grieuous pestilence: so it was in elder times vnto Dauid, Heze iah, and Iob, and so it is vnto this day in such as are smitten, we see and know daily by their complaints.
Verse 4. He will couer thee vnder his wings, and thou shalt be sure vnder his feathers; his truth shal be thy shield and buckler. HEere the Prophet applyeth vnto the beleeuers spirit and conscience, the same gracious promise of protecti∣on, in other most sweete rearines, and fami∣liar speeches. When men are dulled with griefes, sorrowes, and calamities, they will hardly admit any consolation: for this cause the holy Ghost here so often repeateth the same promise of mercie and comfort vn∣to vs. The metaphor of the Hen couering her young with her winges and feathers, is no lesse comfortable than familiar. Our Saui∣our liketh it, Math. 23. 27. The like is also vsed, Exod. 19. 4. I haue carried you vpon Ea∣gles wings, and haue brought you vnto me. The metaphor wherein he compareth the truth of Gods promise vnto a shield and buckler in the warres, is thus vnderstood: Like as the shield and buckler couereth our
bodies from the strokes and darts of our e∣nemies: so the holy promise of Gods pro∣tection and deliuerance receiued by faith, strongly confirmeth our hearts to receiue any calamities or plague, and to rest confi∣dently, as out of all danger in Gods almigh∣tie shadow. So is Gods promise called, Pra. 30. 5. Euery word of God is pure, and a shield to those that trust in him. Here note, that whereas before hee said, the Lord to bee the most sure protection of his people, hee ascribeth now that protecti∣on here vnto Gods truth, that is, the reuea∣led promise of God, because the Lord ca no other way be found, but in the word o promise, neither can our faith receiue him by any other meanes. So then, such as seek him without his word, shall neuer find him to their comfort. Psal. 119. 114. 2. Question. Wherefore the Lord smiteth his people with the Pestilence. THE Bookes of God giue the Pe∣stilence many names, some proper,
some borrowed and metaphoricall, which may helpe vs with some light to discerne the causes of this terrible destroyer of man∣kinde. First, the most sit and significant name in all the Scriptures, is giuen it in the third verse of this Psalme, Deber hauoth (a) a Pl. n. for superlati plague of sorrowes, or a plague of griefes and torments, for that it is both most noy∣some and painefull, as our experience tea∣cheth vs. The same word is vsed, Exod. 5. 3. where it signifieth in like manner the Pe∣stilence. But Exod. 9. 3. the murraine which fell vpon the beastes of Egypt. Because the murraine and the pestilence destroy both man and beast alike. Secondly, it is tropical∣ly called, The hand of the Lord. 2. Sam. 24. 14. Iad Iehouah. Because the Lordes power and might more appeares & is more manifested in this I doo not ground this vpon the metapho great euill, than in any other. I thinke it not fabulous what I haue heard some report, that they haue seene, as it were, the print of a hand vpon the armes and other parts of the body, of sundry smitten with the pesti∣lence. Thirdly, the Pestilence in this Psalme hath sundry names, Pachadlaiilah, the feare
of the night, from the effect, for that it cau∣seth many seares in the night. So Dauid, Psalme 38. (2.) (b) Chets, an arrow flying by day, because it strikes Mortalibus miserabile hoc impri∣mis est, im∣pendentem tantam per∣niciem ne odore qui∣dem sentire nos posse. Fernel. 14. c. 1 1 King. 8. 37. suddenly, it is swift and deadly. (3) Verse 6. (a) Destroyer, againe, walking in darke places, no light can helpe vs to discerne this contagion this euil spreds it selfe so closely, and so darkly. (4.) Verse 6. Kereb, which word signifieth againe de∣struction or ruine, or as some say, the biting of a wicked spirit. ve. 10. (5.) Negang, a plague, a scourge, a whip, because it is the Lordes great scourge for the correction of his peo∣ple. (6.) It is named also, 2 Sam. 24 21. 25. Magephah, which signifieth great smiting, and grieuous beating, of Nagaph, to smite and beate to death. The holy Ghost in all his speeches con∣cerning this sicknesse, seemeth to desire to list vs vp aboue the secondarie causes, to looke vpon the Lorde, and to fixe and fasten all our sences vpon him. Thus Dauid speaketh, Let 2 Sam. 24. 14. vs fall now into the handes of the Lord, for his mercies are great. And the Lord is said to Ezec. 14 19. Leuit. 26. 25. Num. 14. 12 send the Pestilence as it were a meslenger and executioner of his iu∣stice: And to meete Exo. 9. 15. Ezec. 38. 22. 11. vs with the pestilence.
Exodus. 5. 3. And to smite with the pestilēce, Ier. 29. 1 & to plead against his enemies with the Pe∣stilence, and to persecute with the Pesti∣lence. Whersore when, and whersoeuer we see this hand of God, let vs remēber that the destroier is sent from God, to smite vs for our good, if we fly vnto his mercies, for they be great, as Dauid speaketh, but for our iust confusion, if we abide still in our sinnes, and rest vpon the creatures, for now we must list vp our selues to look on him which smiteth, pleadeth, and persecuteth vs for our sinnes most iustly, as we haue deserued, because wee would neuer acknowledge his hand, power and might, in his other ordinarie, fa∣therly, Causes of the pestilēc and gracious chastifements vpon vs. Now for the causes of the Pestilence, the Phisitiōs (who ought to guide vs in this ar∣gument) here some sweate much and gaine little; others either ouer-boldly flye vp to constellations, or too negligently ascribe it to secret causes. They all say, that it is an What the pestilence i infectious poison, deadly enemie to the vi∣tall spirits, with all speed flying into the hart the castle of life, but whence it commeth, whereof it ariseth, and wheresore it is sent, in these causes they confesse their igno∣rance.
First, they say it is not bred of any e∣lementall qualitie, cold, hot, drie, moyst, but Fernelius Lib. de ab∣diti. Sed a vene∣nato inqui∣namento acrei infuso.  bi quos s∣pe dixi cau∣sam occul∣tam habere. doth proceed of some venimous pollution which is spred in the ayre. Againe, saith he, These be the maladies I haue said often, they haue some secret cause. And whereas some deeme the scorching heate of Summer to be some cause of this e∣uill: he answereth, first euery hot disease (as the Plague) is more dangerous and grie∣uous in hot times then in colde. Secondly, that it is knowne by obseruation, that the hottest Summers haue bin without all man∣ner of plagues, and that sometimes it hath Wherefore the plague is more grie∣uous in sum∣mer than in winter. begun in Winter, and ceased in Summer or Autumne. Thirdly, if any say that it is bred of rotten exhalations, which abound in vn∣sauourie places of great cities, he answereth, that it is found likewise to pester the people also, which inhabite the most sweete and sa∣uourie regions that can be, and in the most temperate season. Againe he he saith, Sunt pestilentiae semi∣na vsque adeo occulta, &c. The first causes which breede the pestilence are so vnknowne, so inisible, and so strange to all our senses, that we are altogether ignorant of them, and they
smite vs when we thinke not of them, neither can they euer bee espied but by their effecies and euents. Againe, hee speaketh wittily of rotten and vnsauourie ayres. Ea Epidemio quosdam morbos inferre solet, nunquam ta∣men sola pestilentes: ad pestilentiam interdum confert, & incrementum addit, at non illam ex∣citare potest: sed causae altioris hoc opus est. The putrifaction of the ayre (saith he) which ariseth of vncleane streetes, &c. it may cause some of the common & ordinary diseases among the people, but this alone can neuer breede the Vnsauourie streets giue strength to the Pesti∣lence. Pestilence. This giueth greater strength to the contagion, and increaseth it, but cannot beget this euill; the Pestilence is an effect of some high∣er power. Thus then wee see these learned Phisitions to confesse their ignorance in the causes of this most grieuous sicknesse. The most they can say is, that it is a poyson sent into the ayre, which poysoneth and killeth men in a straunge manner: and it is not to bee forgotten, that this man sendeth vs a∣boue nature and secondarie causes vnto an higher power; that is, I thinke, to speake with the Scripture, to the mightie hand of God, as we haue before shewed. Where the Phisition faileth and cannot
proceed to discouer the causes of straunge and incurable diseases, it were no dis∣grace for the best of them, to intreat the re∣ligious and learned Diuine to reach sorth his helping hand. It were happie in Church and Commō-wealth if men were so linked together in hearts and affections; for that Artes and Sciences liberall and common, are so coniugated and tied together, that they haue continuall reference one to an o∣ther, and can neuer well want the helpe one of an other. Now to returne to our purpose, these three questions may here be considered. 1. What moues Almightie God and our most mercifull Father, to smite his people with the Pestilence? 2. By what instruments he vseth to smite his people in the Pestilence. 3. To what ende the Lorde thus smiteth his owne people in the Church with the Pesti∣lence: and what vse we are to make of this, and of all kindes of afflictions? To come then to the Booke of God: first let vs learne I say, wherefore the Lord
hath sent in all ages this destroyer into the world. And next we will in like manner consider of the instruments and meanes whereby the Lorde poysoneth the Ele∣ments, and so smiteth man with the Pesti∣lence. And lastly, to what ende hee thus proceeds in execution of his feareful iudge∣ments. The causes which moue the Lorde to persecute the worlde vniuersally with the Pestilence, are the intollerable sinnes of men: and in the Church these speciall im∣pieties and wickednesses which followe, as motiues, and causes of this euill, are of∣fered vnto our wise and godly considera∣tion. First I sinde, that ignorance, contempt, The first cause of the pestilence▪ and negligēce in the pure worship of God, causeth the Lord to smite vs with the Pesti∣lence. Moses saith to Pharaoh, Exod. 5. 3. Let vs goe three dayes iourney into the wildernesse, and sacrifice vnto the Lord our God. Then hee addeth this reason. Least he bring vpon vs the Pestilence or sword. Contrarily, to the true worshipper it is said, The Lord shall blesse thy bread and thy water, and I will take away all sicknesse from the midst of thee.
A second cause is infidelitie and rebelli∣on against the word, and the holy ministrie Exod. 23. 25. The second ause of the Pestilence. of the same. Thus saith the Lord, Num. 14. 11. 12. How long will this people prouoke me How long will it be ere they beleeue me? Here is the cause: I will smite them with the Pesti∣lence: Here is the effect. A third cause is this, to trust to the crea∣tures The third cause of the Pestilence. in extremities, and not in the Lorde: as to men and armour in times of warre; this was Dauids sinne, for it is said, Sathan stood vp against Israel, and prouoked Dauid to number Israel. 1. Chron. Chap. 21. verse. 1. Here is the cause: So the Lord sent a Pe∣stilence, and there feli of Israel seuentie thou∣sand men, verse 14. Here is the effect. Con∣trary vnto this sinne is the patient resting of the faithful vpō god in aducisities, to whom it is said, Who so dwelleth in the secret of the Psal 91. Verse. 1. most high, shall abide in the shadow of the Al∣mightie. A fourth cause wee finde is spirituall and The fourth cause of the Pestilence. corporall whoredome, and all superstition whatsoeuer: of this cause Moses writeth, Num. 25. and Dauid Psalme 106. 28. 29 They ioyned themselues vnto Baal-peor, and did eate the offerings of the dead: thus they
prouoked God to anger with their owne inuen∣tions: thus farre the cause, the effect. And the Plague breake in vpon them. A fifth cause is blasphemie, and all the prophanation of the most great and glori∣ous name of God, and the want of a due feare and reuerence in his worship accor∣ding to his name, power, and maiestie. If thou wilt not feare this glorious and fearefull The fifth cause of the Pestilence. name of the Lord thy God. (Here is the cause, want of reuerence of God, and all that is contrary to this feare, all prophanation of this great name of God) the effect follow∣eth, Then will I make thy plagues wonderfull, Deut. 28. 58. and the plagues of thy seed, euen great plagues, and of long continuance, and sore diseases and of long durance, all the diseases of Egypt, eery plague, &c. A sixt cause, is the gracelesse contempt The sixt cause of the Pestilence. of the holy word, and of the messengers and Ministers of the same. Thus saith Iere∣mie, to the Iewes in Ierusalem, which would not be taught by Gods word, and despised the Prophets of God, chap. 29. 18. I will persecute them with the sword, with the famine, and with the Pestilence. Here is the effect first, the cause followeth, because they haue
not heard, I. obeyed my word, saith the Lord, which I sent vnto them by my seruants the Pro∣phets, &c. In the seuenth place all the sins The seuenth cause of the Pestilence. of Sodome, pride, fulnes of bread, want of mercy, idlenes, &c. may be numbred. These caused the famine, warres and pestilence in Zedekiahs miserable kingdome. Ezech. 16. 46. 47. and Iere. 29. 17. 18 And the eight cause, is the affliction & grieuance of Gods people, Tyre and Sidon they shal be smitten from the Lord with the pestilence, saith E∣zechiel, for afflicting Gods people. I will Chap. 28. 23. The eight cause of the Pestilence. send her pestilence and blood into her streetes, the cause is added, they shall be no more a pric∣king thorne vnto the house of Israel, nor a grie∣uous thorne. Eusebius speaking of the fa∣mine, warres, and pestilence in the East parts vnder Maximinius, and at the same time in Rome and West parts vnder Maxen∣tius, he sheweth the cause in these wordes, Quis autem, sicausam tantorum malorum in∣quirat, Euseb. lib. c. 16. persecutionem aduersus nos motam cau∣sae loco assignare dubitauerit, &c. Who shall doubt to affirme, that the persecution or af∣fliction of Gods Church and people, was the cause of all the euils that fell vpon the world vnder those two Tyrants for tenne
yeares space, for when they gaue libertie to the Christians their plague ceased. To the same purpose he writeth againe in the same Dis. 9. 1. 7. 8. story, shewing how all the calamities which came vpon the world, they are sent from God, for the affliction of his people. Let the ninth cause bee the abuse of the holy Sacraments, as in generall of all disea∣ses, so no doubt one especiall of the pesti∣lence. Thus the Apostle speaketh: For this cause, meaning the abuse of his Sacrament, first many are weake: secondly many are sicke: thirdly many are asleepe, i. dead already. I. Cor. 11. 30. This also is a generall impietie, which hath ouer-spread Citie, Towne, and Countrey: for Saboths and Sacraments be exceedingly prophaned, by reason of the blinde ministrie of the land. Christ is not preached, his diuine mystries be not opened to the people. The precious and the vile are alike accepted to the Lordes Table. The idolater, and blasphemer, the mur∣derer and bloody man, the adulterer and whoremonger, the vsurer and oppressor, are thought worthy men, to sit and feast with Iesus Chaist. The tenth cause: the Lorde Iesus saith,
the Pestilence is one of the messengrs of his comming. These messengers some of them are long before, Luke 21. verse 12. as persecution for the Gospell, Before all these they shall lay hands on you, &c. Some not long before, as famine, warres, Pestilence, earth∣quakes, &c. verse 9. But after these the ende followeth not by and by, some shall be euen in his comming, verse 26 the powers of hea∣uen to be shaken, the Sun to be darkned, the Matth. 24. 29. Moone to loose her light, the starres to fall, the whole frame of heauen to passe away with a noise, 2. Peter 3. 10. the element and the whole earth to consume away with heat, and lastly, the great signe of the sonne of man shall appeare. The Plague then in these times is the sword of reuenge, drawne foorth against all nations, when the Lorde sendeth it for the contempt of the Gospell of Iesus Christ, and to proclaime vnto men, that if the execution of this iudgement can∣not preuaile against their securitie: the Lord himselfe commeth speedily to the ge∣nerall iudgement, to sweepe away all sin∣ners from the face of the earth, and to cast them into a place of torments: where they shall haue plagues, farre exceeding the
plagues of Egypt, not only in body but also in minde, not for a day or two, but for euer. They shall haue plagues without end. The eleuenth cause. If any yet would The ele∣uenth cause of the Pesti∣lence. know wherefore the Lord sweepeth away so many thousands in the world among Pa∣gans, with this beesome of destruction, let him take a veiwe of the plagues of Egypt, most terrible and dreadfull, for besides the reuenge of his people, the Lord mentioneth often another cause, namely the manifesta∣tion of his power and might, which he will haue knowne, as by his mercies among his people, so by his fearefull iudgements vpon his enemies, Exod. 7. 4. and 5. By great iudgements the Egyptians shall know that I am the Lord Chap. 9. 14. I will at this time send all my plagues vpon thine heart, and vpon thy seruants, and vpon thy people, that thou maiest know that there is none like me in all the earth. The twelfth and last cause, may bee this againe in the Church, & among Gods peo∣ple, the reuenge of the couenant of the Lord, for where the Lordes Lieutenants and keepers of his couenant the magistrates are slow to draw forth the sword of iustice, there the Lord telleth vs he will draw forth
his owne swords of famine, warres, and pe∣stilence. Leuit. 26. 14. 15. If ye will not obey me, nor doe all these commandements, and if yee shall despise mine ordinances, either if your soule abhor my lawes, so that ye will not do all my com∣mandements but breake my couenant, &c. verse 25. I will send a sword vpon you, that shall auenge the quarrell of my coue∣nant: When you are gathered in your Cities, I will send the Pestilence among you. Deut 28 15. If thou wilt not obey the voyce of the Lord thy God, to keepe and doe all his commandements, &c. verse 21. The Lord shall make the psti∣lence cleaue vnto thee, vntill he hath consumed thee the Lord shall smite thee with a consump∣on, and with the feauer, & with a burning ague, &c. verse. 27. the Lorde will smite thee with the hotch of Egypt, with the rods and with the scab, and with the ch, that thou canst not be healed. Now then condering the premises, may not we heere out of the Lords booke more The con∣clusion. certainly declare the causes of the pestilence than the learned Plan can doe? and let vs not now thinke it strange, that the Lord so smites vs in a short and light plague, but
rather let vs admire and extoll his mercies with all the praises we can: for considering the grosse ignorance, the great Atheisme, the beastly epicurisme, the prophane blas∣phemies, These sins raigne in e∣uery Citie, towne, and hamlet, and yet the watchmen are a sleepe, the Lords couenant is broken, the watchmen regard not, and there∣fore he will auenge the quarrell of his coue∣nant, by th Pestilence. the wicked periuries, all the in∣tollerable prophanations of Gods holy name, the abuse of the Lordes Sabbothes, the great contempt of Gods holy Ministe∣rie, word and Sacraments, vncleannes, adul∣teries, incest, fraud, deceite, vsuries, and all manner of oppressions, with infinite more sinnes amongst vs, is it not a most admira∣ble and miraculous mercy that wee bee not continually consumed with all the iudge∣ments of the Almightie? within these few yeares, the Lord first began with a famine which sinote al the parts of the whole land, not long after he made vs al to tremble with the sight of a most bloody Nation which came to deuoure vs: now in the last place, he hath called vs by Pestilence, to a sinere Anno. 1587. Anno. 1588. Anno. 1592. obedience vnto his Gospell. The first iudgement was soone forgotten the second hath giuen vs no instruction. The Lorde grant this third and last of the Pestilence, may open the eyes of his people. Great plagues and iudgements, argue
great sinnes assuredly, and great sinnes call for great iudgements. I conclude this ques∣tion with the wise mans golden sentence, Though a sinner do euill an hundred times, and God prolonge his daies, yet I know that it shall be Eccle. 8. 11. 12. 15. well with them that feare the Lord, and doe re∣uerence before him: but it shall not bee well to the wicked, he shall be like a shadow, because he feareth not before him. THE 3. LECTVRE. Verse 5. 6. Verse 5. Thou shalt not bee affraide of the feare of the night, nor of the arrow that flyeth by day. Verse 6. I meane the Pestilence that wal∣keth in the darkenesse, and of the Plague that destroyeth at noone-day. TO passe ouer the allegories, of which some are not vnprofitably, nor vnfitly here vnderstood by diuers of the lear∣ned Interpreters, I thinke it sufficient, to commend vnto Gods people that sense on∣ly, which the scope of the whole Psalm
leadeth me vnto. I vnderstand here therfore in all these sweet promises, by all these me∣taphors, and borrowed speeches, that great euill which the Prophet before, verse 3. in naturall and proper tearmes hath cal∣led Deber hauoth, The grieuous Pestilence: or the pestilence of griefes, that is most grie∣uous. In the fift verse, The Pestilence hath two fit names, 1. The terror of the the night, a me∣tonymie of the effect for the cause, because this sicknesse breeds many terrors & feares in the night. 1. Because the night is a sollitary time, and solitarinesse doth encrease feares. 2. Because of the darkenesse of the time; for as all light brings comfort and boldnes, so all darknes workes feare and discourage∣ment in the sound, much more in the weak, and now most of all when a man is readie to walk into the valley of the shadow of death, where is wont to be alwaies some agonies, and great causes of feare, Psal. 23. 3. 4. 3 The night breedes fearefull dreames, which in time of the Pestilence increase ter∣rors. Iob in his affliction crieth out because hee is terrified with the visions of the night;
When I say my couch shall relieue mee, my bed Iob. 7. 13. 14. 15. shall bring comfort, in my meditation, then fea∣rest thou with dreames, and astonishedst me with visions, my soule choseth rather to be strangled, and to die, then to be in my bones. When the Lord mindeth to amaze his enemies with any terrors, hee powreth his iudgements vpon them in the night season: Note what sundrv ef∣fects this feare wrought in Phatoh and all his sub∣iects. when hee would shake all Egypt, hee slew one, euen the first borne in euery house in Egypt, at mid-night; and it caused a dread∣full crying and lamentation throughout the whole land, Exod. 12. 29. 30. 33. It was the night time whē the Lord slew 185000. 2. King. 19. 35. in Senacharibs campe, that so he might beat downe the great insolencie of that proude enemie of his people. First, the Pestilence is called, the arrow that flyeth by day. So Dauid called it, Psal. 38. For that it comes inuisibly, if mē be not wel sighted they cā hardly discerne how it flies. Secondly, for that it comes swiftly, a man can hardly auoid it. Thirdly, because it strikes suddenly, as an arrow doth when men thinke least of it, sometimes in their mirth-making, feasting, gaming, &c.
Fourthly, an arrow if it come neere the heart, giues a deadly wound; so this euill if it come once neere the heart, the Phisitions confesse it incurable. In the 6. verse. The 2. trophes set down verse. 5. are expressed verse 6. Hee deliuers his meaning in plaine tearmes, which hee had vttered before, verse 3. and 5. in meta∣phors and in borrowed speeches: The He∣brew hath in verse 5. The feare of the night, the arrow that flyeth, &c. then the verse 6. The Pestilence, so that we may very fitly ad the word (I meane) or I vnderstand, the bet∣ter to expresse the Prophets minde. It is said againe, 1. that the Pestilence walketh in the darknes, 2. that it destroyeth at noone-day. The pestilence, as some of iudgmēt auouch, is more violent in the night then in the day, & at mid-day, then in any other part of the day. First for the night, the ayre is made more grosse and thicke, with the coldnes of the night, and then the strong contagious poyson spread in the ayre, being driuen to∣gither (as in the generatiō of meteors, thun∣der No wisdom in time of Pestilence to walke in the aires of night. and lightnings in the middle region of the aire) it is made more violent and deadly where it lighteth or smiteth any man.
Secondly, where it is saide to destroy at noonday: the cause of this (they say) is for that in the day, the pores of our bodies are ope∣ned, and then when the Sun is in the high∣est pitch of the meridionall line, most open in all parts and arteries. This time therefore are we most apt to receiue any poyson, and this infectious vapour can soonest pierce in∣to our secret parts. And it is knowne by the experience of many yeares, that albeit the heate of the Sun cause not this pestiserous exhalation, yet it may cause it to be more violent, and that all windes that come from that part, breed pu∣trifaction and rottennesse in all places. This saith one Aphorisme of Hipocra∣tes, Hypocrates Aphorisme. which is, Venti meridionales, hyemales, snt mortales: South windes in winter doo bring death or mortalitie. But I iudge the simple meaning of the holy Ghost may be this: That the Pestilence spares not where God sends it, but smites downe at all times, as at midnight, so at mid-day all alike: in saire weather and in soule, in the moun∣taines and in the vallevs, in the best ayres and in the worst, &c. And therefore when God shootes this arrow, men are
warned here to be in a readines at all times and in all places. Watch (saith our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ) for ye know not what houre the theefe commeth. Thus much briefly for the sense and meaning of these two verses. Now let vs consider yet somewhat more carefully, seeing the Pestilence breeds so many feares and terrors night and day, and is so great an enemie and destroyer of man-kinde: what instrumentes and meanes the Lord vseth for the affliction of his people in the Pestilence. 3. Question. How the wicked spirits are Gods speciall in∣struments in the Pestilence. 3. Surely hee will deliuer thee from the snare of the hunter. verse. 3. FIrst here it seemes to mee very expe∣dient, that wee take a short viewe in the booke of God, how Sathan and
his wicked spirits come to this great Do∣minion & principalitie vpon earth among men, and then wherfore he so hunteth, and striueth by all meanes in all ages for the death and destruction of mankinde. The holy Ghost telleth vs that Sathan and his angels, were created Angels of light, and companions in grace with the elect Angels of God, commended and bles∣sed of God in that generall benediction and commendation of all the creatures. But they continued not long in that loue and obedience of God, (being made muta∣ble, and hauing a freedome of will, as all the rest) of their owne accord (God so permit∣ting it, and denying in that instant the assi∣stance of his grace, and mightie hand of his holy spirit) they disobeyed and displea∣sed Iude verse 5. the Almightie, and so fell from that blessed light to extreame darkenesse, and from that wonderfull glory, to inspeakable and endleste consasion. Afterwards these 1. Iohn 3. 8. wicked spirites haue neuer rested to blas∣pheme God and to dstroy man by all the meanes they can, for Sathan is a murderer, Iohn 8. 44 and euer hath sinned with al his wicked an∣gels from the Beginning.
He first began with our first parents, for hee knew the rootes once infected, the whole bodie, armes, & branches are soone poysoned. And to the ende hee might in∣uisibly deceiue them, he first possessed the serpent, for this cause the Scriptures Reuel. 22. 9. 1. Cor. 11. 3. call him that old Serpent Turtul Apoc. ca. 22. Gene. 3. 1. Mtum spiritualibus virbus licet, The Diuell can doe much by his spirituall strength, saith one. To be short, the holy Ghost sheweth it, how after this, by certaine degrees, he sought and had en∣trance into the woman. Fst, that lying spirit perswadeth her most impudently, of the vntruth of Gods law and holy word, concerning the forbidden fruite. Secondly, by long conference with that Long con∣ference with Sathan dan∣gerous, let him soone be packing. Matth. 4. wicked spirit, the woman beginneth to doubt, and to call in qustion the certaintie of Gods loue and holy truth. Genes. cap. 2. 17. cap. 3. 2. Thirdly, as that holy light of God was emptyed out of the minde by degrees, so Sathan stept in, for where that light is hee hath no entrance. Fourthly, when Sathan had once posses∣sed her minde & blinded it, he then soorth∣with slipt into the hart, & there Matth. 12. 43 44 wrought
infidelitie, first he blindes iudgement, then he easily corrupts affections. Fiftly, when the heart was thus poisoned he easily filled it with euill thoughts, vn∣cleane lustes, and wicked imaginations. Sixtly, wicked lustes of the heart, beeing set on fire with the sight of the forbidden fruite, stirred vp the affections, the affecti∣ons the will, the mutable will the endeuor. Seuenthly, from this inward corruption 1. Mens. 2. Cogita∣tio. 3. Affectus 4. Voluntas 5. Studi∣um. Gen. 3. 4. 5. 6. and subscription vnto Sathans sophistrie and calumniation against the trueth, fol∣lowed that outward rebellion and mani∣sest apostacie and falling away from God. Lastly, the woman bewitched by Sathan, was the second instrument to deceiue the man, who yeelded in all pointes by de∣grees as the woman, and so was brought to the same most horrible condition of death and condemnation. And thus began Sathan in our first parents to exercise his spirituall iurisdiction and kingdome vpon earth. Man is not able to expresse, how bles∣sed and how glorious man then was be∣fore he fell to this league and societie with Sathan. Hee was more beloued of God,
more deare and precious vnto the Almigh∣tie, than all the frame of heauen and earth, and all things contained therein. For that hee was the end and last of all his creation, prouided, for of all necessaries before his  creation, onely created with that won∣derfull  consultation of the Trinitie, the  onely creature vpon earth, resembling his Gen. 4. 26. Psal. 8. 84. God in many beautifull graces, the glo∣rious Lorde and Emperour ouer all crea∣tures,  in body shining like the Sunne, and  immortall, Math. 13. 45. In minde beau∣tified  with wisedome and knowledge,  Col. 3. 10. Like his God in righteousnesse  and true holinesse, Ephe. 4. 24. So that in regard, as of his first honour, so of his last glory, which shall be yet more excellent, the Psalmist bursteth out into this holy ad∣miration: What is man! thou hast made him li∣tle lower then Angels, & crowned him with glo∣ry and honour. Now then the Lorde hauing enriched him with so many graces, and aduanced him to that imperiall dignitie, because hee so shamefully subscribed and consented to Sathans vntroaths, and conspired with the onely enemie of the Almightie, his sinnes
were most dreadfull, and drowned him in perdition with all his progenie. And thus we are all become the subiects, vas∣sals and vncleane cages of wicked spirits, which haue an inuisible acquaintance, so∣cietie and spirituall affinitie with our spi∣rits, before Christ come and binde that strong man: Luk. 11. 21. before the Gospell and faith in Iesus Christ, make cleane the heart. Ioh. 15. 3. Act. 159. Before the mightie spirit transforme and reforme our mindes, hearts, and affections, Rom 12. 2. Ephe. 4. 18. This is Adams progenie: Who can bring a cleane thing out of silthinesse? There is not one. vers. 14. VVhat is man that hee should bee cleane? verse 16. Man is Iob. 144. abhominable and filthy, and drinketh iniquitie like water. Nay we are said before grace to be the very seede of the serpent, Gen. 3. 15. Ephe. 2. 3. 4. And the very children of the di∣uell. Ioh. 84. And thus to conclude this point, the noblest of all inferior creatures, is become the vilest and basest of all creatures, and most abhorred of God, the wicked spi∣rits excepted, in this life subiect to innume∣rable Thus we are ll by nature without ex∣ception. curses and miseries; in the next to infi∣nite torments, and euerlasting: in this life
the soule Sathans vassall to inuent, the body Ep. 2. 2. 3. 4 Sathans instrument to practise; and in the life to come, both companions of his confu∣sion. Thus we see briefly how Sathan be∣came the god and prince of this worlde. And this is hee, who with great power and might continually ruleth and wor∣keth in all the sonnes of Adam, the chil∣dren of disobedience, as the Apostle spea∣keth. Ep. 2. 1. 2. 3 And hee worketh also so inuisibly, and so strangely, that till Christ come and his spirit, the most wise in this world can neuer discerne him: For this cause one saith thus: Suadent miris & inuisibilibus modis, perillam subtiitatem suorum corporum, cor∣pora De diuin. daem. lib 1. cap. 3. 5. hominum non sentientium penetrando, se{que} cogitationibus corum, per quaedam imagina∣ria visa miscendo, siue vigilantium, siue dor∣mientium. They perswade by maruellous and inuisible meanes, piersing by reason of their ayrie thin bodies, the bodies of men when they perceiue it not, and so con∣founding & mingling themselues by means of some imaginations conceiued, with the motions of their mindes both waking and sleeping.
And thus hee poisoneth so strongly the sences of men, as the best Diuine is not able to expresse the manner of his working How effectually and suddenly did hee pos∣sesse Iudas? How strangely did he surprise Ananias and Sapphira? Who can expresse how hee breathed such poyson into their hearts, or iniected such motions in theyr mindes? An other saith, hee worketh in his vassals with as great facilitie as the beames Vtlamen solis pene∣trat aquam, nubemacrē, ita spiritus petrat om∣nia. P. M. of the Sunne in any liquid or soft matter. Tertullian writeth of this secret power and working of Sathan in the soules of men very learnedly, &c. Suppetit illis ad vtram{que} substantin, &c. Like as blastes destroy fruits and trees inuifibly & strange∣ly, so (saith this learned man) do wicked spi∣rits kill and poyson the bodies and soules of men. And Augustine speaking of this point, doth notably teach vs the blindenesse and madnesse of men, who many times to ex∣cuse and couer Sathan, they blame some euill humour or distemperance in theyr bodies. Daemones (saith he) quantum viderin fidem in homine crescere, tantum ab eo refu∣giunt,
si tamen in aliqua infidelitatis parte resederint, cum tempus inuenient, cogitatio∣nes subiscient coraibus hominum, & ills nes∣cientes vnde haec veniant suggestionibus dae∣monum quasi animae suae sensibus credunt suggerunt ergo alijs occasione corporeae neces∣sitatis delicias sequi, aliorum iracundiam ex∣cusant per abundantiam fellis, aliorum insa∣niam nigri fellis vehementia colorant, sed & stultitiam quorundam ob phlegmatis multi∣tudinem extenuant. The diuels the more they see a man increase in faith, the more they flye from him; but if they haue any residence in any part infected with infi∣delitie, when they finde opportunitie, they suggest many thoughts into mens hearts, and they not knowing whence these co∣gitations come, they beleeue the sugge∣stions of deuils, as if they were the moti∣ons of their owne spirits. They suggest therfore vnto some to follow after their de∣lights, by occasion of some bodily necessitie, they excuse others for their anger by abun∣dance of choller, and the madnesse of some they colour and hide vnder excesse of me∣lancholy; and they lessen the folly of others also, because they abound in phlegme.
And because this enemie so inuisible, so mightie and so dangerous, can hardly be discouered, great arguments and signes of his kingdome and habitation are thes by Gods light giuen vs. The heartfull of By speciall euidences to discerne and discouer Sa∣thans habi∣tation. infidelitie without any measure of faith, Act. 5. 3. 2. The minde full of grosse ig∣norance in the fundamentall pointes of saluation. 2. Cor. 4. 4. Ephe. 5, 8 4, 18. Col. 1. 13. 3. To walke in the workes of darknes, howsoeuer we pretend knowledge. 1. Io. 1. 5, 6, 7. 4 Vncleannesse of body or soule; Math. 12. 43. 5. A relapse into fearefull sinnes, and to bee worse after then before. 2. Pet. 2. 2. 21. Math. 12. 44. 45. 6. To see onely into the bare story of the Gospell, not to vnderstand profitably any part of it. Luke. 8. 12. 7. To persecute the word with blasphemies, Matth. 12. 30. And with violence. Io. 8. 44. 8. To withstand the true Preachers of the Gospell with all subtiltie and mischiefe. Act. 13. 10. 9. To haue Sathan breathing into the heart con∣tinuall disobedience. Ephe. 2. 2. 10. To be as it were haltered and choked with cares, riches, and pleasures. Luk 8. 14. All proud sinnes argue Sathans presence in the wic∣ked
neuer humbled alwaies, and in the beleeuers when they fall into such sinnes, till they for sake them by repentance. Dia∣bolicibus est ebrietas, luxuria, fornicatio, & Ierom. epit∣ad Damasū. vniuersa vitia. Drunkennesse, riot, whore∣dome, and all proud sinnes, are the diuels meat: that is, he lodgeth, feasteth, and spor∣teth himselfe where such abhominations are committed. Cyprian sheweth his vigilancie and great strife to re-enter where hee is once dislod∣ged: Circuitisle nos singulos, & tanquam ho∣stis Cypr. de Ii∣uore & caelo & Hel ser. 2. clausos obsidet muros, explorat, & tentat, an sit aliqua pars membrorum minus stabilis, & mi∣rus fida, cuius aditr. ad interiora penutrat. The diuell compasseth about euery one of vs, and as an enemie doth beset our walles, hee searcheth and trieth whether any part of vs be weake and vnsure, that thereby hee may haue entrance into vs a∣gaine. Finally, to end this point, and to come The  peace of Christ, the false peace of Satha. vnto our purpose againe, there is nothing we ought in all our liues to bee more care∣full of, then to striue to discerne betweene the true, the blessed, and most comfortable peace of Iesus Christ in our hearts and
consciences: and the false peace, and most dangerous and deadly sleepe of carnall and benummed consciences, where Sathan dwelleth. That if wee haue the one, we may with all our might endeuour to pre∣serue it: and if we be miserably deluded, and so endangered by the other, wee may with all speede come to the meanes appoin∣ted in the Gospell of Iesus Christ for our deliuerance. Great and deadly is the sleepe Ro. 15. 11. 1. Th. 5. 6. 1. Cor. 15. 34. 2. Cor. 2. 18. 2. Cor. 4. 34. of all Atheists, hypocrites, and carnall men, before Sathans face by the light of the Gospell bee discerned. They are like men which haue drunke some deadly poyson, they can but sleepe and delight in sleeping, and yet perswade themselues in this misera∣ble security that all is wel. Our Sauiour ren∣dereth a reason of this when he saith: Sathan watcheth them with all his strength, muni∣tion, armour, and with all violence, stuing to keepe blinde in this state all he can to the Luk. 11. 21. 2. Cor. 4. 4 1 day of death. There can bee no true peace before Christ by his word and spirit cast forth Sathan out of the mindes and hearts of men: as long as men loue darkenesse, and hate Tit. 1. 15. Ezech. 11 19. light; as long as the sloni, slintie, polluted
heart' and conscience remaineth, the peace and sleepe is to be suspected to be Sathani∣call. Secondly, before Christ giue peace, hee must needes warre with Sathan, Luk. 11. 21. In this warfare the prisoner that Christ taketh which fought against him, is the soule of man, &c. a man therefore must be captiuat, and so in soule humbled vnder Christ before true peace in Christs king∣dome: that peace therefore which is before humiliation, is to be suspected. Thirdly, where Christ hath ouercome, there his goood spirit watcheth, for hee will not leese any that he hath found. Io. 10. 28. Where that spirit is, there hee worketh true sanctification of soule, spirit, and body. I. Thess. 5. 23. Where therefore true sanctifi∣cation is wanting, the peace is dangerous, and to be suspected. But of this more in an other question. Now to returne to that wee purposed, let vs consider briesly whether the wic∣ked spirites are Gods instruments and messengers to smite vs with the Pestilence. The Lorde vseth no doubt as in many o∣ther of his iudgements, so in this: the mi∣nisterie
of Angels good and euill: Hee maketh his Angels like the windes, and his mi∣nisters Ps. 104. 4 are like a flame of fire. It was (as it seemeth to me) a good Angell, which with his sword drawne flew so many thousands 2. Sam 24. 1. Chr. 21 16. Aug. in Psal. 78. in Israel in Dauids time. Howbeeit Au∣gustine saith, hee can neuer remember that the good Angels execute any iudgements vpon any good people. And it was the Angell of the Lord that flew in Senacheris campe in one night 185000. And they 2. Ki. 19. 35. were good Angels which came to Sodome and Gomor, when it was destroyed with Gen. 19. fire and brimstone. It was likewise the Angell of the Lord which smote proud Herod, that hee was ea∣ten of wormes, Act. 12. 13. Yet Iosephus saith hee sawe an Owle, or a Diuell in that Antiq. 19. 7 Bubonem supra ca∣put suum funi exten to nisidentē likenesse ouer his head, presaging that miserable death. And he addeth there fol∣lowed great torment in his inwarde parts. His grandfather was eaten of lice, but this Tyrants death smeth to be of some sore griping, and guawing wormes in his bowels: hee was made wormes meate, saith Act. 12. 3. Saint Luke. It may be hee was tormented of lice without, and wormes within. But
they were euill spirits and Sathans angels which plagued Aegypt, Psal. 78. 49. 50. Wicked sp¦rits by sor∣cery filled their soules with errors destroyed their bodie with the pe∣stilence. Malaki Ragnim. Iob. 1. & 2. Hee cast vpon them the fiercenesse of his an∣ger, indignation, and wrath, and vexation by the sending out of euill angels: hee made a way to his anger: hee spared not their soule from death, but gaue their life to the Pestilence. And sathan is saide to fill Iobes body all ouer with most pestiferous botches and biles. One saith, the diuell gathereth of the first seeds of nature, and applyeth them to some matter, and so can produce strange effects, but how farre hee can proceede in nature it is hard to iudge. The diuell is limited two wayes. First hee cannot out-reach P. M. nature. Secondly, the will of the Lord: so (saith hee) the diuell can bring pestilence, famine, biles, for he knoweth of what causes these euils do arise. And an o∣ther reuerend diuine saith: The wicked an∣gels are Gods instruments in the pestilence, Beza de peste. Ille spiri Daemonia∣cus de men∣b. vestrie aduersus nos araelia∣tur. Tert. Apo 27. working by naturall causes. So the diuell is said to send the godly to prison, but by meanes of tyrants Reue. 2. 10. and chap. 6. 8. 9. verse 1. At the commandement of God the windes are in like manner sent foorth by euill angels,
from the which windes doubtlesse it is ma∣nifest, that many infections of the ayre, and this infection chiefly doth arise. And Augustine vpon the Psalme 78. hee is of iudgement, that the good and euill An∣gels can vse these visible Elements, and by them effect many things. As men (saith he) can vse them, not onely to sustaine life, but also according to the measure of their knowledge, most artificially both in sundrie supersluous trisles, and in diuers mechani∣call effects. There be three sorts of maladies wher∣by the wicked are plagued, and the godly chastened of the Lord. The first kinde is meere naturall: the second is meere dia∣bolicall: the third is mixt. Meere natu∣rall I call all those which haue their causes knowne in nature, discerned and cured not by rude Empyri, but by the lear∣ned Math. 8. 14. 15. in the practise of Phisicke, as the ordi∣nary common diseases among the people. Meere diabolicall I thinke wee may c those euils wherein no cause appear to the most perfect and learned Phisition but some secret cause; that is, some wicket spirit sent of God to distemper the body
and to cause the naturall faculties and parts of the body, eyther not to be able to per∣forme their duties, or to benumbe the body, or to do farre more, with greater strength and violence then nature alone can effect: such were those the scripture cals dmoniaci, possessed of diuels, or holden of diuels; or as some learned men reade, inspired by diuels. In which most grieuous affliction, Sathan doth most commonly bereaue the posses∣sed of the vse of common sense and reason, working in them beside their ordinarie course of nature straunge effects, euen such as the most iudicious both Phisiti∣ons and Diuines cannot ascribe to any other cause but to Sathans effectuall wor∣king. There is great wisedome and heede to bee taken in helping and healing such at this day; for it is not done by con∣iuration or diuination, as Popish Priestes professe and practise, but by entreating the Lord humbly in fasting and prayer. I see no warrant we haue to talke or que∣stion with Sathan: for hee is the Lords executioner, hee hath sent him; what authoritie then haue wee to commaund
him to depart, where God hath sent him. A Prince or Magistrate is offended with a subiect for some disloyaltie, an Offi∣cer is sent to imprison him: shall hee or any other, charge the Officer in the Prin∣ces name to let him alone, and not to touch him? Is it not their way onely to pa∣cifie the Prince, and so the Magistrate will commaund the Officer to surcease? euen so where God sendeth Sathan his execu∣tioner to arest any person in any forme or manner, in body or minde: the onely way no doubt, is to entreat the Lord to be pacifi∣ed, and to rebuke Sathan. Againe, we reade often that Sathan tormented many in sundry most grieuous diseases, which I call the third and mixt kinde; for by secret poysons hee hath made them incurable to the best practi∣tioners in Phisicke in all ages. The good woman mentioned Luke 13. verse 16. shee is saide to bee bounde of Sathan 18. yeares, and to haue a spirit of infir∣mitie. And such were many lunatikes, and may be to this day, they had a disease of causes partly knowne, partly vnknowne,
Matt. 17. 15. Maister haue pittie on my sonne, for he is a lunatike. The learned deriue the cause of this euill from the Moone as the name impor∣teth, because they haue obserued, that such as are borne in the change are thus pai∣ned, but note what the Euangelist ad∣deth, and wee shall see the secret cause of it, verse 18. Iesus rebuked the diuell, and hee went out of him, and the childe was healed in that houre. Here then we see a disease in part na∣turall, in part sathanicall. And maister Caluine hee saith, that experience teacheth vs howe this disease dooth increase and decrease according to the course of the Moone: yet this lets not, but that Sathan can put in his effectuall working in the na∣turall meanes. Ne{que} tamen hoc obstat quo minus sathan naturalibus medijs suos impetus permise uenit. The woman also mentioned Marke. 5. 25. labouring of an issue of bloud twelue yeares, may seeme to be grieuous on this manner, for some cause or causes seene to bee secret and vnknowne (such be sa∣thans
practises) for it is said shee had suf∣fered many things of the Phisitions, and had spent all shee had, and it auailed her nothing, but she became much worse; and this woman was one of Gods elect, for shee heard afterwardes these gracious wordes: Daughter thy faith hath made thee whole, goe in peace, Verse. 34. and be whole of thy plague. Of this third and last kinde I iudge to bee our common plague and pestilence at this day. My reasons are: First it is partly naturall; for if there were here no naturall  cause, then those whom the plague hath infected, cannot doubtlesse so much as bee cased; much lesse healed by naturall reme∣dies: but this second to bee very false, our common sence and experience dayly tea∣cheth vs. Secondly, it must haue also some secret cause: for the learned, as I haue before  noted, cannot finde it to arise of any elemen∣tall qualitie in nature. But my greatest and surest ground is this, the word of the Lorde  speaketh it plainly, that the wicked spirits are his messengers, and his instruments for this purpose.
If any doubt of this, let him looke into the iudgements which were inflicted vpon Egypt and Iob, by the ministerie of wicked spirites, for so the Psalmist speaketh, they vexed and tormented Egypt with wonder∣full plagues. They turned the water that was in the riuer into blood. They which can corrupt one ele∣ment August in Psal. 78. Angeli mali ex vtra{que} parte. for the destruction of mankind, can corrupt another, the water with blood, the avre with the pestilence. But wicked spirits did the first: therefore they can doe the se∣cond: when and where God permitteth. Againe, they which can poyson the wa∣ter with frogs, may poison in like man∣ner the aire with pestiferous exhalations: euill spirits did the first, ergo. Thirdly, they which cā destroy beasts with the morraine, may as easily destroy men with the Pesti∣lence, the wicked spirits did the first, and therefore can doe the second, Exod 9. 3. Fourthly, they which can breed scabs and blisters, can breed the pestilence; cha. 9. 10. Lastly, the destroyer which flue so many in one night throughout all Egypt with the Plague, can plague in like manner to this The Lord will not suf∣fer the de▪ day, where and when he is sent, hee was an
euill angel (saith Dauid) he sent euil angels, he gaue their life to the Pestilence. In Iobs sto∣ry wee see sufficient demonstrations for this purpose. They which can bring downe fire from heauen to destroy beastes, may in like ma∣ner poison the aire, and men with the pestilence, the wicked spirits did the first, Ergo, can do the second. Secondly, they which can driue windes and tempests toge∣ther to beate downe houses most violently, may be as fit instruments to execute the like iustice and iudgements in the pestilence, the wicked spirits, &c. Thirdly, they which can poison the soules of men, suggesting and breathing most pestilent motions in∣to the mindes of men to their destructi∣on, can much more easily poyson their bodyes when. GOD sendeth them for that purpose. But Sathan did that first (wee see) in the Sabans, and in the Chal∣deans, and in all the pestilent crewe of rebellious sinners at this day: hee driueth them before him as men driue beastes, saith August. Ergo. Lastly, he that would plague that blessed Iobs plagu. & the plague of Egypt, haue one name in the originall causes. man of God, Iob, with most grieuous poyson and torments in his bo∣die,
can doe much more vpon all the wic∣ked enemies of God, and vessels of wrath, and the like also vpon Gods good people to this day: but Sathan and his wicked Iob. 2. 7. Exod. 9. 11. Deut. 28. 28. 59. 60. 01. spirites smote Iob with most pestiferous vlcers, or pestilentiall carbuncles, or biles; scabs and sores most noysome. Wherefore these wicked spirits may and doe no doubt serue the Lord in the like iudgements to this day. And for this cause some of the lear∣ned Interpreters haue sayde, these two names vsed in this Psalme. Keteb and De∣ber, are the names of certaine euill spi∣rites, which poyson the ayre with pesti∣lent and venimous exhalations. Of all the premises let vs conclude, that wee must in this visitation of the Lorde, prin∣cipally lift vp our mindes aboue the se∣condarie causes, Winter, Sommer, colde, heate, drought, moisture, all the elementa∣rie qualities, and fasten our eyes vpon the mightie hand of GOD, who, when, and where it pleaseth him, sendeth foorth his raunging hunter, this olde Dragon, these venimous Aspes, and bloodie Lyons, Sa∣than and his wicked spirites against vs,
as in the warres and famine, so likewise in the pestilence, the Scriptures speake often that the wicked spirites flye about, and doe many euils: as Iob 1. 7. 2. 2. 1. King. 22. 22. Matth. 12. Luke 8. 31. Ro. 16. 20. 2. Cor. 12. 8. Ephe. 2. 2. 6. 11. 1. Pet. 5. 8. 9. But how agrees these Scriptures with Saint Peter words: 2. Pet. 2. 45. wee read that the An∣gels which sinned were cast downe into hel, and deliuered into chaines of darkenesse, to bee kept vnto damnation: so Iude verse 6. They are reserued in euerlasting chaines vnder darknesse, vnto iudgement of the great day. (A.) In the beginning God did so, but afterwards for the execution of his iustice and will, hee suffered some part of of them to slie about in the aire: but at his pleasure he can shut them vp againe in pri∣son, for proofe Reuel. 9. 1. 2. The bottom∣lesse pit opened by an Angel, and thence come foorth many euill spirits. This same bottomlesse pit is shut vp by an Angel, Reu. 20. 7. and Sathan is bound a thousand yeares. Thus it appeares now and then they are shut vp, and againe loosed when the Lord wil* therefore they intreat Christ Luke 8. not to cast them into the deep in hell.
Luke 16. 25. so Matth. 8. 24. Iames 2. 19. And thus farre of the causes mouing the Lord, and of the instrumentall and secret causes which the Lorde vseth to smite his people with the Pestilence. Now let vs not be brutishly secure and senslesse as the vn∣godly be, but let vs make a holy vse, as of all the Lords chasticemēts, so of the pestilence, comforting euery man himselfe by the word of the Lorde, on this manner as fol∣loweth. First, I consider the Pestilence and the like calamities on Gods people, to be Gods holy visitation, to call men to a serious and a publique humiliation before him, that their iniquitie may bee purged, and this is all Esd. 27. 8. 9. the fruite he desireth, euen the taking away of their sinne. Hee doth not punish willingly. Iere. Lam. 3. 33. And that this is all hee de∣sireth when he smiteth the Church with the pestilence, may appeare; For the Prophet saith, that he contends in measure with it in the branches thereof, not simiting them as hee doth the Gentiles. And this we shall sinde in due time true, if wee compare his lenitie with vs, and his fierce wrath vpon many citties in the Popes dominions. Conferre
Pet. 1. 14. 15. and 2. Chap. verse 12. 18. Secondly, I consider the Lords chastice∣ments, How to comfort our selues and to make vse of afflictions. as effects of the great and certaine decree of God vpon mee. Rom. 8. 28. what God hath decreed must come to passe: God hath deered to make the Saints through af∣flictions, that is, all maner of chasticements whatsoeuer, conformable to the image of his sonne Christ: The best beloued Sonne wanted not rods all the life hee liued vpon earth, and therefore I must not otherwhiles want them. I must beare many crosses on earth, before I shall be crowned with Christ in heauen. Thirdly, I know Christ seeth dayly all my sores, all my griefs, all my paines, all my troubles, all my teares, they are as well knowne vnto him, as if they were distilled by drops into his bottle, and the number of them by iust account set downe in his regi∣ster. Psal. 56. 8. Thou hast counted my wande∣rings, put my teares into thy bottle, are they not in thy Register? Fourthly, I consider all these greeuances of this life as vndoubted seales of mine immortalitie: for the Lorde hauing de∣creed to bring mee to immortalitie, to
blisse voyd of all miserie, &c. The effects of his decree I know, and see in my vocati∣on, Iustification, and sanctification: but the life promised as yet I finde not, be∣cause of my manifold afflictions: where∣fore I shall vndoubtedly finde it when this life is ended. Eiftly, I learne in Gods booke, that the diseases of the body, and all other afflicti∣ons of this life, they are oftē sent vpon Gods people and holy seruants, to worke in them a more serious humiliation for the sinnes of their youth, either because they were neuer throughly humbled for them, or least they fall dangerously into the same sinnes a∣gaine. Psalm. 25. 6. Remember not the sinnes of my youth, nor my rebellions, but according to thy kindnesse remember thou me, euen for thy goodnesse sake O Lord. And Iob complai∣neth, chap. 13. 26. Thou writest bitter things against me, and makest me to possesse the sinnes of my youth. Fiftly, I consider also that God would haue vs his children beaten The godly are beaten for the con∣firmation of their brethr and for the instructiō of the wicked. as for their owne sinnes so also that he may awaken his enemies, and tell them, that for their intolle∣rable sinnes, their destruction sleepth not.
1. Pet. 4. 17. Iudgement must first beginne at the house of God: if it first begin at vs, what shal be the end of them which obey not the Gospell of God? Sixtly, I see and know the corruptions of mine heart to be so many, and the dulnes and dimmesse of my minde to be such, that if I were not often by the crosse brought to hearken and to obey, I should neither vn∣derstand aright the Lords reueiled will, nor practise it with any sincerity in my life. Psal. 1 19. 71. It is good for me that I haue bene af∣flicted, that I may learne thy Statutes. Iob. Chap. 33. verse 16. God openeth the eares of men by their corrections. Maister Caluin, in his Preface on the Psalmes saith, that if God had not exercised him with manv afflicti∣ons, he could not wel haue vnderstood ma∣ny Psalmes. Seuenthly, I finde also another great comfort in all mine insirmities and gree∣uance: I haue heard and knowne the faith∣full to confesse Christs presence more fami∣liar, sweet and comfortable in their aduer∣sitie Good to haue chan∣ges. then prosperitie: and this I finde true in like manner. And the rather I obserue this, for that the Apostle speaketh thus of
himselfe, I will reioyce rather in mine infirmi∣ties, Psal. 7. 3. 2. Cor. 12. 9. that the power of Christ may soiourn with me, therefore I take pleasure in mine infirmi∣ties, in reproches, in necessities, &c. And I finde true that prosperitie breedes dange∣rous pride and carnal securitie: I sayd in my rest, I shall neuer be mooued, for thou Lord of thy goodnes hast made my mountaine so strong: but thou didst hide thy face and I was trou∣bled then I cryed to thee, O Lord, and prayed to my Lord. Psal. 30. 8. Eightly, I gather also by afflictions experience, and this both worketh in me a Christian sympathie & compassion to∣wardes Rom. 5. 2. 3. Iames 1. 2. 3. Nonigna∣ra mali mi∣seris sucur∣reie disco. other men in their miseries, and teacheth mee how to comfort them as I haue beene comforted of the Lorde. 2. Cor. 1. 3. 4. Blessed be God euen the father our Lord Iesus Christ, the father of mercies and the God of all comfort, which comforteth vs in all our tribulation, that we may bee able to comfort them which are in any affliction, by the comfort wherewith we our selues are com∣forted of God: for as the sufferings of Christ abound in vs: so our consolation aboundeth through Christ. Wee gather experience of Gods loue & of our weakenes, Rom. 5. 2. 3.
Iames 1. 2. & strength to endure cōtempt. Lastly, I consider death, whether by pe∣stilence or otherwise, as the complement of my mortification, for in mortification I am crucified and die dayly, but in death I shal finde the full destruction of the whole bodie of sinne. The Phisitions say, death is the last phisition which endes the most grieuous pangs, and dangerous diseases by Phisicke incurable: so I know that death shall put an ende to all the euils that Sathan, sinne, and the world shall bring vpon me during this present life. And thus farre concerning Sathans kingdome, the seruice of wicked spirites vnto God in the pestilence, and how the Christians may bee comforted, as in that euil, so in any other. THE 4. LECTVRE. Verse. 7. A thousand shall fall on the one side, and ten thousand at thy right hand, and it shall not come neare thee. HEre againe obserue how carefull the holy Ghost is to multiply his promises
to comfort and cherish the true beleeuers heart. As long as prosperitie and health lasteth, we thinke alwayes that wee haue Gods presence with vs: but when mi∣serie approcheth, then if our faith faile vs, our hearts soone faint within vs. Now this faith euer fainteth without the holy promises which are the very food & nou∣rishment of our faith. O then thou man of GOD, looke often vpon the holy pro∣mises that thou may est beleeue, that so thy heart may not deceiue thee in the euil day. Remember there is no vse of all these pro∣mises, vnlesse by faith thou canst receiue them. Be not afraid, saith the Prophet in this Verse, of that great destroyer the pesti∣lence, which killes so many by day an by night. No nor yet feare not (I say) al∣beit The sense. a thousand of thy neighbours or com∣panions fall on the one side, and ten thou∣sand on the other side, for thou shalt bee free: onely be strong in faith, and watch wisely ouer thine owne wayes, calling mightily vpon God for his defence and deliuerance. Note here againe, how careful the holy Obse.
Ghost is to answer all obiections, all argu∣ments and circumstances which in the pe∣stilēce may breed feare in vs. There is no∣thing doth so appale, discourage and dis∣may vs, as to see many dead men lie before vs, thousands on the one side, & ten thou∣sands on the other side, as in warres often, and in campes where the pestilence ra∣geth, as in Maximilians campe, when hee besieged Verona, twentie thousand dyed in one plague, & in Dauids time seuentie thousand in three dayes, there many great heapes of dead men might bee seene on both sides and in all places. The like was to bee seene at Alexandria and in many Euseb. hist. lib. 7. 21. other places, where the liuing were not able to burie the dead. There is none of the other causes before mentioned, doth so terrifie the heart as this, quicke is the eie, and sendeth things seene very swif∣ly to the phantasie & so to the heart. How greatly were the Pagans in Egypt terri∣fied when but one dyed in a house tho∣roughout the whole land? The King and all his subiects rose vp at midnight, and strangely all amazed they trembled, fea∣ring least present death and destruction
was come vpon them. Againe, and againe, I warne the faith∣ful man of God to obsetue these holy pro∣mises. Thou art precious and deare vnto God among many thousands: he that ca∣reth for the sparrowes, careth much more for vs, that bee redeemed by the blood of his snne, and called to his grace & hope of glorie wherein wee stand and reioyce: he that numbreth our haires will not see Rom. 5. 2. 3. Matt. 6. Luke 12. one of vs perish, he that will giue vs a kingdome, will not suffer any enemie to hurt vs in this life without his grace and comfort: yea, when they seeme to hurt vs, they shall will they nill they, hasten our endlesse felicitie. Here before we passe, whereas the Prophet saith, verse 7. The Plague shall not come neere thee: it may bee demaunded how this can bee true: for that wee read both in elder ages, and see dayly that the pestilence where it is sent, doth not only come neere the godly, but also smites dead many of the righte∣ous and religious people, among the great heapes and troupes of vnbeleeuers. (A.) The answere is this: that either they faile in the particuar faith in Gods
prouidence so much commended and re∣quired in this Psalme: or, they keepe not within the bounds of their callings: or, be not instant in prayers: or, the Lorde hath some secret purpose best knowne to himselfe: yet hee is their firme conso∣lation, that neither powers, nor princi∣palities, nor life, nor death, shall seuer them from the loue of God in Christ Ie∣sus. Rom. 8. 39. Verse. 8. Thou shalt onely behold with thine eyes, and see the reward of the wicked. THou shalt see the Pestilence sweepe away thousands on both sides: I say againe, thou shalt but onely see these calamities light vpon other, and this sight it shall doe thee good, by the obseruation of the executioners of Gods great and fearefull iudgements, thou shalt (I say) see howe the Lorde doth chasten his children for the time, and con∣found and plague his enemies.
Note here how we ought to make vse of all Gods iudgements that we see, heare, and know, for therefore doth the Lord lay them before his children, and not vpon them. Frist, that they may see, and by see∣ing, learne to feare him, and to beleeue in him, that they may consider, as of Gods mercie towardes them, so of his iustice in rewarding sinners, that as by the one they are stirred vp to loue him, so by the other they learne to feare him, that so they may haue a holy mixture of loue and feare, and thereby sound hearts to walke in sincere obediēce before him. Secondly, they must when they see the Lords iudgements to smite others, be stirred vp to compassion, and so to prayer for their brethren, and euen for their very enemies, for what hart can be forgetfull in these extremities, whē they are presented before vs, to labour in prayer to God for our brethren: the pra∣ctise of this wee see notably in Dauid, 2. Sam. 24. 17. Verse 25. We must shew com∣passion on our bre∣thren: in praying for them, in our liberalitie towardes m, in vi∣siting them when they be sicke: of which dutie see more in the ende. who neuer rested crying and calling vnto God for his people, till the Lord was ap∣peased. Thirdly, the Lord would haue vs thus to behold the calamities of our bre∣thren, that wee might shew all the com∣passion
that we can, as by our prayers, so by shewing our Christian liberalitie vpon them; and by visiting also such, as we are bound, by any bond of natural loue, Chri∣stian societie, &c. For we must not bee as Dauids friendes, standing aside, and flying away, whē our dearest friends haue grea∣test need of our helpe and comfort. Verse. 9. 10. Because thou hast set the Lorde, which is my hope, euen the most high for thy refuge: There shall none occasion be giuen, that e∣uill Lo teun∣nh. may touch thee, neither shall any plagu come neare thy tabernacle. HEre the Prophet giueth vs an other reason of all the former securitie of the faithfull, making himselfe one of the number. His reason is this (as farre as I can conceiue it) God will deliuer them, and couer them, &c. for that they doe not onely runne to hide themselues vnder his wings for protection: but also they do ve∣ry watchfully attend to all their wayes, that they giue none occasion of offence, & greiuance to his most holy spirit. Eph. 4. 30.
Wee see againe the holy Ghost re∣quires Note. A particular victoriou aith, a speci∣all preserua∣tiue against the pesti∣lence, as be∣fore. q. 1. in vs an especiall faith in these ca∣lamities. Before he spake, verse 2. of his owne particular faith, that albeit all the world went from God in these extremi∣ties, to many vnlawfull meanes, yet he would sweetly rest in God, and seeke for lawfull meanes onely: here hee speakes of euery other faithful beleeuer as of him∣selfe, that he also must haue this particular faith. For a man must not onely haue faith concerning Gods prouidence, as at other times: but I must also beleeue, that God in this speciall visitation, hath a most spe∣ciall care of me, and hath commanded his Angels to watch ouer me. And for this cause all the promises are particularly applyed to this beleeuer from the beginning to the ende of this Psalme: verse 3. Surely he will deliuer thee from the sare, &c. verse 4. Hee will couer thee with his wings, and his truth shall bee thy shield. verse 5. Thou shalt not be afraid, &c. verse 7. A thousand shall fall at thy side, and it shall not come neare thee: verse 8. Thou shalt onely see the reward of the wicked. verse 11. Hee will giue his Angels charge ouer thee, to keepe thee.
verse 12. They shall beare thee, &c. verse 13. Thou shalt walke vpon the Lion, &c. Where∣fore thou must striue to haue this particu∣lar and speciall faith in troubles. The 10. verse seemeth vnto me to con∣taine this argument. Hee that with all good conscience watcheth ouer his wayes, and so endeuoureth with all his might to walke with his God in sinceritie of life, and soundnesse of heart: hee shall be deliue redin the Pestilence. Thou art one of them which striue with all good conscience to serue the Lord thy God, and Lo Teun∣nah. doest endeuour, that no cause be giuen, that thy father now in his anger shall site thee with the Pestilence: Therefore hee will deliuer thee. THe Lord saith in an other place, that when the dayes of famine come, he will not famish the soule of the righteous: and to the true worshipper which serueth him in truth of spirit, he saith: The Lord shal blesse thy bread and thy water, & I will take a∣way all sicknesse from the mids of thee.
The Prophet here teacheth vs as the Apostle, that Gods children must auoyd all occasion of sinne, or to speake yet more strictly as the holy spirit speaketh, all sha∣dow, all likenesse, or appearance of sinne. So some godly Interpreters vnderstand 1. Th. 5. 21 that place. The Psalmist as I iudge, here com∣pareth vs to wise and faithfull children, which are most watchfull, least by any the least meanes, they giue cause of offence to their good parents. And surely all ar∣guments of our heauenly fathers loue and mercie considered, in our election, creati∣on, redemption, regeneration, adoption, continuall preseruation, & euerlasting sal∣uation: we are of all other the most foolish and vnkind childrē, if we study not cheare∣fully to obey, and carefully to auoyd the offence of so mightie, so louing, so gra∣tious, and so bountifull a father vnto vs. Againe, if this watchfulnesse must be found alwaies in vs: how much more e∣uen then, when our almightie Father in the continuance of his anger (as Ieremie saith) consumeth his enemies, and chaste∣neth Ier. 14. 15 his owne people.
Therefore at this time specially all the wise sonnes of God, tremble to displease him, and studie to please him. Psal. 2. 4. Question. That a good conscience is a speciall preserua∣tiue against the Pestilence. A Good conscience, saith Augustine ve∣ry well, is the paradise of the soule, and surely so an euill conscience is the ve∣ry hell of the soule. And Chrysostme calles the good conscience the good countenance Hob. 4. 16 of the soule, because this conscience alone can approch boldly to the throne of grace. Wherefore this good conscience is one of the greatest blessings wee haue on earth. Now for as much as it is a thing most dan∣gerous to bee deceiued in our greatest Dangerous to be decei∣ued in a good cause. treasure, and to take drosse for gold, good for euill, and euill for good: let vs therefore be the more circumspect and carefull, first to know and learne what this great grace 2. Cor. 13. 5 is. Secōdly, let vs wisely examine ourselues whether we possesse it, & haue it in truth, or ignorantly be deceiued, as most mē be.
Lastly, after iust triall and examination had of our owne hearts, if we finde it in our selues, let vs labor with all our strength to cherish it & preserue it; if we finde we haue it not, let vs neuer giue our selues any rest, but contend in all the meanes appointed, to come to Iesus Christ, that he may giue it vs, for he alone can giue it, and strength to keepe it. Conscience is described of some, to be a liuing lawe in our hearts, which stirreth, awaketh, & driueth vs vnto good things. I suppose wee may truly describe the con∣science first generally, on this manner: Conscience is an inward remembrancer in our minds, and hearts, witnessing eyther with vs, or Definition against vs, of all our thoughts, wordes and workes. The cause wherefore the Lord hath put this remembrancer in man is this: a small light, and weake knowledge would soone lve hid, and be as buried in him, by rea∣son of the corruption of our hearts and affections: therefore the Lord hath left him this feeling, as a keeper and a watch to a∣wake him, to marke and espie all his se∣crets, and continually to present him vn∣to
the iudgement seate of God, that no∣thing may be lost in obliuion, and this keeper men say to be as a thousand witnes∣ses to testifie with vs or against vs, euen of of all our secrets: a great controller of A∣theists, euen in their secret chambers. The seate of this Or the Lords hand∣writing. remembrancer is the vnderstanding, yet for that it is found sen∣sibly to smite the heart, therefore the holy Ghost euer seates him there: So Salomon noteth speaking to Shimei: Thou knowest all the wickednesse (wherevnto thine heart is priuie) that thou didst to Dauid my father. And the Apostle saith, that the great peace keepeth the heart and mind in Christ Iesus. And the Author to the Hebrewes, Your heart being pure from an euill conscience. Ec∣cles. 7. 24. Lastly, that this witnesse or remem∣brancer will be with vs, or against vs, at all times, and that in Gods presence, the A∣postle testifieth, Rom. 2. 15. The Gentiles shewe the effect of the Lawe written in their hearts, their conscience also bearing witnesse, and their thoughts accusing one an other, or excusing before God.
The first diuision of the con∣science is this, the consci∣ence is either 1. Good. or 2. Euill. 1. Of the good conscience. SAint Peter 1. 3. 21. saith, that a good conscience is a quietnesse of mind after we be perswaded of the grace of God in Christ, being then readie without feare to present our selues before him. Heb. 10. 2. The holy Ghost to the Hebrewes cal∣leth it a conscience purged from dead Heb. 9. 14. Conscientia bene actae vitae, multo∣rumque be∣neficiorum recordano, iucundissi∣ma est. works to serue the liuing God. If the Hea∣thens did so much reioyce in their good consciences, which were but counterfeit, in respect of the consciences of the faith∣full: how much more should we desire to know, and reioyce to finde, and endeuour to keepe, & continually to possesse a good conscience. Thus then I trust, according to Gods holy veritie, a good conscience may be de∣scribed. What a good con∣science is. A good conscience is an assured vnder∣anding in the minde, a feeling in the heart of the iudgement of God, acquiting and dischar∣ging
vs frō our sinnes, by faith in Iesus Christ: and an inward witnesse testifying with vs of our holy endeuour to walke in all the commaunde∣ments of God. Psal. 119. ver. 6. Here in this description I consider two thinges principally: first the fee∣ling Two things in a good conscience. and finding in the conscience of that wonderull peace, which passeth vnderstanding, as the Apostle spea∣keth, by our free iustification, and dis∣charge from all our sinnes in Iesus Christ Note: Rom. 5. 1. Secondly, I consider the most iovfull in∣ward testimonie, and boldnesse which we haue, when we are assured that our actions are warrantable by Gods word, sanctified by Gods spirit, and accepted of God in Christ. 2. Cor. 1. 12. The first thing (I say) that glad∣deth and reioyceth the conscience, is that peace, which is purchased by the bloud of Iesus Christ, betweene God and vs: such peace as the merits of all men and Angelles coulde neuer pro∣cure vnto vs. Rom. 5. 1. Beeing iustified by faith, wee haue peace with God, through our Lorde Iesus Christ. Hebr. 10. 22. Let
vs drawe neare with a true heart in assu∣rance The first peace be∣tween God & our hearts is by Christ immediatly onely. Ro. . 1. Heb. 9. 14. 10. 22. Io. 14 27. Io. 8. 56. M. 42. of faith, our hearts beeing purified from an euill conscience. Of this peace speaketh Christ to his Apostles. Iohn 14. verse. 27. Peace I leaue with you, my peace I giue vnto you; not as the' worlde giueth, giue I vnto you, let not your hearts be troubled, nor feare. This peace most cheared and comforted Abraham. Iohn. 8. verse 56. Rom. chap. 4. And this cau∣seth Dauid to sing often, and to stirre vp all the powers of his soule to sing praises vnto God: All that is within mee (sayeth hee) praise his holy name: Ps. 103. 1. 3 the reason is added, which forgiueth all thine iniquitie, and healeth all thine infir∣mities. And because Christ is the matter and the onely purchaser of this wonderfull peace: the Apostle cannot fasten his heart and affections vpon any thing but vpon Christ. The things which were aduantage vnto me, the same I counted losse, for Christs Phil. 3. 7. sake: yea doubtlesse, I thinke all things but losse for the excellent knowledge sake of Christ Iesus my Lorde, for whome I haue counted all thinges losse, and doo iudge them to bee
dung that I might winne Christ. This peace therefore, whereof we speake, doth more rauish euery true beleeuers heart, then any earthly pardon or peace whatsoeuer can comfort his heart, which is adiud∣ged and condemned vnto the most ter∣rible torments that can bee deuised on earth: the Apostle calles it rightly, th peace that passeth vnderstanding, Philip. 4. 7. the peace which can be felt, but cannot be vttered. The second thing that cheareth our con∣sciences, and bringeth a secondarie peace The second peace be∣tween a man and his own heart & con∣science. vnto vs, is an inward assurance that our ac∣tions are warrantable by Gods word, san∣tified by his good spirit, and accepted of God in Iesus Christ, as the workes of his children: of this the Apostle speaketh and reioyceth, saying: Our reioycing is this, the testimonie of our conscience, that in simplicitie 2. Cor. 1. 12 and godly purenesse, and not in fleshly wisdome, but by the grace of God, wee haue had our con∣uersation in the world, and most of all towardes you. This secōd peace is euer a consequent of the former, and neuer goeth before, but followeth after, for that before we come to Christ, & receiue a sweet smelling ointmē
from him, our best actions are altogether Tit. 1. 15. 16. 1. Io. 2. 21 27. vnsauourie and vncleane. Because there are many dangerous er∣rors of conscience: obserue well the marks. The markes and signes of this good consci∣ence which we haue hherto described, are these following. THis cōscience alone hath free accesse vnto the throne of grace, to make Zac. 12. 10. 11. 20. 8. 16. 1. Io. 3. 19. 20. The spirit of prayers a good signe of a good conscience. Spiritus du∣cit orationē ad Deum, si spiritus reus apd se sit, conscientia erubescet, quomodo audebit ora∣tionem du∣cere ad ala∣re. ibid▪ requests for our wants, strengthe∣ned by the spirit of prayers. Wee know that we are of the truth, and shall before him assure our hearts, for if our hearts condemne vs, God is greater then our hearts, and knoweth all things: beloued if our hearts condemne vs not, then haue we boldnesse towards God, and what∣soeuer we aske we receiue of him. Oratio de cō∣scientia procedit. si cōscientia erubescat, erubes∣et oratio. Tertul. de castit. Praier doth pro∣ceed from the conscience; if the conscience blush, prayer will be ashamed. 2 This conscience doth most glory in ope to see the glory of God. Rom. 5. 2. Heb. 3. 6. Luk. 10. 20. 3 Another good signe is this, incom∣parably
to loue and esteeme Christ: f such haue truly felt and knowne what peace is purchased by Christ. 4. An other speciall marke of a good conscience is inestimably to value, the word of grace, the Gospell of Ephe. 6. 15. 2. Cor. 5. 18 19. Psal. 119. Rom. 10. 15 peace, that word of reconciliation, and the ministery thereof; for none can so highly esteeme of them, as they which by these holy meanes haue bin reconciled vnto God. Note what honor the beleeuers giue the message and messengers thereof. Rom. 10. 15. Act. 10. 24. 25. Act verse 15 33. Gal 4. 15. 5 The Apostle euer chaines and knits faith vnfained, loue out of a pure heart, and a 1. Tim. 1. 5. 19. good conscience together. 6 An inward care to liue in all hone∣stie of life: this is an inseparable compani∣on Watch our thy consci∣ence as ouer the apple of thine eye. of a good conscience. Heb. 13. 18. Pray for vs we haue a good conscience, in all things desiring to liue honestly. When wee haue a precious peale, wee studie and endeuour with all our might so to preserue it, as that we neuer leese it, vnlesse it be taken from vs by violence. 7 To keepe a good conscience we must be well Ro. 14. 5. assured of our actions to be war∣rantable Act. 24. 16
by the word. Heb. 13. 18. We are assured that wee haue a gaod conscience in all things. 1. Cor. 4. 4. I know nothing by my selfe. 8 Where this peace that passeth vnder∣standing is the Apostle saith it keepeth the heart, that is, the will and affections: & the mind, the seat of reason: & the vnderstan∣ding the facultie of discoursing and iud∣ging in obedience to Christ Iesus. Phil. 4. 7 2. Of troubled consciences. THe faithfull are disquieted often in their consciences. An vnquiet or troubled conscience is a wonderfull griefe of heart, conceiued in What a troubled conscience is. the feare of Gods iudgements, whereby the soule is pressed downe, and mourneth, vntill it be comforted by auh in Iesus Christ. The conscience is a tender eece (as the eye) and therefore we must take heed how we offer any violence to it. 1 There doth arise in all worldlings a most extreame sorrow, for the losse of dignities, preferments, honour, health,
prosperitie and riches, &c. When the carnall churle Nabal heard that his sub∣stance was diminished, his heart dyed . Sam. 25. 37. Wee haue many Na∣bals in these dayes. within him, and he was like a stone. This griefe is no griefe of conscience, arising of the feare of Gods presence or judgements, but a sorrow which doth proceed from a feare of some worldly and externall wants in this present life. So in like maner many Aheists and prophane beastes are dri∣uen, not for any trouble of conscience, It is a com∣mon prac∣tise with P∣pists and A∣theists to hng them∣selues. but as that myser, by the spirite of coue∣tousnesse, some by the spirit of fornica∣tion corporall and spirituall, to hang and drowne themselues because they cannot obtaine that which they purposed & desi∣red, as we see in Achitophel. Therfore these worldly sorrows must be wisely discerned from the good sorrowes of the troubled 2. Co. 7. 9. 10. consciences of the faithfull. Wee must euer desire the light of Gods louing countenance, which we may be as∣sured of, if we keepe faith & a good consci∣ence: but if we make shipwracke of these, the least thing shall greatly amaze vs; yea, the shaking of a leafe: but if we haue this, nothing shalt dismay vs.
This paine is like to other griefes, and no doubt accompanied with many other euils out of the body, losse of goods, name, honour, &c. In the body sundrie diseases goe before and follow it, melan∣choly, &c. But if worldly sorrow alone, turmoyle the heart, as for riches & goods lost, let these be recouered, and all teares are soone gone and past: but the troubled conscience is not so quieted. And as for melancholy and other paines in the body, they are cured wee see with medicines and good diet: but nothing can appease this e∣uill till Christs bloud be applyed. 2 The griefe of conscience smites the heart. Cant. 5. 6. My heart was gone when hee did speake, I sought him but I could not finde him. Againe, Esay speaking of this troubled conscience, saith, I dwell in the high and Esa. 57. 15 holy place, with him also that is of a con∣trite and humble spirit, to reuiue the spi∣rit of the humble, and to giue life to them that are of a contrite heart. And Dauid, A contrite heart O God thou wilt not despise. Thus then we see this griefe is in the hart, Psal. 51. melting it as fire doth mettals, in what
measure it pleaseth the Lord to humble his children. 3 This sorow presseth downe the soule, so Dauid complaineth: Why art thou cast downe my soule, and disquited within me: wai on God. Psal. 43. 5. 4 Lastly I adde, the troubled consci∣ences of the faithfull can neuer finde ease but in Iesus Christ. There streames from him a most sweete liuing water, as from a Zach. 13 1 fountaine, dayly to purge and wash our running sores, and to heale the paine and griefe of our hearts. By his stripes are Esa. 53. 5. wee healed. 2. The Saints euer sought to Christ and none other, to case them of this paine. Psalme 51. 1. Cant. 5. 6. 7. 3. If by any other meanes the conscience be falsely quieted, it will afterwardes rage farre worse then before: much like vnto As in pope∣ry we see many gib∣bets to hang poore con sciences. Sauls spirit, which for some moment of time could be quieted by some sweete melodie, but when the musicke was en∣ded, he fell into his old furious phrensies a∣gaine. The troubled con∣sciences of the faith∣full most appeare 1. In their calling. 2. After.
1 When God doth separate his elect by the preaching of the Gspell, that they may be sanctisied by his spirit, and come to the profesion of his faith. 2. Thess. 2. 13. 14. There must bee then great and many perturbations in the hearts & soules of such as the Lord effectually calleth vn∣to his grace: for the heart before was chai∣ned and fastned to Sathan, sinne, and the world, and this league and fellowship can not easily be broken. Secondly, the heart which before was stony and slintie, must now be softened. Ezech. 11. 19. I will take away the stonie hearts out of their bodyes, and will giue them an heart of flesh. Thirdly, examples teach this. Paule is stricken downe from heauen, & greatly humbled. The good hearers, Act. 2. when the Lord began to awake their consciences, they were picked in their hearts, and cryed saying; Men and brethren what shall we do? Fourth∣ly, some maister sinne, and inueterate cu∣stome in sinne, will breed great wrastling and strife at this time. Fiftly, some enor∣mious sinnes, will cause many to bleed at the heart and to dispaire. 2 After the Lord hath vouchsafd to
giue his elect his spirit of grace, and hath Zach. 12. 10. giuen them heartes to beleeue in Iesus Christ, and after peace obtained with God in Christ, after accesse to grace, and the blessed reioycing in the hope of the glorie of God: the old enemies may yet a∣maze, disquiet and cast downe the soules of Gods elect. Dauid saith, hee felt some terrors and troubles of minde euen from his youth. The reasons are; first, they haue dayly falles, and therefore their repentance, hu∣miliation, and sorow must dayly be renu∣ed. Secondly, they must otherwhiles a∣gaine be humbled for their olde sinnes, to proceed on in repentance, and least they fall into them againe. Psal. 25. 6. Iob. 13. 26. Thirdly, God layeth a grieuous hand They are Gods ene∣mies which through their sinnes and infirmi∣ties take ccasion to blasphme God. vpon them, when they giue cause through great sinnes, that his enemies blaspheme his holy name, for the example doth much harme, it imboldens the wicked, & makes faint the heartes of his children. There∣fore hath Dauid suffered more torments of conscience then any other. 2. Sam. 12. verse 14.
Remedies and helpes for troubled consci∣ences are these which follow. FIrst pray earnestly for the restoring of the holy comforter. Psal. 51. 10. and for a clean heart. Ioh. 14. 16. Lu. 11. 13. 2 With prayer striue to ioyne much weeping and fasting, if thy strength will beare it. Psal 69. 10. 3 With prayer & fasting comfort thy self with a meditation of the vse of all the afflictions of the faithful. Ioh. 7. 13. Psal. 77. for thou hast no tentation nor affliction of conscience, but they haue had the same, or the like. 1. Pet. 5. 9. 4 When thine owne cries and teares cannot finde Christ, aske the watchmen and the daughters of Ierusalem for him, and so neuer rest but by all good meanes finde him. Cant. 5. 6. 7. 8. 6 If all this will not helpe thee, seeke to the Elders of the Church, and acknow∣ledge thy sins to one or moe most discreet, wise, godly & righteous mē, fearing God, that they may haue compassion on thee: & thē be perswaded their cries vnto God shall preuaile for thee: Confesse your selues one to another, and pray one for another, for Iames 5. 15.
the prayer of faith shall saue the sicke, and if he hath committed sinne, it shall bee forgiuen him. So farre for the good conscience of Gods children quieted and troubled: now the euill conscience of the wicked followeth. AN euill conscience, is a conscience neuer What an euill con∣science is. purged by the blood of Iesus Christ. An euil conscience is either 1. Liuing: or 2. Dead. The first is the naturall conscience of the naturall man, retaining naturall sight and naturall feeling, and this liuing con∣science is euer 1. Accusing. 2. Excusing. The naturall man hath left in him sun∣dry generall motions of good and euill, Nocte di∣eq: suum gestat in pectore testem. Iu∣ucnal. Sa∣yr. 13. which are most crooked & corrupt rules being tried by the first Table of the Lawe of God, but his knowledge is not so much darkene and corrupted in the generall heads of the second Table. This man, in all points that may bring him to the king∣dome of heauen is most blind, and counts all these holy meanes meere foolishnes. 1.
Cor. 2. 14. The wisedome of the flsh is en∣tie Rom 8. 7. This con∣ence is a specll pre∣set ue oral. com. w so∣es or men. against God, so the Apostle speaketh. The conscience, handwriting, or watch∣man in this man, is giuen him of God: partly, to conuince him because hee wal∣keth not according to the generall mo∣tions and naturall knowledge he hath of good things: partly to bridle and keepe vnder his wild and disordred affections. 1 This conscience excuseth euer fals∣ly: because of ignorance, corruption of the minde and all affections: as first, when it doth excuse those works which in the ge∣nerall are good indeede, but are sinnes in him and all naturall men: as Vzzas fact, mentioned 1. Chron. 159. Secondly, whē it excuseth and couereth any inward sin, and hypocrisie, by an outward false obe∣dience. An example of this wee haue in Mark 10 20. 2 This conscience first truly accuseth and citeth a man before God, for that which is euil indeed: as 10. 9. the wicked ac∣cusers were accusea by their own consciences. Many are thus cited and sent for, by this Parator, and confesse it with shame, as Saul did to Dauid, and yet are neuer the
better, a dangerous signe. Secondly, this Popish con∣sciences are thus much disquieted. conscience citeth a man falsly, for that which is not euill in it selfe, but superstiti∣ously thought to be euill: Col. 2. 21. As for the committing or omitting of any thing against the superstitious traditions of men; Touch not, taste not, handle not. Thus much of the feeling conscience: the dead conscience followeth. A dead conscience is a heart and consci∣ence, voyd of all naturall sense, or naturall fee∣ling. This conscience of all other is most fearefull and daungerous: and commeth after multiplying and heaping of gree∣uous sinnes together: or long contempt of the holy truth, or both. The Apostle Eph. 4. 19 speaketh of some of the prophane Gen∣tiles: that first from vanitie of minde they come to blindnes, from blindnes they fall to hardnes of heart, then they become past feeling: and the last degree of euill is: they giue themselues vnto wantonnesse, to work all vncleannesse euen with greedinesse. And of Antichrist and his disciples hee sayth, First, they depart from the faith: secondly, The popish erisie. they giue heed to spirits of error: thirdly,
to doctrines of diuels: fourthly, they giue heede to such as speake lies through hy∣pocrisie: lastly, their consciences is seared with a hot iron. Signes of a deadly, frozen, and benum∣med conscience, are these. FIrst, a dangerous signe to multiply sins without feeling. Ephes. 4. 18. 19. Rom. 1. 22. 30. 2 A dangerous signe to regard neither the curses nor blessings of GODS lawe. Deut. 29. 19. But to flatter himselfe in his heart, saying, I shall haue peace, although I walke according to the stubburnnesse of my heart: so adding drunkennes vnto thirst: the Lord will not be merciful vnto that man: This heart is poysoned by the spirit of slumber. Rom. 11. 8. 3 To make a mocke of sinne, and of the Ministrie of Gods most holy Word. Ezech. 33. 30. 31. 32. 33. 4 When vexation of spirit commeth Mat. 27. 5. Psal. 55. 2. Sam. 17. 23. to lay violent hands vpon themselues: as to hang themselues with Iudas and Achi∣tophel: to kill themselues desperately with
Saul and many others. Lastly, these are most fearfull signes of a most wicked prophane conscience: to haue some notable horror of minde, and trembling of bodie, when some of Gods iudgements appeare: blaspheinies in great extremities and passions of death. Nero was wonderfully terrified with vi∣sions, flashings of fire and terrible dreams, Sneton∣vita Ne∣ronis. Take heede ye Church robbers, to your con∣science be-ime: if your hearts condemne you, God is greaer, &c. Dan. 5. 4. 5. 6. after he had murthered his owne mother. Belshazzar King of Babylon, hauing the spoyles of Gods Church, and in great con∣tempt of the true God, sporting himselfe and praysing the gods of gold and siluer, of iron, wood, & stone: at the same houre appeared fingers of a mans hand, which wrote ouer against the candlesticke, vpon the plaister of the wal of the kings pallace, and the king saw the palme of the hand that wrote: Then the kings countenance was changed, and his thoughts troubled him, so that the ioynts of his lynes were loosed, and his  knees smote one against another. And this trembling had Felix, when  Paul disputed before him of righteousnes  and temperance, which he wanted, and of the fearfull iudgements wherin all sinners
must appeare before Iesus Christ in the Act. 24. 26. end of the world, and receiue a heauie sen∣tence of condemnation. The troubles of reprobates breede in them often desperation: the causes of this are either secrt or open: Secret, Gods re∣probation Hebr. 12. 17. knowne to himselfe, and not to be searched: manifest causes, in the ende finall impenitencie, & hardnesse of heart. Here it is wisedome to hope the best of men (Crastinus dies ignoratur, wee knowe 1. Ioh. 5. 16. Matt. 12. 31. not what shall be to morrow) if an open blasphemie with an abnegation of the trueth appeare not. And thus much of an euill conscience. Now to make in a word, some vse of this sweet doctrine aforegoing, and to ap∣ply it vnto our present purpose: First in the time of pestilence and all other cala∣mities, wisely examine thy selfe, as is a∣fore shewed. If thou doubtest of thy con∣science how it may stand in the euill day, make hast to purge it, least euill preuent thee. And if after sound tryall, thou fin∣dest thy selfe to possesse a blessed cleane conscience well purged by Iesus Christ and sanctified by his holy Spirite: then
mightily keepe watch & ward, as it were, that no enemy may steale this pearle frō thee, for it is of inestimable value and sur∣passing vertue to preserue thee in the pe∣stilence. I giue thee here none other coun∣sel Pro. 4. 23. 1. Tim. 1. 18. 19. then the holy Ghost hath giuen vs all. For it is written; Keepe thine heart with all diligence, for thence proceed the actions of life: and leese this, thou shalt make shipwrack also offaith, and spirituall vnderstanding. And Christ saith, that vnlesse the heart be purged and watchfully preserued and kept cleane, it sends foorth euill thoughts, adulteries, &c. Iob therfore was very care∣full Mar. 21. Iob. 27. 6 of his heart and conscience, and very watchfully kept it: My heart (saith hee) shall not reproue me of my dayes. And so was Dauid: for assoone as he had sinned, and gaue occasion of that Pestilence, before the Prophet Gad came vnto him, it is said; Dauids heart smote him after hee had 2. Sam. 24. 10. numbred the people. And examine thy selfe also truely how thou standest in the faith, and how Iesus Christ is in thee. Take heed of a false faith, as thou beleeuest, so so shall it be done vnto thee. For like as the true faith brings many blessings to
the beleeuers: so a false faith breedes ma∣ny euill effects in the vnbeleeuers. And as the heart chiefly must be regarded, so the outward sences and partes of the bo∣dy, must in no wise bee neglected in this watch. The eye is a dangerous sence and most quicke, and suddenly doth stirre vp Iob 31. 1. Psal. 45. 12. euill motions in the heart: wee must (as Iob) make a couenant with our eyes. The are must diligently first heaken, and then consider how to beleeue and obey the Gospel of Iesus Christ. The tongue is a most dangerous mem∣ber, and Dauid heere requireth a heedie Psal. 36. 1. Iam. 1. 12. watchfulnesse: & Saint Iames saith plain∣ly, that all our profession and religion is in vaine if wee neglect this part, and yet more fearefully. The tongue is fire, yea a world of wickednesse, so is the tongue set a∣mong our members, that it defileth the whole bodie, and setteth on fire the course of nature, and it is set on fire of hell. And to be short Ch. 3. 6, Watch o∣uer all parts. for all partes, remember, watch, and so beat down thy body, as that thou maist be able to haue it in subiection, and to bridle thine vnrulie affections, so did the ho∣ly Apostle. 1. Corin. 9. I beate downe my
body and bring it to subiection, least by any meanes after that I haue preached to other, I my selfe should bee as a refuse, or as one re∣iected and forlorne. And that like, &c. And the like is said of Hillari: Ego te asine (saith he) non hordco sed palca pascam, ne me post hac recalcitres. O mine asse (so he calleth this bodie of sinne) I will hencefoorth feed thee with chaffe and not with barley, least hereafter thou kicke or strike me with thy foote. THE 5. LECTVRE. Verse. 11. 12. For he shall giue his Angels charge ouer thee, to keepe thee in all his wayes. They shall beare thee in their hands, that thou hurt not thy foote against a stone. HEre wee haue againe, a newe most A gracious preseruati∣on in the Pestilence. comfortable doctrine, concerning the preseruation of Gods children by the holy Angels of God, as against sun∣dry calamities of this present life, so against the pestilence, the argumēt is thus formed.
They which haue the custodie and watch of the holy Angels ouer them, shall be preserued from euill spirits, and comforted in the noy∣some pestilence. But thou true beleeuer, which hidest thy selfe by faith in Gods prouidence, as in the bo∣some of the Almightie: which art so watch∣full ouer thy conscience, thy heart, and all thy wayes: thou shalt bee preserued by the holy Angels of God. Wherefore walking thus watchfully in thy wayes, thou shalt be kept free frrom wicked spirits, and comforted in the pestilence. HE commpareth vs in this Argument to infants, and the Angels to Nurses, most fitly, & the scandals and offen∣ces of this life, which hurt and hinder vs in our race to heauen-ward, vnto stones which cause vs to stumble in the streetes. And surely who so considereth our weak∣nes, the thorns & briers we passe through, and the dangerous rocks we passe ouer, a∣gaine, Sathans subtilties and infinit snares: shall well vnderstand this argument con∣taineth no hyperbole, or fained speech, for assuredly we could not passe three paces
in our wayes towards heauen, if that the holy Angels did not as it were carrie vs in the aire, and chase away wicked spirites from vs. Here we see, the Lord offereth another spirituall preseruatiue of wonderfull ver∣tue, power and might, against the pe∣stilence. We haue in these 2. Uerses; these three things most worthy our obseruation. 1 That all the holy Angels are vnder the charge and gouernment of the Lord, they serue and minister vnto him, and where he will. 2 How that they haue not onely a ge∣nerall charge ouer all the faithfull, but in particular they must care for, and watch ouer euery one: Keepe thee, beare thee. 3 How long their charge lasteth: as long as the faithfull walke vprightly and soundly with God in all their wayes ap∣pointed for them. 5. Question. Howe graciously the Lord preserueth his peo∣ple by his holy Angels in the pestilence.
TO passe by all needlesse and curious As of the orders of angels. questions of Iewish Rabbins, and o∣thers concerning the holy Angels of God, we shall content our selues, when we haue learned only those points which the sacred Scriptures haue recommended and reuealed vnto vs, for our comfort and in∣struction. The first point needfull to be knowen, as our Prophet here noteth vnto vs, is, that these holy spirits haue no absolute autho∣ritie of their owne, but are vnder, the charge of the Almightie, they come and go where and when they be sent by him: and they doe most faithfully and readily performe all seruice they are commanded. So the Psalmist speaketh: They do his com∣andement Psal. 103. 20. in obeying the voyce of his worde. And we be taught, what their function and ministry is, both by their proper and common names often giuen them in scrip∣ture. For their proper names are euer sig∣nificant, and shew some part of their ser∣uice, for the performance whereof they are sent of God. The Angel sent to the Luk. 1. 19. 29. Dan. 9. 21 8. 16. holy Virgin is named Gabriel (and so he calleth himself) this signifieth the strength
of God, answerable to his message, which was to declare the great power of God, as in the wonderfull conception of Christ in the Virgin: so in all the worke of our redemption. The Angell sent to Esay, is said to be one of the Seraphins: he had his name of Zaraph, to burne: and fitly, for his seruice was to touch Esays lippes with a hote cole from the Altar. Thus the Lord confirmed his Prophets both with his word and Sacraments. So Ieremie, so Da∣niel. Iere. 1. 9. Dan. 10. 16. The Angel which came to Mancah, named himselfe Pelt, wonderfull: he both miraculously consumed the sacrifice with fire, and in the said slame of fire ascended vp and departed from them. The Angel which came to Tobias, is called Raphael, Iudg. 13. 20. But that storie is ve∣ry Iewish and fabu∣lous. Col. 1. 16. the Lordes phisicke or phisition, because he cured him, or was sent of God to cure him. And in like maner their common names put vs in minde of their seruice and holy ministrie vnto God. They are all in generall called, thrones, dominions, principa∣lities, powers, because the Lorde doth go∣uerne his empire, exercise hi dominion, and shew forth his principalitie & power by their seruice. Againe, they are said to be
the Lords host, and the host of heauen, because they are of a wonderfull multi∣tude, and God ruleth them, as kings and Psal. 103. 148. 1. Ki. 21. 22. Reue. 19. Dan. 7. 10 Psal. 34. princes do an host of men. Daniel saith: Thousand thousands ministred vnto him, and tenne thousand thousands stood before him. And Christ affirmeth the same, saying: Thinkest thou that I cannot now pray my fa∣ther, and he will giue me moe then 12. legions of Angels? Againe, they are maruellous faithfull and readie in their seruice. Ezech. Ezec. 10. 5 Dan. 9. 21 and Daniel doth see them flying: they haue no wings, and yet are they swift as the windes, and eadie to execute with all speed any thing they haue in charge from God. He maketh his ministers spirits, and his messengers a flame of fire. They do their Ps. 104. 4 Heb. 1. 7. Mat. 5. message faithfully, and will haue no ho∣nor nor worship done to them, as the euill angels, but all to be done to God. Re. 19. Iud. 13. 18. 19. 20. Their faithfulnes great seruice, and sincere, and constant obedi∣ence to God, is notably commended by the Prophets, where hee saith: Praise the Lord yee his Angels that excell in strength, that doo his commaundement in obeying the voice of his word. Where note first, they
praise God in their seruice. 2. They are of wonderfull strengh to serue him. 3. They Luk. 2. Not as the euill spirits do. do Gods will. 4. They do it faithfully ac∣cording to his word. Thus far for the first point. The 2. thing to be knowne is their loue to Gods Church, and great care ouer the faithfull members of the same. And cer∣tainly their loue is great. For it is saide they reioyce ouer one sinner that repen∣teth and turneth vnto God: The Psalmist Luk. 15. testifieth of their loue and care, when hee faith: They pitch their tents round about Ps. 34. 7. them which feare the Lorde, and desiuer them. Psal. 91. 15. And here it is said, they beare them (like as louing parents & nurces do their chil∣dren) in their hands and armes, to keepe them from scandals and offences. And the Lord giueth them in charge thus to doo, faith this Prophet heere. And hence it is the Author to the Hebrewes describeth them to be Ministring spirits, sent from their sakes, which shall be heires of saluation. And Heb. 1. 14. as for their number wee must not curious∣ly search, how many each man hath to keepe him: for the scriptures tell vs, that
sometimes many are sent to one man, and againe sometimes one Angell is sent for the deliuerance of the whole Church. To saue Elisha against the king of Syria, the mountaine was full of horses, and chari∣ets 2. K. 5. 17. It may be this was Mi∣chael Iesus Christ. Eze. 37. 2. K. 19. of fire round about Elisha. But in Da∣els time, one Angell seemeth to be sent for the protection of the whole Church. And in Ezechias time, one was of strēgth sufficient to kil and destroy in one night 185000. of the enemies of Gods people. And if yet we further desire to learn, what ther causes, besides that speciall charge of God, moue them so to loue vs, affect vs, and to minister vnto vs for our pro∣tection and deliuerance: the holy Ghost  teacheth vs, that first they are members Col. 1. 16. 20. with vs of one bodie, which is the whole catholicke Church, wherof part is trium∣phant We are in communion with the An∣gels. in heauen part militant vpon earth. secondly, they haue with vs one spirit for their Lord, as to conuert and sanctifie  , so to confirm them in the truth. Third∣ly Iob. 4. 18. they haue with vs one Gospel of com∣ort: for the Angels saith Peter, desire to  ehold the mysteries therein contained, 1. Per. 1. 12. or their confirmation: and our conuersi∣on
and euerlasting saluation. They are present in the holy assemblies, & reioyce, no doubt greatly, to see the Gospell of Ie∣sus 1. Cor. 11. Christ preached vnto thei retheren. Lastly, they haue one head with vs, euen Iesus Christ our Lorde: this the Apostle speaketh: Christ is set at the right hand of the father in heauenly places, farre aboue all principalitie, and power, and might, and domi∣nation, and euery nme that is named, not in this worlde, but also in that, that is to come, and hath made all thinges subiect vnder his feete, and hath giuen him ouer all things to bee the head, to the Church, which is his boy, euen Eph. 1. 12. 22. the fulnesse of im that th all things. Here foolish Rabbims obiect, by occa∣sion of the words of this Psalme. Of bea∣ring Obiection. in their hands, That the holy and elect are more worthy persons, and more ho∣norable then the Angels, because the An∣gels must as it were attend vpon them and keepe them. Their reasons are weake, and they Answere. too too curious: for parents beare chil∣dren, and yet the children are not the re worthy: the good shepheard fin∣th the sheepe which was lost, and carri∣eth
it home on his shoulders, and yet is not the sheep more worthy then the shep∣eard: An other question is here demanded of their appearance, what letteth it now more Questi  then in elder times? They know now their visible appea∣rance is both needelesse and dangerous. Answere. 1. Needlesse for instruction, for they know we haue now in the booke of God, all the counsell of God reuealed vnto vs, so they Gal. 1. 6. Io. 20. 31. 2. Pet. 1. 19 had not in the old times in that cleare ma∣ner that we haue. 2. Needlesse for our pro∣tection, for they can do this inuisibly as well as in sight. Elishas guard was as strong and as faithfull before he sawe them as af∣ter. Lastly, their ppearance now is dan∣gerous, since Antichrist hath peruerted Wherefore Angels ap∣peare not. many with the false worship and inuoca∣tion of Angels: for since this Idolatrie crept into the Church, wee know assured∣ly that wicked spirits haue taken the forme of good Angels, and haue bene adored of miserable men, and so deluded many. And the visible appearance vnto men, would be more terrible in these daies, then it was to Manoab and his wife. Iudg. 13.
And thus farre of their loue towardes the Saints. The third and last point to be consi∣dered, briefly is, how long their charge lasteth ouer vs: the answere is, So long as Mat. 4. they walke in their wayes. This is that which Sathan left out, when hee made assault a∣gainst Christ: for hee can both pare and An so do his members often. shred the scriptures, and stretch them al∣so otherwhiles to serue his purpose. So he can heape vp iudgements to terrifie and amaze poore consciences which are hum∣bled, and multiply mercies before such as stand, to breede in them dangerous pre∣sumptions. By these words, Their wayes; The Psalmist vnderstandeth our seuerall 1. Cor. 7. 20. vocations, wherein we must walke cir∣cumspectly, and not rashly runne forth to any vnlawfull meanes (as Sathan would haue Christ to do) for so doing wee shall tempt God, as Christ answereth the diuell in the second temptation. Here then we are taught to walke wise∣ly within our boundes, and not to vse vn∣lawfull meanes, or to neglect the good meanes giuen vs of God for our benefit and good. We must not lie in the ayre,
for God hath not giuen vs wings to flye, but legges to walke. We must not talke Siman Magus. Act. 8. Deut. 8. 10. 11. 12. of reuelations, for God doth not so teach vs now, but by his written word. Wee must not goe to witches in extremitie, to theft in pouertie; for so wee walke out of our w, and the holy Angels forsake vs,  wicked spirits will maister vs and Pro. 30. 9 confound vs. The workes of our calling, are called in scripture the way wherein we must walke, desiring the Lord to blesse them and all lawfull meanes appointed for vs. Now to make vse of this doctrine brief∣ly for our present purpose; no doubt of all other spirituall preseruatiues, this of the Angels is one of the best against the pestilence. For we may not doubt, but mly beleeue, they pitch their tents, and et as it were an hedge about vs, for our cu∣stodie Psal. 34. and preseruation as the diuell con∣esseth it of Iobs protection. Iob. 1. 10. So then consider euill angels are cruel, good Angels are mercifull; euill angels are olde and subtile, good Angels are of ke yeares, and more wise; euil angels are very expert to send forth venimous ex∣halations
to poyson the ayre: the good Angels are more wise to purge the same: The euill angels haue no such po∣wer to de∣st oy vs, as the good angels to preserue vs. Psal. 103. 20. the euill angels are strong and mightie, but they be fearefull, and feare abates strength: the good angels are more migh∣tie and excell them in strength, and voyd of feare, for that they be voyd of . To bee short, looke wherein the eu ngels haue any might to hurt vs and annoy vs in soule or in body, the blessed Angels far passe them to preserue vs and protect vs in both. Now blessed be God in this in∣speakable mercie, for this wonderfull ho∣nour and glory, hee giueth his poore chil∣dren heere vpon earth, that hee accounts them worthy the communion and fel∣lowship of his most holy Angels. And yet hee giueth them a greater glory then this, for they haue his owne presence most comforable, for Iesus Christ wal∣keth with them in afflictions, as partly before hath bene shewed, and yet in that which followeth, shall be more plainely proued. Here to conclude this question, forget not to make this vse of this holy doctrine. First learn by the excellencie of these holy
creatures, the great glory of their creator. Secondly, learne by their loue to conceiue rightly of the infinit loue of thy God to∣wardes The vse of the doctrine going be∣sore. Reu. 19. 22. thee. Thirdly, remember seeing they be but our fellow-seruants they must not be adored. Fourthly, consider often how much thou art bound to bee thanke∣full or this blessed protection. Fifthly, learne humilitie by their examples, they take vp poore Lazarus in their armes, and poore sinners often. Lastly, let thy beha∣uiour be comely with all reuerence, in thy secret chambers, and priuate affaires, be∣cause of their presence. And so much for this question. Verse 13. Thou shalt walke vpon the fierce lion, and the aspe, thou shalt treade vpon the young ly∣on and the dragon. THis verse againe containeth a conse∣quent of an antecedent set downe in the last verse aforegoing. And here hedoth amplifie what he spake before of the Pe∣stilence: well, I said the pestilence was like
the snare of a hunter, like an arrow, &c. I say yet further, let it be as fierce as a lyon, as venemous as an aspe, as terrible as a dra∣gon, yet if thou canst beleeue in Iesus Christ, and repose thy selfe in the proui∣dence of the Almightie, in the Almightie, and watchfully walke in thy waies, it shall goe well with thee. This reason is thus formed. Such as haue the holy Angels to preserue them, may walke safely amongst lyons and aspes, and pestiferous euils, such as the Pe∣stilence is. But thou that beleeuest in the Almightie, thou that watchfully walkest in thy wayes, thou hast the holy Angels to preserue thee. Wherefore thou shalt be preserued in the Pe∣stilence. Here we may well vnderstand, first ge∣nerally, by lyons, and aspes, and dragons, all the great dangers, secret and open euils, of this present life. Note here for instruction and comfort,
what the life is of Gods Saintes on earth. Assoone as thou hast giuen vp thy name to Iesus Christ, there wil bend themselues against thee, and beset thee, all the wicked The condi∣tion of Gods chil∣dren in this world. spirits that can flie vpon thee, and all the euil men of this world will vow thy de∣struction, and like dragons, lyons, & aspes will these euer bestir themselues to poyson thee, to sting thee, & teare thee in peeces. But be no whit dismaied, this was and is the condition of all thy bretheren, and remember there are more, better, stron∣ger, and mightier, with thee then against thee, which thing thou mightest visibly discerne if thine eyes were opened. But we walke, and liue by faith. Againe, I am of iudgement that the Psalmist doth here also in other termes laie before vs the plague, and the great danger therof, as touching this mortal life. For like as before, he calles the pestilence tropically: 1. The snare of the hunter: 2. the feare of the night: 3. the arrow that flieth by day: 4. the reward of the wicked: so here, 5. he calles the same euil, a fierce lyon, 6. a venimous aspe: 7. a yoong ly∣on, and lastly, a terrible dragon.
First let vs see wherefore the plague is compa∣red to a lyon. 1 FIrst because of the rauenous crueltie of this beast, she teareth all our beasts in peeces, especially then, when shee hath young: the she lion spareth (as they say) no pray, euen so the pestilēce spareth no sorts of men. 2 For the inuincible strength of this beast, there is none comparable vnto the lion. Euen so the pestilence of all other diseases is most strong & deadly, & brings P. 8. lib. nat. h. c. 15 downe to the earth as well the strongest as the weakest. 3 The lion is a beast of a most hotte and fierie nature: euen so the plague; for the in∣fected complaine much of their extreame burning. Secondly, hee compareth the Pestilence to the aspe. WHere the aspe biteth, his wounds be not great. But (like as they say) to the prickes of pins or needles,
but there followeth his bitings, strange ef∣fects: for such as the aspe biteth are smit∣ten with a numnesse throughout all parts, and there followeth a wonderfull cold∣nesse, Plin. h. n. lib. 8. c, 15 16. 23. continuall gasping, heauinesse in the head, and after all this a deadly sleepe. There be diuers kindes of these serpents: Some breede dimnesse in the eyes, paine of the heart, swelling in the face, and deafenesse in the eares: some bring present death, and some kill within three houres space. Wee haue here then, not an vnfit comparison, considering what like dan∣gerous effectes the aspe and the plague breed in the bodies of men. Some by the Hebrue Peten. word here vsed vnderstand the Basilisco or Cockatrice. There is noree∣ping thing can abide the least hissing of this venemous worme. Such as be bitten by this beast, are tormented with ex∣treame heate and burning in their bodies, the falling of the haire followeth, and present death not long after. And some say, it is death also to see it, or to heare the hissing of it. Surely, there are some such lke symptomes to bee found in the Pesti∣lence: and the Phisitions counsell vs not
to eie them greatlie which are infected; But I thinke our sinfull feares bring ma∣nie euils vpon vs, which otherwise might well be auoided. Thirdlie, hee compareth the plague to the Dragon. THis beast (saith Plinie, and other natu∣rall writers) doth not cast forth poi∣son, Lib. S. n. b.. 15. but killeth by violence, and tearing in peeces, as the lions do. For these beasles haue great sharpe teeth, like wilde sowes, with which they crush and rend in peeces any thing. The Pstilence is compared to this beast by the Psalmist, and by a man of wonderfull experience and sight in natu∣rals, because they are alike dangerous, ter∣rible, alen. and of like poison and qualities to∣gether. THE 6. LECTVRE. Verse 14. Because he Dependeth pon me, or mbraceth me. loueth me, therefore will I deli∣uer him. I will exalt him, because hee hath knowne my name.
NOw the Lord himselfe speaketh and The pa confirmeth, as it were to the consci∣ence by his good spirit, all that his Prophet hath hitherto spokē both of Gods promises and of his owne experience: for it is but a small comfort onely to heare the experience of other men, the sweete promises of the Lord, in the outward ears, vnlesse the holy spirit speake also effectu∣ally vnto the heart & conscience. But here obserue how first the Lord will haue vs to attend vnto the experience of his Saints, Not . and the ministrie of his word before hee adde his owne effectuall working. The reason is thus framed. He that knoweth my name, and dependeth vp∣on me, and so resteth in my shadow, &c. shall be kept and comforted in the pestilence. But thou knowest me and louest me, &c. wher∣fore I shall preserue and comfort thee in this Pestilence. HEre learn how greatly God loueth, fa∣uoureth, and deliteth in such as know him, and hang vpon him, as vpon their al∣mightie
father in trouble. Feare not little flocke, saith our blessed Sauiour, it is thy Luk. 12. 32. fathers will to giue thee a kingdome: hee that will giue the greater, will assured∣ly giue the lesse: Thy father will giue the a Kingdome, therefore much more the transitorie benefites of this life. It is our fathers will to giue vs immortalitie in heauen: it is not to be doubted therefore, he careth for vs in a speciall manner in this mortalitie vpon earth. The word exalting is a Metaphore, borrowed from their manner of protecti∣on in wars in elder times, they made their towers of defence, & their fortresses vpon high rocks, or high hilles, that they might haue the greater aduantages against their enemies. This then is the meaning of the holy spirit here. I will set thee aloft, so 1. Ioh. 5. 18 as thine enemies the wicked spirits shall not touch thee with any mortall wound. By the name of God, hee vnderstandeth all the properties and proper adiuncts or attributes of God, whereby he is discerned in his word from all the creatures, most mightie, most iust, most prouident, most mercifull.
By knowing Gods name, hee meaneth both to know, and acknowledge, & con∣esse the care, the prouidence and mer∣ie of God in his deliuerance, as Psal. 1. 6. God knoweth vs whē he acknowledgeth  to be of his number, & we know Gods me, when by his good word and holy pirit, discerning the same, we distrust in ll other power, and acknowledge his and only to be able and ready to saue vs, nd deliuer vs. Note here how the knowledge & loue of God, be inseparable companions. He Ignoti nulla cupi∣do. We do not desire things vn∣knowen. Mark. 4. 11. Mt. 16. that loueth God, knoweth God, and is taught of God. As all spirituall graces, they are not of, nor by nature, but by grace, so likewise this knowledge spoken of in this place. Verse. 15. He calles vpon mee, and I will answere him. I am with him in troubles, I will deliuer him, and glorifie him. With length of dayes will I satisfie him, and shew him my saluation.
The Argument is thus set in forme. Hee that knoweth me, loueth me, and cals vp∣on me in troubles: shal be heard, deliuered, and comforted, &c. Thou art one of that number, which truely know me, loue me, and worship me in pray∣er: wherefore thou shalt bee heard and comforted. HEre the Psalmist commends vnto vs another singular preseruatiue, which is prayer. To stirre vs vp vnto this holy exercise, there are added sundry most sweete and comfortable promises. First, God is ready to answere that man before described in afflictions. Secondly, God is with him in troubles. 3. God will deli∣uer him out of this danger. 4. God will bring him to honour and glory. 5. The Lorde will satisfie him with dayes and yeares. 6. He shall see the saluation of God. First, here concerning prayer, note who it is that prayeth rightly & profitably, to be heard.
The same man that is said the verse be∣re to know God, to loue him, and by th to rest vpon him, he shall call & shall e heard. Euery man cannot pray to bee eard, for the carnall man here can do no∣ing: for the faithfull say: Wee know not Rom. 8. 26.  to pray as we ought, but the spirit it selfe keth requests for vs with sighes and grones ich cannot be expressed. In the Lawe Mal. 1. o kindes of sacrifices were reiected:  lame and the blinde sacrifice. What crifices must now bee offered? if wee ke the Apostle, hee will tell vs wee Rom. 12. 1. st offer vp our selues, and our spiri∣all seruice vnto GOD. If then we bee nde or lame, all our seruice displeaseth od. We be blind when we care not for e light of God: of such it is written, ouerb. 28 9. He that turneth away his eare And yet few so blind and so wic∣ked, but they say they can pray. Psal. 141. Eccles. 4. 17.  hearing of the Lord, his prayer is abho∣able. We be lame when any proud sin gnes ouer vs without repentance: and uch the Lord saith, Prouer. 21. 27. The rifice of the wicked is an abhomination o God These men be fooles (saith the lmist) and pray not at all, verse 4. the e saith the Preacher, and willeth them
to hearkē vnto God speaking, before they presume to open their mouthes before him, rude & vntaught, not knowing how and what to speake. 2 He that will pray must first beleeue (saith the Apostle) How can they call vpon him in whom they do not beleeue? And Iames Rom. 10. 14. Iames 5. addeth: He must be a righteous man. And yet these holy ones cannot alway pray, for how oftē come they to the Lords gate, and yet haue the repulse? how often mourneth and roareth the holy man of God, Dauid, and cannot be heard? And Psal 22. 1. 2. Cant 5. 4. 56. Psal. 66. 18. the Church cryeth after Christ mightily, and for a long time cannot finde him. The Psalmist semeth to giue a reason of this, when he saith, If I If I de∣ligh in wic∣kedns. regard wicked∣nesse in my heart, the Lord will not heare me. A third thing required in prayer, is a fee∣ling of our wants. A fourth point, is an earnest desire to obtaine that we aske, as the widdow. Luk 18. 12. And a sist point, not to waxe faint in prayer. Now for the vse and practise of this ho∣ly preseruatiue, according to the charge o God, Call vpon me in the day of trouble, &c.
The holy men of God haue euer vsed it n the elder Churches. Hezekiah being smittē with the pestilence, first it is said, He turned his face to the wall. 2. he power forth his prayer. O Lord remember now, I haue laboured to walke vprightly, and with a sound heart before thee. 3. It is saide, hee wept sore: 4. I haue heard thy prayer and ene thy teares. 5. He receiued this com∣fortable answere, Behold, I heale thee. Da∣vid, in like manner when hee was smitten Psal. 38. 2 with the plague, he crieth to God, saying; Lord thine arrowes are light vpon mee, and thine hand lieth vpon me: and so con∣tinueth Some good Interprets so iudge. amplifying & shewing the great∣nesse of his euils: and then he concludeth no doubt, hauing receiued comfort: verse 15. On thee, O Lorde, do I wayt, thou will eare me my Lord my God. And Iob wept much and prayed, and vsed, the mother of all good learning often, a sweete and comfortable meditation with prayer let all the faithfull flye to this; Christ spends mights in this exercise, so the faithfull in the Act. 2. 4. 13. 14. and Paul in all his Epi∣stles. And I will heare him.
Here is the first promise, which is ad∣ded 1. Promise. vnto this precious preseruatiue of prayer. But doth not God heare and see al∣wayes? Obiection. Answer. That is true: but by hea∣ring in this place is meant, to like and to grant his petitions, as else where often. Dauid in the end of many Psalmes, addeth that God hath heard him, and granted his request: not that the Lorde did not heare from the beginning, but now in the ende he feeleth an answere in his soule that God hath granted his desire. As Psal. 69. The Lord hath heard my petition. 66. 18. 19. God hath heard me, and considered the vyce of my prayer. Where note two things, if we de∣sire to be heard, first that we haue a feeling of our wants, as here in troubles. 2. That we cry mightily, and continue, & God in the end wil heare vs, as he did Dauid, in the end alwayes, and after much crying. I will be with him in troubles. This is the 2. promise. Some man will thinke this no special promise for that God is both by his essence infinit (filling heauen and earth) & by his prouidence, watchfull, present and carefull ouer all and euery one of the creatures in heauen and earth. And yet
further, is hee not with his beloued chil∣dren alwayes in a more speciall manner, by his spirite of sanctification and com∣fort, effectuallie also working by the Gal. 6. 14 15. 16. ath and resurrection of Iesus Christ to make them new creatures? All this is true, both of the generall prouidence of God, and of his speciall working and grace in the Saints. But yet they are not alwayes alike comforted. For the Lorde doth otherwhiles more graciously shew him∣selfe at one time then another. For may not the King to those of his housholde more louingly shew his countenance at one time then another, and frowne at o∣ther times vpon them, and yet they bee his seruants? So is it with Christ and his members. The righteous soules of the faithfull sometimes eate and drinke, and feast with Christ: yet at other times, they cry much, they aske many watchmen for Reu. 5. 20. Cant. 5. 5. 6. 7. 8. him, and seeke him with much sweating before they can find him. And that the Lord Iesus doth more familiarly shew his face, and communi∣cate his graces vnto his Saintes in trou∣bles and in their grieuances: the experi∣ence
of Gods people in al ages can testifie: and this we haue before partly vouched. Dauid cryeth: Hide not away thy face from me, for I am in trouble, and they cryed to the Lord in their trouble, and hee deliuered th Psal. 69. 17. out of their distresse: O, that men would ther∣fore prayse the Lord. Master Philpot sayth, to Lady Vane. Belieue me (dear Lady) there Psal. 107. vers. 6. 13 19. 28. Act and M. in M. Philpots letters. 2. Cor. 12. 9. 10. Act. & M is no such ioy in the world, as the people of Christ, haue vnder the crosse. These holy ones haue often many desertions, and yet in the midst of their agonies, Christ will suddenly shine foorth as bright as the Sun after a cloudie blacke tempest, as in Mai∣ster Glouers storie appeares and many o∣thers. And this blessed presence wee speake of, make so many of Gods people so constantly and so cheerefully to offer vp themselues a liuing sacrifice, to bee ro∣sted, and tormented with fire in smithfield, and many other parts of the world. 6. Question. What wonderful communion there is between Christ and his holy members, best knowen to his people in afflictions.
Cant. 2. 16. My welbeloued is mine, and I am his verse 15. I will bee with him in trouble. FIrst, let vs here consider in what man∣ner the holy Scripture speaketh of this great communion and fellowship be∣tween Christ & his members: Thus Iohn writeth of it, first in his Epistle. That I 2. Iohn. 1. 3. say which we haue seene and heard, declare we vnto you, that ye may haue fellowship with vs, and that our fellowship also may bee with the father and his sonne Iesus Christ. A∣gaine in his Gospel most comfortably on this manner: I pray not for these alone, but for thē also which shall beleeue in me through their word, that they all may bee one, as thou O Father art in mee and I in thee, euen that they all may be one in vs, that the world may Iohn. 17. 20. beleeue that thou hast sent me: and the glorie that thou gauest mee, I haue giuen them, that they may be one as wee are one, I in them and they in me, that they may bee made perfect in one and that the world may know that thou hast sent mee, and hast loued them as thou hast loued mee. And the Apostle speaketh of this communion when hee saith; Tempt
your selues whether you be in the faith? do ye not know that Iesus Christ is in you, except ye be refues? Because this blessed vnion, com∣munion, and fellowship is spirituall and misticall, the holy Scriptures do striue to helpe our weaknesse, to conceiue rightly the trueth of it by sundry Metaphors and borowed speeches, as Iohn in the sweet pa∣rable of the vine and vine branches: in 2. Cor. 13 4. A parable is a speech comparing like things together, to stirre vp affection to illustrate a∣ny doubt, and to shew the effectu∣all working of any thing by most fa∣miliar and best known tudes. 1. Cor. 2. 9. Es. 5. which place the whole comparison (if we make supply out of other places) standeth vpon sundry most familiar similitudes, as to expresse the singular loue and care of God ouer his people, and the effectuall power of the Ministerie of his holy word wo in them: so to instruct vs of the VI separ b vnion betweene Christ and his holy members. 1. The heauenly Father, is compared to the husband-man. 2. The ministers, vnto the husbandmans laborers. 3. The people and the Church of God, vnto the vineyard, or husbandry. 4. Christ and his members vnto the vine and vine branch. 5. The spirituall vni∣on, lie and growth of the faithfull in Christ, vnto the naturall coniunction, life and growth of the naturall vine and her
branches. 6. Lastly, as the husbandman on earth loueth, careth for, and purgeth his vine with his handes and instruments, his corne fieldes, &c. so the heauenly fa∣ther loueth, and purgeth his Church and his people by his Spirit, word, and sacra∣ments. &c. And like as wise Princes commit their sonnes to the custodie and instruction of wise and faithfull men, so the heauenly Father commendeth the e∣ducation of his children to his holy labou∣rers, and by their Ministrie hee prepareth such on eaith, as he purposeth to aduance to the kingdome of his glory, to be fellow heires with Iesus Christ in heauen. Againe, all that heauenly and most sweet parable, the song of Salomon, tendeth principally to expresse this inspeakeable communion: comparing it often vnto the holy vnion which is betweene man and wife, in that mariage which is in the Lord: and so doth the Apostle: and concludeth that wee are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones. 3 And this firme coniunction which  in this mysticall body is againe notably id before vs, by the similitude of the na∣turall
body and the essentiall parts of the same. 1. Cor. 12. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. Thus when we see by these few places how the holy spirit doth demonstrate vn∣to vs a most certaine and reall coniuncti∣on and communion betwixt Christ and all the faithfull heere on earth. And yet heere is no corporall commixtion of our soules with his, or any coniunction of na∣tures, neither is this a bare consent of mindes onely but an inspeakeable con∣iunction is  by meanes of the words of reation without, and the holy spirit of Christ within working effectually: almightie in power to knit together things most arre distant, as one soule bines head and eete together in one body. To be ort, the Lord to bring his children to this high pitch of honour and dignitie, doth proceede with them in this manner as followeth. First, the holy spirit singleth and seue∣reth thm out of the world by the ound of is Gospel:  15. 19. I haue chosen you out of the world. And receiueth them to his owne house nd amilie. Ephe. 2. 18. 19 Ye are no more strangers and forreners,
but citizens with the Saints of the houshold of Ethe. 14. 15. ere. 15. 17. An vnder∣standng eart o a ng heart. Mat. 13. 15. God. The 2. effect is: Hee prepareth our hearts by faith to receiue Christ. And to this end. 1. he renueth the minde. 2. hee giueth an vnderstanding heart. Marc 4. 10. 1. to receiue Christ by faith. Ioh. 1. 11. To renue the mind his light dispelleth ig∣norance, & bringeth in that wōderful do∣ctrine which cōueteth the soule. Psal 199. To renue the heart, 1. he softh and humbleth it by the preaching of Gods law. Ezech. 11. 19. 20. 2. he causeth it with sighes and grones to confesse, Rem. 826. There is no good thing in my flesh. 3. the heart hungreth after Christ, and his righteous∣nesse. Mat. 5. 6. 4. Lastly, he worketh in the heart that admirable worke of God, Iohn 629. Even a pretious and victorious faith to receiue (as with a hād) Iesus Christ and his benefits. Ioh. 1. 12. The 3. effect, and worke of Gods spirit is: hee giueth them as a free gift vnto Christ. Ioh. 1027. 924. And Christ vnto them againe in like maner. Rom 8 3. 2. Cāt. 2. 16. My welheloued is mine an I am his. The 4. effect. The holy spirit doth in
a most wonderfull and reall manner knit their soules and hearts vnto Christ, and Christ ento them againc: so that Christ become the head, and the beleeuer the liuely member of Christ. So as the bran∣ches haue not a mre certaine sap life, and growth by the vine, then the true beleeuer hath life, grace and growth in al good gra∣ces from Christ. lab. 15. 1. 2. For this cause the Apostle saith truly. We are mibers of his body, of his flesh & of his bones. Ep 5. 38. 21 Fiftly, then Christ doth communicate  vno them, being thus vnited vnto him by the wonderfull worke of his spirit, all graces and blessings which concene their euerlasting saluation. 1. They are co∣uered with his righteousnes as with a gol∣den robe, Gal. 2. 27 They receiue by his Iustificati∣tion. Sanctifica∣tion. spirit the precious vertue of his death, which hath a great fficacie to kill sinne. Rom 6. 6. Gal. 6 15. and the vertue of his buriall to rot sin, that so they may loath it as an vnsa carrion, being crucified and slaine in them: and the vertue of his resurrection. Phil. 38. 9. whereby they are made new creatures. Gal 6. 15. 16. 3 Because of this communin wee are
said to bee partakers of the diuine nature. And the beleeuer may speake all this the Apostle speaketh, in his owne person; I 2. Pet. 1. 4. am crucified with Christ, but I liue, yet not I any more, but Christ liueth in me, and in that I now liue in the flesh, I liue by faith in the sonne Gal. 2. 20. of God, who hath loued me, and giuen himselfe for me. Insignis sententia fideles extra se vi∣uere: id est in Christo; A notable saying (saith maister Cal.) the faithfull ue without them∣selues Iohn Cal. Com in Gal. verse 2. 10. in Christ. 6 Lastly, when they are thus highly aduanced into the communion of the holy Trinitie, all the holy Angels and Saints of God: they slay not then in one stay, but they must haue their dayly con∣firmation by the said word and spirit, that so they may haue a holy growth vnto a per∣fect 2. Pet. 3. 18. Epe. 4. 13. man, and vnto the measure of the age, of the full growth or fulnesse of Christ. And this growth is signified vnto vs, by the growth and increase which is to be seene in the partes of any naturall body. Ephe 4. 15. Let vs follow the trueth in loue, and in all things grow vp to him, which is the head, that is Christ. And againe, Col. 2. 19. All the body furnished and knit togi∣ther
by ioynts and bands increaseth with the encreasing of God. Thus farre briesly of this holy communion. The third promise; And I will deliuer him. The Lord will haue his childrē wade through afflictions, yea sometimes to bee smitten with the plague it selfe: but hee will deliuer them: that is, hee will restore him to health if that bee good for him, or else he wil change this miserable and tran∣sitorie life, with the happy and immor∣tall life, which is best of all. Blessed is the man whom God correcteth therefore refuse not thou the chast of the Almightie, for hee maketh the wound, and bindeth  vp, hee Iob. 5. 17. 18. 19. smiteth, and his hands make whole: he shall de∣liuer thee in fixe troubles, and in the seuenth the  shall not touch thee. The fourth promise. And I will bring him to honour. It is not to bee doubted but God hath perormed this promise alwayes to his children: whether wee vn∣derstand it of an earthly anour or an hea∣uenly, they which faile of this one, are sure notwithstanding of the other, and sometime of both, Ioseph and Daniel of both after great aduersitie: Hezekas, Da∣uid
and Iob, of both, after plagues and pe∣stilentiall maladies. Yet Lazarus and many of his condition, wanting this vaine and transitory glory, haue receiued the greater measure of the heauenly. Here againe, I do not thinke, but that he putteth vs in minde of the glory of our resurrection, and of our regeneration, where assuredly our glory begins. 2. Cor. 1. 18. which while wee consider (albe∣it afflictions for the present are gree∣uous) yet wee must be wonderfully chea∣red and comorted: for howsoeuer heere for a moment, our bodies bee subiect to many most grieuous and noysome disea∣ses, for our correction and chasticement, and after to putrefaction: yet in the ende, they shall be illed with a wonderfull glo∣ry, For they shall shine in the resurrection as Mat. 13. 43 the Sunne, and shall be like the Angels of God. Whereas the wicked shall arie to a grea∣ter Dan. 12. 5. shame then if they were filled with all the sores and plagues of Aegypt. And therefore this promise much comforted Iob: or thus he speaketh of it in his great passions most chearefully: I am sure that my Redeemer lcth, and he shall stand the Iob. 19. verse 25.
last on the earth, and though after my skinn, wormes destroy this body; yet shall I see God If Sathan be sent to tor∣ment the body, remē∣ber Iobes comfort in my flesh, whom I my selfe shall see, and mine eyes shall behold, and none other for me, though my reynes are consumed within mee. The fifth promise. With length of daies will I sanctifie him. Here I iudge this pro∣mise, as that aforegoing, and the last which followeth, concerneth both the life present, and that which is to come. The faithfull then in that plague looked euery mment for death, and therefore they haue this promise to comfort them. An old age is promised as a blessing often to the godly, and they haue so accounted 1. Tim. 4. 8. Prou. 5. 1. 2. Pro. 4. 10. 25. 8. Citie bo∣na, senio sa∣tur. Pro. 16. 31. Age nor ho∣nour make men wie, but the spi∣rit of God. Iob. 32. 8 9 it. Gen. 15. 15. Thou shal come to thy fathers in peace, and shalt be buried in a good old age. So Gedon is buried in a good age. Iudges, 8. 32. And Da∣uid full of daies, riches, and honour. 1. Chron. 29 28. Surely olde age, and gray haires is a Crowne of glory to the righteous and godly man. For thus the holy Spirit speaketh: Age is a Crowne of glory, when it is found in the way of righ∣teousnesse:
but all things are turned into sinne, and accursed to the wicked and vn∣godly. Com. 5. Againe, Gods children are more satisfi∣ed here on earth with a fewe daies, then the wicked are with Nestors yeares. And concerning long dayes in hea∣uen, there shall be dayes continually and no more nightes. The heauenly Ieru∣salem hath no neede of the Sunne, neither of the Moone to shine in it: for the glory of Keue. 21. 23. God doth light it: and the Lambe is the light of it. The 6. and last promise, I will shewe him my saluation. This promise of all the rest is most com∣fortable. And here two things must be considered. First, who see their salua∣tion, or to whome it is shewed. Se∣condly, 1 Who see their salua∣tion. where and when it is shewed vs, and seene by vs. For the first: not eue∣ry man can see into this mysterie, no not euery professour of the Gospell: first he must be, as he is described in this Psalme, a faithfull man, a godly man, a righteous man, watchfull ouer his wayes, a deuout man, fearing God; the Lord doth assure
such in time by his good spirit, of their election, adoption, vocation, and euerla∣sting saluation. Rom. 8. 15. Eph. 430. All the faithfull ought to striue daily in all re∣ligious seare, to come to the knowledge, Psal. 23. 6. and the full assurance by faith of their saluation. Secondly, if thou demandest when and where the faithfull see their saluation: I answere, that they see it both on earth and in heauen: first in earth they see it as in a glasse, two waies: st by saith 2 Cor. 3. 12. 18. Io. 8. 56. Heb. 11. 1. when they see Christ, and haue the assu∣rance of his benefits in their hts by the holy spirit: secondly, by eeling, when they eele the power and vertue of Christ working in them true moficaton and Eph 320. Ph 3. 8. 10. 19. 2. Cor. 13. 4. Gal. 6. 14. 15. 16. sanctification of life. Again they see their saluation in heauen, when they come to the present possessiō of that crown which is purchased for them, then shall they no more see darkly: for ohn saith; We know that when he sh appeare we all bee  him, for we shall  as he is: and be with him where he is. 10 17 . 24. 1. 10. 3. 2. Note here  sts and Athsts till the Lord  your eye with his eye alue, you can neuer but doubt of your
saluation, for he alone doth shew it, whom, and where, and when he will. To be short, this is a most soueraigne comfort for all Gods people, and euer hath bene in all paines and griefes of this present life, plagues, persecutions, and all euils what∣soeuer. Iob reioyceth in his miserie, say∣ing: I am sure my redeemer liueth, and I shall see him, &c. Ch. 19. THE 7. LECTVRE. The seuenth Question. Of the visation of the sicke, which dutie must also be erformed, by some chosen, faithfull, and discreet men, in the Pestilence. Iames 5. 14. Is any sicke among you? let him send for the Elders, &c. WE haue already shewed very cor∣dall and precious preseruatiues both against many euils, and specially a∣gainst the Pestilence. And yet there is one more which is giuen vs of the Lord,
no lesse profitable and effectuall then the rest. And this is that comfortable visita∣tion of the sicke, which containeth medi∣cines of wonderfull vertue, to be ministred by the righteous and religious Elders or holy Ministers, vnto Gods people: and by the wie & godly brethren one to an other in all their maladies. In the visitation of the sicke, Iames teacheth vs what the sicke or visited must doo. 1 He must send for the Elders, verse. 14. 2 Acknowledge his sinnes, verse, 16. 3 He must beleeue, verse 15. 4 He must pray with them, verse 16. Secondly, what the visitors must be. 1 The Elders, verse 14. 2 The Elders of the Church. verse 14. 3 Faithful men, verse 15. 4 Righteous men, verse 16. 5 Zealous men. 6 Mercifull men. 7 Men of one accord.
Thirdly, what the visitors must do. 1 They must come to the house of mour∣ning, verse 14. 2 They must teach and admonish the pa∣tient, verse 16. 3 They must striue in fasting and praier for him, verse 15. 4 They must pray tn faith, verse 15. 5 They must perseuer and expect a bles∣sing assuredly. Is any sicke, let him send for the Elders. 1 HEre againe with Iames wee see that sicknes (as all afflictions of this life) is common to all the godly, with the wicked, poore & rich, strong and weake in faith, there is no exception nor priuiledge here to free any man. 2. S. Iames would haue the sicke man to shee his faith & loue, by sending first of his own accord for the Elders of ye church to instruct him and to pray for him, and to comort him: so the Elders seeing his de∣sire, his loue & feare, shall be stirred vp in a
greater affection and compassion towards him againe. 3 Wee must here note also wherefore the holy Ghost sends vs first to these spi∣rituall Phisitions of the soule, before wee call for the other of the body, which must not be despised. And this hee doth, that these holy men may take a view of the spi∣rituall causes of our euils, and labour to re∣moue them, for then our naturall griefs are both soonest holpen, & most soundly cu∣red: so Christ begins his cure, Mat. 9. 2. by remouing first the spirituall causes, Thy sinnes are forgiuen thee. And surely this we 2. Chro. 16. 10. 12. finde daily true by our experience, that when phisicke res without the Lord, as it were, the sores & plagues of their soules become more dangerous & incurable, for being nothing humbled, nor bettered by the Lords chasticements, they walke more boldly in their old sinnes when they reco∣uer Note. health th before. Now l  examine with all diligence, what speciall points S. Iames commendeth vnto vs concerning the visitation of the sicke. First hee saith, the Elders must be sent
for: by these Elders, the holy spirit vnder∣standeth else-where the holy Ministers chiefly, and with them the godly brethren which were their helpers in their ministrie and spirituall seruice vnto God and his church, men of knowledge, wisedome, ex∣perience, and godlinesse without rebuke. Secondly, hee saith not one, but many Elders, not one Elder: for here in this spi∣rituall seruice, as in many other corporall actions, that is true which the Preacher saith, Two are better then one. Againe, the loue, iudgement, experience, faith, feeling, Ecc. 4. 9. and praier of many, must here be more ef∣fectuall and comfortable then of one. And yet here cases no doubt may oftē so fall out, as that some one most rare, most Iob. 33. 23. expert, and wise messengers of the Lord must be sought for, albeit as Iob speaketh, we shall hardly finde one such amongst a thousand. Thirdly, he addeth, they must be the El∣ders of the church, that is, such as are best knowne to thee: thine owne wise pastor, &c. which can best discerne al thy sores: or that minister which hath bene Gods most holy ordinance, either for thy conuersion, or confirmation.
Question. BVt here now a question may bee de∣manded, whether the same Ministers of God which serue the Lord in their pub∣like ministry, and come to the holy assem∣blies, are charged also in this place to at∣tend vpon the visitatiō of the sicke in time of pestilence? Answere. TO this I answer with men Ioach. Ca∣merar. in sy∣nop. depeste Ewichs depeste. of iudge∣ment, that it were very expedient, that at such times, there should be certaine speciall men chosen for this purpose, men knowne both for their ministery, godli∣nesse, and sinceritie of life; who should not neglect their dutie concerning eyther the soules or bodies of the faithfull, which they could performe, or cause any way to be done for their good. Secondly, I answere, that I cannot see how the Pastor notwithstanding, can neg∣lect any of his slocke (committed of the Lord vnto his charge) in any calamitie, or
the pestilence. For the Apostles charge is so general in my Here I de∣sire to bee taught by the godly learned, both how S. Iames must be vnder∣stood, and how he sicke of the plagne may best be visi∣ted. iudgement, that it ex∣cludeth all exceptions of persons., time, and sicknesse. Any man may send in any sick∣nesse for the Elders of the Church. But here let wise Christians be carefull, as not to abuse the loue of their kinsfolkes and friends, so to preferre the health of all the congregation, before their own, and so to striue to content themselues, with the presence of such as the magistrates haue selected and appointed for this purpose. This religious loue & care for the church was in Boz:, who being sicke himselfe of B. de peste. the plague at Lausanna, would not haue M. Ioh. Caluin, and P. Viret to come vnto him, when they offered freely, & most lo∣ingly to come & visit him: because (saith he) we must preferre the benefit of Gods Church, and the glorie of God, before our owne comforts, and the preseruation of our owne life. Fourthly, these men must be men of great loue, mercy & compassion: for this cause hee willeth vs to take the Elders of our Church, that is, such louing, knowne, mercifull men, as can & will mourne with
vs, and for vs. Psal 41. 1. Blessed is hee that iudgeth wisely of the poore, the Lord shall de∣liuer him in time of trouble. A notable ex∣ample of this compassion is in Iobs friends: for first they came to comfort him; second∣ly, Iob. 2. 12. 13. they wept greatly when they sawe him; thirdly, their great griefe is signified in renting of their cloathes; fourthly, their compassion, in sitting by him seuen dayes and seuen nights in silence. This is the time when Gods children must striue to shew their affection, and brotherly kindnesse 2. Pet. 1. 7. towards the Saints. Fifthly, these holy Elders which visit the sicke must affect one thing, be of one minde, and of one accord: for the cris and praiers of such men be very strong, and Rom. 15. 6. can soonest and best preuaile with the Lord, according to his owne truth & holy promise. Uerely I say vnto you, that if two of you shall agree in earth vpon any thing, what∣soeuer they shall desire, it shall be giuen them Mat 8. 19 of my father, which is in heauen, for where two or three are gathered togither in my name, there am I in the midst of them. The truth of this promise is to be seene in the prac∣tise and praier of the holy Saints. The dis∣ciples
which were met togither, to pray for the good successe of the gospel, for spi∣rituall courage & boldnesle in their mini∣stry, for the cōfirmatiō of their doctrine by signes & wonders. I it is said of the whole multitude of thē which beleeued, & there prayed, That they were of one heart & of one soule. Ast. 4. 31. 32. They lift vp their voyces Omothu∣madon. Ast. 2. 1. 4 24. vnto God with one accord. ver. se 24. 3. After prayer they obteined all that they asked. For it is said: first that they were confir∣med presently with a myracle. The place was shaken where they were assembled togi∣ther, and all were filled with the holy Ghost. vers 31. 2. They receiued their second re∣quest, spirituall Uers. 31. Parresia. Eph. 6. 19. 1. Chro. 28 20.boldnesse & courage: for it is said, they spake the word of God bold∣ly, ver. 31. 3. Lastly, the Gospell was more glorified, & had a more free passage daily. And the day of Penticost, when they wai∣ted togither in praier for the gifts of the holy Ghost: It is said they were altogither Act. 2. 1. with one accord in one place. And the holy Disciples which beleeued, they are said, that in hearing the word in praier, they continued with one accorde daily in the Act. 1. 46. Temple. These Elders then of whom Iames
speaketh, must be thus affected. Religious men, faithfull men, deuout men, righte∣ous men, and such will not lightly iarre or disagree, but be most carefull to keepe the bandes of loue in holy peace and vnitie, with heart and minde affecting one thing, Phil. 3. 15. 16. Ro. 15. 16 and bearing with them of weaker iudge∣ment, till the Lord hath reuealed better things vnto them. These men thus hauing one heart and one mouth, may send forth such cries vnto the Lord, as shall be heard, and none other. Sixtly, S. Iames requireth that they be faithfull men, righteous men, and mn of good feeling. They must haue faith, for otherwise they cannot pray, as wee haue before shewed: ver. 15. of that 19. Psalme: they must be righteous men, for other∣wise they shall be reiected of God in this sacrifice which they offer. Pro. 21. 27. and the sicke can haue no comfort in them. And they must haue a good feeling of the wants of their brother, otherwise their praier will not worke and be effectuall: so the promise is to be vnderstood, the prayer of a righteous man auaileth much, which is Verse. 15. working, and effectuall.
Seuenthly, they must instruct and ad∣monish the patient, and by mutuall con∣ference, so stirre him vp to open and re∣eale such sinnes and euils as most grieue his hart and conscience. They must know his passions, his life, his calling, his know∣ledge, his feare, his affections, his loue, and all his conuersation and how long he hath knowne Iesus Christ. Againe, here they must be wise to dis∣cerne, Ephe. 6. whether Sathan hath wounded him with any siery dart, and so hath caused him to doubt of his election, voca∣tion, faith, repentance, &c. They must be prouided of examples which may shewe him how that other of Gods children haue so bene smitten, & haue languished long, and yet at last were graciously restored. But nothing comparable to our owne ex∣perience. Here let them pray earnestly for the spirit of iudgement for that Sathan Esai. 11. 2. hath many strange & inuisible delusions: and remember the prouerbe, That a graci∣ous speech heateth the passions of the soule. A Pro. 25. 11 word spoken in his place, is like appes of golde with pictures of siluer. Eightly, Saint Iames requireth in the
visitors of the sicke, verse 15. a praier of Euchentes pisteos. faith. They must be perswaded that all this sacrifice and seruice which they of∣fr vnto God in their supplications, &c. is accepted of God in Iesus Christ, and shall returne from him a cmfort for themselues, and a blessing for thei bro∣ther, according to his holy promise in this place. This Iames telleth vs, in the beginning of his Epistle, that if a∣ny Ca. 5. 16. will receiue any good  Lord, let him aske in faith and wauer not: for he that prayeth effectually, must be per∣swaded, his labour shall not be lost, but that the Lord will consider it. Psalm. 66. 19. this aith our Sauiour: Whatsoeuer ye Mat. 21. 22. aske in prayer, if you beleeue you shall re∣ceiue it. The father of a lunaticke, which was vexed also with an euill spirit, came to Christ, and spake thus doubtfully: If thou canst do any thing helpe vs, and haue com∣passion Mat. 9. Verse. 22. 23. 24. on vs. Christ answered: If thou canst eleeue, all things are possible to him that beleeueth: and straightway the father of the child crying with teares, said: Lord I be∣leeue helpe mine vnbeliefe.
Arguments to confirme their faith in this instant are these. 1. The patient is a brother and a professor of the Gospell, and therefore we must as feeling members cōsider his case our as own. 2. If heretofore he neuer gaue vp his name to Iesus Christ, now hee is desirous to doe it, as appeares and is signified by sending for the Elders, by confession of his sinnes, &c. And thus both parts must striue that this prayer ma be done in faith, and may be working effectuall. Cyprian speaking how he and his bre∣thren did much good in his time in the vi∣sitation of the sicke, saith, that they prōsperd according as they and the pa∣tient hath faith to speake vnto God. Prout 4 Tract. de Idol. vanit. fides patientis adiuuat, aut grati curantis aspirat. 9 Saint Iames here requires also the humiliation and faith of the patient. The holy Elders doing their enduour with all dilligence; the brother which is thus visited, must striue also to be∣leeue as all things generally concerning his saluation: so also so that this par∣ticular action of these holy men shall doe
him good, as for the free pardon of his sinnes, so sor bodilie health so far as shall be expedient for him. To this end the A∣postle willeth the sicke man to confeile his sinnes, and the elders to prouoke him thereunto by their experience, vers. 16. Confesse your sinnes one to another, and pray one for another. Surelie the Lord Iesus in all his miraculous cures, euen requireth this faith in uerie one of his patiēts. Mat. 8 10. To the good woman which had the issue of bloud he saith: Daughter be of good comfort, thy faith hath made the whole. And so to all the rest, he asketh alwaies Mtt 9. 22. of their faith, and how they are perswaded of his grace, loue, power, and might to do them good. And this is it that Cypri∣an noteth, prot sides patientis adiuuat: a the Patients saith helpeth vs so we preuale with God, in the visitation of the sicke. The 10 point and the last here to be remembred is, these me must haue zeale to perseuer and continue this holie exer∣cise in abstinence add praier  admoniti∣on and instructi. &c. For  the Lord heareth alwaies the praers & supplicati∣ons o his uants in the beginning: not∣withstanding
hee sheweth not alwaies a∣nie full grant of them long after, because he would haue his children more carnest∣ly to sue vnto him, and to waite vpon him. So the Apostle chargeth that we perseuere and continue in praier, waiting Kom. 12. 12. nd expecting with patience a blessing from the Lord. And this our Sauiour tea∣cheth Luke. 8. 1. vs sweetly by a parable. And Dani∣l cōfirmeth it vnto vs by his owne prac∣ise and experience: for thus he saith: At the same time I Daniel was in heauinesse for 3. weekes of daies, I ate no pleasant bread, Dan. 10. 2. 3. neither came flesh nor wine in my mouth, nei∣ther did I annoint my selfe at all, till three weekes of daies were fulfiled. Here is a watchfull continuance in praier, fasting and humiliation for 21. daies, then he re∣eiueth an answere, Feare not Daniel, for from the first day, that thou diddest set thine Vers. 12. beart to vnderstand and to humble thy selfe before thy God, thy words were heard, and Mat 2. 46. 47. I am come for thy words. Thus we see that albeit the Lord hea∣reth not at the first crie, yet he delighteth to see our humiliation, & will grant our requests in his good time and not faile vs.
And thus farre we haue seen howe the holy elders proceed in their spiritual cure. These rules being followed with wise∣dome and iudgement, I doubt not, the holy men of God haue, and may attaine great mercies & blessings in the due pra∣ctise of them, in the visitation of the sicke people of God. And if this spirituall ex∣ercise be so comfortable and so profitable in common and vulgar diseases, which come of naturall causes onely: howe much more precious are they in greater plagues in any, as Saint Iames speaketh? and therefore in the pesilence it is so also, which is no doubt a mixt euill of naturall common knowen causes, and spirituall. inuisible and vnknowen as wee haue be∣fore shewed. Here I would nd, but that I must first answere two sort of men, which oppose themselues against the comely and com∣fortable ordinance of the Lord. For some there are so hard heared, and so voyde of all humanitie, that they will not haue this holy exercise to haue any place in time of pestilence. Again, there are others o void of al good iudgment, which with∣out
all difference or respect of time, per∣sons or place, frequent all houses, without any feare of contagion or infection, and exclaime mightily against all departure or going aside from the pestilence. For the first sort, I commend vnto them these ho∣ly rules following. 1. they must summon thēselues vnto the iudgement seat of God, and looke on the plague as on the messen∣ger of Gods wrath, which cannot be auoi∣ded with change of places, but by repen∣tance and amendment of life, &c. 2 Let no man go aside, nor tarry with a doubtful conseience, but when as he shal haue learned out of the word of GOD what his dutie is, that commending him∣selfe to God, he may continue constantly therein. 3 Let no man depart a haires bredth, for feare of death, frō the duties of huma∣nitie, nor breake any of the bondes of loue, which are many as betweene man and wife, betweene parents and children, maisters and seruants, betweene kindred. betweene christians, neigbours & friends: For if wee breake these bonds, I see not howe humane societies may continue.
And here when the Lord shall change the life of anie of thy good friends, be not cast downe, as they which are without hope: But remember Cyprians words: Nō amittimus nostros, sed tantum premittimus: We haue not loct our good friends, but we haue onely sent them before vs. 4 Let not him that is bound to anie ci∣uill office depart, for such are bound, by the lawes of christian and godlie pollicie in euerie common wealth to attend vpon their calling, function and place in their owne citie. 5 Lastly, the Pastors and elders (as here Iames speaketh) may not depart, for how then shall the sicke be visited and com∣forted; which thing seemeth here to be commaunded & commended by the ho∣lie Apostle vnto them. The second sort make many obiectiōs which may be thus answered. First they say, Gods decree is vnchangeable: Frgo 1. Ob. it is in vain to depart or to goe anie thing aside, for no mā can escape his decree, and so death when he sends it. This argument is not good: for Gods decree doth not take away ordinarie and
lawfull meanes to saue life: no not When a man hath receiued an answere from Thus a hea∣thē spaketh, God to prolong his life: as in S. Paule, who was told of the Lord, he should goe to Rome, and yet the Apostle neglecteth Tam fatale est medi∣cum adhibe re quam conualesce∣re. Delato. no means of Gods prouidence to bring him thither. Act. 27. 143. Againe they say: Such as flie from death loue not God, for death is the way to him. Yet againe looke on Paules example: 2. obiect. he greatlie desired to be with Christ. Phil. 1. 21. 24. And yet for his brethrens sake, Rom. 9. 3. and Gods glorie, he would not giue vp his life to the enemies handes when they thirsted so much for his bloud. act. 25 11. And he giueth God great thankes for his deliuerence. 2. Cor. 1. 5. 11. They say the pestilence is an especiall 3. obiect. messenger sent from God, and therefore we must quietlie abide it. So warres and famin. And yet Abraham, Isaac, and Ia∣cob, flee and depart to those places where they might best be relieued. They say we haue no christian exam∣ple 4. obiect. for this departure. This is no good
argument. Is it not apparant in holy scrip∣ture what euery one hath done? and wee know that in many things, the generall rules of doctrine are sufficient to deter∣mine those things whereof wee haue no commaundement, nor any paricular ex∣ample. They say, Dauid sled not the 5. Obiect. plague. That was a short time, and whi∣ther should he flee, seeing that pestilence was spread all ouer the land. 2. Sam. 24. The christians in Alexandria being amōg 6. Obiect. the heathens, without all difference or re∣spect of persons, time, or place, did per∣sorme all duties ofhumanitie and charitie If any desi∣sire to know more of this, read Bza of the pestilence. in visiting and comforting the liuing, and burying the dead Pagans: ergo, much more should we do this among the Chri∣stians. I answere, such Christian constan∣ci, and mercifull humanitie is to be praysed and followed, so that a generall rule be not made of it: For Euseus, doth not say that euery one did Lib. 7. ca. 10. so but that very ma∣ny of the Cristi∣ans did so.
An admonitiō concerning the vse of phisicke, and all naturall helpes which the Lord may blesse for our good, as in other maladies, so in the pestilence. SAint Iames addeth, that after the former spiritual comforts, the Elders of his time did annoint the sick with oile in the name of the Lord: Marc. 6. euen as our Sauiour had before appointed, and his Disciples practised in their miraculous cures. This gift of healing the Apostle spea∣keth of, 1. Cor. 12. 30. shewing it to be a pe∣culiar gift: are all doers of myracles? haue all the giftes of healing? And it ceased in the Church, when the Gospell was suffici∣ently confirmed with myracles, euen a∣non after the Apostles, Prophets, and E∣uangelists had finished and ended their
worke, and when their time was expired. Now then the gist ceasing: it is mad∣nesse to retaine still the signe which went with the gift, that is, this annointing or anciling, and more madnesse to make a Sacrament of it, as Antichrist hath done, and most extreme madnes to giue it vnto them onelic which are a dying, which was wont to be giuen to such as did re∣couer health againe. Wherefore as the holie visitors then did first vse their spi∣rituall exercise, which is left for vs to practise, and next this extraordinarie gist and meanes of healing: so let vs care∣fully and wisely heere call sor in the se∣cond place the learned phisition, the com∣sortable and ordinary meanes which God hath lest vnto vs in nature as long as the worlde endureth. This order that holie writer, the godly Preacher commendeth vnto vs in these wordes. My sonne faile not Eccle. 38. 9 10. 11. 12. in thy sicknesse, but pray vnto the Lord and e will mae thee whole: leaue off from sinne, and order  hands aright &c. and cleanse Ecclesi 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. thine heart from all wickednesse, &c. Then giue place to the Phisition, for the Lord hath created him, let him not go from thee, for thou
hast neede of him: the houre may come that their enterprises may haue good successe, for he also shall pray vnto the Lord, that he would prosper that which is giuen for the prolonging of life. Whereas some obiect that in the pestilence naturall remedies of phisicke cannot benefite vs, because the causes here cannot be found or seene in nature: I an∣swere with M. B. If there come into the pestilence no naturall causes, then these whome the plague hath infected, cannot doubtlesse so much as be eased, much lesse be healed by naturall remedies. But this secōd to be very false, experience & com∣mon sense do daily tell vs. Wherefore I af∣firme, that naturall remedies must not be neglected. Againe, whereas others doe obiect, that phisicke heere often is seene to haue but small good successe: I answere, that we must not say of naturall preseruatiues, that because they do not benefite one or two, or three: therefore they cannot helpe any at all. It is a badde conclusion: for consider that God doth gouerne na∣turall causes and their effects as it pleaseth him, and blesseth them to whom hee will,
where and when he will. And hence it commeth, that the infec∣tion toucheth not euerie one that is in daunger of it, neither is it deadly to eue∣rie one that is infected. Others yet more fondly dispute against naturall remedies in this sicknesse: and they saie that God hath here a more spe∣ciall prouidence, and he will smite whom he will to death, and therefore all reme∣dies are to small purpose. These men a∣gaine want iudgement. I answere, that the Lord no doubt, when he sent a famine into Egypt, and the regions there-about, he determined who should die in that scarcitie: yet for all this, ceaseth not Ioseph with most wise counsell, to prouide for the Egyptians, and Iacob for his familie. The like did Paul in the sea with the Marriners, when hee had receiued an answere hee should come to Rome safely: as is before she∣wed. And Christ knew his time, and yet he went aside often from the enemies hand till his houre came, vsing the ordinarie
meanes for his preseruation. And that no man may stand stifly 1 Denature dcorum. in his owne rash iudgement; Quid Te∣meritate fortius? saith Tullie; What so foole hardie, or so violent, as rash and hastie spirits? Heare what that learned Father of bles∣sed memorie, Maister Luther saith of this matter in his Treatise of the pestilence, translated out of Dutch into Latine, and in English thus much: God hath created phisicke, and giuen vs Of the pla∣gue in Wit∣tenberge. Ann. 1527 a minde and reason, that euerie man should haue a care of his owne bodie for health and life: whosoeuer vvil not vse these, vvhen as vvithout the hurt of his neigh∣bour hee may, the same man betraieth his owne life, and there lacketh little, but that before God he is made a murtherer: for by the same reason hee may despise meate and drinke, rayment and housing, and trusting too much vnto his faith, saie if God vvill, hee can preserue me with∣out all these thinges: then the which fol∣lie, this is yet greater, that hee whiche after this sorte, casteth off the care
of his bodie, he may hurt and infect o∣thers also, and so through his negligence he may purchase the blame of a murde∣rer. Some men doe indeed as foolish men doe in a common firing, which will not come and helpe the citie, but let the fire alone, that the whole citie might be burned: namelie vpon this trust, doubtlesse, if God will, e can without water quench the fire. But friend, thou oughtest in no wise so to deale: Nay, it is vnlawfull and shame∣full which thou perswadest thy selfe: but rather vse remedies and medicines, and doo whatsoeuer anie way may helpe: per∣fume thine house, orchard or streete: flie the infested places, and so behaue thy selfe as one willing to quench and not to maintaine this open fire. Againe, it followeth in the same treatise. If Sathan by the will of God, either by himselfe or his Ministers, hath wrought vs this deadlie infection: I on the other side before all things will pray vnto God, that of his mercie he will take away the same from vs: then I will put to my simple helping hand, both by perfuming
aud clensing of the ayre, by vsing of medi∣cines, and also in sbunning the infection, where my presence is not necessarie. Lest I might seeme my selfe to haue neglected some thing, or to be cause of death vnto other, who through my negligence may take harme. But if God neuerthelsse will haue me viited with this sicknesse, or call me out of this world vn∣to his kingdome, yet I haue done but that which was my dutie, neither haue I offeded n any thing, either against my selfe or my neigh∣hour, but vvhere my seruice is needfull, there I will let passe nothing of all things which ei∣ther can or ought to be done of me. Behold this Note. is that godly faith indeed which doth nothing rashly, neither tempteth God in any thing. Thus thē I conclude, when thou shalt haue wisely considered and discerned the causes of the pestilence: then turn to God (as the Prophet biddeth) with all thine heart, with fasting, with weeping, & with Ioel 2. 12. mourning, and slie aloft by faith into the secret place, almightie shadow, & blessed Conclusion. protection of the Lord, and there rest pa∣tiētly as vnder his holy wings, euer pray∣ing for the increase of faith and patience, that thou maist quietly wat and depend
vpon God, and for a good conscience, that so thou maist auoyde false, foolish, vaine, and wicked feares, and cheerfully standing in thy place: and carefully call for the protection of the mightie, blessed and holie Angels, & for the communion and presence of Iesus Christ: so shalt thou chase far*away from thee the wicked and vncleane spirits which are sent of God to poysen and to destroy men with the pe∣stilence. And lastly, when thou hast vsed al the meanes before shewed, for thy spirituall helpe and comfort, thou must neglect no ordinance nor helpe of God in nature, both for thy cure and preseruation. The 1. Ch. 6. 12. wicked indeed inuert & peruert this or∣der, as did Asa, and therefore no maruell if they receiue often a curse in steed of a blessing; for if phisicke giue them health of body, their soules notwithstanding are neuer cured, or made any better by their chasticements: but they daily gather more strength to commit sin with grea∣ter boldnesse.
MAISTER GREENE∣HAMS PRAYER. O God most mighty, glo∣rious and righteous: O Father most louing, gracious, and merciful, which keepest coue∣nant and mercie in Ie∣sus Christ; for all those which receiuing the first fruites of thy holy spirit, walke before thee in vprightnesse of their heart: we thy vnworthy children come vnto thee in the name of thy onely begotten sonne Iesus Christ our Lord: beseeching thee to renue and encrease thy holy spirit in vs, and to purifie our hearts more and more by faith, that we may haue a clearer sight, and a su∣rer perswasion of thy fatherly goodnesse vnto vs, and that we may more readily perform our dutifull obedience vnto thee.
For we do acknowledge & confesse vnto thy sacred Maiestie, that wee haue yet ne∣uer hitherto worthily estemed thy mercies towards vs, nor sufficiently expressed the fruites of our bounden dutie towards thee: but that stil we remaine ignorant, and for∣getfull of many good things, which wee ought, and might know. And we confesse Lord, we are slack vnto those things which thy holy spirit offereth to our mindes, vn∣apt to do them, soone weary of wel-doing; and wherein we please thee something, we please our selues too much. Moreouer we likewise confesse, that we are ignorant of many euill things, that we haue done, doo, or may doo: forgetfull of diuers things, which sometime we haue had knowledge and remorce of. And now the thinges which come to our remembrance, and are in our sight, do not appeare to be so sin∣full in any measure as they are, and ought of vs to be regarded. Yea we are beguiled or euer we are aware with our present cor∣ruptions, and they cleaue so fast vnto vs, that wee can hardly leaue them, but most hardly be brought to true repentance of them. We beseeh therfore thy sacred Ma∣iestie,
to worke in vs by thy holy spirit, a wise and carefull searching out of and into our sinnes, that by thy lawe wee may be conuinced of them, awakened by thy threatnings, rebuked for them by thy iudgements, executed vpon the wicked, and exercised towarde thy children, ser∣uants, and friends, that so we may feare and tremble for them. And by the serious pre∣meditation of the vncertaine houre, of a most certaine death, of the day of thy ge∣nerall, initable, and dreadfull iudge∣ment, of the horrible & euerlasting paines of the wicked in the helles, and their losse of the inestimable ioyes of the heauens, stirre vp our dead heartes to seeke thee O Father in thy Christ, and thy sonne our Lorde and Sauiour in the Gospell. And finally, wee pray that wee may be euen confounded in our selues, by the fruitfull remembrance of thy blessed suf∣ferings, the most precious bloud-sheading and death of our Lorde Iesus Christ, that so wee may bee humbled after that manner and measure thy children should bee: beseeching thee, that wee may so
aforehand accuse our selues before thy blessed Maiestie, that our aduersarie may haue no power hereafter to accuse vs, so iudge our selues, that we be not iudged by thee: so with shame, sorrow, feare, & trem∣bling, acknowledge the vilenesse o our sinnes wholely before the throne of thy iustice, that wee finde it to be a throne of grace and mercie vnto vs in Iesus Christ our Lord. Now O Lord, the searcher of the hearts and reynes, thou knowing this to be the humble and single desire of our hearts, we flye vnto thee for refuge, beseeching thee by thy holy spirit to worke in vs a clearer sight of the wisedome of our Lord Iesus Christ, whereby our mindes may be fur∣ther cleared from blindnes, and we haue a clearer sight of the whole misterie of our saluation in him; and graunt vs God a ful∣ler perswasion of the discharge of all our sinnes in his death, and of the imputation of his righteousnesse vnto vs, in his resur∣rection: that the guiltinesse of our consci∣ence may daily more and more goe away from vs, and peace of the same be confir∣med in vs; especially in the time of our
temptation and trouble, the day of our death, and the houre of iudgement. And next (most mercifull Father) graunt vs a more powerfell experience of his death, killing sinne in vs, and of his resurrection, raising vs vp vnto a new life, that daily we may be lesse sinfull, and more holy, righte∣ous, and sober in this present life: that so al∣so wee may haue a more sure and stedfast hope in his redemption, and may more strongly resist the vanities of this world, in false pleasures, profits, and glories: and more patiently endure all manner of mise∣ries of the same, which may befall vs, vntill his glorious appearing when he shal come to bee glorious in his Saintes, and made maruellous in all those which beleeue in him, Amen. Furthermore O Lord, whereas we are priuie to our selues, or it is knowne vnto others, or vnto thee, that thereby any sinne or sinnes more strange in vs through our corrupt nature or custome, or the tempta∣tiō of others, or of the tempter; we beseech thee that there we may labour to finde the precious death of our Lord Iesus Christ more powerfull in subduing the same: and
whereas through vnabilitie of nature, want of meanes, or grace, wee are weaker in any duties of well-doing, there wee may striue to finde the vertue of his glorious resurrection more effectuall in raising vs vp in meanes of life: so that our fa∣miliar corruptions being cured, and our speciall infirmities beeing relieued, wee may be also endued, as with generall gra∣ces meete for all Christians, so with such peculiar graces as may be meete for our callings, and inable vs to gloriie thy holy name, build vp others in well do∣ing, and treasure vp the fruites of a good conscience, for our selues at all times, and especially in our neede. And in this behalfe the desire of our heart is, that thy holy spirit worke in vs the renoun∣cing of our reason so farre forth as it is blinde, and the crucifying of our affecti∣ons so farre forth as they be corrupt, that so wee may offer them vp with soule and body in sacrifice of humiliation: and that hauing receiued these graces, we may also oer them vp in a sacrifice of obe∣dience vnto thy gracious Maiestie. And wherein soeuer wee haue, doe, or shall
with thy graces obey thee, wee desire to offer vp thy graces, our obedience, and our selues in a sacrifice of thankes∣giuing, and praising of thy holy and bles∣sed name, through Iesus Christ our Lord, Amen. All thy waies O Lord, we acknow∣ledge to be mercie and truth; we beseech thee therefore, giue vs the holy fruites of all the good meanes thou hast heretofore wrought our good by: as thy holy and sweete promises preached vnto vs, red of vs, meditated vpon by our selues, or con∣ferred of with others, the prayers, thankes∣giuings, Psalmes & Hymnes of our selues, our friends, and thy church, thy sacred Sa∣craments, the ministeric of thy holy An∣gels, the cōmunion of thy Saints, & admo∣nitiō which hath bin giuē vs for our good: most humbly entreating that we may haue sanctified vnto vs the remembrance of thy former mercies bestowed vpō thy church, vpō any member therof, or vpō our selues, either in benefits, or in crosses: & albeit our nature is most impatiēt either of reproches offred vnto vs by our enemies, or any iniu∣ries by our friends, yet herein we feruent∣ly aske of thy wise and mercifull goodnes,
that wee may reape a good fruite euen of such euill meanes. And because wee grow to be acquainted with the pride of ourspi∣rits, and sloathfulnesse of our flesh, and fewe meanes are left vs, and many offen∣ces (by our selues conceiued; by others and Sathan offered) do alreadie, and are daily like more to assaile vs: O Lord, thou which hast bene our God, euen from our first birth, especially since our new birth, bee thou the God of our middle age, yea of our old dayes, (if wee liue so long) vntill thou finish the last worke of our new birth begun and continued thus farre in vs. To this ende we aske of thee that we may vow (and receiuing grace from thee, wee doo vowe) to vse all these forenamed good meanes of our saluation, more mercifully, then yet euer we vsed them; in vsing of them wee aske more feare of thy Maiestie, faith of thy promises, purenesse of our hearts, loue vnto others, and withall, bles∣sing and fruite more aboundant, that our latter workes may be better then our for∣mer. Wofull experience (O blessed Sauiour) teacheth, and moueth vs to call vpon thee,
as for these former things, so to be preser∣ued and protected by thy almightie and mercifull grace, from our owne corrupti∣on to come, from all Sathans temptations and accusations, from all manner of conta∣gion of the vngodly in their iniuries, re∣proches, and in their benefites, praises, their sorceries, inchantments, yea from any hurt of thy children (as they be not rege∣nerate) & from any hurt by thy creatures, so farre forth as any of these things may hurt our saluation. Former experience Ô mightie God and mercifull Father, ought not onely to teach, but also to enforce vs to giue thee thankes, praise, and glory, for thy former mercies vpon vs and thy Church bestowed: but wherein thou hast prouided for vs many arguments of strength, of faith: or ignorance, forgetful∣nee, negligence, and want of reuerence of thy mercies receiued, minister iust cause of humiliation: and therefore in some faith in, and thankfulnesse for thy former merci∣full blessings, and yet in much weakenesse, in the merits of Iesus Christ our Lord: with our whole heart, we beseech thee giue vs a good portion of thy spirit, to call care∣fully
thy benefites to our remembrance, wisely to vnderstand them, and reuerently to regard, and truly to be thankfull for them, in minde, in heart, in word, and deed, through Iesus Christ our Lord and onely Sauiour. Amen. Wee beseech thee most mightie God and mercifull Father, to make partakers of our praiers, and thankesgiuings, all the whole Church, and euery member therof, especially where dutie most char∣geth, promise bindeth, necessitie craueth, and thy glory chalengeth, &c.
LEt the rich seeke for the godly, wise, and learned Phisition, and take heed of wicked, ignorant, bold empyricks, which kill many men, and yet feare no∣thing, because they be not called to their accounts according to good lawes for this cause prouided. And let the poorer sort with good ad∣uise and counsell (if they can haue any) vse Maist. Phaer of the Pesti∣lence. Maister Phaers medicines, in his short, but learned Treatise of the Pestilence, which he wrote of purpose for the benefit and comfort of the poore. I haue added a fewe medicines of Mai∣ster Phaers, because of some emptie pages: they may serue at a neede, and by Gods grace do some good when better counsell is wanting. A most precious Electuary against the Pe∣stilence for the rich. TAke Cinamome elect, one ounce, Terra sigillata 6. drams, fine mirre 3. drams, Vnicornes horne, one dram, the seed and rinde of citron, rootes of Dyptany, bur∣net, Tormētille, Zedoary, red coral, ana: drās two, yelow saunders foure scruples, red
saunders, two scruples, white bene and red flowers of marygolds, ana, one dram, Iuo∣ry raced, Scabiouse, Betonice, Offininis tunicae appellatae seed of Basile, the bone of a Stags hart, Saffron, ana two scruples, make a fine powder, & adde vnto it, of Bole armoniake preparate two ounces, white sugar three pound, and with a sirrup of Acetocitate ci∣tri make a goodly electuary, and keepe it in a glasse. Or this forme with lesse cost and quantitie. TAke of the rootes of Dictamu, tormen∣til, bole armeni prepared, (that is, wa∣shed with water of Scabiouse) terra si∣gillata, ana Of euery one like quantitie. 6 drams: of the roote of Gen∣tian, and of the roote of butter-burre, of Betonie, called in the shops Betonice tunicae. Ana, 2. scruples, red saunders one scruple, Iuorie raced, the barke of Citrone, of red corall, of the bone of a stags heart, of the roote of Zedoary, ana, halfe a dram of most pure perles, of both kindes of been, ana 2. scruples, fragmentorum quing, lapidū pretio∣sorum ana one scruple: amber, good Vni∣cornes Let the Apo∣thecary help you to make this pouder. horne, ana hale a scruple, of gold and siluer leaues three of each, mingle all these, & make a fine pouder.
If the Pestilence commeth with great excesse of heat, take one dram and drinke it vpon Rose water and vineger, but if yee feele it cold, take it in a draught of wine, and couer you with clothes, so that ye may sweate as long as is possible, for without doubt, it is a present remedie, as I my selfe haue oftentimes proued. For the poore the best I finde is this. TAke the roote called Petasites in La∣tine, in English the butter-bur grow∣ing by the water side, drie it & make fine powder of it, giue it the sicke. If the Pestilence commeth with heate, take three drams of it in Rose water and vineger: but if it come with a cold, giue it in a draught of wine, and cause him to sweate as long as he can endure it. To ripe the botch. TAke Mallowes, & the rootes of holi∣hock, & onions, as much as shall su∣fice, wash them and seeth them in water, and afterward bray them in a mor∣ter with powder of linseed, and of Fen∣greke, & a good quantitie of swines grease
fresh, laying on the plaister euerie day once. To breake the botch. SOme lay on it a plaister made of figges, soure leuen, and reisins without ker∣nels, braied and incorporate altogither in oyle of camomill. To mundifie the botch. AFterward mundifie the place with a salue made of yolkes of egs, fine barly flowre, and a litle hony or oyle of Roses. Medicine for incarnation. LAst of all, for the perfect incarnation, take the iuice of Daises, & with a litle waxe make a soft oyntment, and vse it: or ye may lay thereto any other salue incarnatiue, as ye are wont to do in other cleane sores. FINIS.
