669.f.9[28] 50811819 161126
BY THE KING. ¶ A Proclamation of Grace and Pardon to all such as shall returne to their Obedience, and submit to, and seek His MAJESTIES mercy before the end of May next. WHEREAS this unnaturall Rebellion was begun and fomented upon pretence of maintai∣ning the true Protestant Religion, the Laws, Liberty and Property of the Subject, and the Pri∣viledges of Parliament; And was heretofore carryed on in the name of the King and Parlia∣ment, upon pretence also of the preservation of Our Honour, and the Rights of Our Crowne, and the Safety of Our Person, and redeeming it from the hands and power of evill Counsel∣lors: And under these specious pretences very many of Our Subjects have been misled into it. But that which was at first known and foreseen by some, may now be manifest to all, even of the meanest capacity, that these were but pretences to colour the Ambition, malice, and ava∣rice of a few men; since it is apparent, that in the prosecution, and for the upholding of the Rebellion, there hath been more prophanation and scorne to the Protestant Religion here established, more oppres∣sion of the Subject, by depriving them of their Lives, Liberry and Property, without and against Law, and more usur∣pation upon the Rights of Our Crowne, and violation of Lawes, and of Acts of Parliament, and of Priviledges of Par∣liament publiquely avowed, then can be parallell'd by any former example in this Kingdom. And upon Our severall Messages and Invitations for a Treaty for Peace, nothing is propounded to Us, and insisted upon, concerning the breach of any Law, or the Liberty, or Property of the Subject, or the Priviledges of Parliament; But changes in the Religion established, and alterations of the ancient Government of this Kingdome both in Church and State. And touching the defence and safety of Our Person, notwithstanding Our earnest endeavours for Peace, this Rebellion is still prosecuted, and new Armies now moulded, and Forces raised under the name of the Parliament and State, with Commission to kill and destroy, without exception or regard of Our Person: So that (beside the Tryalls We have al∣ready undergone) We may easily discerne what safety or defence We are to expect hereafter. And it is evident that the designe tends to the destruction, not onely of Our Person and Posterity, but even of Monarchy it selfe: and that the de∣fence of the true Protestant Religion established, of the Lawes, Liberty and Property of the Subject, of the just Privi∣ledges of Parliament, and of Our Person, and the Rights of Our Crowne, are laid aside, and can be no longer preten∣ces for this Rebellion. And whereas We have reason to beleeve that very many of Our Subjects, who were heretofore seduced, and misled, are by this, and their own manifold sufferings, brought to a sight of their error, and to a dislike and detestation of this execrable Rebellion, which threatens speedy Ruine and destruction to the Nation: but being hereto∣fore involved and intangled in the guilt of it, are doubtfull of their owne security, and cannot easily find the way to free themselves with safety. In pursuance therefore of Our constant purpose, to omit nothing which We shall conceive may give security to those Our Subjects, who shall not still wilfully and malitiously persist in mischiefe, and which may conduce to the quenching of this Fire, and restoring Peace to Our People in all Our Dominions, We have thought fit once againe to set forth this Our Proclamation of Grace and Pardon: And We doe hereby Publish and De∣clare, That to all such of what estate, degree, or condition soever they be (without exception) who shall before the end of May next ensuing, returne to their due Obedience, and submit to, and desire Our Mercy, We shall grant them Our free and gracious Pardon for all offences whatsoever, committed or done, in or by the prosecuring, promoting, assisting, or countenancing of this Rebellion, or which have any relation thereunto. And this in the Word of a King We shall effectually make good unto them. Given at Our Court at OXFORD, the 19th day of April, in the One and Twentieth yeare of Our Raigne. 1645. GOD SAVE THE KING. Printed at Oxford, by Leonard Lichfield, Printer to the Ʋniversity. 1645.
