e1061_45 99868190 169094
A[prill .2. 1655. An Act for continuing ye jurisisdiction of ye Court of Admiralty. vide voll. 10th. fol. 3 single sheete.
blazon of the Commonwealth AN ACT Concerning the New INVENTION OF Melting down Iron and other Mettals with Stone-Coal and other Coals, with∣out Charking thereof. WHereas Jeremy Buck of Minchinhampton in the county of Glocester Esq by a New Invention doth undertake to melt or cause to be melted down Iron, Lead, Tin, Copper, Brass, and other Mettals, with Stone-Coal, Pit-Coal or Sea-Coal, without Charking thereof; Be it therefore En∣acted by this present Parliament, and by the
Authority thereof, That the said Jeremy Buck, his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and such as he or they or any of them by Writing under his, their, or any of their Hands and Seals shall from time to time appoint (and none other) shall and may use, exercise and enjoy the Art, Skill and Mystery of melting down Iron, Oare and Sinders into Raw Iron, and of other Oare and Mettal, with Stone-Coal, Pit-Coal or Sea-Coal, without Charking thereof; and the sole and onely benefit of his New Invention aforesaid, for and during the term of Fourteen years, from the First day of March in the year of our Lord God One thousand six hundred and fifty. And that no person or persons, Bodies Politique or Corporate whatsoever, shall make use of the said New Invention within the Com∣monwealth of England, or any the Dominions thereof, during the said time of Fourteen years. Provided always, and it is hereby Declared and Enacted, That all and every person and per∣sons may use such ways and works for melting down any Iron, Oare, Sinder, or other Met∣tals, as they now use, or have heretofore law∣fully used to do, or any other way or works here∣after by them newly to be invented, so as they make not use of the said New Invention of him the said Jeremy Buck. And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every person offending against this Act, for every day where∣in such Offence shall be committed, shall for∣feit and lose to the said Jeremy Buck, his Execu∣tors, Administrators and Assigns respectively, the Sum of Ten pounds, in the name of a Pain or Penalty to be recovered by the said Jeremy Buck, his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, by Action of Debt to be grounded upon this Act,
in any Court of Record within this Common∣wealth, where any Action of Debt now doth, or shall hereafter be Tryable, together with Damages for Non-payment thereof, and Costs of Suit; in which Action of Debt, or for the staying whereof, no Essoin, Wager of Law, Protection or Injunction, or any other means of Delay, shall or may be granted, admitted or allowed. Provided also, That the said Jeremy Buck and his Assigns, after Seven years of the term hereby granted, do and shall take Appren∣tices and teach them the Knowledge and Mystery of the said New Invention. Die Mercurii, 2 Aprilis, 1651. ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forth∣with printed and published. Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti. London, Printed by JOHN FIELD, Printer to the Parliament of England. 1651.
