e1074_18 99867277 119582
AN ACT For holding an ASSIZE For the County of LANCASTER. blazon of the Commonwealth Friday, August 5. 1659. ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forth∣with Printed and Published. THO. St NICHOLAS, Clerk of the Parliament. LONDON: Printed by JOHN FIELD, Printer to the Parliament. And are to be sold at the seven Stars in Fleetstreet, over against Dunstans Church, 1659.
AN ACT For holding an ASSIZE For the County of LANCASTER. BE it Enacted by Authority of Parliament, and it is hereby Ordained and Ap∣pointed, That an Assizes and Gaol-delivery for the County of Lancaster, shall be holden and kept at Lan∣caster in the said County, the Seven and twentieth day of this instant August, in this present year one thousand six hundred fifty nine; And that Francis Thorpe one of the Iudges of this Commonwealth, and John Parker one other of the Iudges of this Com∣monwealth, shall be Iustices of the said Assizes, and of Oyer and Terminer, and Gaol-delivery for the said County: And that all Actions aswell Real as Personal, and all other Actions mixt or otherwise, and all Pleas, Precepts, Writs, Process, Demur∣rers, Recognizances, Fines, Recoveries, and all other Proceedings, Matters and
Things, which were depending in any of the Courts, within the said County of Lancaster, upon the Twentieth day of April, one thousand six hundred fifty three, or at any time since, shall be and stand revived, continued, and of as full force and effect in Law to all intents and purposes, as they were the said Twentieth day of April, one thousand six hundred fifty three, or at any time since, and may be proceeded in at the same Assizes according to Law, as if the same had been taken and proceeded in before lawful Iustices; And that the Seal of that County heretofore appointed by this Par∣liament, and now in the Custody of John Bradshaw, Serjeant at Law, shall and may be made use of for the carrying on the said Assizes, Oyer and Terminer, Gaol-delivery, and Matters aforesaid, and all and every the proceedings concerning the same, until the First day of November now next coming, and no longer. Friday, August 5. 1659. ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published. THO. St NICHOLAS, Clerk of the Parliament.
