a3940a 45789141 172454
A Remark upon the Baths, In the City of Bath in Somersetshire. With a Word of Tender Caution and Admonition to the Inhabitants thereof. I'Ve travell'd far and near, this Nation up and down; I've lov'd to see and hear, God's Works of great renown. Wonderfully indeed they set forth his great Pow'r, To which we must take heed, and fear him ev'ry hour. Earth's Book that's here below doth set forth God's great Pow'r; Most glorious Works doth show unto this very hour. And herein stands our Bliss, to serve the living Lord; And that Man blessed is, whose Deeds with it accord. Tho' I have great things seen, the Baths I must admire; Hot Waters there have been, and still are, without Fire. Some wise Men there have sought, this Myst'ry to find out, Their labour is at nought, they leave off with a doubt. This wonder makes me pause, my Thoughts have gone about: Here's Supernatural Cause, to me it's beyond doubt. Th' Effects thereof declare the Cause, that it is so; The works of it are rare, Lame whole away do go. Diseas'd of many a place come here to find relief; It yields in many a case, and takes away their grief. The Cripple, with his Crutch, comes limping to this place; The Vertue of it's such, he's heal'd, and goes a-pace. Crutches advanced are, as I did plainly see, To shew Bath's Vertue rare, O let God honour'd be! As for Bethesda's Pool, it differed in Nature; For doubtless that was cool, but these are still hot Water. Now may I speak to you in Meekness and in Love, The Counsel given's true, may it effectual prove. Inhabitants of Bath, I have to you Good Will, And truly wish you Faith, God's Mercies do you fill. Do ye submit to him, who is your great Creator, Whose Mercies great are seen in this your Virtuous Water. Come, heark to me a while, for my intent is good, There's no such place i' th' Isle, whose Springs yield so much Food. For by your Virtuous Springs, I eas'ly may suppose, Giv'n by the King of Kings, y'ave both Meat, Drink and Clothes, Let Love of God therefore for evermore take place; Sin, Vanity give o'er, for it doth you disgrace. Be cautioned in time, for God hates all such things: Repent of every Crime, lest Virtue leave your Springs. I pray you Serious be, and fear the Living God; For you I shew how He may visit with his Rod. But as you heed do take, to his Divine Appearance, Of which the Scripture speak with a most plain Coherance. Then may ye Fruits bring forth, which Mercy may engage, And him who hath and doth, may bless you in your Age. I pray this Caution take, as given in true Love, So may God's Mercy make you Joyful from above. And thus, when Health shall end, and this Life cease to be, The Lord may be your Friend to all Eternity. R. A. London, Printed and Sold by T. Sowle, in White-Hart-Court in Gracious-street, 1699.
