a3875 E651_9 99865098 166020
THE ARTICLES OF THE RENDITION OF ELIZABETH-CASTLE in the Ile of JERSEY; And the totall reducement of that Island to the obedience of the Parliament of ENGLAND. The severall Summons, Answers, and Replies passed between Col. Heane Commander in chiefe for the Parliament, and the late Gover∣nour, Sir George Carteret. With the particulars of an extra∣ordinary quantity of Ordnance, Armes, Ammunition, provision of Victuall, and other rich stores found at the surrender. LONDON, Printed by Edw. Griffin in the Old-baily. 1651.
Worthy Sir, I Have here inclosed sent you the summons, with the several Answers and Replies between Coll. Heane, and Sir George Carteret, as also the Articles upon which Elizabeth Castle was surrendred the 15 instant, with an inventory of what Ordnance, Arms, Ammunitions and furniture of war, and the several stores we found in it after the delivery: there were in it of French, Germans, Danes, Switzers, Scots, Dutch, Irish, English, and Islanders 340, and as proper men as ever my eys beheld; they marcht not forth in the Island according to the Articles, but went by boat out of the Castle, aboard the Vessel provided for them, and the 16 instant set sail for St. Mallo in France, and carryed with them between twenty and thirty horse; they left us under the Castle 7 or 8 vessels, most of which are not serviceable, and truly without vanity it may be said, it is the strongest place in the Parliaments possession, its scituation being at such a distance from the main land; and a firm rock, that all the engines possibly to be invented cannot hurt it, the late Govervour thereof after the Articles were con∣cluded confest, that this Master (as he called him, meaning Charls Stuart) sent him word from France, that he was not in a condition to relieve him; and therefore wisht him to make as honourable terms for himself, as he could. We have Intelligence by Passengers from France, that the Hunter Friggot of 22. Guns, the biggest that Carteret had for∣merly belonging to this Island is gone for England with an in∣tention to submit to the Parliament; and to that purpose the Seamen put their Captaine (one Lendall) a shoare in France. If French Wine might be Landed in England, I could send from hence both White, and Clarret, if an Order could be procured, 40, 50 or 100 Tuns. Hillaries in the Isle of Iersey the 18. Decemb. 1651.
SIr, Although I have hitherto received no encouragement from you either by Message or writing, yet my conscience incites me as a Chri∣stian, and Souldier to invite you againe, and offer you an opportunity to shew you obedience to the Parl. of the Common wealth of England, by de∣livering up Elizabeth Castle to me for their use, I also offer you my endea∣vours to reconcile you to the English nation, whose affection formerly your selfe and your Ancestors have enjoyed. I blesse the Lord the Parliament have nothing to doe but to reduce this Castle, and that of Garnsey: there∣fore you cannot think I am necessitated to Court you. Sir your punctillo of Honour will not ballance the losse of one of your Souldiers; and the late sad experience of the death of some poor Souldiers of yours hath been suffici∣ent to let you know that it might have bin prevented, and another Granado may have the like Commission, from the most high, to whose Councell I re∣fer you, desiring your answer, and remaine, Sir, Your humble servant, Ja. Heane. St. Hillery, Octob. 3. For Sir Geo. Carterett, Governour of Elizabeth castle, these. SIr, I have received your Letter by your trumpet, an answer whereunto I will send you back by my owne, wishing that you will take care that hereafter when any Message shall be sent from either party to the other none of yours approach our works, such advantage being unhandsome and against the descipline of War. Your humble servant, Geo. Carteret. Elizabeth castle, 3 Dec. 1651. For Col. Heane, Commander in chiefe of the English forces in Jersey, these. SIr, Although the Consideration of any Dammage we are like to receive by your Granado's, or advantage which you may imagine to have hitherto gained upon us, be too weake an argument to incline me to harbour your desire, yet I conceive it not amisse to heare what you have to propose unto me, to which end I leave it to your choise to send unto me some fit persons sufficiently impowred by you with whom I may Confer, or to let me send others to you, for the like number of Hostages to be sent hither, and remain here while they shall be with you, of this and of the time I expect your answer. Your humble servant, Geo. Carteret. Elizabeth castle, 5 Decemb. SIr, You were pleased by your last to mention Advantages taken by me upon sending my Drum or Trumpet, which makes me take notice of sen∣ding to the Beale which lies as well within my Command as yours; at the same time you sent forth your Drum to me; I have considered the particu∣lars in your Letter, and shall appoint Major Ashby, Captain Yardley, and Lievt. Pigeon Lieut. of horse, impowred to treat with you for the surrender of Elizabeth Castle, so as you send me Sir Philip Carteret, Mr. Hampton senior, and Captain Pawlet; whom I expect to morrow at the opening
of the Bridge, and do engage my honour for their safe protection, and the immediate dispatch of my Commissioners to you; and so I remain, Your humble servant Ja. Heane. St Hillary 5 Decemb. 1651. SIr, I accept of the three Gentlemen whom you have proposed to come hither to treat with me, and albeit the Hostages you demand, be of differing quality from you, yet I am unwilling to raise any scruple in that particular; onely I desire that when I send them to you, they may be met half way by those you send hither, with whom I desire you will send three horse men and a Trumpet to receive mine, for the like number I in∣tend to send to bring yours to me; and that to be upon the return of my Trumpeter if you approve of it; and as you have engaged your honour to me, for the safe return of the Hostages whom I shall send to you, I like∣wise engage you mine for those you shall dispatch to me, Your humble servant Geo. Carteret. Elizabeth castle this 6 Decemb. 1651. SIr, I have sent you three Gentlemen mentioned in my last, with such Propositions as I have at present thought of, giving them liberty until Munday, in the mean time I resolve the acts of hostility shall cease on my part, so as you do the like, and forbear lading or sending any Vessel from the Castle during the Treaty; leaving you and my Commissioners to the counsel of the Almighty, and remain, Sir Your humble servant Ja. Heane. St. Hillery 6 Decemb. 1651. SIr, One of my Commissioners coming out from you, informs me that you take exception, partly at their Articles, partly at their Power, al∣though power to conclude was more then you desired: yet I gave them power to treat and conclude was more then you desired: yet I gave them power to treat and conclude, according to those particular instructi∣ons I had at that time given them, but if what I have offered be so little worth, I resolve to give them further to comply with your desires, so far as I may maintain the honour of the State that sent me, and keep my reputa∣tion as a souldier spotless; onely I desire to know the end of your de∣mands, that so I may enable them to conclude in half an hour, otherwise I desire you to send back my Commissioners, and I shall send back your Gentlemen, that as here resting your debtor for your civilities, and remain, Your humble servant Ja. Heane. St. Hillery 8 Decemb. 1651 SIr, I have have received your letter by Major Ashby, it shall not be my fault if we do not agree, and make a good conclusion with your Com∣missioners, and they may take what time they please, to stay or return to you; in the mean time I send back Capt. Paulet to remain with you. Your humble servant Geo. Carteret. Castle Elizabeth 8 Decemb. 1651.
Articles of Agreement for the Rendition of Elizabeth Castle, Indented, made, and conclude, betweene Col. Iames Heane Commander in chiefe of all the Forces in the Isle of Iersey, on the behalfe of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of Eng∣land of the one party, and Sir George Carteret Knight and Barronet Governor of the said Castle Elizabeth of the other party, 12. December, 1651. 1. THat Sir George Carteret shall be indempnified for all Acts done du∣ring the time of the late War untill this day, and shal peaceably and quietly enjoy all his Goods, Chattels, Leases, Houses, and grants which were lawfully his own, when the Parliament Forces entered this I∣sland, and shal have liberty to dispose of the said Estate, and every part thereof to his best advantage, without paying Composition for the same; dna to live and abide if he please in the Parliament Dominions, without siad Sir George Carteret shal have liberty to goe into France, and returne without molestation; and that he shal have and enjoy for ever the grant of the mannor of Melecher bearing date at Westminster the eighth year of the late King which was made unto him for, and in consideration of his good service against the Turks, composition free, all other Lands, Rents, and Revenues formerly belonging to the said King excepted in this, and al other Articles; and that he shall have one of the Vessels now under the Castle, which he shal please to choose, with all that belongs to it for his proper use. 2. That all those who are at present in the Castle called Elizabeth, shal enjoy all their goods and personall estates within the Parliaments quarters as they now are, and be indempnified in their persons and estates for al acts done, during the late war until this present day, and shal have liberty, and nine moneths time to perfect their composition, which is not to exceed two yeares value of their Lands, according to the qualification made by Ordi∣nance of Parliament, and shall be made in the Island by such as the Parlia∣ment shal appoint for those of the Island, and in England for the English and others, and that no oath shal be demanded of them, they acting nothing to the prejudice of the Parliament upon paine of forfeiture of their Estates, and those that have no Estates of such bonds for security, as shall be reason∣ably demanded of them, if they stay longer in the Parliaments quarters; and that no action, Suite, or Arrest shal be Commenc't, brought or executed against the said Sir George Carteret, or any of the persons aforesaid, for a∣ny
debt, or pretence whatsoever, until the exspiration of nine moneths en∣suing the date hereof, provided by this Article, that it shal be left to the pleasure of the Parliament, whether Sir Philip Carteret shall compound or not for the Island of Sarke. 3. That no rent paid heretofore by vertue of the Authority then in being within this Isle be redemanded, or any person questioned for payment, or receiving the same. 4. That such as shal desire to live beyond the Seas, shal have the same be∣nefit of their Estates as if they were present, and that such as shal desire to sell them, shal have permission to doe it with their best conveniency and advantage, and shal have effectual Passes granted them, as occasion shal re∣quire for transporting of themselves, their monyes and goods to what place they please, they first compounding as aforesaid. 5. That Mistress Motire and her children, and the late wife and chil∣dren of Mr. Thomas Seale deceased, shal have liberty and Passes to come home and enjoy their estates in this Isle free from composition; and that John Browne servant to Sir George Carteret, shal enjoy his Estate in the said Isle without composition, it not exceeding eight pounds per annum. 6. That if Sir George Carteret, or any other person now within the said Castle, shal desire to repaire to Virginia, or any other Plantation in A∣merica, or to send others thither, shal have Passes for themselves and their servants and goods to goe thither unmolested and live there quietly, they acting nothing against the Parliament and Commonwealth of England. 7. That Sir George Carteret, and all Officers by Sea and Land, as wel Commissionated as reformed, and Souldiers, Gentlmen, and al others re∣siding within the said Castle, shal march forth with their Horses and Armes of al sorts to some convenient place within the Island, with Colours flying, Drums beating, Matches lighted at both ends, Bal in mouth, and there deli∣ver them up to such person as Col. Heane shal appoint, excepting and re∣serving to al private Souldiers their Swords, and Captaines and Commissio∣nate Officers, and Gentlemen their Horses, Swords, Back, brests and Pi∣stols; and all persons whatsoever before mentioned, shal enjoy their wearing Apparel of al sorts with al their pay, evidences, and Bookes of accounts without being subject to plunder, or search for those things they shal carry about them by any person whatsoever, and that al sick and wounded per∣sons that shal be left in the said Castle at the time of surrender shal have due care taken for their recovery. 8. That al prisoners on both sides having relation to this Island be forth∣with set at liberty, and have Passes given them to travel for their several homes. 9. That al such in the said Castle as shal desire to be transported for France or England, shal have Vessels provided by Col. Heane at the Parlia∣ments charge for that purpose, and provision allowed them during their pas∣sage.
10. That if any Officer, Souldier, or other person comprehended in these Arcicles shal violate the same, or any branch thereof, it shal extend onely to the person so offending, and not be charged on any other of his party. 11. That an Order of Parliament shal with convenient speed be procu∣red by Col. Heane for ratification of these Articles. 12. That Sir George Carteret shall deliver up, or cause to be delivered to Col. James Heane, or to such persons as he shal appoint for the use of the Parliament, and Common wealth of England, the aforesaid Castle called E∣lizabeth, with all the Ordnance, Armes, Ammunition, and Utensils of War, stores, and provisions of all sorts, and all goods and things whatsoever now within the same, with the Writings, Records, &c. belonging to the Jurisdi∣ction of this Isle, also all the Vessels, Shallops, Boats, &c. with their Appur∣tenances now under the said Castle, without spoile or imbezlement, upon Munday at 12. of the Clock at noone, being the 15. of this instant Decem∣ber, winde and weather, providing to goe to Saint Mallo, excepting his Houshold Goods, Moneys, and Plate particularly and properly belonging to him, whereof an Inventory shal be taken, and in the meane time all things to remaine as they now are without any further Communication on either side, unlesse by consent of both parties. An Inventory of all the Ordnance, Armes, Ammunition, and stores of Provision in Elizabeth Castle, at the time of the surrender of the same. Ordinance of Brass 17. 1. Demi Cannon, 6. Whole Culverin, 2. Culverin Cuts, 1. Sakor, 1. Mi∣nion, 3. Faulcon, 2. Faulconets, 1. Stock Fowle. Ordnance of Iron, 36. 1. Demi Canon Cut, 1. Demi Canon Drake, 6. whole Culverin, 1. Cul∣verin Cut, 3. Culverin Drakes, 11. Demi Culverin, 6. Sakor, 2. Sakor Cuts, 2. Faulcon Cuts, 3. Faulconets. Inall 53. Peeces. Muskets 450. Sword 40. Bandaleers, 100. Colours. Rests for Muskets 30 Powder 64. Barrels. Match 5000. Great Shot 1000. Musket-shot 100 l. weight, Lead 4. Tun, Iron 2. Tun, 1 Gun with compleat furniture. Provisions of Victuals. Bisket 60. Hogsheads. Wheat 6. Quarters. Barley 4. Quarters. Malt 20. Quarters. Pease 36. Bushels. Porke 50. Sides. Poore John 60000 French Barley 3. Hogsheads. Spanish Wine 4. Pipes. French Wine 10. Hogsheads. Beere 4. Tuns. Salt 60. Quarters. Podered Beefe 8. Hogs∣heads. 2. Fat Oxen. 2. Fat Hoggs living. FINIS.
