A3814 E337_10 99861459 113596
ARTICLES Concerning the SVRRENDER OF Newark To the Commissioners of both KINGDOMS: And sent from Colonel General POYNTZ to the Honorable William Lenthal Esq; Speaker of the Honorable House of Com∣mons, by Lieutenant Colonel Carleton, his Adjutant General. Which Articles were read in the House of Commons, May 9. ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That these Articles be forthwith Printed and Pub¦lished. H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. London, Printed for Edw. Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons, May 11. 1646.
Articles Agreed and Concluded the sixth day of May, 1646. between the Commissioners hereunder named, Au∣thorised by the committee of both King∣doms of England and Scotland on the one part, and the Commissioners hereunder named, Authorised by the Right Ho∣norable Iohn Lord Bellasyse Governour of Newark, Lieut: General to His Majesty of the Counties of Nottingham, Lincoln, and Rutland, and Governour of the Town and Castle of Newark of the other part; touching the Surrendering of that Gar∣rison, and the Castle, Forts, and Sconces thereunto belonging, to the Committees of both Kingdoms, for the use of the Parliament of England. 1. THat the town and Garrison of Newark, with the Castle, Forts, Sconces, Ordnance, Morter-pieces, Arms, Ammunition, Provisions and Necessaries of War (not hereafter excepted) be Surrendred on Saturday next by ten of the clock,
into the hands of the Committee of both King∣dome, or whom they shall appoint for the use of the Parliament of England, without imbezelling any of them. 2. That the Governour of the said Garrison, the Lord Bellasyse, shall march away with his Ser∣vants. Horses, Arms, and their proper Goods, to any Garrison he shall name, not Besieged or Blockt up, or to his own house, there to remain unmolested (submitting to all Ordinances of Parliament) and also that the said Lord Bellasyse shall have liberty upon desire, any time within three Moneths to passe beyond Sea, and to have Passes granted for himself and his Servants accordingly. 3. That all Officers in Commission, or that have formerly been in Commission, shall march away with their Horses, Arms, and their proper Goods, the Common Souldiers Horse and Foot, with their Money, Clothes and Swords, to any Garrison not Besieged or Blockt up, or to their own Houses, as they shall make choyce of. And those that have∣not money, to have free Quarter in their March, and not to march above ten miles in one day, unlesse they please, and to have Convoys and Carriages provided for carrying away their Goods; Hostages being given for the return of the Convoy and Car∣riages: And such Goods as cannot be removed, the owners shall have three Moneths liberty to dispose of them. 4. That all such Officers and Gentlemen now in the Garrison, who shall desire to depart this King∣dom, shall upon signifying thereof to the Commis∣sioners
of both Kingdoms, any time in three moneths, have passes for that purpose for themselves and Servants, ingaging themselves during their stay, to do no disservice to the Parliament. 5. That all such Officers and Souldiers, as by reason of sicknesse, wounds, or otherwise, are not able to march out at the time appointed, shall have liberty to stay in the Town, or some other conve∣nient place, till they be recovered; and such as are not able to provide maintenance for themselves, shall have care taken of them. 6. That all Noblemen and Gentlemen in the said Garrison, shall have liberty to march forth of the same, with their Horses and Arms, and their known menial Servants, with their Horses and Swords to their own Houses, there to remain un∣molested, submitting to all Orders of Parliament; and to have liberty to carry away their own proper Goods then, or at any time within three Moneths, or to have Passes for themselves and Servants to go beyond Sea, upon desire within three Moneths; and in the mean time to engage themselves to do nothing to the disservice of the Parliament. 7. That all Clergy-men in the said Garrison, shall have liberty with their Horses, Servants, and their own proper Goods, to march to any Garrison unblockt up, or not besieged, or to their own Houses, there to remain unmolested (submitting to all Ordinances of Parliament). 8 That the Mayor, Aldermen and Inhabitants of the said Garrison, shall not be molested in their persons, Priviledges, Goods or Estates (submit∣ting
to all Ordinances of Parliament) but to enjoy the same liberties, and to have the same protection as all other Towns have which are under the power of the Parliament. 9. That the Ladies, Gentlewomen, Wives, Widows, Children and Servants, belonging to any of the persons mentioned in the former Arti∣cles, or any others, shall have liberty to march forth of the said Garrison, with their Coaches, Horses, and proper Goods, as in the sixth Article. And if any of them by reason of sickness, or any other just reason, cannot march forth then, they shall have liberty to stay there till their recovery, and then to depart unmolested. 10. That all prisoners now in the said Garrison, Castle or Forts, or any other Prisoners of War taken by either party since the Siege began, shall forthwith upon Signing these Articles be set at li∣berty, unlesse they be detained for criminal offences, charged upon them not as Souldiers. 11. That all persons comprised within these Ar∣ticles, grounded upon the Summons of the 27 of April, which begat this present Treaty; be recom∣mended to compound with the Parliament for their Estates, as coming in before the first of May; so as they do effectually prosecute such Compositions within two Moneths next ensuing the date hereof. 12. If any of the persons above mentioned shall violate any of these Articles, or any part of them they shall loose the benefit of all the said Articles. 13. Lastly, That for the performance of these
Articles, Hostages be mutually given, and that a Cessation of Arms be continued by both sides, till the time of Surrender according to these Articles. And that Guards and Convoys be appointed to protect the Gentlemen, and Souldiers in their march from violence. Signed by us, Authorized by the Commissioners for both Kingdoms. Alexander Popham. Fran. thurnhaugh. Jo. Hutchinson. Walter Scot. Hen. Grey. Rich. Thornton. Gilbert Carr. Philip Jurfleton. F. Douglas. Jo. Archer. Signed by us Commissioners for the Lord Bellasyse. Marm. Darcy. Ger. Nevil. Tho. Ingram. Bry. Palms. A. Eyre. J. Atkins. Anth. Gilby. Simon Fanshaw. Hugh Cartwright. Edw. Standish. FINIS.
