A3842 E993_8 99866802 168659
ARTICLES OF High CRIMES AND GRAND MISDEMEANORS Exhibited against Lt. Col. Tho. Kelsey, governour of Dover Castle, Lately Major General of Kent and Surrey. The which will be proved and made good against him by sufficient Witnesses. LONDON: Printed for Livewel Chapman, at the Crown in Popes-Head Alley 1659.
Articles exhibited against Lt. Colo∣nel Kelsey, Governour of Dover Castle. First, Howsoever he took the Engagement ser forth by the Long Parliament, against King and House of Lords; yet he had a great hand in the very change of the Government from a Common∣wealth to a Single Person. For, 1. He was at a Meeting of the Officers of the Army when the Go∣vernment was presented to them in writing for their approbation; and he himself did alter some∣thing therein, and gave his consent, professing it to be his Judgement and conscience. And also, he perswaded many of the Little Parliament to give up their power to the usurping Protector. 2. In the prosecution of the usurped Government by a Single Person, he went to the Fleer at Ports∣mouth, Decemb. 1653. and carried with him the Paper of the new-intended Government in writing, with a Blank in that Article where the name of a Protector should be inserted. Now in this he most grosly dissembled, and abused the people: for it was known and declared before he came there, that Oliver Cromwel then General should be the man; and yet he carries a Blank, as if nothing had
been done or intended about nominating the Per∣son. Secondly, That the said Kelsey is a man dis-af∣fected to the Government of a Commonwealth, and against the Liberty and Rights of the people, is most apparent by his actions from time to time. For 1. When he was in the Parliament, not onely were his Votes alwayes for a single person, but the Succession to be Hereditary: Nothing then would serve his turn, but an absolute Monarch, and the People all Slaves. 2. Such as did manifest any good affection to the Commonwealth and the good old Cause, his manner was, to discourage them, and basely to abuse them. As for instance: When the Judge in a publike Sessions of the Peace, giving the Charge to the Grand Inquest, justified the Au∣thority of Parliament, in opposition to a Single Person, Kelsey could not bear it, but very much re∣buked the person for speaking in the behalf of the Commonwealth. Again, when a Member of Par∣liament had asserted the Peoples Liberty, and Pri∣viledges of Parliament, against the Usurpation of a Single Person, Kelsey was so much discontented at it, as that he sharply checked the good Man for it. Thirdly, When he took upon him to be major General, his Actions were most arbitrary, and un∣christian like, especially towards such-who stood well-affected to the Good Old Cause, and bore their Testimony against a Single Person. He publikely threatned the People of GOD, in these words, That whosoever amongst them should oppose the present Power, (though usurped) under what pretence soever, he would
sheath his sword up to the hilt in his Bowels, though he were his Brother. And for such as did suffer for bearing their Testimony against the late Usurper, he was not ashamed to declare that it was just up∣on them, and that they suffered as evil doers. Be∣sides, he sent Souldiers to some honest faithful Per∣sons to quarter upon, because they would not pay illegal Assesments. Neither was this enough, but in a hostile manner, from others he takes away by his souldiers their Corn, kills their sheep, and car∣ries away 4 or 5 l. more then they were assessed at; and from others took the value of 30 s. for Soul∣diers, for a day and a nights quarter, besides Asses∣ments. Fourthly, That the said Kelsey hath been a great favourer and encourager of those that aided and assisted the late King, and men dis-affected to the Commonwealth; as is most apparent by the fol∣lowing particulars. 1. He preferred some to places of eminent trust, who served in Offlice in the last Insurrection & Rebellion in Kent; one of which re∣taining the same spirit, saith, He hath a black Book for the Roundheads. 2. He hath declared, that such kinde of people as are known Enemies, are the fit∣test persons to be presented for Magistrates in the Town of Dover. And in order thereunto, he by his Agents did invite such to have their free Vote in the choice of Burgesses. Insomuch as the honest & well affected of the town were put out of a capacity to be serviceable to the Commonwealth in chusing to places of trust, Persons that are qualified accor∣ding to the Order of Parliament, being hindered
by those so encouraged as aforesaid. 3. When complaint was made to him of a Malignant Mini∣ster in the Wild of Kent, although the matters a∣gainst him were of high concernment, yet be would not receive the prooss that were brought to him, by many well-affected persons in the Wild, but in contempt and scorn put them off, saying, They were giddy-brain'd Fellows. Fifthly, That Kelsey hath been an open Enemy to the Good Old Cause, and a great discourager of such as stood well affected to a free Common∣wealth, appears thus: 1. After he was made Ma∣jor General of Kent and Surrey, such persons as had formerly adhered to the Parliament, and born their Testimony against the usurpation of a single person, were put out of their Commissions of Justices of Peace, as men not fit to Act any more in their places. 2. Because several honest persons in Dover would not give their Votes for him to be a Parliament-man for Dover (having lost it at Pickenden Heath in Kent) as knowing him to be a corrupt person, and an Enemy to the Com∣monwealth; he complains of this in a Letter which he writes to his Deputy in Dover Castle, and brands these honest men for disaffected per∣sons to the Government. Whereupon his Deputy drew up a Letter of Recantation, unto which he would have those honest men subscribe: but they altogether refused it, as being firmly principled for a Commonwealth; and no way would comply with such a treacherous person to the freedom and rights of the people, as they knew him to be. 3. When the Free-holders of Kent were at Pic∣kenden
Heath choosing the Knights of the Shire, Kelsey did what he could to disswade and hinder all honest men from giving their Vote for Sir Henry Vane, Calling them Rascals that cried up Sir Hen∣ry Vane, saying, That he was not fit to be chosen, because he was disaffected to the Government of a single Person: or words to that effect. 4. How∣soever he hath made a seeming profession, as if he did own the Principles of the Independents, and Baptized Churches, in preaching as a Gifted Brother without Ordination, Yet that his hypocri∣sie might be known to the world, he hath declared that he prefers the choice of Malignants before Sectaries to serve in Parliament. Sixthly, Besides what is charged upon him, he is guilty of great Oppression, not to mention his Partiality: for thus was his practice, when he took Bond of those that aided and assisted the late King, it was usually from those of the inferi∣our rank, letting the great ones go free. From the meanner fort, whom he forced to give Bond, he would force them also to pay some five shillings, some ten shillings a piece for their own Bond, and half a crown for their servants; besides other gifts wehich he took from them which were not bound. Lastly, That the said Kelsey is an enemy to Par∣liamentary Government (and therefore not to be trusted by Parliament) his actions first and last do shew it: When the personal Treaty was with the late King in the Isle of Wight, he did at Oxford O∣penly declare, that he was for the Personal Treaty, and did endeavour to obstruct a Petition, then in Agitation in the Regiment against the said perso∣nal
Treaty, The which Regiment was then, and is against a single Person. When the old Protector died, he did sadly complain, and said, The glory was departed from Israel; and did a little after ride in the head of the Proclamation, when his son Richard was proclaimed. FINIS.
