a620A 99896553 134522
ADVERTISEMENT. THe Tryal of Sir Thomas Gascoigne not being printed, we thought good to let the world know, that Mr. Mowbray and Mr. Balron, two of the Evidences against him, have both published their Narratives, the Titles whereof it was judged convenient here to insert. I. The Narrative of Lawrence Mowbray of Leeds in the County of York, Gent. concerning the Bloody Popish Conspiracy, against the Life of his Sacred Majesty, the Government, and the Protestant Religion, wherein is contain∣ed (1.) His Knowledge of the said Design from the very first, in the year 1676. with the opportunity he had to be acquainted therewith; and the Reasons why he concealed it so long; with the manner of his discovering the said wicked Project to his Majesty, and his most Honourable Privy Council. (2.) How far Sir Tho. Gascoigne, Sir Miles Stapleton, and others are engaged in the Design of Killing the King, and Firing the Cities of London and York, for the more speedy setting uppermost the Popish Re∣ligion in England. (3.) An Account of the Assemblings of many Popish Priests and Jesuits at Father Rishton's Chamber at Sir. Tho. Gascoigns House at Barmebowe, with their Consultations and Determinations. (4) A Dis∣covery of the erecting a Nunnery at Dolebank in Yorkshire by the Popish Party, especially by Sir Tho. Gascoigne, with an Account of an Estate of Ninety pounds per annum settled thereupon by him. (5.) A Manifestation of the Papists fraudulent conveying of their Estates, himself being privy to some of them. (6.) A probable Opinion concerning the Jesuits, the grand Instruments in these Affairs, with other considerable matters relating to the Plot; together with an Account of the Endeavours that were used to stifle his Evidence, by making an Attempt upon his Life in Leicester-Fields. II. The Narrative of Robert Balron of Shippon-Hall Gent. concerning the late Horrid Popish Plot and Conspiracy for the Destruction of His Ma∣jesty, and the Protestant Religion, wherein is contained, (1) His Informa∣tions upon Oath before His Majesty in Council, and before several Justices of the Peace, of the said Design, and the means by which he arrived at the Knowledge thereof. (2) Some particular Applications made to himself to assist those designed in the murdering of His Majesty, the Persons by whom such Applications were made, and the Reward Promised. (3) The Pro∣ject of the Popish Party to erect a Nunnery at Dolebank near Ripley in York∣shire, together with the Names of some Nuns actually designed for that im∣ployment, and taking the Profession upon them; as also an Account of a certain Estate of Ninety Pounds per Annum, given by Sir Tho. Gascoigne to the Nunnery for ever. (4) The Names of the Persons Contributers to the Design of Killing the King, and the establishing of the said Nunnery; as also the Particular Sums of Money by each of them respectively subscribed and given, (5) The cunning Contrivances of that Party by fraudulent Conveyances, to secure their Estates from Forfeiture to the King, if they were discovered to be engaged in the Plot, himself being Witness to one of them. (6) The Names of the Popish Priests known by him to have said Mass, or to be engaged in the Plot. With other material Passages relating to the Horrid Plot. Toghether with an Account of the Endeavours that were used by the Popish Party to stifle his Evidence. Both Printed for Tho. Simmons and Jacob Sampson in Ludgate-street, Price of each one Shilling.
