B3261A R230871 99899698 134573
THE Bloody Murtherers EXECUTED; OR, News from Fleet-Street. Being the Last Speech and Confessions OF The Two Persons Executed there On Friday the 22 of October, 1675. With an exact Account of all the Circumstances of their Murthering the Knight, Sir R. S. in White-Fryers. The Manner of their being Appre∣hended, and their Deportment in Newgate, from the time of their Condemnation, to their Execution. They were Removed to Hang in Irons, one on Finchly-Common, and the other on Sanford Hills, on Saturday the 23d. of Octob. 1675. With Allowance. Printed for William Powel. 1675.
An account of the crime and con∣fession of the two Persons hang∣ed in Fleet-Street. THere is nothing more false or extravagant than common fame; and therefore to pre∣vent the further spreading of untrue Re∣ports concerning this unhappy accident, it is now thought fit to make publique a more Impartial and perfect account thereof then has yet been ex∣posed to general view. The fact it self was of that Nature as scarce admits of any Extenuation, much less Apology, Murther being a Crime most heinons and abomi∣nable, not to be expiated, where wilfully Com∣mitted by any thing but the life of the offender: All Laws both Divine and humane centring in this most Just result, That he that sheds mans blood, by man shall his blood be shed:
The Gentleman upon whom this assassination was committed was a person of good worth, a handsome noble Estate, young in years, and like∣ly to have proved very useful and serviceable to his Countrey and Generation, his Family being so well known that I do not think it fit to stain his name by inferring it in a pamphlet; Let it suffice to say; That as he was a Knight by Ti∣tle and quality so he was of that clear courage and generosity, that he deserved a braver fate than to be thus clean destinely kill'd by surprize; The occasion of which was thus. This Knight and a friend of his being acciden∣tally in company at a Tavern in Fleet-street, these two Persons whose lives have now paid for their insolency, intruded into their room, and one of them creates a quarrel with the Knights Friend, pretending forty shillings due to him from his Brother as won of him at play, which he very rudely demanded of this stranger, who refusing to gratifie so unreasonable a request, high and very rough words arose from the over-swelling of their mutual passions, from Words, as too often is usual in such cases, the heat of their Spirit brought them to blows, wherein yet little harm was done on either side; they being quickly parted in the fray by the people of the house and others that there interposed. Hereupon these two persons now to suffer went way, but as it sadly appears, not being satisfied
resolved to way-lay them, more particularly to be revenged on this Knight, whose appearing re∣solutely in his friends behalf had defeated them of their expectations; and accordingly waited in the street till the others came forth, they follow∣ed them towards the back Gate of the Temple in White-Fryars, and then both of them with as lit∣tle generosity, as piety or regard to the Laws of God or Man, fell on the Knight on a suddam sheathing both their Swords in his body, and pur∣suing their thrusts even after he was down: he not having opportunity by reason of the unexpect∣ed surprize so much as to draw his sword. Leaving him dead there upon the place, the two Criminals considering what they had done, betook themselves to flight, and as is said immediately cross'd over the Water, but thinking themselves not secure about London, concluded to take their Iourney for refuge, yet wanting Horses and other conveniences for that purpose, and not daring to be seen abroad to provide any they were forced to make use of a friend, who 'tis probable knew nothing of the particulars of their danger to get such necessaries for them; It happened that Gen∣tleman that very day had a Tryal to be in Guild-Hall, and being plaintiff came in the morning to his Attorney, desiring of him to put off the Tryal, because he had two friends in a little danger that he must that day help to get out of the Town; The honest Attorney being called upon by the
other side to proceed to Tryal, acquainted them with what his Clyent said, and the particular oc∣casion which kept him absent, not imagining it to be any matter of secrecy. But by chance shall I say or rather providence, one that stood by and had been well acquainted with the murthered Gen∣tleman overhearing him, inquired who his Clyent was, suspecting these two persons to be the same they afterwards proved; and it appearing so up∣on the examination of the Clyent, and that they were gone towards Barnet, pursuit was made af∣ter them, who crossed the Countrey, and Rid by-roads, but yet not so secretly but still the hue and cry had notice of their motion, till at last they lodged them in a village, where getting of a Constable and comming with store of company to apprehend them, these seemingly unconcerned Gentlemen themselves look'd out at a Window, and ask'd the people what the matter was; and be∣ing told it was to apprehend persons suspected for the murther of a Knight at London they stood upon their guard, but being apprehended, and committed, and thence by due process of Law brought to London, and arraigned at the Old Bay∣ly, at the Sessions, the 13 of October 1675. where they insisted that the Fact was done le defendendo, and afterwards that it was onely Chance medley, or Manslaughter, being acted in heat of Blood upon a sudden fray or Rancounter; but the seve∣ral circumstances before mentioned being distinct∣ly
and fully proved against them, and that they made the second assault a good considerable time after the first quarrel, the Iury brought them in guilty of murther, and accordingly they received Sentence of death, as in such cases is usual, one∣ly because it might be a more a Warning, and make the greater impressions on the spirits of the wild Hectorian Gentlemen, wherewith this age and City too much abounds; it was thought fit by authority, that they should be hanged in Fleet-street as near as conveniently might be to the place where they did the fact. There were several addresses (as 'tis said) made for obtaining a pardon or reprieve for them, but the heinousness of the crime, the quality of the person kill'd, and many other circumstances pre∣vented that indulgence. After Sentence they behaved themselves in New∣gate with much moderation and seeming (I hope hearty and sincere] repentence; The Ordinary and other godly Ministers often attending them with Christian admonitions and exhortations for the eter∣nal good of their souls. The Day of Execution for the common priso∣ners was on Wednesday the 20. of October, at which time five 'condemned last Sessions for Housebreak∣ing Robbery and the like crimes suffered death at Tyburn; but these two persons had the date of their lives extended until Friday the 22 of this in∣stant October, and then suffered in Fleet-Street;
where vast multitudes of people were assembled to be spectators of the difmal spectacle. Some time before their death in prison they ac∣knowledged great sorrow for their ill spent lives, and particularly for the crime for which they were to dye; they confest from the time of the fray at the Tavern they had a murtherous intention against the Knight, but protested they had no malice a∣gainst him before. At the place of Execution they Desired very passionately all young Gentlemen to take Warning by their unhappy end of such rash actions, and in particular reckon'd up neglect of the Sabbath and Gameing as the main Original Sins that brought them to this ruine. Particularly Mr. S. was Noted to be very Penitent, often Admonishing Young Men to beware of a Debaucht and Desalute way of Living, too much addicted to by the youth of this Town: He said he was never in his Life before con∣cerned either as Accessary or Principal in any such Fact, though he had been in many Broyls, and Quarrels, yet thanked God that he alwayys Escaped without Blood shed until this unhappy business: He was very earnest in Prayer, and with Three Ministers, Mr. F. Mr. P. and Mr. — And also prayed heartily by himself. Mr. J. was a Person which seemed more Cheerful and un∣daunted in his condition, though it is said he hath behaved himself very Christian-like since his Condemnation, until his Execution, before which he said little or nothing to the People. And so after certain Prayers and private discourse with some friends, they were executed according to Law. Mr. S. first, and Mr. J. about half an hour after. FINIS.
