B386 R223496 99899907 135601
CAPT. BADILEY'S ANSWER ƲNTO Capt. Appleton's Remonstrance, Given in To his Excellency the Lord Generall CROMWELL, And the Right Honourable, the COUNCEL OF STATE. AS ALSO: His true RELATION of what past between the Great Duke of Tuscany, and himselfe. WITH Sundry Letters, Affidavits, and Certi∣ficates, discovering the Fallaciousnesse of the said Pamphlet, called A Remonstrance of the Fight in Legorn-Road, between the English, and the Dutch. With some other particulars, not impertinent to the purpose, of clearing up the TRƲTH. LONDON, Printed by M. Simmons, in Aldersgate-street. 1653.
AN APPENDIX, Shewing the Chief Heads, and Principall Things in the ensuing Answer. For the right understanding of such as would in brief be ascertained of the Truth. PAge the 9 shewes how the dealing of the Remonstrancer and his Associ∣ates, was like unto them that tri∣umph before Victory, but Capt. Ba∣diley was encourag'd with other thoughts in his home-ward way. P. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. shewing how little reason the above-said had to bespatter their Commander unjustly, if multiplyed acts of civility would have wrought upon them. Part of p. 19. shewes Mr. Longlands expression and the Remonstrancers, differ greatly about Mr. Red∣ding. P. 20. Mr. Longland and the deceased Cap. Wood are vindicated, from Capt. Badileys experience of their faithfulnes.
P. 21. something is said to shew the Remonstrancers malice, in saying, The Phenix Frigot was not re∣gained by his Order, and the Great Duke had not com∣plained of that, if Capt Appleton had not meddled with his Centinell. P. 22. it's cleered up to rationall men, the regaining of the Phenix Friggot was no disturbance to the Great Dukes Port. P. 23, 24. the Remonstrancers Fallaciousnesse is discovered, in saying There was a Treaty between the English and the Dutch, as also the impertinacy of his endeavours to acquit the Great Duke from any blame, with some observable notes. Part of p. 21. and 25. declaring how marvellously it pleased the Lord alone, to preserve a confiderable part of the Nations strength and wealth from the Enemy. P. 26. shewes how well the weak endeavours of such of the States servants, were resented by the authority of England, and withall there is expressed what unworthy scurrilous language was given such not long after, occasi∣oned by the fallacious expressions of the Remonstrancer and his Associates, in their Letters. P. 27, 28, 29. relate how it was not Capt. Badileys ordering Capt. Appleton to hasten out to him as for life, but his breach of a first and second Order or directi∣on, that next to a hand of God against them, proved the ruine of that Squadron: And Capt. Wood at his going out of the world confest, Capt. Badiley was not at all to blame, but themselves, in not following Order. P. 30, 31. sheweth that Capt. Badiley did hasten in to the reliefe of them who rashly and indiscreetly came out of Legorn Mould, with all the sailc was possible, un∣till he came within Musket shot, and then inregard his
ship would not worke, could not get on bord the Leopard, or the Enemy on bord her, untill it was judged too late, if it had been to save the Nation. P. 31, 32, 33. sheweth not the least of Capt. Apple∣ton's failings, if it was, as he expresseth in his Remon∣strance. P. 33.34, 35, 36. declares the fallaciousnesse of that part of his Remonstrance, which saith Capt. Ell, and Capt. Fisher would have relieved the Leopard, but Capt. Badiley would not doe that worke himselfe, nor suffer them to doe it. P. 37, 38. doth manifest the great ridiculousnesse and vanity in the Remonstrance, to relate what a company of drunken Eum-boat men, or he knowes not who, said to the reproach of Capt. Badiley, upon his leaving Le∣gorn as he did, thinking thereby to disparage him. P. 38, 39. shew what Capt. Badiley's endeavours have been, and in the close he somewhat passionately de∣sireth that justice and right may take place in this and all other cases, from a Scripture consideration; his meaning is, that if he have done wrong to the Remon∣strancer, or any others, he may be a sufferer for it; but if the Remonstrancer hath heft dirt in the face of the States faithfull Servants most wrongfully, he may be made to know it, that others after his example, may not presume to doe amisse, contrary to Command, and then bespatter their Commanders, in hopes to escape the lash by such a Matchevillian practice. P. 40, 41, 42. contain a brief abstract, and what may justly be termed the causes of the great disaster be∣fell that Squadron that was coop'd up so long in Legorn. Mould. P. 43, 44. speaks out how much Capt. Badiley was
sensible of the affront cast on him in print, and that by the Printer to the Parliament, as if they had father'd it; and in all humble manner he closeth with a word of advise, least such further mischief might follow upon it, as may be soener discerned then remedied. P. 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50. containing five Letters from Mr. Charls Longland, who therein declares the backwardnesse of the ships in Legorn-Mould, to come out thence, and that if Capt. Appleton would have ta∣ken his Counsell, our conjunction had been effected ere the Dutch first Engaged us. P. 51, 52, 53, 54, and again 47, 48, 49, 50. con∣taine six Letters from Consull Reed, declaring how ex∣ceeding importunate he had been with Capt. Appleton, and also with Capt. Sea man and others, to goe out to as∣sist Capt: Badiley about Porto Longone, but no means could prevail with them. P. 51, 52. are two Letters from Capt: Wood, and two from Capt: Cox, declaring the backwardnesse of our States ships, and some of our Merchant men, to come out of the Mould, and withall complaining of some who retarded the service, and betrayed our designe on the Phenix Frigot. P. 53, 54, 55. containe three letters from C: Apple∣ton, telling C. Badiley in his first, he was warping out of Mould, to come away to the assistance of the ships at Longone, but came not, although in his second letter he saith the Dutch confessed as there had not been a greater Sea-fight in their remembrance, so they were as much shattered as those at Porto Longone. P. 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61. are five letters more from Mr: Longland, shewing not onely how we were troubled with false brethren, but how gallant an opportunity was
lost by our ships not coming from Naples, to Porto Longone, and how cauteous he was about impresting of Merchants ships into the service, had not the necessity of their occasions required it: And withall he declares how much he was troubled for Capt. Appleton's imprison∣ment, wherefore he did not triumph in it. P. 62, 63. containe two letters from Capt. Gilbert Roop, declaring no man would please him to command the Mary, but Ben: Fisher. P. 63, 64. containe Capt. Cox's letter, shewing that bad weather forc't him from Naples to Messina, with the Harry-Bonaventure. P. 64, 65. containe the copy of Capt. Badiley's letter to Capt: Appleton, March 1 bidding him to hasten to him as for life, if the Dutch came out to engage with the wind off shore, although afterwards he was ordered to the contrary. P. 66. containes a letter from Mr. Longland, tel∣ling Capt: Badiley the Great Duke would not let loose the Dutch he had in prison, unlesse Van Gallen would agree to come out, and fight us without the Malora. P. 67, 68. shew first the contents of Capt. Badiley's letter to Capt. Appleton, March 3. at four a clock in the morning, if his memory doe not greatly faile, which ap∣peares by his Answer annexed, at 4 a clocke in the after∣noone. P. 69. containes Mr. Longlands last letter before our Engagement, causing some to doubt we were dealt withall as those that were betrayed. P. 70. containes the Resolves of Counsels of Warre, which is not handsome to publish, but as we use to say, Necessity hath no law, without it some men will not know where to lay the blame. The Author hereof supposes
he is more troubled then any man in Engl: to think that, such things as these should come to publick view. P. 71, 72. Two Letters under Mr. Longland's hande shewing the issue of the Tragedy neer Legorn-road, the 4 of March last, and the scurrilous language and great abuse of C: Seaman, to whom he had been so courteous. P. 73, unto 92. Certain Affidavits clearing up the truth to all rationall men. P. 93 A relation about C. John Wadsworth. P. 94. C. Wadsworth's Letter to M: Longland, com∣plaining of the failings of the Commanders of the Fri∣gots, but of none else-where; And a Certificate from one, which might have been signed by others. P. 96. shewing C: Badiley very moderate in relating how the Phenix was lost. P. 97. shewing how C: Wadsworth's folly caused complaints to be made of him. P. 98, 99. shewing that by his Letter and otherwis as by Certificate appeareth, he sully acquitteth C: Badi∣ley from any blame. P. 99, 100. The first Letter from the Great Duke, af∣ter the regaining of the Frigot, complaining of C: Apple∣ton's assaulting his Centinell, but nothing of the Fenix. P. 110. Something is spoken in answer to Signior Mountemagnies relation. P. 101, 102, 103. containes the Great Dukes Letter of Credence, with what discourse past between Signior Mountemagnie the Great Dukes Secretary, and C: Badi∣ley, near Legorn, about the end of Feb: last. P. 104. containes a Letter from C: Badiley, to the Great Duke, occasioned by the insolency of the Dutch. P. 105, 106. conteins his reasons for writing that Letter, and an Answer from the Great Duke translated.
P. 107, 108, 109. containing the last discourse C: Badiley had with the Great Dukes Secretary, and how earnest he was for 30 or 40 dayes time, untill our ships could be got together. P. 110, 111. containing his last letter to the Great Duke, wherein he earnestly desires that he would be plea∣sed to move that as well for keeping his Port unviolated, as for other reasons, our conjunction with the Squadron in Legorn might be effected. P. 112, 113, 114. containes certaine propositions hee made for bringing about what is before denoted, with his reasons for it. P. 114, 115. containes the Great Dukes last letter to him, telling him he might have staid till the 8 or 18 of March, before the ships in Legorn-Mould went forth, if wind and weather hindred, that we could not come neer one another sooner, and no other liberty could be ob∣tained. P. 116, 117. Some fallacious passages in Sig: Moun∣temaignes Relation, are answered: And a notable disco∣very of truth, by way of Query p. 118. where the blame may be justly laid, in regard of the late disaster. P. 119, 120. shewing the issue of what refers to the Great Duke, with an Apology for C: Badiley, least a∣ny thing hath slipt his pen that should be distastfull, and withall in the close there is a short expression, shewing his amazement, that after his great endeavours for publick good, he is by the Printer to the Parliament, ren∣dred lyable to contempt. ☞ In most of these Books is Capt. Badiley's Answer to Capt. Seaman, Capt. Ell, and Cap. Fishers Declarations.
Captain Badeley's Answer, unto Captain Appleton's Remonstrance, or (at least) that part which he judgeth concerns him in any kind to Answer: as it was given in to the Committee of Scoth and Irish Affairs, with very little Digression. IT's more then three months since I came home, out of the Mediteranian Sea; and none, high or low, hath said to my face, this or that hath bin il done by you, whilst you were on the said Voiage. Yet about the time that Captain Appleton's Remonstrance was given in, as those that triumph before Victory, news must needs be carried to my Relations in Fa∣mily (whilest I was absent) a file of Musquetiers was provi∣ded for me, to carry me to the Power; another friend com∣ing to my house, said, the Watermen upon the Thames gave out I was gone to prison, and this Report was raised about Chattam, and the Exchange: But when I heard thereof, and that some were troubled at it, I answered; One that is accused of theft, and never plaid the Thief, either directly, or indirectly, he knows not wherein he is guilty: So I know not of any offence to the State, that I can be made capable of. Surely therefore, before they do such a thing, they will tell me for what, and wherefore it is. I shal now crave leave to make a little further deviation, before I come to answer the contrivers of the Remonstrance, who have thereby kindled a fire which is like to end I know not where. And in the first place I shall lay down before you, how I have laboured to deliver, and by multiplyed acts of civility have endeavoured to ingage these who appear a∣gainst me.
He saith in his Remonstrance, whereas his sicknes and Cap∣tain Witherages death was cause of his not coming forth to assist me (although I wanted not Information enough) as by the Letters appeareth, which herewith I present you, how backward he was to come out, and how unready the Ships were to do service: so that among others, his great Friend, the great Duke, that knew very wel how he did, expounded it not to be sickness, but treachery; for who knows not, that a man may draw up a Commission in an hour, and he might have done it as well then for Captain Line, as he did after∣wards to jostle out Captain Cox: And if a man have an Ague, or some such smal distemper, an Engagement with the Ene∣mie may shake it off sooner, then a Cartooch of Grego. But if it would not, must therefore such a peice of the Nations strength lye still, when there is an opportunity of doing ser∣vice, and in his power either to put in another man, or else to sit in his Gabbin and order others to do the business? And although in his first, second, and third Letter he mentions nothing of his sickness to me; and though Mr. Morgan Reed the Nations Consul, laments to me greatly of his dulness in several Letters within a few days one after another; as also Mr. Longland the States publick Minister in sundrie of his Letters, saying, he had little or no mind to do service for the State; and in one Letter saith, If Captain Appleton would have followed his counsel (rather then the advice of others, the chief of which he declares in some Letters, made open defiance to the State) we bad joyn'd our Forces, and so I had not been left to fight the Enemie all alone; and notwith∣standing much more wrote against him by Captain Wood and others, for his backwardness; yet for all this, when I wrote to the Higher Powers about him, I did, as it were, take a Mantle and cover his failings, and miscarriages, using but his own words, saying, I beleeved, or judg'd his sickness and Captain Withrages death retarded the coming out of those Ships to our assistance Again, when he did that filly act in his own person, fetching a Dutch man out of the Great Dukes Centinels house, because he rescued the Fleming: Up∣on which came all our trouble about the Phaenix, as saith
Mr. Longland by his Letters; and he that will open his eyes, may see, that if that foolish business had not been, there had not an extraordinary Messenger been sent from the great Duke into England, complaining of him; and consequently there had not been so much discontent given him in the An∣swer by that person, as made the Dukes Secretary say pub∣lickly on the place of Legorn, the Parliament of England had sent his Master so much poyson when they sent him that Letter. I say, notwithstanding this, when as he was sent to me as a Prisoner to Porte Longone, that I might do justice on him, really pittying his Condition, I desired some of our Cap∣tains to wait on him from Porta Feraro; and when he came, although somthing was done in a private civil way, that the Duke might not be greatly enrag'd, when as we should ap∣pear to mock at his justice; yet he knows I did effectually end eavour to help him out of that trouble; and when he had made his Remonstrance to send home, wherein he weakly declared his men forc'd him ashore to the Mould, I hope him to make a better Remonstrance then so; and if he had come to acknowledg'd my Favours, I might have helpt him to draw up one now, according to the tenor of Truth more to his re∣pute then this, that is ful of horrid Falsities; If I had direct∣ed him to write thus, it had been according to very truth, Briefly. When God was pleased to give us a very good opportu∣nity, insomuch that we might have relieved C. Badiley, if we had had hearts to have been unanimous, and had vigorous∣ly prosecuted it, or had wils to take his counsel in coming out in the night, as we ought to have done; but omitting it, the Lord was pleased so to order it, by the alteration of Winds which are in his fists, that when the said Badiley would have reliev'd us, and have cleer'd us of Legorn, he was made unable and uncapable of hindring, or preventing our Ruin and Destruction. To come to the business of Legorn, when he came thither in his home-ward way, at the time when the great Duke had newly declared we must be gone to engage the Enemie, let
the ods be what it will; I say seeing me now busie in fitting the Ship with all Accoutrements for an engagement, and filing a Vessel with Lumber to make the Ships ready and clear, when as he was making up his things to go for Genoa, for his friend. The great Duke declared he should not stay in his Territories, or come ashore into his Town, he comes to me; Oh saith he, this almost breaks my heart, to think that you should go to fight, and I go home to answer what is al∣ledg'd against me. My Lieutenant also having heard him sadly express, he knew they sent for him into England to que∣stion his life: Truly I could not but pity the man, and an∣swered, Captain Appleton, it's a dangerous thing to dally with the Commands of the Councel of State: But since the Captain of this Ship, Jonas Pool, cannot be sent for from Ve∣nice in any time, if you be real indeed, and that your peace can be made with the great Duke, I will be your friend to further you all that lyeth in my power, and to that purpose Mr. Longland and a Councell of Officers shall be called toge∣ther to consider of the business; and there upon Debate it was concluded in the Affirmative, if he could procure that leave as before: Oh but then how should he get that leave! I answered not (at that private meeting or Councell) as he in his Remonstrance (like some Chancery Bils) saith, it was then agreed he should give six hundred Dollars to buy his peace, which is a most notorious untruth, there was not one word about Dollars spoken there; but I said to him, your best way in my opinion was, to confer with Consul Read, who hath great friends at Court, and it may be by means of a little greace to his Highness Secretary, or Master of the Ceremonies, and upon your humble submission he wil remit your offence; and it seems it was so effected after I was gone: but if it cost him more to do it then his feasting with the great Duke was worth, it will shew he hath been as simple as he is now malitious. In all ages some there be that will reward others evil for their good; I think it would have been a good business for this man, who feared the questioning of his life at home, to have an opportunity given him, that by his Gal∣lantry in Service, he might have done somthing to remove
that fear, as also the dis-reputation, which otherwise he could not. And then as to his Engagement at last, wheras no effectu∣al course was taken to rid himself of those ships that were on board him, after our example in the Paragon, who notwith∣standing a great number of men were killed and wounded on the upper Deck and else-where, to the number of about fourscore, so that all was ordered to withdraw thence but the Commander himself; and howbeit almost as many were run down into holes, the Enemy being bord and bord: and although the Fleet had all left her without any encourage∣ment, yet three or fourscore men was got up to bear away the Enemy by main force of hand; how much more should they have done it, that had so much encouragement as their Admiral, and other their friends, to be within two or three ships length of them; and although I was so neer as about Musket-shot off, about half an hour together, not seeing a Man, stirring upon the upper Deck, I think it a great fault in a wise Vice-admiral, what ever it be thought of the Remon∣strancer: And although an Anchor was not let go, which was the duty of his place to have order'd, for so the Ship in all likelihood had been sav'd. Nay, as there is good testimony, although I had heard, when my Lieutenant was on bord the Leopard, to tell him how effectually I recommended to him the coming forth; but they neglecting it, his Mate Wrighting∣ton, whom he highly commended to me, I am sure a man that knew when it was a fit season for them to sail, he was at their neglect so transported in passion, that he either stampt, or tore his hair, or used some such gesture, saying, These cursed men (meaning the Captains) are besotted, or bewitched to this Mould; why cannot we go to Sea now we have so gallant an opportu∣nity, and that the Admiral sends for us. I say, that neither in my Narrative, nor else how I should cry up this mans faults, but rather take a garment to cover them, when as I say he was forward to come out, but over∣powred by others, forbore it; yet after all, that a mans heart should be so like a Forge, to blow up coals of Mischief and Falsities on another (which are like to fall on himself) could
hardly have been imagined, but that Experience shews it. One word more of the Witnesses, by many Letters that came to Porte Longone from Mr. Longland, Consul Read, and others, wherein was Complaints upon Complaints of Cap∣tain Seaman, and another. I say, whatsoever reports came from Legorn concerning their backwardness, or rather stub∣bornness to come out with others of their Neighbours under the same obligation with themselves, as we use to say; he that hath but half an eye in his head, and one dram of ho∣nesty in his heart, knowing what then past, as that there was but four ships of the Enemies in Legorn Road; and as Cap∣tain Appleton himself confesseth, the Enemie that fought us was shattered as much as we: if they had come to our Relief, we must have been (in humane appearance) in England with the Merchants great Cargazon long before the last yeer end∣ed. And yet I wrote not any thing to those in Power or any others that I remember against these by name, that were the cause of so much loss and damage as the Nation received thereby. Again, about the beginning of February last, seeing a stout gale of wind of the shore, it was much on my heart to go out at that time; and seeing but nine of the Enemies men of War in the Road, and there could be expected but two more in the Offing: A Councel of Officers being called, the Question was carried from me, and answered in the Negative; and why Captain Seaman, said he? it's the way to lose three or four good ships, shewing cowardize enough I think. It was replyed, not so I trow; here is besides others the Leopard, the Bonaventure, the Sampson; and since I have gone to Sea, any one of these would not fear half a dozen, or the whole num∣ber of these our Antagonists; but what said Mr. Longland to me, you do but strive against the Stream, in seeking to get out these Ships, they think they shall have their pay, and then it's no matter what service they do; you must get Ships else-where to fetch them hence, if you will make any use of them; whereupon I wrote (upon that very score) somewhat passionately unto the Councel of State among other matters, the ensuing passage.
Right Honorable, THe Merchant Ships imprested will be little better man'd, then when they carried Merchants goods: However, if it pleaseth God to open a way that the greatest part of our Ships can joyn; and that it will not be judged too great a presumption, I shall endeavour to fight the Enemie, that the ships in the Mould may be freed hence. I do not in the least doubt, but your Honors hath the Common wealths affairs in these parts under consideration: Yet I beseech you give me leave humbly to minde you, that some assistance (when least) what is signified in former Letters, seems to be most necessarie, not onely in re∣spect to the Honour of our Nation, which is so much concerned in this Transaction, at such a place especially, which in some sense may be called the Centre of Trade, upon which is the eye of all Europe: But it is re∣ported P. Rupert may be here every day with his prizes from the West Indies, according to his own intimation by Letters; and if he comes before our conjunction, what disorder our Marriners may be put into, cannot be fore-seen, besides that other inconvenience. Ordinarily mens spirits are debased to lie so long together without any succour from their friends. I humbly conceive, if half a dozen Ships or Frigots had been sent out to us, when it was first known in what a condition we were in after our dispute, I do verily beleeve we had been in Eng∣land, peradventure to have assisted in the last Engagement against the Dutch, whereas now a considerable part of the Nations strength lyeth at no easie expence, to little or no purpose. I also wrote to the Generals of the Fleet, and the Copy of that Letter is hereunto annexed. Honorable, SInce sending forward unto your Honours the Originall to the fore∣going Copy, there hath been various Transactions, which cals for immediate Consideration from such as sit at stern: Hearing you are like to be at Sea before this comes to band, I thought it my duty to write my mind freely and largely unto the Councel of State, that in plain English (by one means or another) their Affairs in these Parts may be rightly understood; here inclosed is the Copy of my late Letters to them, unto which I humbly refer you for advice of such Occurrances as pas∣seth among us in the Mediterranean Sea, not doubting but your Ho∣nours will put to your helping hands for what shall be judged most
necessary to be done, not only in reference to the freedom, and reprievall of some of your old servants from out of a labyrinth of Sares but chief∣ly in regard of the honour of the Nation, which is so much concern'd in point of our supplyment, with some additional strength. I wrote also another Letter to a Friend at White-Hall, to this effect: I wish it may not so fall out, that the State had better give a hundred thousand pounds a ship, and ten pounds a month to a Marriner, then that their ships should lie in Legorn Mould so long, without any relief. And further; however I wrote not a word against this man, but when I came to speak of the Sampson in my Narra∣tive, hid all his failings, saying; That the Ship being taken abackstaies, the Enemy had opportunity to fire her: yet Mr. Longland, (who I beleeve would write no such thing without good proof) saith, it's no such matter; The Captain and Company run under hatches, and did not look after trim∣ming of Sails as they should have done. But now, as if he were no small Proficient in Machiavels School, in hopes that something may stick, writes hideous things against me, that made some of his Kindred talk of coming to Execution Dock, of those that with-drew from Legorn; and since his return for England, his malice hath been let out to the full, charging me with horrid falficies. Capt. Marsh another of the Witnesses, knoweth very well that when his great failings hath much transported me, so after keen arguments in private, and promise of amend∣ment, I have been civil towards him: And though he hath put his hand to Capt. Appletons Remonstrance, that would make men believe Mr. Longland were one of the veriest Vil∣lains in the world; yet coming to my house since his coming home, he told me he could not but vindicate Mr. Longland, when he was spoke against, and therefore in their home∣ward way, he was call'd by the rest, Longlands creature, but it may be this man was meerly drawn in, and therefore I pitie him. Again Captain Ell, after he had presumptuously left the Convoy, where all care was taken for his preservation, once and again, being come to Messina, upon his acknowledgment
I pass'd those things by. Four dayes after, in Circa, being a∣bout ten leagues from Zant, he tels me he had a mind to be gone for Smirna; but I answered, have a care what you do, lest you loose the ship your friends have intrusted you with∣all, I must carry my business before me, in regard the Harry stops there: but I intend not to Anchor there, if the wind be fair. Well saith he, I will speak with you again, yet did not, slipping away in the night. But though pragmaticall self-conceitedness was judg'd a higher Tower then the Convoy, it was a thousand to one it had not occasioned his Mer∣chant, and Owners to bid farewell to their Ship and Goods, for had not a strong gale of wind brought him in after us to Zant, four Turks Men of War had call'd him to an account, This made me hint to the Committee of the Navy, how the Convoy was slighted, as it was by him unto the very last. But to see how things are carried by way of Retalio, he and others wel know, and the Levant Companies purses hea¦viest feel. Yet being he had embraced the States Service afterwards, I advis'd him, no man should be more willing to passe by prejudicatednesse of opinion against him, then my self, as may appear by my Letters to him: However, after he had been in the service of the State a few weeks, I sent him an Order to go for Naples, or Mssna: yet he stayes, putting the State unto charge of some hundred pounds, which fault he laid on his men; and although I have heard the contrary, yet I winked at that time, and hitherto mentioned nothing of it. Next, in our Engagement at Legorn, such was his failing, that I told him and others, at our very next meeting, after we came thence: Those that had nimble ships were extream∣ly too blame: But said I, since we are home-ward bound, and I know not what eminent Service we may be call'd too for the Honour of the Nation, I will not cause contention now among you; but where ever there hath been a failing, let every man amend one next time, and one would have thought it would have wrought upon ingenious spirits. But after we came to the Bay of Legos, I sent a Warrant
to him to spare two men, exchange of 2 Dutch men, to help man the Augustine Prize, yet he absolutely refused it, al∣though earnestly advis'd to the contrary by Captains, and others about him, that told him he could never answer it, yet peremptorily he denied it. Whereupon I bid the Cap∣tains, and others about me to take notice; he and his Con∣sort Fisher, that made the like refusal, were discharg'd out of the States service, and that I would never give them any kind of order more, untill we came to the Generals, where their contempt should be laid open, and I did forbear know∣ing any of them a long time. But at length through perswasion of friends, and their own sollicitations in publique and private, to forgive that one failing, what amendment should I see, I was prevailed with all to lay aside prejudice. Although I suppose by this time, that he very well knew that howbeit upon his own quarter Deck (as some prag∣maticall men in former times have done) he might cry, Am not I king now? am not I King now? Yet by the Laws Martial, which were either made to be put in Execution, or to be like Bug-bears which are to skare children, all the Councel he can find in England, can hardly save him from a most se∣vere sentence for his contempt. Again, coming into the Downes, this Captain Ell comes to me in the Evening, desiring he might have leave to go to Canterburie to meet his Wife; yea said I, go, but pray be here speedily, I know not what Orders may come from Au∣thority, nor who suddenly may appear on the back of the Goodwin to engage us; In words he would comply, and re∣turn accordingly; but was wanting thence ten dayes, and upward, as if (at least) he were a Prince, not to be accomp∣table for any disservice to the State, which caused his men to mutiny, when his Ship was ordered to go to Sea. All this time I wrote nothing against him. Next they bring in one Whiting, that was heard say so, and so, it may be it is true as spoken from him; but I deny that I ever spake such things, neither is there any reason or sense for why I should. But admit the latter had been true,
it would have shewed ingratitude enough in him, a man whose life and freeedom I had first beg'd of the great Duke, and then at my request his estate, and his worthy and grate∣full friends (by the rule of contraries) to the value of 3000 crowns, and the ship, all sentenc'd for lost, and confiscated, were reprieved, remitted, and given back to them; at length being made Commander of the Fire-ship, his wretched cowardize in not prosecuting the work he was sent about, with Main-saile and all: which had he done, having such an opportunity as he had upon the Dutch Admiral, for ought I know it might have turn'd the day; and then the base lea∣ving the next man to himself behind him, would have caus'd many a man to have brought him home in chains, and tryed him for his life; and if so, I know not what would have become of him. In fine, I have alwayes endeavour'd to govern with sere∣nity, mixt with some authority, and rather by multiplyed acts of Civility have laboured to engage them, then by ri∣gorousnesse to dishearten them: and let whose will say to the contrary, I have been alwayes ready to cry up to the height in any service of worth in them, and have covered all fail∣ings at the same time, as my Letters to Authority do witnesse for me. But we see not only many of the Proverbs fulfill'd now and then, but old Stories. Wash some creatures ears with never so much water, and they will be no whiter, heap coals of love on some, and they will turn back coals of fire on you, when it lies in their power, Traytor or any thing they wil not baulk at. But not to be tedious in rehearsing ingratitude, I shall re∣turn to the Remonstrance, where I find Mr. Redding magnified in an employment he was sent on by M. Longland, who with the deceased Captain Wood, is vilified to some purpose. A word of the former, of whom Ditto, Mr. Longland en∣form'd me something, as that Captain Appleton should create him Agent, and that he went to Florence contrary to his ad∣vice, and at the great Dukes Court he made Master Longland be look'd on as an Impostor, which forc'd him to send away
from Florence in the night for his Commission. I also heard him say, that for ranting in Naples, wherein he and his Com∣pany kill'd a Child, or for shooting at the Justice, he was ar∣raign'd at the Bar on life and death; yet by crying out he was forc'd to fly from his Country in his Kings Cause, it fell out so, that he was sav'd on a general day of grace, and set free with fellons, and murtherers: but as for service for the Common wealth of England, I heard of none he did; yet if by a day of grace of greater advantage, his spirit is changed, that now he shal think of doing it in good earnest, I shall be very glad. Next a word of Mr. Longland, one of the abused persons in charity I can do no lesse then speak out a word of my knowledg concerning him, and the dead: It's 16. yeers since I knew Mr: Longland first at Aleppo, and as he then shewed himself as grave; sober, discreet, and as religious a Mer∣chant as ever I met withall abroard: So ever since the Parli∣ament begun (oppose who would) as there wanted not Scoffers, and Opposers enough in those parts, he would still justifie the Parliaments proceedings, and the Armies, as by very many Letters of his appeareth altogether as freely and effectually before, as since he was the States servant: so that although they might have Friends abroad, I am confident they had no man like minded, that hath made it so much his study to advance the Benefit, and honour of the Nation, and good people in his restlesse motions that way, and to rejoyce at their good successe, as if he were to be look'd up∣on more like a States-man, then a Merchant; and he deser∣ved not the imputation of such a wicked wretch, as would betray the States Captains into Prison, and send away a Post into England to complain of the Remonstrancer; and then for Captain Appleton to say the deceased Cap: Wood tri∣umphed over him, I dare say is a most false thing, in that there are many can testifie he was a man restlesse to serve o∣ther Captains in their necessities (who had shewed them selves his great enemies) in so high a nature, as that the like can hardly be parallel'd, and so much I can further say for the said Captain, according to what Mr: Longland denotes
(as his opinion) in his Letter to me at my first coming into Porto Lon∣gone, he was a man more readier to serve the State, then such as eat their bread, before ever he entred into the States service to receive their pay, not only in taking care to hasten Ammunition, and other things to me at my first harbouring in Longone, but otherwise. And if Captain Apple∣ton, and Captain Seaman, the letter of which struck him as I have heard, for expressing his zeal to the States Affairs; I say, had they hearkned to his counsel, or those keen Arguments he us'd to draw them forth to my assistance in Porto Longone; at my first coming there, we had been in Eng∣land long since; and all along to his death, he was a faithful, stout ho∣nest man, and one that to his last breath would acknowledg their de∣struction was of themselves, they did not follow Order, and went out too soon in the morning, being they went not in the night. But again to the Remonstrance: Whereas he saith, that he stir'd about taking the Phaenix Frigot by my order, if I forget not, that will prove very false, because he had hindred it once before, and so I was minded to make no further use of him in that businesse, yet I do not deny, but that (without giving disturbance to the Dukes Port) I ordered that she should be stollen away from the drunken Dutch, and to that purpose I picked out (at was Capt: Cox his desire) some chief persons: and ha∣ving encouraged them all that lay in my power, I sent them away a∣bout it, and at the time it might have taken place, I went on the moun∣tains to see her steal away, at my return being certainly inform'd how it had taken effect, to the joy of my heart, being confident it was as good a piece of service as could be done the Nation at that time: And so the Councel of State esteemed it, when they were pleas'd to give Mr. Longland, and my self thanks for it: And truly if such service meet with no kind of esteem, such an ill Consequence may follow, as that those that eat the States bread, will turn as very Drones as their hearts can desire, who are on the other side. And Cap. Appleton well knoweth; if not, I am sure I have heard, at first the great Duke commended the Exploit, saying the Turks had stole her away from the drunken Flemmings, whilst they minded their bu∣sinesse no better, and all seemed to be covered, so that in many dayes after, the Duke sent me not a word about it; and it's judg'd (by pru∣dent men) he would never have taken notice of it as a disturbance to his Port; had not that foolish childish act of Captain Appletons in taking the Dutch man out of his Centinels house, with his own hand (as if he had been Lord Paramount in that Countrey) highly incens'd him, as indeed it would any other Prince, or State in the like Case.
And when the great Duke did dispatch away a Messenger to me to la∣ment that high affront in his first Letter, as one in whom the thoughts about the Phaenix Frigot were utterly extinct, and drownd, he mentions not a word to me of that business, until his second Letter came long af∣ter, and then I could do lesse then own it, and labour to justifie it, as I can do now more fully. And I could wish also, that Authority had been pleased to have done it more effectually in their Answer, and not leave Mr. Longland, and my self (their Servants) in some kind of difficulty, or shame upon us about it. For I fear it opened a gap to some further trouble. Now to prove that the said Act was no disturbance or affront to his Port (or at least) ought not to have been esteemed so without great par∣tiality, it is clearly thus, against which (I believe) there can be no rati∣onal Objection. Some weeks before the Phaenix was surprized, a smal English ship bound for Barbary, comes out of the Mould, and was shot at by the Dutch men of War, with divers shot, and they afterwards chas'd her; now if the great Duke accounted that no disturbance, so as to make a publick com∣plaint, by imprisoning the Captains, denying them provisions, or by sending an extraordinary Messenger into Holland. Then he ought not to account Capt. Cox slipping away with the Frigot (after the drunken fit of the Dutch was over) in such a manner as that the vessel (being far without shot of his Cannons, when the attempt was made) did get a∣way, and yet not discerned by his people from the shore, to be any af∣front, or disturbance at all to his Port. But if it be objected here, they did the Duke service therein, in regard it was contrary to his Laws that a Ship should carry Lead to Barbary: I answer, they might have acquainted him with it while she was in his Cubert, or in the Mould, and not let him know of it afterwards by the ratling of their shot. And thus I have answered the Remonstrancer in that particular, wherein peradventure he hop'd I would have come under the Lash of Justice for breach of Orders; but he is not so secret in lay∣ing the plots of his malice, but it may be as openly discovered. Again, the next thing mentioned at his coming to Legorn the last time is, That the Dukes Secretary, my self, and the Dutch had concluded to Fight; A pretty story, that made me smile, though malice enough lye under these sinders; but as cunningly as the Remonstrance is drest up, the knots about it are not so tied, but a little skill and honesty is able to un∣do them all, and make the filthiness that is underneath, to be sufficient∣ly discovered. I know there was a Treaty, if you will have it call'd so,
between the Dukes Secretary, Mr. Longland, and my self, as there was it may be the same between the Dutch, and that Secretary, but to say be∣tween us three was a Treaty, is a horridfalsity, or much less, that it was concluded amongst us to Fight the Dutch, and yet the searcher of hearts must be appealed unto in this thing, amongst other falsities, as if they were very truth; Great impiety, and God may be a swifter witness against false Swearers, then they are aware of. One would wonder to see how the Great Dukes failings should all be covered by Cap. Appleton, whose name he could not mention, except with a scorn, but that we know by an old practice, Two arch enemies wil make friends to bring about their ends upon those that are faithful There's not a man or Boy in the Fleet, but must needs take notice, that the Great Duke thrust us out of his Port, and that after all means had been used for the gaining of thirty days time, until our Venice ships that had cost the State of England so vast an Expence, came up to our Assistance, insomuch that Mr. Longland and my self, proffered the Great Dukes Secretary as much money as the Phaenix Frigot was worth, to give the Dutch, or do what he would withall, and although he knows thereupon, what a Speech I made in the face of each Ships Company, saying, our condition was much like those Leapers we read of: The Great Duke commanded us to be gone hence in ten dayes time, and if not, here are more Guns brought down (for ought I could perceive) to expiate our Destruction; so that if we stay any longer we must perish, and if we go forth, we can do no more; wherefore as Gods providence had put us on such necessitous service, so I hop'd our sins should not hinder his High appearance with us in it; & the rise I had from thence, to stir them up to quit themselves like Englishmen, was not unknown. And though he very well knoweth in the steerage of every ship it was pasted up, to this effect, That whereas the Great Dake had required us to go thence in so short a time, each individual man, as wel Captains as others, were therefore required to give their attendance to their res∣pective Shipt, and not to go thence on shoar upon any terms, without speciall leave, as they would answer the contrary at their perils, &c. And moreover, though he very well knew the Duke had an opportu∣nity to procure our Conjunction (or at least) to have caus'd our Enemy to have gone out, and Fought us in the Sea, yet slighted it, & at length set at liberty the Dutch Captains, and many of their Marriners, which he had in Prison, & though our Ships were taken very near the Mould head, shoots not a shot in their defence; yet notwithstanding all this, Capt. Appleton takes no notice of it, as if he would Petition him for the
money back again, which he saith it cost him formerly to procure his pardon. But it may be some wil say (as I have heard they have already) the Great Duke is a Worthy and Magnificent Prince, and wrote you, that the ships might stay longer in his Mould, if there was a necessity for it. I answer: Truth is, untill we had a loss here in England of the Gar∣land, and other ships, I had very good respect from him, (and I endea∣voured with as much reverence, respectiveness, and thankfulness to ac∣knowledge the same) and he told me he was not my Friend so much because I was in an eminent Employment for the State, but upon an old score, I might Command him, yet the News of a fore-mentioned loss turned the streame presently; for like Politicians they took the strongest side, and then I could no more be heard in what was but Ju∣stice and reason, then if those words had never come out of his mouth. I very wel know what was wrote in answer to mine, about the latter end of Feb: last, I desired when winds and weather hindred my coming to Legorn (within the time limited) it might be lookt upon as a just impediment. The Answer runs thus, You shall have eight days added to the former, and longer if necessity required. What necessity is that, but the being crost by winds and weather: for all men know, vvho use those parts, that the Northerly wind bloweth sometimes so fresh, that a man may be put to Lee∣ward, so that in eight days he cannot get up to Legorn-Road. If he had meant other∣wise, that knew how importunate I was, But for thirty days time, would have said, take the time you desire, then should I have known what to have done. If yet any will make a more favourable construction of his words, I shall only say thus much, I wish he may find what I have oft times thought on, to be a true saying, One ounce of reall honesty and integrity, will turn better to account in all cases, then a whole pound of Court policy, where mentall reservations are used, by which they will have liberty to make two severall Constructions. And for this crying up of magnificency, I know not what to make of it, except there be such abroad as differ in judgement from some Atheistical spirits, I have met withal in the parts, where I have been, both of Aegypt and Greece, who have held, that in so many hundred thousand yeers (I forgot the just number, there shal be a Revo∣lution of all things, as if I should be a writing, and you should be a reading, just as we are now, I say peradventure some men may be of the mind, the Revolution may come about sooner. In fine, Let others judge of that Transaction what they will, I am of opinion, that the blood of the men of our Nation which fell that day, will lye (in a speciall man∣ner) at the Great Dukes door. But to the Remonstrance in answer to my charge of Treachery or Cowardise, or they know not what themselves, I suppose the proofs that are herein included will acquit me of the former, and if those, (who very well know I have complained of them as great failers in service) do not acquit me of the latter, let me lye under that indignity. I ever counted it one of the unhandsomest things in the world, to be speaking out any thing tending to self applause; yet I am in a manner constrained to write like such a one at this time, although my aim is that God alone may have ho∣nour by it. The 29 of August 1652 it fell out that more then the seven eight parts of our ships Company mutinied
against me (notwithstanding about midnight be∣fore every individuall man in the Ship, who was not wound∣ed, gave me his hand to live and dye with me if occasion were, against the enemy next day) but then got on their best cloaths, or one way or another declared themselves, by making the Ship uncapable of steerage, or otherwise, that they would leave the Ship Paragon, and the rich Merchants Ships to be de∣stroyed; nay, so high was the mutiny, that some gave out they would destroy my person, if I would not give them leave to call for quarter, in case the enemy had come up a∣gaine. And when I had made a speech among them, to en∣courage them what in me lay (although now so spent, that it was a very great paine to me to speake so as to be heard twice or thrice my length) notwithstanding some Comman∣ders came after me, where I was heaving over bord the lum∣ber our men had got up to cloy our Guns, and told me, I strove against the streame, and those very men that held up their hands before to stand by me, had declared they would call for Quarter among the rest, when ever the Enemy came neere; and upon that score begg'd of me to loose no more time, but forsake the Ship, and give them leave to fire their Merchants ships with rich Goods, and flye also: But my an∣swer to them was to this effect: As it is said, was given to Queen Eleanor in another case, I will not give you such leave as you desire, but if you will begin upon your owne account, doe it; I can fire our Ship when the Enemy comes within Musket shot. And adding, Be but patient, and waite upon God a little, and I am perswaded God will save this part of Englands strength and wealth, whether men will or no; and so it sell out through Gods mer∣cy in causing it to fall flat calme; of which miraculous pre∣servation (if some Merchants were rightly sensible) they would not murmur, and quarrel, and be ready to speake all manner of evil, whether right or wrong, against the States faithfull Servants. It's feared, because really and truly they are such, although the pretence be otherwise, and yet as far peradventure as the former from Christianity; Oh the event and successe hath not answered the great desires of gaine that was on their hearts, being the Goods were left by the way, & not brought through.
But for the Service before mentioned, the Councel of State by Order of Parliament, sent me a Letter of Thanks, wherein they did no more declare how well they resented my weak endeavours, and how it should be advantagious to me at my returne (which includes kind Acceptance, the most I a∣spired after) then I with all reverence and thankfulnesse did acknowledge. But peradventure some will say, What need all this dis∣course concerning what past in your first Engagement? You are not blamed for Cowardise then; it's thought, according to what was reported and openly said on the Exchange, when as this Remonstrancers Letters came for England, with some other Letters from (Malignant) Merchants, such as would be gladder that the Dutch, then that the English should pre∣vaile, and no other, Badiley was turn'd Coward, Badiley was turn'd Coward. When all things that have been said in the foregoing ex∣pressions, and shall yet be declared, be weighed in the ballance of Truth, and be found downe weight, not having a tittle of fallaciousnesse in them; and when the Testimony is likewise considered, I believe there is hardly ever an honest man in England, but will confesse with altogether as much honesty, they might have cryed out, and said, Badiley was turn'd Turke, Badiley was turn'd Turke. But naught saith (I should say naughty people) he had Currants, and I know not what in his Fleet, and for private advantage sake turn'd his back upon the Enemy: The con∣trary to that hath been declared to the Committee of the Admiralty, and it can be fully proved that for ought I could know, my losse in the Perrigreene (for want of timely suc∣cour) was more then I had in our part of the Fleet, that came away, although the shirt on my back had been priz'd at the highest value, but if there were some small difference, that were a likely matter indeed, sithence that it now appeareth be∣fore the Commissioners of the Navy. In zeale to the States Service, and it cannot be imagined to any other end, at Porto Ferraro, I run out of my owne particular stock, to the value of 1000 l. in Circa, which I believe the State will make me good hereafter.
I shall now come to ravell out the later end of the Re∣monstrance into some parts, and so answer them. Captaine Appleton saith in one place (that after I was gone for Porte Ferraro) I sent him order to hasten to mee as soone as the Dutch weighed Anchor, and upon his life to do it with all diligence; and a little below he saith, without Mr. Longland he durst not act, my order being to the con∣trary. As Elihu well said; Just as the mouth doth tast meate, so the eares of wise men tryeth words: To whom I appeale, whether there be not Non-sense, or Contradiction enough in that part. For he that looketh in the Letter, wherein I advis'd him to hasten after, as for life when as the Dutch were com∣ing out, that we might not be too much over-prest before they came for our assistance, shall not finde that I there or∣der'd him (however) he should not act any thing without Mr. Longlands presence and assistance. Wherefore such an Order must be either before, or after that Letter was sent him; if he saith it were before, then this Letter makes it of none effect; but if he saith it were af∣ter, it made the former order null, and void. Whether it were before or after, certainely no knowing man will imagine, that by my Letters, or Orders, I shut out my owne Authority, so as to say, although I come there my selfe in person, yet you are to act nothing with∣out Master Longland: and if this be beleev'd, I would not part with the Command I had over that Squa∣dron. Then thus it will follow: Why did not hee and the rest come out when I sent for them (as it were in person) by my Lieutenant? And if my former order of hastning as for life were in his eye, why then did he not hasten as for life? For if so, in all likelihood we had got together, and obtai∣ned the Victory over our Enemies. If yet he saith, Mr. Longlands opinion was to be taken be∣fore he stir'd next morning, why did he not conform to his Counsell (for what ever they say in their Remonstrance) it
will be prov'd by what Mr. Longland hath wrote to the Councell of State, Committee of the Admiralty, and my selfe about that Business, is a reall truth. When he saw they would go out so soon, contrary to his Advice, he shut himselfe in his Chamber, giving up all for lost; and as it's prov'd, when Cap. Wood came ashore woun∣ded, oh saith he (as he confess'd to his last breath) Master Longland, Our Destruction is of our selves, our Destruction is of our selves, we cannot blame Captaine Badiley, nor any body else, since we went not out in the night when as we were sent for, I saw wee went too soone in the morning; if we had staid while the Ad∣mirall had been engag'd, all might have been well enough, or words to that purpose. Truth is, I did write him such a Letter as he mentions, wherein he was ordered to hasten after me as for life, in case the Enemie came to looke after me in the Sea, and I did it for these reasons. First, because all men had complained of his dulnesse and backwardnesse in coming to our assistance the time that wee were formerly engag'd. And secondly, in regard that I had sent some Propositi∣ons to the great Duke, humbly begging him to endeavour the Dutch might comply, and not fight our Ships under his Cannons, but come out to Sea, and do it there. Now who could imagine, that hee that had made such a deale of pudder, complaining of English Commanders in a high manner about violating his Port, would not have constrained the Dutch, if they would have fought us, to come out and fight at Sea, and upon that score did I verily believe they would have been with me, either at Porte Fer∣raro, or as soone as ever I came thence; much lesse could we imagine, that ever the Duke would turn all the Dutch Captains, and others of that Nation that had affronted him out of Prison, and unworthily suffered some of our Ships to be taken within Musket-shot of his Works, and not shoo a shot in our defence. And it is as true as the former, that after that Letter be∣fore mentioned (upon other news I did advise) that in my
absence I would have them consult with Mr. Longland about the time of their coming out: but they that run may read, and clearly see, that Cap. Appleton hath neither conform'd to my Order and Advice, in coming out in the night, ha∣ving such a fit opportunity, which made the Masters Mate, or Pylot say, they were cursed people to be so be∣witched to that Mould, as not to goe when their Admirall sent for them; neither hath he conform'd to Mr. Longlands advice, which was; that since they did not goe in the night, they should not goe out so soon as they did, but stay whilst I was engaged with the Enemie before they went out. But Cap. Appleton doth not confesse in so many words, that my Lieutenant came to call him away in the night; however, besides the testimony given in, such jugling is dis∣covered by his owne expressions; he saith he had thoughts of coming out, but that the wind faltered; now, how came he by such thoughts? either they were from mee, or from Mr. Longland, but they were not from Mr. Longland, he con∣fesseth that the want of his Order was an impediment. But what saith he? Cap. Badiley sent to see in what readi∣nesse we were in, and to tell me the Constant Warwick would be sent neer the Mould head in the morning to assist us, with the Fire-ship. Cap. Appleton well knoweth I saw the Ships all clear, and ready to engage at a quarter of an hours warning before I left the place of Legorn, which was about eight or ten dayes before: and besides, by Cap. Appletons owne Letters, and by Cap. Coxe that was in with them the night before, I heard they were in a readinesse: so that now to send my Lieute∣nant at midnight through the Enemies Boats, or Scouts that lay in wait for ours, it had been as vain a thing in me as in him, to make such a lame excuse. But he addes, the Messenger told him that the Constant Warwicke, and the Fire-ship should be at the Mould head in the morning to receive him forth: were it not now an easie thing to condemn him out of his own mouth, and say, why went you out of the Mould so soone in the morning (being you went not in the night) since you had word sent, the
Constant Warwicke and the Fire-ship should be at the Mould∣head to receive you, and in effect intimating, that untill then you were not to come forth: For as soone as they be∣gan to loose Saile in the Mould, I was heard say, surely they will not be so mad as to come forth before the Constant Warwicke and others be neere the Mould-head to receive them. But to proceed; he saith when he first engag'd, Cap. Ba∣diley and his Fleet might have come to us quarter winds, if they would: To that I shall only say thus much, let me lie under the censure and dis-reputation about it, if I cannot prove by some hundred Witnesses, that as the winde gave leave, so we plyed in. And I make no question, but as many Witnesses can make it clearly appear, no time was lost after their coming out of the Mould, but all diligence was used to hasten in to their succour, and many of the Parragons men can averre, they never see me more earnest then I was at that time, in looking after the Sailes and Steerage, and in labouring a∣bout hoysing the Top-gallant Sailes so long, untill it was fear'd all would have come downe about our eares; and al∣ways gave the Ship Brace and Sheat as the wind would give leave, and slackned no other Saile untill we came within shot, and then haled up our Main-saile (as was all the rea∣son in the world) being the Capstain that heaves our tacks aboard in those Ships would have hindered the use of foure Guns, besides other inconveniences that might have hap∣ned. Next he saith, at last we came within halfe shot, as if we had lost time before (an easie understanding can trace the malice that runs through his expressions) I have given the Councell of State already an Account what I did when I came neere, as that I went directly with the Admirall of the Dutch, preparing to grapple with her; but casting my eye about, and feeing none of our Frigots had executed my Orders about relieving the Leopard, considering shee was worth three of the Dutch Admirall, I powred about thirty pieces of Ordnance, and a volley of small shot into her, and stood away for the Leopard, with a reall intent to have
gone on Bord those were on bord her, but it was judg'd no wisdome to run stemlings on bord with all Saile, being a fresh gale of winde when we first came neere her: And pas∣sing by the Julius Cesar stern within two or three ships lengths from her at most; and within halfe Musket-shot of the Leopards stern, it may be that is halfe shots length, Cap. Appleton speaks of, having discharged first a broad side, and a volley of small shot, on that ship, and the Sunne, in hopes to have cut one Mast or another by the bord, we made way to flat our Ship round, fully intending to have gone on bord with our fore-saile hal'd up either between the Sunne, and the Julius Cesar, (and so should have been able to have fenc'd on both sides) or else to have lain alongst the Sunnes side, with my Bow-sprit over the Leopards Poop: but it pleased God the wind so dullard all on a suddain, that our Ship with as much endeavour as ever was us'd, would not weare nor beare up, so that wee were forc'd to bring our Ship to, and stand further, before we could make her stay; and when we had got her about, we stood away for the Ju∣lius Caesars side again, resolving to get on bord that time; and having pass'd another broad side on her about Musket∣shot off, the Helm was put a weather to beare up againe, but the Ship we could not make work with that little wind, if a thousand Common-wealths had lain upon it: And the sight of it transporting me into a passion, I call'd to my Lieute∣nant to passe the word among the nimble Ships, that I would have them goe on board the Leopard, or those Ships on bord her to see to dis-intangle her from those Ships: Whereupon having none within call but the Mary Rose, he call'd to her to go on bord; but they being no better man'd excus'd it; thereupon I stept up to look for the Lewis, with words in mouth to this effect; Where is this vapouring flash Ell now, with his forty men, and his 20. Guns, or his thirty Guns and his fourscore men? where is hee? see if you can make him hear, that we may employ him in this service? but he was gone out of call after his owne inventions. In all this time there ap∣appears not a man upon the Leopards upper Deck that I could discern: and being extreamly troubled to see the Leo∣pard
manag'd no better, I call'd to man the Pinace, and the Lord my great witnesse knoweth, with a full resolution to have gone on board her with my boat, when I could not with the ship, verily believing the Captain had been kil'd, and chiefe Officers, and had kept my resolution. But although Capt. Appleton now saith the two Ships on bord him call'd for quarter, or he knoweth not for what; those Ships untill I was gone fir'd five times as many Guns as the Leopard did in my sight; for I never saw her shoot but once in halfe an hours time: I say the with-drawing of the Leopards men within doors and hatches, and their not ap∣pearing to let goe an Anchor in any time, nor doing any thing else towards their owne preservation, caus'd me to think some part of the Leopard might be in the Enemies pos∣session, and so was diverted from going in my Boat. But Captain Appleton saith, his men call'd to the Constant Warwicke, to tell them the Enemies cal'd for Quarter, and therefore they should forbeare firing on those that lay on bord her. As for the Frigots Commander, let him answer for it, that hee did not acquaint me with what he was in∣form'd of from the Leopard. But if I had been in Cap. Appletons place, and exprest so much as now he doth, truly I should have fear'd I should have been accounted one of the greatest Cowards, or fools in the world; for if the men did call for quarter, which I believe is as true, or as false as many other things mentio∣ned in the Libell, or Remonstrance, then why did he not call his men upon the Deck to enter them, (at least) why did not he himselfe appeare on the Poope, when his Admirall came by, and have told him so much: Or if his with-draw∣ing were through feare, why was not some body else sent on the Poope to have done it, and have shook his hat, cry∣ing All is ours, all is ours. I but saith he, to colour the mat∣ter, (as if we were all asleep in the Fleet besides) by a story he tells in his Remonstrance (in point of truth, like that of 600 Crowns agreed on at a Councell of Warre to be given for his re-establishment) how that 5 of the Enemies ships so gal'd him, that he was not able to possesse them that cal'd
for quarter. If it be not a dreame, I am sure they were in∣visible, above two hundred persons beside my selfe will de∣pose the contrary; none was neere within Saker shot, if a∣ny were within shot of their best Ordnance, but only the Admirall of the Dutch, that made what meanes he could with his Sprit-saile, and Sprit-saile top saile to get away; and being twice Musket-shot from him, discharg'd no Ord∣nance upon him that I and others could discern: and I be∣lieve it will be very hard to prove by the testimony of any honest man, that ever they were struck with a shot from any Ship of the Enemie while we were neere, but only from them two on bord the Leopard: Now then except his ship had been shot-free between Decks, since no man can aver any E∣nemie was neer but those on bord, or had been within Mus∣ket-shot of him, his men would have been as secure on the upper deck, as on the lower, & they might have bin as safe all the time they were entring the Dutch ships, he saith cal'd for Quarter, as to have staid in their own; and therefore I know not what to make of that passage, it shows so like a frenzy Fiction. Next, Cap. Appleton magnifies the valour of Cap. Ell, and Cap. Fisher, telling how they did assist, as if no body else did; and again he declares, Cap. Ell did great execution on the Enemy. This is just the old proverb, Claw me, and I'le claw thee: But you have sufficient Witnesses given in alrea∣dy, and I dare say there may be found above a hundred more to attest those that did least service in reference to the Leo∣pards reliefe, did as much service, or rather more then was done by the Lewis or Mary. Next Cap. Appleton saith I cal'd off the Lewis and the Ma∣ry that would have assisted him, and set my Main-saile to goe away, &c. For answer; When I saw all hopes past, in humane Rea∣son, not because the Enemie was now grown three to one, there being foure of our best Ships lost before I could come up, and one since, nor because many more expected from East and West every houre to their assistance, but none to ours; Although I believe it's justifiable for a Commander in
Chiese to with-draw in such a case, or else old Van Trumpe had been in a poore condition, when as twice together, al∣though the numbers were upon the matter equall, he let us take away so many ships, and staid not by it, but with-drew with the rest. Neither was the Leopard left in that Case (whether sunck or afloat we could not tell) in regard most of the Com∣manders of our nimble Ships had acted quite contrary to order in this (as they did in my last) engagement, which yet is a sad, and heart-discouraging mischief. And although I had of my selfe no inclination to leave the place, as I did, yet when halfe a score of the Chief Offi∣cers in the Paragon came, and gave me it, as an opinion they would justifie upon their lives, saying to this effect: Sir, if now you goe on bord the Leopard, and those with her, to relieve the former, we cannot see how it's possible you can dis-intangle your selfe againe before both ships be ashore; besides saith many, it's very questionable whether she be not sunck already, and ly on the ground. Hence it was, I set my Main-saile, and came away; and if he looks on that, to be the sign of calling off the Fleet, Capt. Appleton is in the right; but if his meaning be according to the litterall sense of his Expressions, how that I cal'd to Cap. Ell and Captain Fisher to come away, when as they were going to relieve the Leopard, by sufficient Testimonie, it will be prov'd a most false thing. I know not upon what other score the Machiavelian poli∣cie (except it be to tickle the minds of some of their Own∣ers) they should appeare against mee, who before sundry upon the Parragons decks, and in her Round-house, as hath all other Captains said in our passage home-ward; in case the Admirall had gone on bord the Leopard, or those Ships lay entangled with her, in all likelihood the whole Fleet except the Frigots (who could have fled) had been lost: And now we come to the stresse of all, what Capt. Appleton saith of Cap. Ell and Cap. Fisher, and they say of themselves the Leopard had been relieved, but that I hindred them.
I know not what to make of such impudency and in∣solency, I professe were I in their case, my owne Con∣science would tell me, that although other contempts were pardoned, which the Law Martial saith is Death, I deserved the severest sentence for coming short of my Du∣ty, and not complying with the Admirals Order, in point of the Leopards reliefe: But a word more. First, for Capt. Ell, before we came neere the Leopard, see∣ing our Rear-Admirall aground, whereas all the Frigots had speciall order to relieve any who were opprest by the Ene∣my, and seeing they did not act accordingly, as I was hasten∣ing in to the Leopards reliefe, being he was neere me, either I call'd to him, or did expect although he were of the Rear-Admirals Squadron, he should follow me, and keep near me in my Weather-quarter, where then he was, his Leader being aground: for knowing that the Lewis was almost double man'd, in proportion to other Merchants Ships, I thought to have her by me to employ upon some eminent service, when as there should be occasion, but whil'st we were endeavouring to bear up, and goe on board the Leopard, he goeth after his owne inventions, so that when our Ship would not work (it being little wind, and our Ship heavy and foule) I bid call to the Lewis to bear up, and go on bord the Julius Caesar; and seeing she was gone out of call, and that the Mary Rose had made her excuse for want of men, I confesse I was almost distracted with passion, saying (amongst other things in my mind) to this effect, When such vapouring Blades are in a Gen∣tlewomans Chamber, oh then they are mighty men of valour; but now here is service to be done, they can turne shifters above all that ever any Commander in chiefe was troubled withall, before me. Yet as he lay in my way as we were withdrawing, when we saw it was too late to doe any more then what was done, I might bid him follow me. As for Capt. Fisher thus, knowing there was such pittifull Captaines to be employed with me in this service, that perad∣venture would forget in the morning, what they did over night; I sent a Copy of what was agreed on at our Councel
of War, to Capt. Fisher, wherein among other Orders it was agreed as followes. If any of the Admirals, Vice-Admirals, or Rear-Admirals Squadron, were laid on bord by the enemy, then such as were next to them of that Squadron, ought to have laid any such Ship of the Enemies on bord againe on the other side. But now pray mark, not to tell you how peremptorily he hath refused my Warrant or Command, before or afterwards ex∣prest in some kind elsewhere, see how he layes himselfe open under the lash of the highest censure, or severest sentence, take but his owne words, He broke through the Dutch Fleet, and then did very good service a second time, meaning he made a bord or two near the Leopard, I say in that he did not goe on bord the Leopard according to the Order of the Councel of VVar, he being of that Squadron, the Vice-Admirals Squadron, what hath this man to say, but that truly he is not such a novice in Matchiavels Arts, nor yet such a sottish person as some of his men complained to me of, when as they mutined in the Downes; nor yet such a reputed Coward, which made me de∣sire any one might Command that Ship rather then he, and sure enough he had never been in that place, but that Mr. Longland advis'd me the owners earnestly desired it, and for quietnesse sake it were best I yielded. But I say, he knows well enough (it's said being well backt) how to abuse his Com∣mander, in hope that (right or wrong) something may stick to his disparagement. But in the close, Capt. Appleton declares how the Marriners wrested his sword out of his hand, and put his arm and shoul∣der out of joynt; whether that were true as that the Ships on bord him cal'd for Quarter, some of his chief Officers are not able to tel, for though they saw C. Appleton the day they were surprized, yet heard nothing of any such thing, but however it seems he was able to hold it before, then one would think I should have seen it, or himselfe at least (in his place) on the Poop, all the time I was neer him, so long together. After that comes in a story of the Gunners order to blow up the Poop, I am sure his time had been better employed if he had ordered the Gunner to have turned the muzzles of two or
three Guns downe into the Hatchway, and have sunk the Ship, which he omitting to doe in time, did very much trou∣ble my spirit, and I think may be rank'd among the highest of his failings: But I think there is too much of that before. In the last place he tels a long story of what the Great Duke said, among others I think it will little advantage him; for is that Expression because Authority should be incensed a∣gainst me: Then thus, The Great Duke said Capt. Appletons Crime was unpardonable in that he came not out to my As∣sistance in nor after my first Engagement; would he there∣fore have Authority incens'd against me meerly upon such a score? But then, some of Mr. Longlands house, some about the Duke, Italians, French, &c. are brought in to speak he knows not what, nor it may be they themselves; but two witnes∣ses are brought in at last, that were then so sober as to re∣member some French and Italians had said they would teare me in pieces for a Coward if ever I came thither. I suppose if this stuffe be weighed (in the Ballance of understanding mens Judgements) it will be found very ridiculous. Because some English Merchant hath said sundry times upon the place of Legorn, What Newes from our Rogues at West∣minister? meaning the Parliament (although it's a shame English men should so speak (was the Parliament ever the worse for that? And although Italians and French have been heard many a time say, They could teare some worthy mem∣ber of our State to pieces upon the account of being enemies to the Romanists, would it not be a ridiculous thing for him that heard such expressions, to acquaint the Higher Powers of it, in hopes to bring them into dis-reputation upon such a score? What though the Spectators at Legorn, were a thousand Legorn Ladies, and as many Fooles and Knaves among them, is that any thing to me? Were they not like a Company that being in a Ladies Chamber near the Sea-coast, seeing a Ship with some little wind and sea, to their understanding, dri∣ving into a Bay, and not being able to get off the shore, by weathering one point or other, cut the mast by the bord, and
all that time they cryed out, Oh Fooles, oh Knaves, what, cut your Masts by the bord this weather? loose so much of your friends interest that might be sav'd? not considering the ac∣cidents that are subject to happen on bord Ship, when those that were there saw they could not get off with a saile; and peradventure he that had Command perceived there was no∣thing in his Ship but an old Junck, unto which there is no trust at all to be given, without his Masts be parted withall. Indeed if the Spectators had flesh'd some of the Great Dukes old Gallies, and had with them such instruments, and instru∣ment-users, as walk to and againe among the Banks in these Vessels, and would have come to tow our Ship too and again, when she would not steere, and if then we would have done no more then we did, indeed they might justly have said som∣thing in our disparagement. But what need I speak so much of them, I wish there may be none in the world who pretend to better principles, that would not (at least in word and thought) condemne and execute before they heare, contrary to the manner of the Ro∣mane Heathens. I have now finisht my Answer to the Remonstrancers, where∣in I have not onely opened the dresse it was made up in, but shewed the filthy malice from whence such productions as are there held out, did issue forth; and I doe believe most noble and ingenuous spirits will confesse, I am no more worthy to be blamed in what past neer Legorn the 4 of March last, then I was to be blam'd for what past among as the 28 and 29 of August before, wherein God made me instrumentall to save a better Ship then the Leopard, and a vast Estate of the Nations, for then I did but my endeavour, and both that, with my re∣solution will be prov'd to be every whit as much in the last, as in the former Dispute, so long as in reason there was any hope; although I confesse it was not answer'd from Heaven with such successe: And if any man will yet say, I would have done more had I been in your place, I hope he will give me leave to think, that more knowing men would have blamed his prudence, then there is, that would have com∣mended his valour.
In fine, I suppose if all the paines and care I was at, were well weighed, to keep our Ships from ruine in Porto Longone, and what was done to get Victuall and other necessaries for the people ten Moneths together, with the correspondence I held with most adjacent places. As also, what hardship I under-went in sundry Journeyes by Sea and Land, to effect the conjunction of both Squa∣drons, having been way-laid as I was inform'd sundry times. And if it be also considered what aversnesse and contrarinesse was in most peoples spirits (unto this Common-wealths service) with whom I had to doe, which men we were yet forc't to make use of, it must needs be concluded, Never any subject of State or Prince, could possibly undergo more trou∣ble in the time, then I have gone through. To conclude all, what I crave is onely good acceptance, and that which of right belongs unto me; and the like I de∣sire in the behalfe of the States faithfull Servant, Mr. Charles Longland, whom the Remonstrancer hath greatly abus'd. My practice shall not be after the manner of those in Constantino∣ple, who going up to that Pallace, take fire on their head, and cry, Justice, Justice; but I hope I shall have that when I go els∣where, which will be like fire in my heart, to kindle desires, that Davids last words may be remembred: 2 SAM. 23.3. The God of Israel said, and the Rock of Is∣rael spake: Hee that Ruleth over men must be Just, Ruling in the feare of God, &c.
Ʋpon mature Consideration, I shall humbly crave leave to adde a short Breviate or Abstract of what to my understanding appeareth to be the Causes of that great Disaster befell the Squadron neare Legorn, the 4 of March last. And I hope what I have to say, will not be accounted impertinent to the purpose of clearing up the Truth. NOt to mention any thing of those crying sins wch did not onely make a Turke, that being taken with the Excellency of the way of Christ, and had made some profession of our Religion, for some Months together abord the Leopard, to naucite it, and turne from it (conclu∣ding if God were a Holy God, those that run into such E∣normities must not be his people) which yet doubtlesse did provoked God to stretch out his hand against us. Nor yet to mention any failing of those in England, wch should have done well to have sent us some kind of reliefe. But abroad, by what hath been said, and is hinted in seve∣rall Letters I now present, there may be clearly discerned a perfect number of particulars, shewing what were the impe∣diments to our Conjunction, and consequently where the blame ought to be laid; and if the Conscience of the Remon∣stancer, and his Associates will but speak out, I am assured they must sixe and and annex their Acknowledgement there∣unto, as unto a most real truth. First, The stubbornesse of the Commanders of the Samp∣son and Mary, and the dulnesse and backwardnesse of the Commander of the Navy Ships to come out to our Assistance, upon and after our first Engagement, although greatly inci∣ted thereunto by other Commanders, that in every respect were under the same capacity and obligation with them∣selves; and it appeareth by sundry Letters from Mr. Long∣land, Consul Read, Capt. Wood, and others. Secondly, That imprudent act of the Remonstrancer, per∣form'd
in his owne person, forcing back a Dutch-man his prisoner from the Great Dukes Centinels house, whereunto he had made his escape, caus'd the Duke to send a Messenger into England, which otherwise had not been sent, as (upon good grounds) Mr. Longland advis'd me from time to time, and as was the opinion of the Consul, and other knowing Merchants, and consequently the dissatisfactory Answer he had returned by that Messenger, had not more incens'd him against us then the naturall genius of Princes towards young Common-wealths would have prompt him unto; so that peradventure, although he lov'd not the Parliament of Eng∣land, yet he would not have thrust their Ships into the mouths of their Enemies (upon the matter) as he did afterwards. Thirdly, The not coming of our three Friggots & the Harry Bonaventure from Naples unto Porto Longone, whil'st the Ene∣my had no considerable strength to resist us, but contrary to Order going back to Messina, and I know not where, spend∣a great deale of time, while we might have done our business with as much seasonablenesse as our heart could desire; and this appeareth by sundry Letters. Fourthly, The exceeding backwardnesse and unwilling∣nesse of some of those Commanders of English Ships at Ve∣nice, to embrace the States service without such tearmes as could not be well agreed unto by the States servants; for thereby such a needlesse dispute arose, that caus'd so much time to be spent to no purpose, which (in all probability) had been sufficient to have effected our Conjunction, before the 4 of March last; and this will appear by sundry Letters from indifferent persons that were lookers on, as well as from the States Servants. Fifthly, The Great Dukes partiality, whether because the Dutch were then like to be the strongest side, or for other rea∣sons I know not; but I am sure he dealt very unworthily with the States Servants, in commanding us out the Port, when as the Enemy was near three to one; and after he had made many complaints of the above-mentioned, for viola∣ting his Ports, to give the Dutch liberty to assault our Ships when their sternes were in the Mould-head, and although we
were promis'd from time to time, great assistance from his Cannons, in case the Enemy should meddle with us within their reach, not to shoot a shot in our defence, when as some of our Ships were surprised within little more then musket shot of his works, was worse then all the rest. Sixthly, The Remonstrancers omitting to come out in the night, when as I sent for them in such a season, wherein some of those that were Pylots, in effect, said of their Command∣ers, They were cursed because they took not hold of that op∣portunity; and the omission was quite contrary to Capt. Appletons promise, by his Letter to me of the 3, 13 of March, for therein in Answer to my former Letter, he would come out in the night, if he had my approbation, and he wanted not that, with expressions from my Lievtenant, how earnest∣ly desirous I was to have had them come away with all speed. Seventhly, and lastly, Coming out (contrary to their owne deliberate result at a Consultation) before that I was engag'd with the Enemy; whereas notwithstanding, what∣ever he simply inserts concerning my requiring him to ha∣sten out to me as for life, three or four dayes before the Dis∣pute, his Letter of the 3, 13 of March tels me he had receiv'd my Letters and Orders dated that morning at four a Clock, if that were produc'd (of which I had no time to take a co∣py, or have lost it) I am confident therein it will be found exprest, I was so far from bidding them hasten to me as for life, that per contra, I desired he would not stir (meaning in the day time) until he saw me engag'd, and in effect he con∣fesseth as much, by saying in the afore-mention'd Letter, that He thank'd me for my care in not hazzarding that Squadron: Un∣to which I shall adde no more, but that I am, Your Honours Very Humble Servant, RI. BADILEY.
AS I was upon returning in with the foregoing An∣swer, I have met with a printed paper intituled, A Relation of the Fight neare Legorn-Road, the 4 of March last. And casting my eye upon it, I find a Declaration from C. Seaman, from C. Ell, and from Cap. Fisher, which I had ne∣ver liberty to see before, and so it's not possible for me to give an Answer thereunto at present. And although therein I find such horrid falsities, as fils me with admiration, in regard such is their boldnesse to doe it, even as we use to say, in the very face of Authority, an∣nexing, it's Printed by the Printer to the Parliament of ENG∣LAND. I beseech you give me leave to declare what is on my heart, like as in a vessel that wants vent, and I hope no levity will be found therein. As the Lord is sometimes pleased to prevent his by the blessings of goodnesse, so the Remonstrancer, and those that seem to imbark in the same cause with him, such I heare, as would have been well pleased with a second Revolt, I say they have prevented me, or quite out-stript what I could ima∣gine (in point of broaching about their mischievous slan∣ders) so far as the condition of London (in the case it now stands) is different from the condition of Oxford, eight or nine yeares since. I shall not yet say all men are Lyars, or that many have been so, neither shall I yet Query (as one did with his so (in another case) whether we must indeed bow downe to that Image the Enemies of this Common-wealth were deno∣minated by a few yeares since. Nor shall I yet conclude they have been happy men to be (at least) so wise, as to stand Newters, such as have look't on, and said nothing, whatever they have thought, thereby
escaping many a knock that others have met with, among malicious Anvils. But this I shall conclude, that as the people is happy whose God is the Lord, so that particular person is happy whose inte∣rest lies there: And give me leave to adde, of him that hath truth on his side, like Oyle, it will be uppermost when all is done, and let men doe what they can. I have onely one or two particulars humbly to mind you of: in a word, Whether it would not be best (for the sifting out of truth) to enquire whose hand is in all this: I do not deny but some whom I have highly honoured in my heart, may be surprised about it; yet I say the root or spring of all this would be look't into. In the next place, although I would not exasperate a mat∣ter, or hunt after the utmost severity of Justice, but rather seek after lenity and mercy in case of acknowledgment: yet in the close I shall commend unto your Grave Considerati∣on, what I heard was concluded among some ancient Com∣manders, many years since: To suffer an inferiour Officer to be abus'd, is just as if a man should suffer his servant to take hold of any part of his arme, and that commonly opens a gappe, or proclaimes some kind of liberty to take hold of his Collar; or those Officers (that although subordinate) are very neer to him: And further, for that to be suffered, it opens a passage to the Masters throat, which every man knowes is very dangerous. Your Honours very humble Servant. As per supra.
Here followeth five Letters from Mr. Charles Long∣land, the States Publique Minister at Legorn. Sixe Letters from Mr. Morgan Reed, Consull to the English Nation in that place. Three from Captain John Wood, and two letters from Captain Owen Coxe. ALl declaring more or lesse of the backward∣nesse, dulnesse, and negligence of the States servant, Captain Henry Appleton; and with∣all, the desperate perversenesse, and stubborn∣nesse of Captaine Edmund Seaman, and his Consort to assist in the States service, with o∣thers under the same Obligation, in point of Merchants goods with themselves. And whereby all those that are unprejudic'd may see (as cleerly as that which is most discernable in the face) the Cause why the Conjunction of the English Ships of War within the Mediter∣ranean Sea, was not effected, which in all out∣ward appearance was the reason the Dutch, & not the English obtained the Victory in those parts. And withall who is really in the fault, and to be blamed, in regard the Merchants great Estate by Goods laden in the Levant, was not brought under the States Ships Conduct as well all the way, as preserved a good part thereof.
Mr Charls Longlands first Letter. Captaine Badiley. Sir, THis morning I received yours by Mr. Lightfoot, and am in a readinesse to obey all your Commands: I have seene with much griefe the troubles have laine upon you in the late fight with the Dutch, especially by your owne men: God be prais'd that hath deli∣vered you out of them. Last night I sent downe my man, Edward Goodwin, in a Feluca laden with powder and match; To morrow I shall dispatch away a Frigot with what I can get ready, salt flesh, nor salt fish any to be had, so you must be content with fresh, till a moneth more be over. I have sent you some money, and shall supply you with more as occasion shall present. I have sent to Genoa to buy 100. barrels of powder, and sent up to Florence to get another parcell, so all, or part shall be sent you by the first. As well the Men of Warre as the Merchant-men lie very safe in this Port, for I see no inclination in the first to stirre without the later; if they would have done it, you had not come hither (or so farre alone) for I often importun'd Cap. Appleton before the Warwick depar∣ted to appoint you a place of Randezvous, either at Maritimo, or Tunis, but without the Merchant men went with him he would not stirre. This day dyed Cap. Witherage, not being above four dayes sicke: Our freshest Letters out of England the 29. of July, the States have promised the Company a Fleete of Ships to be sent into these Seas to bring off these ships. I have nothing more to en∣large, so I subscribe my selfe Your faithfull servant, Charls Longland. Legorr. Sept. 12. 1652.
Mr. Longland's 2 Letter. Captain Badiley. THis is to accompany a small Brigantine or Lint, laden with provisions, according to the inclosed Bill of Lading, which I have consigned to Mr. John Wood, in case the Boat should not be able to get into Porto Longone, that then Mr. Wood might follow your Order in its disposall in Porto Ferraro, or Piombei∣no, which I am assured he will be carefull of it, for he is an honest man, and more forward to doe any service that concernes the bene∣fit or honour of our Nation, then those in this place that are trusted with it. Yesterday came in one ship from the East, another from the West, and the Flemmings sent out one of their ships to see what they were, if it had proved the Harry Bonaventure, or any other English ship, you may judge what had been become of them; for the States two ships ride very safely in the Mould, without the least appearance of going to Sea. I herewith send you some Letters, and shall send you more by the next conveyance. You will heare of Capt. Witheradges death. In Holland are two parties, one for the Prince of Orange, another against, accordingly is their affe∣ctions to England. I rest, Yours, Charls Longland. Mr. Longlands 3 Letter. Capt. Badiley, SIR; UPon receipt of yours of the 14 currant, I was resolved to de∣part hence immediately towards you, but the returne of my servant Edw. Goodwin the next morning, brought me better Newes, that you were not in so bad a condition. I stay for the gold Chaine from Florence, which when it comes I shall be going to∣wards you; in the mean time I send you a second Boat laden with Provisions, and is consigned to Mr. Lightfoot in Porto Fer∣raro,
who I have commended there to Signior Boucetano the Go∣vernours Secretary. This day we had received Letters out of Eng∣land, to the 16 or 26 of August, Generall Blake was returned from the North, and was about Yarmouth, Sir George Askue was at Plymouth, the Dutch with a hundred saile (whereof one third men of war) were past the Channell westward, some say they were put into Torbay. The generall advise from England is, That no succour is like to come hither till the 2 Fleets have fought. Capt. Appleton is gone to Pisa and Lucca: The Phaenix is come hither, and hath but 30 men on bord, which I told the States servants, but they have no mind to her. I rest your Servant. Charls Longland. Mr. Longlands 4 Letter. Capt. Badiley, SIR; I Have received yours of the 12 or 22, the Bristow Ship came into this Road yesterday, where she still continues, we have in Road two men of War, and two others lately come out of Hol∣land, the one bound for Scanderonne, the other for Smyrna, to convey three ships thither; the rest of the Ships are at Sea, but where, or whether gone I know not, I believe some are gone to Tellone, to raise men and victuals. Three new raised ships at Ve∣nice departed to Westward ten days since, it may be they will look into your Port. Concerning what you wrote of the 11 or 21, about the Governour of Porto Ferraro, his deniall to let you come into that Mould; I went to the Great Dukes Secretary, that the Mer∣chants ships at leost, that had Goods for Legorn, might goe and li∣ver such Goods, or if the rest of the Ships would lay up their Goods there upon such tearmes as the Sampson doth here, till they finde an opportunity to depart for England, they might doe it. I have had an Answer, that whatsoever Goods the ships will liver, shalbe receiv'd, and well lookt to at Porto Ferraro; for which pur∣pose I dispatch this Footman with such an Order to the Governour
from England, but I doubt affaires there will require Forces about them, supposing a Conjunction hath happened with you, and Capt. Appleton. God direct you for the best. I did put Capt. Appleton, and M. Longland in mind thereof yester∣day, it hath been a businesse too much omitted formerly, I wish remedy in future. The Little Lewis is in Civita Vechia, I wrote him to carreene his ship, and to attend your Com∣mands, I am confident my Letters may somewhat prevaile; if you think good, notwithstanding former mis-understand∣ing, hee's neer at hand: I could wish care were taken by Felueas, for the preservation of the Harry bonaventure, and Imployment. With my kinde Salutes I rest, Yours, Morgan Reed. Consull Reed's 3 Letter. SIR, I Wrote you by M. Goodwin, and since by M. Wood; the last can further tell you how much I stirred upon the first Newes of your Engagement with the Hollanders, for these ships to assist you: I found in Capt. Appleton cou∣rage and resolution, I am sorry it was not put in executi∣on; both that and somewhat else, God grant the obstru∣ctions and delayes prove not prejudiciall. I was sorry to heare somewhat concerning your doubts, wherein I am not satisfied; but M. Longland telleth me, M. Goodwin bring∣eth better Newes, and the confirmation of that Governours constancy towards your security; I told M. Longland my sence of the businesse. I have wrote a friend in Rome to pro∣cure from the Spanish Ambassador, Letters unto the Go∣vernour for continuance of his friendship towards us, hap∣pily you may have it thence directly. Time gives the Ene∣my opportunity to recruit, they are diligent and vigilant, I wish we were, or had been so from hence. God direct you
for the best, and give you, and those with you, courage and strength, to act what the honour of our Nation, in you all is required, for your owne safeties. And I put you in mind, Authority must be in such cases made use of, unto the utter∣most, both in faire and rugged wayes, when faire cannot take place. With my salutes I rest, Levorn, 18 Oct. 1652. Yours, Morgan Reed. Sir, I wish you have a speciall care no parlies from the Enemies, or meeting be permitted out of your owne Ship, or any of your Squadron to goe on bord theirs, or enter∣taine discourse on bord, or ashore, but by your Order, and the lesse you have, I hold the better. Againe, God direct you for the best. The Harry Bonaventure is safe at Naples, I wish care be taken for the Employment. Sir, have a care your people avoid eating of Grapes, and Mellons, all Fruit breeds Feavers, and Fluxes, whereof ours begin to smart for it. Idem 16 October, 1653. Livorn. Consull Reed's 4 Letter. Good Sir; ALthough I have domestick sorrow in the losse of my servant this morning, yet my mind runs on the great danger I apprehend may befall you there, if others beside your selfe doe not stir, and take it into consideration. I was once in hope of the going out of Capt. Appleton, and some others with him, that I assured unto my selfe a defeat of these ships that lay in this Port, as well as a reliefe, and beating the Enemy thence, which doubtlesse upon the sight of these would gladly have escaped hence; but however it hath been delayed, and let slip so probable an opportunity, Heave to them it concerns to answer, I wish they themselves
with your Squadron, do not come endangered thereby, the unhappy loss of the Phoenix Frigot hath daunted som, & en∣courag'd the enemy, who as I wrot was diligent & vigilant both in gathering Merchants ships into their service, as in shipping any sort or Nation to man them, and therein they stir; we have now 8 ships of them lying in the road, compre∣hending our intended Fire-ship, and that unhappy quandum Phaenix Frigot in the Mould. God strengthen you all, and those here, with spirits to provide for your selves. I have noted to you all the ships here, and the Harry Bonyventure at Naples, as the Lewis in Civita Vechia. An assurance of a re∣ward, and a loving Letter from you, as Authority to com∣mand, if they, or these should refuse assistance in so emer∣gent an occasion; when you by a Councel of War shall think convenient for the preservation of that Squadron, and wherein lyeth involv'd, as I apprehend, in part, the Honour of our Nation, together with the great Estates of many Merchants (I say under correction) I apprehend all ought to give their assistance; but in this, and matters of such concernments, I shall leave unto your Results, in case you please to debate theron. And I will pray God to direct you for the best, and in the interim, neither will I be idle; I have wrote unto a friend at Rome, to procure the Spanish Ambassadors Letters as unto Genoa, for others thence, all in your favour to that Governour. This is what I thought upon, when I see my endeavours could not pro∣cure these ships going forth. If I can think of ought else may be serviceable unto you, or that you may apprehend I may serve you in, please to command, you shall alwayes find me (no lesse then ever you knew me) ready to serve and promote the welfare of our Nation, as if I may in your perticular serve you, so it be without jealousie to encroach; you shall finde me alwayes Your affectionate Friend, Morgan Reed.
This is the fourth Letter I have wrote you; the first per M. Goodwin, who tells me he had delivered the same; the other per M. Wood, who I assure my selfe he hath delivered, the third I delivered to M. Goodwin, who tels me he had de∣livered it to M. Lightfoot: I wish you all happinesse, and rest as above. I have put our Factors here in mind to study some way to send for the fine Goods there, in case of eminent danger; but I observe no resolution. God direct all for the best; I apprehend the ships will be lesse pestred, and more service∣able. Livorn, 19. 7ber. 1652. Vale. Consull Reed's 5 Letter. Livorn, October 26. 1652. SIR, IN Answer unto yours 21 currant, I have not failed upon all occasions to further and solicite the going out of these ships, but Capt. Seaman, and M. Roopes flat deniall, without Order from their Owners, or Commands from the State, giveth such a dulnesse in the prosecution thereof, that I have little hopes of the stirring hence of the men of War; God knoweth the vexation of spirit I have had here∣abouts, and the more for that unto me it appeared facill to have at the first destroyed, or beaten out of the way the small force of the Enemy then lying before this Port; and the more, in relation to the weaknesse ours would have found that batter'd Fleet before yours: so that I appre∣hended the sight of these would have made them flye, or if stood, not able to encounter these; my opinion at first was embrac't with a seeming forwardnesse and alacrity in Capt. Appleton, and some others, and voted requisite by most of the Nation at that time, but how dulled, and not put in execution, I leave it to them it concerns to Answer, for its
not putting the same in execution in such eminent and e∣mergent occasions, I apprehend Authority with compulsi∣on should have been used, with promise of pay from the State for the service, and indempnity unto the Comman∣ders for their Ownets and Merchants, this would have ren∣dred them unexcusable, and without question the State would have gratefully ratified such a resolution in their Ministers and Commanders, which I not onely pressed of∣ten unto Capt. Appleton, but unto M. Longland, out of zeale to the preservation and reputation of the Nation. What Answer Capt. Seaman, and M. Roope since have given in to Capt. Cox, upon your desires, as how he finds the men of War fitted, and their results, I leave unto Capt. Coxes Re∣lation, who also can certifie you how far I stirred therein. I have from the friend I employed at Rome, a returne with a Letter from Cardinall Triultio, the greatest Minister the Spaniards have in Italy, who recommends your interest unto that Governours care. From Genoa, the Ministers of Spaine were abroad, as M. Lewis his Letter will tell you, which I send you for the Newes therein, after perusall you may returne it me. The Cardinals Letter is open, so you may read it, and then wet the Wafer, and close it before delivery. I pray God put into your hearts resolution, and to act what may be for your safety speedily, ere more Vessels sent hence: And with my salutes to you and your Officers, my old friend M. Watts, Leiv. Stone, M. Tanner, &c. I re∣maine, Yours, Morgan Reed. Consull Reed's 6 Letter. SIR, I Wrote you under the 26 past, and therein sent a Letter from the Cardinall Triultio, chief Minister of Spaine, and
Ambassador with the Pope for the King of Spaine, unto that Governour, and being I was then going to Pisa, to as∣sist Capt. Cox about the Corn-ship, I left it unto the care of Capt. Appleton, for its speedy conveyance unto you; tel∣ling him withall how much it might import its speedy be∣ing with you, he promised to further accordingly, and I shall gladly understand you have it, as that it may be use∣full unto you; and if in ought else you can imagine me ca∣pable of doing any service, freely command me. Inclosed I sent you such Newes now come to hand from Genoa, which anticipateth our Letter not yet arrived from London, when you have perused the same, please to returne it. I am still sorry no resolution hence in our Ships going forth to relieve you; and I fear, as I tell them, Fryer Bacons last Vote will soon come upon them, viz. That since time was, and time is (that time drawes neer) wilbe past: I can tell you the Enemy is vigilant, and diligent, both here, and at Genoa, and speedily may be in such a posture as may give you reason to doubt to engage: God of his mercy put in your hearts to resolve and doe what's requisite for your preservation. In hast I rest. I am told a Fireship is gone now towards Longone, hence. Legorn, Octob. 1. 1652. Captaine Woods first Letter. Cap. Ri. Badiley. HOnoured SIR, I desire to blesse God for your safety, being delivered from your Enemie, and sorry for the losse of one of your Squadron, as also that you could have no assistance from any that is here; but of that no more now. Captain Witherage this day departed this life, and Captain Appleton not very well, conse∣quently the Squadron not in a good posture, which I am sorry to see, rather wishing that we had some good Resolutions to do a little work before us. Not above foure saile of Ships doe keepe us all here, and
I suppose at last it will be put to you to contrive our worke for us, & the Lord direct you in it: so time not permitting at present, but by the next shall be larger, of our crosse providences. No newes from England, with my humble respects to you Legorn, Sept. 3. 1653. Remain your Servant, John Wood. Capt. Wood's 2 Letter. Capt. Ri. Badiley, SIR; YOurs by the Satty, and another by Capt. Cox, came to my hands, and am glad you have found out such a way to secure your Provisions, as for the Governour to owne it: I doe wish in the mean time, none of our Boats run into danger, for the Barque men are very incident to lead them, if they will be rul'd by them; so am I also glad of your care in sending Capt. Cox to stir us up at Le∣gorn, in each businesse I shall not be wanting according to my po∣wer, the successe I shall refer to God, who is able to judge of all our intentions. The Lord in mercy send us united hearts in this time of Tryall, unto whose goodnesse I commend you, and respect∣fully rest Piombeene, 7ber 8. 1652. Yours, John Wood. Capt. Cox's 1 Letter. SIR; AFter the tender of my service, I salute you, trusting in the protection of the Almighty, you are in good health, with all our Christian friends; I desire to be excus'd for not writing at my first arrivall to this place of Livorn; the cause of my delay was to
see the resolution of Capt. Appleton, with the Commanders of the Merchants ships, but from the first day to this time they have kept their resolution. The Sampson and Mary will not budge, they say they did not com to convey men of War, I believe they have been put on by the dissaffected porty here of Merchants. So having not els at present, I humbly take leave, and rest, &c. Lg. Sept. 24. 1652. Owen Cox. Capt. Cox's 2 Letter. Sir; AFter the tender of my most humble service, I give you to un∣derstand that I have received yours the 30 of the last, where∣in you are pleased to hint to me my slacknesse in writing to you; I desire your favourable excuse in that particular: The great and chiefest cause of my omissien, is because I hop'd we might doe some acceptable service here worth the imparting to you. I wrote you in my lost the hopes I had of the reducing the Phaenix, the businesse was brought to a head, I then receiv'd a Command from Capt. Ap∣pleton not to persist any further in it, which hath been a great trouble to my spirit, yet resolved to proceed in it; but to crosse me in my resolution, the Flemmings were made acquainted with it, and set a strong guard abord the Frigot: I had fitted two Barques with forty men a peece, to bord her, which I did not question in the least, but to have carried her, but was betrayed by him whom it doth so much concerne. Sir, the Fireship departed this Port with a man of War, about two a clock this morning, intending for Porto Lon∣gone, I hope God will preserve you: Having not else at present, humbly take my leave, and rest Levorn, 9 Oct. 1652. Owen Cox. Capt. Appleton's first Letter, and two more
were received from him of this tenor, men∣tioning nothing of his Sicknesse. Capt. Badiley, BY the Vessell Capt. Cox found at Sea, which arrived late bere yesternight, we perceive that the ten saile of Hollanders have met with you, and were in Fight, we have sent two Felucas on purpose to see how it is with you, of which we hope well; if you goe in for any Port, I pray give me notice, that I with the rest of our ships here, may give you our best assistance, we are hauling out of the Mould with the Leopard and Bonaventure. The ship Mary, Perrigreen, Levant Merchant, and one M. Edge of 18 Guns, will be all ready to depart this place in the morning, and shall watch the motion of these five ships that are here. I am mind∣ed to take in a hundred Barrels of Powder more, in case you should want, and intend to bring two Felucas along with me, to go to and againe upon occasion, in having correspondence, and taking ad∣vise with you. I have not else but my prayers to God for you, and the ships under convoy, and that our meeting may be safe, and suc∣cessfull, remaine Yours, Henry Appleton. Captain Appleton's fourth Letter followeth; telling me that the Dutch themselves con∣fest, a greater Sea-Fight had not been in their remembrance; and that they were as much torne as the English: One may won∣der since it was so, why he came not out.
Capt. Badiley, YOurs by M. Light foot yesterday-morning, came to my hands, and received this morning yours by M. Cart∣wright, and am very glad to hear of your prosperity and welfare, after this hot and tedious dispute of yours with the Hollanders, and of the good service which Gapt. Cox in the Warwick perform'd, and under God in your behalfe. Sir, I wish with all my heart that my selfe and the Bona∣venture had been with you in this your late Engagement, questioning not but by Gods assistance to have gain'd the Victory, yet blessed be his name it's no worse with you, if considering aright your condition, and the carriage of some Commanders under you, in this businesse it could not have been conjectured for you, with your Merchants ships to come off with those Flemmings so well as you did, ac∣knowledging God was much seen in it. I hear by the Hol∣landers who have writ to their Agent here, there hath not been a hotter dispute on the Sea to their remembrance, then this hath been, confessing themselves are as much torne as you are. The losse of the Phaenix I am very sorry for, know∣ing no man can govern any more ships then himselfe is a∣bord of. I would desire your approbation in placing a Commander in the Bonaventure, in my opinion none more fiter then Capt. Cox for the said place, if it stand with your liking pray perswade Capt. Cox to it, that ship hath never been well govern'd this voyage; I would have Capt. Cox sease his resolution to come from you as yet; I intend if it please Almighty God to give me strength of body, with∣in two or three dayes to come over with M. Wood and o∣ther Commanders to you to Porto Longone, the Merchants want two weeks Letters; we have notice now that the Great Duke hath received a Letter from his Agent in Lon∣don, that Capt. Nicholas Reed hath the Command of fifteen ships which are in the Downes, and as he saith ready to de∣part to this place: Not else at present to advise you, with my prayers for a safe meeting, remaine Lego. Sept. 3. 1652. Yours, Henry Appleton.
Capt. Appleton's 5 Letter. Capt. Ri. Badiley, YOur Letter by Capt. Cox of the 8 instant received, since had not an opportunity to write to you, nor have not received any from you; I perceive you doe approve of what I wrote concerning placing Capt. Cox Commander of the Bonaventure, which is ac∣cordingly done. Mr Longland, my selfe, and Capt. Cox, have severall times used the best Oratory that we could, for the perswa∣ding of Capt. Seaman Commander of the Sampson, and Mr. Gilbert Roope, Commander of the Mary, to fit their ships to goe out with us, but they will by no meanes condiscend unto it; there was then, and is now in this road, nine saile of Hollands men of War, one of which we suppose to be a Fire-ship; my selfe and the Bonaventure, with Mr. Wood and Mr. Marsh, who shew both willingnesse to the service, have not above seventy men be∣twixt both their ships, it would be too great an advantage for the enemy upon us, we being but foure ships. I doe well approve of your advise in standing to the southward of the Island; if we were well able to encounter these nine in the road, that then you would en∣deavour to breake through them seaven ships which keep you in that Port; but I see not in any likelihood which way we can doe it, being but two men of War to confide in: No man should be more forward or willing then my selfe, to advance the service of the State, if that I did see any probability thereof. I have received se∣verall Letters from Mr. iNich: Gold, one of the Committee of the Novy, and he, and Capt. Ryder, both write unto me that there will be very suddenly a good Squadron dispeeded for our supply, Mr. Longland hath the like Newes from Col. Thomson, but it's de∣sired it may be kept private. I have notice of the Expresse I sent on purpose is arrived with the States. I have not received any Let∣ters or Orders from the Committee of the Navy, since I came into this Road, but expect by the next Post. I remaine Abord the Leopard in Leg. Mould, 18 Sep. 1652. Henry Appleton.
Mr. Longlands 6 Letter. Octob. 19 Telling us, that among other Troubles we had false Brethren. Captain Badiley. SIR; I Have received yours of the 2 and 5 currant, the latter came to my hands this day: Your Letters for England came too late for this ordinary, by the next they shall be sent forward. The Dutch have advice of a great Sea-fight in the mouth of the Channell, wherein they say they have sunk 14 saile, and as many of our ships are returned into Brest; I have Letters from Amsterdam as fresh as any, but they writ nothing thereof they there heard of your dispute, so next week the News will be in Eng. I send you this man expres to advise you that last night departed hence the Bristow Prize, which is made a Fire-ship, so it were convenient you sent up to the Generall to acquaint him with it, that he may deny her coming into Port, for her coming thither can be with no other intent but to de∣stroy your ships; at least let the Governour send abord to search her, and he shall find the Ship full of Faggots and Brush, and such combustible matter. I referre you to Capt. Coxes Relation, to tell you how his designe on the Phaenix is discovered, by some false Brother from abord the Ships. Van Trump is now come hither to take possession: so no more thoughts of her till it please God to send some other succour: Col. Thompson gives me hopes of suc∣cour for these ships. Legorn, Octob. 19. 1652. Charls Longland. Mr. Longland's 7 Letter. Shewing how gallantly we had be en to passe, in case the three Frigots and Harry Bona∣naventure,
had not gone to Messina, but have gone to Porto Longone, as it was de∣sired. Capt. Ri. Badiley, SIR; I Wrote you yesterday by the present, in answer to yours received by the Footman; this day I called the Commanders together, and delivered them your Letters, who are now making all ready to saile: Last night went out Van Gallen and another ship, who in the night run ashore at Vada, as the Bearer hereof will inform you: when you writ your last Orders to these Commanders to come away, you did not know otherwise but that the Frigots and the Harry Bonaventure might be with you to joyne together, but I fear your Order to them to that purpose came short, for ten dayes afore they were all together in the Vare of Messina, so you may imagine which way they are going. Six of the Enemy lye at the entrance of the gulfe of Venice: I dispatch this Feluca to you to know where Van Trumps Squadron is, for if these ships depart, it's probable the Five ships of the Enemy will fly before them, till they come nigh with another Squadron, and ten or twelve ships together may much prejudice these; wherefore pray informe us well by returne of this Feluca where they are; and give us your absolute Order whether these ships shall come, and accordingly they will proceed by Gods blessing. We have made choice of Capt. Seaman to Command the Leopard, Mr. Roopes Owners desires Fisher to be Command∣er, so I think it best to let it rest for quietnes sake. I take leave, and rest, At your Command Charls Longland. Legorn, Feb. 10. 1653. Mr. Longlands 8 Letter. Shewing how cauteous he was in Impresting
Merchants Ships into the Service. Capt. Badiley, SIR; I Writ you the 19 instant by a Footman which I sent you Express, that the Dutch had that day sent hence the Bristow Prize, whereof they had made a Fire-ship: This morning is come in∣to Port about nine saile of Dutch, which are said to be those that lay at Porto Longone, if so that your place be clear of them, I hope the Merchants ships that have Goods for this place, have made use of the opportunity to goe into Porto Ferraro, where immedi∣ate Order will be taken for delivery of their Goods. This day I have received large Letters from the Councell of State, whereof the inclosed to you will give you notice, and impart unto you. I suppose the Contents of what they have writ to me, a∣bout taking up Merchants ships for their service; wherein I am to advise with you and Capt. Appleton, how far it will be conveni∣ent to doe it; for as I would not by any means spare their money for the Nationall good or service, so I would not willingly freight ships at the publick Charge, to lye still in Port, and doe nothing. I am sorry you are at such a distance that we cannot so well confer to∣gether, wherefore pray send me your advise for my Government herein. Here is the Perrigreen a fit ship if men may be got; at Ge∣noa is the Lewis, M. Ell, at Venice may be others, but the great difficulty will be want of Men: All things together considered, give me your advise whether I shall fraight those two ships, and up∣on what terms (for the State prescribes not any) and that you may the better understand their meaning, whereby you might give me some insight thereinto: I herewith send you copy of their Or∣der word for word. And so I rest At your Command. Charls Longland. Legorn, Octo. 22. 1652.
Mr. Longlands 9 Letter. By which all men may see what a horrid Lye Capt. Appleton puts out in Print against him, saying, that he should triumph in his Imprisonment. Capt. Badiley, SIR; I Am now come to Answer yours of the 17 and 19 cur∣rant: The Great Duke hath writ downe Newes hither to the Colonel, that 22 English or Dutch ships have been seen on the Coast of Spaine, I believe about the end of the next Month we may expect our ships if their resolutions hold. The Letter you sent for the Great Duke I sent for∣ward, and herewith return you his Answer: About the de∣mands you make of the Great Duke for your free Egresse and Regresse, I thought it more secure to write for it, that I might have it under his hand, then to take an Answer by word of mouth, so I herewith send you Signior Pandolfini his Secretary of State's Letter to me in Answer. For what you say about the Dukes imprisonment of Capt. Appleton, unheard, all the Princes in the world are on the same trade, and steere their course after one manner. What doe you think had become of the five Members of Parliament, if the late King had found them; besides his imprisonment, not a man could be suffer'd to speak with him, those few lines he wrote were all translated at Court, before they came to our hands. You know very well how unlimited a thing an absolute Prince is, wherefore in this Countrey we must have patience. I told the Great Duke the Common-wealth suffer'd in their reputation by Capt. Appleton's imprison∣ment, but he answer'd he would give them good satisfacti∣on therein. I perceive Capt. Roope will know nothing of Capt. Bowman to Command the Mary, the Bonaventure ex∣treamly
wants a good Commander, for the Master is not right, never from the shore. I herewith send you Capt. Cox Letter, wherein you may see what there passes, I have given him credit on M. Baker for what his occasions require to re∣pair his Ship. C. Peacocke is to bring you out twenty sail of Ships to be under your Command: The inclosed from Eng: will acquaint you with what passes there; you need not doubt in the least of your free coming hither, this is my o∣pinion, and you will see as much by the Secretaries Letter. I rest, Your Servant. Charls Longland. Lego. Dec. 24. 1652. Mr. Longlands 10 Letter. Shewing what a gallont opportunity we had, in case the Frigots had come from Naples, (and not have gone to Messina) unto Porto Longone, where the Parragou rode all alone in expectation of them. Capt. Badiley, SIR; I Wrote you yesterday by the return of your Feluca, this is intended by the Purser of the Mary Rose, with whom I have had some discourse about the livering of the ship, wherein can be no difficulty, whil'st they keep the Goods in their owne possession ashore, so he tels me he will liver her, wherein you may please to urge him likewise. I sent for∣ward your Letter to Genod by the Lyons Post, and writ to Mr. Wright, to whom the John and Concord is commended, about sparing 30 men and 20 Guns, upon the tearms you
propound; what the issue will be we must attend. Here is not above 6 or 7 Dutch in the Road. I wish the Frigots were come from Naples, and then 'twere a good opportuni∣ty to come hither and clear this road; for if these ships in the Road could be destroyed, or at least removed, I hope we should never again be put into a pin-fold. The Dutch have now shewed us the way, that 'tis lawful to doe any thing in Road or Mould, when we have a power and op∣portunity to doe it; for two dayes past I laded 50 Chests of Tinn upon a French ship, for Smyrna, upon which I took 2400 d. of the Captain at Cambio, but the Tinn was worth 1600 d. more, the Dutch having intelligence of it, the French man riding to the north of the Road, two ships made saile towards her, and sent 4 arm'd Boats abord her, and took a∣way the Tinn: I have sent away a Carrier to the Great Duke, to acquaint him with it, but I fear his Answer wilbe the same as the Governour gives me, that it must goe upon account of the Frigot: At least we now clearly see by this action, that when we have a power we need not be scrupu∣lous in what place we fall upon the Enemy; and although an unhappy losse be fallen upon me, yet it may prove ad∣vantagious to the generall businesse: I shall to morow have answer from Florence, what the Great Duke sayes to the bu∣finesse, whereof my next shall advise you. These Dutch talk much of their wedding the Kings Quarrel, but Mr. Webster writes me nothing of it. This is what occurres, I rest, Legorn, Feb. 8. 1653. Charls Longland. Captain Roop's 1 Letter, about putting off Fisher into the Mary. SIR; MY humble service presented unto you, some few days since I made bold to trouble you with a few lines,
advising Mr. James Bowman's reply unto your proffers, in which I conceive you are well satisfied, as likewise am I, so do againe recommend unto you my Mate, Benjamin Fisher, requesting you by the first good occasion, to send him a line or two with your Warrant to take the Com∣mand of the Mary, that I doe now again confirm, humbly intreating you to favour me with it, quitta primo, that so I may settle him before the ships are required out. Thus hum∣bly requesting you to remember him that is, and whil'st remaining will be, SIR, Your humble Servant, at Command, Gilbert Roope. Legorn the 9 of Feb. 1653. Capt Roop's 2 Letter, desiring none but Ben∣jamin Fisher might Command the Mary. Cap. Ri. Badiley; Honoured Sir, MY most humble service presented, your courteous lines of the 28 of January, I have from the hand of Mr. Charls Longland now receiv'd, and cannot but returne you humble thanks for your willing assent unto my re∣quest, whereby you have obliged me to you, so, as that up∣on all occasions I shall not want to manifest the same by my thankfulness and readinesse to observe your Com∣mands. And in order to what you advise, I shall take out my
name of the Commission, and put in Ben: Fisher, he being one I am confident that will deserve your love. I have con∣sidered what you are pleased to write about Mr. Watts, in answer say, That by no means I can admit of him, nor any other, onely Ben: Fisher, for he is the man that I have advis'd my Owners, hath the charge of the Ship: Now as you have been pleased so freely to favour me in my request heretofore, so I humbly beseech you to confirm the same, and not to put any other Commander in, save Ben: Fisher. Your humble Servant, Gilb: Roope. Legorn, Feb. 10. 1653. Capt. Cox's Letter, speaking of the Reason why he came not from Naples, but went to Messina. SIR, WIth the tender of my very humble service, I salute you, trusting in the protection of the Almighty, you are in good health, with all the Commanders that are with you. Sir, I received yours at Naples, but the Post came two dayes after his usuall course, and my great trouble and grief in my imprisonment, prevented me in writing by the last conveyance from thence: it was Wednesday late in the night, before I had my liberty, the next day in the evening I set saile, and put to Sea with all our Fleet. Sir, I endea∣voured to performe according to your desire, but winds and weather proving so bad, which forc't me to Messina, where I left the Harry Bonaventure. I stopt not at Messina, but went through about five in the afternoon, by the south Lantern: about ten at night we met with one of the Dutch Fleet, whom we took; the next day we engaged the Fleet in hopes to have given a good account of them, but provi∣dence hath otherwise ordered it. I have had much spoyle
among my men, my ship much torn; when God sends me well to meet, I shall give a full relation of our passages; in the mean time I shall refer you to Mr. Lightfoot, who is in some measure sensible of our dispute. Sir, if you are not pleased that I shall not come in to you, let me hear by the first, and withall to send me a supply of Powder and Shot proportionable, for that I much want, I could not have a supply at Messina. I humbly take leave and rest, Your humble Servant to Command, Owen Cox. From abord the Phoenix at Sea, Feb. 17. 1652. Here followeth the Copy of my Letter to Capt. Appleton, three dayes before our Ingagement. Capt. Appleton; I Am heartily glad the Great Duke is so far pacified to you, as that he is willing you should continue your Command until this dispute be over, & then, God sparing me life (at a consultation of Friends) I shall do for you what I can, and I hope we shall reach your desires; I would have all the ships to be of your Squadron for the pre∣sent, except the Bonaventure, that I desire may be of mine. I came from Porto Ferraro last night, with these eight ships and a Fire-ship (blessed be God) all in a good equipage, having got the Fly-boats men and Guns, and all our men seem to be gallantly resolved. I suppose we may be almost a third part of the way over, and ere this come to hand we may be in sight, pray desire Mr. Longlands company on bord, and consult with the Commanders what is best to be done, whether it were not best to ward your ships without the Mould head, or not;
I think it were best this fine weather; and if I see the ships plying out to meet me, I intend to keep plying to wind∣ward of them, untill I see you under saile, plying after us, and then when it's a gale I shall endeavour to break through them, that so I may come and joyne with you. If the wind be of shore, and you see them coming out to me, pray hasten as for life, to follow with all the saile you can make, that we may not be too much opprest before you come, for other matters I must leave it to you that are upon the place; I doubt the onely want of our ships will be Powder and round Shot, pray desire Mr. Longland (at least) to put some on bord of you for us. I suppose your selfe and the Vice-Admirall of the Dutch will try a pluck for it; although he be the great Boar, yet he is but a Boar, and (who knowes) being the Game of this Countrey, he may be hunted as well as others: And not to enlarge, I remaine Yours, Ri: Badiley. On bord the Parragon, Tuesday, Mar. 1. at 6 mor: of Pompalonia, the 1 Letter. Here followeth Mr. Longland's 11 Letter; telling me the Great Duke would not suf∣fer the Dutch to doe any acts of Hostility in his Road. Legorn, the 12 of March, 1652. Capt. Badiley, SIR, LAst night about Sun-setting, came to my hands by your Feluca, your Letter, dated 4 leagues to the northward of Porto Ferraro; in answer, all things shall be punctu∣ally
effected as you Order. I carried Capt. Seaman and Capt. Wood twice to the Se∣cretary, as sent by the rest of the Commanders, to acquaint him, that if the stormy weather continued, 'twas not possi∣ble for them to goe out, nor you to come in: As also if the Dutch lay at the Mould head, their ships could not get out; and as it was his Highnesse pleasure to Command them hence, so it concern'd him in honour to open the door or passage to let them out. Last night the Secretary shewed us the Great Dukes Letter to you, in answer to yours from Porto Ferraro, that he gave us liberty to the 18 of this month to get out, and longer then, if wind and weather hindred: He takes very well what you propound∣ed concerning the freedome of his Port, and ha's been all this day (as he saith) endeavouring to get Van Gallen to under-write the same likewise; but whil'st they were in Treaty, Newes came to Van Gallen that you were on the way from Porto Ferraro, so nothing was effected; the Secre∣tary tels me within this hour he will send again to him, and I hold it not convenient that the ships stir out of the Mould, til an answer come, except the Dutch weigh An∣chor, and goe out to you, in such case they must all out of the Mould, come what will. The Secretary tels me they have three or four Captaines, and fifty or sixty Dutch Mar∣riners in hold, who shall not be set at liberty except Van Gallen subscribes the writing to use no hostility in the road. Our men and Commanders are all chearfull and ready to use their utmost indeavours, upon which I hope the Lord will give his blessing. Capt. Appleton is permitted by the Great Duke to stay here during this Engagement: I hope the two Felucas are arrived with Powder, Shot, and Mo∣ney, I gave them order to look out for you at Sea; let me know if you want any thing, it shall be sent you. A few hours will resolve us what the Enemies intents are. God I hope will appear for our Nation, in his wonted mercy, to whose protection I commit you, and rest, Wednesday morn. at 9 a clock Mar. 2. abord the Leopard. Your servant, Charls Longland.
In the next place here followeth the substance of my Letter (to the best of my remem∣brance) unto Capt. Appleton of the third of March, at four a Clock in the morning; but as for the direct Copy, either I had not time to take it, or else it is miscarried. Capt. Appleton, I Perceive the Dutch have no mind to come out to me, but remaine in the Road, with hope to ruine you at your coming forth; and the Squadron with you being somewhat the lesse, what ever I suffer my selfe, I would not have it hazarded: wherefore be very cautious what you doe as to coming forth, if you have not an opportu∣nity in the night. I would have you remaine at the Mould head while I come neer that place to receive you, unlesse you see me engag'd, and in that case pray take Mr. Long∣lands opinion what to doe, who is a discreet Gentleman, and one that will not onely give you the best Counsel he can, but I am confident is as loath to hazard you, as my selfe. Yours, Ri: Badiley. Here followeth his Answer to my Letter, dated at 4 a clock that Afternoone. Capt. Ri. Badiley, I Received yours, bearing date 4 a clock this present mor∣ning, and do acknowledge your great care in advancing the publick, and of not hazarding this Squadron. The Agent being on bord, I sent for all the Commanders, and
shewed them not only your Letter, but the results of your Councel of War, which were all with a unanimous con∣sent, very well approved of; together with your intenti∣ons for managing the Fight, Squadron to Squadron, I shall to my utmost endeavour to execute what you please to order; we being at present in a very good posture, all men exceeding willing. If you can draw neer in the night, within the Malora, the wind be∣ing off the shore, we shall by God his assistance, and your approbation, break through the Enemy, which by a gene∣ral consent is referred to you. Our eyes are towards him, who by the breath of his Nostrils can make these Vaunters flye before us, for which I continually pray, in the meane am Leopard, Lego. Mould, Mar. 3. 1653. at 4 in the afternoon. Henry Appleton. Master Longland's 12 Letter, being his last before our Engagement; wherein it appeares that we were dealt withall, as those that were betrayed. Legorn-Mould, abord the Leopard, March 13. 1653. at 22 houres. Capt. Badiley, Sir; I Now Answer yours dated this morning at 4 a clocke, and I must write you that the Dutch  rison are releast and sent abord; the businesse betwixt them and the Duke seems to be ad∣justed, which must turne to our prejudice: the Collonel told me his opinion was, as soone as our ships had their sternes to the Mould, the Dutch would assault them; he likewise ask'd me if you in∣tended
to assault them in the Road; these are symtomes that the Road is theirs that win it, as I cannot get so much from them in plaine tearms, neither will I perswade you to begin any hostility in the Road, for I believe you will not want provocation, or at least the ships now here before you come in, yet I would not wish you to de∣sist from any notable advantage, upon nicities, when no assurance or certainty can be got from any of these great Officers. The ships are all ready to undertake any thing that is within the compasse of possibility, but except part of the Dutch goe out to you, or at least your Fleet come in to our succour, it is impossible for these ships to get away without great losse and hazard. The Great Dukes Letter unto you was sent to Porto Ferraro, and is thence come back to my hands, which I would have sent you translated, if time would permit, but I doubt not but it will be well done, by some with you. I must not omit to tell you, that the Collonel this day told me, if our ships were worsted in this incounter, and came back thither for a Port, the Frigot must then be restored. The great designe of the Flemmings is to spoyle them ships in the Mould, which I believe is the cause they will not stir to come out to you. Your Servant, Charls Longland. Here followeth the Copies of the Orders and Rules agreed upon, for every mans better Government in the time of Engagement. UPon the Question, whether we shall stand into Legorn-Road with the wind westerly, so that we judge our Ship cannot come out of the Mould; it was resolved in the negative. But rather, that we shall keep the wind off our Enemy, and not wilfully ingage them without hope of help from our other Squadron.
Upon the Question, in case the wind be Easterly, when we come near Legorn-Road, whether it were not best tack, and stand off to the southward a little while, thereby to en∣deavour the drawing or touling off our Enemy out, that our dispute might be where we may have Sea-roome e∣nough, it's resolved in the affirmative. Upon the Question, what shall be done in case the Ene∣my bord any Ship of this or the other Squadron, it's resol∣ved that those of the same Squadron (with all speed) shall bord that Enemy on the other side, as most conveniently it may be done. On bord the Parragon, March 1. 1653. Ri. Badiley. Owen Cox. George Hugham. William Ʋpshot. John Turtle. Jonat: Reeves. Will: Ell. John Godolphin. It followed the 3 of March. Ʋpon the Question, whether we were not best keep our ships loose when we draw neer the Enemy in Legorn-Road, let the wind be where it will, it's resolved in the affirmative. Ʋpon the Question, what the ships of any Squadron shall doe, in case the Commander in chiefe of that Squadron, be removed by any disaster; it's resolved, that in such case they shall keep neere the Admirall by night or day to receive his Commands, if possible it can be done. Ri: Badiley. Wil: Ell. Jo: Godolphin. Jo: Turtle. Pet: Whiting. The Frigots were about a League within us, to watch the motion of the Enemy, the Commanders could not be with us, but every one of them, with others, had Copies sent them of these Resolves, that no man might plead excuse herafter.
Mr. Longlands 13 Letter. Shewing what was the issue of that Tragedy near Legorn the 4 of March last. Legorn, Apr: 25. 1653. Capt. Badiley, BY Peter Whyting I received yours, dated the 16 of March, which it seemes was a Copy of what you writ me by Captaine Hewes, the Originall I never heard further of, nor the bearer: I hope this may meet you well arriv'd at home, and bid you welcome thither. I need not write you the various censures here upon your going away. All the 4 ships were lost before you came up; of this you will heare at home, as also the full relation of the unhappy losse of our ships. For my part I was no Spectator, for when I saw them so suddenly goe out of the Mould, upon the back of the Enemy (con∣trary to their own deliberate result in a Councell of War that morn∣ing not to stir thence till the Enemy had engaged you) I went into my Chamber, where I kept my selfe, fearing that successe which befell them: By noon the Tragedy was ended, the Leopard being the last ship, who had strength enough to clear her selfe, if she had either the courage or discretion to make use of it: The Dutch themselves report, if she had but ask'd for those ships that lay abord her, she might have had them. Mr. Spradlerow the Minister (now at my house) confesseth that he and others look'd in at their Ports, but saw not a man on their Gun-decke, but such was their fate, that they still delayed untill it was too late. I rest, At your Command. Charls Longland. Here followeth Mr. Longland's 14 Letter; complaining very justly of Cap. Seaman's Ingratitude, and of the great abuse he re∣ceived from him. Vale.
Legorn, May 23. 1653. Capt. Badiley, SIR; AT request of Capt. Appleton, Seaman, and Marsh, I entred into Bond to the Dutch Vice-Admirall for 12000 Dollars, that in two moneths they should render themselves Prisoners in Holland, the Dutch having lost their prattick (by taking a Po∣latto which brought some Wools from Tunnis) our Captaines were necessitated to make Purgo in the Lazareta, when they came thither: Two dayes since I went to see them, and bid them wel∣come ashore, but I found such an encounter from Seaman, that in all my life-time I never was halfe so much abused, he call'd me all the base scandalous names he could imagine, took up great stones and flung at me to have brain'd me, and I am confident if he could have come at me had done me some notable mischiefe, if not to the losse of my life. If the State take not some order to tame such men, it will not be in my power to doe them any service, nor fit to be a Commissioned servant of theirs, when I shall be subject to the abuse of such a scandalous fellow, whose extream Malignancy and backwardnesse, ha's been the ruine of all our ships here; and now he ha's basely lost his ship, he vents his venome to the full; there were above forty Witnesses of this abuse. Neither did he leave you and Capt. Cox un-abus'd, but toold me before all men, that Co∣wardly base fellow Badiley, and that base Rogue Cox, were like∣wise Confederates. In fine, if he could have nam'd any man else that bore any affection to the State, or served them with faithful∣nesse, they had likewise come under his abuse. I am certaine I have not injured him in the least, but contrarily I am engaged for him a great sum of money. If the State doe not make me some re∣paration upon this man for the injury he has done me herein (and likewise to let him know it) I shall be subject to all abuses from such fellowes, which rather then I wilbe, I will returne the States Commission; and so much I pray let them know from Your Servant. Charls Longland.
Certaine Affidavits, and Certificates, Shewing the Fallaciousnesse of that Pamphlet, called The Remonstrance of the FIGHT neer Legorn, the 4 of March last, 1652. The first Affidavit. THese are to certifie whomsoever it doth concerne, That being Lievtenant in the States ship Parragon, about midnight, before the 4 of March last, our Ad∣miral seeing a fresh gale of wind off the shore, cals me to him, when as we seem'd to be neer the Lanthorne, and with great earnestnesse bids me hasten into Legorn-Mould with the Feluca, and tel Capt. Appleton that he should cal the rest of the Captaines immediately, and there acquaint them, that he did effectually recommend it to their consideration, to come away to him: I went accordingly, and told him my message, but notwithstanding some of the Captaines came together, Capt. Fisher could not be made rise to come thither in an houre after, and when they did come to∣gether, they were so long in concluding what to doe, some∣times they would, and sometimes they would not, Capt. Seaman lying on Capt. Appletons Couch like a Lordaine most part of the time. In conclusion, when it was nois'd on the Leopards upper deck that they would not goe out til morning, I heard one Wrightington a Masters Mate, or Pylot of the ship, say these words in a passion, as if he would tear his haire, These cursed men (meaning the Commanders) are so bewitched or besotted to this Mould, that they care not for going hence, why cannot we goe having such a gallant gale of wind, now that the Admirall hath sent for us. Returning to our ship the Parragon, at break of day, find∣ing
our selves to be somewhat further off then we made account, I am able to testifie, all saile was made to ply in∣to Legorn-Road, as possible could be, until about an houre after, that the Dutch Fleet was come out neer Mount Ne∣gro, and then their head-most ships bearing off directly up∣on us, our Main-saile was hail'd up for halfe an houre, as was all the reason in the world, that we might have no∣thing hinder us from plying all our Guns between Decks, that our men might be ready to stand by our great Ord∣nance; but as soone as ever our Ships came out of the Mould, all the saile the wind would give leave, was kept abroad, and the Admiral plyed in with all diligence, and to my knowledge it was first declared by him, his resoluti∣on was to bord the Dutch Admiral, but coming so neer her as that we could discharge a Volley of smal shot to a∣ny purpose, we did it, together with a broad side of great Ordnance; and seeing none of our Frigots going on bord to the relief of the Leopard, our Captaine seeing so many of the Fleet lost, judging it the most necessariest service to re∣liefe her, we stood towards that ship, but being the wind was very fresh, it was not held fit we should run stemlings with all our sailes (except the Main-saile, and top-gal∣lant sailes, for ends before denoted) however after we had powred a broad side into the Julius Coesar, and past within two or three ships lengths of her sterne, great indeavours were used to make our ship Parragon bear up, that we might come to the other tack, that so we might goe on bord with the more ease; but it pleased God the wind dullard all on the sudden, so that we could not make our ship work, nor bear up in any time, if all our lives had laine on't, and then bringing our ship to againe, before we could make her stay, we were shot so far, that before possible we could get a∣bord the Leopard, she was driven so neer the sand of the Ma∣lora, that it was my opinion humbly given in to the Admi∣ral among other Officers, in case we should have further in∣deavoured to have gone on bord, it would be almost im∣possible ever to disintangle our selves from them againe, un∣til we had been upon the afore-mentioned sand, the wind
being at E. S. E. most commonly: And to my knowledge, when the Captaine saw that the ship would not work, he order'd some of the nimble ships to be cal'd unto to doe that service, and if the Mary or the Lewis had beene neer us, they had been cal'd to as wel as the Mary Rose. And I am confidently assured, that such as did least in our Fleet, did as much service against the Enemy, to destroy such as borded the Leopard, as did either Capt. Ell, or Capt. Fi∣sher; and whatever the Captaines of these ships say now we are come home, I am sure in our homeward bound way it was the vote and expression of them, and all other Captaines in the Fleet, that if we had engag'd any further in the businesse of Legorn, all had been lost. Dated this 13 of Sept. 1653. Tho: Hughes, Lievt. I doe also attest over and above what is inserted in the foregoing lines, that being at Legorn about the latter end of November last, I was upon the Bonaventures Fore-castle, when as Capt. Appleton did send men on shore to the Mould head to take a Flemming that had escap't thither, out of the Centinels house, and the Souldier refusing to deliver him, with his sword drawne, Capt. Appleton went himselfe ashore, and forc't the Prisoner to come thence, and had car∣ried him back on bord his ship, but that more Souldiers came downe with their Muskets Cock'd, and forc'd the Marriners to let him goe, and so he made his escape. I doe also Attest, That being on bord the Parragon in Por∣to Longone, about the latter end of Jan: last, Capt. Appleton having received an Order from the Councel of State, to com for England, taking his leave of me, said, They have sent for me home to question my life, to which I replyed, You may hear∣tily thanke God that your life was not taken from you when you tooke the Dutch man out of the Centinels house. And more-over the 4 of March last, being all the time on the Parragons Deck, that we were so near the Leopard, as is denoted by what is exprest before, I could never discern that any one man appear'd upon the Leopards Deck, to signifie
unto us whether she were in our possession, or in the Ene∣mies. Dated as above, the 12 of September, 1653. Tho: Hughes. Lievt. Sworne, September 12. 1653. John Page. The second Affidavit. THese are to certifie whom it may concerne, That upon the fonrth of March last, being in the Fleet, a Masters Mate in the ship Mary Rose, all the night I observed we had a fine fresh gale of wind off the shore, with brave weather that our ships might have come out of the Mould if they would, and in the morning all a∣long I could not discern to the contrary, but that our Ad∣miral and our selves made all the way that could to suc∣cour those that came out of the Mould; and being got neer the Leopard, I am confident as much meanes was used by the Admiral, and the backwardest of the rest to destroy those ships on bord the Leopard, and to bring her off, as was u∣sed by the Commander of the Lewis, and Mary, I may truly say notwithstanding their vapouring, much more was used by the Admiral, who having a heavy foule ship, could not work that time, the wind being so fickle, sometimes much, sometimes little, whereas they having clean nimble ships, might have gone on bord, to the Leopards reliefe, if they would: Also whil'st we were neer the Leopard with our ships, whereas it is said five ships of the Enemy gaul'd the Leopard to the Lee-ward, it is an abominable untruth, all of them (except their Admiral) being to the North∣ward of the Sampson, that lay then a burning, so that their shot could hardly reach the Leopard, and as far as I could discern, did not shoot at her, for we wth our ships past several broad sides upon those ships that were on bord the Leopard, within Pistol shot of them, and when the Dutch Adm: was to the South ward of the Leopard, our Admiral endeavoured to lay her abord, as far as I could discern, and she bore a∣way
from her afore the wind, into shoal water, to the N. wards, at last the Leopard was driven so neer the sand of the Malora, with the wind at E. S. S. that no prudent men would have stayed longer in hopes to have brought her off, then we did, which if she had let goe an Anchor in time, and stopt their own ship, as their head would have come to windward, the two Enemies ships that were abord her, would have back'd off with their own fails, with the help of the Leopards men upon their owne Deck, to clear the Ropes, for most part of the time, all the Enemies ships were a great distance from her to the N. wards, for truth of the aforesaid premises I make Oath. James Thomas. James Thomas maketh Oath, that the Contents of the a∣foresaid Certificate are in substance true. Sworne, Septemb. 9. 1652. John Page. The third Affidavit. I William Poole, being Lievtenant of the ship within men∣tioned in the above-said Certificate, doe testifie that the Contents hereof are true in substance. William Poole. Sworne, Sept. 22. 1653. The fourth Affidavit. THese are to certifie whom it doth concerne, That being Lievtenant on the ship Tho: Bonaventure, near Legorn, upon the 3 of March last, we were near the afore-mentio∣ned place, lying Leeward most part of the day, and after ten a Clock the night following, we had fine fresh gales of wind, that lasted until morning, so that I believe the ships
might have come out of the Mould, if they would, and the next day, although our Admiral made a bord or two, to get clear of the Malora, and hal'd up his Maine-saile for half an houre, to have his Guns clear when some of the Dutch Fleet bore away directly upon him, before the English ships come out of the Mould; yet after they came forth, I never per∣ceived to the contrary, but that the English Admiral haste∣ned to meet them with all the saile he could possibly make, ned being come neer them the wind was very fickle, some∣times much, and sometimes lesse, so that I verily believe those on bord the Parragon could not work her, being a heavy foule ship, as they desired to doe: And further, that I am very confident, that there was never a ship in the Fleet but did as much or more execution on the Enemy, then did the Lewis, or the Mary, after the latter broke through the Enemy to come to our Fleet: And (all things conside∣red) I could see no reason why we should have stayed longer neer Legorn then we did, in hopes to have relieved the Leopard. Dated neer London, Sept. 13. 1653. Sam: Dunn. Sworne, Sept. 13. 1653. John Page. The fifth Affidavit. GEorge Hewes, aged thirty-six years, or thereabouts, ma∣keth Oath, That he this Deponent being at Legorn a∣bout the middle of January last (and having not then re∣ceived the Stater Commission) but this Deponent being taken into the States Service upon the third of March last, being neer Legorn, having the Command of the ship Thomas Bonaventure, doth say, that all the next night following af∣ter ten of the Clock, they had a fine fresh gale of wind off shore, so that the ships in the Mould might have come out if they would; and the next day although our Admiral made a bord or two off to get clear of the Malora, and hal'd
up his Main-sail for half an houre, to have his Guns cleer, when as the Dutch Fleet bore away directly with him, before the English ships came out of the Mould; yet after they came forth, this Deponent further saith, That the English Admi∣ral hastned to meet them, with all the saile he could possi∣ble make, and being neer, the wind was very fickle, being sometimes much, and sometimes very little, so that he ve∣rily believes those on bord the Parragon could not work her, being a heavy foule ship, as they desired to doe. And further, this Deponent is very confident, That there was never a ship in the Fleete but did as much or more execution on the Enemy, then did the Lewis or the Mary, after she broke through the Enemy to come to the English Fleet. And this Deponent further saith, That (all things considered) he conceives there was no reason the English should stay longer at Legorn, then they did, in hopes to relieve the Leopard. And moreover this Deponent saith upon his knowledge, that Capt. William Ell, being in the Bay of Logos, about the latter end of March last (notwithstanding this Deponent advising him to the contrary, did absolutely refuse to obey our Admirals War∣rant, or Order which was sent to him for two men to help Man the Augustine Prize, in lieu of two Dutch-men, & after∣wards C. Badiley bid me bear witnes that the said C. Will: Ell was discharged out of the States service, from the time he made such refusal. George Hewes. Sworne, Sept. 12. 1653. John Page. The sixth Affidavit. THese are to certifie whomsoever it may concerne, That Thomas Hewes late Lievtenant of the States Ship Par∣ragon, Capt. Ri: Badiley Commander, being sworne upon the Holy Evangelists, doth say, and deposed on his Oath as followeth, viz. That on the third of March last, 1652. be∣twixt
the hours of twelve and one that night, he this De∣ponent was Commanded by the said Capt. Ri: Badiley, to go in a Feluca to Capt. Henry Appleton Commander of the Leopard then in the Mould, and to defire him to loose no opportunity to make to the said ship the Parragon, with the rst o those ships in company with them, where, in going, this Deponent did certainly see the Holland Fleet lying at Anchor some two mile distant from the said Mould, riding East, and West neerest. And moreover, I doe attest, That on the 4 of March last, in the afternoone, being clear of the Malora, by the Admirals Order we shortned saile, and staid until the Mary past by us, within Pistol shot, where they were cal'd unto from our ship, and not onely as'kt how it was with them, but directed what course they should steer when it was night. All which premises this Deponent af∣firmes on his Oath to be true, this 30 of September, 1653. Thomas Hewes. The seventh Affidavit. THese are to certifie whomsoever it doth concerne, That being Master of the States ship Parragon, and on the 4 of March last, in the said Ship near Legorn, which place I am very well acquainted with, having used it these twenty years, and upwards. At break of day, find∣ing our selves to be somewhat further off then we made account, I am able to testifie, all saile was made to ply in∣to Legorn-Road, as possible could be, until about an houre after, that the Dutch Fleet was come out neer Mount Ne∣gro, and then their head-most ships bearing off directly up∣on us, our Main-saile was hail'd up for halfe an houre, as was all the reason in the world, that we might have no∣thing hinder us from plying all our Guns between Decks, that our men might be ready to stand by our great Ord∣nance; but as soone as ever our Ships came out of the Mould, all the saile the wind would give leave, was kept
abroad, and the Admiral plyed in with all diligence, and to my knowledge it was first declared by him, his resoluti∣on was to bord the Dutch Admiral, but coming so neer her as that we could discharge a Volley of smal shot to a∣ny purpose, we did it, together with a broad side of great Ordnance; and seeing none of our Frigots going on bord to the relief of the Leopard, our Captaine seeing so many of the Fleet lost, judging it the most necessariest service to re∣liefe her, we stood towards that ship, but being the wind was very fresh, it was not held fit we should run stemlings with all our sailes (except the Main-saile, and top-gal∣lant sailes, for ends before denoted) however after we had powred a broad side into the Julius Coesar, and past within two or three ships lengths of her sterne, great indeavours were used to make our ship Parragon bear up, that we might come to the other tack, that so we might goe on bord with the more ease; but it pleased God the wind dullard all on the sudden, so that we could not make our ship work, nor bear up in any time, if all our lives had laine on't, and then bringing our ship to againe, before we could make her stay, we were shot so far, that before possible we could get a∣bord the Leopard, she was driven so neer the sand of the Ma∣lora, that it was my opinion humbly given in to the Admi∣nal among other Officers, in case we should have further in∣deavoured to have gone on bord, it would be almost im∣possible ever to disintangle our selves from them againe, un∣til we had been upon the afore-mentioned sand, the wind being at E. S. E. most commonly: And to my knowledge, when the Captaine saw that the ship would not work, he order'd some of the nimble ships to be cal'd unto to doe that service, and if the Mary or the Lewis had beene neer us, they had been cal'd to as wel as the Mary Rose. And I am confidently assured, that such as did least in our Fleet, did as much service against the Enemy, to destroy such as borded the Leopard, as did either Capt. Ell, or Capt. Fi∣sher; and whatever the Captaines of these ships say now we are come home, I am sure in our homeward bound way it was the vote and expression of them, and all other
Captaines in the Fleet, that if we had engag'd any further in the businesse of Legorn, all had been lost. I doe also Attest, That being on bord the Parragon in Por∣to Longone, about the latter end of Jan: last, Capt. Appleton having received an Order from the Councel of State, to com for England, he told me, They have sent for me home to question my life. And more-over the 4 of March last, being all the time on the Parragons Deck, that we were so near the Leopard, as is denoted by what is exprest before, I could never discern that any one man appear'd upon the Leopards Deck, to signifie unto us whether she were in our possession, or in the Ene∣mies. Dated the 12 of September, 1653. Anthony Watts. Sworne, September 12. 1653. John Page. The eighth Affidavit. THese are to certifie whomsoever it doth concerne, That whereas I was a Masters-Mate on the States Ship Par∣ragon, coming near Legorn-Road the 4 of March last, in the morning, to my knowledge as soon as ever it was known on bord our ship, that the English Squadron were coming out of the Mould, and that it was seen the Dutch intended to stand back and meet them, (according to the Admirals Order) we hastened in to them with all the saile we could make, and never shorted saile until either the heads of our Top-masts were ready to goe by the board, or that we came neer a close Engagement with the Dutch Admiral, and then our Admiral in the hearing of severall of us, at sundry times exprest himselfe, that he intended to have gon on bord the Admiral of the Dutch; and after we had dis∣charged a broad side, and a volley of smal shot on her, lea∣ving her by the Lee, his Boat was then sent to require the Commander of the Fireship to execute his duty in endea∣vouring
the destruction of the said Admiral, which if he had with, Main-saile and all, I believe she had been ruin'd; and when we left the Dutch Admiral, I heard our Com∣mander say he would on bord those ships that were entan∣gled with the Leopard, seeing none else going on bord that Cluster of ships to her relief. But we all judged it madness to run stemlings on bord her, when we first came to her, b∣ing then a fresh gale of wind; but passing by the Julius Cae∣sar, we poured a broad side in to her, and passing by within Musket shot of her, the Sun, and the Leopard, I could not see a man stirring fore and aft the Leopards Deck, but when our Capt. Commanded to flat our ship, that we might ei∣ther lay our Bowsprit over the Leopards stern, and so lye a∣long the Suns side, or else between the Sun and the Julius Cae∣sar, our ship with the little wind we had all of the sud∣den, would not bear up, with all the means we could pos∣sible use; and by that time we had brought her too again, and stood a little way to make her stay, the Perrigrins Main∣mast went by the bord (and it seems she was surrendred to the Dutch, with the Levant Merchant before) and being on the other tack, I heard our Captain say again, he would on bord the Leopard, and that knot of ships, but then when all, or the chiefest of his Officers came, and gave him their opi∣nion, that if we should go on bord, it would be very hazar∣dous, and questionable whether we should be dis-entangled againe, before we were all ashore together, or have been o∣therwise destroyed by fire: Therefore he thought fit to or∣der us to set our Main-saile, and withdraw, in regard we could hardly weather the Malora: And being thwart of the Malora, or very little without (it being about an hour af∣ter we had set our Main-saile) I saw the Leopards Flagge downe, but the Vice-Admiral of the Dutch had her Flagge out, on bord of her. And moreover I doe aver, That most part of that day, and as we stood out, the winde was at E. S. E. and S. E. b E. insomuch that we could lay South, and S. b E. to the S. and by W. with the stemm, and wea∣ther'd the Gorgano, about 3 or 4 Leagues. And moreover I doe testifie, that in my opinion, if the
ship Mary had been at an Anchor in the place where she was when we first left our Main-saile, the neerest of the Flem∣mings (being then on the edge of the Malora-sand) would have been about 6 or 8 miles running before they could come to her, who then can be so mad but sottish people, to judge her in any danger; and suddenly after we were clear of the Malora, long before night, our Admiral staid until all the ships came up with us, and especially the Mary, who was cal'd to from our ship, and was directed what course we should steer when it was night. Dated the 6 of October, 1653. John Jeakins. Sworne, Octob. 6. 1653. John Page. The ninth Affidavit. THese are to certifie whomsoever it doth concerne, That being Carpenter of the ship cal'd the Perrigrine, then in Legorn Mould, upon the fourth of March last, in the morn∣ing I heard our Captain John Wood say, that we went out too soone; and after our ship was lost, being at Mr Long∣lands when the said Captain came first ashore, very much wounded, I heard Mr Longland say, In regard Capt. Badileyes Order was not followed, therefore our Squadron was ruined. And moreover, I heard Capt. John Wood Reply to this effect, We cannot blame Capt. Badiley, but must confesse that our destruction is of our selves, for had we staid a little longer, while the said Badiley had been engaged, no doubt but that might have been saved, which is lost. And moreover I heard Mr. Longland say at that time, as soon as ever he heard they were under saile (to say, our ships in the Mould) he shut himselfe up in his Cham∣ber, and there in his thoughts gave them all for lost. And moreover I am able to testifie, That in August 1652. a Flemming coming from Zant, declaring how he came
out of the Levant with C. Badiley, and that he might be ex∣pected every day at Legorn, yet notwithstanding the States ships with us, lay in the Mould unrigg'd, and unprepared, so that when it was nois'd about that Capt. Badiley was in the Offing, in Fight, although we in the Perrigreen had our Top-masts an end, and were kept Victualled, yet the Leo∣pard, and Bonaventure, were not in a readinesse to go to Sea, nor could not have been in a day or two, the Leopards Main∣mast being all unrigg'd. Dated the thirteenth of September, 1653. John Butt. Sworne, Sept. 13. 1653. John Page. The tenth Affidavit. THese are to certifie whom it doth concerne, That where∣as I was Carpenter of the ship Perrigreen, in the Engage∣ment neer Legorn-Road the 4 of March last, to my knowledg the afore-named ship was surrendred the Dutch about an houre before the Main-mast of the said ship fell by the bord, and long before we were surrendred it was nois'd up and down the ship that the Levant Merchant was surrendred to the Dutch. Moreover I doe confidently affirme, That the Leopards Flagge was downe, and the Flemish Colours spread in that ship, ere the English Fleet that withdrew, had wanted an houre, in my judgement, or at most two houres, from discharging their Ordnance on the Enemy: This is as neer as I can give an estimate, to the best of my remembrance.. Dated the 30 of September, 1653 neere London, John Butt. I can attest the substance of the above-mentioned parti∣culars to be true. Gregory Barnett.
The eleventh Affidavit. I David Booth, being a Mate on the Parragon, do testifie, That the 4 of March last, from one a clock i'the morn: until it was day (when we seem'd to be neer the Lantern of Legorn) God was pleased to give our ships in the Mould as faire an opportunity for coming out to us, as men could desire, by a fresh gale of wind at E. N. E. so that in all likelihood they might have weather'd the Enemy above a mile, they riding all fast at an Anchor in the Road, but neglecting to put Capt. Badiley's Order in execution, proved their ruine, as also their not working, as men ought to have done, next morning, for had they stayed while the Dutch had com to Lee-ward upon us, and engaged us, they might have done good service, by following on the back of the Enemy, for all men saw, coming out as they did, they thrust themselves into danger, and all reasonable men might well have thought, the Enemy would have tack't back on them, see∣ing us so far to Lee-ward, that we could not come in to their succour, in two or three houres time. And moreover I can testifie, That as soon as ever the word was given, the ships were coming out of the Mould, we did as much as was possible for men to do, hastening in with all the sail we could make, to the hazard of our Masts. And being come neer, I am sure no man could shew more resolution to carry on the work of the day, then our Com∣mander shewed, and required all men to fit, for that he in∣tended to bord the Dutch Admiral, and when we gave her a broad side, that had been done, but that we saw the Leopard wanted relief, so we went to disentangle the Leopard, from those Enemies on bord her in the first place, and going by those ships within Pistol shot, our ship would not bear up, that the Capt. desire in going on bord that cluster of ships, might be effected, if al our lives had lain on't; but if the Leo∣pard had let goe an Anchor, they might have clear'd them∣selves with ease, yet they did it not, all men were hous'd, not a man to be seen on her upper Deck. And whereas I have heard, that Capt. Appleton should say
Capt. Badiley would not succour him, nor suffer any others to doe it, it is a most false thing; for I am confident our Captain was in such a passion when he saw our ship would not work, that he seem'd to tear his haire, in regard none of our nimble ships would doe what he was not able to doe; and afterwards, when the Parragon was got about by making a short trip, and staying, there was then no reason to have gone abord the Leopard, she being laid so far to∣wards the sand, the wind being at E. S. E. without it had been resolved we should perish together. David Both. Sworne, Sept. 20. 1653. John Page. The twelfth Affidavit. THese are to certifie whomsoever it may concerne, That whereas I was a Masters-Mate in the Phaenix Frigot, being neer Legorn in the Fleet upon the 4 of March last, I ob∣served that the night before (or at least) after ten of clock til morning, we had a fine fresh gale of wind, so that the ships in the Mould to my understanding, might have come out of the Mould if they would, and after it was light on the day aforesaid, I never saw to the contrary, but our Ad∣miral hastned in with all the saile he could make, and al∣though he sent order for us to goe before, to the relief of the ships coming out of the Mould, yet I am assured there was no diligence wanting in him that had the Command of all, to ply in, but the wind being sometimes much, and sometimes little, I believe that heavy foule ship the Parra∣gon, could not be wrought to their minds, and consequent∣ly they could not bord those ships on bord the Leopard, to their relief, as they desired to doe, and it was the opini∣on of most knowing men in our Frigot, there was no rea∣son to stay longer, in hopes to relieve the Leopard, then we did.
And moreover, I am able to testifie, that such as did least in our Fleet towards the above-mentioned ships relief, did as much as either the Lewis, or Mary. And moreover I doe attest, That being in the Bay of Lo∣gos, about the end of the said Month of March, the Admi∣ral sent me on bord the ships Lewis and Mary, with a War∣rant to each Commander, Authorizing them to spare two men of each ships company, to man the Augustine Prize, but both one, and the other, refused to render any conformity or obedience thereunto: Nay notwithstanding (I carried two lusty Flemmings in their roomes) with all the argu∣ments I could use to the contrary, they utterly denyed the same. Dated, Sept. 14. 1653. John Plumpton. Sworne, September 14. 1653. John Page. The thirteenth Affidavit. THese are to certifie whom it may concerne, That being a Reformado on the States ship Parragon, ha∣ving had a fresh gale of winde off the shore the night before the 4 of March. At breake of day finding our selves to be somewhat further off then we made ac∣count, I am able to testifie, all saile was made to ply in∣to Legorn-Road, as possible could be, until about an houre after, that the Dutch Fleet was come out neer Mount Ne∣gro, and then their head-most ships bearing off directly up∣on us, our Main-saile was hail'd up for halfe an houre, as was all the reason in the world, that we might have no∣thing hinder us from plying all our Guns between Decks, & that our men might be ready to stand by our great Ord∣nance; but as soone as ever our Ships came out of the Mould, all the saile the wind would give leave, was kept
abroad, and the Admiral plyed in with all diligence, send∣ing me in a Feluca to hasten in the Frigots before, wch I did, & to my knowledge it was first declared by him, his resoluti∣on was to bord the Dutch Admiral, but coming so neer her as that we could discharge a Volley of smal shot to a∣ny purpose, we did it, together with a broad side of great Ordnance; and seeing none of our Frigots going on bord to the relief of the Leopard, our Captaine seeing so many of the Fleet lost, judging it the most necessariest service to re∣liefe her, we stood towards that ship, but being the wind was very fresh, it was not held fit we should run stemlings with all our sailes (except the Main-saile, and top-gal∣lant sailes, for ends before denoted) however after we had powred a broad side into the Julius Coesar, and past within two or three ships lengths of her sterne, great indeavours were used to make our ship Parragon bear up, that we might come to the other tack, that so we might goe on bord with the more ease; but it pleased God the wind dullard all on the sudden, so that we could not make our ship work, nor bear up in any time, if all our lives had laine on't, and then bringing our ship to againe, before we could make her stay, we were shot so far, that before possible we could get a∣bord the Leopard, she was driven so neer the sand of the Ma∣lora, that it was my opinion humbly given in to the Admi∣ral among other Officers, in case we should have further in∣deavoured to have gone on bord, it would be almost im∣possible ever to disintangle our selves from them againe, un∣til we had been upon the afore-mentioned sand, the wind being at E. S. E. most commonly: And to my knowledge, when the Captaine saw that the ship would not work, he order'd some of the nimble ships to be cal'd unto to doe that service, and if the Mary or the Lewis had beene neer us, they had been cal'd to as wel as the Mary Rose. And I am confidently assured, that such as did Ieast in our Fleet, did as much service against the Enemy, to destroy such as borded the Leopard, as did either Capt. Ell, or Capt. Fi∣sher; and whatever the Captaines of these ships say now we are come home, I am sure in our homeward bound
way it was the vote and expression of them, and all other Captaines in the Fleet, that if we had engag'd any further in the businesse of Legorn, all had been lost. Christopher Mings. Sworne, Sept. 13. 1653. John Page. The fourteenth Affidavit. THese are to certifie whomsoever it doth concerne, That being in the ship Advance with Capt. Badiley, his Mate in Anno 1637. neer Malta, being all alone, in the above-men∣tioned ship, by his well managing of that busines, so were 3 vapouring Turks men of War of great force baffled, that they fled from us, and we chas'd after them as long as we had any hopes of fetching them up, although we were all alone, and not above 44 men in us. And in 1640. I was a Masters-Mate on the said ship with Capt. Ri: Badiley, about Cape Paul, we were laid abord by 2 Turks, men of War, that were Castles in comparison to us, and by report had at least 500 men to our 44, who entring us, were beat back, where many were forc't to leap over∣bord; and although many times we were fired and burnt very much, in several places, yet God keeping up the reso∣lution of both our Commander, and Company, so it was (through Gods assistance) that I believe never any could doe more in a dispute of that nature; the Commander coming to encourage the men, would say, Come gallants, let me know how it is with you now, they would cry fore and aft, we want nothing, but a new place in the Enemies side, to make a new hole in. In fine, how they were baffled, that ones Fore∣mast and Bowsprit was shot by the bord, and the other torne so lamentably, as I believe ever ship was, as not be∣ing able to budge or stir. Several men yet living, well
know, who saw many of their great platformes of Ord∣nance dis-mounted, and not above one man on all their middle Deck, with their Guns, but the greatest part of their men run into the Hold, and the Turks can best of all tell how they felt it. And in Anno 1644, of Matril with Capt. Badiley, in the said ship all alone, three Turkes men of War came fiercely up with us, as if they would destroy us at once, who could not have lesse then 4 or 500 men, to our 44, yet by Gods assistance, although our Commander cal'd them abord, they were so disheartened at our first broad side, that like Doggs with their tailes between their leggs, they run away from us, with all the saile they could make, and never shot at us more, for hindring their way. In the Parragon being a Mate and Pylot there, in our En∣gagement with the Dutch, neer Corsigo the 27 and 28 of Au∣gust, such was our Commanders resolution in the face of the Enemy, that I am perswaded it's impossible for any man to be more; and after that we had about fourscore men kil'd and wounded in our ship, and my selfe wounded in three places, so that I was not able to help my selfe, or Com∣mander, yet I know whereas he plac't every man anew at his Quarters, and each man over night gave his hand to live and dye with him next day, if occasion were; howbe∣it the 29 day in the morning, about the coming downe of our Main-yard, most of the men were so rallyed into a mu∣tinous distemper, that they said, If the Enemy comes up we shall have no Quarter, let's be gone with the Frigots, another shot shall not be made; but I suppose it was occasioned withall from a report there was of 45 foot water in the ship. At that time seeing one Hide with two or three others standing in a knot, I said, Good Sirs, we that did such good ser∣vice yesterday, let's not leave the Commander to day; if this ship, and so great a strength of the Nations be lost, it would be the great∣est disgrace that ever befell our Nation; he replyed, Wee'l fight no more, the State hath better ships, but we have no more lives. Nay to such a height the mutiny was growne, that I have
heard some say, If the Captaine would not suffer them to call for Quarter, they would stowe him well enough, or words to that purpose. And whereas in the last Engagement neer Legorn, I was next subordinate to Peter Whyting in the Fire-ship, called the Spy, thus much I did observe, That the gale Easterly of the shore continued all night, and if they in the Mould had come out whil'st God gave them an opportunity by the E∣clipse of the Moon, I believe they had not been shot with many shot from the Enemy, who of necessity they must have weather'd, and so have joyned with us very handsomely; and when it was day the Admiral plyed in for the Road, with all possible diligence, until he came neer within Mus∣ket shot of the Dutch Admiral, & that he alter'd his course to goe for the Leopard. In this interim, I being on bord the Fireship aforsaid, know that our Admiral sends us word to do our execution upon the Dutch Admir. who was brought by the Lee, but I never understood that he would ever come neerer to us with his owne ship, then he was, and I know not to what purpose he should, there being (except the Dutch Admiral) none to hurt us, within shot, that I saw, but those on bord the Leopard, and to windward we might goe on bord what ship we would, which was our owne, but our Capt. Whiting would not let us set our Main-saile to doe the service; and when it came to, get into the Boat one of the first (as I have heard) shaking like an Asphen leaf, leaving me on bord between drowning and burning, in a most miserable condition; and I doubt it would go hard with him for his life, if he should come to be questio∣ned in the busines, for so great Cowardise. Dated Sept. 7 1653. John Steele. Sworne, Sept. 7. John Page.
And now that such as wish well to Captaine Wadsworth, may not have any prejudicate Opinion against me, nor conceive I have received little or no wrong from him, who as I have heard, instead of humbling himselfe, hath been at worke to blow up these Coales, adding to that what I have heard both by the weekly intelligence that came from Ge∣noa, to Legorne, and otherwise by private Letters, how that the said Wadsworth had aspersed and be spattered me in refe∣rence to what past in our first Engagement with the Dutch, the 28 of August, 1652. (although the particulars I could yet never be fully informed of) I can doe no lesse then briefly ex∣presse my selfe about that businesse, and shew all rationall men how little reason he hath had, either for one or the other. IN February, 1649 or 50, hearing how well he had car∣ried himselfe under Col. Lidcott, upon the Coast of Ire∣land, and withal considering how earnestly he had desired to be employed under me in Merchant Affaires, having then the most considerablest interest in the ship Perrigrine, that was imprest into the States service, I did in a special man∣ner recommend him to the General, for the Command of that ship. And fithence he was employed in the States service under me, in our late troublesome Voyage, in the beginning there∣of he very well knoweth I endeavoured to engage him by several acts of civility, yet notwithstanding all perswasi∣ons I could use, he presumed to make the first breach a∣mong the three ships of War of us, which were sent out: whereupon, as I told him, it was very ill done, so I wisht it might be the last breach he might make, although I fear'd the contrary. But now to come to the Engagement before signified. Whereas he was order'd to lye in one of the Quarters of the ship I was upon, and yet goeth a head (contrary to or∣der) appeareth by a Letter to Mr. Longland, under his own hand as followeth.
SIR; I Kindly salute you, These being to acquaint you with my sad di∣saster of the losse of our Frigot; I shall not need to write the circumstances of the businesse, because I believe you have them already, but I shall give you a true relation of the losse of her. A∣bout three of the clock in the afternoone, the 28 of August, the Admiral having two great ships of forty peece of Ordnance a piece abord of him, and another ready to clap him crosse the Hause, and another upon the Bough, I espying their designe, being two or three Cables lengths a head of him, tackt my ship to interrupt one of them, but my Sailes, Rigging, and Masts, being all torn, I could not worke her so well as I would, fell abord of him, but having many of my men, about fifty slaine, and twenty wounded, and some running away in my boat, and being fired, and opprest by their men, and finding not the other Frigots to relieve me, as I did the Admirall, and having two other ships lay gauling me under my Lee, we were forc't to surrender; but I doubt not but they will be cal'd to an Account for their Cowardly courage in this businesse. Not having else at present, I take my leave, and rest, From Porto Longone, Sept. 3. 1652. Your Servant to Command, Jo: Wadsworth. And although I heard in effect what the Certificate here-annexed certifieth, how that if a carefull person had made fast the Doores of the Round-house and steerage, as they ought to have been made fast when an Enemy was en∣tring, the ship might have been saved. The Certificate made by Captaine Wadsworth's Clerk, followeth: BE it knowne unto all men whom it may concerne, That on the 27 day rf August, 1652. meeting with ten saile of Hollands men of War, the Parragon being our Admiral, and with her the Phaenix, Elizabeth, Constant Warwick, with foure Merchants ships, about foure of the clock in the afternoone the Fight began, and continued till night, and the next morning being the 28 of the said Moneth we began againe, and about twelve of the clock one of
the Hollands men of warre laid the Parragon aboard, and a∣bout half an hour after another laid him aboard, each ha∣ving fourty Guns, and Captain Iohn Wadsworth being Com∣mander of the Phenix Frigot, seeing a third coming on board his Admiral, tackt and went about for the security of his Admiral, and being then close upon a wind, and two Hol∣lands men of warre coming up with him, and lying of his broad side, shot at him as fast as they could, and tore all his Rigging, whereby his Friggot was taken astais; and then another of the Hollands Ships named the Endrath, by acci∣dent fell crosse the Phenix Haise, and presently entred her men, and the Phenix having beene in fight all that day, and a great many men slain, and wounded, and weari∣ed out; these Hollands Ships being new come up with us, with fresh men, beat our men off the Deck, and we retreated into the Round-house, and steerage, and presently after we were beaten off the Deck; Captain Iohn Wadsworth went downe betweene Decks for to encourage his men; and all the powder we had in the Round-house being spent, only what were in the guns, we sent one man down for powder, who was slaine as he went down the staires in the steerage; and whilest we expected his coming with powder, the enemy approached so nigh, they thrust in their swords, and cut the snet which made fast the leaves of the doore, whereby we were forced to retreat down between Decks; and as I was going I saw one of the leaves of the steerage-doore open, but whether it were cut open as the Round-house doore was, I know not, neither could I see any man in the Steerage, or Cabbin, but one which came down out of the Round-house with me, who was slaine on the stairs of the Steerage. This I testifie to be of a truth, whereunto I have set my hand on board the Parragon, in Port Longone this 28 of Ianu. 1652. Christopher Bovey. YEt notwithstanding what is before denoted, and how∣beit it was not unknown to my self and others, that
Merchant Ships having but fourty and odde men, by being careful to make all doores and hatches surely fast, have maintain'd their Ships against such of the enemies as have come on board them, and have had above four hundred be∣tween them. However in my first Letter to Authority in England, I wrote onely thus; In our dispute the Phenix Friggot was lost very strangely, I wish (to speak the least) there had not beene carelesnesse in it. Now I appeal to all rational men, looking back to what is before related, whether I could have wrote more mode∣rately if Captain Wadsworth had been my brother; for by that expression, I did not so tax him, but he might have cleared himself by imputing it on his men, if by their carelesnesse the doores had not been made fast, or by their cowardlines they had left their quarters in the steerage and Cabbin, and run elsewhere. But before I sent away my next Letters, I heard the mans spirit was very high-flown, that now we were all taxt, as those that dealt basely, cowardly, and unworthily with him, ac∣cording to the contents of the Letter he wrote Mr. Boneale, as follows. Mr. Boneale, SIR, I kindly salute you, giving you many thanks for your kinde remembrance of me, though in affliction, and to advise you that I have received your Letter with the enclosed, and that Mr. Mussell, and William Powell are very well, though many others lost, and wounded, my self being wounded in my hand, so that I cannot write unto you the Relation of our sight (but I have wrote to Master Longland of the whole, which I question not, but he hath certified you of) our fleet hath dealt most unworthily, cowardly and basely by me, and that is all I shall advise you at pre∣sent; but they will be made to know it, when it shall please God to send me well home: nought else at present: I rest From aboard the Rear-Admiral of the Hollanders in Port Longone. Septemb, 3. 1653. Your loving friend John {inverted †} Wadsworth.
Wherupon lest he should have wrote to my disparagemen into England, I could do no lesse then signifie what I did in my next Letters about the two great Friggots lying like Chickens under the Parragons wing. contrary to Order, ma∣king many men in the Fleet, cry out upon them, what a shame it was; yet I professe I did it not so much to the end they might be called to accompt, or be sharply rebuk'd about it, as I did to the end, that when the carriage of the Com∣manders of our Fleet, & my own Company were deciphered in point of their backwardnesse, it might be a more effectual argument to such as sate at Sterne in England to send me some additional strength, and other persons out in halfe a dozen, or a dozen Ships and Friggots (as to them should seeme most meet) then a thousand arguments of another nature. One word more: that it may be known what kinde of con∣science some men have that act in the world, and how little reason Captain Wadsworth had to bespatter me either in En∣gland, or elsewhere, the Letter following under his owne hand doth sufficiently manifest, as also the following Cer∣tificate. Captain Badiley, September 2. 1652. SIR, I Kindly salute you: these being to acquaint you of the intents of my proceedings in the time of the fight, by reason I heare so many false tales, and such reproachful speeches come from those you sent, of which I conceive you might be an eye-witnesse of their unworthy carriage before our coming to fight, in making no more haste to us, & in the latter part of the fight, in not coming to rescue your selfe and me. When I saw you laid on board of both sides, and others ready to clap you thwart the hawse, and one coming on your Bough, I thought the rest would be as for∣ward as my self, being in a better capacity; but finding it con∣trary to my expectation, and their unworthy promises, I have suf∣fered, but the Fleet is preserved by it, when I tack'd, I intended
not the laying of him aboard, but the keeping him off your self; but our sails and rigging being torne, we could not work our Ship, and had either of our two Friggots seconded me, however I had car∣ried him; but my men being many of them kill'd, and desperate∣ly wounded, and so many of the likeliest of my men run away in my Boat, which I hope you will call to account: for had it not been that they ran away, I had got clear of them, for they had cut their Mainstay to get clear of me. Now if this my acting in the whole time hath been cowardlinesse, I appeale to the whole world. Besides, I will have sufficient testimony from the whole Ships Company; I could net have thought that men had beene so inhumane as Captaine Cox, to report to the Flemish Captaines that came on board him, that it were better I had been kill'd; for if ever I came home, I should be hang'd; the which death doth least of all trouble me, but rather take care how to get there, where I shall call him to account for his treacherous actions, and his running away at that time when he should have come to my help. I am much troubled that I cannot come to speak by word of mouth to you, by reason I have abundance more to relate, which time now will not permit to write; having nothing else at present, I rest Your loving Friend John Wadsworth. To which my answer as briefly thus: Captain Wadsworth, I Have received your of yesters dayes date, and take notice of what you say, but by the way, I must needs tell you, that if you had followed order, I suppose, the trouble of yours had beene prevented; however I shall not make it my businesse to adde af∣fliction to the afflicted, but sending you such things as you stand in need of; I remaine Yours, Ri. Badiley. THese are to certifie all whom it may concerne, that Cap∣taine John Wadsworth, late Commander of the Phenix
Friggot, having made his escap from aboard the Flemings, came aboard the States ship the Leopard, and (after morning Sermon, on the 17th. day of October, 1652.) made a speech (among all the people there then present) tending to the vindication of himself, from those aspersions that were cast upon him, be∣cause of his losing the said Friggot; in which speech he seem'd to asperse others. But being demanded, whether Captaine Badiley could do any more then he did? his answer was, No; to which he added this reason: Because his Ship was so much batter'd and torne, that he could not come to his assistance, but had work enough on board his own ship. He added more∣over, that he spake concerning the Commanders of the o∣ther two Friggots. To the truth of the above written Certifi∣cate, we whose names are here subscribed, are ready to make depositions at any time, being thereunto lawfully called. Reynold Newham, Master. Ed. Spradborrough, Minister. George Wrightington, Masters Mate. In the next place, I have thought fit to insert one of that great Dukes Letters, to shew, Capt. Appletons assault of his Centinel, and not the Phenix Friggot caus'd him to be agreeved. Sir, MAster Appleton hath been so uncivil, (not remembring the courtesies and advantage which the English ships have receiv'd in Livorno,) which besides th'other his unreasonable proceedings and attempts, which he hath let run against all con∣ventions established; hath also laid hands upon the Armes under the faithful trust of our Centinel of the Mould, and to take a person away in so much violence from such a man which was in his house there appointed, hath put me (in obligation) to premeditate upon sincere satisfaction, and doubting he might draw himself out of chastisement by flying: I have ecteemed it necessary to have him come hither, and have arrested him, put∣ting
him in the custodie of this Castle of Pisa, that he may have such chastisement as meriteth; I would not do it without giving you this to understand by dispatching an expresse, being assured that you will be displeased with things so ill acted, and how much it imports to let alone loose respect, concurring in this my under∣standing, which alwayes shall be within the limits of that obser∣vance which I professe to the Parliament and Republike of Eng∣land, and to those and all such which do depend upon them, shall alwayes demonstrate in all occasions my sincere estimation; and in order therefore, have renewed the commissions to my Officers in Livorne to be vigilant in defending the English ships which are there, as they did at first; and also with so much the greater at∣tention, in regard of the absence of the said Appleton, and your self; so rest, praying for your prosperity. Pisa this fifth of December. 1652. Sign'd the great Duke of Tuscany. To Capt. Richard Badiley, Admiral of the English Ships wirhin the Mediterranean Sea. (Now followeth) AN Answer to Signeur Montemagni's relation, (one of the great Dukes Secretaries) as I find it in a Pamphlet, call'd the Remonstrance of a fight neer Legorn Roade. What past between him and Van Gallen the Dutch Admi∣rall, concernes me not to take notice of. But whereas he saith, that he did first acquaint me with the necessity of finding out a way to give the Dutch satisfaction, but it was all in vaine. I believe no lesse, for who can imagine that short of all we had, would be satisfactory to an enemy? But thus, upon the 10/20th. of Feb. the aforesaid person comes to me on board the Leopard, having presented me with his Letter of Credence as followes.
Translated out of Italian. UPon occasion of the answer which is come from the Parlia∣ment of the Republick of England, concerning the business of the Friggot Phenix; I did dispatch for Legorn Desiderio Montemagni, my Secretary of State, who shall deliver unto you these presents, concerning all that which I shall have to treat with you about the said matter; and therefore you may be pleas'd to give full faith to that which he shall declare in my name: our Lord preserve you. From Florence the 18th. of Feb. 1652. from the Incarnation. At your pleasure, The great Duke of Tuskany. To Captain Richard Badiley, Admirall of the Ships of the Republick of England in the Mediterranean Sea. ANd in the presence of Mr. Longland who was interpreter between us both, (for I professe not to understand every word that shall be spoken in Italian) he exprest himself to this effect. That his Master, the great Duke had receiv'd a Letter from the Councel of State, appointed from authority of the Par∣liament of England, wherein were courteous expressions; but there was nothing mentioned concerning the Phenix Friggot, which the Dutch pretended unto; and absolutely his Master must, and would see them satisfied. To which I made this modest reply; Sir, AS you have well denoted, I believe the Letter sent his High∣ness, by order from the Parliament of England; is not only
full of courteous, but reall acknowledgements of the great esteem they have of his Highness favour, in vouchsafing pro∣tection for their Ships in this place; and I believe at all times his Highnesse may be confident that (in a reciprocal manner) the English Nation will acknowledge the same. The Councel of State also hath been pleas'd to signifie unto me that their pleasure is, Cap. Appleton shall returne over land into England with all speed, to give an account why he did assault the great Dukes Centinel, (for, as I alwayes under∣stood, that uncivill act caus'd his Highnesse to dispatch away the Messenger into England) and in the next place, I suppose they will be inform'd from him, how the Phenix Friggot was regain'd; whereupon, if they finde it justice, or reason, doubt∣lesse they will give immediate order, that the great Duke shall make the Dutch satisfaction in the best manner he may, and what he doth therein, they will so stand to it, as that his Highnesse shall be no sufferer. But now lest Capt. Appleton should not arrive in England so soon as the ordinary; if it please you, I will adde to what I have formerly wrote the Councel of State, such a full relation about the manner of that Friggots surprizall, as that it must give a clear light to the understanding of that businesse; and I will presume once in 45. or 48. days the great Duke shall have a punctual answer, so that he will see what they will do in that matter, which referres to the Phenix Friggot, and so we parted at that time. About two or three dayes after he sends for me ashor, and I could not deny but attend accordingly: for you must note, although this were a Treaty, it was a forc'c one; (on my part) I was constrain'd to attend what this Secretary of State would say to me, and could no more (as I conceive) avoid hearken∣ing to what he should say, then I could prevent the great Duke from putting one of our Mariners to the Torture (at our enemies instance.) I know not for what cause, next to the reverence we did him, and respective salutes we made him at passing by, except it was, because he had heard two or three dayes before that the Dutch commanded in our Channel, and were like to be the strongest side. But when Mr. Longland, and my self came thither; he
asked us, whether we had thought on what he had before mo∣tion'd concerning giving some satisfaction about the Phenix Friggot? Answer was made in words, to this effect. We have wrote by this ordinary expressely to know what the States pleasure is in that businesse, doubtlesse they will give the great Duke satisfaction about it; He answered, oh the great Duke would have present satisfaction that he might stop the mouthes of the Dutch. It was replied by us, the Dutch had taken a great parcell of Tinne which belonged to our Nation, out of French ves∣sels and others, even under the Cannons of his Highnesse, im∣porting upon the matter as much as the Phenix Friggot was valued at; and besides, we told him the Dutch themselves bragg'd every day upon the place, that they had taken an English Ship from under the Castle of Lant, and another from under the Castle of Allicant, and so were made good foure times the value of the Phenix Friggot already; and in our o∣pinion it could not but render his Highnesse among all Prin∣ces to be very partial, if he looked for further satis∣faction. In fine, he told us plainly, the great Dukes pleasure was, that one of the States Ships should be disarmed, and have her Rudder and Sailes taken ashore; To that his conclusion, we made answer thus: The great Duke is Patron, and he may do what seemes him good; but one day an account must be given of the damage that the State of England should re∣ceive thereby, or words to that purpose, and so we were dis∣miss'd. About this time one of the great Dukes Subjects Vessels going out of the Mould with some provisions for our Ships at Port Ferraro, as soon as ever she was about the Mould head, was chas'd by the Dutch Tartan, and without the Ma∣ster had cut away his Boat, and bore his quick-side in the wa∣ter, she had been snapt; and yet (upon the matter) no no∣tice was taken of it. This piece of insolency added to all the rest, caused me, with the advice of friends to write to the great Duke these nsuing lines.
May it please your Highnesse, WHereas it hath been your pleasure to honour me with a credential Letter, bearing date the eighth instant; foure dayes since I receiv'd it by the hands of that Right Worthy and Honourable person, your Secretary of State, from whom I was inform'd of what was his message from your Highnesse, and unto whom I returned such a modest, and humble answer, as I hope hath been satisfactory. Among other commands, the Councel of State (ap∣pointed by authority from the Parliament of England,) hath required me (as well out of respect of what I oblig'd my self unto your Highnesse for in my former Letters, or humble addresses, as for other ends) in no case, nor upon any pre∣tence to assault the Dutch in the Ports, and Chambers of your Highnesse, except they first began with us the English, which commands, or orders of theirs, according to my duty, I shall readily render obedience unto. But, may it please your Highnesse, sithence our enemies the Dutch do continually persist and go on, without rendering that respect which is due unto your Highness with∣in your Ports and Chambers, and lording it over all men of sundry Nations, do undertake to search their vessels, and being dexterous at the trade of plundring, in hopes of such lucre, chase Barkes, and Vessels passing about the Mould head, and that as well of the Subjects of your Highnesse, as else how. I do therefore humbly disoblige my self from what I have been formerly by Letter, or otherwise engaged unto; and being it's judg'd they have given the first assault, since the re∣ceipt of the commands before mentioned, I do hope it will not be taken amisse from your Highnesse; although, (when ever power is in the hand of us the English,) we may take the
advantage upon them in a reciprocal manner; and so wish∣ing your Highnesse all increase of splendour and happinesse, I shall subscribe my self, as I am, Dated on board the Leopard in Legorn-Mould, the 4/14th of February, 1652/3. Your Highnesse very humble servant, Rithard Badiley. SO that in ditto Letter I gave his Highnesse to understand, that although I would be very careful to obey the com∣mand I had receiv'd from the authorty of England not to di∣sturbe his Port, without the enemie began with us first; since it was very perspicuous to every rational man, the Dutch had begun with us, I humbly withdrew my word, and crav'd leave to do what was reciprocall to the actions of the Dutch, whenever a power came into my hands. Now my reasons for writing in that manner, were these briefly. First, whereas (peradventure) the great Duke might think that England was lost, because the Dutch commanded in our Channel at the present; yet I judg'd not our Nation in so low a condition, but that I still expected a Fleet of Ships to our assistance: And it was done that (at least) he might be so much amus'd about it, as to believe I had private intel∣ligence of some Friggots that were departed from the West of England, whom I might expect every moment, and thereby be enabled to destroy them in his Road, who had layen so long at the door, watching for our destruction. In fine hereby I thought the great Duke would be somewhat startled, and begin to open his ear to what was propounded by me, so just and equal, and not appear so partial as he had done all along, since he heard of some defeat we had by the Dutch elsewhere.
Secondly, I did it, that the Dutch (who were like to hear of it immediately) might be in some measure mortified; and for ought I knew instead of persisting, to have the Ammuni∣tions, Sailes, Rudder, and Ship Leopard, or Bonavanture to be consign'd into the hands of the great Duke for their use, they might be put into some pannick fear, and have thoughts of removing either to meet their eight ships about the mouth of the Gulfe of Venice, and at Messina, or else to go West∣ward about Telloon to joyne with five good Ships of Warre they had that way, lest when the strength came out of Eng∣land that I expected thence, they might be ruin'd where they rode. The 19th. a returne of that Letter was presented me by his Highnesse Secretary, who having intimated he was at leisure, and had something to declare unto me from his Master, Mr. Longland, and my self waited on him accordingly; but first the Letter followeth. Translated out of Italian. I Have seen that which you have exprest unto me by your Let∣ter of the 4/14th. of this moneth concerning the Negotiation by me remitted unto Montemagni my Secretary of State to treat with you; and you shall understand by my said Minister, that which shall be needful for me to reply, and confirme unto you of my good will, & of the hope which I have that you will yet contri∣bute on your part to the things of common satisfaction, & for the good effecting of the Treaties which are in hand: And if they should not take effect, I shall declare the resolutions which I am constrain'd at this present to take, to my great displeasure; but in the mean time, I will preserve every desire to give you consent, serving the Parliament of the Republick of ENGLAND, to which I shall alwayes be glad to shew my firme and
singular observance: Our LORD prosper you. From Florence the 28th. of February, 162. from the In∣carnation. At your pleasure, The great Duke of Tuscany. To Capt. Richard Badiley, Admiral of the Ships of the Republick of Eng. in the Mediterranean Sea. And when I had read it, he ask'd me why I recall'd my word? It was answered, the Dutch violated the Port every day, and I hoped the Great Duke would not take it amisse if I could when I had power in my hands destroy them that were not onely originally the disturbers thereof, but persisted therein from day to day; However, said I, his Highnesse may be confident I shall be at his command, so that I shall not proceed any further (in point of giving any disturbance to his Port) then himself shall give liberty. But, saith Ditto Secretary, What will you do in order to what I spake to you the other day, about Consigning one of the States Ships into the hands of the Great Duke, untill the Duke had satisfaction? I answered, It is not in my power willingly to deliver up one of the States Ships to the Duke, or any other Prince or State, without special order from my Masters in England; Well then, saith he, His Highnesse pleasure is, you shall depart his Port, what say you to that? I replyed, that rather then I would willingly give consent, that any of my Limbs should be cut off, I would fight for the whole Body as long as I could. To which he made a further Reply, and said; It was the Great Dukes order to tell me, that I must depart his Port, or Mould with the English Ships of warre, that were there once in ten dayes. To which I made this modest Reply, in effect, as I said before, The Great Duke is Patron, he may do what seemeth
him good, and although he knoweth best what he hath to do; yet in my opinion to require us to go out into the mouths of our enemies, when as they shall be three to one, would be an Eclipse to his Honour among all the Princes in Eu∣rope, and I instanced unto him the carriage of the King of Portugal towards Prince Rupert, having once promised him protection in his Port; and proceeding in that discourse, I told him, that as I was employed under the Generals in a service near Lix. for the reduction of our revolted Ships, so I was a spectator of what past there, and although our General made it his request to that King again and again, that a day might be appointed for the forementioned Ships to be commanded forth, that so we might keep the Honour of his Port unviolated, and yet dispute for our own in the Sea; However he would not be prevailed withal about it: For, said he, it would not stand with his Honour to command such forth into the enemies hands, when there is oddes, who had craved his protection, and notwithstanding all the time our Ships were under his command, we carried our selves civilly, not searching and plundering the vessels of Portugal, and Lording it over all, as the Dutch did in Legorne Road; wherefore how can the Great Duke in point of Ho∣nour command us forth to gratifie such insolent enemies as ours were? yet, said I, the above named practice cannot be commended in the aforementioned King, because the Ships we then looked after, were the Common wealths of England, paid for with their own money, onely most of the persons entrusted with them, revolted from their due obedience, which alters the case between their condition and ours, as much as may be; yet it holds out thus much, that Princes have had much respect to their Honour, in commanding those with whom they are in amity to go from under their protection into the mouthes of their enemies, when they judge themselves in no capacity for an engagement. To all which discourse the Secretary answered; all the fa∣vour I could expect was the last, and the first day should not be reckoned into the number of the 10 days. And yet once again I replied, sithence the great Duke be∣gan
to be aweary of us, and would necessitate us to go forth; I earnestly desired one thirty, or fourty dayes to gather to∣gether our Ships at Venice and Naples, adding, his Highnesse the Great Duke must needs be acquainted what a vast chage the State of England hath been at to impress ships into their service at Venice, and elsewhere; and if we be commanded out, and consequently be forc't to engage ere those ships can come to joyne, all their charge would be to no purpose; and I added, that is no small matter. For but the other day having occasion to converse with the Admirall of the Great Dukes Gallies, he could tell me what ships we had fitting here and there, as well as my self, and computed our present charge to be (when least) an hundred and sixty thousand Crownes. In fine, again and again I am sure more then ½. a dozen times, with all earnestnesse I did humbly beg but for thirty or fourty dayes time to get our ships together, and that the dispute about the Phenix Friggot might make no obstruction; the Secretary was proffer'd by Mr. Longland at my instance, as much money as the Friggot should be judg'd worth, that he might do what he would withall. But seeing all our endea∣vours were rendred fruitlesse, and that the said Secretary would harp upon no other string then what is before de∣noted about giving us the first and the last day, I took my leave of him; and considering how more guns had been late∣ly brought down, and planted against our ships; to what end I could not tell, except it were to further our destruction, if we were not gone at the time set us; and calling to minde how vain a thing it was ever counted to lie in the ditch, and not stirre to get out; I laboured in those two or three dayes I remain'd at Legorn to put our ships in as good an equipage as I could, and went to Port Feraro to fetch up the rest of our strength that was there; and seeing how unready our ships were, and unlikely that even our ships should get up to Legorne to succour our friends before our set time would be expired: I wrote the Great Duke a few lines, the co∣py whereof followeth.
May it please your Highnesse, LAst Saturday I receiv'd those lines which your Highnesse was pleas'd to honour me withall, bearing date the 28th. of the last moneth; and although I heartily wished the dispute a∣bout the Phenix Friggot, might have been ended with the Treaty; yet having by so notable a stratagem regain'd the said Vessel, I could no wayes be satisfied, how I could answer it to those that im∣pos'd this trust in me, to part with her again willingly, or any of the States ships for her. And in conclusion when I saw what was your Highness pleasure concerning the limitted time for our going forth, I did immedi∣ately labour that a very ready compliance might have been given unto on my part, and I hope it shall take effect accordingly; on∣ly I humbly beg, that if our ships be not out of Legorn-Mould untill the last day, and then the winde and weather be against us, it may be look'd upon, (as really it is) a just impedi∣ment. I am only in fear, that because we cannot ride quietly one dayes time in the Roade of Legorne, to take in ballast, some of our ships may overset, in case a gale of winde should come down upon them before the dispute be over. Your Highnesse may also be pleas'd to take notice, whereas by my former Letter of the 4th. ult. I humbly disoblig'd my self from what I had formerly promis'd in reference to the Dutch, and such as related to them, or at least begg'd leave to act in a recipro∣call manner, seeing them so exceedingly to domineer. I do assure your Highnesse upon my reputation, it was occasion'd in regard of the insolency of our enemies, that upon the knowledge thereof, they might be mortified, or curb'd in some measure, and consequently be brought (by the Treaty) to what is judg'd rea∣son: For seeing no other meanes like to prevaile, I conceiv'd by that expression they might be cast into no little fear, thinking we had more force at hand, then they were aware of.
It hath been alwayes clearly my opinion, that if any two per∣sons come into a private mans house, there to refresh themselves, they ought to be civil in that place, much more in the Chambers of Princes; wherefore (for my own part) according to the com∣mands I have receiv'd from my Masters in Engl. (if the Dutch will agree to conformity, and in a reciprocal maner promise the same) I shall render your Highnesse all maner of due respect, and give no kinde of disturbance to your Ports, especially in Legorn-Road; but as I suppose, all within the Malora, to be your Port, and Chamber; so I shall neither directly, nor indirectly meddle with the enemies of our Nation, nor any that belongs to them; neither shall I at any time, either weigh Anchor from the said place, to give chase to any that shall be coming in, or going out, or be disobedient to any of those just commands your Highnesse shall be pleased to lay upon me, as well by withdrawing out of sight with all the English Fleet, for three or four dayes more or lesse, as else how. And I do verily believe, the Parliament of England will al∣wayes give order that the like civility be rendered unto your Highnesse, by all other their Commanders that shall follow me in∣to these parts; that so the flourishing Trade of Legorn, that hath been so eminent for many years, might meet with no impediment from the English. If the Dutch will not hearken to such a correspondency now, in regard they suppose they are strong enough to ruine us, surely they may be deceived: We are eight men of Warre in this place, and Longone, and six in Legorn, which bears no great dispropor∣tion to what strength they had in Legorn yesterday. And if it please your Highnesse to send anothor Messenger to the Admiral of the Dutch, to know whether they will render that respect unto your Highnesse in your Ports, which the Eng∣lish promise to do: For their encouragement, and to take off all maner of trouble from your Highnesse for the future; I have thought of some Propositions, which I shall fully comply withall in each particular herein inserted. To the performance whereof, I believe Master Longland, a publick Minister of the Common-wealth of England, will become
oblig'd with me, as per contra it's desired Signeur Van de Stra∣den, shall oblige himself together with Van Gallen before some publick Minister of your Highnesse; So leaving what is herein denoted unto your Princely wisdome, I shall adde no more, but that I am Your Highnesse very humble Servant, RICHARD BADILEY. Certain Propositions sent the great Duke. IN case the Admiral of the Dutch Fleet will oblige himself, that without molestation or impediment, I may quietly en∣ter into the Road of Legorn with the eight ships, and a Potash that are now with me, and will be ready to set saile once in 48. houres; and shall, as is before denoted, suffer us to ride there untill our other ships come out of the Mould, and take in their ballast; Then per contra I shall reciprocally become oblig'd, not to molest the Dutch in any kinde whil'st they are there; and that businesse being accomplished, I shall go without the Malora as soon as he pleaseth; and be∣ing there, shall freely stay until his ships come within Musket-shot of ours, there to fight it out like men, so shall we not be any way instrumentall to dishonour, or give any disturbance to the Port of that Prince who hath granted us both refreshing from the fruits of his Countrey. Secondly, whereas the Dutch did lately give out, that they would fight the English when they were seven to seven; lest it should now be objected, if this Squadron and that at Le∣gorn meets, we shall be too hard for the Dutch, then thus; if it pleaseth them to accept of the proportion, there will be granted them to advance, one in every seven ships; so that if we be 14, they may be sixteen; and lest they should say some of our ships are bigger then theirs; there will be allow∣ed them to advance (when the men are poll'd) one man in
every seven, so that there may be nothing to object against such endeavours as hath been us'd to preserve the great Dukes Port from violation. 3ly. In case we the English have the better, and then come into Legorn Road with all our Fleet, and finde riding in that place some Dutch Merchant ships, and it may be some of their Men of Warre, that may be laim'd, or otherwise they need not haile into the Mould: we the English shall not shoot a shot, nor meddle, nor make with any of them with∣in the Malora, provided the Dutch will oblige themselves per contra, not to molest the English (in a reciprocal manner) to what the English promise in reference to the Dutch. My reasons for writing this Letter, and propounding such Propositions, were briefly these. FIrst, I was in very great hopes, that by this means the great Duke, who had exprest himself in former times with so much bitternesse against Capt. Hall, and Capt. Appleton, for disturbing of his Port, as he call'd it, although what they acted was far without shot of his Cannons; (as I have understood) would now have his ends in keeping of his Port unviolated, & we should have had our end in like manner by our conjūction: I was more especially perswaded of obtaining such an effect, as is before denoted, considering that at this time, such a number of the Captains & others of the Dutch were in his custody, for threatning to shoot down his Palace; that rather then Van Gallen would have been without their help, he would have agreed to what I had so reasonably propounded; And I am yet apt to believe, the great Duke had never freed the Dutch out of prison, nor yet have given them liberty to assault our ships within Musket-shot of his Mould-head, without the Golden Pistols had flowne apace.
Secondly, Although I had exprest so much before to his Secretary of State, that no pretence might be laid upon me by the great Duke for withdrawing my word, I thought fit to open my self to him, so freely and fully as I did by the said Letter, to the end that he might be in a manner constrain'd to shew forth the noblenesse of his minde; and that reality of affection, which in all his Letters he pro∣fessed to bear unto the Parliament and Republick of Eng∣land, by saying, My Ministers have been endeavouring to perswade Van Gal∣len to signe the Propositions; but he will not be prevail'd withal, and therefore, Badiley, take the thirty or fourty dayes, that the other day you were so earnest with my Secretary for, that so you may meet your Venice ships, and come up, or do what else seem∣eth best for your advantage: Thus should I have known what to have done. The great Dukes Letter followeth. SIR, JN answer to your Letter receiv'd this day, I cannot but tell you, that although the times are so disturbant, I see your re∣solution and diligence is, that those ships may depart which are under your command at Levorno; and I being desirous to pleasure the Parliament and Republick of England, am contented to pro∣long your time, for the departure of your ships above mentioned, till the eighteenth day of this present moneth, that they may have a considerable time for their getting out, not dissenting from what you in yours advise; that if winde and weather do not present, and your said ships cannot depart out of my Mould of the Port of Le∣vorno, shall suspend till some other day. Now unto the Propositions which you imparted to me, that I might take notice of, concerning the ships which are under your command for engaging with those of the States General, it is not a thing convenient for me to meddle in.
I do accept of what you mention, not to offend my Ports with your ships against the Hollanders, which promises I do expect from you to be fulfill'd, and doubt not but to have the like from the Hollanders, in such manner, to the content of both parties; and for the time to come all quietnesse, and liberty shall be had in Ports, and the Almighty prosper you. From Florence, the 9th. March, 1652. I hope that this favourable weather will cause the departure of your ships out of my Mould of Levorno, so that you need no obligation for the regaining the Friggot. At your pleasure, The great Duke of Tuscany. To Capt. Richard Badiley. Admirall of the ships of the Republick of Eng∣land in the Mediterranean Sea. IT's well I have this Letter under the great Dukes hand, for otherwise peradventure more such confident people then these who had a hand in that Remonstrance of a fight neer Legorn: would have outfac'd me, and have indeavoured to make me believe, we might have staid longer in Legorn, if we would: It's true, if winds and weather had not given our ships leave to come out as they did, then they might have staid: But if once winde and weather gave leave, they have not liberty to stay an hour above the prefixed time, that I can finde. I suppose (in the foregoing passage, which relates to the great Duke of Tuscany,) I have made answer to the substance of Signeor Mantemagnis relation, and discovered the falla∣ciousnesse that is in divers passages thereof, as also in the copies of the Letters from the aforesaid Duke unto my self, and per Contra of mine to his Highnesse.
Yet there is one or two fallacious passages more that have slipt me, which I must needs give answer to. In Pag. 114. he tells a meer story, (and you know what that is) saying the insolency of the Dutch, caus'd by the unacquaintednesse of the time of our departure (after we knew it) constrain'd the great Duke to put divers of the Dutch Captains and others into prison: Whereas by sufficient testimony it will be made appear, the Dutch knew of the time when we were to be thrust out of Port some days before us, and to that purpose had opportunity of hyring Felucas, and sending them away with Dutch Captains or other Offi∣cers in them, this way and that way to call in their ships of strength together; and being an eye-witnesse of it my self, I wondred what was a brewing, until the occasion thereof was taken away by my being order'd to depart in ten dayes accor∣ding to what hath been before signified. Whereas it's said, I might have staid four dayes longer, it hath been sufficiently prov'd by the great Dukes own Letter, and I know not what better proof to make, I could not have staid an hour longer, without winde & weather had hindred. And to say I came out by my own election, is a story of the like nature with the former, and that is sufficiently prov'd by what is before mentioned. But at length he that hath spread abroad in Print Signeur Montemagni's relation, thinkes he hath struck the naile on the head, saying, we had sufficient advantage against the enemie, if our fight had been better manag'd. I would here appeal to all knowing men in the World, whether 'twas not likely to have been better manag'd, if the dealings of the great Duke, and his Ministers with us had not been like unto such as had betray'd us by the ensuing parti∣culars, that may be added to what is before de∣noted.
FIrst, As appeares by my Letters of the 2/21th. of Mar. wheras the great Dukes Secretary promis'd the Dutch Captains and others should not be let out of prison, unlesse their Ad∣miral would signe the Propositions, for keeping the great Dukes Port unviolated; and yet afterwards, when as we were come so neer, that there was no going back. I say now to let the Dutch out of prison, and tell us plainly they would assault us, when our Ships sternes were to the Mould. Secondly, Whereas the great Duke and his Ministers have many times told me, that if the Dutch at any time should affront us within reach of his Cannons, all the force they could make, should be discharg'd upon them; and yet not∣withstanding when it came to the point, should suffer our ships to be surpriz'd within little more then Musket-shot of their workes, and not shoot a shot in their de∣fence. Thirdly, whereas the great Duke wrote me in the close of his Letter dated the 9th. of March, he hop'd that fair winde and weather would put all our ships out of the Mould of Le∣gorn, that so the dispute about the Phenix Friggot might be over; and yet notwithstanding that his Colonel who com∣manded Legorn, and all that Sea-coast (as a subordinate Minister under him) should give me to understand the 13th. of March stilo novo, that if the English ships of War had any further occasion of their Mould of Legorn, the Phenix Frig∣got must be restored, which was as much to discourage us as possible could be. For I would make but this one querie in the close of all. ADmit inferiour Officers shall have liberty to asperse their Commander in chief, (when as he shall think fit to call them off,) because of so great a disproportion between the enemies and themselves. as is three or four to one, which was our case in Legorn Roade. And although some peradventure will say, what although you had as knowing Pilots on board as any were in the Fleet, and
(howbeit) their opinion was if you had engaged any further about the Leopards relief, the great ships would be a ground together, and hazard the losing of all that way; yet you should have forc't the doing of what was in your own thoughts, with your sword in the faces of them. Again, admit it be granted a Commander in chief ought to prosecute the service he is upon, although the Com∣manders of most of the nimble ships should not act accord∣ing to what was required of them, but neglect their duty, so that he seeth he hath little or nothing to trust to but his own ship; and howbeit the Marriners on board had prov'd formerly like a rotten staffe, which deceives him that leans on it, he ought still to carry on the service, above all hope. Yet when the Commanders of one or both our Friggots, shall tell him their Masts were shot through, and like to fall every moment, (as they were) considering we could not be furnisht in Legorn without surrendring the Phenix Frig∣got; would he not have been reputed as mad a man as any was in the world, to have renewed the engagement at that time? For suppose we could have reliev'd the Leopard, and not have been on ground, and brought her off, to be sure by that time, all the Dutch Fleet, twenty and odde saile, that were standing away to the Southward under our Lee, would have got the weather-gage of us; and if so, I think every one will grant, that although we might have defended our selves, yet it would have been an hundred to one, but on of the Frig∣gots maimed Masts, or some others would have gone by the board; and consequently as the winde was, we must have gone into the great Dukes Mould for a supply; which if we had, we were told beforehand, (notwithstanding the great Dukes Letter) the Phenix Friggot must be deliver'd. Now as things stood. Although it might have been more to the honour of the Nation to save the Leopard, then the Phenix; yet in a word,
I suppose it would not be more to the profit of the Nation, if all things be considered. TO winde up all, when that fallacious Remonstrance of a fight neer Legorn came to my hand, seeing the great Duke, his Secretary, and I know not whom besides, (a∣mong some of our Captains interest) all woven together; I thought of those words, a threefold cord is not easily broken, how much lesse that which may be compared to a sevenfold cord, to draw on mischief (if possible) on the heads of the States faithful Servants; yet a little skill, where there is hone∣sty and integrity, may make it like unto rotten tow; whether it hath or no, I shall not query. But in my proceeding in this short discovery of Truth, I shal only say thus much by expressing what is before denoted; I have been cautious that none might be offended, except it be such whose contentious spirits have sufficiently discovered themselves: And although that some may think Sir Walter Rawleigh's words concerning those times, are like to prove true in all ages, (He that traceth Truth too neer at the heeles, may chance to have it kick out his teeth;) For my part, I am of another opinion, and do yet hope better of the present season. But as a Gentleman exprest himself not long since, upon another occasion; I am in a land of miracles, meaning in England; I was thinking whether it may not be added, are we not in an age of miracles? That a Commander of a Force havein been sent forth should be so neglected, and as if he had been sent abroad for d , (although I confesse I had better hopes) and be∣ing in forreigne parts, should there conflict with as many hazards and troubles, as almost was possible for any
man to undergo in the time; and yet when he shall come to his owne Countrey, hoping to finde that as good Harbour after a storme, shall per contra be made liable to contempt from such as have absolutely disobeyed commands, and have been the causes of all the damage which hath befallen the Nations in those parts, in which he hath been, and few seem to take notice ot it. To which I need adde no more, being Your servant as before. Ri. Badiley. FINIS.
ERRATA, PAge 2. line 27. reade had for bad. p. 3. l. 19. r. helped for hope. p. 4. l. 1. r. odds for ods. l. 3. r. filling for filing. l. 29. dele. the p. 5. l. 12. r. were for was. p. 10. l. last. r. sence for it, for sence for, p. 11. l. 20. r. any service for in any service. p. 25. l. 1. r. mutined for mutinied. p. 26 l. 16. r. hath for have. p. 31. l. 1. r. the balfe for halfe p. 31. l. 33. r. my mouth for mouth. p. 34. l. 27. r. then for the. p. 36. l. 17 r. Machiavels for Match∣iavel. p. 37. l. 11. r. him for me. p. 38. l 9. r. flush'd for flesh'd. p. 38. l. 11. r. those for these p. 40. l. 8. r. provoke for provoked. p 41. l. 17. r. spend∣ing for spend. p. 41. l. 38. r. to for in. p. 45. l. 17. r. conjunction for con∣junctiou. p 49. l. 9. r. carreen for carreer. p. 54. l. 17. r. 18. for 16. p. 47. l. 32. r. particular for perticuler p. 54. l. 26. r. cease for sease p. 58. l 19. r. Perrigrine for Pilgrim p. 62. l. 3 r. Recommend for Recommend∣ing. p. 64. l. 30. r. warpe for ware. p. 70. l. 12. r. Jonas for Jonat. p. 70. l. 19. r. Hughes for Hugham. p. 70. l. 26. r. so that the for the. p. 71. l. 17 r. sp. adbarrough for spradlerow p. 76. l. 27. r. Leeward for the Leeward. p. 77, l. 3. r. E. S. E. tor E. S. S. p. 77. l. 21. r. becalm'd for Leeward. p. 78. l. 5. r. came for come. p. 82. l. 22. r. was for were. p 82. l. 26. r. shorten'd for shorted. p. 84. l. 2. r. set for left. p. 86. l. 2. r. Masters mate for mate. p. 86. l. 32. r. Captains desire for Captain desire. p 87. l. 8. r. sagg'd for laid. p. 91. l. 30. r. 4. or 5. foot for 45. foot. p. 92. l. 16. r. sent for sends. p 92. l. 26. r. he was one for one p. 95. l. 24. r. sennet. for net. p. 95. l. 20. r. was for were. p. 96. l. 3. r. that for and. p. 96. l. 7. r. hath for had. p. 96. l. 27. r. fight for sight p. 96. l. 32. r. not for naught. p. 98 l. 11. r. not for net. p. 98. l. 26. r. yours for your. p. 98. l. 28. r. this for the. p. 99. l. 19. r. the for that p. 99. l. 20. r. assaulting for assault. p. 100. l. 32. r. and having for having p. 103. l. 16. r. Zant for Lant. p 103, l, 39. r, ensuing for usuing, p. 105. l, 10. r. yet since for fince, p, 106, l, 29. r, content for consent, p, 107, l, 17, r, Dutch for Duke, p, 109, l, 34, r, ever for even.
