B6363D 669.f.7[67] 99870682 161048
BY THE KING of Kings his Prophets: A Proclamation concerning the Covenant and League of the People of GOD, to joyne together with the Parliament in the great worke of the Lord, against the enemie that hath brought all these miseries upon us. COme a Esay. 34.1. neer yee Nations to heare and hearken ye people let the earth heare, and all that is therein, the world, and all things that come forth of it. b Amos 1.11. Thus, saith the Lord, For three transgression of E. and for foure, I will not turne away the punishment thereof: because hee did pursue his brother with the sword, and did cast of all pittie, and his anger did teare perpetually, and kept his wrath for ever c Esay 1.7. Your Country is deso∣late, your Cities are burnt with fire: your Land strangers devoure it in your presence, and it is desolate, as overthrown by strangers. d Ieremiah 4.18, &c. Thy ways and thy doings have procured these things unto thee, this is thy wickednesse because it is bitter, because it reacheth unto thine heart. My bowels, my bowels, I am pained at my very heart, my heart maketh a noise in me, I cannot hold my peace, because thou hast heard, ô my soule, the sound of the Trumpet, the Alarm of War. Destruction upon destruction is cried, for the whole Land is spoiled: sodainly are my tents spoi∣led, and my curtains in a moment. How long shall I see the Standard, and heare the sound of the Trumpet? For my people is foolish, they have not known me, they are sottish, and they have no knowledge (saith the Lord) e Ezra 1.5. Then rose up the chief of the Fathers with all them whose spirit God had raised to go up, to build the House of the Lord. f verse 6. And all they which were about them, strengthened their hands with vessels of silver, with gole, with goods, and with pretious things, besides all that was willingly offered. g Ezra 4.1. Now the adversaries h ver. 4. weakned the handsof the people and troubled them. i verse 8 Wrote a Letter to the King in this sort. k ver. 13. & 14. Be it known unto the King, that if this Citie be builded, and the walls set up again, then will they not pay Toll, Tribute and Custome, and so thou shalt endamage the Revenues of Kings. Now because we have maintenance from the Kings Palace, and it was not meet for us to see the King dishonoured: therefore have wee sent, and certified the King. l Nehemiah, 4.7, & 8. They were very wrath. And conspired all of them together, m ver. 11. to slay them, and cause the work to cease. n Nehemi. 9.38. And because of this, the Princes make a sure Covenant, and write it, and seal unto it. o Nehemiah 10 28, & 29. And the rest of the people, and all they that had seperated them∣selves feom the people of the Lands unto the Law of God, their wives, their sons, and their daughters, every one having know∣ledge, and having understanding. They clave to their brethren, their Nobles, and entred into a Curse, and into and oath, to walk in Gods Law, which was given by Moses, the servant of God, and to observe and doe all the Commandements of the Lord our God, and his judgments, and his Statutes. p Esay 49.5. And though the Church be not gathered, yet shall they be glorious in the eies of the Lord, and God shall be their strength. q verse 8, &c. Thus saith the Lord, in an acceptable time have I heard thee, and in a day of Salvation have I helped thee: and I will preserve thee, and give thee for a Covenant of the people, to establish the earth to cause to inherit the desolate heritage. That thou maist say to the Prisoners, goe forth to them that are in darknesse, shew your selves, they shall feede in the wayes, and their Pasture shall be in all high places. They shall not hunger nor thirst, nei∣ther shall the heat nor sun smite them, for he that hath mercie on them shall lead them, even by the springs of water shall hee guide them. r Hosea 13.10. I will be thy King (saith the Lord) where is any other that may save thee in all thy Cities? s Hosea 13.9. Thou hast destroyed thy selse, but in me is thy helpe. t Ieremiah 51.63, 64 It shall be when thou hast made an end of reading this booke, that thou shall binde a stone to it, and cast it into the midst of Euphrates. And thou shalt say. Thus shall Babylon sinke, and shall not rise from the evill that I will bring upon her: And they shall be weary. v Mallachy 4.1, &c. For behold the day cometh, that shall burne as an Oven, and all the proude, yea, and all that doe wickedly shall be as stubble, and the day that cometh shall burne them up, saith the Lord of Hosts, that it shall leave them nei∣ther roote nor branch. But unto you that fear my name shall the sonne of righteou snesse arise with healing in his wings, and ye shall goe forth, and grow up as calves of the stall. And ye shall tread downe the wicked, for they shall bee ashes under the soules of your feete, in the day that I shall doe this saith the Lord of Hosts. Given by the Prophets, as it is written in the holy Word of God out of which it is collected, London thes 25 of March. 1644. London, Printed, by Andrew Coe, and pub∣lished accordeng to Order, for the use of the two united Kingdomes of England and Scotland, Auno Domini, M DC XLIV,
