c4009e 99896216 153861
ARTICLES TO BE ENQUIRED OF, AND ANSWERED UNTO BY The Church-wardens and Sworn-men in the Visitation of the Right Worshipful the ARCH-DEACON of Anno Domini 166 CAMBRIDGE: Printed by John Field, Printer to the University, 166.
The Tenor of the Oath of the Church-Wardens, and Sworn-men. YOU shall Swear, that you, and every of you, shall faithfully execute your several Offices of Church-wardens and Side-men, according to the Kings Ec∣clesiastical Laws. So help you God and the Contents of his Holy Gospel.
Articles to be inquired of, and answered un∣to by the Church-wardens, Quest-men, or Side-men in the Visitation of the Right Worshipful the Arch-Deacon of Anno Domini 166. TIT. I. Concerning Churches, Chappels, with the Ornaments and Furniture thereunto belonging. 1. IS your Parish Church or Chappel in good and sufficient repair, both for the Roof,Can. 85. Windows, Floor, and Seats? 2. Hath any part of your Church, Chap∣pel, or Steeple been demolished or pulled down? what part, and how long since? or any of the Lead, Timber or Bells thereunto formerly belonging, any way imbezelled or fold, and by whom? 3 Is there a decent Font of stone with a cover? and doth the same stand at or near the nether end of your Church,Can. 81. in such man∣ner as anciently and usually Fonts have stood for the baptizing of children? Doth the Minister baptize publickly onely in the Font? Is there a decent Communion table in your Chancel,82 with a de∣cent Carpet, and another Covering of white Linen, to be spread thereon at the time of the Administration of the Lords Supper? and have you a fair Chalice or Communion cup, with a Cover, and one or more Flagons? have they been profaned by common use?20
4 Have you a convenient Seat or Pew wherein to read Divine Service;82 a Pulpit with a decent Cloth or Cushion;83 a large Bible of the last Translation,80 and a Book of Common-prayer lately pub∣lished, Anno 1662.Stat. 99 the Book of Homilies set forth by Authority; and a Printed Table of the degrees wherein Marriages are prohi∣bited, and a Book of Canons and Constitutions Ecclesiastical; and a Decent Surplice and Hood?58 5 Have ye a Register-book in Parchment of Christenings,87 Bu∣rials, and Marriages?70 and is the same kept in all points according to the ancient use? 6 Have you a Book of Paper, 52 to record the names and Licenses of such Strangers as are admitted to Preach in your Church or Chappel? and do such Strangers subscribe their Names? As also a third Book for the Church-wardens Accounts? as also a Chest with Locks and Keys,70 wherein to keep the said Books, and the aforementioned Furniture? TIT. II. Concerning the Church-yard, the Houses, Glebes and Tythes belonging to the Church. 1 IS your Church-yard sufficiently fenced, and decently kept? Hath any person enchroached upon the same, or made any door into it? and how long since? 2 Is the House of your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, and the Out∣houses in good repair? have any of them been defaced or pulled down without license? have there been any enchroachments made upon the same, or any of the ancient marks or bounds removed or changed? and by whom? 3 Have you a true and perfect Terrrier of all the Glebe-lands, Gardens, Orchards, Tenements or Cottages belonging to your Parsonage or Vicarage?C. 87. As also a note of such Pensions, Rate∣tythes, and portions of Tythes, or other yearly profits (either with∣in or without your Parish) as belong thereunto? Have any of the same been withheld from your Minister? and by whom, as you know, or have heard?
TIT. III. Concerning Ministers. 1 IS your Minister a Priest or Deacon, Episcopally ordained, ac∣cording to the Laws of the Church of England? 2 Hath he been legally instituted and inducted into his Bene∣fice? And did he within two moneths after his induction, publick∣ly in the Church upon some Sunday or Holiday, in the time of Divine Service, read the 39 Articles of the Church of England, established by Authority, and there publickly declare his assent thereunto? 3 Is he resident among you? how many Weeks hath he been absent from you without urgent necessity? 4 Hath your Minister a Curate? Is he in Holy Orders, and confor∣mable to the Laws of the Church?Can. 47. Is he allowed by the Ordinary? 5 Doth your Parson, Vicar, Curate, or Lecturer, if you have any, perform his Office in all things according to the Rubrick of the Book of Common-Prayer lately established, and the Act of Uniformity published therewith?14 without either diminishing in re∣gard of Preaching or in any other respect, or adding any thing in the Matter or Form. 6 Doth your Minister at the Reading Divine Service,58 wear a Surplice and Hood? 7 Doth he observe the Holidays and Fasting-days, the Ember∣weeks, and the yearly Preambulation of Rogation-week, as is ap∣pointed by the Rubrick. 8 Is your Minister licensed to Preach? if so,45, 46, 47. doth he constantly (not having a reasonable impediment) Preach one Sermon in your Church or Chappel every Sunday? or if he be not licensed, or be hindred, doth he procure one to supply his Office by Preaching or Reading one of the Homilies? 9 Doth your Minister instruct the youth in your Parish in the Church Catechism,Can. 59. Rubr. be∣fore Con∣firm. and prepare and present them to be confirmed by the Bishop? 10 Doth he neglect or delay to visit the Sick,67 or to Baptize any Infant that is in danger of death?69 Doth he baptize any without
Godfathers and Godmothers, or admit either of the Parents to be Godfather or Godmother to their own Children? 11 Hath your Minister Married any persons without publishing the Banns on three Sundays or Holy-days,62 or hath he married any in private houses, or not between the hours of Eight and Twelve in the morning, unless he had a license or dispensation so to do? 12 Hath your Minister taken upon him to appoint any publick or private Fasts,72 Prophesyings or Exercises not appointed by Au∣thority? Or doth he,73 or any other, either Minister or Lay-person hold any Conventicles or Meetings in private houses within your Parish, for people of several Families to resort unto, under the pre∣tence of Preaching, Praying, Thansgiving or Humiliation, contra∣ry to the Laws and Canons in that case provided? 13 Is your Parson,75 Vicar, Curate or Lecturer, a man of a sober life and conversation? or is his carriage in any kinde disorderly or scandalous, and unbeseeming a Minister? 14 Hath the Sacrament of the Lords Supper been duly Admi∣nistred in your Church or Chappel so often, and at such conveni∣ent times, that at least thrice every year, (whereof one at Ea∣ster) every Parishioner within your Parish, being of the age of six∣teen years or upwards, might receive the same? 15 Hath any Childe been Baptized within your Parish in any private House, (except upon great necessity; and if so what was the same?3. Jac. 5.) or by any Lay-Person, or Midwife, or Popish Priest, or by any other then your own Minister? and hath such Childe which was privately Baptized,Rubr. of private Bapt. if he lived, been afterwards brought to your Church, that the Congregation and the Minister of the Parish (in case such Childe was not Baptized by him) might be certified whether such Childe was lawfully Baptized, or no? 16 Doth your Minister publickly in your Parish Church or Chappel,Ratis. Can. once every year, read over the Constitutions and Ca∣nons Ecclesiastical, agreed upon by the Clergy of both Provinces An. Dom. 1603. in such manner as is commanded to be done? 17 Doth your Minister every six Moneths in your Parish Church,C. 65. openly in the time of Divine Service, upon some Sun∣day
denounce and declare Excommunicate by name, all such of your Parish as do persevere in the sentence of Excommunication, not seeking to be absolved? 18 Hath your Minister said Divine Service while any Excom∣municate person hath been present in the Church? or hath he delayed to denounce any Excommunication, Suspension, or Ab∣solution that hath been sent unto him from his Ordinary, further then the next Sunday or Holiday after the receipt thereof under Seal? 19 Doth your Minister,Rubr. after Nic. Creed. upon Sundays at Morning Prayer de∣clare unto the Parishioners, what Fasting-days and Holidays are to be kept the week following?C. 64. 20 Hath any strange Minister been admitted to Preach in your Church,C. 50.52. who did not before the Church-wardens subscribe his name in your Book provided for that purpose, and the day when he Preached, and the name of the Bishop or Bishops of whom he had license to Preach? TIT. IV. Concerning the Parishioners. 1 IS there any in your Parish that make profession of any other Religion, then what is established in the Church of England? And that refuse to come to the publick Assemblies, Prayers,Act for U∣niformity 1 Q. Eliz. or Service of the Church? If there be any what are their names? 2 Is there any person in your Parish,C. 109. that lieth under a com∣mon fame, or suspicion of Adultery, Fornication, or Incest? Are there any common Drunkards within your Parish, or common Swearers, or Blasphemers of Gods Name, or any that are noted to be Railers, unclean or filthy Talkers, or sowers of Sedition, Facti∣on, and Discord amongst their Neighbours? 3 Do any of your Parish upon Sundays or Holidays follow their bodily and ordinary labour, or permit their servants so to do? Are any Shops kept open, or wares sold? or do any Vintners, Inn∣keepers, or other Victuallers and sellers of Beer or Ale, suffer any persons to tipple or game in their houses upon those days?
4 Doth every person in your Parish duly resort to your Church or Chappel upon Sundays and Holidays,Can. 13. and as well during Divine Service,18 as Preaching the Word of God, demean themselves reve∣rently, uncovering their heads,Rubr. kneeling at Prayers, standing up when the Creed and Gospel are read? 5 Is there any in your Parish that refuse to send their Infant-children to be Baptized in the Church,Rubr. of Bapt. unless in case of urgent dan∣ger? or do they send them to be baptized in other Parishes? or are they Baptized after other Form then is appointed? or are they kept unbaptized longer then is allowed? or is there any Infants, or more aged persons as yet unbaptized? 6 Is there any person in your Parish of 16 years of age who doth not receive the Sacrament three times in the year, of which Easter is always to be one?112 Doth any refuse to receive it kneeling, or re∣sort to other Parishes?Rubr. after Commun. 27, 28. or do any Strangers come to your Parish-Church to receive it? 7 Are there any in your Parish that be denounced and declared excommunicate for any crime committed?63 How long have they been so excommunicated? and do any of your Parish keep society with them before they be reconciled to the Church, and absolved? 8 Are there any living in your Parish, who have been unlawfully Married,Exprest in a table set forth by Authority. Anno Dom. 1563. contrary to the Laws of God? or any that being lawfully Divorced have Married again? or any that being lawfully Married, and not Separated or Divorced by course of Law, do not cohabit together? 9 Are there any Married Women in your Parish,99 who after their Delivery from the Peril of Childe-birth,107 refuse to make their publick Thanksgiving to God in the Church? And when they come so to do, do they come decently Apparelled, and make their offerings according to Custom? 10 Are there any that refuse to pay their duty for Easter Offer∣ings,Rubr. or refuse to contribute to the Rates made for the repair of your Church or Chappel,Can. 85. or any thing thereunto belonging? 11 Do any refuse to bury their dead according to the Rites of the Church of England?Rubr. b. and are there any Wills or Testaments
of persons dead in your Parish, that be yet unproved? or any Goods administred without a due grant from the Ordinary? did any dying in your Parish, or elsewhere, leave any Legacy to your Church or Chappel, or to the use of the Poor, or to any other Pious and Cha∣ritable purposes? What were those Legacies, and how have they been bestowed? 12 Is there any Strife and Contention among any of your Pa∣rish for their Pews or Seats in your Church? Have any new Pews been erected in your Chancel, or in the body of your Church or Chappel, without leave from the Ordinary? 13 Do all, and every housholder of your Parish, Fathers,Can. 59. Ma∣sters, Mothers, and Mistresses, cause their Children, Servants and Apprentices, which have not learn'd their Catechism, to come un∣to Church on Sundays and Holidays in the afternoon, obediently to hear, and to be ordered by the Minister till they have learned the same? TIT. V. Concerning Parish-Clerks, and Sextons. 1 HAve you belonging to your Church or Chappel a Parish-Clerk,Can. 91. aged 21 years at the least? Is he of honest life and conversation? and sufficient or able to perform his duty in Reading, Writing and Singing? Is he chosen by your Minister, and doth he duly attend him in all Divine Services at the Church? are his Wa∣ges duly paid unto him? or who withholdeth the same from him? 2 Doth he diligently do his duty in keeping the Church clean and decent, in tolling and ringing the Bells before Divine Service, and when any person is passing out of this life, doth he upon no∣tice, toll a Bell, that the neighbours may thereby be warned to re∣commend the dying person to the grace and favour of God? TIT. VI. Concerning School-masters, Schools, Physicians, Chirurge∣ons and Midwives. 1 DOth any man keep a publick or private School in your Pa∣rish,Can. 77.79. who is not allowed thereunto by his Ordinary? doth
he teach his Scholars the Catechism of Religion set forth by Au∣thority? doth he cause his Scholars upon Sundays and Holidays orderly to repair to your Church or Chappel, and see that they be∣have themselves quietly and reverently during the time of Divine Service and Sermon? 2 Doth any in your Parish practise Physick or Chyrurgery? or any woman take upon her to exercise the office of Midwife, with∣out license from the Ordinary? TIT. VII. Concerning Church-wardens and Side-men. 1 ARe the Church-wardens of your Parish yearly and duly chosen by the joynt consent of your Minister and Parishi∣oners?Can. 89. or one of them by your Minister, and the other by the Pa∣rishioners? 2 Have the former and last Church-wardens given up their Ac∣counts to the Parish, and delivered up to the succeeding Church-wardens the Moneys remaining in their hands, together with all other things belonging to your Church or Chappel? 3 You are further to understand, That according to your Office, you are to provide against every Communion appointed in your Church or Chappel, a sufficient quantity of fine white Bread, and of good Wine,Ruber. at Commun. according to the number of Communicants. YOu also are to exhibit a Bill of Presentments to this Court, of all and every the offenders in any of the matters mentioned in the precedent Articles, and therein to take the assistance of your Minister. FINIS.
