C6131 E288_42 99860920 113047
A Copie of a Letter of the taking of LEICESTER On Wednesday the 18.th of June, 1645. With the Copie of the Articles, and the manner of Storming it the day before: A List of what was taken in LEICESTER, 14 Peeces of Ordnance, 30 Colours, 200 Armes, 500 Horse, 50 Barrels of Gun∣powder. And all their Ammunition and Provisions, of Bagge and Baggage. The Lord of Loughborough to goe to Ashby de la Zouch, and the rest of the Officers and Souldiers to Lichfield. The severall marches▪ of the King since hee was Routed, and his numbers, and how pursued by Sir JOHN GELL, and 200 Horse by him taken from the King. Brought from the Army, and commanded to be forthwith Printed and Published. June ee 20th LONDON, Printed by THO: FORCET, 1645.
An exact and perfect Relation of the manner of taking of LEICESTER, with the Treity and all the particulers con∣cerning the same, certified by a Letter from an eminent person (there) of the Army. Honoured SIR; VPon the routing of the Kings Army, Sir John Gell gathered together all the forces of Derbishire, Notingham∣shire, and the adjacent parts that hee could, and on Munday the 16. th of Iune, 1646. They met with some of the Kings horse and tooke 200. And another party met with some of the Newarkers, and fell upon them, and routed them, tooke 60 Horses, 42 Prisoners, and 80 Armes. The Scots wee heare are at Chesterfield, and Sir William Brereton at Stafford marching this way.
On the said Munday Iune the 16. Sir Thomas Fair∣fax lay before Leicester and sent in a Summons to the Towne, to require the Governour to surrender it to him for the use of the Parliament; and putting it to them to consider how the King was routed, and shewing them what use they might make of that Clemency, with di∣vers other very gallant expressions to the summons, to advertise them how much better it was for them to sur∣render then to force him to take it by storming. To this summons the Enemy sent a negative An∣swer, positively this, that they would not surrender it; whereupon Sir Thomas Fairfax called a Councell of Warre to consult about the Storming of it, which was soon concluded on; that they should prepare all things in readinesse to round it the next day: which was done with all expedition not loosing any time. So they fell presently to raising of Batteries, and doing all things that were necessary for the storming thereof according as they had appointed, and continued providing every thing that had appointed, and continued providing every thing that was requisite for the doing thereof, to be in a readinesse to batter it the next day, and sent into the Country thereabouts for such helpes as were necessary for the worke, which went on with great speed both night and day; so desirous wee are to have a speedy end of the worke that there may be an end of these warres if possible. On Tuesday the 17. th of June, wee drew downe our Ordnance and playd with our Pieces against the Towne, we stormed it playing with our Ordnance very hot on the Newarke side, which we conceived was their greatest
strength? And in short time we made a breach in their workes, which strucke such a terror into the hearts of the Enemy, that the Governour sent to us to destre a Parley, and offered to surrender upon very faire termes; as upon capitulation should be agreed upon. To this request (Sir Thomas Fairfax being willing to save the spilling of innocent blood as much as may be) he assented: and promised speedily to send in Com∣missioners for the treaty, and called a Councell of warre and it was agreed that Collonel Pickering, and Collo∣nel Reinsoorough should go into Leicester to treat with the Governour about the surrendring the said Garrison to Sir Thomas Fairfax. And accordingly a safe conduct was desired for them, which being sent they went to Ca∣pitulate with the Governour about the surrender there∣of. In the meane time Sit Thomas Farfax was not idle, nor did he loose any time; but went on providing and furnishing himselfe with Pittars, Carts, Hay, Grana∣does, Ladders, and all other things necessary for storm∣ing; resolving to fall on at their returne, in case that they should not agree, not knowing how things might fall out, during which time there was both great paynes and care taken by all in their places for the going on in the sayd worke. In the meane time we had Intelligence that the King was on Munday the 16 of Iune at Sheffield; that he came from Ash by de la zouch thether with about 2000 horse, or more, the day before, viz. Sunday night, and matched that morning (viz. Munday morning) to a
Randez vouse neere Dudley Castle, where with the Lich∣field, and Dudley horse, and others that come in to their Randez-vouses, the King had above 3000 horse as is con∣jectured by the Country people which saw them. About 11 of the clocke on Munday morning, they marched from thence to Sturbridge, where he had some more Horse came in, so that in all it is conceived that hee is nigh 4000. Divers of which hee hath been faine to rectuite with fresh Armes from Lichfield, Dudley, and other Garrisons the reabouts. The King it is believed will for Worcester, and there joyne with what Forces Gerhard can releeve him with, and some more Forces that hee lookes for out of the West; but Collonel Gerhard hath met with a rout al∣so in Shropshire, where he lost almost 400 men, by figh∣ting with the Countrey forces, and the Governour of Worcester was killed, and divers other Officers of note were sline, and taken. All the rest of that day, viz. Munday the 16 of Iune, our Commissioners were in Capitulation with the E∣nemy in Leicester, and the Army went on preparing for a Storme, having no Answer that night, and looking for their returne the next Morning very earely, were re∣solved to fall on if they had not agreed with the E∣nemy. On Wedesday Iune the 18. about two of the clock, the Commissioners, viz. Collonel Reinsborough, and Collonel Pikering, returned with a Conclusion of the delivery of it up upon these Articles following.
The Articles for the surrender of the Towne and Garrison of Leicester to Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX, for the use and service of the Parliament, agreed on June the 18. th, 1646. Betweene Collonel PICKERING, and Collonel REINSDOROVGH. 1. THat the Lord Loughborough shall have quarter granted him, and have protection for his Person to be safely conveyed to the Garrison of Ashby de la Zouch. 2 That all field Officers, Collonels, Lieutenant Collonels, Serjeants, Majors, and Captains, & Lieutenants of Horse, (but not of Foot) shall march away with their owne parti∣cular single horse and armes, with protections for their owne persons. 3 That all the rest of the Officers shall be conveyed safely to the Garrison of Lichfield with Staves only, and no other weapons in their hand. 4 That all common Souldiers have quarter onely for their lives, and be conveyed to Lichfield without any other weapons, save onely staves in their hands. 5 That before 10 of the clocke the said morning Iune the 18. the Governour of the Towne, and the Lord Lough∣borough and all the rest of the Officers, and Souldiers
march out of the Garrison according to the agreement a∣foresaid. 6 That Sir Thomas Fairfax be permitted to enter in at 10 of the clock the said Wednesday morning aforesaid, with his Forces, and take possession of the Garrison. 7 That all the Pieces of Canon, great and small now in the Garrison of Leicester, be lft to Sir Thomas Fairfax. 8 That all the Armes, and Ammunition now in Lei∣cester be left to Sir Thomas Faitfax, save onely what is agreed to for the Officers of Horse aforesaid. 9 That all the Provisions, Colours, Bag and Baggage be also left to Sir Thomas Fairfax. 10 That all the Horse (save onely those excepted for the Officers aforesaid) that are in the Garrison of Leicester be delivered up to Sir Thomas Fairfax, for the service of the Parliament. 11 That all the Officers and Souldiers have quarter for their lives. 12 That all the Prisoners of Warre that are in Leice∣ster at the same time, be released and set free to serve the Parliament. With these Articles the Commissioners returned to Sir Thomas Fairfax, certifying further how ioyfull that poore Towne of Leicester was at the hearing of the said agreement, and that they should be rid of the Cvaliers. Thus you see the Lord doth wonderfully for us, above the reach of mns wisdome. Truly we cannot but much admire the goodnesse of Almighty God to us, in doing so great things for us, we cannot ascribe it to any but to the hand of God Almighty, who is the Lord of Hosts.
And it is to be admired to see the cariage of our Ge∣nerall, and indeed all the Officers, how lovingly wee a∣gree, how full of Courage all men are, both Officers and Souldiers when we are in array, what heavenly ex∣pressions, there is from all; and our Generall doth car∣ry himselfe in so excellent a manner that it rowsed up the Courage of all that see him; and the like also did Maior Skippon, who by reason of his wound could not be here in the taking of Leicester, but we hope that hee will recover; for in all Designes, by his wisdome and Valour, his very name is a terrour to the Enemy. A List of what was taken at Leicester. 14 Pieces of Ordnance. 30 Colours. 2000 Armes. 500 Horse. 50 Barrels of Gun- powder. And all their Ammunition and Provisions, with bagge and baggage. FINIS.
