C6118 E285_17 R200072 99860876 113003
The Copy of A LETTER FROM An eminent Commander in Sir Thomas Fairfax Army, to severall worthy Members of the Honourable House of Commons assembled in Parliament. Dated at Marston, within a mile and little more of Oxford, May 24. 1645. Wherein is fully related the return of Lieu∣tenant Gen. Crumwell, and Major Gen. Brown, and their joyning with Sir Thomas Fairfax at Marston aforesaid. The Lord Gorings returne into Gloucester∣shire, the Kings forces advance into Darbyshire, Secretary Nicholas his Letters intercepted, the taking of Philpet the Kings Harrold at Armes, and fundry other Doctors. The taking of Wolvercote house, which the enemy set on fire, but was quenched by our forces, and therein the Deputy-governour, divers other prisoners, and all their Armes and Ammunition. Published by Authority. May 27 LONDON, Printed for Francis Coles in the Old-baily. 1645.
Tudor rose surmounted by a crown Scottish thistle surmounted by a crown French fleur-de-lis surmounted by a crown Irish harp surmounted by a crown SIRS, THe last night Sir Thomas Fairfax our Generall came to Marston, within a mile and little more of Oxford, the 22 of May instant, where Lieutenant Generall Crumwell and Major Ge∣nerall Browne met him, the Foot were quartered in severall Towns about a mile and halfe from Ox∣ford, our Horse-guards and Per∣dues
within twice Musket-shot of the Workes. The enemy hath drowned the meddowes as much as they can, and fired the Suburbs, and have burnt a Corn∣mill the last night, and this mor∣ning set on fire a Garrison at VVolvercoate which they had within a mile, which is burning at the writing hereof. They in∣tended to have burnt the Towne, and other Townes hereabouts, but our Forces being possessed thereof, have prevented their evill intentions. Yesterday, as our Generall was on the Bow∣ling-greene viewing the workes at Magdalen-Colledge, a Bullet weighing eight pound was shot at him, but went over his head
and did no hurt to any of the rest, though hee stood within twice Musket-shot of the VVorkes; this day hee was within twice Pistoll-shot of the VVorkes at the other end of the Towne, but they were sparing of Powder. The Souldiers are intrenching their head Quarters and making a bridge over the water, to hold a correspondency with the other Forces on the other side of the River. Goring is come into Glo∣cestershire wee expect his Horse suddenly: yet if yee send Auxi∣liaries from London and other Counties, wee make no doubt to make short worke of the busi∣nesse, either by gaining of the Towne, or by being Masters of
the field, if the enemy advance to fight with us. This day, May the 24. we have intelligence that the Kings For∣ces are advanced into Derbishire, and so Northward, as wee con∣ceive, if the besieging of Oxford divert not their intentions; letters from Secretary Nicholas were this day intercepted, the princi∣pallest matter they contained was intelligence of passages in both Houses. The Lord Cotting∣ton, the Earle of Dorset, and all the Lords and Gallants beare Armes in Oxford. VVee have taken Philpot the Harrold, and some stragling Doctors that were fear∣full of a siege. As soone as the bridges be made, (the want of
boats much retarding the ser∣vice) there will bee communi∣cation from one Quarter to ano∣ther, and then fit for making approaches neerer. VVe quen∣ched the fire yesterday, and took the Deputy-Governour and all the Armes and Ammunition in the house at VVolvercoate be∣fore the fire got to it. The Generall going to Burstall house to view the workes, and to settle a guard to keepe the garri∣son Souldiers within, that the passage might be open betweene Alisbury and the Army, and so to London, Captaine Flemming Adjutant generall of Horse was shot in the belly, we thinke mor∣tall, he adventured further then
his Commission, and the unruli∣nesse of his Horse brought him among the enemy unawares, he was a very active and stout Gen∣tleman. Marston, May 24. 1645. FINIS.
