D2666A E117_2 99860348 156062
TWO LETTERS The one being sent to the Lord Bishop of Peterborough. The other sent from the Bishop of Bangor, to the Ministers of his Diocesse. Wherein is discovered the readines of the ill-affected Clergy, toward the furnish∣ing of his Majesty with moneys for the mayntaining of Warre against his Parliament. Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, That these bee forthwith printed and published. Hen. Elsinge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. LONDON, Printed for Ed. Husbands, and Iohn Francke, and are to be sold at the Kings head in Fleetstreet, 1642.
Two Letters, the one being sent to the Lord Bishop of Peterborough, the other sent from the Bishop of Ban∣gor, to the Ministers of his Diocesse, &c. MY LORD, THough I have deferred to give you an account of your last Letters, yet I have beene no way forgetfull of your com∣mands in them; For upon the first opportunity offered, I acquainted his Ma∣jesty with the affection and zeale expressed by you to his service, which neither the meannesse of your fortune, nor the multitude of your troubles, could so quench, but that you were ready to the utmost of your pow∣er (and something above it) to give your as∣sistance.
His Majesties gracious Answer was, that hee was very well perswaded of the truth of it, but as then, things were not ripe, nor did he looke much from his Clergy, till he were in a Posture to defend them. Vpon this (and wanting withall a convenient Mes∣senger) I forbore to venture a Letter towards you, till I saw his affaires drawing neerer to∣wards an issue. They that are able to helpe, must either doe it at this time, or never, nor can your Lordship doe better service then in a private way (till a publick way may be prote∣cted to deale with the ablest and likeliest men of your Clergy to that effect. The King is now comming neerer to you, but I stay yet at Yorke with a part of my charge, till wee are sent for. I beseech your Lordship afford mee a place in your prayers, as you have in mine, who am Your most affectionate friend, and Brother, Br. S. Yorke Aug. 14.
Gentlemen, I Have received a Letter from my Lord Strange Lievte∣nant Generall to his Maje∣sty for these parts, to excite my Clergie to a free and full contribution for his Maje∣sties support in these his urgent extremities. For the expediting of this request you shall receive by the Bearer the very originall. It would bee superfluous to use any arguments to move you to this purpose, otherwise then to say, that a Sovereign (which if Plutarch were now alive, hee could not finde a parallel for him) is he, the gracious Prince that receives our myte▪ therefore lay your hands upon your hearts, and like good Christians out-goe the liberality, which not only reason but na∣ture will dictate, that every particular will for∣go
his owne conservation, if it tends to the preservation of the Vniverse. Speed is the se∣cond thing required, so that I expect to re∣ceive by the return of the Bearer Doctor Lloyd the expression of loyall and free hearts. So commending all to Gods protection, exhort∣ing you to prayers for the peace of Ierusalem, I rest Your loving Friend and Brother, William Banger. Landurnog ultimo Aug. 1642, The Bearer can acquaint you with what a∣lacrity these parts have dispatched this busi∣nesse, I am unwilling to appoint any propor∣tion, the iniquitie of the times have sufficiently instructed you, what his Majesty deserves at our hands, treble tenth will be the least quan∣tity that will make a visible summe, but I hope the meanest will far exceed that. VV. B. A Copy of the Letter sent to the Ministers of Arnstley, from their Diocesan, the Bishop of Bangor. FINIS.
