D699 E555_26 99865022 165115
THE DECLARATION OF THE LEVELLERS CONCERNING Prince Charles AND Their Treaty with His Excellency the Lord Generall Fair-fax; the particulars of another great Fight; the suc∣cesse thereof, and the number killed and taken prisoners. ALSO, The Declaration of the Counties of York, Lincoln, Nottin∣gham, Liecester, and Warwickshire, concerning the Par∣liament, Army, and Levellers. TOGETHER With a new Declaration from Scotland, touching Religion, KING and KINGDOME. Imprinted at London, for C.W. 27. May, MDCXLIX.
A great FIGHT Between The Parliaments Forces and the Levelers, on Munday last, divers killed and taken prisoners, and their Declaration touching Baistoll. SIR. COl. Reynolds with the Troops of horse that stuck to him, resolving to oppose the Level∣lers, marched towards Banbury, and discovered a prrty commanded by Captain Thompson marched up to them and the Scouts having met and parlyed, Collonel Reynolds men brought word to him, that the Lrvellers, desired to know a reason of their approach and what it was they desired; Collonel Reynolds sent word he demanded their Cullers, and their Leader so him: this begat a short parley, and Captain Thomp∣son called a councell, but in the mean while some of the Souldiers slunk away, some one: way and some a∣another, some with horses and some without: They
were all of horse both one party and the other; some moved that Captain Thompson and the Cullers, might be delivered up, but his Quarter-master said no, they were all equally engaged, and that as they had joyned together, so they might live and dye together: but at last, Captain Thompson was advised to escape if hee could, and accordingly he mounted, and attempted, to be gone, with his Lieut. and some others; but by ad∣vertizement from the rest, Col. Reynolds had notice thereof, and sent out his Lieut. with two more after him, who approached near him capt. Thomson whee∣led about, and shot the Lieut. Party dead, the other two being some space behind, they came up to them, and after a short dispute one of them was wounded, & the other dismounted, and Thompson and the rest, who are about twenty are gone to those that disserted col. Scroop. And those that would to come in to col Reynolds, the rest to march away: and some 60 of them being ill armed went away, and 40 came in to Colonell Rsy∣nolds, the coulours were delivered, and Thompsons cor∣porall and another delivered prisoners, beside some o∣ther prisonrs that are taken. But afterwards the Ox∣ford Troop, commanded by Lieut. Rawley. Capt. Smiths Lieut comming up to joyn with Thompson (not know∣ing what was done, nor of any approach of col. Reynolds against them, but expecting some from Rutland, and o∣ther parts to have joyned with them,) col. Reynolds sent out a gallant Troop, commanded by his Lieut. who in a Parly with them, demanded whither they mar∣ched; they answered to their friends, it was asked who they meant, it was answered capt. Thopson: hereupon col. Reynolds men charged them, & they answered them againe, some were hurt on both sides, but the Oxford Troop took some prisoners: After which another par∣ty
was sent after to pursue them; and have taken and dispersed them. But Captain Everard hath still a considerable party, and is marching Westward, to joyne with the rest of their Brethren in those parts, who in his way on Tuesday last met with some opposition by the Lord Generals Forces, and after a sharp dispute many of the adverse party were dissipated and levelled, about twenty taken prisoners, and almost as many killed. The min By are at Marlborough, whether the L. Generall sent a Message and Declaration to them to of∣fer indempnity if they would submit; and in order ther∣unto some overtures hath been made for a reconciliati∣on, Major White, Major Gibbons, and Captain Bayley be∣ing employed as Commissioners on the Lord Generals part to treat with them: some progresse hath bin made therein, but the Levellers stand upon high terms, and no∣thing will appease their fury but a new Representative; their number increaseth, and many come in to them dai∣ly, yet divers of the Officers and old Souldiery deserts them. The Country is divided, in reference to both par∣ties; but that which takes the deepest impression and in∣fluence upon the peoples affections, is, Their declaring for Magistracy, Libety, and Freedom, their inviting the people into their assistance, under fair pretences for Charls the second, and that they intend nothing more then the re∣stauration of the Common-wealth of England to its just li∣berty, splendor, and proprietyy, and to expell and dissipate all obstructive Clouds both in Church and State; but it i ap∣parent that the chief promoters of that desgn are Ene∣mies both to Magistracy and Ministery, and that if once they should become powerfull, their little finger would be far more heavier, then the loyns of those who have bin entrusted before them. Gloocester 14. May, 1649
Right Honoured, THis morning his Excellency the Lord Gene∣rall Fairfax, and Lieutenant General Crumwell, randezvouzed with their Horse and Foot neer Andover, where the Lieu. Gen. rode to the head of each Regiment, declaring▪ That He was resolved to live and aie with them, and that as he had often engaged with them against the common Enemy of this Nation, so was he resolved still to persist therein, against those Revolters which are now called by the name of Levellers; not doubt∣ing but that they would as one man unite, and with una∣nimous spirits follow him, for the subduing of them, and bringing the chief Ring-leaders thereof to exemplary pu∣nishment. Many declared a great willingnesse to engage with him: Others rejected it, saying, they would not fight against their friends: But they are now upon their march towards Salisbury, for the reducing and bring∣ing of those Regiments to obedience and subjection that have declared against them: from whence wee hear, that they are resolved rather to die, then yeeld to any thing which shall infringe their liberty, or pervert the freedom of their Nativity. Many of the said party have agreed upon a Decla∣ration, containing these ensuing heads: First, they de∣clare against the present Parl. and their proceedings. 2 Against the Councell of State. 3 Against the Ge∣nerall Councell of the Army. And 4. against the pro∣ceedings of the late Court of Justices Their chief Ring leader is one Capt. Tompson, who was formerly con∣demned by a Councell of War to be hanged, but by the, goodnesse and compassion of the Lord Gen. he was spared: this is the man who draws all men after him, his number is conceived to be about 400. and in his
watch up and down hee daily gains new Proselites to him: On Wednesday last he marcht to Coventry where he found resistance, and the Gates shut against him (demanded if the Gates were so holy that he might not enter;) and after the exchange of two or three Vol∣lies, he left the place, and marched thence to Tossiter, where coming in very late at night, he seized upon ca∣ptain Farmer the Post master there, who, after they had carryed him as a prisoner up and down with them, they were content to release him upon his Parol to come up to London to the Councel of State, to pro∣cure the release of three of their Brethren, who were taken posting up of their papers about Banbury; if he could not procure this he was to return as their priso∣ner to Banbury. Some blows have been already disputed neer Banbu∣ry between 100 of the Lord Gen. horse and 200 of the Levellers, and after a sharp conflict, the Levellers declining engagement, retreated towards Oxford, but no great harm done on either side: there is a body of horse about Oxford ready to joyn with them, comman∣ded by Mr. Everard, after uniting, its said they intend Westward. Some difference hath also been in the City of Wor∣cester and the Levellers who had entred the City for∣ced to retreat out again with the losse of five men: the Generall and the Lieutenant Generall hath sent a Let∣ter to the Agitators and Commanders in chief of the said party, for preventing of the effusion of bloud, and healing of the present breach, and quenching those flames of Discord, which are ready to break forth in severall parts of this Nation; and its hoped a happy & mutuall reconciliation will be embraced, before the
involving and shedding of any more bloud within the Bowels of this Nation. Andover 14 May, 1649. May 15. Letters from the North say, That the Coun∣ties of Yorkshire, Lincolnshire, Nottinghamshire, Lie∣cestershire and Warwickshire, have declared for the par∣liament and Army, and are resolved to unite and associate against those called Levellers. The Estates of Scotland have likewise declared Generall Pluscarden and other his Associates, and all such as shall joyn with them guilty of the crime of high Treason, and pro∣hibite all manner of persons whatsoever to give any man∣ner of assistance, or countenance the persons aforesaid, un∣der the pain of being esteemed Rebels, and enemies to Reli∣gion, King and Kingdom. But the businesse is rather worse then better; for Ogleby, Pluscardy and Middleton grow numerous, waving the Declaration of the States, and were the last week at Athol; since which time David Lesley hath randezvouzed with his whole body of Horse and Foot, and is now marched af∣ter them. FINIS.
