D798 e476_7 99864845 162496
A DECLARATION TO The Kingdome, OF The Armies generall Survey of the In∣come of the Excize, the profits of the Customs, the benefit of Compositions, and other Moneys raised in the Kingdome: And concerning Committees in London and the Countrey which have re∣ceived moneyes for the State. Also a particular Letter from his Excellency the Lord Fairfax to the Commissioners of Excize, concerning their proceedings in levying and receiving the same, and such sums of money as they have in Cash, and already received. Signed by his Excellency, and published for generall satisfaction. London: Printed for R. B. 1648.
A Declaration to the Kingdome, of the Armies generall survey of the accompts of the Ex∣cize, the Customs, the Kings Revenue, the Compo∣sitions of Goldsmiths Hall, and the Receipts of Committees in London, and severall Counties of this Kingdome. HAving by Gods blessing and the endeavours of this dispersed Army overcome the most vi∣sible actors of their own and the Kingdomes ruine, it pleased him to put into their thoughts to use such waies and means as he shall dictate to them in a time of extremity and danger, for setling this long oppressed Nation in their just Rights and Priviledges, and upon the approach of some Regiments of the Ar∣my into the City of London, his Excellencie with the advice of his Generall Councell of the Army, gave Orders for the seizing of certain Treasuries within the said City, (they being as yet much in arreare for the Assessements to the Army) and coming to Weavers-Hall they found a considerable sum of mony, which in probability was part of the money collected upon the Assessements to aforesaid, however it might be otherwise pretended, which money by his Exeellencies Declara∣tion (that not only the Kingdome, but the whole world may judge of the justnesse of his proceedings,) is to be restored againe without losse, or to be made
good out of that which is yet due to the Army, and was paid in by the middle sort of people, which we hope will satisfie all reasonable men that the intent of this Army is not to take or act any thing by vio∣lence, but what is theirs and the Kingdomes due; for however it may be alleadged that this act was to make provision to pay the private souldier, yet is it not with∣out speciall regard to the peoples interest, for it is too well knowne that if the souldier hath not his pay he is unable to discharge his Quarters, which causeth many deepe sighs and groanes from the poore Farmer in the Country, who (with us) have long had a perticuler aspect on the City of London in hopes of redresse, for that it is notoriously knowne, that it is the only place of receipt and the publique treasury of the King∣dome. And when we examine the income of the Ex∣cize only, it amazeth us to think that the Estates of Holland should maintain a far greater Army then this in constant pay (the Excize being no higher there then it is there) by that alone. But when you consider the other vast summes of money, which for severall yeares together have accrued out of this Office, the Custome, House, (and other the Kings Revenue) Composition money, the sale of Bishops Lands, sequesterations in all parts of the Kingdome, &c. and yet all too little either to satisfie publique debts, or pay the deerly ear∣ned wages of the souldiers, it must necessarily follow that a great part of such moneyes were converted to a contrary use, or not that improvement made thereof as might best advantage the publique; which hath caused us and our friends to consider of these perticu∣lars following.
1. That the Assessements for this Army were either not gathered, or deteined on purpose to bring the Ar∣my into disdain, and render them odious unto the Kingdome. 2. That the accompts of the Excize are unperfect, or not kept in that forme which is requisit for that and other Officers of like nature, the experience of the la∣ter too plainly appearing by the delaies that have com∣monly been used, when they have been called on to bring an accompt which could hardly ever yet be per∣fected, or brought to just estimate under 6. Moneths; within which time there commonly happened some extraordinary oceasion for a great summe, and if this upon earnest request were advanced, it must be repaid with 8. l. per centum, which together with the large al∣lowance to the Commissioners, and Sub-Officers, there comes not de claro above one moitie to the State. 3. That the Customs taken, or Tunnage & Poundage and the revenue of the Kings Land, brings a vast pro∣fit to the State, and some part thereof is unaccompted for, and the Customes which were heretofore declared to be for the maintenance of the Navy, not sufficient to defray that charge, but large summes of Composi∣tions, and otherwise have been added towards that service. 4. That before the time of the rising in Kent (and the Earle of Hollands party) there was at least three∣score thousand pounds due, from such as had already made their compositions and entred bond to pay it at such a day, which moneyes not being brought in was made use of as an inablement to those persons in whose hands it remained, the more deeply to ingage in the
last War, and of that which was brought in, many great summes thereof were given away as a recom∣pence or reward to particuler persons which had no need thereof, whilst others which had faithfully ser∣ved the Parliament were ready to famish with hun∣ger. 5. That for Bishops Lands if they have not been sold at an under value, yet hath not that benefit been gained thereby as suited with the necessity to supply the publique affaires, for it is a thing which few are unsenfible of, that some men being in equipage and con∣dition to purchase, have made that good to themselves which others have had ltttle cause to esteem any better of then desperate debts. 6. It is not to be forgotten that as these places before mentioned are chiefly to be dived into, yet doth it no waies excuse Committees in the Countreies or other Cities, or any person or persons of what sort or de∣gree
soever which may justly bee charged, neither is it to be understood that every Member or particuler per∣son officiating or appertaining to any of the Officers or Committees afore∣said, are faulty or blameworthy for a∣ny miscarriages therein, For he that doth well shall be accepted both of God and man. These things premised as so many generalls, wherein is conceived there might be great redresse, neverthelesse it is hereby fit likewise to be declared, that the Army do not take on them by force or violence to regulate these or other matters of the same kinde, but freely leave it unto the honourable House of Commons, and others in place of trust and judicature; and no sooner shall it please God to settle this Kingdom in peace, the Army secured by good and undoubted wayes from those which have and will at all times hereafter (if it Ile in their power) seek their utter ruine, and bring a new disturbance upon the whole Kingdome; and our dearly earned wages satisfied or secured, we shall most readily and willingly disband, and betake our selves to our former callings. And further, forasmuch as a Party of Horse did by mistake march to the grand Excize, although no vio∣lence or injury offered, or money by them taken or se∣cured,
yet many false reports were raised, whereupon the Lord Generall, to preserve a right understanding, sent a Letter to the Commissioners of Excize in these words. Gentlemen, WHereas upon this present eight of December, a par∣ty of horse and foot came to the Excize Office in Broadstreet, which perhaps will occasion some to think the Army came thither with a purpose to interrupt any more levying of the Excize. These are to assure them that the said forces came thither by a mistake, and that there was not any intentions to give interruption unto the due levying of the Excize, or to seize upon any money in Cash, and that you may proceed as formerly according to those Ordinances and Orders of Parliament, which you have received con∣cerning the same, Decemb. 8. 1648. Your very assured friend, Fairfax. For my worthy friends the Commissioners of the Ex∣cize and new Impost. FINIS.
