E1561aA 45097688 171286
The Humble DESIRES AND PROPOSITIONS OF THE Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, Presented to the KINGS most Ex∣cellent Majesty at his Court at Oxford, February 3. 1642. With His MAIESTIES ANSWER thereunto, and six Propositions propounded by him to both Houses, to be debated upon with the rest. Die Lunae. Feb. 6. 1642. Ordered by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament that these Propositions with his Majesties Answer thereunto shall be forthwith printed and published. Io. Browne Cler. Parliamentorum. Feb. 7. Printed for Iohn Wright in the Old Bailey. 1642.
The Humble Petition of the Lords and Commons to the King. WE your MAJESTIES most humble and faithfull Subjects, The Lords and Com∣mons in Parliament Assembled, having in our thoughts the glory of God, your Ma∣jesties honour, and the prosperity of your people, and being most grievously afflicted with the pressing miseries, and calamites, which have over∣whelmed your two Kingdoms of England & Ireland, since your Majesty hath by the perswasion of evil Councellors, withrawn your self frō the Parliament, raised an army against it, And by force therof protected delinquents, from the Justice of it, con∣strayning us to take Armes for the defence of our Religion, Lawes, Liberties, Priviledges of Parliament, and for the fit∣ting of the Parliament in safety; which feares and dangers are continued and increased by the raising, drawing together and arming of great numbers of Papists under the command of the Earle of New-Castle, likewise by making the Lord Herbert of Ragland and other knowne Papists Commanders of great Forces, whereby many grievous Oppressions, Rapines, and cruelties have been and are dayly exercised upon the persons and states of your people, much innocent bloud hath beene spilt & the Papists have obtained meanes of attempting with hopes of affecting their mischievous designes of rooting out the reformed Religion, and destroying the professors there∣of, in tender sence and compassion of these evills under which your People and Kingdome lie, (according to the duty which
we owe to God your Majesty and the Kingdome for which we are trusted) doe most earnestly desire that an end may be put to these great distempers and distractions, for the pre∣vention of that desolation which doth threaten all your Ma∣jesties Dominions, and as wee have rendred, and still are ready to render to your Majesty that subjection, obedience and service which we owe unto you, so wee most humbly beseech your Majesty to remove the causes of this War, and to vouchsafe us that peace and protection which we and our Ancestors have formerly injoyed, under your Majesty and royall Predecessors, and graciously to accept and grant those our most humble desires and propositions: 1. that your Maje∣sty will be pleased to disband your Armies as wee likewise shall be ready to disband all those Forces which we have rai∣sed, and tht you will be pleased to returne to your Parlia∣ment. 2. That you will leave Delinquents to a legall tryall and judgement of Parliament. 3. That the Papists may not only be disbanded but disarm∣ed, according to the Law. 4 That your Majesty will be pleased to give your royall as∣sent unto the Bill for taking away superstitious innovations; To the Bill for the utter abolishing and taking away of all Arch-bishops, Bishops, their Chancellors, and Commissaries, Deanes, Sub-deanes, Deanes and Chapters, Arch-deacons Canons, and Prebendaries and all Chantors, Chancellors, Treasurers, Sub-treasurers, Succentors and Sacrists, and all Vicars Chorall, and Choristers, old Vicars, and new Vicars, of any Cathedrall or Collegiate Church and all other their under Officers out of the Church of England, to the Bill a∣gainst scandalous Ministers; To the Bill against Pluralities. And to the Bill for Consultation to be had with godly, Religious and learned Divines, that your Majesty will be pleased to promise to passe such other good Bills, for setling of Church-government
as upon consultation with the Assembly of the said Divines, shall be resolved on by both Houses of Parlia∣ment; and by them be presented to your Majesty. 5. That your Majesty having exprest in your Answer, to the ninteene propositions of both Houses of Parliament, an hearty affection and intention for the rooting out of popery out of this Kingdome. And that if both the Houses of Parlia∣ment can yet finde a more effectuall course to disable Iesuits, Priests and Popish Recusants from disturbing the state, or De∣luding the Lawes, that you would willingly give your con∣sent unto it. That you would be graciously pleased for the better dis∣covery, & speedier conviction of Recusants, that an Oath may be established by Act of Parliament, To be administred in such manner as by both Houses shall be agreed on, where in they shal abjure and renounce the Popes supremacy, the doctrin of Transsubstantiation, Purgatory, worshiping of the conse∣crated Hosts, Crucifixes and Images and the refusing of the said Oath being tendered in such manner as shall be appoint∣ed by Act of Parliament, shal be a sufficient conviction in Law of Recusancy. And that your Majesty will be graciously pleased to give your Royall assent unto a Bill, for the education of the chil∣dren of Papists by Protestants, in the Protestant Religion. That for the more effectuall execution of the Lawes a∣gainst Popish Recusants, your Majesty will be pleased to con∣sent to a Bill for the true levying of the penalties against them, and that the same penalties may be levyed, and dispo∣sed of in such manner as both Houses of Parliament shall a∣gree on, so as your Majesty be at no losse; And likewise to a Bill whereby the practise of Papists against the state may be prevented, and the Lawes against them duely executed. 6. That the Earle of Bristoll may be removed from your Majesties Councells, and that both he, and the Lord Herbert,
eldest son to the Earle of Worcester, may likewise be restrained from comming within the verge of the Court, and that they may not beare any Office or have any imployment concer∣ning the state or Common-wealth. 7. That your Majesty will be graciously pleased by Act of Parliament, to settle the Militia both by Sea and Land, and for the Forts and ports of the Kingdome in such a manner, as shall be agreed on by both Houses. 8. That your Majesty will be pleased, by your Letters pa∣tents to make Sir Iohn Bramston, chiefe Justice of your Court of Kings-Bench, William Lenthall Esquire the now speaker of the Commons House, Mr. of the Rolles, and to continue the Lord chiefe Justice Bankes, chiefe Justice of the Court of Common-Pleas; And likewise to make Mr. Sergeant Wyld chiefe Baron of your Court of the Exchequer, And that Mr. Justice Bacon may be continued, and Mr. Sergeant Roles, and Mr. Sergeant Atkins made Justices of the Kings Bench. That Mr. Justice Reenes, and Mr. Justice Foster may be con∣tinued, and Mr. Sergeant Phesant made one of the Justices of your Court of Common-Pleas. That Mr. Sergeant Creswell, Mr. Samuel Browne, and Mr. Iohn Puleston may be Barons of the Exchequer and that all these, and all the Judges of the same Courts for the time to come, may hold their places by Let∣ters patents under the great Seale, Quam diu se bene gesserint. And that the severall persons not before named that doe hold any of these places before mentioned may be removed. 9. That all such persons as have bin put out of the Com∣missions of peace or of Oyer, and Terminer or from being Cus∣todes Rotulorum since the first day of April. 1642. (Others then such as were put out by the desire of both or either of the Houses of Parliament may againe be put into those Com∣missions and Offices; And that such persons may be put out of those Commissions and Offices as shall be excepted against by both Houses of Parliament.
10. That your Majesty will be pleased to passe the Bill now presented to your Majesty, to vindicate and secure the pri∣viledges of Parliament from the ill consequence of the late president in the charge and proceedings against the Lord Kimbolton now Earle of Manchester, and the five members of the House of Commons. 11. That your Majesties Royall Assent may be given unto such Acts as shall be advised by both Houses of Parliament, for the satisfying and paying the debts and dammages, where∣in the two Houses of Parliament have engaged the publique Faith of the Kingdom. 12. That your Majesty will be pleased according to a gracious Answer heretofore received from you, to enter in∣to a more strict alliance with the states of the united Provin∣ces, and other Neighbour Princes, and states of the Prote∣stant Religion for the defence and maintenance thereof, a∣gainst all designes, and attempts of the Popish and Jesuiticall faction, to subvert and suppresse it; whereby your subjects may hope to be free from the mischiefes, which this King∣dome hath endured through the power which some of that party have had in your Councell, and will be much encour∣aged in a Parliamentary way for your aide and assistance, in restoring your Royall Sister and the Prince Elector to those Dignities and Dominions which belong unto them, and the relieving the other distressed Protestant Princes, who have suffered in the same cause. 13. That in the Generall pardon that your Majesty hath bin pleased to offer to your Subjects, all offences and misde∣meanors committed before the tenth of Ianuary, 1641. which have bin or shall be questioned or proceeded against in Par∣liament upon complaint in the House of Commons before the tenth of Ianuary, 1643. shall be excepted, which offences and misdemeanors shall neverthelesse be taken and adjudg∣ed to be fully discharged against all other inferiours Courts,
That likewise there shall be an exception of all offences com∣mitted by any person or persons which hath or have had any hand or practise in the rebellion of Ireland, which hath or have given any Counsell, assistance or incouragement to the Rebells there, for the maintenance of that rebellion, as like∣wise an exception of William Earle of New Castle, and George Lord Digby. 14. That your Majestie will be pleased to restore such Members of either House of Parliament to their severall place of service and imployment out of which they have bin put, since the beginning of this Parliament, that they may receive satisfaction and reparation for those places and for the profits which they haue lost by such removall▪ upon the Petition of both houses of Parliament, and that all others may be restored to their offices and imployments who have bin put out of the same upon any displeasure conceived a∣gainst them for any assistance given to both Houses of Parlia∣ment, or obeying their Commands, or forbearing to leave their attendance upon the Parliament without licence; Or for any other occasion arising from these unhappy differen∣ces betwixt your Majesty and both Houses of Parliament up∣on the like Petition of both Houses. These things being granted and performed, as it hath all∣waies bin our hearty prayers, so shall wee be inabled to make it our hopefull endeavour, that your Majesty and your people may injoy the blessings of Peace, Truth, and Iustice; The Royalty, and greatnesse of your Throne may be sup∣ported by the Loyall and bountifull affections of your people, their Liberties and Priviledges maintained by your Majesties protction and Iustice, and this publique Honour and Hap∣pinesse of your Majesty and all your Dominions, commu∣nicated to other Churches and States of your Alliance, and derived to your Royall posterity, and the future Generations in this Kingdome for ever.
HIS MAIESTIES Answer and Propositions to the Lords and Commons in PARLIAMENT. IF His Maiesty had not given up all the faculties of His soule to an earnest endeavour of a peace, and reconciliation with His people; Or if He would suffer himselfe by any provocation to be drawne to a sharpnesse of language at a time when there séemes somewhat like an overture of Accomodation; He could not but resent the heavy charges upon Him in the preamble of these Propositions; And would not suffer himselfe to be reproached with protecting of Delin∣quents by force from Iustice (His Maiesties desire having al∣waies béen, that all men should be tryed by the knowne Laws, and having béen refused it) with raising an Army against His Parliament; And to be told that Armes have béen taken up against Him for defence of Religion, Laws, Liberties, Privi∣ledges
of Parliament, & for sitting of the Parliament in safety, with many other particulars in that preamble, so often and so fully answered by His Maiesty, without remembring the World of the time and circumstances of raising these Armes a∣gainst him, when His Maiesty was so farre from being in a condition to invade other mens Rights, that He was not able to maintaine and defend His owne from violence; And with∣out telling His good Subiects, that their Religion (the true Protestant Religion, in which His Maiesty was borne, hath faithfully lived, and to which He will die a willing sacrifice) Their Lawes, Liberties, Priviledges, and safety of Parlia∣ment, were so amply setled, and established, or offered to be so by His Maiesty, before any Army was raised against him, and long before any raised by him for his defence; That if nothing had béen desired, but that peace and protection which His Subiects and their Ancestors had in the best times enioy∣ed under His Maiesty, or His Royall Predecessors, this mis∣understanding, and distance betwéene His Maiesty and His People, and this generall misery and distraction upon the face of the whole Kingdome had not now béene the discourse of Christendome. But His Maiesty will forbeare any expres∣sions of bitternesse, or of a sence of His owne sufferings, that if it be possible the memory thereof may be lost to the World; And therefore, though many of the Propositions presented to His Maiesty by both Houses appeare to Him very derogatory from and destructive to His Iust Power and Prerogative, and no way beneficiall to His Subiects, few of them being al∣ready due to them by the Laws established (and how un-Par∣liamentary it is by Armes to require new Laws, all the world may Iudge) yet because these may be waved or mollified, and many that are now darke or doubtfull in them cleared and explained upon debate) his Maiesty is pleased (such is his sence of the miseries this Kingdom suffers by this unnaturall War,
and His earnest desire to remove them by a happy peace) that a speedy Time and Place be agréed upon for the méeting of such persons as His Maiesty, and both Houses shall appoint to discusse these Propositions, and such others here following as His Maiesty doth propose to them. 1. That His Maiesties owne Revenue, Magazines, Townes, Forts, and Ships, which have béene taken or kept from Him by force, be forthwith restored unto Him. 2. That whatsoever hath béen done or published, contrary to the knowne Lawes of the Land, and derogatory to His Maiesties legall and knowne Power and Rights, be renoun∣ced and recalled, that no séed may remaine for the like to spring out of for the future. 3. That whatsoever illegall power hath beene claimed, and exercised by or over his Subiects, as imprisoning their persons without Law, stopping their Habeas Corpusses; And imposing upon their Estates, without Act of Parliament, &c. either by both or either House, or any Committée by both or either, or by any persons appointed by any of them be disclai∣med, and all such persons so committed, forthwith discharged. 4. That as His Maiesty will readily consent (having done so heretofore) to the execution of all Lawes already made, and to any good Acts to be made for the suppressing of Popery, and for the firme setling of the Protestant Religion now esta∣blished by Law; So he desires that a good Bill may be fra∣med for the better preserving of the Book of Common-Prayer from the scorne and violence of Brownists, Anabaptists, and other Sectaries, with such clauses for the ease of tender con∣sciences, as his Maiesty hath formerly offered: 5. That all such persons as upon the Treaty shall be ex∣cepted out of the generall pardon, shall be tryed per Pares according to the usuall course and knowne Law of the Land,
and that it be left to that either to acquit or condemne them. 6. And to the intent this Treaty may not suffer interrupti∣on by any intervening Accidents, That a cessation of Armes, and frée Trade for all his Maiesties Subiects may be first a∣gréed upon. This offer and desire of his Maiesty he hopes will be so chéerefully entertained, That a spéedy and blessed peace may be accomplished: if it shall be reiected, or by insisting upon im∣reasonable circumstances, be made impossible, which he hopes (God in his mercy to this Nation will not suffer) The guilt of the blood which will be shed and the desolation, which must follow will lie upon the heads of the refusers; however, his Maiestie is resolved through what accidents soever he shall be compelled to recover his rights, and with what prosperous successes soever it shall please God to blesse him, That by his earnest constant endeavours to Propagate and promote the true protestant Religion, And by his governing according to the known Lawes of the Land, and upholding the Iust Pri∣viledges of Parliament, according to his frequent Protesta∣tions made before Almighty God, which be will alwaies in∣violably observe, The World shall sée that he hath undergone all these difficulties and hazzards for the defence and mainte∣nance of these, The zealous preservation of which his Maiesty well knowes is the onely foundation and meanes for the true happinesse of him and his People. FINIS.
