E2068 E36_14 R11841 99859146 111212
AN ORDINANCE OF The Lords and Commons assembled in PARLIAMENT; For the upholding the Government and Fellowship of Merchants of England Trading in the LEVANT Seas, For the maintenance of Clothing, and Wool∣len Manufactures, the venting of LEAD, TIN, and sundry other Commodi∣ties of this Kingdom. ORdered by the Commons in Parliament, That this Ordi∣nance be forthwith printed and published: H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. MARCH 11. 1643. London, Printed for Edward Husbands, and are to be sold at his shop in the Middle-Temple. 1643.
9. Martii, 1643. FOr the better encouragement and supportation of the Fellowship of Merchants of England trading in the LEVANT Seas; vvhich, besides the building and maintaining of divers great Ships, both for Defence and Bur∣then, the venting of Kersies, Sayes, Perpetuanies, and severall other com∣modities, Hath been found very ser∣viceable and profitable to this State, by advancing Navigation, and transport∣ing into Forraigne parts for severall yeers together, above Twenty thou∣sand Broad-clothes per Annum, besides other commodities dyed and dressed
in their full Manufacture: And for the better Government and Regula∣ting of Trade, especially that of Clo∣thing, whereby the poor people are set on work, and the whole Kingdom re∣ceives benefit, The Lords and Commons in Parliament do Ordain, that the said Fellowship of Merchants of England trading into the LEVANT Seas, shall continue and be a Corporation, That they shall have the free choice and removall of all Ministers and Offi∣cers, which are to be by them maintai∣ned either at home or abroad, vvhether they be dignified, or called by the title or name of Ambassadours, Governours, Deputies, Consulls, or otherwise; And shall have power to Leavie Monies on the Members of their Corporation, and Strangers, upon all Goods that
shall be shipped in English Bottomes, as also upon all the Goods of English shipped in Strangers Bottomes, which go into or come from the LEVANT Seas, for and towards the necessary charge and maintenance, and supply of their Ministers, Officers, Govern∣ment. And that the said Fellowship shall have further power to Leavie such sum and sums of Money on the Members of their corporation, and their Goods, as shall be advanced for the use and be∣nefit of the State, by the Approbation of both Houses of Parliament.: And that no person shall bring from, or send Goods or ships into those parts Limited by their Incorporation, but such as are Free Brothers, or otherwise Licensed by the aforesaid corporation, or forfei∣ture of the whole, or other lesser Penal∣tie
to be imposed by the said corpora∣tion, on their said Goods or ships so sent or traded in unduly. Provided that the said Fellowship shall not exclude any person from his Freedom and Admission into the said Fellowship, who shall defire it by way of Redemption, if such person be a meer Merchant, and otherwise capable thereof, and shall pay Fifty pounds for the same, if he be above the age of twenty sevē yeers, or twenty five pounds if he be under that age, or so much lesse, as their Fellowship shall think fitting. And that the said Fellowship shall have power to impose a Fine upon any per∣son or persons wilfully contemning, or disobeying the Order or Orders in matter of Government, so as the Fine do not exceed the summe of Twenty
pounds, for any one offence; And in default of payment of such Fine, the said Fellowship shal have power to distrain the Goods of such per∣son or persons so fined; And if no sufficient distresse can be found, then the said Fellowship shall have power to imprison the said person or persons for their said contempt, untill such person or persons shal pay such Fine or Fines, or otherwise conform themselves to the Act and Government of the said Fellowship; And the said Fellowship shall have power to give such an Oath or Oaths, to the Officers and Members of their Corporation, as shall be approved of by both Houses of Parliament: Provided that all Rights or Charters granted under the Broad Seal of England or otherwise, shall be hereby saved. And the said Lords and Commons do fur∣ther Ordain, That with all convenient expedi∣tion, a Bill shall be prepared, in order to an Act of Parliament to be passed in this present Parliament, for the further settling, and full confirmation of the Priviledges of the said Fellowship herein before mentioned, with
such other clauses and Provisions, as shall be found expedient by both Houses of Parlia∣ment; This Ordinance to remain in full force, untill a Bill or Act shal be prepared and passed according to the intent and true meaning of this Ordinance. And it is Ordered, that this Ordinance be forthwith Printed and published, that all Persons concerned may take notice thereof as appertaineth. H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. FINIS.
