E254A R231737 99900019 133239
THE SAINTS SACRED LAVER. By Iames Eglesfield, Master of Arts, Minister of Gods Word at Knightsbridge. Preached at Padington, September the first, 1645. LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper, 1646.
To the Honourable Knight, Sir William Belfore. AS Christ himselfe said some∣time to a multitude, the like may I, taking occasion from this my presumpti∣on, What came ye out to see? a Reed sha∣ken with the winde? it may be so: but what came yee out for to see? a Prophet? here I must change the note, nay lesse then a Prophet, for as among the sonnes of women, there was not a greater then Hee of whom Christ spake; so among the sonnes of women is there not a lesse then he whose pen now presents that service
which his tongue ought, in its proper place, did not the cloud of a darkenned fortun eclipse his apparition. Lesse in maturity and ripenes for so weighty a busines, as touching my selfe; lesse in o∣pinion of fitnes, as touching the esteeme of many who it may be have seene me sweating in the pursuite of my Recreati∣on, (fishing) but never in serving at the Alter of my God, Notwithstanding, oh my God, I am sent as a messenger before thy face, and shall prepare the way be∣fore thee. For by a fit Metaphor drawne from the art and practice of fishing, our Savi∣our Christ hath shaddowed forth both the calling and imployment, both of his first choice Apostles, and all other Apostolicall succeeding Preachers, saying, I will make
you fishers of men. Mat. 4, 19. Such you shall bee, because such I will make you to be, & quorum pars parva fui, full twenty yeeres exercising this holy functi∣on: who although with Peter may say, I have toyled all the night and caught nothing, (for my selfe) yet with Iohn Baptist Luc. 3.10. I have some reason to beleeve that my labours have not beene altogether unprofitable, among the Men∣noes and meaner sort I fished for, which were the crowd of common people publi∣cans and sinners, very slippery Eeles, that had long lien in the mud of their misdoings, and sanguinary souldiers, the Pike and Water-wolves of the Ocean of this world, a people naturally diseased with the bloody issue. Encouraged ther∣fore by that inabling spirit of grace which
of Priscilla and Aquila, poor Tent ma∣kers, were able to pose that great Clerke Apollos: with Ieremy I presume to go to the great ones: and with Peter will once more let downe my Evangelicall sweep-net, which was not composed by the wisedome of man, or woven with the deceitfull words of Sophisters, but with the words of the Gospell, according to that of St: Paul, 1. Cor. 2.4. Neither is it any materiall net, like that in Suidas which one cast over another, while they were in single combate together, and when he had ensnared him, he slew him; nor such a cruell, barbarous, and bloody spirituall net, as the Prophet Micah spea∣keth of, Micah 7. All lie in wait for blood, every man bunteth his brother with a net. But it is that Sagena, that
sweep net which our Saviour brought downe from heaven, even the glorious Gospel of Iesus Christ preached, that wil dragg and drawe out all those that are plunged in the darkesome holes of igno∣rance, and in the muddy cares of this World, to the light of Truth, and love of supernall things. Et faelices illi quos haec sagena de profundo criminum et errorum pertrahit ad lucem. Amb. Happy, oh thrice happy they, if this draw net fasten on them, and bring them from darkenesse to light from death to life; a faeculo, from the sea of this World, ad faecula saeculorum to the shore of a bet∣ter life, even the land of the living, which as I wish to your Worship specially for my bounden duties sake, and to your ver∣tuous Lady, the field of whose loving sin∣cerity
in the remaining course of your lives, being fully charged with deeds of charity, cannot but be accomplisht with a Crest of Glory: So even from my soule I wish it to all that love to Bathe in Inno∣cency, and expect the comming of the Lord Iesus. Sir, I am your humblest servant, IAMES EGLESFIELD.
THE SAINTS SACRED LAVER. Psal. 26. vers. 6. I will wash my hands in innocencie, O Lord, and so will I go to thine Altar. THis verse containes a holy Preparation, a ho∣ly Presence, and a holy Place. The holy pre∣paration is in these words, I will wash my hands in innocency. The holy presence in this word ô Lord: And the holy place, in this word, Altar, and so will I goe to thine Altar. In the holy preparation note two things: 1 Quis praeparat, in this word, I, David. 2 Quo modo, in this word, wash, I David ash.
In the Quo modo, note two things, 1. The Bath, Innocencie. 2. The parts bathed, Hands. In the holy presence note two things: 1. The Majesty Domine. 2. The Mirror in this particle, ô! In the holy place note two things. 1. The Reverence of his Progresse in this word, So, not presumptuously, but humbly, like his Servant. 2. The reference of the place, in these words, Thine Altar, And so will I go to thine Altar. This is the resolution of the Text, which I meane by Gods goodnesse to treat of: and first, Quis, that is David, a King by place, a Prophet in Spirit, and a Saint by cal∣ling. I will wash. A King by place: as the image of God is more exprest in Kings, then in Groomes and vassalles, their power being a resemblance of his divine power, and their Majesty a Character of his divine Ma∣jesty; so ought the flames of this Image to be more conspicuous in them, then in the in∣feriour or darker sonnes of God.
It is not the beauty of his Throne, the riches of his Diadem, the guard of his per∣son, or any the like Dalilah can cut the hair of David, or blow him bigge with a Tym∣pany of selfe righteousnesse, he being fully bent for his own salvation, and his peoples instruction to bath in the Laver of Holines. In Innocency will I wash my selfe sayes he, I, a God by name will do it for so the Scri∣ptures title Kings, that when I come before the God of nature my sacrifice may be well accepted. What David doth here in person must be the president of Magistracie, or rather of Magistrates, then any of meane or perfun∣ctorie calling; such a levell hath the shaft of Iniquitie, against the breast of the great Ones, so many are their pit falls, so danger∣ous their examples, so contractive of Sinne their consciences; Therefore whisper not in their eares the Magnificency of their places, it is a temptation; nor the solemnity of their worships, it is a Temptation, for David knew by woefull experience, that all the power of worldly dignity was temptation,
for hee abused his power in the murther of Vriah: 2 Sam. 11. hee stained his beauty in the deffowry of Bethsheba, he wronged his Throne, in the numbring his people; And flatter not, then the Great Ones with telling them of their Greatnes, puff them not up, with the power of their places, they are all but baits for their Innocency. So the higher men bee in place, the more frequent they ought to be at Prayer: so slippery is the con∣dition of greatnesse. For who sooner fell then Lucifer, who more debased then Nebu∣chadnezar? Dan. 4.24. Who offend God oftner then great Ones? A Lecture to the Vermillian robes of Magistracy; that their soules be not of the colour of their scarlet, their consciences of the same graine with their Coapes, is to wash in Innocency. Take heed yee great Ones, Authority is a glewy & pitchey adjunct, maivelously contractive of Sinne, and therefore should ever be necrest the poole of Bethesda, when the Angel  it, so quickly doth it take the soyle, so easi∣ly doth it catch the staine. Wherefore as yee are eminent in place,
so must you bee righteous in person. You must be as Christ himself, Cant. 8. not only Rubicundi but Candidi, as white per innocen∣tiam cordis, as you are ruddy per ruttlatio, nem vestis the brightnesse of your garments. Your hairs must bee like the Ancient of daies, or like wool, or like Snow, to signifie your wisedome; your eyes like a flame of fire, to signifie your search and might, your feet like fine brasse, to signifie the perfectnes of your wayes; and your voice like the sound of many waters, fearefull and terrible. You must put on the glorious apparell of Inno∣cency, and trans figure your selves, like Christ himselfe upon the mount, that your righteousnesse may break forth as the light, and the beauty of it, as the burning lampe: for so saith, holy David I will wash my hands in innocency, a King by place. Now followeth I will wash my hands in Innocency, a Prophet in Spirit. As I rang in the eares of Magistracie, in the former point, so ring I now in the eares of Priesthood, arraigning mine own spirit, in the presence of God, and with mine the
Spirit of every Levite in this Temple, the Soule of every Prophet in this house, ac∣knowledging the required innocency of our Condition. Wee are the Cherubims and Seraphims of the lower house of God. We of the Ministery are Gods by a more pecu∣liar sequestration, then the ordinary Sonnes of men; Wherefore wee must wash our hands in Innocency, who are Prophets in Spirit: I will saith David, a King, then must we, if wee will follow the example of the righteous, I will saith hee, a Prophet in Spi∣rit, a party conversant with the religious ser∣vice of God. This is a preface unto us, this teacheth us who are of the Tribe of Levi, to gird our loines straite with the girdle of Innocency when we enter into the Sanctua∣ry of God. For we serve at the Altar, wee preach the Law, we keepe the book of Co∣venant, we are of Gods privy chamber as it were, wee lodge with Moses in the Mount, we peruse the Tables of Stone, we beare the Arke, we bow at the Mercy seate, wee are dedicated to God, we are consecrated to the Temple, wee are tyed to have Vrim and
Thummim upon our hearts, wee weare the white linnen Ephod, in which should shine the Sardin, Topaz, and Carbuncle, A gae and Amatist, of a holy conversation. Exod. 28.17. The Signet engraven upon Aarons forehead, is holynesse to the Lord, Exod. 28.36. so that the Bill of our report, must be pure mettle, no tinckling or hollow Cym∣ball: in a word wee are forbidden any, the least blemish; for faith the Scripture, cleanse the Levites, purifie, fetch the Laver of brasse for the Levite, All their cloathes must smell of Myrrh, Allowes, and Cassa, of a good conscience, out of the Ivory pallaces, their Innocent and spotlesse hearts whereby they should make themselves glad. Let my Priests be cloathed with righteousnes saith the Spirit of God; It is the Livery of Aaron, the cloath of Levi, the mark of distinction, the seale of our vocation, the Ensigne of the Prophets of God; which holy David held out as a Banner of defiance against the De∣vill, though the snailes of our times pull in these hornes of salvation, wee being lights which shine not, salt which season not
clouds which drop not, tapers which burne not, unsanctified vessels which purifie not, Censors which perfume not, Ethiops which wash not, this was not Davids security, this was not his unhallowed precipitation: No, I will wash, a King by place, theres a Cau∣tion for great Ones, I will wash, a Prophet in Spirit, thers a caution for Prophets. And as I have hitherto spurred on the Magistrate and the Minister, to a provident and watchfull superintendency, whiles they stand in the gates of Sion; So come I now to the meanest and shallowest proselite in this assembly. I will wash my hands in In∣noncency, not onely as I am a King, and so may be dangerously disposed to doe evill; neither as I am a Prophet, and so strictly ty∣ed to do well, but also as I am a Saint by cal∣ling, an Israelite, a professor, within the Arke, within the Covenant, within the Church: for without are none but unhallowed Caitifes, profane adulterers, outcasts from Heaven. As I am therefore thine, & through thy mercy admitted into the family of Saints, enrowled in the parchment of heaven, registered a∣mong
the blessed ones, as I am thus regene∣rated by the spirit, adopted by grace, con∣firmed by the Sacraments, united to the Church, and out of thy mercy made a live∣ly member of the same (as every person un∣der this holy roofe, in all seeming appear∣ance, is) why, even for this, will I wash my hands in Innocency, saies David, seeing my Calling is holy, my God, his Altar, my vow holy, my inheritance holy, I therefore thus inhabited thus adopted, though my Scepter had lickt the dust, and so I had been no King, though the gift of prediction had failed mee, and so I had been no Prophet, yet for the grace shewed me in the benefit of my calling as being called to serve for the greater praise of thy Name, I who am thus sequestred from the world, and sanctified from my infancy to thy service, will wash my hands in Innocency. And in this respect the poorest person in this Congregation, is tyed to an holy preparation: for though we bee not all Kings by place, nor Prophets in Spirit with David, yet we are all Saints by calling with David. I therefore when I come
into the house of God, will wash my hands in Innocency, must be the generall resoluti∣on of all men. For Innocency is aswell the Sacrifice of Trades-men as Prophets, if they once be inaugurated to the name of Christi∣ans, baptised to the death of Sinne. For then as punishable shall Alexander the cop∣per-smith bee, for opposing the spirit of God, as Balaam for taking the wages of ini∣quitie. So then, we sonnes of Aaron, must not so urge Davids holy preparation, as hee is a King by place, as that we neglect it, as hee is a Prophet in Spirit, neither must you Me∣chanicks so presse our Innocency who are of the Priesthood, and so Prophets by spirit, as that you neglect your owne, who are of the Church, and so Saints by calling. The bright sunne of our righteousnes must not quite ecclipse the Star of yours, but wee are all to shine, though one exceed another in glory. Wherefore to conclude this point, when David saith I will wash my hands in Inno∣cency, as I am a King he satisfies the Magi∣strate, as he is a prophet, he sanctifies the Mi∣nister,
as a Saint by calling, he sanctifies the people. Thus you see he speakes to all sorts of people, all trades of life, to every condi∣tion of persons, to every Mammonist, none are exempted from holynes, whether Deme∣trius the silver-smith, Act. 19.24. or An∣drew the fisher-man, Matth. 4.24. or Gama∣liel the Lawyer, Act. 22.3. or Lydia the purple seller, 16.14. or Dorcas the Semster, 9.36. or Simon the Tanner, 6.43.20.9. or to be short, the meanest of all, the Con∣gregation is mixt, and therefore I pray & re∣quest you all, to leave your dissimulation, and to wash your hands in Innocency. Thus much for Quis, now followeth Quo modo praeparat, and that is by washing, I David Wash. Now me thinkes I heare a voice which tells mee we are all, a leprous generation, a viperous and infectious brood, full of sores, ulcers and botches, scarlet soules, crimson consciences, ramish unsavoury loathsome sinnes: if so; then let us see the remedy and that induceth two things, the Bath, and the Parts bathed: and first of the Bath, Inno∣cency.
See but the ingredients, and you shall ea∣sily see the vertue. This Bath is made of Holinesse, righte∣ousnesse, charity, hope, faith, joy, humility, peace, prayer, thanksgiving, meditation, vigilancy, equity, sanctity, chastity, contri∣tion, repentance, perseverance, with many other heautious ornaments of the house of God. All holinesse of mind, righteousnesse of soule, charity towards thy neighbour, hope in thy Jesus, Faith in his merits, Joy in the Holy Ghost, peace of conscience, humility of carriage, serventnesse of prayer, meditation of Gods mercies, delight in his word, vigilancy over our affections, sanctity of heart, equity towards all men, chastity of thought, repentance for sinne, heat of devo∣tion; and perseverance, the Crowne of holy and vertuous actions. Lo here's a holy water for the Church of Rome to wash in, here's a Jordan for all le∣prous Naamans to cleanse in, tis no river of Damascus, but of Israel, here's a poole of Bethesda, for our lame and creeple conditi∣ons, here's a river of life, as cleere as cristal,
proceeding out of the throne of God and the Lamb, in midst of which; groweth the tree of life. Revel. ult. Who so enters into the Temple of God without these, who so offers to set foote within the porch which is called Beautifull without these, doth but only peep through a craney of the mount Horeb, but shall ne∣ver with Moses ascend up his holy hill: they only sound forth harsh melody into the ears of God; through the untuneablenesse of their spirits, which should sing Gorapical∣ly as the Coristers of heaven, for holinesse becometh thy house for ever. Nazianzen is so religiously scrupulous, and conscionably timerous of his unworthy ap∣proach into the house of prayer, that it hath often affrighted mee (saith hee) from the Mercy feat of God; not that I shund the beauty of his Altar, but that I feared mine owne unhallowed presence; and so conse∣quently the suddain vengeance of Heaven: I am ashamed (saith he) of those that come with unwashen hands, and unsanctified hearts, to such holy mysteries as these are;
I feared to draw neere, said hee, and yet my hands were innocent, mine eyes cleare, my heart single, mine eare erect, and attentive, my speech savoury, and my members were weapons of righteousnesse, and like so many Instruments to tune forth the praise of my Creator. Here was an innocent and vertu∣ous Churchman, well known, squared and cut out of a spirituall building, of a holy and heavenly tincture; and yet he feares his own weaknesse. But is there the like devotion found among us? No, For were it, as it is not, it would draw many a brinish teare from the eyes of these marble and Stone witnesses, to see our ir∣reverent and hallowed approaches: for wee come with our hands filthy, our feet pollu∣ted, with sleepy eyes, with drowsy heads, with full stomacks, with quailes in our mouthes, and our bellies full of bread. Some sleepe with Euticus, Act. 20.9. some are of∣fended with the Scribes & Pharisees Joh. 7.48. some are angry with Herod, Mat. 2.16. some seoffe with Ahab, 1 Reg. 22.8. some glance laciviously with Iesabel, some are on∣ly
lukewarm with Agrippa, Act. 26.28 and some make bargaines with Iudas, Matth. 26.15. Few here with a chaste and dove-like simplicity, few with patience, few with Faith, scarce one, with a good conscience. No, our eyes are playing the harlots, our hearts are gon a whoring, our eares are stopt with the adder, our tongues broaching va∣nity, our hands in our counting-houses, our feet prickt with thornes, never at ease, ever straite at the instep, till we can whip forth of the holy congregation and make it the house of folly: So that it is Gods great goodnesse wee are not stricken dead with Nadah and Abihu, Numb, 3.4. for offering strange fyer upon his Altar. It is his infinite mercy that we are not burnt down with the men of So∣dom. Lev. 10.1.2. or swallowed up quick with Corah, Dathan and Abyram, Numb. 16.1. for comming thus rashly and unprepared into his holy Sanctuary, our hearts being full of evill intentions, which is to play the hypocrite. But David saith I will wash, and so must it bee with all those that ap∣proach
the face of God. Thou must arise oh Sion, thou must put on the garments of thy beauty oh Ierusalem thou must shake the dust of thy feet and unloose the yoak from thy neck, when thou drawest neere unto the presence of the most high: Nay, yee ought to use all reverence with fervency of Pray∣er, with fire of devotion, with sanctity of life, with purity of Spirit, with contrition of heart, and the like acceptable offices in the eye of heaven. Then shall thy righteousnesse break forth before God, as the light, and thy just dealing as the nooneday. Therefore bath thy heart often in sorrow full sighs, and de∣sire the Lord, saying; O Lord grant, I beseech thee, an equitie towards all men; piety to∣wards thee my God, honesty of mind, and a heart seasoned with the leauen of Religion, that is, a Soule ever prepared to come into the house of my God and visit towards his holy Temple. And thus much of the Bath, Innocency. Now for the partes bathed, Hands. I will wash my hands. &c. There is a glorious stipend set downe in
Scripture for such as have cleane hands; who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? Even he that hath cleane hands, Ps. 24.4.18.20. Againe, God shall recompence me accor∣ding to the cleannesse of my hands. So then we must know, that as innocency shewed the vertue of the Bath, so Hands the wise∣dome of the party Bathing. Jezabel anoynted her face when David washed his hands, and threw ashes upon his head, a great disfiguring to his person; yet was he cleaner in the sight of God then the slippery singing Queene of Israel. Ezekiah cleansed his hands, and Job made a cove∣nant with his eyes, pretious parts both; yet none so pure, so entire, so holy, as the ba∣thing of our Hands in Innocency. I meane not that Pharisaicall cleaning of the hands, for that is not comparable to the cleaning sincerity of the heart, if you para∣lell the parts: but I meane the hands, by way of a symbolicall and figurative resem∣blance; the phrase not being so much to be cand, as it is an externall washing, and so roper to hypocrites, but as it is a symbole
of internall purification, and so proper to the Saints. Now some washing their hands onely will rashly salute the Altar of God, beeing coloured with seeming appearance: this is Hypocrisie. Others will wash their hands as a testimony of the purity of their hearts and so reverently approach the Mercy seate of God, being beautified with reall integri∣ty. This is Innocency. But why did David say his hands more then his feet, or any other part of his body: Because the principall Organs of all exter∣nall Actions, are the hands, and so Symbo∣lycally the truest resemblance of all hearty and spirituall ablution. When therefore it is said David washed his hands, &c. Wee must not understand onely an outward and visible cleansing of his carnall body, but a generall cleansing of his soule and Spirit; Hands being the Executioners of all exter∣nall Actions, and so the Figure of a totall and generall, both exteriour and interiour San∣ctification. Wherefore when thou look∣est into the house of God, look to thine Eye
least that grow wanton, take heede to thy Tongue, that it speake no guile, looke to thy feete, that they slip not, but especially wash thy Hands, that they miscary not, let not those be rough like Esau's, but smooth as Iacobs, set with gold, Cant. 5.14. Then mayest thou put thy finger in thinge eye, if it trouble thee, then mayest thou nipp thy self by the Eare, to keep them from sleep in se∣curity, strike thy selfe on the feete, if they stumble or tripp, beat thy selfe on the heart, if that prevaricate or play the whore, smite thy selfe on the mouth, if it talke idlesy, rubb thy selfe on the Temples, if they grow dull, in a word, then mayest thou doe all things decently as befitts the house of prayer. So that the washing of the hands in Innocency is the true resemblance of all Spirituall ab∣lution. Now many will wash, but few in Inno∣cency. Some with Pilate before blood pub∣liquely, Mat. 27.24. Some with the Phari∣see before dinner hypocritically, and some with the Gentiles before an oath superstiti∣ously. But let us with the religious Levite
and Christian professor, purifie and purge not onely the visible flesh of our hands, but also the invisible taints of our Spirit. Fo the former sanctification is but only a figur of that which followeth, as you may read Heb. 9. but the latter is a modell of that true and lively sacrifice of Christ himselfe, who through the eternall Spirit of God, offered himselfe without spot to God, purging our consciences from dead works to serve the e∣verliving God. Wherefore, O Lord, sprinkle with thine hysope, the blood of thy Sonne, that the water of thy Spirit may never cease to puri∣fie our hands, till they bee as white through Innocency, as thy Throne above is beautifi∣ed with Ivery: Especially wee of the seede of Aaron, that every action of ours may bee acceptable: our hands with which we hold the Tble of the Covenant, our hands with which we slay the Sacrifice, our hands with which wee blesse the Congregation, with which we gird about the linnen Ephod of an holy conversation, with which wee lift up the sacred Challice, with which wee di∣stribute
thy holy Body, our hands by the continuall intention of which in our Pray∣ers, wee lift up the hinges of the everlasting doores, that the King of glory may receive us. Let all these bee made cleane and pure from all filthynes; let us wash our hands in all our Actions, that being thus prepared we may goe to his Altar. Thus much for the Quo modo: now followes the holy presence,  Lord. In which, note two things, first the Ma∣esty, Domine. Secondly the Mirror in this article ô! First of his Majesty, Domine. Some writers divide the Names which re common to the Trinity by a foure fold ifference, some onely pointe at the Essence,  Iehovah, some at the distinction of per∣ns as Elohim, some at the essentiall proper∣s of his Diety, as only wife, only just &c. d some at the Relation which God hath  his creatures, as Lord of Lords, King of ngs: And of this last order is the name u∣d in my Text. For power and authority ve a certaine habitude and respect unto the
by which hee is subjugated and tyed to a awfull obedience: for we have as Aquina sayeth, a certain reall relation unto God, a our Creator, without whom we had had n Being, and God to us a Rationall, becaus he did humble himselfe to exalt us. Where fore this name Domine, in my Text, is nei∣ther a Symbole of his infinite essence, nei∣ther of any personall distinction, but only o a powerfull, dreadfull, and vindicatory re∣lation he hath to Man; which ought to caus a reverent and fearefull approach, into hi presence. Therefore if we refuse his Mercy as he is Deus, and so can crowne us, yet le us not despise his power as hee is Dominus and so can crush us. For as he is Deus, he is a God of bowells and compassion, an carrieth the rod and staffe of comforte, P 23.4. but as hee is Dominus, he is a God  vengeance, that can scourge us with a rod  yron, Ps. 2. for our iniquities. Wherefore when David in the awfull re∣solution of his soule, and cristall sincerity  his Spirit, commends the Sacrifice of his cle∣votion to heaven, he proposeth such a pr∣sence
of God, as is most extimulatory of feare and reverence: I will wash my hands in Innocency O Lord. This Name shewing the Majesty and power of God over man. By vertue of his name hee punished the Sa∣crifice of Cain. Gen. 4.5. The rebellion of Corah, Numb. 16. The bleating and Hypo∣criticall Sacrifice of Saul. By vertue of this he threatens the Israelites, I am the Lord, by vertue of this he bids battle to the Nations, I am the Lord, What shooke the Wilder∣nesse? The voyce of the Lord. What brake the Cedars of Lebanon? The voyce of the Lord: by vertue of this Name he ratifies his purposes, the voyce of the Lord hath spo∣ken it. By vertue of this Name he rides up∣on the heavens, the Chariots of the Lord. By vertue of this Name his wrath is publi∣shed, how long wilt thou be angry O Lord? By vertue of this Name hee summons the quarters of the earth, the day of the Lord. When shooke the Earth? at the presence of the Lord. When melted the Heavens? at the presence of the Lord. When were the waters dryed up? At the presence of the
mighty God of Iacob: the least falme of this bush dasht Moses out of countenance. This fiery pillar burnt Iobs goods and cat∣tle. This burning heate made the children of Israel stand a farre off. Wherefore with St. Jeromes Marcella, we are to desire the proper interpretation of all the Names of God; every one ministring occasion of spirituall growth; yet are wee most to de∣sire it, when wee approach the Sanctuary of God, to prefixe this Name before our eyes, the name of the Lord: It being the Ensigne of his power, and the tempest going before his face, the Embleme of his Majesty, the thunder of Mount Sinai, where Gods seate is, by vertue of which hee breatheth haile∣stones and coales of fire. This holy meditation of his Majesty tur∣ned Abraham into dust & ashes: This stript Iob of all humane and vaine conceits, this cloathed David in Sackcloath, this made him a worm and no man, a thing of nought. And I doubt not, but if wee seriously enter∣tained it, this would burne downe the stub∣ble of humane opinions in us, and lay us
prostrate, yea, even breathlesse before the face of God, with the very thought of our wretched unworthynesse. Wherefore (Beloved) let the reverent o∣pinion of the presence of the Lord be ever∣more our curb when we come to the propi∣tiatory of his Mercy seate. Let this calme the Sea of our affections, and worke in us an awfull and religious Obedience. Let us knowe the presence of God is not the pre∣sence of Dagon that hath no eyes, nor of Nisroch which hath no eares, but the glo∣rious and present beauty of Syon, the al-see∣ing Eye of God, the discovery of Heaven. This Memento will cause us to wash, to cleanse our hearts, and search the very con∣cavity of our spirits; This will beget not on∣ly an holy preparation before we come, but a cautelous and strong attention after we are come, and the expectation of an happy be∣nediction, ere we goe: fearing each moment the arrow of his displeasure, the merit of our owne presumption, and the doome of Heaven. Thus much for the Majesty, now follow∣eth
the Mirror, O: And so will I go to thine Altar O Lord. This interjection howsoever smothered in the Latin and Greeke Syntaxe, yet hath it in the English an Emphaticall use, and spe∣ciality, it being the flood-gate of mans exta∣sie, and the dilatation of his Spirit, when he is transported with the high and sublime speculation of the presence of God. Nei∣ther is it only vented when we thinke of his presence, but when wee speake of his Attri∣butes, or any the extraordinary or transcen∣dent workes of his Diety: O the depth and riches of his Mercies! cries Paul in one place, O the inscrutabilitie of his Judge∣ments! in another place. O his wonder∣full workes in the deepe! cries David in one place, O how amiable are thy dwellings! in another. Thus wonders Mortality, when it droopes and hangs the wing, being strook with the Majesty of God. This should cause humble dejection in our spirits, a poore and lowly esteeme in our selves, when we enter into conference with God. Now there is nothing will sooner
draw us to this practise, then the paralelling of our estate with Gods, our condition chal∣lenging the wonderment of Lamentation, and Gods of Praise and Exaltation. For in this, Gods O of Mercy, will answer to Mans O of misery: See it in the wrestling of Paul, O miserable man that I am! cryes he when he took Survey of his fleshes rebelli∣on, O the riches of the Mercies of God! when he weighs the depth of Christ's Pro∣pitiation. See it likewise in the methode o David, O remember not my sinnes and of∣fences; cryes he, when he scan'd the measure of his owne misery; O call to mind thy lo∣ving kindnesse ô Lord, when hee recollects the Balme of Gods mercy. O how short is my time! when he spann'd the life of Man▪ O God thy seat endureth for ever, when he would fathome the Auncient of dayes. The like meditation will drive us to the same, to the same astonishment, when wee shall con∣scionably think of our owne unworthyness with an O how inferiour are we! by reason of our many pollutions, to stand before the face of God; and it will make us say as Da∣vid
doth here, I will wash my hands in Innocency &c. Thus much of the holy pre∣sence, I come now to the holy place, in this word, Altar. Where note two things first the Reve∣rence of his Progresse, So. Secondly the Re∣ference of the place, Thine. And so will I go to thine Altar. So, not otherwise though the Devil upon the pinacle, should promise mee the King∣dome of the world, for why should we pre∣sume to come to the marriage of the Lambe without a wedding garment, or Samuels E∣phod? So will I goe saith David, adorned with these unto thine Altar. And if ever his So, was dedicated to the obtaining of Eternity, if ever to the joy of Angels, and omfort of the Elect, it was then done, when David renounced the whole body of Sinne, & turned to his Creator that made him. Lastly if ever this So, did procure the An∣els of Heaven to rejoyce, then may it now use us, to shed teares of gladnesse since the eauty of Holines, the Lamb of God, Inno∣ncy, hath offered himself upon the Crosse,
and become an advocate to the father for our sinnes. Here was a So worthy to bee remembred for ever; for he dying turned our death in∣to Life, that is, our sinnes to righteousnesse. Thus much for the Reverence, now follow∣eth the Reference, Thine: The Pronoune Thine, is a partition wall, twixt God and Dagon, and sanctifies the e∣difices of the Temple. For this seperates all Idolatrous places of worship: Not any Al∣tar, but the Altar of God, and not any place, but the place where his honour dwelleth. So that by this word, Thine, is meant the ha∣bitation of his Glory, & the holy Temple of the eternall and ever living God: To which whosoever comes thus washed and prepa∣red, shall enjoy the mount of Syon, and the hill of the new Ierusalem, Montem pinguem, being a fat mountaine, in respect of the mul∣titude of spirituall grace, Montem Dei, be∣cause God himselfe dwells there, and Mon∣tem coagmentatum, so strongly congealed and knit together, as that it is impossible it should ever be removed.
Thus by Gods assistance and your gentle patience I have cleared my hand of my Text. Now the God of mercy and compassion, which opened the heart of Lydia to con∣ceive, opened the eyes of Elisha to see, and opened the lipps of David to speake, say E∣phata to your hearts, eares, and eyes, that you may ever hunger and thirst after righte∣ousnesse, that you may ever seeke the Lord, and serve him in faith, and in the revealed mysteries of his word, Washing your hearts and hands in Innocency, that so you may for ever obtaine Grace here in this world, and eternall glory in the world to come; which God grant unto you all, Amen. Soli Dei Gloria.
