E2752 669.f.5[135] 99870452 160846
Two speciall Orders made by the House of Commons in Parliament assembled: THE ONE Prohibiting that no Carriers, or Waggoners whatsoever shall be permitted hereafter to go to Oxford or else∣where without speciall License from the PARLIAMENT. THE OTHER That if any Agent, or Servant to any person that bear Arms against the Parliament, shall presume to come to Westminster, or recide about London, shall be forthwith apprehended as a Spy, and proceeded against accordingly. Die Lunae 16. Ianuarii, 1642. IT is this day ordered by the Commons House of Parliament, That no Carriers, VVaggoners, carts, or waggons, or horses laden with any commodities whatsoever, shall be permitted hereafter to go from hence or elswhere to Oxford, or any part of the Kings Army, with any manner of Provisions, without the speciall License and Authority of this House first had and obtained; And if they do presume notwithstanding to go or carry any thing, that then their persons and goods shall be seized upon, and kept in safe custody, till this House take further order. And Colonell Moore is to take care, that strict command be given to all the Courts of Guard to make stay of them accord∣ingly; And to bring the persons staid, before him, to the intent they may be brought to this House: And that diligent search be made for any Moneys that may be carryed or conveyed by any person to Oxford. H: Elsynge, Cler: Parl. D. Com. Die Lunae 16. Ianuarii, 1642. IT is this day ordered by the Commons now assembled in Parliament, That if the Agent or Servant to any person that bear Arms against the Parliament, shall pre∣sume hereafter to come to VVestminster, or recide here about London, That he shall be forthwith apprehended as a Spy, and be proceeded against accordingly; and all persons are required to do their endeavour for the discovery of such persons that shall hereafter come to the Parliament House or VVestminster, or any parts about London, that they may be apprehended accordingly. Ordered that these two Orders be forthwith Printed and published: H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. London, Printed for JOHN FRANK, and are to be sold at his shop the next door to the Kings head Tavern in Fleetstreet. Januar. 17. 1642.
