E3033 E327_24 99861345 113478
portrait of Thomas Fairfax The Effigies of the most Excellent & truly valliant S Thomas Fairfax Cap:tin Generall of the Armies raised for the preservation of Religion, defence of King Parlia:mt & Kingdome
ENGLANDS REMEMBRANCER: IN TWO PARTS. OR, A Catalogue of all or most of the se∣verall Victories, and strong Holds obtained (through Gods blessing) by the Parliaments Forces since the Armies rising from before Oxford in June last, 1645. to the Generall Thanksgiving, Octob. 2. 1645. As also since that time to this present Thanksgiving of the Parliament, City of London, and parts ad∣jacent. March 12. 1645. All within the time of 8 Moneths. Published of purpose to draw forth Englands Thankfulnesse, Unto the Lord of Hoasts at all times, but more especially upon her dayes of Thanksgiving. LONDON: Printed for Tho: Ʋnderhill at the Bible in Woodstreet. March 11. 1645.
A Catalogue of the PARLIAMENTS Victories since the Army (under his Excellency Sir THO: FAIRFAX) rose from before Oxford in June last. 1645. IN June 1645. the Army of the Parliament under the Com∣mand of his Excellency Sir T. Fairfax rose from the besei∣ging of Oxford, marched against the Kings potent and insulting Army then in Northamptonshire (who were new∣ly flesh't with the taking and sacking of Lecester) and by Gods blessing obtained over them. 1 A glorious Victory the 14. day of the same moneth by a great battell fought in Nazby-field, where after a great fight we routed all the Kings horse, kild, and took all his foot, with all the Ordnance, bag, and baggage. Also the Kings Cabinet of Letters, therein promising to set up Po∣pery; and calling over not onely Irish, but other forraign forces against the Parliament. Presently after which, God blessed the same Army with, 2 The regaining of that very considerable Town of Lecester, with all the many Ordnance, and Arms, much Powder, and many hundred horse that were in it. And after a long and wearisome march, with, 3 The Relief of that greatly distressed, but faithfull Town of Taunton. 4 And the gaining of the Garrison of Ilchester in Somersetsheire. Which done, both Armies again joyn'd battell, and God gave the Par∣liaments Army under his Excellency, Sir Tho: Fairfax, 5 A great and full victory over Gorings Western Army neer Langport: And suddenly after gave unto them many other very stroug Holds: (viz.) 6 Langport Garrison, with all the Arms, and Ammunition. 7 Burrugh-Church Garrison, a strong hold near Taunton. 8 The great and strong hold of Bridgewater. 9 The City of Bath. And inabled them to beat and quell, 10 The Army of malignant Club-men of Somershetsheire: as also to take in
11 The strong Castle of Sherburn, by Storm, with all the Ordnance, Arms, and Ammunition therein. 12 Nunney Castle in Somersetsheire. And after 3. weekslying about Bri∣stoll, God delivered up unto the same Army. 13 Porshut Point, a strong Fort commanding Kings Road by Bristoll, and presently after also on the 11. Sept. 14 That rich, great, strong, and most considerable City of Bristoll, partly by Storm, and partly by Composition. And, 15 That considerable Castle, and Town of the Devizes, upon the 22. of Sept. 1645. A little time after which, the Parliaments forces also took 16 Farligh Castle in Somersetshiere. 17 Laycock-House in Wiltsheire. 18 Barkly Castle in Gloucestersheire, Sept. 26. which was a very strong Hold. There was also about the time of the Seige of Bridgewater taken by the Parliaments Forces, 19 Chidwick Castle near Lyme, being a strong Garrison. The successe of the English and Scottish forces in the North since June last, viz. 20 The obtaining of the strong City and Castle of Carlile, after many moneths seige. 21 The strong Castle of Pontefraict in Yorkesheire. 22 The impregnable Castle of Scarborough, after a long seige. 23 And the regaining of Rabie Castle in the Bishoprick of Durham. Since which, the Scots took by Storm, 24 Carmon Froome Castle in Herefordsheire. 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 The successe of the Parliaments forces under the command of the Committee of Shrewsbury hath been likewise very great in the taking of 25. Dawley Castle, 26. Shradon Castle, 27. Caos Castle, 28. Stockley Castle, 29. Morton Corbet House, 30. Rooton Castle, 31. Lin∣sill Manner, and 32 Apley House. 33 The Scots Forces in Scotland have also been blessed with Aglo∣rious victory upon the 13. day of Sept. 1645. (which was to them as a Resurrection from death, God remembring them in their lowe estate, after Montrosse had over-run the Kingdom, and was Master of the Field) after a fierce battell the Enemy was totally routed, and spoiled; where was killed the Lord Crafford Generall of the Kings Horse, with many others of note. And took prisoners, 6 Lords, 16 Knights and Collonels, with many hundred other pri∣
among our Victories, because we did lay the losse so much to heart. The Parliaments Forces also in South Wales under Major Ge∣nerall Laughorn, have been blessed with glorious successes in the time before mentioned, viz. 34 With the raising the Seige from Pembroke. 35 A great Victory, Aug. 1. 1645. over the Enemies whole Welch Army, con∣sisting of 450 Horse, 1100 Foot, and 4 peece of Ordnance, upon Colby Moore, 3 miles from Haverford-West, where the Enemy was to∣tally routed, 150 of them kill'd, about 700 of them taken priso∣ners: Among whom were 3 Feild-officers, 29 Captains, and other Officers. Where they also took from the Enemy 4 peece of Ordnance, 5 Barrels of Powder, and about 800 Arms, with all their Carriages, and Provision. 36 The taking the Town and Castle of Haverford-west by storme, Aug. 5. and in it 120 common Souldiers, 20 Commanders, and Officers: whereof were, 1 Coll. 1 Lieu. Coll. and 1 Major, also 1 peece of Ordnance, and 120 Arms. 37 Carew Castle. 38 Picton Castle in Pembrookesheire, and 39 Cardish Castle in Glamorgansheire. 40 Chester being beseiged, stormed, and part of it taken by the Chesheire forces, the King with an Army of 5000 marched from Worcester to its relief, which Forces were incountred at Routon-heath neer Chester, Sept. 24. by the Chesheire Forces, and the Forces under Major Generall Pointz; who were blest with a glorious Victory, the Enemy being wholly routed, the Earl of Litchfeild killed, and about 600 of them slain. We took prisoners about 1400 men, and 2000 horse. Besides 10 Knights and Collonels, 7 Lieu: Collonels, 5 Majors, 19 Cap∣tains, besides other inferior Officers. The second Part of the Catalogue of Victories, since the Rising from before Oxford, containing a Cata∣logue of all or most of the Parliaments Victories since the last Generall Thanksgiving, to this present Generall Thanksgiving. Feb. 5. 1645. GOd continueth yet gracious unto the Parliament, in deliver∣
41  Sandal Castle, Oct. 1. after a long siege, a place of great strength. To the Forces under Sir Tho: Fairfax, led by Lieu. Generall Crumwell. 42  Winchester City and Castle upon composition, Oct. 6. A place of great strength, with 7 peece of ordnances, 17 barrels of powder, 2000 weight of Musket bullet, 800 weight of Match, 700 Muskets, 38 Hogshead of Beef and Pork, 15000 weight of Cheese, 8000 weight of Butter, 140 quarters of Wheat, 7000 weight of Bisket, 112 Hogsheads of Beer, 3 Hogsheads of Wine, &c. To the Forces of Gloucester and Munmothsheires. 43  Chepstow Town and Castle in Munmothsheire, Oct. 11. 1645. (after a siege and battery) upon Composition, with all the Ordi∣nance, Arms, and Ammunition, viz. 10 barrels of Powder, 17 Peece of Ordnance, 200 Arms, with great store of all manner of provision. To the Chesheire Forces. 44  Holt Church Garrison. To part of the Army under his Excellency Sir Tho: Fairfax, led by Lieu: Gen: Crumwell, and the Forces under Col: D'albere. 45  That rich and strong Hold, of Basing House by Storme, Oct. 14. In which was taken the Marquis of Winchester, all the Com∣manders, and common Souldiers, all the Ordnance, Arms, Ammunition, viz. 10. peece of Ordnance, 20 barrels of powder, with Match proportionable, 9 Colours, 2000 Arms, 300 horse, 400 quarter of Wheat, 300 flitch of Bacon, 200 barrels of Beef, 40000 weight of Cheese, divers Sellers of Beere, &c. To the said Army under his Excellency: 46  Langford House neer Salisbury, Oct. 17. upon composition: with all the Arms, and Ammunition in it. And to the Forces under Major Generall Laughorne: 47  Camarthen Town and Castle, Oct. 12. The whole County there∣upon declaring themselves for the King and Parliament. Presently after which, God blessed the Parliaments Forces in Yorkshire with, 48  That great victory neer Sherborn in Yorkesheire, Oct. 15. which was in manner following. (viz.) The Enemy commanded by the Kings new made Generall Digby, and Langdale, with a purpose to in∣
Sherburn, and Milford; but our party under the command of Col∣lonel Copley being then in the pursuit of the Enemy, forc'd them to fight neer Sherburn: and after a hot dispute, totally routed them, and pursued them 3 miles. By which victory not onely our lost men were rescued, but we killd of the Enemies 2 Collonels, took of the Enemy, 4 Coll: 2 Lieu: Coll: 1 Major, 9 Captains, besides many other Officers, and about 400 common soul∣diers, with 600 horse, and many Colours; together with Dygbys Coach, and Cabinet of Letters. The Army under his Excellency Sir Tho: Fairfax, with the gaining of 49  Tivorton Castle neer Exeter by storme, Oct. 19. in manner following. A Councell of Warre being called to order the manner of the Storme, a Cannonere with a great shot brake the chain of the Draw-bridge, whereby it fell down; and thereupon the Souldiers immediately without order entred, and got over the Works with little opposition: whereupon the Ene∣mie fled into the Castle and Church for their security, where they had quarter for their lives. In which Castle we took 4 peece of Ordnance, 30 barrels of Powder, 5 Feild Of∣ficers, 6 Captains, 7 Lieftenants, 6 Ensignes, and about 200 common Souldiers. The Forces under Col: Morgaine with the taking of 50  Munmoth Towne by storme about the middle of October, and after three dayes seige the Castle upon composition, in which were ta∣ken 7. Peeces of Ordinance, 4. sling Peeces, 300. Musquets, 100. Pistolls, 10. Barrills of Powder, with all manner of provision proportionable, and the Scottish Forces in the North of England, commanded by Sir John Bromne, with 51  The great second Victory over the Kings Army under the Command of Digby and Langdale, who againe intending the invading of Scotland were met with, by the said Scottish forces, Octob. 24. on the sands, upon the Border of Scotland, and after a fierce en∣counter were totally routed in which fight, the Scots kild of the Enemy 100. tooke in this fight 200. Horse, Digbyes quar∣ter Master Generall, 1. Coll. 2. Lievtenant Collon: &c. and utterly dispersed the rest, who were most of them ta∣ken by the valiant Traind Bands of Lankeshare and Westmor∣land in their flight, which happy Victory did not onely
overthrew his Army, and forced him to flye to Ireland from the hand of Justice. Shortly after which God gave the Forces under Sir William Brereton upon the 1 Nov. 1645. 52  A great Victory over the united Forces of severall of the Kings Garri∣sons, under the Command of Sir William Vaughan at Denbigh in Wales, who were 2000. Horse and Foote, intending the reliefe of Chester, but were by a small party of ours (while the greater part of the body were fetching a compasse to gaine the advant age of ground) fought with, and totally routed, in which Battell were slaine of the Enemy about 100. and taken 600. Horse, and 400. Prisoners. And blessed the Parliaments Forces under Major Generall Pointz, with the taking of severall strong holds, viz. 53  Shelford House by storme, Oct. 27. 1645. with all the Ordinance, Armes and Ammunition. 54  Boulton Castle neere Newarke upon Composition. 55  Worton House neare Newarke upon Composition. 56  Welbeck House procured to be slighted. God continued yet gracious to the Parliament, in blessing their Forces in severall Counties, viz. The Chesheire Forces with the gaining 57  That impregnable Castle of Beeston in Chesheire upon Composition Nov. 16. after a long seige. The Lanchesheire Forces after a years seige with the ob∣taining 58  The impregnable Fort of Latham House upon Composition, the onely remayning Garrison the Enemy had in that County. The Forces under Collon. Morgan and Col. Birch, with the gaining 49  That strong and considerable City of Hereford by a Strategem upon the 18. of December, 1645. where were taken 11. Peece of Ordinance, many Armes, much Ammunition, the Lord Brudnell, 14. Knights, with many Feild Officers, Captaines and Leiftenants, all with little or no losse. The Forces under Major Generall Laughorne, with the winning of 60  Embleden Castle in Carmarthen-sheire. The Yorkesheire Forces with the taking of
remaining in Yorksheire upon Composition, after a long Seige. Also the Army under his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax is further blest with the gaining 62  The Garrison of Fulford House neare Exeter, and 63  The Garrison of Callityne House neare Exeter, and in it a Troop of Horse, with all the Armes and Ammunition, and 64  The Garrison of Pouldram House neare Exeter. And with 65  The releiving of that famous Towne of Plimmoth (the Plimmoth Forces taking from the Enemy 66  Canterbury Fort. 67  St. Budeaux Church nere Plimmoth by storme, a strong Garrison, and in it 92. Prisoners: among which 2. Majors, 4. Cap∣tains, with a Troope of Horse, and all the Armes and Am∣munition, and forcd the Enemy to quit. 68  Sir Francis Drakes House nere Plimmoth.) The gaining also 69  The strong and considerable Towne and Castle of Dortmoth by storme, Jan. 18. 1645. Sir Thomas his Excellency being pre∣sent at the storme, in which were taken the Governor, 1. Earl, 1. Col. 4. Lievetenant Collonels, 2. Majors, 15. Cap∣taines, 14. Leifetenants, 9. Ensignes, 1. Cornet, above 800. common Souldiers, 120. Peeces of Ordinance ready mounted, with all the other Armes and Ammunition, al∣so two men of Warre in the harbour. 70  The Parliaments Forces in divers parts are yet blest with Successes, as the Yorksheire Forces with 71  The gaining of Belvour Castle, a place of great strength. The Army under Sir Will: Brereton with the gaining 72  That famous City, and strong Port of Chester, surrendred unto Sir Wil∣liam Brereton upon Composition, the 3 day of this instant Febr. (after a long Seige) with all the Ordnance, Arms, Ammunition and Horse (except a horse and Arms to every Commander and Officer above Lieftenants) and all the Irish Prisoners. The Army under the immediate Command of His Excel∣lency with 73  The great Victory over the Enemy in and neer Torrington in Devon∣sheire, by which not onely that Town then fortified was taken by Storm, Febr. 16. 1645. But also the Lord Hoptons Infantry was taken, slain, and totally routed; and the Horse put to
that Victory 600 prisoners, (among whom, 1 Lieft: Col: 8 Captains, &c.) 200 horse, 3000 Arms, with all the Ene∣mies bag and baggage. 74  The gaining of the strong, and very considerable Garison of Corffe-Castle in Dorsetsheire, which was taken by Storm. The Army under Major Generall Laughorne with 75  The great and most seasonable Victory over the Army of Welch revolt∣ers under the Command of Sheriff Karne, who had besieged Car∣diffe, by which means not onely the said Town and Castle was re∣leived; but that new Army of the Enemies was after two fierce in∣counters totally routed. In which were kild of the Enemy above 200, and took 800 prisoners: whereof 2 Lieft: Col: 2 Ma∣jors, 10 Captains. The Forces of the Parliaments at Abbington with 76  A great Victory over the Enemy that was entred the Town, but had a gallant repulse, and so the Town cleared of them. The Forces of Lecester with 77  The obtaining that strong and gallant Garison of Ashbedelazauch upon Composition. To God alone be all the Glory. Amen.
